Monthly Report
May 2017
Vol 69  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 19 May 2017.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
The macroeconomic impact of tax reform plans in the United States  .................................  12
Labour market slack in the euro area  .................................................................................  19
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  22
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  23
Ongoing portfolio shifts into higher- yielding assets in Germany  .........................................  30
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  39
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  48
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  57
Current fiscal developments in the euro area  ......................................................................  59Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  65 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  74 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  83 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
5

Overview
German economy off  
to a flying start
The world economy’s underlying dynamic is 
still sound, although the faster pace of growth 
seen in preceding quarters probably could not 
be maintained at the start of the year. In a 
number of industrial countries, for instance, 
growth in seasonally and price-  adjusted gross 
domestic product (GDP) saw a marked first-  
quarter decline. Higher inflation dampened 
private consumption, as expected. But the 
lacklustre start to the year also owed some -
thing to the preceding dynamics. Thus con -
sumers in the United States, for example, but 
presumably also in the United Kingdom raised 
their saving ratio, which they had scaled back 
in the preceding months. By contrast, real GDP 
rose fairly strongly in the euro area and Japan. 
The Brazilian economy, which slid into deep re -
cession just over two years ago, may have ac -
tually started to grow again in the quarter just 
ended.
In line with the stable underlying momentum 
of the world economy, the International Mon -
etary Fund (IMF) expects global economic out -
put to pick up by around 3½% both this year 
and in the coming year. In each case, this 
growth would be roughly ½ percentage point 
higher than in 2016. IMF staff have thus mar -
ginally lifted their forecasts for 2017 and 2018. 
These were the first upward revisions in a long 
while to the short- term growth expectations. 
However, the subdued start to the year sug -
gests that the IMF staff projections could prove 
to be slightly too high in 2017, particularly for 
the United States. The outlook there hinges 
largely on the future path of economic and fis -
cal policy. At the end of April, the White House 
raised the prospect of extensive tax cuts for 
corporations and households. Bundesbank 
model simulations suggest that a package of 
measures like the one presented is likely to 
provide a considerable boost to the US econ -omy initially, albeit at a high fiscal cost, but 
that the positive effects will evaporate over the 
medium to long term, assuming there is a time 
limit on the measures. The short- term eco -
nomic impacts on trading partners are less 
clear owing to offsetting effects. Even so, in -
flation would probably increase in the euro 
area as well.
Since the start of the year, the international fi -
nancial markets have been caught between a 
basically stabilised world economy on the one 
hand and volatile political influences on the 
other. In particular, the lead- up to the French 
presidential elections saw market uncertainty 
mount distinctly for a time and led to increased 
demand for safe assets as well as to short- term 
share price losses on the European stock mar -
kets. However, market players’ concerns were 
quickly allayed once the results of the first 
round of voting became known. The stock 
markets subsequently recorded major price 
gains, which were accompanied by rising 
yields on ten- year Federal Bunds, for example. 
The temporarily wider yield spreads within the 
euro area narrowed again during this period. 
In contrast, yields on long- term US Treasuries 
receded on balance in the course of the re -
porting period although the US  Federal Re -
serve (Fed) raised its policy rate again in March. 
It seems that market players’ more sceptical 
view concerning the implementation of eco -
nomic policy measures in the United States, 
the announcement of which had earlier 
pushed up interest rates, has now led to de -
clining term premiums. This is consistent with 
the fact that market- based forward inflation 
rates also contracted at the end of the report -
ing period in both the United States and the 
euro area. In Europe, the decrease may have 
been triggered mainly by market participants’ 
preference for liquid nominal assets. In the for -
eign exchange markets, sentiment shifted in 
favour of the euro amid waning political un -
certainty in Europe.Global economy 
starts year  sluggishly, …
… but remains 
on trackFinancial market 
uncertainty 
 temporarily 
heightenedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
6

The Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) kept its key interest rates unchanged 
over the entire reporting period. In March 2017, 
the last of the four rounds under the second 
series of targeted longer- term refinancing op -
erations (TLTRO II) was conducted. The partici -
pating institutions borrowed a total volume of 
€233.5 billion, thereby significantly exceeding 
market expectations.
The monthly volume of asset purchases under 
the expanded asset purchase programme was 
reduced to €60 billion in April, as planned. The 
Governing Council intends to continue pur -
chasing securities until the end of December 
2017, or beyond, if necessary, and in any case 
until it sees a sustained adjustment in the path 
of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. Al -
though the ECB Governing Council perceives 
that the euro area’s economic recovery has 
continued to strengthen in the past few 
months, it has so far considered the rise in 
headline inflation to close to 2% to be unsus -
tainable, since no clear upward trend in core 
inflation has yet been observed. The Governing 
Council will review this assessment at the be -
ginning of June, when the new Eurosystem 
macroeconomic projections are available.
The positive underlying dynamics in the monet -
ary indicators persisted in the reporting quarter. 
The broad monetary aggregate M3 again ex -
panded considerably in the first quarter of 2017 
against the backdrop of the historically low 
interest rate setting and robust economic 
growth in the euro area. This was mainly attrib -
utable to lending to the domestic private sector 
as loans to households and non- financial cor -
porations continued their upward trend. Mon -
etary growth was additionally supported by 
securities- based lending to domestic non-  
banks, which was dominated by the Eurosys -
tem’s asset purchase programmes.
The cyclical upturn in the German economy 
gained momentum at the beginning of the 
year. According to the Federal Statistical Office’s 
flash estimate, real GDP in the first quarter of 2017 rose substantially by 0.6%, after seasonal 
and calendar adjustment, against the fourth 
quarter of 2016 in which the German economy 
had expanded by 0.4%. The pace of aggregate 
growth clearly exceeded the potential rate. As a 
result, overall capacity utilisation, which has 
been considerably above its longer- term aver -
age for quite some time, increased further. The 
acceleration of economic growth was due 
mainly to a marked expansion in construction 
activity fuelled by high demand, especially for 
housing, but also to a recent high inflow of new 
orders in the industrial sector which helped it to 
overcome its sluggish phase in the second half 
of 2016. Growth continued to be supported by 
buoyant business activity in the service sector. A 
breakdown of the GDP expenditure compon -
ents likewise suggests that the upswing has be -
come more broadly based recently. Investment 
in machinery and equipment also picked up 
again after the turn of the year in the wake of 
strong export growth, which continued the 
trend seen at the end of 2016, and the dispro -
portionately high level of capacity utilisation in 
industry. The boom in the housing market con -
tinued. Although the inflation hike at the start 
of the year eroded consumers’ real disposable 
income, private consumption remained on an 
expansionary course owing to the very strong 
labour market situation.
This impression is supported by the fact that 
banks again noticeably stepped up their lend -
ing to the domestic private sector in the quar -
ter under review. The largest net expansion 
was recorded by loans to households, driven by 
their brisk demand for mortgages. Banks’ lend -
ing business with domestic non- financial cor -
porations, too, grew distinctly on balance.
The German labour market remains extremely 
resilient. As in the last three months of 2016, 
employment surged again in the first quarter of 
the year. Jobs subject to social security contri -
butions continued to be the main driver of this 
positive development. By contrast, the low-  
paid part- time employment segment continued 
to contract. Registered unemployment fell Monetary  policy: 
ECB Governing 
Council leaves policy rates unchanged
Ongoing monet -
ary growth in 
the euro area
German econ-
omy showing strong growth in Q1Marked rise in loans to the domestic private sector in Germany
Labour market: 
situation and outlook still very buoyantDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
7

quite significantly in the period under review. 
The leading labour market indicators suggest 
that this very favourable development will con -
tinue in the months to come.
Although the increase in wages accelerated 
slightly in the first quarter of 2017, it remained 
subdued compared with the exceptionally 
strong labour market situation. Negotiated pay 
agreements to date in this year’s “small” wage 
round have largely mirrored the level of last 
year’s collective bargaining agreements. This 
applies both to the size of the wage increases, 
which have mostly been moderate so far, and 
to the normally two- year duration of the agree -
ments. The wage demands of the trade unions 
in the case of outstanding pay negotiations 
vary between 4.5% and 6.5%, thus matching 
last year’s range. However, the outstanding la -
bour negotiations will probably not be limited 
to pay increases but will also feature other as -
pects such as pension arrangements or the im -
pact of digitisation.
Consumer prices as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose fairly 
sharply in the first quarter of 2017, as they had 
in the final months of 2016; in each case, they 
were up by a seasonally adjusted 0.5% on the 
quarter. Inflation was still mainly driven by en -
ergy and food. Prices of refined petroleum 
products continued to appreciate in line with 
crude oil prices. The unusually cold weather in 
large parts of Europe pushed up the cost of 
food. By contrast, the prices of industrial goods 
excluding energy rose only moderately, as in 
the previous quarter. The prices of services as a 
whole registered another slight increase des -
pite a marked drop in patients’ contributions 
to the cost of long- term care following the re -
cent reform. Overall, annual HICP inflation 
jumped very sharply from 1.0% to 1.9% on a 
quarterly average. A key baseline factor in this 
was that energy prices had declined sharply at 
the beginning of 2016. The core rate excluding 
energy  and food, meanwhile, remained at 
around 1%.The German economy’s strong growth looks 
set to continue in the second quarter of the 
year. Industrial activity is likely to remain on an 
upward trajectory, buoyed by lively domestic 
and external demand. This is also suggested by 
the positive sentiment in manufacturing in con -
junction with still optimistic export expect -
ations. Given that utilisation of production cap -
acity remains above average, this should sup -
port the ongoing momentum of private invest -
ment in machinery and equipment. The 
construction sector should continue to flourish, 
and the service industries are also likely to re -
main on an expansionary course. All this is 
likely to have a positive impact on households’ 
income and labour market prospects, which 
should ensure that consumer spending remains 
robust in the second quarter.
Germany’s public finances remain favourable. 
Nonetheless, the budget surplus could shrink 
somewhat this year. Fiscal policy is expansion -
ary. Economic developments and a further de -
cline in interest expenditure should ease the 
pressure on public coffers on balance, while 
other spending will continue to rise fairly 
sharply. Over the next few years, no major 
change to the fiscal balance is currently ex -
pected, and, overall, surpluses are anticipated. 
As things currently stand, the debt ratio looks 
likely to remain on its downward trend and 
could fall back below the 60% threshold to -
wards the end of the decade, the first time it 
would have done so since 2002. There is un -
certainty especially with regard to the inter -
national environment and new fiscal policy 
measures following Germany’s general election 
this autumn.
In recent years, the very positive underlying 
economic setting – such as the strong labour 
market performance, falling financing costs 
and the surging growth in tax revenue – has 
masked expansionary spending. However, zero 
interest rates, improvements in the labour mar -
ket and an increasing tax ratio cannot continue 
forever, and fiscal policy will face major chal -
lenges in the future. Demographic change will Moderate wage 
trend persists
Consumer price 
inflation still driven by energy and foodStrong growth set to continue 
in Q2
Public finances: 
situation remains  favourable
Expansionary 
spending masked by  positive settingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
8

take a toll on the social security funds, for in -
stance, resulting in a clear rise in contribution 
rates. Central, state and local government, too, 
will have to prepare for additional expenditure 
amid lower growth in tax revenue.
A key component in preparing for these chal -
lenges is to bring the debt ratio down rapidly. It 
would also be advisable for central government 
and the state governments to factor structural 
surpluses into their fiscal plans as this would 
allow their budgets to absorb temporary shocks 
without needing to bend or breach the budget -
ary rules. With this in mind, the surpluses 
mapped out in the stability programme appear 
appropriate, overall. Looking at the Federal 
Employ ment Agency, it would make sense to 
lower the contribution rate given the excep -
tionally good financial situation and positive 
outlook, thus limiting the further increase in re -serves. This would be a way of easing the bur -
den on employees and enterprises alike.
The healthy budgetary position at central, state 
and local government level proves not least 
that the additional cost of absorbing the tem -
porarily high influx of refugees can be funded 
without running up budgetary deficits. It would 
therefore make sound sense to release the re -
serve set up for this purpose in the Federal 
budget in order to repay debt. Moreover, rely -
ing on reserves to fund permanent spending 
would generate a risk of budget shortfalls in 
the medium term. Besides, such withdrawals 
would not be recognised as reducing the def -
icit under the European fiscal framework. Re -
leasing reserves to pay down debt would there -
fore also prevent a potential conflict with the 
European fiscal rules.Demographic 
challengesRelease reserves to repay debtDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
9

Global and European setting
World economic activity
The world economy’s underlying dynamic is 
still sound, although the faster pace of growth 
seen in preceding quarters presumably could 
not be maintained at the start of the year. In a 
number of industrial countries, for instance, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) growth de -
celerated markedly in the first quarter after sea -
sonal and price adjustment. Higher inflation 
dampened private consumption, as expected.1 
Yet the lacklustre start to the year is also a re -
sult of the dynamics of previous periods: con -
sumers in the United States, for example, but 
presumably also in the United Kingdom, inten -
sified their efforts to save, after having scaled 
back their saving in autumn. Real GDP in the 
euro area and Japan, meanwhile, showed a 
fairly sharp increase. It is likely that the Brazilian 
economy, which slid into deep recession just 
over two years ago, even returned to growth in 
the quarter just ended.
In line with the stable underlying dynamic of 
the global economy, according to the World 
Economic Outlook published by the Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF) in April, global 
economic activity, calculated at purchasing power parity exchange rates, is expected to 
grow by 3.5% in 2017 and by 3.6% in 2018. 
This would be around ½ percentage point per 
year more than in 2016. This was slightly up on 
the IMF’s projections for 2017 and 2018 com -
pared to the World Economic Outlook pub -
lished in October 2016. These were the first 
upward revisions in a spring forecast in com -
parison to the previous autumn’s projections 
since 2011 and 2010 respectively. However, the 
subdued start to the year suggests that the IMF 
staff projections could prove to be slightly too 
optimistic in 2017, particularly for the United 
States. The outlook there hinges largely on the 
future thrust of economic and fiscal policy. At 
the end of April, the White House proposed 
extensive  tax cuts for corporations and house -
holds. Simulations using the NiGEM global eco -
nomic model developed by the National Insti -
tute of Economic and Social Research suggest 
that a package of measures such as these will 
probably initially give a considerable boost to 
the US economy. The economic impact on 
trading partners is less clear owing to counter -
balancing effects. Even so, inflation would 
probably increase in the euro area as well. The 
fiscal costs would be high for the United States 
(see the box on pages 12 and 13).
The easing of the burdens in the commodities 
sector through adjustments is a major factor in 
the fundamental strengthening of the global 
economy. Economic growth in regions that 
mainly export commodities2 fell from 4% in 
2012 to less than 1% in 2015.3 The IMF is fore -
casting an increase in real GDP of almost 2% in 
these regions in 2017. However, the decline in World economy 
off to sluggish start, …
… but probably 
remains on track
Burdens in the 
commodities 
sector have 
easedPrivate consumption and investment in 
selected industrial countries*
Source: National statistics, OECD, Haver Analytics and Bundes-
bank  calculations.  * Data  in  real  terms  for  the  USA,  Japan, 
France  and  the  Netherlands.  Aggregated  using  nominal weightings  from  the  previous  quarter  based  on  market  ex-
change rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20170.400.40.81.21.6
–++++Quarter-on-quarter percentage change, quarterly data, 
seasonally adjusted
Private consumption
Gross fixed capital formation
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Energy prices and private 
consumption, Monthly Report, February 2017, pp 13-15.
2 These include – as defined by the IMF – the Common -
wealth of Independent States, Latin America and the Carib -
bean, the Middle East and North Africa (including Pakistan 
and Afghanistan), and Sub-  Saharan Africa.
3 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, The 
slowdown in global economic growth and the decline in 
commodity prices, Monthly Report, November 2015, 
pp 16-17.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
10

commodity prices has also left its mark on 
some advanced economies –  not least the 
United States – in recent years. It was one of 
the factors that contributed to the lacklustre 
performance of global industrial output, inter -
national trade and investment.4 The recovery in 
the commodities markets thus played a part in 
the rebound in economic activity. According to 
data from the Dutch Centraal Planbureau, aver -
age global industrial output in January and Feb -
ruary 2017 was up by 2.7% on the year. At the 
same time, the volume of global trade in -
creased by 3.5%. By contrast, at the beginning 
of 2016, growth rates had stood at just 1.3% 
and 0.7%, respectively. Moreover, as inflation -
ary pressures have risen, the forces of growth 
have tended to return from households to busi -
nesses. According to the data available for 
some industrial countries, while price- adjusted 
consumption expenditure showed weak 
growth in the first quarter, at the same time, 
gross fixed capital formation saw exceptionally 
strong growth. In the United States, a resur -
gence in investment in the oil industry also 
played a role.
The price of Brent crude oil hovered at around 
US$50 per barrel in the period under review, 
rising to just over US$53 at last count. The con -
tinued recovery in production in the United 
States was probably the factor weighing most 
heavily on prices. On the other hand, Saudi 
Arabia and Russia have come out in favour of 
extending the cuts in output until 2018. Owing 
to the base effect, the annual rate of change in 
oil prices contracted from 72% in January to 
25% in April. Assuming that prices remain 
steady, it will continue to narrow over the next 
few months and quarters. Prices for other com -
modities have fallen, in some cases significantly, 
since the beginning of the year. In April, the 
HWWI price index for food and beverages (on 
a US dollar basis) was, on average, 7% lower 
than its January level, while the index for indus -
trial commodities declined by around 4%. Iron 
ore, which is needed to produce steel, recorded 
the sharpest price drop. Expectations of a dip 
in construction activity in China and a high level of global production are likely to have played a 
part in this.
In the industrial countries, headline consumer 
price inflation rose to 2.1% in February, its high -
est level in almost five years. By April, the rate 
had gone back down to 1.8%. The fluctuations 
were primarily caused by the year- on- year rate 
of change in the energy component. Core in -
flation, which is based on the basket of goods 
excluding energy and food, was less volatile 
and stood at 1.5% at the end of the period.Year- on- year 
rate of change in price of crude oil declining …
… and of con-
sumer pricesWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and foodand beverages
Sources: Thomson Reuters and HWWI. • Latest figures: aver-
age of 1 to 12 May 2017, or 1 to 16 May 2017 for crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201733405060708090100110120130US dollar basis,monthly averages, log scale
60708090100110
405060
607080901001102011 = 100
Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beverages
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Recent trends in world trade 
in goods, Monthly Report, March 2016, pp 23-24.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
11

The macroeconomic impact of tax reform plans
in the United States
Nearly 100 days after the Trump Adminis-
tration took offi   ce, some details on its ideas 
for a comprehensive tax reform have been 
made public. In keeping with promises 
made before the elections, these plans en-
visage not only a simplifi  cation of the tax 
code but also comprehensive relief for cor-
porations and households.1 Proponents of 
these proposals believe they will give the US 
economy a strong and sustained boost and 
therefore see the consequences for public fi  nances as minimal.
2 In addition, some 
analyses and projections by international 
organisations indicate that this type of fi  scal stimulus could jump- start economic activity in other countries as well.
Simulations performed using the NiGEM 
global economic model may serve to critic-ally examine the plausibility of these ideas.
3 
The core element of the corporation tax re-form presented by the US government was modelled by reducing the effective tax rate 
on enterprises to 15%.4 The numerous 
planned modifi  cations to individual income tax law – including the transition to a model 
with just three tax brackets with low rates 
of 10%, 25% and 35%, a doubling of the 
standard deduction and the elimination of 
most other deductions  – were approxi-
mated by reducing the effective income tax 
rate by 1.4 percentage points.5 In keeping 
with the current budgetary rules, which re-
quire non- defi  cit- neutral, non- temporary 
draft legislation to carry a qualifi  ed Senate 
majority and thus bipartisan support, both 
changes were assumed to be limited to 10 
years beginning with the fi  rst quarter of 
2018.
Overall, the NiGEM simulations show that the economic impacts of the planned tax reform will differ considerably over the short and medium term and that, in the 
long term, a positive impact on the US real 
economy is by no means certain. In the short run, a lower after- tax user cost of 
capital in the model will lend a considerable 
boost to investment, and household con-
sumption will likewise improve perceptibly, 
causing the economy to pick up signifi  -cantly at fi  rst. However, despite the rela-tively persistent character of the fi  scal 
stimulus, the growth effects will quickly ex-
pire. The assumed repeal of the tax relief 
after ten years will, in the end, throw such 
a severe damper on economic activity that 
real GDP will even drop below the baseline. 
1 According to initial estimates, the overall package 
could come with a direct price tag of US$5.5 trillion in 
lost public income over a ten- year period. The annual 
average cost would thus run to roughly 3% of gross 
domestic product (GDP) for the year 2016. See Com-
mittee for a Responsible Federal Budget (2017), Fiscal FactCheck: How much will Trump’s tax plan cost?, Blog post, 26 April 2017.2 According to US Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, the interaction between the tax reform and other en-
visaged measures means that sustained real GDP growth of at least 3% is achievable. The plan would 
thus help to reduce the public debt to GDP ratio. See White House (2017), Transcript of a briefi  ng by Secre-
tary of the Treasury Steven Mnuchin and Director of the National Economic Council Gary Cohn held on 
26 April 2017.
3 NiGEM is the macroeconometric model developed 
by the UK- based National Institute of Economic and 
Social Research (NIESR). It individually models the bulk 
of OECD countries as well as major emerging market 
economies and their economic interconnectedness via 
foreign trade and the interest- exchange rate nexus. 
The model has New Keynesian features and, in particu-
lar, forward- looking elements on fi  nancial and labour 
markets. Visit https://nimodel.niesr.ac.uk for further in-formation.
4 The implications of the envisaged restructuring of 
the tax code towards a territorial system and the levy-
ing of a one- off tax for the repatriation of profi  ts 
amassed abroad, which is a relief from current legisla-tion, were not explicitly factored into the mix. The bor-
der adjustment of corporate taxes proposed by the Republican majority in the House of Representatives 
did not make it into the Trump Administration’s draft 
reform and is therefore not taken into account in the simulation.5 The calibration was based on estimates of direct in-come losses prepared by the non- partisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. It takes into account not only the items mentioned above but also the costs 
involved in repealing the alternative minimum tax 
(AMT) and the investment income surtax as well as the 
new pass- through business tax rate. See Committee 
for a Responsible Federal Budget (2017), op cit.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
12

Up until this time, the rise in consumer price 
infl  ation will prove considerably more per-
sistent. Compared with the baseline, it will 
gradually climb by up to 1.5  percentage 
points despite the fact that, in the simula-
tion, the central bank responds to acceler-
ating infl  ation by tightening monetary pol-
icy, in conformity with standard policy 
rules.6 It is not only an increase in primary 
defi  cits but therefore also growing interest 
expenditure which will place a strain on US 
public fi  nances. According to the simula-
tions, the public debt ratio, which is already 
high by historical standards, is likely to rise 
within the space of a decade by around 
30 percentage points compared with cur-
rent projections.
Infl  ationary tendencies in the United States 
will spill over to other economies through 
an effective appreciation of the US dollar 
caused by shifts in international interest rate patterns. This means that positive effects of 
growing US import demand will contrast with dampening infl  uences of lower pur-
chasing power and a likewise tighter mon-
etary policy. The relative importance of 
these forces for economic activity is differ-
ent for each country and is determined by 
factors such as the intensity of trade links 
with the United States and the interest rate 
sensitivity of domestic demand. The result-
ant rise in crude oil prices in the simulation will lead to a further divergence of real eco-
nomic spillover effects. In some countries, the overall impact on GDP could even be negative. According to the model calcula-
tions, this holds true for Germany and most 
of the other economies in the euro area.7 
By contrast, infl  ation is likely to increase 
globally.
Given the usual model uncertainty and the 
lack of specifi  cs to date surrounding the 
planned measures, with the resultant dis-
cretionary scope for calibration, the simula-tion results should be interpreted with cau-tion. It must also be borne in mind that the 
implementation of the reform measures modelled here is by no means a “done deal”. As regards the funding of potential 
tax relief, in particular, the Trump Adminis-
tration’s proposals are quite at odds with 
the views of numerous lawmakers. Diffi   cul-ties in securing majorities could cause con-troversial policy plans to be amended or to 
fail altogether. Lastly, the simulations omit 
changes in other areas of economic policy. 
A possible shift towards a more restrictive US trade policy could perceptibly impair 
economic activity in the United States and 
its partner countries.
6 This will cause an immediate and considerable ap-
preciation of the US dollar, which in 2018 and 2019 
will initially dampen import and consumer prices. In subsequent years, growing domestic cost pressures will become an increasingly signifi  cant factor in con-
sumer price movements.
7 The European Commission reaches similar conclu-
sions based on simulations performed using the QUEST model. Whereas, in the model, real euro- area GDP falls 
slightly in response to the assumption of somewhat 
smaller fi  scal stimulus in the United States, there are, 
overall, no meaningful effects for other economies. See European Commission, US macroeconomic pol-
icies and spillovers to the euro area, Spring 2017 Euro-
pean Economic Forecast, Institutional Paper 053, 
pp 45-48.Domestic economic implications of a potential tax reform in the United States according to NiGEM simulations
*
Source: Bundesbank calculations using NiGEM. * These simula-
tions model a reduction in the effective tax rate on corpora-
tions  to  15%  alongside  US$310bn  in  annual  tax  relief  to households over a ten-year period given rules-based monetary 
policy reactions.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 312.01.51.00.500.51.0
––––++Deviation from the baseline in percentage points
–1.0–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0Real GDP growth
Consumer price inflationDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
13

Selected emerging market 
economies
According to the official estimate, real GDP in 
China was up by 6.9% on the year in the first 
quarter of 2017. While aggregate growth thus 
remained more or less stable, the industrial sec -
tor saw its growth accelerate. The turnaround 
in exports is likely to have helped in this regard. 
Export revenues (on a US dollar basis) increased 
by 8% on the year, after an extended period in 
which they had followed a clear downward 
trajectory. Growth in expenditure on imports of 
goods was much more pronounced, at 24%. 
However, this also reflected significant price ef -
fects stemming from the recovery in commod -
ity prices. By contrast, consumer inflation re -
mained very subdued, with the relevant price 
index rising by just 1.4% on the year. The 
weather- related decrease in the price of food 
played a part here. Moreover, housing costs in -
creased only marginally, although the strong 
upturn in the housing market continued. The 
Chinese authorities have been trying for some 
months to curb speculative elements of the de -
mand for property by placing restrictions on 
the purchase of second homes and through 
other regulatory measures. A marked down -
ward revision in the Chinese real estate market 
could significantly slow the pace of aggregate 
growth owing to the importance of the con -
struction sector.5
In India, the currency exchange initiative of No -
vember 2016, in which many of the country’s 
currency notes in circulation were suddenly 
stripped of their legal tender status, caused 
major cash shortages and payment disruptions. 
This appears to have noticeably dampened 
consumer demand for a while.6 In the mean -
time, many of the demonetised currency notes 
in circulation have been replaced by newly is -
sued banknotes, following which economic ac -
tivity appears to have largely returned to nor -
mal. The IMF is forecasting GDP growth of just 
over 7% for the current financial year. India 
would thus remain the fastest- growing econ -
omy among the G20 countries. By India’s standards, consumer price inflation remained 
very low over the last few months, standing at 
3.9% in March.
The seasonally adjusted data available so far in -
dicate that Brazil’s economy returned to growth 
in the quarter just ended for the first time in 
two years. Goods exports were up extremely 
strongly, mainly as a result of a very fruitful har -
vest. Furthermore, consumer demand is likely 
to have increased. The extent to which this 
economic growth might kick- start a sustained 
recovery process is currently still uncertain. No 
change for the better is yet discernible in the 
labour market. Moreover, progress in imple -
menting key items on the government’s reform 
agenda is slow. The central bank responded to 
a further fall in inflation rates in recent months 
by cutting its policy rates significantly. In March, 
consumer prices were up by 4.6% on the year, 
the weakest rise since mid-2010.
According to a preliminary estimate by the Rus -
sian Federal State Statistics Service, year- on- 
year growth in economic output in Russia came 
to 0.5% in the first quarter. The pace of the 
recovery thus remained rather slow. Although 
private consumption appears to have picked up 
slightly, probably owing to a one- time payment 
to pensioners at the beginning of the year, in -
vestment is likely to have remained sluggish. In 
addition, Russia’s oil production was limited 
according   to the terms of an agreement with 
OPEC. Consumer price inflation continued to 
dwindle in recent months, falling to 4.2% in 
March. Against this background, the central 
bank maintained its accommodative monetary 
policy.Stable economic 
growth in China and significant pick- up in foreign  trade
Economic 
activity  in India 
largely back to normal follow-ing currency exchange initiative Signs of growth in Brazil
Weak recovery 
in Russia
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The potential effects of a 
downturn in the Chinese housing market on the real econ -
omy, Monthly Report, August 2014, pp 17-19.
6 The dip in consumer demand, as shown by a number of 
indicators (such as vehicle sales figures), is not reflected in 
the latest national accounts data. However, these should 
be regarded as provisional estimates.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
14

United States
After adjustment for price effects and the usual 
seasonal fluctuations, first- quarter economic 
output in the United States grew by just 0.2% 
on the previous quarter, in which it had in -
creased by 0.5%. The main reasons for the 
slowdown were a marked turnaround in inven -
tories and a sudden deceleration of private 
consumption growth. Nominal household in -
come rose at similar rates to the previous quar -
ters, bolstered by moderate increases in wages 
and employment. In April, the unemployment 
rate dropped to a new cyclical low of 4.4%. 
Owing to a surge in inflation, however, the rise 
in disposable income in real terms was weaker 
than it had been in more than three years. 
Annua l consumer price index (CPI) inflation ex -
panded to 2.7% by February before recently 
narrowing to just 2.2%. Households also inten -
sified their efforts to save somewhat, after hav -
ing reduced their saving noticeably in the previ -
ous quarter. In particular, they acquired fewer 
new motor vehicles, following a final quarter of 
2016 in which such purchases had climbed to a 
new all- time high. Car manufacturers are find -
ing it increasingly difficult to further increase 
their high sales figures. In the quarter ended, 
the decrease in the production of motor ve -
hicles dampened GDP growth by 0.1 percent -
age point in arithmetical terms. By contrast, 
private gross fixed capital formation, particu -
larly in construction activity, expanded strongly. 
Investment in structures used for petroleum 
and natural  gas exploration increased by more 
than one- half. Nevertheless, it was still consid -
erably lower than its level in the final quarter of 
2015. A full recovery in this line of business 
would noticeably boost GDP growth, just as 
the slump had dampened it.7 In keeping with 
its monetary policy objectives, the US Federal 
Reserve raised its key policy rate by ¼ percent -
age point in March.Japan
The Japanese economy continued on the path 
of recovery during the winter. A provisional es -
timate shows real GDP increasing by a season -
ally adjusted 0.5% on the fourth quarter of 
2016, in which it had grown by 0.3%. The 
heightened pace of economic growth occurred 
mainly on account of the perceptible pick- up in 
private consumption, while business invest -
ment was unable to maintain the preceding 
period’s high growth rate. Foreign trade has re -
mained dynamic, although it contributed con -
siderably less to growth than in previous quar -
ters. Although the unemployment rate fell to 
its lowest level since 1994 (2.8%), there were 
no signs that domestic inflationary pressures Focus of growth 
shifted from consumption to investment
Recent growth boosted primar-ily by private consumptionGross fixed capital formation* in the
US oil industry
80
60100140180220260
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research and Bundesbank calculations. *Approximated 
aggregate of real commercial investment in structures used for 
petroleum and natural gas exploration and of real commercial 
investment in mining and oilfield machinery.
Deutsche BundesbankUS recessions
according to NBER2009 = 100, after seasonal and price adjustment,
quarterly data, log scale
1970 75 80 85 90 95 00 05 10 15 17
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The effect of one- off factors 
on real GDP growth in the USA in the first quarter of 2015, 
Monthly Report, May 2015, pp 15-18; and Deutsche Bun -
desbank, The weakness in equipment investment in the 
United States, Monthly Report, February 2017, p 17.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
15

would strengthen soon. The interim result of 
the spring pay round suggests that wage dy -
namics are still muted. The percentage change 
in the consumer price index excluding energy 
and food slipped even further into negative ter -
ritory in March. This is in keeping with a signifi -
cant drop in the GDP deflator on the year. 
Against this backdrop, the Japanese central 
bank kept its monetary policy on an expansion -
ary track.
United Kingdom
The cyclical upswing in the United Kingdom re -
cently lost some steam. According to an initial 
estimate, real GDP , after adjustment for the 
usual seasonal variations, was up in the first 
quarter by 0.3% compared with the fourth 
quarter of 2016, in which, however, it had 
increased  by 0.7%. Growth in the services 
sector  slowed down in particular. In some 
consumption- driven service sectors, the gross 
value added even decreased on the previous 
quarter. There are therefore mounting signs 
that the momentum in private consumption is 
flagging, including the fact that real retail sales 
have fallen sharply. One of the main reasons for 
the slowdown in consumer spending is likely to 
be losses in purchasing power, with inflation 
calculated based on the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP) up to 2.7% in April; it 
had stood at only 0.3% one year earlier. The 
labour market remained robust throughout the 
period. At 4.6%, the unemployment rate over 
the winter months was at its lowest since the 
spring of 1975. The Bank of England kept loose 
reins on its monetary policy.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-6),8 the eco -
nomic upswing persisted at the start of the 
year. Most countries recorded strong growth in 
the first quarter. This favourable economic ac -
tivity could also be seen in the labour markets. 
In Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic, unemployment rates are now at their lowest 
levels since the start of the transformation pro -
cess. Wage growth has also correspondingly 
accelerated in these countries. In the final quar -
ter of 2016, wages and salaries outstripped 
their previous year’s level by 3.7% in Poland, 
4.2% in the Czech Republic and as much as 
6.4% in Hungary. HICP inflation rose to 1.5% in 
the EU-6 in the first quarter. Though this was 
primarily attributable to higher energy prices, 
core inflation was also up to nearly 1%. In April, 
the Czech National Bank discontinued the floor 
for the euro- koruna exchange rate, thus usher -
ing in a gradual tightening of its monetary pol -
icy.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The euro-area economy remained robust at the 
start of the year. According to data from Euro -
stat, real GDP in the first quarter rose by 0.5% 
on the previous quarter, after seasonal adjust -
ment, and by 1.7% on the year. For the last 
quarter of 2016, the GDP growth rate was also 
raised to 0.5% from 0.4% following the publi -
cation of data from Ireland.9 Economic growth 
in the first quarter of 2017 is likely to have been 
primarily driven by the domestic economy. 
Though the dynamics of private consumption 
probably decreased, seasonally adjusted invest -
ment was also expanded considerably. By con -Marked 
economic  slowdown 
Continuing 
upswingContinued robust economic growth
8 This group comprises the non- euro-area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech 
Republic , Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.
9 According to Ireland’s official national accounts data, its 
GDP in the fourth quarter of 2016 rose by 2.5% on the 
previous quarter after seasonal adjustment. The activities of 
multinationals are the cause of this extraordinarily high 
growth rate. This makes it more difficult to interpret the 
cyclical importance of the economic data for Ireland and 
also for the euro area, albeit to a lesser extent. Thus, gross 
fixed capital formation grew by just over 85% in the fourth 
quarter of 2016 according to data from the Irish statistics 
office. At the same time, Irish imports increased by over 
35%. This results in arithmetical contributions to each of 
the percentage rates of change in the euro area of 2.6 per -
centage points in terms of investment and 2 percentage 
points in terms of imports. For more information on similar 
processes, see also Deutsche Bundesbank, The revision of 
the euro-area national accounts for 2015, Monthly Report, 
November 2016, pp 16-17.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
16

trast, exports were unable to maintain their 
fairly robust growth rate from the previous 
quarter.
Private consumption presumably grew less 
strongly in the first quarter of 2017 than in the 
previous quarter. In any case, retail sales rose 
by just 0.3% after seasonal and price adjust -
ment. This was probably not offset by the 
strong growth in new motor vehicle registra -
tions. The noticeable increase in consumer 
prices is expected to have had a negative effect 
on private consumption despite the additional, 
primarily labour market-  induced improvement 
in consumer confidence.
Indicators are painting a more positive picture 
of investment, with construction investment 
likely to have increased significantly. Construc -
tion output accordingly rose by 0.8% on the 
quarter after adjustment for seasonal vari -
ations. However, the growth has probably been 
biased upwards by the statistical break in the 
German reporting population.10 Investment in 
machinery and equipment is likely to have in -
creased moderately. Though capital goods pro -
duction was only up by 0.3% on the quarter, 
imports of capital goods appear to have risen.
Revenue from the exports of goods continued 
to go up in the first quarter, albeit with slightly 
reduced momentum, and trade between 
euro- area member states was once again quite 
lively. Meanwhile, business with non- euro-area 
countries was less dynamic than before. After 
adjustment for price variations, the overall in -
crease was presumably marginal. Real imports 
of goods again rose sharply, consistent with 
the robust economic growth at the beginning 
of the year.
Industrial activity in the euro area lost signifi -
cant momentum at the start of the year after 
having sped up noticeably in the final quarter 
of 2016. Seasonally adjusted industrial output 
remained at the previous quarter’s level. It 
should be noted that energy production was 
down by just over 2%, probably due to wea -ther conditions. Flagging consumption growth 
may have also played a role. In any case, the 
production of consumer goods fell by almost 
1%.
Most of the euro-area member states recorded 
positive GDP growth rates at the start of the 
year. French economic output was up 0.3% on 
the fourth quarter following seasonal adjust -
ments, though private consumption virtually 
stagnated. The growth of business investment 
accelerated further. There is also likely to have Private 
consumption  losing steam
Construction 
investment especially   buoyant
Exports weaker, 
imports still strong
Slowdown in 
industrial activity Positive economic   development in most euro-area countriesAggregate output in the euro area
Source:  Eurostat.  1 Affected  by  jump  in  Irish  GDP  since 
2015 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 1798100102104106108Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data,
log scale
9698100102104106
94969810010210498100102104106108
Italy
SpainFranceEuro area1
of which
10 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Com -
mentaries, Monthly Report, April 2017, pp 6-7.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
17

been a noticeable build- up of inventories, 
which is probably linked to the significant in -
crease in imports. By contrast, exports slowed 
down distinctly. Aggregate output in Italy con -
tinued to expand only moderately. In the first 
quarter, real economic output grew by only 
0.2% after seasonal adjustment, which broadly 
matches the average quarterly GDP growth of 
the last two years. Exports probably had a 
propping- up effect, yet on the whole the Ital -
ian economy is likely to have remained weak. 
Spain continued its rather strong recovery at a 
slightly faster pace. Economic activity in the 
first quarter rose by 0.8% on the quarter after 
adjustment for seasonal variations. While pri -
vate consumption there also lost momentum 
on the back of a considerable increase in con -
sumer prices, continuing buoyant foreign de -
mand is likely to have given the economy a 
noticeable  boost. Investment is also expected 
to have made a notable contribution to eco -
nomic growth. The other euro-area countries 
also broadly experienced growth in their eco -
nomic output at the beginning of the year. Fin -
land, Latvia, Lithuania and Portugal recorded 
relatively high GDP growth rates, while Slovakia 
and Cyprus once again showed robust expan -
sion. A clear upward movement could still be 
seen in Belgium, Austria and the Netherlands. 
Real GDP in Greece fell again on the quarter, 
though only slightly.
In the second quarter, the aggregate economic 
upturn in the euro area could continue at a 
similar pace. In any case, this is augured by the 
results from surveys of businesses and con -
sumers, who for the most part are hopeful for 
the future. Domestic demand, which is also still 
being supported by highly expansionary mon -
etary policy, should benefit from this. It is also 
expected that foreign trade will prove to be a 
mainstay of growth as the global economy 
gradually recovers strength. This, in turn, could 
stimulate investment.
Following the broad- based recovery on the la -
bour markets in the past year, the labour market 
situation continued to improve in the first quar -Economic 
growth also  presumably robust in the second quarter
Decline in 
unemployment0.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–+++++++
0+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0
AprilHICP in the euro area and in Germany
Deutsche BundesbankOverall index
Excluding energy and food
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017AprilQuarterly data, year-on-year percentage change
Germany Euro areaSentiment indicators for the euro area
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 17–30–25–20–15–10–50Percentage balances, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
3530252015105051015
–––––––+++
Consumer confidenceManufacturing
industryServices sectorBusiness confidence
ConstructionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
18

Labour market slack in the euro area
Despite picking up at the end of the year, 
euro- area wage growth has remained 
weak. A key factor cited as a reason is the persistence of considerable underutilisation 
of capacity in the labour market, also known as labour market slack.
1 Recently, 
reference has also been made to measures 
of labour market slack which are defi  ned more broadly than the traditional un-employment rate, based on the ILO defi  n-
ition.2,3
A wider defi  nition includes, alongside those defi  ned by the ILO as unemployed, the fol-lowing groups: those who are not currently 
seeking work but are available to work, 
those who are actively seeking work but are 
not (yet) available, and those who are cur-
rently employed but want to work more hours.
4 In terms of fi  gures, the former 
group comprised 6.7 million persons in the 
euro area in 2016, the second group  1.6 
million and the third 7.0 million, compared 
with a fi  gure of 16.2 million unemployed persons. In relation to the accordingly ex-
tended active labour force, this would yield a labour market slack of 18.5% for last year, 
considerably higher than the offi   cial un-
employment rate of 10%.
It cannot be surprising that the extent of 
reported underemployment will increase if a broader defi  nition is applied. After all, po-tentially useful additional information about the situation in the labour markets is taken 
into account. However, if this is merely a 
level shift, the implications for the degree of 
cyclical labour market slack are likely to be 
similar. If, on the other hand, the broader 
measure has risen much more sharply in the 
course of the recent recessions or has dropped considerably more weakly in the 
aftermath of the current recovery, this could 
be a sign of additional cyclical labour mar-
1 For more on the relationship between the labour 
market situation and wage growth in the euro area, 
see also Deutsche Bundesbank, Wage dynamics amid 
high euro- area unemployment, Monthly Report, De-
cember 2016, pp 33-55.
2 The International Labour Organization (ILO) defi  nes 
as unemployed job- seekers without work who are 
available for work within two weeks and were actively 
seeking work in the last four weeks prior to the survey.3 See European Central Bank, Assessing labour market slack, Economic Bulletin 3/ 17, May 2017, pp 31-35.4 In the offi   cial statistics, the fi  rst two groups are listed 
according to the ILO defi  nition as inactive and often 
referred to as the “potential additional labour force”.Labour underutilisation in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Includes not 
only unemployed persons as defined by Eurostat but also un-
deremployed part-time workers, persons not actively seeking work but who are available to work, and persons actively seek-
ing work but not (yet) available. The numerator is composed of 
the extended labour force (persons in the active labour force plus persons in the potential additional labour force). 2 Num-
ber of unemployed persons over the active labour force (em-ployed  persons  and  unemployed  persons).  Unemployed  per-sons  are  persons  between  the  ages  of  15  and  74  who  are 
without work, available to take up work within the next two 
weeks and were actively seeking work in the four weeks prior to the survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 20166810121416182022%, seasonally adjusted
0246810Broader measure of underemployment 1
Unemployment rate 2
Difference (in percentage points)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
19

ter. The standardised unemployment rate fell to 
9.5% in March; one year previously, 10.2% of 
the labour force were recorded as unemployed. 
Broader measures of underemployment are also 
showing signs of an improvement in the situ -
ation (see box on pages 19 and 20). While the 
number of unemployed people in the fourth 
quarter of 2016 fell by one million compared to 
the same quarter a year earlier, employment ex -
perienced considerable growth. Gross hourly 
wage growth accelerated to 1.9% on the year.
Consumer prices in the euro area rose markedly 
on the quarter for the fourth time in a row in 
the first quarter of 2017, at a seasonally ad -
justed 0.6%. This was primarily due to energy, 
which became significantly more expensive on 
account of higher crude oil prices, and to un -
processed food, where the especially cold wea -
ther at the start of the year became noticeable. 
By contrast, prices for services again increased 
moderately by 0.3% and consumers, as before, 
had to pay very little more for industrial goods excluding energy than in the preceding quarter. 
Overall, annual HICP inflation jumped very 
sharply by 1.1 percentage points to 1.8% on a 
quarterly average. The fact that consumer prices 
a year earlier had dropped significantly due to 
the lower crude oil prices at the time was also a 
contributing factor in this context. On the other 
hand, the shift in the date of Easter from March 
in 2016 to April in 2017 had a particularly damp -
ening effect on the prices of services and re -
sulted in a slight temporary decline on the year-  
on- year rate at the end of the quarter.
Inflation excluding energy and food averaged 
0.8% for the first quarter, as in the three previ -
ous periods, with figures ranging from -0.1% in 
Cyprus to 1.8% in Austria. In Germany (1.0% at 
last report), core inflation has slightly exceeded 
the euro-area average since 2013, primarily due 
to a greater increase in the price of industrial 
goods excluding energy, while the price of ser -
vices is displaying trends similar to the euro 
area. Core inflation was up on the quarter in Consumer price 
inflation up again in winter primarily due to volatile components By contrast, core inflation unchanged and slightly above euro-area aver-age in Germany since 2013ket slack which is not being adequately re-
ported by the traditional unemployment 
rate.
In actual fact, according to the broader def-
inition, the rate of labour market slack in 
2008, the last year up to which such a cal-
culation can be retraced using the available data, was around 14.8%, as against an un-employment rate of 7.6%. Even prior to the massive job losses in 2009-10 and 2012-13, 
the gap between both rates has stood at 
7.3 percentage points. In the past year, it 
was only around 1 percentage point larger 
than in 2008. If one looks at the period be-
tween 2008 and 2016, both rates moved 
more or less in sync.5 Although the broader 
rate picked up a bit faster, particularly in the later phase of the crisis, before then initially receding a bit more slowly, the broadly de-fi  ned ratio already fell more strongly in the 
past year than the narrowly defi  ned ratio. On the whole, therefore, there appear to be similar implications for the degree of 
cyclical labour market slack in the euro area 
and thus for wage dynamics, and the two 
defi  nitions should be regarded as largely 
complementary.
5 On the other hand, the United States saw a similarly 
broad measure of labour market slack (U6) and the 
unemployment rate drift apart considerably during the 
2008-09 recession. The resulting gap, however, re-
ceded considerably and, at last report, was only slightly 
above its pre- crisis level. In addition, precisely in view 
of the data for the euro area, the possibility of struc-
tural shifts and statistical breaks needs to be taken into 
account. These could be signifi  cant, specifi  cally regard-ing the data for France and the Netherlands.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
20

nine countries in the first quarter of 2017, while 
it was down in five other countries.
Euro-area HICP inflation rose considerably to 
1.9% in April from 1.5% in March. This was 
predominantly due to services prices, which 
had increased significantly on the year primarily due to the shift in the date of Easter on the cal -
endar. By contrast, the prices of the other com -
ponents in the basket of goods hardly changed. 
HICP excluding energy and food, in which ser -
vices are given a weighting of two- thirds, 
therefore increased significantly by 0.5 percent -
age point to 1.2%.Inflation up 
sharply in April, mainly due to EasterDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
21

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
The Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) kept the key interest rates un -
changed in the reporting period. The main refi -
nancing rate therefore remains at 0%, while 
the marginal lending rate stands at 0.25% and 
the deposit facility rate at -0.40%. Further -
more, the Governing Council continues to 
expect  the key ECB interest rates to remain at 
present or lower levels for an extended period 
of time, and well past the horizon of its net 
asset purchases. Purchases under the expanded 
asset purchase programme (APP) have been 
made at the reduced monthly pace of €60 bil -
lion since April 2017 and will run until the end 
of December 2017, or beyond, if necessary, and 
in any case until the Governing Council sees a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. The net pur -
chases will be made alongside reinvestments of 
the principal payments from maturing secur -
ities purchased under the APP .
The economic recovery in the euro area has be -
come increasingly solid in recent quarters, 
according  to the ECB  Governing Council’s 
assess  ment. At the same time, the downside 
risks to the euro area’s growth prospects 
waned, meaning that the risks are moving 
towards  a more balanced configuration overall. 
However, the Governing Council perceives that 
the risks have so far remained tilted to the 
downside and relate predominantly to global 
factors. The ECB Governing Council will review 
this assessment at the beginning of June, when 
the new Eurosystem macroeconomic projec -
tions are available.
The Governing Council of the ECB does not 
consider the significant rise in the headline in -
flation rate to close to 2% at present to be dur -
able and self- sustained, noting that pressure on 
core inflation has remained subdued and has 
yet to show a convincing upward trend. The 
Governing Council therefore believes that a 
very substantial degree of monetary accommo -
dation is still needed for underlying inflation 
pressures to build up and support headline in -
flation in the medium term. In view of the re -
cently observed fluctuations in headline infla -
tion, the ECB Governing Council also stressed 
the need to continue to look through changes 
in HICP inflation that it judges to be transient 
and to have no implication for the medium-  
term outlook for price stability.
On 29 March 2017, the last of the total of four 
rounds in the second series of targeted longer- 
term refinancing operations (TLTRO II) adopted 
in March 2016 was conducted. This operation 
saw 474 institutions taking up an overall vol -
ume of €233.5 billion. This significantly ex -
ceeded market expectations, probably thanks ECB Governing 
Council leaves policy rates unchanged Economic recov-ery increasingly 
taking hold and 
downside risks 
diminished
Headline 
inflation  up significantly  on 2016
474 banks 
borrow  €233.5 billion in final TLTRO IIMoney market interest rates in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month Euribor less three-month Eonia swap rate. • Average 
1 to 18 May 2017.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 20170.500.2500.250.500.751.00
––++++
025Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
22

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 25  January 2017 and 2  May 2017 saw a signifi  cant increase in euro- area li-
quidity needs stemming from autonomous 
factors (see the table below). They aver-aged €1,000.5 billion in the March- May 2017 reserve period, which was €99.5 bil-
lion more than the average for the Decem-
ber 2016-January 2017 reserve period, ie 
the last period before the period under ob-
servation. Overall, the sum of the autono-
mous factors moved within a broad corri-
dor of €890.0 billion to €1,038.8 billion in 
the two reserve maintenance periods and exceeded the €1 trillion mark for the fi  rst 
time. The average increase in autonomous 
factors resulted mainly from the €61.3 bil-
lion decline in net foreign assets and other 
factors, which are considered together be-
cause of liquidity- neutral valuation effects. In addition, the increase in government de-
posits with the Eurosystem also raised the 
calculated need for central bank liquidity by 
an average of €38.9 billion. In the March- 
May 2017 reserve period, average deposits 
were therefore high, at €182.0 billion. 
Banknotes in circulation, which fell slightly 
by €0.7 billion in net terms, had little infl  u-
ence on the banking sector’s liquidity pos-
ition vis- à- vis the Eurosystem. The minimum 
reserve requirement was €120.6 billion in 
the March- May 2017 reserve period, which 
equated to a liquidity- absorbing increase 
totalling €1.9 billion across the two reserve maintenance periods.
A particularly important event during the 
period under observation was the allotment of the fourth operation in the second series 
of targeted longer- term refi  nancing oper-
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2017
25 January
to
14 March15 March
to
2 May
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +   8.3 –   7.6
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) –  17.2 –  21.7
3 Net foreign assets
1 –  12.3 +  16.2
4 Other factors 1 –   8.6 –  56.6
Total –  29.8 –  69.7
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –   5.6 –  10.5
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +   5.4 + 153.1
(c) Other operations + 116.7 + 117.8
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +   0.1 +   0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  44.8 –  70.8
Total +  71.8 + 189.6
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) +  41.9 + 120.2
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   1.6 –   0.3
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report. 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
23

ations (TLTRO II). Overall, 474 credit institu-
tions were allotted €233.5 billion, which 
was signifi  cantly more than the majority of 
market participants had expected before-
hand. The attractive terms for this four- year 
operation and the prospect that this tender was, for now, the last of its kind are likely to 
have been key factors contributing to the high demand. In addition to this TLTRO II operation, voluntary early repayments of the fi  rst and third operations of the TLTRO I 
series totalling €16.7 billion were received 
on 29 March 2017, meaning that the net in-
jection of liquidity from these three oper-ations amounted to €216.7 billion overall. 
The positive liquidity effects had been con-
siderably lower for the three previous TLTRO II operations, namely €38.2 billion, 
€34.2 billion and €48.0 billion. The volume 
of all TLTRO II operations totalled €740.2 billion at the end of the period under re-
view, which was equal to 95% of the out-
standing tender volume.
This dominance of long- term operations came at the expense of standard tenders: averaged across the March- May 2017 re-
serve period, demand for the main refi  nan-cing operations dropped by €16.1 billion to €18.5 billion as compared to the December 
2016-January 2017 reserve period. More-over, the total volume of the three- month 
tenders fell by €4.3 billion to €7.4 billion in 
the same period. In sum, the outstanding 
tender volume rose considerably, however, 
and averaged €725.9 billion in the March- 
May 2017 reserve period (+€142.4 billion 
compared with the average for the Decem-
ber 2016-January 2017 reserve period; see 
the charts on pages 25 and 26).
Despite this increase, monetary policy asset 
purchase programmes again accounted for 
the majority of the liquidity provided 
through the Eurosystem in the period under consideration. During the March- May 2017 
reserve period, they represented average 
balance sheet holdings of €1,905 billion, 
which equated to a plus of €234 billion 
relative to the average balance sheet hold-
ings of all purchase programmes in the De-
cember 2016-January 2017 reserve period 
(see the adjacent table). As of 1 April 2017, 
the Eurosystem reduced its intended 
monthly purchase volume under the ex-Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ItemChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet holdings as 
at 12 May 
2017
Active programmes
 PSPP + 203.9 1,534.8
CBPP3 +   9.2 218.6
CSPP +  24.8 84.9
ABSPP +   0.9 23.8
Completed programmes 
 SMP –   3.8 98.4
CBPP1 –   2.8 8.3
CBPP2 –   1.0 5.8
Deutsche BundesbankCentral bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankDec Jan Feb Mar Apr May
16 20170.50.40.30.20.10
–––––Daily data
€ bn%
1,0001,2001,4001,600Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for 
the reservemaintenance period
 2Eonia
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
24

panded asset purchase programme (APP) 
from €80 billion to €60 billion.
As a result, excess liquidity in the Eurosystem 
rose further during the reporting period. 
During the March- May 2017 reserve period, 
it averaged €1,510 billion, which was €276 
billion above the average of the December 
2016-January 2017 reserve period. The 
greater liquidity needs resulting from au-
tonomous factors, however, meant that the injection of liquidity from open market oper-
ations was not fully reﬂ  ected in excess li-
quidity. Nonetheless, excess liquidity reached a new all- time high of €1,641 billion on the last day of the observation period.
This extremely comfortable liquidity situ-
ation meant that the deposit facility rate re-
mained the benchmark for overnight rates 
during the period under review (see the 
chart on page 24). Eonia stayed above the 
deposit rate and tended to move between -0.35% and -0.36% throughout the two re-serve maintenance periods, albeit with low 
turnovers averaging €9.2 billion (as com-pared to €13.8 billion in the two corres-ponding periods of the previous year). By contrast, secured overnight money in GC Pooling (ECB basket) was even trading somewhat below the deposit rate in the period under review, at an average of 
-0.42%, with regulatory factors potentially 
also having an inﬂ  uence. Overnight money in the ECB EXTended basket (which contains 
a larger set of eligible securities) traded at an average of -0.40%. The underlying 
GC Pooling Overnight turnovers in the two 
baskets were also low during the two re-serve maintenance periods, at a total of €5.6 billion on average (compared with 
€10.0 billion in the same two periods of the 
previous year). End- of- month transactions 
have recently not tended to have any major 
impact on Eonia or the overnight rates in 
GC Pooling.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor  purchase  programme  (CSPP).  2 Current  account  holdings  minus  the  minimum  reserve  requirement  plus  the  deposit  facility. 
3 Volume so small it is hardly visible. 4 The marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank2,0001,5001,00050005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,000
––––++++++October November December January February March April May
2016 2017Current account 
holdings in excess of the reserve requirementDeposit facility
 4Purchase
programmes 1
Main refinancingoperations
Three-month 
tenders 3
Second series oftargeted longer-term refinan-cing operations(TLTRO II)First series of
targeted longer-term refinan-cing operations(TLTRO I)
 3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2017  
25

to the operation’s favourable conditions, which 
became even more attractive compared with 
the costs of market- based funding due to 
growing expectations of an interest rate hike. 
In parallel to the final TLTRO II allotment, there 
were voluntary repayments of funds provided 
under the first series of targeted longer- term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO I) in the total 
amount of €16.7 billion. This brought the net 
liquidity effect to €216.8 billion. The total 
amount outstanding for TLTRO I and II is thus 
€762 billion.
On 12 May 2017, the Eurosystem held assets in 
the amount of €1,534.8 billion as part of the 
public sector purchase programme (PSPP). The 
average residual maturity of the PSPP portfolio 
declined again slightly from 8.3 years to 8 
years. Assets purchased to date under the third 
covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3) 
and the asset- backed securities purchase pro -
gramme (ABSPP) came to €218.6 billion and 
€23.8 billion, respectively. As for the corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP), the volume 
of assets purchased up to 12  May totalled 
€84.9 billion.
In the period under review, excess liquidity con -
tinued to follow the upward trend seen since 
the APP was launched, climbing by €329 billion 
to €1,654 billion. This increase was again 
mainly propelled in the reporting period by the 
continued asset purchases and given a further 
boost by the positive net liquidity effect stem -
ming from the TLTROs, while volumes in the 
standard tender operations eased again slightly. 
Excess liquidity should carry on increasing 
throughout the rest of this year on account of 
the monthly APP purchases.
The unsecured overnight rate in the money 
market (Eonia) hovered in a narrow range of 
between -0.35% and -0.36% during the period 
under review, which was not far off the deposit 
facility rate, while the secured overnight rate 
(STOXX  GC  Pooling) was still lower than the Purchase 
volumes  still in line with announced target Excess liquidity 
continues 
upward trend
Fluctuating for-
ward rates sig-nal uncertainty about interest expectationsOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve periods. The last period displayed 
is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 201704008001,2001,6002,0002,4002,800€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
26

Eonia rate and slightly below, but close to, the 
deposit facility rate. The three- month Euribor 
was largely unchanged in the reporting period, 
standing at -0.33% at last report. Money mar -
ket forward rates experienced strong fluctu -
ations in the period under review, signalling 
uncertainty in the assessments concerning the 
future path of key monetary policy rates. In 
March, forward rates rose distinctly, indicating 
a market expectation of a possible first hike to 
the deposit facility rate as early as the begin -
ning of 2018. More recently, however, they 
exhibited  signs that the deposit facility rate is 
expected to be lifted only after the end of 2018 
or thereabouts.
Monetary developments  
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 continued 
to grow considerably in the first quarter of 
2017, the annual growth rate of 5.3% observed 
at the end of March matching the pace re -
corded since back in April 2015. The sustained 
expansion of the money stock can be explained 
by the money- holding sector’s ongoing strong 
preference for overnight deposits given low 
opportunity costs. A glance at the counterparts 
reveals that lending by the MFI sector – includ -
ing the Eurosystem – to non- banks in the euro area was the chief driver of monetary growth 
in the last few quarters. During the quarter 
under review, continued growth was seen 
mainly in bank loans to the private sector, on 
account of the economy’s robust and geo -
graphically broad growth path as well as the 
very low interest rate level. At the same time, 
securitised lending to the non- bank private sec -
tor and general government also continued to 
grow on the back of the Eurosystem’s asset 
purchases.
The increase in overnight deposits has been the 
dominant factor in monetary growth for five 
consecutive years now; inflows were particu -
larly strong between January and March 2017. 
For the most part, the deposits were those of 
households and non- financial corporations. 
Both sectors have been steadily building up 
overnight deposits since 2012; this has been 
observed in many euro-area countries, and 
especially  in the four large member states. The 
extremely low short- term interest rates coupled 
with the flat yield curve are making it attractive 
per se  for risk-  averse investors to maintain 
money holdings over other forms of invest -
ment. Besides that, interest rates on other 
short- term deposits have moved more un -
favourably than those on overnight deposits, 
spurring shifts within M3 into the highly liquid 
monetary component.Accommodative 
monetary policy shapes monet -
ary dynamicsOvernight deposits still main driver of M3 growthConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2017 Q1 2016 Q4
Central government deposits – 15.9 6.6
Monetary aggregate M3 212.8 117.7
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 202.0 162.6
Other shorter-term bank deposits (M2-M1) –  7.2 – 62.1
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 18.0 17.2
MFI longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 26.3 – 27.5
of which
Capital and reserves 28.1 15.0
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 54.4 – 42.6Assets 2017 Q1 2016 Q4
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 152.6 79.8
Loans 99.6 61.4
Loans, adjusted 1 92.9 65.0
Securities 53.0 18.3
Credit to general government in the euro area 61.0 153.1
Loans – 11.0 – 20.3
Securities 71.2 173.6
Net external assets – 30.4 – 44.5
Other counterparts of M3 – 11.9 – 91.7
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
27

Turning to MFI lending to non- banks in the 
euro area, one notable development in the 
quarter under review was the ongoing recovery 
in loans to private non- MFIs (adjusted for sales, 
securitisation and notional cash pooling), which 
saw the annual growth rate climb to 2.7% by 
the end of March. The gap between money 
and credit growth has thus narrowed consider -
ably since mid-2015, but is still large by histor -
ical standards.
The largest increase was recorded in loans to 
households, which saw the annual growth rate 
rise in the reporting quarter from 2.0% at the 
end of December to 2.4% at the end of March. 
Once again, the driving force behind this was 
loans for house purchase, which in turn were 
shaped by sustained growth in the core coun -
tries, and particularly in France. However, there 
was also evidence of an overall upward trend 
in those countries where the household sector 
as a whole is still in the process of paring back 
its stock of housing loans. According to the 
bank managers approached for the Bank Lend -
ing Survey (BLS), the dynamic growth in house -
hold demand for housing loans also persisted 
in the first quarter. They stated that demand 
was mainly supported by the low general level 
of interest rates, the outlook on the housing 
market and the anticipated house price trend, 
as well as robust consumer confidence. Credit 
standards were loosened a little.
Consumer credit also recorded a marked in -
crease in the first quarter, once again under -
pinned by the expansionary underlying trend in 
private consumption. The banks surveyed in 
the BLS reported another distinct increase in 
demand for consumer credit, which they attrib -
uted mainly to the strong propensity to pur -
chase, the low general level of interest rates 
and stable consumer confidence. Lending 
standards were eased slightly, as in the preced -
ing quarters.
The other mainstay of lending to the private 
sector in the quarter under review was loans to 
non- financial corporations. Net inflows in this Loans to private 
non- MFIs recover further
Clear growth in 
loans to house-
holds driven by 
housing loans
Marked rise in 
consumer credit
Loans to non- 
financial corpor-ations still on the rise as wellMonetary aggregates and counterparts in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial  
corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 17202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
202468
–++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
of which
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and counterpartsM3 and components
M3–M2
M2–M1
M1
Percentage growth
in M3
Remaining counterparts
Securities-based lending to
general government
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations
HouseholdsNet external assets
Credit to the private sector 2
Percentage growth in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage pointsContribution of components in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
28

credit segment came to a similar volume as in 
the preceding quarter, with the increase in me -
dium to long- term lending still the most signifi -
cant factor (see the upper adjacent chart). 
Growth in loans to enterprises is currently 
being boosted by the very low lending rates 
and by the geographically broad- based eco -
nomic recovery in the euro area. However, the 
sluggishness of investment in machinery and 
equipment is acting as a brake on credit growth 
dynamics. The growth rate of loans to non-  
financial corporations remained virtually 
unchanged on the previous quarter, at 2.3%. 
This is consistent with the fact that, according 
to the BLS results, demand for bank loans 
among non- financial corporations rose further 
in the first quarter, albeit  less dynamically than 
in the preceding quarters. The survey respond -
ents cited higher financing needs for inventor -
ies and working capital as well as the low gen -
eral level of interest rates as major contributors 
to the increase. Moreover, the surveyed institu -
tions left their lending standards for corporate 
customers largely unchanged.
As in the preceding quarters, the growth in 
loans to non- financial corporations in the euro 
area was fuelled chiefly by the contributions of 
banks in France and Germany. Banks in other 
core euro-area countries, too, appreciably ex -
panded their lending business in this segment 
in the aggregate. Italy and Spain, on the other 
hand, again provided only very weak impetus 
in the first quarter. Aside from restrained invest -
ment activity, demand for loans among enter -
prises was dampened in specific countries, 
such as Germany and Spain, by the ongoing 
good availability of funds via internal financing. 
What is more, net sales of bonds issued by 
non- financial corporations in the euro area 
– particularly in France, and to a lesser extent in 
Germany, too – picked up in the last few quar -
ters (see the lower adjacent chart). This devel -
opment is being propelled by the favourable 
financing terms on the capital markets, which 
can be attributed in part to the Eurosystem’s 
CSPP . This is consistent with the assessment 
made by the banks surveyed for the BLS that Discernible 
country- specific differences in loan dynamicsLoans to non-financial corporations in the euro area
*
Source: ECB. * Aggregate adjusted for loan sales and securit-
isation as well as for positions arising from notional cash pool-
ing services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 1760402002040
–––++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
... up to 1 year
... more than 1 to 5 years
... more than 5 years
TotalMaturity of ...
Selected components of the external financing of non-financial corporations in the euro area
20015010050050100
––––++€ billion, year-on-year change
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 17
Source: ECB. 1 Granted by MFIs in the countries shown. Season-
ally adjusted and adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as 
well as (in the euro area) for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 By non-financial corpora-
tions in the countries shown. According to issuance  statistics. 
Not seasonally adjusted.
Deutsche BundesbankFrance
Italy
050100150Spain
Net bond sales 2GermanyLoans1
Euro areaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
29

Ongoing portfolio shifts into higher- yielding assets 
in Germany
In an earlier work the Deutsche Bundesbank 
came to the conclusion that the investment 
behaviour of households in Germany is gener-
ally dominated to a very great extent by risk 
aversion and a preference for liquidity, despite 
the implications of the low- interest- rate envir-
onment. The Bank’s economists observed that yield awareness started to pick up to a degree 
in 2014 but found that it was only a second-
ary factor overall. A stronger inclination to 
search for yield, relatively speaking, was iden-
tifi  ed among fi  nancial corporations, but there 
were no signs of any large- scale portfolio re-
allocations in the majority of sectors.1
All things considered, these developments ap-
pear to have persisted, judging by the latest 
data (for the year 2016) taken from the fi  nan-
cial and monetary statistics. The money- 
holding sectors as a whole once again saw 
their bank deposits grow at a slightly quicker pace than their fi  nancial assets in 2016 (see the below chart). This development was 
driven by the increase in deposits of the pri-
vate non- fi  nancial sector, which more than 
offset the drop in the deposits of fi  nancial cor-
porations.2 The fact that bank deposits pro-
duce lower returns on average than most 
other forms of investment3 indicates that 
households and non- fi  nancial corporations 
are still less inclined overall to search for yield.
This is mainly true for the household sector, 
which built up deposits at an even faster pace 
in 2016. Households’ money holdings in par-
ticular continued to be dominated by the un-
usually brisk build- up of overnight deposits, while the reduction of short- term time de-
posits as well as longer- term forms of deposit 
was slower than one year earlier (see the 
chart on page 31). Non- fi  nancial corporations 
likewise continued to accumulate overnight deposits in particular, even though banks 
lowered their interest rates on the short- term 
deposits of non- fi  nancial corporations even 
further than those of households, sometimes 
even moving their rates into negative territory, especially for large- scale deposits.
Turning to the other forms of investment, it 
was observed that households stepped up 
their exposures to listed shares noticeably in 
2016, investing their funds in both German and foreign shares. Purchases of investment 
fund shares continued to play a major role as well. Hence, the importance of capital market 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Indications of portfolio 
shifts into higher- yielding assets in Germany, Monthly 
Report, May 2016, pp 34-37.
2 For the purposes of this box, fi  nancial corporations 
are defi  ned as excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) as the analysis relates to the money- holding sec-
tors. In addition, the following sectoral analysis disre-
gards the general government sector as its acquisition of fi  nancial assets is comparably modest and volatile.3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, German households’ sav-
ing and investment behaviour in light of the low- interest- rate environment, Monthly Report, October 
2015, pp 13-31.Deposits as a percentage of total sectoral financial assets in Germany
1 To adjust for statistical changes and revaluations. 2 Including 
investment funds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 20168101214161820222426Notional stocks with base year 2000,1 %
Money-holding sectors as a whole
of which
Households
and non-financialcorporations
Other financial intermediaries
 2
as well as insurance corporations
and pension fundsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
30

exposures has increased substantially over the 
past two years. While this would indicate that 
households, faced with historically low nom-
inal interest rates, have certainly not turned a 
blind eye to yield considerations in their in-vestment decisions, the persistently steep 
growth in claims on (life) insurers, along with 
the strong accumulation of overnight de-
posits, would suggest per se that households 
act primarily in a risk- averse manner.4
The acquisition of fi  nancial assets by non- 
fi  nancial corporations is another factor that is presumably still being driven less by yield con-
siderations and more by other motives. For 
instance, non- fi  nancial corporations acquired 
far more listed shares in the context of M&A activities at the current end than one year 
earlier. The bulk of those shares were issued 
by other non- fi  nancial corporations in Ger-
many and abroad. Intrasectoral loans granted, 
by contrast, were somewhat more subdued in 
2016 following a rather strong showing in 
2015, when loans were mainly channelled to 
4 Indications that a greater number of households in 
Germany have adapted their saving and investment 
behaviour of late can also be found at the microeco-
nomic level. For more on this topic, see P Marek, Sav-
ing patterns in the low- interest- rate setting – results of 
the 2016 PHF summer survey, Bundesbank Research 
Brief, April 2017. This survey does not indicate which 
forms of investment are affected by these changes, 
however.Build-up of deposits and total acquisition of financial assets in the private non-financial sector in Germany
1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. Deposits figures seasonally adjusted. 2 Households including non-profit institutions 
serving households. 3 Including quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201620015010050050100150200250
––––+++++€ billion, 12-month flows at quarter-end 1
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201650050100150200
–++++
–30–20–100+10+20+30+40+50+60
–150–100–500+50+100+150+200+250+300Households 2
Non-financial corporations 3... with a longer maturity... redeemable at notice of up to 3 months... with an agreed maturity of up to 2 years
Overnight depositsDeposits ... Deposits
Securities
Claims on insurance corporations
Other
Loans
TotalTotalTotal acquisition of financial assets DepositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
31

other non- fi  nancial corporations in the euro 
area.
Within the fi  nancial sector, 2016 once again 
saw insurance corporations and pension funds 
pare back their stock of deposits considerably, 
mainly by reducing their holdings of longer- 
term time deposits (see the above chart). These 
developments mean that investment fund 
shares have eclipsed deposits as this sector’s 
most important form of investment since back in 2012; note that the stocks of debt securities 
now also clearly surpass those of deposits.
In 2016, insurance corporations and pension 
funds once again invested very heavily in in-
vestment fund shares, and their purchases of long- term debt securities (primarily foreign 
paper) were also up on the year. This accumu-
lation of debt securities forms part of the 
portfolio shifts which can be traced back in 
part to regulatory requirements, ie the EU- wide introduction of Solvency II – a regime 
which gives insurers a stronger incentive to 
hedge their exposure resulting from the usu-
ally long duration of their liabilities by invest-
ing in long- term assets with the nearest- 
possible maturities, ie to duration- match their assets and liabilities.
5
5 More on duration matching can be found in 
D Domanski, H S Shin and V Sushko (2017), The hunt 
for duration: not waving but drowning?, IMF  Eco-
nomic Review, 65 (1), pp 113-153.Build-up of deposits and total acquisition of financial assets in the financial sector
in Germany
1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. Deposits figures seasonally adjusted. 2 Other financial intermediaries including in-
vestment funds but excluding monetary financial institutions and thus excluding money market funds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201640302010010
––––+€ billion, 12-month flows at quarter-end 1
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201650050100150
–+++
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30+40
–100–500+50+100+150+200+250+300Insurance corporations and pension funds
Other financial intermediaries 2... with a longer maturity... redeemable at notice of up to 3 months... with an agreed maturity of up to 2 years
Overnight depositsDeposits ... Deposits
Equity
Loans
Debt securities
Other
TotalTotalDeposits Total acquisition of financial assetsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
32

corporate demand for loans was dampened in 
the reporting quarter per se  by alternative 
funding sources, chiefly by internal financing 
and the issuance of debt securities.
As in the preceding quarters, monetary growth 
was again fuelled largely by the Eurosystem’s 
asset purchases. This was attributable partly to 
the continued purchases of domestic govern -
ment bonds under the PSPP , though securitised 
lending to the private sector also benefited, as 
in previous quarters, from the Eurosystem’s 
bond purchases under the CSPP . Furthermore, 
amidst rising equity prices, banks also added to 
their equity holdings in the quarter under 
review  .
The positive impact of longer- term financial 
liabilities  on the monetary aggregate, which 
has been observed since the end of 2011, con -
tinued in the reporting quarter. The money-  
holding sectors made further significant reduc -
tions to their stock of longer- term time deposits and savings deposits as well as longer- term 
bank debt securities. These developments are 
likely to have been boosted largely by the inter -
est rate constellation and the Eurosystem’s 
TLTRO II series, which represents an attractive 
form of funding to the banking sector.
On the other hand, the continued reduction in 
the MFI sector’s net external asset position per 
se put a damper on monetary growth. Despite 
high current account surpluses, this counter -
part has been declining since mid-2015, mainly 
due to the sharp upturn in net capital exports 
brought about by portfolio investment. The 
balance of payments data so far available for 
January and February 2017 indicate that non-  
resident investors again sold a large volume of 
euro-area government bonds in the quarter 
under review; therefore, the impact of the PSPP 
on the monetary aggregate may have been less 
substantial on balance than the increase in 
securitised  lending to general government Securitised lend-
ing dominated by Eurosystem bond purchases
Renewed drop 
in longer- term financial liabil-itiesContribution from net external  asset position still negativeThe increased take- up of foreign debt secur-
ities with their frequently superior returns, 
meanwhile, refl  ects a certain search for yield. 
This should also be seen against the backdrop 
of the substantial pressure on profi  tability in 
this sector caused by the further drop in inter-est rates in the euro area, which is – amongst 
other things – a result of the expanded asset purchase programme (APP).
6
Stocks of deposits at other fi  nancial inter-mediaries (OFIs)
7 barely changed over the 
year, and their acquisition of fi  nancial assets in 
2016 was underpinned primarily by the invest-
ment activity of investment funds, which par-
ticularly acquired shares in other investment 
funds – a pattern which was already evident 
one year earlier. Similarly, direct purchases of 
long- term debt securities (mainly foreign 
paper) were a major factor in OFIs’ acquisition 
of fi  nancial assets, bouncing back after the 
previous year’s lull.All in all, the changes in the acquisition of fi  -
nancial assets in Germany suggest that while 
there is an inclination to search for yield, it has 
not increased substantially on the year, if the 
aggregated data observed here are anything 
to go by. In particular, households’ investment 
behaviour remains primarily risk- averse and 
very much geared to liquid forms of invest-
ment, though they are generally showing a 
greater interest in securities. Furthermore, the portfolio shifts by insurers were arguably mo-
tivated not just by purely yield- related consid-
erations but also by an increased preference 
for long- dated assets on account of the low- 
interest- rate setting and the new supervisory 
regime.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Risks in the life insurance 
sector, Financial Stability Review 2015, pp 41-55; and 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Funded pension providers con-
tinuing to face challenges, Financial Stability Review 
2016, pp 49-66.
7 Including investment funds, but excluding monetary 
fi  nancial institutions and thus also money market 
funds.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
33

might suggest.1 Furthermore, the net external 
asset position was adversely affected by the 
fact that demand for foreign securities among 
domestic non- banks regained momentum in 
the first two months of the year.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic  customers
In the first quarter of 2017, German banks’ de -
posit business with domestic customers again 
saw an ongoing increase in short- term deposits 
and a simultaneous reduction in long- term de -posits, although growth was even stronger 
than in the fourth quarter of 2016. Once again, 
inflows were most notably recorded by over -
night deposits, with their growth in the 
January- March quarter – in contrast to the pre -
vious quarters – being supported by all money- 
holding sectors. The continued preference for 
highly liquid forms of deposit is still being 
driven by the historically low interest rate level 
and the flat yield curve (see the adjacent chart).
From a sectoral perspective, this development 
was mainly propelled by households, though 
their figures were slightly down on the previous 
quarter. As is explained in greater detail in the 
box on pages 30 to 33, the manner in which 
the other components of households’ financial 
assets are developing suggests that the inclin -
ation to search for yield has now also become 
something of a factor for this sector.
The non- financial corporate sector likewise 
recorded  high inflows for overnight deposits 
during the reporting quarter, even if their inter -
est rates dwindled further and in some cases 
even dipped into negative territory. One reason 
for the marked accumulation of short- term 
bank deposits in this sector – besides the nar -
row yield premium offered by longer- term bank 
deposits – is likely to be non- financial corpor -
ations’ high level of cash holdings at present, 
which is due to their strong earnings position 
amidst continued weak investment.
Financial corporations, whose investment be -
haviour is characterised more strongly by return 
considerations, once again had a negative im -
pact on deposits overall. Within the financial 
sector, it was again insurance corporations and 
pension funds which reduced their long- term 
time deposits on a fairly large scale. This reduc -
tion is part of ongoing portfolio reallocations 
which – in addition to the pursuit of higher-  
yielding forms of investment – can also be at -
Deposit growth 
still dominated by build- up of 
overnight depositsGrowth in over-
night deposits 
for all sectors, 
especially 
households
Decline in 
deposits in the financial sector driven by insur-ance corpor-ations and pension  fundsInterest rates on bank depositsin Germany
 *
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new 
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the ba-
lance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17012345% pa, monthly data
012345Overall volume 1
New business 2up to 2 years
over 2 years
up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable at notice of ...
over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, How asset purchase pro -
grammes affect the consolidated balance sheet of the MFI 
sector, Monthly Report, November 2016, pp 28-31.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
34

Banking conditions in Germany
1 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as 
the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume 
of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 2 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of re-
spondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents report-ing “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “nar-rowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 3 Expectations for 2017 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 20171.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30+60–300+30+60
2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 171.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
3003060
–++
300306090
–+++Credit to non-financial corporations
%
pa
%
%%
pa
%
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins 2 for ...
Change in margins 2
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit1...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
3
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises1...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.5
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 
    million
3... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase1
with an initial rate fixation of
over ten years
Change in credit standards 2
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards 2  for ...
3... with an initial rate fixation of over
    five years ...Credit to households
... with an initial rate fixation of up to
    one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
35

tributed to regulatory requirements (see 
page 32 of the box).
The dynamics of German banks’ lending busi -
ness with the domestic non- bank sector weak -
ened further in the first quarter of 2017. This 
was due to the continued decline in credit to 
general government, which steepened again in 
the quarter under review. Given the favourable 
fiscal situation, the further reduction in the 
public sector’s financing needs is probably one 
notable factor influencing this development. 
However, as loans to the domestic private sec -
tor once again recorded distinct inflows at the same time, lending to the domestic non- bank 
sector was slightly positive overall.
Following a slight slowdown in the previous 
two quarters, the buoyant household demand 
for loans for house purchase was distinctly 
stronger in the reporting quarter and was again 
primarily responsible for the marked increase in 
loans to the private sector. At 3.8% at the end 
of March 2017, however, year- on- year growth 
in this credit segment was only marginally 
higher than at the end of the previous year.
In addition to the sound income and asset situ -
ation of households, the buoyant demand for 
housing loans in the quarter under review was 
also spurred on by the still exceptionally favour -
able financing conditions. Although the inter -
est rate on long- term loans for house purchase 
rose according to the MFI interest rate statistics 
to 1.9% over the course of the first quarter, it 
still stood close to its all- time low since the 
introduction of the harmonised statistics in 
2003, which it reached last September. The re -
sults of the latest BLS provide evidence of fur -
ther factors influencing these developments. 
According to the surveyed banks, the demand 
for loans in this segment during the reporting 
quarter was not only supported by the low 
general level of interest rates, but also by ro -
bust consumer confidence as well as the posi -
tive outlook for the housing market and for 
prospective residential property price develop -
ment. At the same time, the banks’ lending 
policies helped stimulate demand for housing 
loans in the quarter under review, with the re -
spondent banks having eased their credit 
standards for loans for house purchase mark -
edly in net terms for the first time since 2011. In 
light of the buoyant demand for loans for 
house purchase, it remains to be seen whether 
this tendency will persist. For the coming quar -
ter, the surveyed banks intend to relax their 
standards further on balance, albeit to a lesser 
extent when compared with the current level 
of easing.Barely any 
increase in lend-ing business with domestic non- banks on balanceLoans to the 
private  sector 
driven by 
increased 
demand for 
loans for house 
purchaseLending and deposits of monetary 
 fi  nancial institutions in Germany*
3-month accumulated fl  ows in € billion, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2016 2017
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 31.2 43.0
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 5.5 5.7
over 2 years – 3.2 –  7.0
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 0.6 0.0
over 3 months – 2.2 –  1.7
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 8.2 –  7.8
Securities – 5.8 – 11.3
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 16.0 19.7
of which to households 3 9.6 12.7
to non-fi  nancial  corporations
4 4.5 5.7
Securities 5.3 –  1.4
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-prises, households and general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non-fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
36

Consumer credit also recorded distinct inflows 
in the quarter under review. This is consistent 
with the notable upturn in demand for con -
sumer credit in the first quarter of 2017 re -
vealed by the BLS data. The banks surveyed in 
the BLS put this increase down to consumers’ 
stable propensity to spend, ongoing strong 
consumer confidence, and the low general 
interest rate level. The surveyed banks left their 
standards for consumer credit virtually un -
changed.
Aside from loans to domestic households, 
banks in Germany also markedly increased their 
loans to non- financial corporations in the re -
porting quarter. At an annual rate of just under 
2½% at the end of the first quarter, the pace of 
growth in this credit segment, however, is cur -
rently slower than that of loans to households. 
The upward trend exhibited by loans to enter -
prises is being curbed by industrial investment, 
which has remained subdued. Unlike in the rest 
of the euro area, where enterprises have a 
stronger inclination to take out shorter- term 
loans as well, German companies only stepped 
up their demand for long- term loans in the re -
porting period. Besides the exceptionally low 
interest rates on long- term loans, this can prob -
ably be put down mainly to the generally up -
beat economic and business expectations, 
which strengthened enterprises’ interest in 
long- term financing projects. The persistently 
weak development in short and medium- term 
loans should be seen against the backdrop of 
the abundant funds currently available to Ger -
man enterprises from alternative sources of 
financing .
The BLS results from the first quarter of 2017 
largely support these inferences. The respond -
ent banks pointed to the financing needs for 
inventories and working capital as well as the 
low level of interest rates as the main drivers of 
the marked rise in demand for bank loans. By 
contrast, recourse to alternative sources of 
funding such as enterprises’ use of ample in -
ternal financing means, in particular, had a 
dampening effect on demand. The surveyed banks reported that they had left their credit 
standards for lending to enterprises virtually 
unchanged.
The BLS conducted in April contained add -
itional questions on banks’ financing condi -
tions, the levels of credit standards, the impact 
of the Eurosystem’s asset purchases, and the 
consequences for credit business of the nega -
tive interest rate on the Eurosystem’s deposit 
facility. The German banks reported that, given 
the situation in the financial markets, their 
funding situation had shown a marked im -
provement compared with the preceding quar -
ter. Relative to the midpoint of the range set by Fresh inflows for 
consumer credit
Renewed 
increase in 
lending  to 
non-financial  corporations with unchanged credit standards
Banks’ profitability  dented by APP and negative deposit facility rate2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 17–10+1+2+3+4Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
32101234
–––++++Non-financial corporations 1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholdsUp to 1 year
More than 1 year and up to 5 years
More than 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total percentage 
growth rateLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal percentage 
growth rateMaturity contributions in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
37

the credit standards implemented since the 
second quarter of 2010, credit standards for 
loans to enterprises and consumer credit alike 
are currently somewhat higher than their aver -
age level, while it turns out that the standards 
for loans to households for house purchase are 
considerably tighter than the benchmark. Ac -
cording to the banks, the Eurosystem’s pur -
chase programme was improving their liquidity 
position and funding conditions. The increase 
in liquidity in the past six months was chiefly 
the outcome of bank customers’ portfolio 
shifts into bank deposits rather than the banks’ own sales of securities. Nevertheless, the Ger -
man banks taking part in the survey also re -
ported on a broad front that the purchase pro -
gramme was squeezing their net interest mar -
gins and thus denting their profitability. The 
negative interest rate on the deposit facility 
was another key factor  in banks’ shrinking net 
interest income over the past six months. 
Owing to the negative deposit rate, both lend -
ing rates and margins in all surveyed business 
lines fell, while the effects on the credit volume 
were limited.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
38

Financial markets
Financial market setting
From the beginning of this year the inter -
national financial markets have been character -
ised on the one hand by global economic activ -
ity that was firmer overall and, on the other, by 
volatile political factors. Uncertainty in the mar -
kets rose temporarily, in particular, in the run-  
up to the French presidential elections. This led 
to an increased demand for safe assets and to 
short- lived price losses in the European stock 
markets. Market participants’ concerns dissi -
pated quickly, however, immediately after the 
results of the first round of voting were an -
nounced. The stock markets subsequently re -
corded major price gains, which were accom -
panied by rising yields on ten- year Federal 
bonds, for example. In contrast, yields on long- 
term US Treasuries receded on balance in the 
course of the reporting period although the 
US Federal Reserve raised its policy rate again in 
March. A more sceptical view held by market 
participants regarding the implementation of 
the economic policy measures in the United 
States, which had previously driven up market 
interest rates when they were announced, 
seems to have led to decreasing term pre -
miums. This is supported by the fact that 
market- based forward inflation rates also con -
tracted towards the end of the reporting 
period. In the foreign exchange markets, mar -
ket sentiment shifted in favour of the euro as 
political uncertainties in Europe ebbed. Meas -
ured against the currencies of 19 major trading 
partners, the euro appreciated by 2% com -
pared with the beginning of the year.
Exchange rates
The euro- dollar exchange rate strengthened 
considerably on balance from the beginning of 
2017. Over the course of the last months, how -
ever, it was affected by marked fluctuations 
that were largely attributable to changing ex -pectations about the future monetary policy 
stance on either side of the Atlantic and the 
outcome of the French presidential elections as 
well as, more recently, to developments in US 
domestic politics. After standing at below 
US$1.04 – which was close to its 2003 low – at 
the beginning of the year, the euro recovered 
at first significantly on the back of robust eco -
nomic data and a marked rise in euro- area in -
flation. Moreover, at the meeting of the Federal 
Open Market Committee in early February the 
Federal Reserve did not specify details about 
the timing of the next policy rate hike in the 
United States, and doubts arose as to whether 
US President Trump would be able to quickly 
realise his plans to implement extensive tax 
cuts and other stimulus measures. This weak -
ened the US dollar on a broad basis and bene -
fited the euro, amongst others.
In subsequent weeks, however, market partici -
pants focused more on the presidential elec -
tions in France and on the political risks the 
outcome entailed for the euro area. Besides 
concerns that a euro- critical candidate might 
win the election, during this time the euro-  
dollar exchange rate experienced downward 
pressure as early as March 2017 from signs of a 
US policy rate increase. When the Fed actually 
did raise its policy rate in March, yet was more 
reserved about its future monetary policy 
stance than some market participants ex -
pected, this supported the single European cur -
rency. The euro received a further boost from 
the parliamentary election result in the Nether -
lands and from the brighter outlook for the 
euro- area economy. Overall, some market par -
ticipants felt during this period that there was a 
growing likelihood that the European Central 
Bank (ECB) might switch to a less expansionary 
monetary policy stance sooner than had ex -
pected. When euro- area inflation receded 
again for March, however, and the ECB sig -
nalled its intention to stick to its current monet -Easing of 
uncertainty  calms financial markets
Euro up against 
the US dollar on balanceEuro- dollar rate driven by expectations on 
monetary policy 
and the out -
come of the French presiden-tial electionsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
39

ary policy stance, the euro lost most of the 
ground it had gained in the meantime.
However, the euro- dollar exchange rate rose 
significantly after the outcome of the first 
round of the French presidential elections on 
23 April 2017 which, market participants be -
lieved, heightened the likelihood that a moder -
ate candidate would win the election. The elec -
tion result itself did not lead directly to any fur -
ther exchange rate gains. In the time that fol -
lowed, however, renewed robust euro- area 
economic data and growing tension in US do -
mestic politics gave the euro- dollar rate further 
impetus. As this report went to press, the euro stood at US$1.11. It was thus 5.6% above the 
level at the end of 2016.
In contrast, the euro remained virtually un -
changed against the yen compared to the start 
of the year. However, the development of the 
euro against the yen, which is usually particu -
larly sensitive to changes in market participants’ 
perception of and propensity to incur risk, was 
even more strongly affected than against the 
US dollar by changing expectations regarding 
the outcome of the French presidential elec -
tions. While the euro depreciated by more than 
5% against the yen – a movement that was 
also influenced by geopolitical uncertainty  – 
between the beginning of the year and imme -
diately before the first round of the presidential 
elections, it subsequently largely made up for 
these losses within a short space of time. As 
this report went to press, the euro stood at 123 
yen and was thus 0.3% weaker than at the end 
of December 2016.
Besides the political uncertainty in connection 
with the French presidential elections, the 
euro- pound sterling exchange rate continued 
to be strongly influenced by developments sur -
rounding the United Kingdom’s exit from the 
EU. At the beginning of the year, the euro ini -
tially added to the strong gains it had made 
since the unexpected outcome of the referen -
dum, as market participants feared that the 
British government would seek a “hard Brexit”. 
However, this rate movement was reversed 
after a keynote speech by the UK Prime Minis -
ter in which she declared she would work to 
achieve free trade agreements. The largely 
robust  economic data from the euro area and 
the unexpected announcement that the UK 
general election would be brought forward to 
8 June softened the decline of the euro- pound 
sterling rate. Standing at £0.85 at the end of 
the reporting period, the euro was 0.3% below 
its level at the end of 2016.
At the beginning of April, the Czech central 
bank discontinued the Czech koruna’s ex -
change rate floor to the euro that had been in Outcome of the 
first round of the French presi-dential elections helps send the euro sharply higherEuro- yen rate 
virtually 
unchanged on 
balance
After rising 
considerably  in 2016, euro-pound  sterling rate also virtually  unchanged overall since start of the yearExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ F MAM J J A S OND J FMAM J
2016 20171.051.101.151.201.25
110120130140
0.700.750.800.850.90
9095100105Daily data; log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollarLaunch exchange rate: US$1.1789
 1
... yen
Launch exchange
rate: ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange
rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
Launch exchangerate: 103.11
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
40

place for more than three years. Since then, 
however, the euro has depreciated only moder -
ately against the Czech currency.
Measured against the currencies of 19 major 
trading partners, the euro appreciated by 2.0% 
on balance over the reporting period. The price 
competitiveness of euro- area suppliers deteri -
orated somewhat as a result of the euro’s ap -
preciation, but in terms of the long- term aver -
age their competitive position can continue to 
be regarded as neutral.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
Yields on sovereign bonds were mixed from the 
turn of the year. Whereas the GDP- weighted 
average of sovereign bond yields rose in the 
euro area, it decreased in the United States and 
the United Kingdom. Japanese yields remained 
unchanged on balance.
From the end of last year, yields on ten- year 
Federal securities rose by 15 basis points to 
0.30%. This increase is partly attributable to a 
counter-  reaction to the slump in yields in De -
cember 2016. Amongst other things, a year-  
end surge in demand for safe securities con -
tributed to the very low level of yields in Ger -
many. In addition, temporary safe- haven flows 
related to the French presidential elections 
quickly subsided again. For example, yields on 
ten- year Federal bonds on the Monday follow -
ing the first round of voting were eight basis 
points above the level recorded on the previous 
Friday. Finally, the ECB  Governing Council’s 
decisions  of December, which led to an overall 
drop in purchases under the public sector pur -
chase programme (PSPP) at the longer end of 
the yield curve, are likely to have played a part.1
The upward slope of the yield curve derived 
from the yields on Federal securities steepened 
somewhat overall. However, the yields of all 
maturities were latterly higher than in Decem -
ber, with the result that the entire yield curve shifted upwards. As this report went to press, 
only yields on maturities up to four years were 
below the deposit facility rate; yields were 
negative up to a residual maturity of seven 
years. The term premium, which compensates 
investors for assuming interest rate risks with 
longer- term bonds, was above the average 
level of the past year.
Within the euro area, developments in ten- year 
government bond yields were mixed. In the 
GDP- weighted average, the spread vis- à- vis 
Federal bonds remained almost unchanged (+1 
basis point). In this context, developments in 
the individual countries were driven, not least, 
by political factors. In the run- up to the French 
presidential elections, market participants de -
manded higher risk premiums for investing in 
French government bonds. These then fell very 
quickly, however, with the result that the Czech central 
bank abandons exchange rate as additional mon-etary policy tool
Effective euro 
showing 
exchange rate 
gains
Uneven 
developments  in international sovereign bond yields
Interest rates 
on Federal securities  up slightly
Yield curve 
shifted upwardsYield spreads within the euro area mixedYields* in euro area and selected 
countries
Source: Thomson Reuters. * Government bonds with a residual 
maturity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20170.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.7
–+++++++++% pa, weekly averages
GermanyJapanEuro
areaUnited States
United
Kingdom
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Financial markets, Monthly 
Report, February 2017, p 38.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
41

spread of French bonds versus Federal bonds 
contracted overall from the end of 2016 (-2 
basis points). Greek bond yields latterly fell sig -
nificantly, after signs of an agreement with 
creditors emerged in negotiations on necessary 
reforms and the payment of further financial 
assistance. Portuguese bonds benefited from confirmation by one of the four credit rating 
agencies registered in the euro area that it 
would maintain investment grade status for 
them. In addition, the Portuguese central bank 
took a further step in restructuring its banking 
sector by selling the majority stake in Novo 
Banco to a US financial institution. On the 
other hand, in a number of other countries, the 
spreads versus Federal bonds widened. This is 
especially true for Italy, where yields rose fol -
lowing downgrades by two rating agencies in 
January and April 2017 (+21 basis points).
In contrast to developments in the euro area 
and Germany, long- term bond yields in the 
United States fell compared with the end of 
2016 although the Federal Reserve raised, in 
March, its key policy rate by 0.25 basis point 
for the third time since December 2015. On 
balance, the contraction of long- term US yields 
can be fully explained by lower term premiums. 
However, these had increased significantly in 
the fourth quarter of 2016 due to higher infla -
tion expectations and improved economic ex -
pectations following the US presidential elec -
tion. The fall in term premiums over the course 
of the quarter under review points to a correc -
tion of potentially excessive expectations.
Yields on ten- year Japanese sovereign bonds 
stood at 0.05%. They were therefore un -
changed on the whole and within the target 
area of the Bank of Japan’s yield curve control. 
In the United Kingdom, on the other hand, 
ten- year government bond yields fell (-18 basis 
points to 1.06%). On 29  March 2017, the 
United Kingdom declared its intention to with -
draw from the EU. New general elections were 
subsequently announced for June. A less opti -
mistic economic outlook for the current year 
and market participants’ concerns about how 
the Brexit negotiations might go are likely to 
have helped to push yields down.
After market- based inflation expectations rose 
steadily over the autumn months and into Feb -
ruary, they were subsequently scaled back 
slightly. The five- year forward inflation rate in Term inflation 
rates downYield curve on the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest 
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.20.4
––––++
Residual maturity in years18 May 2017
30 December 2016%
Spreads of ten-year government bonds over German Federal bonds
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 201702004006008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,800Basis points, daily data
Italy
SpainIreland Portugal
FranceGreeceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
42

five years derived from swap rates for the euro 
area stood at 1.61% as this report went to 
press. This was below the year-  end figure 
(-12  basis points). Global factors such as the 
drop in prices for crude oil and other commod -
ities could have contributed to lower inflation 
expectations, especially as the US term inflation 
rate, too, was lower at the end of the reporting 
period than at the end of 2016, falling 19 basis 
points to 2.24%. Measured by Consensus Eco -
nomics on the basis of surveys, inflation ex -
pectations six to ten years ahead came in most 
recently at 1.9% in the euro area and just under 
2.3% in the United States. The difference be -
tween market- based and survey- based inflation 
expectations for the euro area is therefore 
slightly negative. The reason for this divergence 
is likely to stem mainly from market partici -
pants’ preference for liquid nominal assets, 
particularly as fears of a deflationary scenario 
remained weak. The market- implied probabil -
ities derived from inflation options for negative 
inflation rates in five to ten years are virtually 
unchanged compared with the low levels at 
the end of 2016. Nor does the ECB’s Survey of 
Professional Forecasters point to a greater like -
lihood of deflation.
Developments in market financing conditions 
for European BBB- rated corporate bonds varied 
widely among the individual sectors in the 
period under review. On the one hand, non-  
financial sector bonds were spared a further 
overall decline in yields, despite the Eurosys -
tem’s corporate sector purchase programme 
(CSPP).2 As this report went to press, seven to 
ten- year bonds belonging to this category were 
generating yields at their end- of-2016 level 
(1.5%). On the other hand, yields on seven- to- 
ten year bonds issued by financial corporations 
narrowed by more than ½ percentage point, 
slipping to 2.4%, a level last seen in the spring 
of 2015. As yields on Federal instruments with 
the same maturity rose, the yield spreads of 
financial  and non- financial corporate bonds 
over these instruments fell by 67 and 15 basis 
points respectively. Compared with their five-  year average, financing conditions for enter -
prises  therefore remain highly favourable.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €333 billion in the first quarter of 
2017, well up on the figure for the previous 
quarter (€231½ billion). After deducting re -
demptions and taking account of changes in 
issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net issu -
ance came to €29 billion. In addition, foreign Very favourable 
financing conditions  for enterprises continue 
Net sales in the bond market upForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 1 Brent blend (for delivery in 
one month).
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20171,82,12,42,7Weekly averages
20406080%
00,30,60,9Five-year 
forward inflation rate in five years based on swapsConsensus inflation expectations
in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
Memo item
Crude oil price1
Difference between forward inflation
rates in the United Statesand the euro areaPer-
cent-
age
pointsUS$1,21,51,82,12,4
%
2 Under its corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP), 
the Eurosystem acquires debt securities issued by non-  
financial corporations with high credit quality ratings. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Financial Markets, Monthly Report, 
August 2016, p 43 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
43

borrowers placed debt securities worth €8½ 
billion in the German market. Funds totalling 
€38 billion net were consequently raised in the 
German bond market in the reporting period.
Domestic credit institutions took advantage of 
the favourable financing conditions to issue 
new bonds totalling €25½ billion net in the 
first quarter of 2017. Debt securities of special -
ised credit institutions accounted for an €11 bil -
lion chunk of these issues, followed by other 
bank securities that can be structured flexibly 
(€9 billion) and mortgage Pfandbriefe (€5 bil -
lion).
In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises issued debt securities worth €6½ billion 
net, thus generating a higher volume than in 
the previous quarter. On balance, the vast ma -
jority of these were bonds with maturities of 
less than one year. Viewed in net terms, the 
issues were attributable solely to non- financial 
corporations, while other financial intermediar -
ies redeemed bonds on balance. Net issuance 
on the part of the non- financial sector was 
probably also partly attributable to purchases 
made by the Eurosystem through its CSPP , 
which entail a steady demand for corporate 
bonds.
By contrast, given the favourable budgetary 
situation, the public sector once again reduced 
its capital market debt in the first quarter of 
2017, this time by €3 billion net, having brought 
it down by €15 billion in the final quarter of 
2016. These figures include issues by resolution 
agencies  set up for German banks, which are 
ascribed to the public sector for statistical pur -
poses. Central government itself principally re -
deemed Treasury discount paper (Bubills; €9 
billion) and five- year Federal notes (Bobls; €8 
billion). This contrasted with net issuance of 10 
and 30-year Bunds in the amount of €5½ bil -
lion in both instances. In the quarter under re -
view, state and local governments redeemed 
their own bonds to the tune of €1½ billion net.Significant 
rise in credit institutions ’ capital  market debt
Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Public sector 
capital market 
debt downYield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years. 3 Brexit referendum. 4 US presidential election.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 20170100200300400500600700
100200300400500High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB Financials 2
BBB Non-financials 2By rating category
4 3Basis points, daily data
Investment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2016 2017
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 54.8 17.9 60.7
Credit institutions 5.5 – 19.6 – 20.7
of which
Foreign debt securities 10.2 –  5.3 –  8.1
Deutsche Bundesbank 38.3 49.5 52.6
Other sectors 10.9 – 12.1 28.8
of which
Domestic debt securities – 13.1 –  1.5 14.0
Non-residents 8.9 – 57.6 – 22.9
SharesResidents 8.1 2.3 14.8
Credit institutions –  9.4 1.8 2.1
of which
Domestic shares –  6.9 3.5 0.5
Non-banks 17.5 0.5 12.7
of which
Domestic shares 8.6 –  8.4 6.7
Non-residents –  1.4 6.6 1.6
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 27.1 33.8 21.4
Investment in open-end funds 5.7 6.0 7.9
of which
Equity funds –  0.9 3.4 1.4
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
44

The Bundesbank was the predominant buyer of 
debt securities in the German bond market in 
the first quarter of 2017, adding a net €52½ 
billion worth of paper to its portfolio, notably 
under the Eurosystem’s asset purchase pro -
grammes. The vast majority of these took the 
form of domestic public sector instruments. 
Domestic non- banks acquired bonds for €29 
billion net. By contrast, foreign investors and 
domestic credit institutions disposed of debt 
securities amounting to €23 billion and €20½ 
billion net respectively.
During the reporting period, share prices in the 
international stock markets went up on bal -
ance, with equities of European and US enter -
prises recording sharper overall price increases 
than those achieved by Japanese shares. In the 
second quarter, stock markets on both sides of 
the Atlantic were initially buoyed by the im -
proving outlook for the global economy. Two 
factors darkened this picture from March 2017, 
however. On the one hand, there was a wan -
ing of optimism on the part of market partici -
pants regarding the implementation of the 
economic and fiscal stimuli announced by the 
new US  Administration. Accompanied by a 
slight downward revision of growth expect -
ations for the US economy in the current year 
(Consensus Forecast), the rise in US stock prices 
ground to a temporary halt in March. By con -
trast, the Federal Reserve’s interest rate hike 
had only a moderately dampening effect on 
stock market developments, as it had been 
broadly factored in by markets prior to that 
event.
On the other hand, market participants’ uncer -
tainty about future stock price developments 
–  as measured by the implied volatility of 
equity indices calculated on the basis of op -
tions – prior to the French presidential elec -
tions temporarily intensified on both sides of 
the Atlantic. After the results of the first round 
of voting were announced, markets calmed 
down considerably and equity prices rose 
steeply across the globe. Combined with the 
receding price uncertainty, the equity markets subsequently reflected increased market par -
ticipant confidence with respect to future eco -
nomic developments. According to surveys 
(Consensus Forecast), in May growth expect -
ations for the euro area in 2018 took an up -
ward turn.
Compared with the end of December 2016, 
the CDAX recorded price gains of 8.1%. Over -
all, the broad Euro Stoxx gained 9.3% in the 
reporting period and thus outpaced the 
US S&P 500 (+5.7%). That said, at one point 
the S&P 500 climbed to a new all- time high. 
At the same time, analysts’ forecasts of earn -
ings per share 12 months ahead were revised Purchases of 
debt securities
Price gains 
in the stock markets 
Market 
temporarily  dominated by political uncertaintiesEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Im-
plied equity risk premiums determined using dividend discount 
models  on  the  basis  of  earnings  and  dividend  expectations 
(I/B/E/S). 2 Brexit referendum. 3 US presidential election.
Deutsche BundesbankLin scale
Risk premiums on
the stock market  1Bank indices
%
2015 2016 2017Beginning of 2015 = 100, log scale
Overall market indicesWeekly averages
60708090100110120130
48121690100110120130Euro area (Euro Stoxx 300)
United Kingdom (FTSE All-Share)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
3 2total total
banks banksEuro Stoxx 300 S&P 500Euro area
United StatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
45

upwards for corporations in the Euro Stoxx 
and the S&P 500 by 6.0% and 3.8% respect -
ively. By this yardstick, the stock market valu -
ations of the Euro Stoxx and S&P 500 in -
creased again.
In addition to global economic determinants 
and political risks, the equity markets were also 
affected by a variety of sector- specific factors. 
For instance, alongside the net drop in oil prices 
from the beginning of the year, the share prices 
of energy companies were significantly weaker 
than for the market as a whole, unlike in 2016. 
From the beginning of the year, US energy 
companies lost about 11.3% of their stock mar -
ket value. At the same time, European oil and 
gas providers saw their stock prices go down 
by around 0.9%.
Bank shares performed better than stocks in 
the energy sector. On this side of the Atlantic, 
their prices increased significantly in net terms 
(+12.6%). Thus, price rises in the European 
banking sector outstripped those in the market 
as a whole. The increase in prices was doubt -
less largely driven by the prospect of enhanced 
profitability, which itself was probably gener -
ated by the more favourable economic pro -
spect and the recent easing of tensions in the 
markets. Conversely, US bank shares, the prices 
of which had in fact soared in the autumn of 
2016, lagged well behind developments in the 
US market as a whole, posting a 1.9% fall in 
price. Among euro- area countries, the Spanish 
and Italian banks in particular benefitted from 
the situation. Differences in the revaluation of 
banks on both sides of the Atlantic also be -
come starkly evident, going by analysts’ esti -
mates of future profits. While projected earn -
ings per share for European banks 12 months 
ahead, at 3.8%, rose by a significantly nar -
rower margin than stock prices, earnings 
growth in the United States, at 9.4%, greatly 
outstripped share price increases recorded by 
US banks. In line with this trend, the price/
earnings ratio of US banks decreased appre -
ciably in the reporting period, while it rose for 
European banks. Having started out with sig -Sector- specific 
factors: energy companies worse, …
… bank shares 
better than those of the market as a wholeMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2016 2017
Q1 Q4 Q1p
I Current account + 64.3 + 68.0 + 65.1
1 Goods 1 + 64.1 + 61.6 + 66.7
2 Services 2 –  3.4 –  3.1 –  3.3
3 Primary income + 16.9 + 21.1 + 15.6
4 Secondary income – 13.4 – 11.6 – 13.9
II Capital account –  0.3 +  0.1 –  0.1
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 36.9 + 78.9 + 70.2
1 Direct investment +  7.3 + 28.9 + 24.8
Domestic investment 
abroad + 27.2 + 21.4 + 47.7
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 19.8 –  7.5 + 22.9
2 Portfolio investment + 41.0 + 51.0 + 52.3
Domestic investment in foreign securities + 44.2 –  0.6 + 31.1
Shares
3 +  1.1 +  3.4 +  5.5
Investment fund shares 4+  9.8 +  9.9 + 16.8
of which
Money market fund 
shares +  6.2 +  2.6 +  6.3
Long-term debt  securities
5 + 27.7 –  9.7 +  5.9
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 21.2 –  7.7 +  6.5
Short-term debt  securities
7 +  5.6 –  4.2 +  2.9
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities +  3.3 – 51.6 – 21.2
Shares 3 –  3.0 +  6.4 +  1.5
Investment fund shares –  2.6 –  0.4 +  0.1
Long-term debt  securities
5 –  8.2 – 29.3 – 13.0
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 – 10.2 – 43.1 – 21.3
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 + 17.1 – 28.3 –  9.9
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  4.6 + 13.5 –  0.1
4 Other investment 10 – 17.3 – 14.5 –  6.5
Monetary fi  nancial  institutions
11 – 29.9 + 22.3 – 34.5
Enterprises and  households
12 –  1.7 – 24.9 – 12.5
General government +  0.1 –  1.8 –  1.9
Bundesbank + 14.2 – 10.0 + 42.5
5 Reserve assets 13 +  1.2 0.0 –  0.4
IV Errors and omissions 14 – 27.1 + 10.8 +  5.2
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10  Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13  Excluding allocation of special drawing rights and excluding changes due to value adjustments. 
14 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from the difference 
between the balance on the fi  nancial account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
46

nificant differences at the beginning of the 
year, the price/earnings ratios of banks on 
both sides of the Atlantic thus became aligned 
to a large extent.
Issuing activity in the German equity market in 
the first quarter of 2017 picked up somewhat 
against the backdrop of the favourable shifts in 
prices. On balance, domestic enterprises issued 
€9 billion worth of new shares, largely on the 
back of a capital increase on the part of a DAX- 
listed enterprise. The volume of foreign shares 
on the German market rose by €7½ billion in 
the same period. Equities were purchased pri -
marily by German non- banks (€12½ billion). 
Domestic credit institutions and foreign invest -
ors also purchased shares, albeit in smaller 
quantities, spending €2 billion and €1½ billion 
on them respectively in net terms.
During the period under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €29½ 
billion, after raising funds totalling €40 billion 
in the previous three months. The fresh funds 
benefited mainly specialised funds reserved for 
institutional investors (€21½ billion). Of the 
various asset classes, it was mainly mixed funds 
and bond- based funds (€8½ billion in each 
case) that placed new shares on the market, 
but also open- end real estate funds (€5½ bil -
lion), funds of funds (€3 billion) and equity 
funds (€2 billion). Foreign funds distributed in 
the German market attracted €17 billion net in 
the first quarter of 2017. Domestic non- banks 
were the main buyers, adding mutual fund 
shares worth €43 billion to their portfolios. Do -
mestic credit institutions acquired mutual fund 
shares worth €3 billion, while foreign investors 
were only marginally active in the German mar -
ket on balance.Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio transactions, 
which recorded a net outflow of funds totalling 
€52½ billion in the first quarter of 2017, net 
capital exports were also registered in the form 
of direct investment in the first three months of 
2017, amounting to €25 billion.
Direct investment abroad by German enter -
prises came to €47½ billion net in the period 
from January to March 2017. German enter -
prises increased their intra- group lending by 
€31 billion, mainly by granting additional finan -
cial credits. In addition, domestic investors bol -
stered their equity capital by €17 billion. On the 
one hand, they did so by means of new cross- 
border investments and, on the other, in the 
form of reinvested earnings. Countries receiv -
ing substantial direct investment from Germany 
in the first quarter of 2017 included the United 
States (€8 billion), China (€6½ billion) and the 
United Kingdom (€6 billion).
Foreign investors increased their direct invest -
ment in Germany between January and March 
2017 by €23 billion. This was achieved mainly 
through intra- group loans (€18 billion). On the 
one hand, foreign owners and fellow enter -
prises channelled funds to their associates in 
Germany. On the other hand, subsidiaries of 
German groups abroad granted their domestic 
parent companies additional loans (reverse 
flows). Furthermore, foreign investors increased 
their equity capital in Germany (€4½ billion), 
chiefly by reinvesting earnings. In regional 
terms, German enterprises saw sizeable inflows 
of funds from Luxembourg (€7 billion), the 
Netherlands (€6½ billion) and Switzerland 
(€3½ billion).Stock market 
funding and stock purchases
Sales and 
purchases  of mutual fund sharesDirect invest -
ment sees 
capital  exports
German direct 
investment abroad
Foreign direct 
investment in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
47

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
The cyclical upturn in the German economy 
gained momentum at the beginning of the 
year. According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate, real gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) in the first quarter of 2017 rose sub -
stantially by 0.6%, after seasonal and calendar 
adjustment, against the fourth quarter of 2016 
in which the German economy had expanded 
by 0.4%. The pace of aggregate growth clearly 
exceeded the potential rate. As a result, overall 
capacity utilisation, which has been consider -
ably above its longer- term average for quite 
some time, increased further. The very upbeat 
economic situation is also reflected in the ex -
tremely optimistic sentiment in the German 
economy and among households. This, to -
gether with the favourable order situation in 
industry and construction, suggests that the strong gains are likely to continue in the second 
quarter.
The acceleration in aggregate growth was due 
mainly to a marked expansion in construction 
activity fuelled by high demand, especially for 
housing, but also to a recent high inflow of 
new orders in the industrial sector, which 
helped it to overcome its sluggish phase in the 
second half of 2016. Growth continued to be 
supported by buoyant business activity in the 
services sector.
A breakdown of the GDP expenditure compon -
ents likewise suggests that the upswing be -
came more broadly based recently. Investment 
in machinery and equipment also picked up 
again after the turn of the year in the wake of 
strong export growth, which continued the 
trend seen at the end of 2016, and the 
above-average level of capacity utilisation in 
industry  . The boom in the housing market con -
tinued. Although the inflation hike at the start 
of the year eroded consumers’ real disposable 
income, private consumption remained on an 
expansionary course owing to the ongoing 
very buoyant labour market situation.
German exports continued on their upward 
path in the first quarter of 2017 and recorded a 
substantial increase on the previous quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. According to the fig -
ures available up until February, the develop -
ment in the value of exports remained broadly 
based in regional terms. Euro- area demand for 
German products rose considerably. Sales of 
German goods in non- euro- area markets grew 
even more dynamically, however, with very 
substantial growth being recorded in the 
United States. The value of goods exported to 
the United Kingdom likewise increased percep -
tibly after –  in some cases, considerable  – 
 declines had been recorded in the preceding 
quarters. The depreciation of the pound ster -
ling is likely to have played an important role in German econ-
omy showing strong growth in Q1Acceleration in growth driven by industry and construction
Upswing more 
broadly based
Strong growth in German exports at beginning of yearOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017102104106108110112
–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price- and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scaleYear-on-year change
 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
48

this development, however. Furthermore, trade 
with Russia stood out in particular after posting 
a surge in growth. The recovery of the Russian 
economy from the persistent recession wit -
nessed in recent years, combined with the 
marked appreciation of the rouble, are likely to 
have fuelled the demand for German exports. 
Exports of goods to China almost maintained 
the record level of the final quarter of 2016, 
when they had risen sharply. This contrasted 
with a sharp drop in exports to Japan and the 
other industrial economies in Asia. German en -
terprises also saw a substantial decline in their 
exports to the OPEC countries.
Investment in machinery and equipment over -
came its sluggish phase of the previous year 
and picked up significantly in the first quarter 
of 2017. This is suggested by the strong growth 
in both the domestic sales and imports of cap -
ital goods. Furthermore, the number of regis -
trations of commercially used vehicles went up 
considerably. The strong industrial demand and 
the ongoing buoyant export activity coupled 
with the greater utilisation of production cap -
acity is likely to have contributed to the higher 
propensity of enterprises to invest.
According to the current indicators, construc -
tion investment grew strongly in the first quar -
ter of 2017. The main reason for this was likely 
due once again to the very high invest ment 
levels in residential construction. Investment in 
commercial construction probably also ex -
panded appreciably, however. This is indicated 
in any case by the turnover figures for the main 
construction sector available up until February, 
which also show a clear upward trend in com -
mercial construction.
Private consumption probably grew somewhat 
more moderately in the first quarter of 2017 
than in the final quarter of 2016. The marginal 
decline in the propensity to consume is likely to 
have been due mainly to the sharper rise in 
prices at the beginning of the year, which re -
duced consumers’ purchasing power. This had 
an impact on retail sales, which largely stag -nated in real terms after posting fairly strong 
growth in the second half of 2016. Sales of tex -
tiles, clothing and shoes fell particularly steeply 
after recording exceptionally strong growth in 
the preceding quarter. By contrast, the buoyant 
consumer demand for information and com -
munication technology (ICT) equipment con -
tinued unabated. There were also more pur -
chases of motor vehicles, which is indicated, 
inter alia,  by the renewed increase in the num -
ber of new registrations by households.
The value of imports increased sharply in the 
first quarter of 2017 after adjustment for sea -
sonal variations. Impetus was provided by both Upturn in 
 investment in machinery and equipment
Construction 
investment 
extremely dynamic
Private con-
sumption prob-ably somewhat more moderate at beginning of year
Import demand still robust100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 
1 Adjusted using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017Jan-
Feb 100110120130
Jan-
Feb
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro-area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scaleForeign trade balanceImports of goodsprice-adjusted
 1110120130140
€ bnto non-euro-area countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
49

the continuing robust domestic developments 
and the flourishing export activity of German 
enterprises. Import growth is likely to have 
been considerably weaker in real terms, ie after 
excluding the fairly strong price effects in the 
reporting period. In regional terms, the value of 
imports from the euro area went up particularly 
sharply. Substantial growth was also recorded 
in imports from non- euro- area countries, how -
ever. This benefited, inter alia,  US and Japanese 
manufacturers, which were able to significantly 
step up their exports to Germany. German de -
mand for products from the United Kingdom 
likewise grew. The strong increase in the value 
of imports from the OPEC countries and Russia, 
which, in the case of the latter, even recorded 
a perceptible two- digit growth figure, should 
probably be seen in connection with the surge 
in crude oil prices at the end of 2016. By con -
trast, imports from the People’s Republic of 
China, which had risen perceptibly by one-  
tenth in the previous quarter, dropped consid -
erably.Sectoral trends
After a period of stagnation in the second half 
of 2016, industry started the new year off 
briskly. In the first quarter of 2017, seasonally 
adjusted output was substantially stronger than 
in the previous quarter (+1%). Driven by the ex -
ceptionally strong inflow of new orders, indus -
trial enterprises had already begun procuring a 
greater volume of intermediate goods in the 
final quarter of 2016 both from within Ger -
many and abroad in order to rapidly ramp up 
their output. Motor vehicle manufacturers 
stepped up their production particularly sharply 
after they had cut back their output at the end 
of the year. Considerable growth in output was 
also seen in the manufacture of basic metals as 
well as in the production of chemicals and 
pharmaceuticals. On the whole, the output of 
intermediate, capital and consumer goods all 
grew at fairly similar rates.
According to Ifo Institute data, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing 
remained at its highest level since mid-2011 
(86%) and thus well above its longer- term 
average. Manufacturers of intermediate and 
consumer goods reported a marked increase in 
capacity utilisation, whereas it declined quite 
perceptibly in the capital goods sector.
According to statistics, the construction sector 
recorded exceptionally strong seasonally ad -
justed growth in the first quarter of 2017 com -
pared with the final quarter of 2016 (+4¾%). 
Although output in the finishing trades also in -
creased very strongly (+4½%), this was mainly 
attributable to a marked seasonally adjusted 
rise of 4¾% in the production index for the 
main construction sector. According to Federal 
Statistical Office data, this increase is due, in 
part, to a sharp increase in the number of con -Industrial 
activity  on growth path
Industrial cap-
acity utilisation 
still above 
 average
Construction 
activity very dynamicOutput in industry andin construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 17Industry
105110115
100105110115120125130135
Construction1Main construction2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
50

struction firms required to report.1 This does, 
however, limit the economic explanatory value 
of the growth rate for the first quarter, as part 
of this increase is likely to reflect the increased 
levels of activity in the previous periods. On the 
other hand, the main construction sector is 
now presenting a more coherent economic pic -
ture which is more in line with the available 
data on output, new orders, equipment utilisa -
tion and sentiment indicators.
The services sector was painting a predomin -
antly positive picture in the first quarter of 
2017. Wholesale trade posted a marked in -
crease in sales spurred by the favourable indus -
trial activity and the brisk import activity. This is 
consistent with the assessment of the business 
situation in the sector, which, according to the 
Ifo Institute, is at its highest level since 1991. By 
contrast, real retail sales (excluding cars) grew 
relatively moderately and remained broadly 
unchanged  at the prior- quarter level. Motor 
vehicle  sales – statistical information is available 
up to February – performed very well, however. 
This is also indicated by the rise in the number 
of newly registered motor vehicles. Other ser -
vices, excluding trade, probably also started the 
new year on an upbeat note. Amongst other 
things, this is suggested by the business ex -
pectations of enterprises, which remained well 
above the long- term average.
Labour market
The German labour market remains in very 
good shape. As in the last three months of 
2016, employment surged again in the first 
quarter of this year.2 This is attributable almost 
exclusively to the creation of new jobs subject 
to social security contributions. The low- paid 
part- time employment segment continued to 
contract and the number of self- employed per -
sons is also likely to have decreased further. 
Registered unemployment fell quite signifi -
cantly in the period under review. The leading 
labour market indicators suggest that this very favourable development will continue in the 
months to come.
The seasonally adjusted number of persons in 
work in Germany in the first quarter of 2017 
went up by 203,000, or 0.5%, after rising by 
an almost equal amount in the final quarter of 
2016. Jobs subject to social security contribu -
tions continued to be the main driver of this 
positive development. According to initial esti -
mates by the Federal Employment Agency for 
January and February, employment subject to 
social security contributions went up in all eco -
nomic sectors with the exception of the finance 
and insurance industries. This applies in particu -
lar to business- related services (including tem -
porary agency employment, which grew again 
recently), logistics, the information and com -
munication sector as well as education and 
training. The construction sector continued to 
hire new staff on a considerable scale in keep -
ing with the vigorous growth in construction 
activity. The health and social work sector, 
which has been expanding strongly for quite 
some time, again posted above- average 
growth. Compared with the strong gains in 
employment in the overall economy, the in -
crease in the manufacturing sector was rather 
modest, as was the case in the preceding quar -
ters. Employment growth in trade and in the 
public sector was also below average.Services sector 
painting a positive  picture overall
Labour market: 
situation and outlook still very favourableVery sharp rise 
in employment 
in winter 
half-year
1 Once a year, those construction firms which are required 
to report for the first time are included in the statistics. Ac -
cording to the Federal Statistical Office, these are either 
“new firms operating in the German market or firms which 
have grown beyond the threshold of 20 or more employ -
ees”. This adjustment to the reporting population, which in 
the past took place in the final quarter of the year, will now 
take place at the beginning of the year from 2017 on -
wards. The expansion of the reporting population was par -
ticularly pronounced this year. See Federal Statistical Office, 
Anpassungen beim Produktionsindex für das Bauhaupt-
gewerbe , May 2017.
2 After a data processing error by the Federal Employment 
Agency was remedied in March 2017, employment subject 
to social security contributions underwent a huge upward 
correction in the second half of 2016. See Statistik der 
Bundesagentur für Arbeit: Grundlagen: Hintergrundinfo – 
Beschäftigungsstatistik: Korrektur  vorläufiger Werte für das 
2. Halbjahr 2016, March  2017. The situation in overall 
employ ment also later turned out to be significantly more 
favourable than previously reported.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
51

The increased demand for labour compared 
with the previous year was not covered by do -
mestic labour reserves alone. Foreign passport 
holders accounted for almost half of the in -
crease in regular jobs subject to social security 
contributions within the last 12 months 
(+318,000 persons). The central and east Euro -
pean countries that joined the European Union 
in 2004 were still the most significant region of 
origin (+148,000 persons). Persons from the 
main countries of origin of asylum seekers are 
also gradually becoming more important in 
employment subject to social security contribu -
tions (+44,000).3
After seasonal adjustment, registered un -
employment declined more strongly in the first 
quarter of 2017 than in the preceding quarters. 
On an average of the reporting period, the of -
ficial unemployment figure was 63,000 lower 
than in the final quarter of last year. The un -
employment rate contracted by 0.2 percentage 
point to 5.8%. The unemployment figure 
posted a further fall in April. The Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s figures show that, above 
all, the risk of losing one’s job has decreased 
significantly. The chances of ending unemploy -
ment with a new job have hardly improved of 
late, however.4 There was a very strong decline 
in unemployment among German nationals, in 
particular, compared with the previous year. By 
contrast, unemployment in the group of per -
sons who only recently immigrated from the 
most significant countries of origin of asylum 
increased (+55,000 on the month), although 
the expansion of labour market policy meas -
ures to integrate refugees had a dampening 
effect .5Demand for 
labour covered by immigration to a consider-able extent
Clear decline in 
unemployment, especially among German nationalsLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 17Apr41.041.542.042.543.043.544.0
28.529.029.530.030.531.031.532.00+500+1,000
2.53.03.5
–5000+500AprSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
AprMillion
Million
Million400500600700Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change 1Officially unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
(scale enlarged)Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change 1
Feb
3 See Federal Employment Agency, Statistik/Arbeitsmarkt -
berichterstattung (2017): Migration- Monitor Arbeitsmarkt –  
Eckwerte Deutschland  (May). The Middle East countries of 
Syria, Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan, as well as the 
African countries of Eritrea, Nigeria and Somalia, are 
classed as being among the most significant countries of 
origin of asylum seekers.
4 See Federal Employment Agency, Statistik/Arbeitsmarkt -
berichterstattung: Der Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt in 
Deutschland – Monatsbericht, April  2017, pp 17-18.
5 See Federal Employment Agency, Statistik/Arbeitsmarkt -
berichterstattung (2017): Migration- Monitor Arbeitsmarkt – 
Eckwerte Deutschland  (May).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
52

The leading labour market indicators are still 
exceptionally optimistic. Enterprises are set to 
continue an expansive recruitment policy in the 
coming months. Both the Ifo employment bar -
ometer and the IAB labour market barometer 
are close to the peaks reached in the autumn 
of last year. The Federal Employment Agency’s 
BA- X job index is at the highest level since its 
introduction in 2004. The very high number of 
job vacancies reported to the Federal Employ -
ment Agency is the main reason for this, but 
increasing difficulties in filling the open vacan -
cies adequately are also likely to have played a 
part. According to the Federal Employment 
Agency, the average vacancy period has al -
ready been increasing for quite some time. The 
unemployment subcomponent of the IAB la -
bour market barometer is well above the neu -
tral threshold. Unemployment is therefore likely 
to fall in the coming months, too.
Wages and prices
Although the increase in wages accelerated 
slightly in the first quarter of 2017, it remained 
fairly moderate compared with the exception -
ally positive labour market situation. The year- 
on- year increase in negotiated pay rates of 
2.4% was somewhat stronger than in the au -
tumn of 2016. Growth in actual earnings may 
also have risen slightly in the first quarter. In 
addition to the positive effect of the high de -
mand for labour, this is suggested by the 4% 
increase in the general minimum wage as from 
January 2017, as well as by the rise in sectoral 
minimum wages laid down in collective agree -
ments at the turn of the year.6
Negotiated pay agreements to date in this 
year’s “small” wage round have largely mir -
rored the level of last year’s collective bargain -
ing agreements. This applies both to the size of 
the wage increases, which have mostly been 
moderate so far, and to the normally two- year 
duration of the agreements. On an annual 
basis, employees in the public service of the 
Federal state governments were granted a wage increase of around 2½% and negotiated 
rates of pay for employees in the west German 
textile and clothing industry and the steel in -
dustry went up by only 2%.
Further wage negotiations are planned for this 
year, mainly in the services sectors, such as re -
tail and wholesale trade, the insurance sector 
and office cleaning. Current wage demands by 
unions vary between 4.5% and 6.5%, thus 
matching last year’s range. However, the out -
standing labour negotiations will probably not 
be limited to higher pay increases but will also 
feature other aspects such as pension arrange -
ments or the impact of digitisation.
Consumer prices as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose fairly 
sharply in the first quarter of 2017, as they had 
in the final months of 2016; they were up by a 
seasonally adjusted 0.5% on the quarter. Infla -
tion was still mainly driven by energy and food. 
Prices of refined petroleum products continued 
to appreciate in line with crude oil prices. Fur -Continuation 
of favourable labour market development reported
Earnings up 
somewhat more sharply in first quarter
Recent wage 
agreements with moderate risesWage demands in similar range as previous year
Consumer price 
inflation still driven by energy and foodNegotiated rates of pay
1 Excluding  additional  benefits  and  lump-sum  payments  (eg 
holiday pay, bonuses).
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201700.51.01.52.02.53.03.5Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Negotiated rates of pay, total
Basic pay 1
Q1
6 This applies to the main construction sector, vocational 
education and training, the roofing industry, electricians 
and office cleaners, agriculture and forestry, horticulture 
and the care sector. The generally binding collective agree -
ment in temporary employment expired on 31 December 
2016 and the sector- specific minimum wage, which has 
since been raised, will probably not be declared generally 
binding before 1 June 2017.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
53

thermore, electricity prices went up moder -
ately. Lower wholesale gas prices are likely to 
have partially offset the higher renewable 
energy  (EEG) levy and the increase in network 
charges. The unusually cold weather in large 
parts of Europe pushed up the cost of food.
By contrast, the prices of industrial goods ex -
cluding energy rose only moderately, as in the 
previous quarter. The significant depreciation of 
the euro in the final quarter of last year, which 
had already led to a marked increase in prices 
at the upstream stages of the economy, was 
now also reflected in prices for consumer dur -
ables, such as information processing equip -ment. In addition, there were marked increases 
in prices of goods which are set by the national 
authorities, such as medicines. On the other 
hand, there were no further adjustments in 
clothing prices, which had seen a distinct rise in 
the previous quarter. The prices of services as a 
whole registered another slight increase des -
pite a marked drop in patients’ contributions to 
the cost of long- term care following the recent 
reform. Travel services became markedly more 
expensive and prices of other services, includ -
ing rents, continued to go up considerably, as 
in the previous quarter.
Overall, annual HICP inflation jumped very 
sharply from 1.0% to 1.9% on a quarterly aver -
age.7 A key baseline factor in this was that en -
ergy prices had declined significantly at the be -
ginning of 2016. Over the course of the quar -
ter, the rate declined from 2.2% in February to 
1.5% in March, mainly because Easter fell early 
last year. This also meant that inflation exclud -
ing energy and food fell from 1.2% to 1.0% on 
the average of the quarter.
The moderate rise in consumer prices con -
tinued in April. Owing to the shift in the timing 
of Easter from March in 2016 to April in 2017 
and to the sharp drop in prices for package 
holidays in April last year, the year- on- year in -
crease in prices rose again overall from +1.5% 
to +2.0%.8 Excluding food and energy, the fig -
ure was +1.6%, compared with +0.9%.
Inflation is likely to fall again significantly with 
the loss of this special effect in the coming 
months. Furthermore, the recent decline in 
crude oil prices should be reflected in consumer 
prices for energy. The recent very cold weather 
conditions could put upward pressure on food 
prices, however. With regard to the other com -
ponents, the most recent increase at the up -
stream stages has probably already been par -
tially passed on to end customers. The continu -By contrast, 
rise in prices of industrial products and services remains  moderateAnnual inflation up sharply
Inflation picks 
up in April, 
mainly owing 
to Easter
Inflation likely to 
be lower again in coming monthsExport pricesImport, export, producer and consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201795100105110
100105110
95100105
0123
+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2
2015 = 100Producer prices1Log scale
Import prices
%
Apr100105110
Apr
7 The annual rate of consumer inflation according to the 
national Consumer Price Index (CPI) rose from 1.1% to 
1.9%.
8 The annual CPI rate likewise rose to +2.0% from +1.6%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
54

ing increase in prices of intermediate goods, 
driven by higher prices for industrial and agri -
cultural commodities, is also likely to lead to 
consumer price inflation in the future, however.
Orders received and outlook
The German economy’s strong growth looks 
set to continue in the second quarter of 2017. 
Industrial activity is likely to remain on an up -
ward trajectory, buoyed by lively domestic and 
external demand. This is also suggested by the 
positive sentiment in manufacturing in con -
junction with still optimistic export expect -
ations. Given that utilisation of production 
capacity  remains above average, this should 
support the ongoing momentum of private 
invest  ment in machinery and equipment. The 
construction sector should continue to flourish, 
and the services industries are also likely to re -
main on an expansionary course. All this is 
likely to have a positive impact on households’ 
income and labour market prospects, which 
should ensure that consumer spending remains 
stable in the second quarter, too.
Sentiment in the German economy is still very 
optimistic. According to the Ifo Institute, the 
business climate in the manufacturing sector 
remains at its highest level since mid-2011. A 
further improvement in the assessment of the 
business situation contrasted with a slightly less 
upbeat evaluation with regard to future busi -
ness. Meanwhile, the assessment of the busi -
ness situation in the construction sector rose to 
the highest level since 1991. The broadly neu -
tral data on business expectations point to a 
continuation of the positive sectoral activity. 
Moreover, sentiment in retail brightened dis -
tinctly. By contrast, sentiment in the services 
sector weakened somewhat but was still clearly 
above the longer- term average.
In the first quarter of 2017, industrial orders did 
not quite match the high level of the final quar -
ter of 2016, where there had been an excep -
tionally strong inflow of orders, however. Steep growth set 
to continue in second quarter
Positive senti-
ment in German economyDemand for industrial goods and construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017100110120
–100+10+20
100110120
100110
Jan-
Feb
Jan-
Feb100110120130140
–100+10+20Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Main construction orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1%
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
55

Nevertheless, they were significantly higher 
than the level of the third quarter of 2016. On 
an average of the fourth quarter of 2016 and 
the first quarter of 2017, new orders were up 
by 3¼% from the summer 2016 level. The 
exceptionally  favourable order situation is also 
reflected in the order capacity index and in the 
assessment and the reach of the order books. 
In regional terms, growth in orders was broadly 
based in the final quarter of 2016 and first 
quarter of 2017. Strong impetus was provided 
by Germany as well as by the euro area and 
non- euro- area countries. This likewise applies 
in terms of the individual sectors.
Construction activity is also likely to flourish in 
the second quarter. After seasonal adjustment, 
new orders in the main construction sector in 
January and February – the most recent period 
for which statistics are available – even showed 
a slight increase on the exceptionally strong 
final quarter of 2016. This development was for 
the most part underpinned by the substantial influx of orders recorded in building construc -
tion, in which residential and commercial con -
struction dominated. By contrast, there were 
significantly fewer new orders in civil engineer -
ing.
Private consumption will probably remain a key 
cornerstone of economic developments in the 
second quarter of 2017. This is largely due to 
the ongoing favourable labour market situation 
and the positive earnings development among 
households associated with this. Another allevi -
ating effect is the fact that crude oil prices were 
not up again in the second quarter and thus 
consumer purchasing power did not shrink fur -
ther on the back of higher energy  prices. This is 
consistent with the consumer climate index cal -
culated by the market research institution Ge -
sellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK) still being 
at a very high level. Sentiment in retail trade, 
which has recently picked up greatly, also 
points to a continuation of brisk consumption.High level 
of orders in  industry in fourth quarter of 2016 and first quarter of 2017
Construction 
boom expected to continue in second quarterConsumer spending prob-ably key growth factor in the second quarter as wellDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
56

Public finances*
General government budget
Despite the fiscal policy stance being expan -
sionary overall, German public finances are still 
in good shape. The surplus for 2016 came to 
0.8% of gross domestic product (GDP). How -
ever, it may shrink somewhat this year, al -
though economic developments and a further 
decline in interest expenditure will ease the 
pressure on public coffers. This is being driven 
by relatively sharp hikes in expenditure, particu -
larly on child day care, education, transport in -
frastructure and the armed forces. Further -
more, the social security funds’ spending on 
healthcare and long- term care will gain mo -
mentum in the wake of new benefit expan -
sions, while pension expenditure will rise sig -
nificantly once again owing to the high mid-
2016 pension increase. On the revenue side, 
the effect of bracket creep in income taxation1 
will be broadly offset by income tax cuts. The 
increase in the contribution rate to long- term 
care insurance will give revenue a boost, while 
growth in revenue from profit- related taxes will 
remain dynamic. However, other sources of 
government revenue, such as the Bundesbank’s 
profit distribution, are lower.2
Under the current policy, there looks set to be 
no major change to the fiscal balance over the 
next few years, thus implying further marked 
surpluses overall. However, new fiscal policy 
measures could be adopted following Germa -
ny’s general election, which means that the 
outlook is fraught with uncertainty. As things 
currently stand, the debt ratio, which had fallen 
to 68.3% by the end of 2016, will remain on its 
downward trajectory. The ongoing winding- up 
of government- owned bad banks is also likely 
to contribute to the medium- term decline. Ac -
cording to the Federal Government’s updated 
stability programme, which is based on the 
budget from mid-  April, the general govern -
ment surplus will hover at between ¼% and 
½% of GDP up to 2021. Furthermore, in 2020, the debt ratio should be back below the 60% 
mark again for the first time since 2002.
Conditions for public finances have been highly 
favourable for some time. Against this back -
drop, structural surpluses recorded since 2014 
have been rather marked. In the past two 
years, falling financing costs, the positive la -
bour market situation and the surging growth 
in tax revenue have masked what is essentially 
expansionary spending. While the latter was 
chiefly attributable to expenditure on refugees, 
spending on pensions, healthcare and long-  
term care, in particular, also rose significantly – 
not least on account of various benefit expan -
sions. As a result of demographic change, the 
social security funds are set to feel the squeeze 
more acutely in the future. If benefits are ex -
panded again, contribution rates will in any 
case need to be raised sooner and more sharply 
than anticipated. In the long term, further rises 
in the statutory retirement age in line with in -
creasing life expectancy could curb the hike in 
the contribution rate and shore up pension 
levels.3 In the statutory health insurance 
scheme, it may be possible to rein in continued 
strong expenditure growth by placing greater Continued 
marked surplus on cards for 2017
Under current 
policy, surpluses over next few years, but new fiscal measures could be adopted after Germany’s general  election
Debt ratio 
continuing  
to fallDemographically 
driven rise in social contribu-tion rates, but also potential for relief
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. The subsequent more detailed reporting 
on the budgets of central, state and local government and 
of the social security funds pursuant to available data is 
based on the figures as defined in the government finance 
statistics (which are generally in line with the budget 
accounts) .
1 In arithmetical terms, this is calculated as the rise in the 
revenue ratio resulting from the combination of the pro -
gressive tax scale and growth in (average) nominal income 
per capita. In other words, both growth offsetting general 
inflation and real growth are factored in.
2 More tangible risks to public finances are posed by on -
going proceedings before the Federal Constitutional Court 
concerning nuclear fuel tax. Furthermore, additional strains 
relating to HSH Nordbank could make themselves felt this 
year already. Overall, state government guarantees were is -
sued to the bank in the amount of €10 billion, of which 
around €2 billion was called on last year already.
3 The positive impact on growth potential would also give 
a boost to central, state and local government tax revenue. 
See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: longer- term pen -
sion developments, Monthly Report, August 2016, pp 68-
77.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
57

emphasis on improving cost- effectiveness.4 
Looking at the Federal Employment Agency, it 
would be worth considering lowering the con -
tribution rate given its exceptionally good fi -
nancial situation and the positive labour market 
outlook, thus limiting the further increase in 
reserves. This would be a way of easing the 
burden on employees and enterprises alike.
Central, state and local governments have like -
wise recorded marked structural surpluses over 
the past three years. These surpluses can be 
used to reduce debt and lower interest expend -
iture, even if this is unlikely to have much of an 
effect on the budgets in the short term given 
the extremely favourable financing conditions. 
However, central, state and local governments 
are also set to be saddled with considerable 
burdens as a result of demographic change. On 
the expenditure side, these will be reflected 
largely in a rise in civil servants’ pension bene -
fits and the central government grant to the 
statutory pension insurance scheme. On the 
revenue side, the pace of tax revenue growth is 
likely to diminish on account of lower GDP 
trend growth and of social contributions pla -
cing a greater strain on the tax base. Bringing 
down the debt ratio rapidly is a key component 
in preparing for these challenges in the context 
of a fiscal policy oriented towards the longer 
term. It would also be advisable to factor struc -tural surpluses into fiscal plans as this would 
allow their budgets to absorb temporarily un -
expected shocks – the recent influx of refugees 
being one such example – without bending or 
breaching the budgetary rules. With this in 
mind, the surpluses mapped out in the stability 
programme appear appropriate overall.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Year-  on- year growth in tax revenue5 came to 
7% in the first quarter of 2017 (see the chart on 
page 63 and the table on page 64). At 6½%, 
growth in wage tax receipts was strong. How -
ever, this was partly attributable to the fact that 
the wage tax level was driven down (by around 
€0.7 billion) in January 2016 by the tax cut 
retroactively applied for 2015 as a whole. In 
view of the further tax cut implemented at the Moderate struc-
tural surpluses appropriate for central, state and local governments 
Dynamic growth in tax revenue in 2017 Q1Key data of the Federal Government’s updated stability programme
 
Item 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Real GDP growth (%)
Stability programme April 2017 1.9 1.4 1.6 1.5 1.5 1.5
Stability programme April 2016 1.7 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6 .
General government fi  scal balance (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2017 0.8 ½ ¼ ¼ ½ ½
Stability programme April 2016 0 0 0 0 0 .
Structural fi  scal balance (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2017 0.8 ½ ¼ ¼ ½ ½
Stability programme April 2016 0 0 0 0 0 .
Debt level (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2017 68.3 66¼ 64 61¾ 59¾ 57
Stability programme April 2016 68¼ 65¾ 63½ 61¼ 59½ .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Germany’s statutory 
health insurance scheme: past developments and future 
challenges, Monthly Report, July 2014, pp 29-50.
5 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
58

Current fi  scal developments in the euro area
2016: defi  cit decreases due to 
 favourable economic developments and  declining interest burden
Last year, the general government defi  cit ratio in the euro area fell from 2.1% to 1.5%. According to calculations by the 
European Commission, this was as a result 
of the positive impact of economic devel-
opments and low interest rates. The under-lying fi  scal stance (ie the change in the cyc-
lically adjusted primary balance) was thus 
neutral. Factoring out burdens arising from 
bank support measures (2015: 0.2% of gross domestic product (GDP)), the stance 
was actually slightly expansionary. The debt ratio contracted from 92.6% to 91.4%. This 
was primarily driven by growth in nominal 
GDP (denominator effect). Given the def-
icits, debt rose, with interest expenditure of 2.2% of GDP being offset by a primary sur-plus of 0.7% of GDP .
No structural improvement on the 
 horizon for coming years either
The European Commission expects only a 
marginal decline in the defi  cit ratio this year 
(to 1.4%). A slight loosening of the fi  scal stance is being overshadowed by positive cyclical factors and relief from interest ex-
penditure. The loosening is expected to be 
more pronounced in 2018; however, the 
national budgetary plans for that year have yet to be fi  nalised. With economic develop-
ments1 and interest expenditure remaining 
favourable, the defi  cit ratio is once again to contract slightly (to 1.3% of GDP). The debt 
ratio is set to continue the moderate de-
cline that began in 2015 and fall to 89.0% by 2018.Greek assistance programme remains 
topic of debate
Greece is the only euro- area country still in 
a European Stability Mechanism (ESM) pro-
gramme. Fiscal developments there are 
thus to be assessed based on the targets for 
the assistance programme, rather than ac-
cording to the European fi  scal rules. The fi  s-
cal target of a primary surplus2 of 0.5% of 
GDP agreed between the institutions in-volved (ESM, ECB, European Commission, International Monetary Fund (IMF)) and 
Greece was signifi  cantly exceeded in 2016 
(by 3½% of GDP), though this was also due 
to temporary effects. According to the 
Commission’s forecast, suffi   cient measures 
have been taken and planned to ensure that the primary surplus targets for 2017 
(1.75% of GDP) and 2018 (3.5% of GDP) are 
met. However, the various institutions dif-
fered in opinion regarding the likelihood of 
achieving the targets. This, coupled with the fact that a need was seen to improve 
Greece’s structural reforms, is delaying the 
second review of the current assistance 
programme. In the past, fundamental struc-
tural reforms were repeatedly found to have been insuffi   ciently implemented.
3 To 
enable the review of the programme to be concluded successfully, measures have been 
agreed for 2018, 2019 and 2020, with 
measures for the latter two years primarily 
concerning taxes and pensions. On this 
1 According to the Commission’s forecast, the output 
gap will total only -½% in 2017 and close in 2018.
2 Under the assistance programme, the targets con-
cern the general government primary balance, which 
deviates from the usual ESA defi  nition in that, in par-
ticular, it does not include expenditure related to sup-
port for the banking sector or revenue from transfers 
in connection with the Eurosystem’s SMP/ANFA trans-actions. There was no notable difference in 2016; the ESA primary balance amounted to 3.9% of GDP .
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Third assistance pro-
gramme for Greece, Monthly Report, August 2015, 
pp 62-66.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
59

basis, defi  cit- increasing measures will be ac-
cepted in the future under the proviso that these measures still enable the primary sur-plus targets to be achieved according to the forecast.
The IMF does not believe that Greece will 
be able to maintain the agreed target of a 
primary surplus of 3.5% of GDP beyond 
2021. At the same time, with a lower sur-
plus, it deems Greece’s public fi  nances un-
sustainable and is thus calling on European 
public lenders to grant substantial further debt relief before it will contribute fi  nan-
cially to the current programme.
In May 2016, the Eurogroup had indeed held out the possibility of granting further debt relief by means of extending the re-
payment period and lowering interest rates 
after the third programme had been suc-cessfully concluded. At the same time, 
however, analyses conducted by the Euro-
pean institutions found that, if the agreed 
targets were maintained, there would be no need for a haircut on debt and the situ-ation would be deemed sustainable.
There is no reason why a primary surplus of 
3.5% of GDP cannot be maintained in the 
longer term. In fact, following the success-
ful implementation of a fundamental re-
form process, this is especially likely to be 
the case. In the past, some countries have 
also managed to achieve similar or, in some cases, even higher primary surpluses for ex-
tended periods of time (Belgium, Finland and Italy). Moreover, the European fi  scal 
rules, which will apply again once the pro-
gramme comes to an end, stipulate struc-
turally close- to- balance budgets. These pro-visions require more ambitious primary sur-pluses when debt levels are higher or inter-
est rates are rising.4 When the debt ratio 
4 A ceiling of 3.5% (or lower) for the primary surplus 
would imply that the target anchored in the Stability 
and Growth Pact of a structurally close- to- balance 
budget no longer needs to be observed when debt ratios (and thus interest expenditure ratios) are high. 
This would fundamentally undermine the European fi  s-cal rules.Forecast for the public fi  nances of the euro-area countries
 
CountryEuropean Commission spring forecast, May 2017 Deadline for 
 correcting 
excessive 
defi  cit Budget balance as a percentage of GDP Government debt as a percentage of GDP
2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018
Austria – 1.6 – 1.3 – 1.0 84.6 82.8 81.2 –
Belgium – 2.6 – 1.9 – 2.0 105.9 105.6 105.1 –
Cyprus 0.4 0.2 0.7 107.8 103.4 99.8 –
Estonia 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.5 9.5 9.5 9.6 –
Finland – 1.9 – 2.2 – 1.8 63.6 65.5 66.2 –
France – 3.4 – 3.0 – 3.2 96.0 96.4 96.7 2017
Germany 0.8 0.5 0.3 68.3 65.8 63.3 –
Greece 0.7 – 1.2 0.6 179.0 178.8 174.6 2016
Ireland – 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.3 75.4 73.5 72.7 –
Italy – 2.4 – 2.2 – 2.3 132.6 133.1 132.5 –
Latvia 0.0 – 0.8 – 1.8 40.1 38.5 36.0 –
Lithuania 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.2 40.2 42.4 38.9 –
Luxembourg 1.6 0.2 0.3 20.0 22.0 22.3 –
Malta 1.0 0.5 0.8 58.3 55.8 52.5 –
Netherlands 0.4 0.5 0.8 62.3 59.8 57.2 –
Portugal – 2.0 – 1.8 – 1.9 130.4 128.5 126.2 2016
Slovakia – 1.7 – 1.3 – 0.6 51.9 51.5 49.8 –
Slovenia – 1.8 – 1.4 – 1.2 79.7 77.8 75.5 –
Spain – 4.5 – 3.2 – 2.6 99.4 99.2 98.5 2018
Euro area – 1.5 – 1.4 – 1.3 91.3 90.3 89.0 –
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
60

falls, these levels can be reduced again. The 
current programme targets for Greece’s pri-mary surplus are thus in no way too tough 
and it would not be appropriate to ease 
them. It is essential to avoid giving the im-pression that the conditionality attached to fi  scal programmes can be diluted if it is pol-
itically inopportune. Debt relief would also 
undermine the credibility of programme agreements and weaken the responsibility of the programme country, not least with 
regard to implementing reforms. Irrespect-
ive of this, an agreement may be reached to 
continue providing transfers due to other 
political considerations. However, the argu-ment that sustainability cannot be achieved without debt relief is not a convincing one. If the programme were to be implemented 
in full and the fi  scal targets reached, this 
would bring about a continuous decline in 
the debt ratio and thus re- establish sustain-ability.
As of 2017, hardly any infringements 
of 3% defi  cit ceiling but debt ratio still high in many cases
Portugal met its correction deadline (which 
had been extended a number of times) in 
2016 with a defi  cit ratio of well under 3%. 
While France is expected to comply with 
the reference value on schedule in 2017 
(after likewise having been granted a num-
ber of extensions), it is likely to breach the 
ceiling again in 2018 if no additional meas-ures are taken. Spain is also on track to re-
main below the reference value by 2018 (here again following a number of exten-sions). Defi  cit ratios are falling in many of 
the other euro- area countries, too.
Yet given the fi  scal rules, expected develop-
ments are unsatisfactory in many countries. 
Insuffi   cient structural improvements are often masked by economic recovery and interest relief. In 2016, 11 member states either  did not achieve their structural 
medium- term objective (MTO) and/or were subject to an excessive defi  cit procedure. Nonetheless, structural improvements, in 
both 2017 and 2018 in most cases, will fall short of the general requirement of 0.5% of 
GDP .
5 In 2017 and 2018, the structural def-
icit ratio is actually expected to increase in 
eight countries that still require fi  scal con-
solidation even though the interest expend-
iture ratio will continue to fall. In 2018, only 
seven euro- area countries (Cyprus , Ger-
many, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Malta 
and the Netherlands) are set to attain the agreed MTO of a structural defi  cit of no 
more than 0.5% of GDP .
It is in precisely those countries that have a 
particularly high debt ratio that the debt ra-
tio’s trajectory leaves much to be desired. Based on a debt ratio of over 90% at the end of 2016, Belgium, Spain, France, 
Greece, Italy and Portugal are not likely to 
be able to reduce the distance to the 60% 
reference value by an average annual rate of one- twentieth by the end of 2018 as 
agreed in the rules.6 In France and Italy, the 
debt ratio is actually set to increase on the 2016 level.
7 According to the Commission’s 
forecast, Greece will have the highest debt ratio by far in 2018 (over 170%). But in Italy, 
Portugal and Belgium as well as Cyprus, Spain and France, too, the debt ratio will 
5 As a general rule, both the preventive and the cor-
rective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact prescribe 
structural improvements of 0.5% of GDP per annum. 
However, country- specifi  c recommendations may devi-
ate from this in both processes.
6 Future debt developments are thus not in line with 
the narrow defi  nition of the debt rule. This requires 
that any debt exceeding the reference value of 60% of 
GDP has fallen at an average annual rate of one- 
twentieth in the previous three years. If this condition is deemed not to have been met ex post, one way in which this can be rectifi  ed is if it is expected to be met 
going forward. Furthermore, transitional provisions 
exist for those countries that were subject to an exces-sive defi  cit procedure at the time that this debt criter-ion was operationalised (November 2011). These provi-sions are valid for three years after the defi  cit proced-ure has come to a close.
7 The debt ratio is forecast to rise in Finland, too, 
climbing to 66% by 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
61

still be very high, at over or very close to 
100%.
Calls for tighter fi  scal fi  ne- tuning not 
convincing
In order to safeguard the sustainability of 
public fi  nances, euro-area fi  scal rules stipu-late defi  cit and debt ceilings as well as min-
imum consolidation requirements. Compli-
ance with these rules enables the automatic stabilisers to take full effect, and exceptions 
are possible should a severe economic 
downturn arise. Maintaining an appropriate margin to the defi  cit and debt ceilings gen-erally creates scope for a country to imple-
ment a nationally desired stabilisation pol-
icy. However, in recent years, the European Commission, among others, has steered the 
focus towards an attempt at fi  scal fi  ne- 
tuning and is increasingly applying the fi  scal rules to this effect.
To avoid a continued rise in debt, active sta-
bilisation policy must be used symmetrically, ie it must be just as often expansionary as it is contractionary and to the same degree of intensity. However, the trend is for the cur-
rent situation to often be identifi  ed as a 
cyclical lull. For instance, in each of its au-
tumn forecasts since 2002, the European Commission has predicted that around 
90% of the EU-15 countries would have a 
negative output gap in the following year. 
This assessment was often revised upwards at a later date.
8 According to the Commis-
sion’s current calculations (as well as those from autumn 2016), the euro area’s overall capacity in 2017 is likely to be only moder-ately underutilised and the output gap is set 
to be more or less closed in 2018. Next to 
no negative gaps are expected in the indi-
vidual euro- area countries either. Neverthe-less, there have still been calls to make fi  scal policy more expansionary overall and, if ne-
cessary, to delay consolidation, even if the 
European fi  scal rules indicate otherwise.9 
Instead, in view of the continued very high debt ratios in some cases and the impend-
ing challenges posed by demographic 
trends, it would be advisable to strengthen 
the credibility of the European fi  scal rules 
and to opt for a strict interpretation of the provisions.
In general, fi  scal stimulus may be appropri-
ate in times of severe economic crisis. How-
ever, in all other situations, the many and fundamental methodological and practical 
problems associated with attempts at eco-
nomic fi  ne- tuning serve as a warning to ex-
ercise restraint.10 These problems do not 
become any less relevant in the case of a 
centralised management approach, such as a European facility to stabilise economic de-
velopment, the establishment of which is 
regularly proposed. It would be worrying if this were to give rise to additional borrow-
ing opportunities at the European level which would further undermine existing 
rules.
8 See also G  Kempkes, Cyclical adjustment in fi  scal 
rules: some evidence on real- time bias for EU-15 coun-
tries, Finanzarchiv 70 (2), pp 278-315. The EU-15 in-
cludes those countries that were members of the EU 
prior to the 2004 enlargement: Austria, Belgium, Den-
mark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, 
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Swe-den and the United Kingdom. A positive output gap 
was reported in only around 10% of cases for euro- 
area countries.
9 See Communication from the Commission to the 
European Parliament, the Council, the European Cen-
tral Bank, the European Economic and Social Commit-
tee and the Committee of the Regions, Towards a 
positive fi  scal stance for the euro area, Brussels, 16 No-
vember 2016, COM (2016) 727 fi  nal. Against the back-drop of a similar situation and developments in overall 
capacity utilisation, the European Commission called 
for additional fi  scal easing for the euro area compared with national plans. The Commission itself noted that 
this was only “broadly compatible with the objective 
of fi  scal sustainability”. Compliance with the provisions 
of the Stability and Growth Pact would then be side-
lined in favour of attempts at economic fi  ne- tuning.
10 In addition to severe measurement and identifi  ca-
tion diffi   culties, not least with a view to the cyclical position, there is also uncertainty with regard to the 
effect of individual fi  scal measures and, as a rule, con-siderable delays in the implementation thereof. More-
over, in the past, structurally low growth has often been mistaken for a slowdown in economic activity, with the result that fi  scal easing, rather than solving the problem, actually led to a structural increase in 
government debt.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
62

start of this year6 as well, weaker growth is 
envisaged  for 2017 as a whole. At 12½%, the 
pick- up in profit- related taxes was strong and 
broadly based across the different tax types. 
Only revenue from corporation tax stagnated. 
However, it had already reached a particularly 
high level in 2016. Revenue from non- assessed 
taxes on earnings, resulting mainly from invest -
ment income tax payments on dividends, rose 
especially steeply. This is probably due not least 
to shifted dividend payments during the year. 
Turnover tax revenue also increased relatively 
sharply (+5½%) but is generally rather volatile 
over the course of the year.
The latest official tax estimate expects revenue 
growth (including local government taxes) of 
4% for 2017 as a whole. One contributing fac -
tor here is growth in the macroeconomic refer -
ence variables for tax revenue7 being forecast 
as solid, while the second is the expected rise 
in profit- related tax revenue going significantly 
beyond what would be envisaged solely on the 
basis of these assumptions and the financial 
impact of changes in tax legislation and court 
rulings. This is due to favourable developments 
in the first quarter. However, growth will be 
markedly curbed by sizeable scheduled tax re -
funds owing to court rulings, some of which 
were made some time ago. Above all, this con -
cerns revenue from profit- related taxes, par -
ticularly corporation tax, local business tax and 
non- assessed taxes on earnings.8 Legislative 
changes are expected to reduce revenue 
growth distinctly, especially on account of the 
aforementioned income tax relief measures.
At 3½%, somewhat lower tax revenue growth 
is forecast for the year ahead. The main reason 
for this is that there is not expected to be any 
renewed boost in profit- related taxes. Growth 
will be bolstered because the payments arising 
from court rulings are assumed to be lower 
than in the current year. Legislative changes are 
set to have less of a diminishing effect. Rev -
enue growth of 4% is expected for the subse -
quent years up to 2021. Developments will pri -
marily be determined by growth assumptions and fiscal drag. Tax cuts will curb growth only 
slightly. The tax ratio (as defined in the govern -
ment finance statistics) is projected to increase 
significantly to 23.3% by the end of the fore -
cast period (2016: 22.5%).
Compared with the November 2016 forecast, 
the budgeted figures have been revised up -
wards by €8 billion for 2017. This is due not Weaker growth 
anticipated for year as whole
Similar revenue 
increases expected in years to comeRevenue expect -
ations up signifi-cantly overallTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 201701234567Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
6 Income tax allowances were raised and income tax 
brackets shifted to the right with the primary aim of offset -
ting the fiscal drag stemming from the previous year’s infla -
tion. Child benefit, which is deducted from revenue, was 
likewise raised. The shortfalls for 2017 will amount to 
around €2 billion.
7 This estimate is based on central government’s current 
macroeconomic projection from the end of April 2017. 
According  to this, GDP is expected to rise by 1.5% in real 
terms and 3.0% in nominal terms in 2017 (November: 
1.4% and 3.1%, respectively). GDP growth for 2018 is fore -
cast to be 1.6% in real terms and 3.1% in nominal terms 
(November: 1.6% and 3.2%, respectively). In the medium 
term, nominal growth of around 3% per annum is still fore -
cast.
8 This pertains, first and foremost, to court rulings (Federal 
Fiscal Court rulings I R 33/ 09 and I R 74/ 12) on section 40a 
of the Act on Asset Management Companies ( Gesetz über 
Kapitalanlagegesellschaften ) and STEKO (section 8b (3) of 
the Corporation Tax Act ( Körperschaftsteuergesetz )); see 
also Bundestags- Drucksache  18/ 5560. Moreover, shortfalls 
are expected as a result of a ruling by the European Court 
of Justice on the taxation of dividends paid to EU/ EEA com -
panies (case C-284/ 09) and owing to various other rulings. 
Unlike the cash receipt developments described here, the 
effect of these court rulings is recorded in the national 
accounts  at the time of each of the rulings (2011, 2013, 
2014 and 2016), increasing expenditure. Consequently, tax 
revenue will rise at a sharper rate this year in the national 
accounts than in the government finance statistics.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
63

only to the annual result for 2016 being better 
than expected in November but also to the 
now significantly more optimistic outlook for 
profit- related taxes. By contrast, lower revenue 
will result from both new and expected, 
delayed shortfalls stemming from court rulings, 
additional legislative changes and a slight 
downward revision of macroeconomic assump -
tions. Estimates were raised, initially by a some -
what lesser amount for 2018 (+€5½ billion) 
and culminating in an increase of €16½ billion 
by 2021. Next year, adjustments in connection 
with the impact of court rulings will have a re -
newed, marked dampening effect on the up -
ward revision, while the burdens arising from 
new legislative changes will also increase com -
pared with the current year.
Central government budget
Central government recorded a surplus of €3½ 
billion in the first quarter of 2017 compared with a deficit of €2½ billion one year previ -
ously. Revenue rose very sharply by 8½% (€7 
billion). This was mainly due to an abrupt rise in 
tax receipts (+15½%, or €11 billion). Even if the 
transfers to the EU budget, which were re -
duced by €6½ billion, are factored out, rev -
enue growth remains strong. By contrast, other 
income fell considerably, primarily because the 
Bundesbank’s profit distribution was down by 
almost €3 billion. On the expenditure side, 
overall growth was very muted at 1% (€1 bil -
lion). While payments to the social security 
funds, in particular, were once again higher, 
interest expenditure dropped considerably 
once more on account of favourable refinan -
cing in 2016 (almost -€1½ billion).
This year’s budget plan runs a deficit of €7 bil -
lion.9 Compared with the previous year’s actual 
budget outturn, this would mark a pronounced 
deterioration of almost €13½ billion. However, 
as in preceding years, developments are set to 
be more favourable than planned. That said, 
the figures for the first quarter overstate the 
underlying trend, not least because high draw -
downs of funds to the EU budget are still out -
standing. According to the May tax estimate, 
central government is nevertheless expected to 
record additional revenue of €7 billion com -
pared with the budget estimate. Interest ex -
penditure could also prove more favourable, 
having been estimated as being €1 billion up 
on the previous year. There will be considerable 
savings due to lower refinancing costs, while 
there has, to date, been no decline in the very 
high premium payments observed last year. 
What can be described overall as imminent re -
lief compared with the budget plan will signifi -
cantly outstrip the global spending cuts10 of €3 
billion and the burden resulting from the Bun -Surplus at start 
of year thanks to extraordinary rise in tax revenue  and declining interest expenditure
Budget outturn 
could be significantly  better  than planned; …Tax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2017 1,2 2016 2017
€ billionYear-
on-year 
change 
%Year-on-year 
change 
%
Tax revenue, total
2 154.9 165.4 +  6.8 + 3.9
of which
Wage tax 42.6 45.3 +  6.4 + 5.1
Profi  t-related taxes 3 28.2 31.7 + 12.3 + 3.7
Assessed income 
tax 14.6 17.0 + 16.7 + 6.8
Corporation tax 8.4 8.5 +  0.9 – 1.3
Investment 
 income tax 4 5.2 6.2 + 18.4 + 2.4
Turnover taxes 5 54.4 57.5 +  5.7 + 4.8
Energy tax 4.6 4.8 +  4.2 + 0.3
Tobacco tax 2.7 2.6 –  3.1 + 0.0
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calcula-tions. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2017. 2 In-
cluding EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds, homebuyers’ 
grant and investment grant deducted from revenue. 4  With-
holding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed 
taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax.
Deutsche Bundesbank
9 A €6½ billion withdrawal from the refugee reserve and 
coin seigniorage are planned to fund this without new bor -
rowing (maintaining a “black zero”, ie a balanced budget). 
Even in the absence of this withdrawal, which is included 
to provide budget relief, compliance with the debt brake 
would still be ensured.
10 Budgeting for global spending cuts means that cost 
savings in this amount must be made in the course of im -
plementing the budget (which were not divided between 
the individual expenditure item entitlements).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
64

desbank’s profit, which was €2 billion lower 
than forecast. Overall, the budget could actu -
ally remain in surplus. This would mean that 
the refugee reserve, which was set up at the 
end of 2015 in response to the strong influx of 
refugees and now contains an already elevated 
total of €18½ billion, would grow further. It 
would still appear to make sense to dissolve 
this reserve in a timely manner by budgeting 
for debt repayment. It is clear that refugee im -
migration can be financed without making use 
of the reserve. If temporary withdrawals from 
the reserve were interpreted as a source for 
funding permanent spending, this would gen -
erate a risk of budget shortfalls in the medium 
term. Besides, such withdrawals would not be 
recognised as reducing the deficit under the 
European fiscal framework. Dissolving reserves 
to pay down debt envisaged in the budget 
would therefore also prevent a potential con -
flict with the European fiscal rules.11
In the benchmark figures adopted in mid-  
March for the 2018 budget and the financial 
plan up to 2021, the Federal Government main -
tains its goal of refraining from net new bor -
rowing throughout the entire period. However, 
the figures do not indicate a structural balance, 
even though the associated deficit limit of 
0.35% of GDP represents the linchpin of cen -
tral government’s debt brake.12 Compared with 
the medium-  term financial plan drawn up in 
summer 2016, the transfer of turnover tax rev -
enue to state government in the form of a flat 
immigrant integration payment up to 2018, 
which has been adopted in the meantime, and 
the permanent municipal relief package of €5 
billion per year from 2018 onwards were spe -
cifically incorporated. The same applies to the 
reform of federal financial relations from 2020 
onwards due to soon be passed by the German 
parliament, which ultimately envisages a trans -
fer of tax revenue, initially of €9½ billion, to 
state government. Moreover, the expenditure 
framework was expanded. As well as increas -
ing defence spending, additional funds have 
been earmarked for internal security and eco -
nomic cooperation, in particular. Unlike in pre -vious years, there was no downward revision 
of estimated interest expenditure to create 
additional scope for spending. Instead, esti -
mates for individual years were increased com -
pared with previous financial plans. As a result, 
considerable shortfalls need to be plugged in 
order to achieve a balanced budget with no 
net borrowing. It is intended to partially close 
these gaps using funds that, in line with the 
planned 2017 budget deficit, will be left over in 
the refugee reserve (€8 billion in 2018 and €4 
billion in the following year). Furthermore, an 
additional high global spending cut of €5 bil -
lion was included for 2018 in order to reach the 
target.
Only in 2021 do the benchmark figures appear 
to include a certain buffer to attain a balanced 
budget without net borrowing again. Revenue 
developments then lag behind the projected 
growth in tax receipts, probably due to an esti -
mated global shortfall. According to the latest 
tax estimate, additional revenue is now ex -
pected to rise from €3 billion in 2018 to €7 bil -
lion in 2021 vis- à- vis the benchmark figures, 
resulting in a significant easing of the fiscal situ -
ation. However, it does not seem appropriate 
to fully use these or any other sources of relief 
to fund new budgetary burdens. There are sig -
nificant uncertainties in terms of the plans. 
With regard to future macroeconomic develop -
ments and interest rates, these uncertainties 
refer not least to the international level. Over -
all, greater budgetary burdens – a lower profit 
distribution from the Bundesbank, for ex -
ample – are also possible. In addition, the ratio 
of defence ministry expenditure to GDP is in -
tended to remain virtually unchanged until 
2021, whereas the NATO agreement could give 
rise to more stringent requirements. With this 
in mind, cautious planning seems appropriate 
overall. Generally speaking, it would make 
sense to plan moderate structural surpluses … it would 
make sense to dissolve reserves to pay down debt
Budget bench-
mark figures 
show need for 
action in 2018 
and full deple-tion of refugee reserve in 2019Marked safety margins still 
advisable
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly 
Report , August 2016, pp 63-65.
12 As in previous years, there are no data on the balances 
arising from financial transactions and of the off- budget 
entities to be included.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
65

and therefore safety margins with respect to 
the ceiling as defined in the debt brake rules. 
This would allow a short- term and potentially 
procyclical need for correction in the wake of 
negative surprises to be avoided. The imminent 
demographic strains highlight the need to aim 
for moderate surpluses, thereby limiting spend -
ing on servicing debt in a sustainable manner – 
also as a precautionary measure for future 
interest rate rises.
Central government’s off- budget entities13 re-
corded a surplus of €½ billion at the start of 
the year, compared with a deficit of €3½ billion 
in the same period last year. At that time, the 
redemption of an inflation- linked Federal bond 
and the transmission of funds collected in the 
previous year from the bank levy to the new 
European resolution authority in particular had 
a negative effect. The surplus this year is ultim -
ately attributable to pension- related entities 
whose revenues from transfers currently still 
significantly exceed the outflows. The deficits of the fund to promote municipal investment, 
recently raised to €7 billion, of the flood relief 
fund, established in 2013, and of the energy 
and climate fund remained low (€¼ billion in 
total). For the year as a whole, net expenditure 
from these three off- budget entities that are in -
cluded in the debt brake could considerably lag 
behind the amount of just over €3 billion 
planned for in the central government budget. 
Given the expected surpluses for pension-  
related entities, overall the off- budget entities 
would thus record a slightly higher surplus than 
in the previous year (€½ billion).14
State government budgets15
The positive development in the state govern -
ment budgets continued in the first quarter of 
the current year. The surplus increased by €3½ 
billion on the year to €5½ billion. The strong 
growth in revenue (6½%, or €5½ billion) was 
primarily due to the development of tax revenue 
(+6½%, or €4½ billion) but current transfers 
from public administration also played a role 
(+13%). However, the latter also include central 
government funds which are to be forwarded 
to municipalities. This also applies to the in -
creased contribution to accommodation costs 
for recipients of unemployment benefit II. Over -
all, increases in expenditure were considerably 
Significantly 
improved result from off- budget entities at start of 2017 …… and surplus anticipated once more for year as whole
Higher surplus 
in Q1 due to substantially increased tax revenue and transfers with moderately increased spendingCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4105051015
––+++
–10–50+5+10+15
201720162015Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
201520172016€ billion
13 The off- budget entities discussed here are those that 
are included in the Federal Ministry of Finance’s quarterly 
data. This notably does not take into account bad banks 
and other entities keeping commercial accounts.
14 With the 2016 supplementary budget finally approved 
in the spring of 2017, a further transfer of €3½ billion was 
made to the fund to promote municipal investment, where 
the amount was also assigned to 2016. This transfer had 
not yet been booked when the Monthly Report for Febru -
ary 2017 went to press. It is possible that a new off- budget 
entity funding the final disposal of nuclear waste will be 
included in the reporting group going forward. Cash rev -
enue of some €24 billion is expected from power plant 
associations in the current year following proof of compati -
bility with the EU rules on state aid. This will not affect the 
general government’s national accounts balance.
15 The development of local government finances in 2016 
was analysed in greater detail in the short articles in the 
April 2017 Monthly Report. These are the most recent data 
available. The data on state government budgets are based 
on the monthly cash statistics on the core budgets. For re -
sults including off- budget entities, see the statistical section 
of this report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
66

weaker at 2½%, or €2 billion. Stronger growth 
was recorded in current transfers to the munici -
palities (+8½%) and personnel expenditure 
(+4%), in particular. Other operating expend -
iture, by contrast, declined (-2½%), having been 
particularly high at the beginning of 2016 owing 
to the initial provision of support for refugees. 
Interest expenditure also continued to fall.
The balance improvement at the beginning of 
the year is unlikely to continue into the follow -
ing quarters. Although, according to the latest 
tax estimate from May, a revenue increase of 
€6½ billion in comparison with the November 
2016 estimate is expected, growth on the year 
remains limited to 2%,16 which is also due to 
the fact that refunds resulting from earlier court 
rulings are expected to be made at a later point 
in time. By contrast, as the year progresses, ex -
penditure growth will probably become 
stronger, even though the overall increase of 
almost 4½% budgeted for in the state govern -
ment plans seems rather high. All things con -
sidered, a marked surplus is likely to be re -
corded once more, although it could be some -
what lower than that of the previous year.
Looking ahead, stronger tax growth can be ex -
pected once again, and the tax estimate re -
ports considerable additional revenue for the 
state governments compared with the Novem -
ber 2016 estimate. Although refugee- related 
increases in central government funds will be 
phased out at the end of 2018, burdens in this 
area also look set to decrease, as things cur -
rently stand. The additional central government 
contributions planned from 2020 for the re -
formed financial equalisation scheme are more 
significant. Overall, marked surpluses in the 
state government budgets are thus also envis -
aged in the medium term. As in the case of 
central government, it seems completely ap -
propriate to factor in certain surpluses with a 
view to ensuring compliance with the debt 
brake, which requires the federal states to have 
(structurally) balanced budgets from 2020, but 
also in order to prepare for civil servant pension 
costs, which are still increasing markedly.Most of the federal states have adopted initial 
regulations for the implementation of the debt 
brake enshrined in Germany’s Basic Law 
(Grundgesetz)  from 2020 onwards.17 Like 
Baden -  Württemberg , Lower Saxony, Saxony-  
Anhalt and Thuringia, North Rhine-  Westphalia 
has also merely adjusted its state budgetary 
rules to this end in the past month. However, 
such exclusively non- constitutional rules may 
be temporarily suspended with a mere budget -
ary act18 and do not allow for a review before Slowdown 
as year progresses 
Marked 
surpluses  expected in medium termFurther specification  of debt brakesState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4420246
––+++
0246810
2017
20162015Quarterly results
Cumulated from start of year
20152017
2016€ billion
16 The divergent allocation of the city states’ local govern -
ment tax receipts at the local government level in these 
figures is of only minor importance.
17 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Federal states’ cyclical 
adjustment in the context of the debt brake, Monthly Re -
port, March 2017, p 34.
18 Bavaria made use of this option to finance a capital 
contribution of €10 billion to Bayern LB in 2008 and 2009 
and suspended the ban on new borrowing which had 
existed in its state budgetary rules since 2006. Going one 
step further, in the face of a strained budgetary situation, 
Baden-  Württemberg’s 2012 reform act replaced the gen -
eral ban on new borrowing in its state budgetary rules, 
which had been in place since 2008, with staggered de -
clining upper limits on new borrowing.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
67

the state constitutional court, for example. 
Should a federal state debt brake only apply to 
the core budget, it would also be possible to 
increase borrowing via off-  budget entities. As 
the national debt brake also seeks to comply 
with European regulations, it would be advis -
able to expand the curbing of debt by applying 
the debt brake to such entities as well.
At the end of April, the federal states in receipt 
of consolidation assistance were required to 
state the extent to which they had adhered to 
the agreed reduction path for their structural 
deficits of 2016. According to the data avail -
able, the provisions were adhered to, but only 
by a slight margin in some cases. It is, in prin -
ciple, a welcome development that Bremen 
was able to completely avoid net new borrow -
ing whilst executing its budget, and that it did 
not have to invoke the exemption clause which 
it had been granted.19 According to Bremen’s 
report, the margin to the limit amounted to 
just over €30 million, with a €65 million surplus 
from the off-  budget entity for Bremen’s gen -
eral debt servicing fund having an alleviating 
effect. The other off- budget entities, by con -
trast, were not taken into account. According 
to the quarterly cash statistics of the Federal 
Statistical Office,20 off-  budget entities in 
Bremen recorded a deficit of almost €90 million 
overall (adjusted for financial transactions). A 
comprehensive analysis ensuring compatibility 
with the definition of the government sector in 
the national accounts, which is relevant for the 
European rules, would result in a much less 
favour  able overall picture. In principle, it also 
seems appropriate to examine, within the 
framework of fiscal surveillance, whether the 
financial transactions reported in the cash stat -
istics results have in fact left financial assets un -
affected (ie that they have not been used to 
offset losses, for example). Only then could 
they ultimately be recorded with a neutral bal -
ance effect, as is the case in the national ac -
counts. It would not be advisable to exclude 
regular capital injections to some cultural insti -
tutions, for instance, in the case of Saarland, or 
else calls on guarantees via off- budget entities in connection with support for HSH Nordbank, 
in the case of Schleswig- Holstein, from the 
agreed limits.
Social security funds21
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
In the first quarter of 2017, the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme recorded a deficit of 
€2½ billion. The deficit – usual for this time of 
year – expanded by €½ billion in year- on- year 
terms. The rise in expenditure was robust at 
just over 5%, which is still largely attributable 
to the high pension adjustments of July 2016 
(+4.25% in western Germany and +5.95% in 
eastern Germany). The strain on the balance 
was eased by just under €½ billion because the 
general central government grant will be paid 
back in full from this year onwards.
In mid-2017, pensions will be raised by 1.90% 
in western Germany and 3.59% in eastern Ger -
many, reflecting in particular the wage devel -
opments of the past year. The adjustment is 
significantly higher in eastern Germany because 
the average gross wages and salaries have risen 
more strongly here. This was partly due to the 
introduction of the statutory minimum wage in 
2015, which also led to higher wage adjust -
ments in eastern Germany in 2016.22 A correc -
tion factor belatedly used to adjust the pension 
adjustment to the relevant development of Restructuring 
reports: critical examination of off- budget entities and financial trans-actions, tooQ1 deficit slightly higher
Pension expend-
iture expected to increase as strongly as in 2016
19 For more on budget planning in Bremen, see also 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Report, 
August 2016, p 66.
20 Data from the periods of lag are not included here.
21 The financial development of the public long- term care 
and statutory health insurance schemes in 2016 was ana -
lysed in the short articles of the March 2017 Monthly 
Report . These are the most recent data available.
22 The statutory minimum wage was only implemented 
across the board after a certain delay. In accordance with 
this, more wages were adjusted upwards within existing 
wage structures, particularly in eastern Germany.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
68

compulsory contributions23 increases the differ -
ence further still. On an annual average, the 
national pension increase in 2017 matches the 
level of the previous year at 3½%. Total pen -
sion expenditure should also increase at a simi -
lar rate to last year (+4% in 2016).
For the year as a whole, however, the result of 
the statutory pension insurance scheme is likely 
to improve compared with 2016 (deficit of 
€2½ billion) essentially because the reduction 
factor of just over €1 billion in the central gov -
ernment grant will no longer apply. Contribu -
tion receipts are likely to increase as strongly as 
pension expenditure. In the absence of new 
measures that have a detrimental impact and 
assuming that positive development on the la -
bour market continues, the financial situation 
could improve somewhat more on a temporary 
basis and lower the deficit further still. How -
ever, statutory pension insurance scheme fi -
nances are merely experiencing an interim 
peak, as demographic pressure is set to in -
crease in the future. The high level of reserves 
will thus be gradually depleted and substantial 
increases in the contribution rate are envisaged 
for the longer term. This will need to be taken 
into account when considering further reforms 
in the area of pensions.24
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency recorded a 
balanced core budget (excluding the civil ser -
vants’ pension fund) for the first quarter of 
2017. The result was depressed by a special al -
location of €½ billion to the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund.25 A decline of €½ billion was there -
fore recorded in comparison with the previous 
year. However, the result in the same quarter of 
the previous year was also boosted by a posi -
tive one- off effect to the tune of €½ billion.26 
Without these one- off factors, there would Improved result 
in current year but statutory pension insur-ance scheme finances to face considerable pressure in future
Balance depressed by one- off effect in Q1 …Finances of the German statutory pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund).
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q443210123
––––+++
–5–4–3–2–10Fiscal balance, quarterly data
Cumulated from start of year201720162015
20162015
20172015 2016 170123456
2015 2016 170123456Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
23 The data on the development of average income sub -
ject to compulsory contributions are only available with a 
delay of just over one year. Therefore the inflation rate of 
average gross wages and salaries from the national ac -
counts of the previous year is used for the respective mid- 
year pension adjustment. Once the data on earlier develop -
ments in average compulsory contributions are available, 
the figures are then belatedly adjusted by means of a cor -
rection factor during the next pension adjustment (wage 
correction).
24 For more on the outlook, see Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Excursus: longer- term pension developments, Monthly Re -
port, August 2016, pp 68-77.
25 The special allocation is linked to the low interest rates; 
see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Re -
port, February 2017, p 68.
26 Here, the supplementary pension scheme of central and 
state government ( Versorgungsanstalt des Bundes und der 
Länder,  or VBL) had reimbursed the additional payments 
charged between 2013 and 2015. This resulted in subdued 
administrative expenditure by the Federal Employment 
Agency, as well as (to a lesser extent) reduced receipts from 
refunds of administrative costs by central government. See 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Report, 
May 2016, p 68 and p 73.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
69

have been an improvement in the balance of 
€½ billion on the year.Contribution receipts increased by 4% against 
a backdrop of ongoing favourable develop -
ments in wages and employment. The positive 
development on the labour market is reflected 
in core expenditure, particularly on unemploy -
ment benefit. The substantial increase in total 
expenditure (+10½%) was driven by the one-  
off effects mentioned above. After adjustment 
for these, expenditure would have fallen by 
½%.
Dynamic growth in contribution receipts and a 
decline in unemployment benefit are also to be 
expected for the year as a whole. The surplus 
(€5½ billion in 2016) is only expected to fall if 
there is a very sharp rise in spending on active 
labour market policy measures. The budget es -
timate of €1½ billion is therefore likely to be 
significantly exceeded once more.
According to current forecasts, favourable de -
velopments are also expected on the labour 
market in future. Surpluses, many of which are 
likely to be structural, should therefore also 
continue to rise. All things considered, a reduc -
tion in the Federal Employment Agency’s con -
tribution rate would seem appropriate. This 
would allow the burden of taxes and social se -
curity contributions on employees and enter -
prises to be eased somewhat. Surpluses could 
still be achieved in the medium term even with 
a lower contribution rate and the reserves 
would be at a level which could also accommo -
date a sharper downturn.… but positive 
underlying developments
Considerable 
surplus expected 
again for year 
as whole
Reduce taxpayer 
burdens by lowering contribution  rateFinances of theFederal Employment Agency
*
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Fiscal balance, quarterly data
Cumulated from start of year201720162015
2016
2015
20172015 2016 17–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2015 2016 17963036912
–––++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage changeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2017  
70

Statistical 
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2017  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
 1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5•
 2 External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5•
 3 Gener al economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 1 The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8•
 2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10•
 3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18•
IV Banks
 1 A ssets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20•
 2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24•
 3 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26•
 4 A ssets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28•
 5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30•
 6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32•
 7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34•
 8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36•
 9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36•
 1 0 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38•
 1 1 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38•
 1 2 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39•
 1 3 A ssets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2017  
2•

V Minimum reserves
 1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42•
 2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42•
VI Interest rates
 1 ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43•
 2 Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43•
 3 Eur osystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43•
 4 Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43•
 5 Inter est rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 1 Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48•
 2 Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49•
VIII Capital market
 1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50•
 2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51•
 3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52•
 4 Shar es in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52•
 5 Y ields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53•
 6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53•
IX Financial accounts
 1 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54•
 2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55•
 3 A cquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56•
 4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57•
X Public finances in Germany
 1 Gener al government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58•
 2 Gener al government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58•
 3 Gener al government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial 
 statistics)  .....................................................................................................................  59•
 4 Centr al, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2017  
3•

 5 Centr al, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60•
 6 Centr al and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60•
 7 Centr al, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61•
 8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61•
 9 F ederal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62•
 1 0 S tatutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62•
 1 1 S tatutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63•
 1 2 Centr al government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63•
 1 3 Gener al government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63•
 1 4 Centr al, state and local government: debt by category  ................................................  64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  65•
 2 Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  66•
 3 Or ders received by industry  .........................................................................................  67•
 4 Or ders received by construction  ..................................................................................  68•
 5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  68•
 6 Labour market  .............................................................................................................  69•
 7 Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  70•
 8 Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  71•
 9 N egotiated pay rates ( overall economy)  .......................................................................  71•
 1 0 A ssets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  72•
 1 1 Revenues and operating  income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  73•
XII External sector
 1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  74•
 2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  75•
 3 F oreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  76•
 4 S ervices and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................  77•
 5 S econdary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  77•
 6 C apital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...................................................  77•
 7 F inancial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  78•
 8 External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  79•
 9 A ssets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  80•
 1 0 ECB’ s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  81•
 1 1 Eur o-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ...............................................................  81•
 1 2 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  82•Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2017  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
May 2017
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
 
 
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
 M 3 3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2015          July 11.6 5.2 4.9 4.8 1.8 0.7 − 3.0 − 0.12 − 0.02 1.5
         Aug 11.3 5.0 4.8 4.8 2.2 1.0 − 3.2 − 0.12 − 0.03 1.3         Sep 11.3 5.0 4.7 4.9 2.2 0.7 − 3.4 − 0.14 − 0.04 1.3
         Oct 11.5 5.4 5.2 5.0 2.3 0.9 − 3.5 − 0.14 − 0.05 1.1
         Nov 10.8 5.1 4.9 4.9 2.6 1.1 − 3.4 − 0.13 − 0.09 1.1         Dec 10.5 5.2 4.7 4.9 2.2 0.6 − 3.1 − 0.20 − 0.13 1.2
2016          Jan 10.5 5.5 5.1 5.0 2.8 1.1 − 3.4 − 0.24 − 0.15 1.1
         Feb 10.4 5.5 5.1 5.1 3.2 1.2 − 3.4 − 0.24 − 0.18 1.0         Mar 10.3 5.6 5.2 5.0 3.1 1.1 − 3.4 − 0.29 − 0.23 0.9
         Apr 9.7 5.2 4.8 5.0 3.4 1.3 − 2.8 − 0.34 − 0.25 0.9
         May 9.1 5.1 4.9 5.0 3.6 1.4 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.26 0.8         June 8.8 5.1 5.1 5.1 3.8 1.5 − 2.4 − 0.33 − 0.27 0.7
         July 8.6 5.1 5.1 5.1 3.8 1.3 − 2.7 − 0.33 − 0.29 0.6
         Aug 8.6 5.0 5.0 5.1 3.8 1.6 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.5         Sep 8.4 5.0 5.1 4.9 3.8 1.9 − 2.5 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.6
         Oct 8.0 4.6 4.5 4.8 4.1 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.35 − 0.31 0.7
         Nov 8.5 4.9 4.7 4.7 4.2 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.35 − 0.31 1.0         Dec 8.8 4.8 5.0 4.9 4.5 2.4 − 2.1 − 0.35 − 0.32 1.0
2017          Jan 8.4 4.7 4.8 4.8 4.3 2.4 − 2.1 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb 8.4 4.8 4.7 4.9 4.1 2.3 − 1.7 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2         Mar 9.1 5.1 5.3 ... 4.5 2.8 − 1.7 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real derivatives 2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2015          July
+ 41,532 + 39,309 + 30,891 + 10,946 + 73,841 + 12,594 − 59,490 − 7,000 1.0996 91.3 87.5
         Aug + 21,955 + 19,454 + 23,892 + 11,282 + 24,767 − 6,866 − 6,680 + 1,390 1.1139 93.0 88.9
         Sep + 36,149 + 29,905 + 43,756 − 325 + 14,377 − 5,351 + 26,772 + 8,282 1.1221 93.8 89.7
         Oct + 32,383 + 33,336 + 74,629 + 19,215 + 15,321 + 12,759 + 33,343 − 6,009 1.1235 93.6 89.6
         Nov + 32,908 + 32,338 − 15,745 − 53,574 + 31,729 + 21,227 − 17,589 + 2,462 1.0736 91.1 87.1         Dec + 43,696 + 31,440 + 71,903 + 50,450 + 63,279 + 22,109 − 72,062 + 8,126 1.0877 92.5 88.3
2016          Jan + 12,075 + 13,949 − 7,315 − 21,180 + 76,535 + 15,172 − 76,687 − 1,155 1.0860 93.6 89.1
         Feb + 16,833 + 27,758 + 17,893 + 49,755 + 34,971 + 13,552 − 81,445 + 1,061 1.1093 94.7 90.0         Mar + 38,572 + 38,963 + 39,050 + 21,682 − 7,359 + 274 + 23,389 + 1,063 1.1100 94.1 89.5
         Apr + 38,395 + 36,027 + 31,131 − 9,953 + 143,701 − 21,784 − 79,216 − 1,617 1.1339 94.8 90.1
         May + 18,417 + 32,704 + 22,318 + 21,060 + 13,454 − 14,099 − 1,206 + 3,110 1.1311 95.1 90.5         June + 39,096 + 39,314 + 33,192 − 44,582 + 37,191 − 9,890 + 49,782 + 692 1.1229 94.7 90.3
         July + 35,314 + 33,511 + 25,758 + 24,632 + 61,351 + 13,323 − 72,670 − 878 1.1069 94.9 90.4
         Aug + 26,206 + 25,245 + 38,025 + 39,999 + 53,899 + 6,763 − 64,449 + 1,813 1.1212 95.2 90.6         Sep + 36,249 + 32,996 + 56,529 + 50,493 + 6,191 + 3,687 − 10,631 + 6,789 1.1212 95.4 90.7
         Oct + 26,096 + 28,014 + 7,992 + 34,231 + 51,503 + 6,228 − 80,020 − 3,951 1.1026 95.5 90.8
         Nov + 32,515 + 33,550 + 842 − 22,287 − 29,949 + 2,867 + 47,753 + 2,458 1.0799 95.0 90.2         Dec + 39,648 + 33,042 + 87,418 + 21,418 + 52,682 + 6,276 + 970 + 6,073 1.0543 94.2 89.6
2017          Jan + 3,083 + 9,340 + 11,786 + 16,879 + 12,453 + 2,292 − 14,760 − 5,077 1.0614 94.4 p 89.7
         Feb + 27,865 + 27,571 − 3,156 − 154 + 73,046 + 4,985 − 83,014 + 1,981 1.0643 93.9 p 89.3         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0685 94.4 p 89.6
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0723 94.1 p 89.5
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82
  2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2017
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
 
 
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2014 1.2 1.6 1.6 2.8 − 0.6 0.6 0.4 8.5 0.1 2.1
2015 2.0 1.5 1.7 1.4 0.3 1.3 − 0.2 26.3 0.8 2.72016 1.8 1.2 1.9 1.6 1.4 1.2 0.0 5.2 0.9 2.0
2015          Q4 2.0 1.6 2.1 0.8 0.9 1.4 0.9 28.4 1.2 2.72016          Q1 1.7 1.2 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.3 − 0.8 3.9 1.0 2.4
         Q2 1.6 1.2 3.2 0.7 1.4 1.7 0.0 3.3 1.1 2.3         Q3 1.8 1.2 1.6 1.3 1.6 0.7 2.1 6.2 1.0 0.5         Q4 1.8 1.1 1.3 2.7 1.0 1.0 − 1.3 7.2 0.4 2.7
2017          Q1 1.7 ... 2.9 ... ... 1.3 − 0.3 ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2014 0.8 1.0 1.4 4.3 − 1.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 20.9 − 0.7 − 0.9
2015 2.1 − 0.0 0.8 0.1 − 1.2 1.8 1.0 36.9 1.1 3.62016 1.4 4.3
r 1.0 1.8 1.9 0.3 2.6 0.7 1.7 4.9
2015          Q4 1.9 1.4 − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.1 2.2 2.6 36.6 1.3 3.0
2016          Q1 1.3 4.6 r 1.5 − 2.0 − 0.8 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.2 1.5 3.8
         Q2 1.0 3.4 r 0.5 − 1.2 3.0 0.5 5.3 0.7 0.2 4.4
         Q3 0.9 4.8 r 0.6 2.9 1.9 − 0.6 2.0 − 0.8 1.6 1.4
         Q4 2.3 4.5 r 1.4 7.6 3.0 0.5 4.0 3.2 3.6 9.8
2017          Q1 e 1.2 ... p 1.0 10.4 1.5 0.7 9.2 p − 5.9 1.6 8.7
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2014 80.4 79.3 83.9 73.0 79.0 81.9 67.7 − 73.7 72.22015 81.3 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.52016 81.8 80.0 85.0 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 − 76.3 72.6
2016          Q1 81.9 80.0 85.0 72.5 79.5 82.6 65.5 − 77.1 72.3
         Q2 81.5 79.3 84.6 73.8 78.0 82.8 67.8 − 76.5 73.0         Q3 81.6 79.7 84.8 73.0 73.8 83.8 67.8 − 76.0 71.8         Q4 82.3 80.9 85.7 75.0 80.6 83.6 69.3 − 75.7 73.1
2017          Q1 82.5 80.7 85.9 74.4 81.0 84.6 68.6 − 76.5 74.5
         Q2 82.6 81.4 86.0 76.4 82.1 84.2 68.1 − 76.0 74.8
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2014 11.6 8.5 5.0 7.4 8.7 10.3 26.5 11.3 12.7 10.82015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 9.4 11.9 9.92016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 7.9 11.7 9.6
2016          Oct 9.8 7.3 4.0 7.0 8.7 10.0 23.3 7.3 11.7 9.4
         Nov 9.7 7.2 3.9 6.5 8.7 10.0 23.4 7.0 11.9 9.4         Dec 9.6 7.0 3.7 6.2 8.7 10.1 23.5 6.9 11.8 9.5
2017          Jan 9.6 7.0 3.9 5.7 8.7 10.1 23.5 6.7 11.8 9.7
         Feb 9.5 7.0 3.9 5.5 8.7 10.1 ... 6.6 11.5 9.3         Mar 9.5 6.9 3.8 ... 8.8 10.1 ... 6.4 11.7 9.0
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2014 6 0.4 0.5 0.8 0.5 1.2 0.6 − 1.4 0.3 0.2 0.7
2015 7 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
2016          Nov 0.6 1.7 0.7 1.4 0.6 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.2 0.1 1.2
         Dec 1.1 2.2 1.7 2.4 1.1 0.8 0.3 − 0.2 0.5 2.1
2017          Jan 1.8 3.1 1.9 2.8 0.9 1.6 1.5 0.2 1.0 2.9
         Feb 2.0 3.3 2.2 3.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 0.3 1.6 3.2         Mar 1.5 2.5 1.5 3.0 0.9 1.4 1.7 0.6 1.4 3.3
         Apr 
e 1.9 2.7 2.0 3.6 1.0 1.4 1.6 0.7 2.0 3.3
 
General government financial balance 8
 
2014 − 2.6 − 3.1 0.3 0.7 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 − 3.7 − 3.0 − 1.6
2015 − 2.1 − 2.5 0.7 0.1 − 2.7 − 3.6 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 2.7 − 1.3
2016 − 1.5 − 2.6 0.8 0.3 − 1.9 − 3.4 0.7 − 0.6 − 2.4 0.0
 
General government debt 8
 
2014 92.0 106.7 74.9 10.7 60.2 94.9 179.7 105.3 131.8 40.9
2015 90.3 106.0 71.2 10.1 63.7 95.6 177.4 78.7 132.1 36.5
2016 89.2 105.9 68.3 9.5 63.6 96.0 179.0 75.4 132.6 40.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual and October. 5  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted seasonally adjusted. Standardised unemployment rate of Germany:
data. 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2017
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
 
   
                   
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
3.5 5.6 8.3 1.4 0.6 0.9 2.6 3.1 1.4 − 1.5 2014
1.8 4.0 7.4 2.0 1.0 1.6 3.8 2.3 3.2 1.7 20152.3 4.2 5.0 2.2 1.5 1.4 3.3 2.5 3.2 2.8 2016
2.1 3.3 6.9 1.4 1.1 1.5 4.6 2.8 3.3 2.7 2015          Q4
2.3 3.0 6.3 1.5 1.7 1.0 3.4 2.2 3.6 2.6 2016          Q1
1.8 4.7 4.4 2.3 1.5 1.1 3.8 2.7 3.5 2.8          Q2
1.6 5.3 4.5 2.4 1.3 1.6 3.0 2.5 3.2 2.9          Q3
3.4 3.8 5.1 2.5 1.7 2.0 3.0 2.6 2.6 3.0          Q4
3.8 ... ... 3.3 2.0 ... 3.1 ... ... ... 2017          Q1
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
0.3 4.5 − 5.7 − 2.9 0.9 1.8 3.6 1.7 1.3 − 0.7 2014
4.6 1.0 6.3 − 3.4 2.2 1.7 7.4 5.1 3.4 3.4 20152.8 − 0.1 − 3.5 2.0 2.1 1.0 4.7 7.1 1.8 7.9 2016
5.4 0.8 5.1 − 4.5 2.4 2.2 9.5 3.7 4.8 6.2 2015          Q4
5.5 2.0 − 5.0 − 2.7 1.8 0.9 4.5 6.6 3.0 10.1 2016          Q1
− 0.3 0.5 − 4.4 2.7 1.8 0.8 7.4 6.1 1.3 8.7          Q2
3.0 − 0.1 − 3.1 3.3 1.0 0.4 2.9 7.2 0.9 6.1          Q3
3.1 − 2.6 − 1.6 5.4 3.6 1.9 4.1 8.7 1.8 7.0          Q4
6.0 ...
p 5.5 p 1.9 ... 2.3 7.8 p 6.6 1.8 ... 2017          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
74.9 66.2 78.1 80.2 84.3 78.4 80.7 80.3 75.8 53.9 2014
74.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 80.4 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 201575.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 2016
75.9 72.4 77.8 81.4 85.0 80.0 85.4 83.2 79.0 56.9 2016          Q1
76.1 76.1 78.9 81.7 84.0 80.8 83.0 83.1 77.8 63.9          Q2
75.5 77.6 79.8 81.5 83.2 79.6 84.3 83.7 78.4 58.7          Q3
76.0 81.3 79.9 82.1 85.1 80.3 85.4 84.1 79.1 59.6          Q4
76.5 82.6 79.3 81.4 85.1 79.8 87.1 84.5 78.8 58.1 2017          Q1
77.4 82.1 79.1 82.5 86.6 79.1 86.5 85.4 78.1 57.6          Q2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
10.7 6.0 5.8 7.4 5.6 14.1 13.2 9.7 24.5 16.1 2014
9.1 6.5 5.4 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 20157.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.0 19.6 13.1 2016
7.4 6.2 4.4 5.6 5.9 10.6 9.2 7.9 18.8 12.9 2016          Oct 
7.4 6.2 4.2 5.6 5.8 10.5 9.0 8.0 18.7 13.4          Nov 
7.6 6.2 4.1 5.4 5.7 10.2 8.9 7.9 18.4 13.3          Dec 
8.1 6.1 4.1 5.3 5.6 10.1 8.7 7.9 18.3 13.0 2017          Jan 
8.3 6.1 4.1 5.3 5.7 9.9 8.6 7.8 18.2 12.8          Feb 
8.1 6.0 4.1 5.1 5.9 9.8 8.4 7.6 18.2 12.5          Mar 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
0.2 0.7 0.8 0.3 1.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.3 2014
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 2016
1.1 0.6 0.8 0.4 1.5 0.5 − 0.2 0.7 0.5 − 0.8 2016          Nov 
2.0 1.6 1.0 0.7 1.6 0.9 0.2 0.6 1.4 0.1          Dec 
2.5 2.5 1.4 1.6 2.1 1.3 0.8 1.5 2.9 0.7 2017          Jan 
3.2 2.7 1.2 1.7 2.4 1.6 1.2 2.5 3.0 1.4          Feb 
3.2 2.5 1.2 0.6 2.1 1.4 1.0 2.0 2.1 1.5          Mar 
3.5 2.6 1.1 1.4 2.3 2.4 0.8 1.7 2.6 2.1          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 8
 
− 0.7 1.4 − 2.0 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 7.2 − 2.7 − 5.4 − 6.0 − 8.8 2014− 0.2 1.4 − 1.3 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 5.1 − 1.2 2015
0.3 1.6 1.0 0.4 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 1.7 − 1.8 − 4.5 0.4 2016
 
General government debt 8
 
40.5 22.4 64.3 67.9 84.4 130.6 53.6 80.9 100.4 107.1 201442.7 21.6 60.6 65.2 85.5 129.0 52.5 83.1 99.8 107.5 201540.2 20.0 58.3 62.3 84.6 130.4 51.9 79.7 99.4 107.8 2016
6  Including Latvia from 2014 onwards. 7  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. latest data publication under the excessive deficit procedure (Eurostat).
8  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht Treaty definition). Euro area: European Central Germany: current data according to the Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank
Bank, regularly updated. Member states excluding Germany: calculations. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
May 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2015          Aug 18.6 − 20.1 6.2 38.7 47.6 − 23.0 10.6 33.6 − 11.3 − 3.3 − 1.4 − 8.8 2.3
         Sep 33.0 − 6.5 − 8.8 39.4 45.8 − 6.4 − 94.4 − 88.0 − 25.9 − 3.2 − 0.7 − 31.1 9.2
         Oct 22.9 0.8 − 15.3 22.1 18.6 9.6 22.5 13.0 − 39.8 − 25.7 − 1.1 − 17.3 4.2
         Nov 88.2 49.1 2.0 39.1 47.1 4.0 − 15.6 − 19.6 − 5.6 − 13.6 − 1.7 − 4.4 14.1         Dec − 109.6 − 70.7 − 2.0 − 38.9 − 33.7 − 3.9 − 190.9 − 186.9 − 8.3 4.1 − 0.6 − 27.0 15.1
2016          Jan 156.2 45.9 6.0 110.3 95.2 − 45.5 129.0 174.5 − 26.8 − 8.1 − 0.4 − 18.1 − 0.3
         Feb 86.4 45.1 − 0.5 41.3 50.1 − 81.6 32.3 113.8 − 15.4 11.2 − 1.2 − 23.8 − 1.5         Mar 62.8 22.2 − 5.6 40.6 41.3 22.0 − 86.1 − 108.1 − 17.5 − 6.5 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 8.7
         Apr 93.9 47.7 27.7 46.2 41.1 − 61.6 119.0 180.6 − 3.1 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 0.5 2.5
         May 68.0 20.7 12.9 47.3 53.6 − 0.6 62.0 62.6 1.0 − 5.0 − 0.5 0.3 6.3         June 52.4 5.1 − 7.0 47.3 58.9 28.4 − 26.2 − 54.6 − 10.6 − 20.8 − 0.8 − 10.2 21.2
         July 51.0 29.4 14.6 21.7 20.7 − 84.9 56.9 141.8 − 27.3 − 7.1 − 0.5 − 23.4 3.8
         Aug 15.1 16.8 27.0 − 1.7 6.9 − 39.7 7.8 47.5 0.2 − 4.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 6.0         Sep 38.2 26.5 − 7.4 11.7 15.9 − 16.9 − 69.0 − 52.1 − 26.4 − 12.2 − 0.5 − 19.5 5.7
         Oct 80.3 35.8 4.4 44.5 42.1 − 46.3 152.9 199.2 − 8.8 − 5.7 − 0.6 − 9.3 6.8
         Nov 104.1 56.0 15.9 48.1 60.1 4.8 − 21.3 − 26.1 − 4.2 − 8.8 − 0.7 − 0.9 6.2         Dec − 59.1 − 48.5 − 5.7 − 10.6 − 3.7 38.6 − 154.6 − 193.2 − 11.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 13.8 4.7
2017          Jan 130.4 48.9 35.5 81.5 63.5 − 14.3 232.1 246.4 − 26.2 − 10.2 − 0.2 − 4.3 − 11.5
         Feb 42.9 30.3 3.7 12.6 32.7 − 40.2 53.5 93.7 14.0 − 6.3 − 0.5 − 5.1 25.9         Mar 143.1 92.6 24.2 50.5 54.4 − 5.7 − 53.9 − 48.1 − 17.4 2.8 − 0.5 − 27.3 7.6
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises Generaland households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves 3 
2015          Aug 12.9 7.2 − 1.5 5.7 9.0 − 20.7 − 0.9 19.9 − 6.5 0.5 − 1.5 − 4.5 − 1.0
         Sep 11.5 4.1 − 2.6 7.3 8.7 15.9 − 2.0 − 17.9 − 11.7 − 2.5 − 1.4 − 7.4 − 0.4
         Oct 3.4 − 3.8 − 9.4 7.1 3.5 − 8.5 − 13.1 − 4.6 − 10.7 − 9.0 − 1.3 0.7 − 1.1
         Nov 27.3 21.3 7.8 6.0 10.6 − 13.0 − 35.7 − 22.7 − 12.8 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 4.1         Dec − 19.9 − 11.6 − 5.8 − 8.2 − 2.8 5.2 − 52.1 − 57.3 − 24.0 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 22.1 2.9
2016          Jan 19.7 5.7 − 3.0 14.0 10.4 − 21.1 24.7 45.8 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 1.3 2.8 − 1.2
         Feb 15.6 10.9 − 4.2 4.7 4.8 − 29.2 7.3 36.5 − 11.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 7.7 − 1.0         Mar 12.3 4.4 0.6 7.8 8.2 7.3 − 22.6 − 29.8 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.1 2.4 − 0.4
         Apr 22.8 12.3 0.7 10.6 5.9 − 40.1 13.5 53.7 − 2.3 − 3.3 − 1.1 1.7 0.4
         May 22.0 16.2 4.9 5.8 9.1 1.7 1.2 − 0.5 4.8 0.8 − 1.0 5.0 − 0.0         June 2.5 1.7 0.5 0.8 6.5 − 2.9 23.9 26.8 − 5.7 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 7.3 3.8
         July 25.7 13.2 1.4 12.5 9.5 − 18.5 7.0 25.5 − 10.5 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 5.1 − 3.7
         Aug 9.0 8.8 1.4 0.2 2.0 − 16.5 2.5 19.0 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.8 4.0 − 1.6         Sep 20.9 13.0 3.3 7.9 9.1 − 37.2 − 11.1 26.1 − 10.8 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 6.2 − 2.8
         Oct 18.3 11.7 2.5 6.6 3.4 − 3.5 42.2 45.7 3.6 2.2 − 0.8 6.0 − 3.8
         Nov 25.8 18.3 4.3 7.5 12.2 − 22.0 − 25.7 − 3.7 6.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 9.7 − 1.7         Dec − 12.6 − 8.0 0.4 − 4.6 5.9 20.0 − 9.0 − 29.0 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.9 0.6
2017          Jan 21.5 14.9 2.2 6.6 6.5 − 26.0 30.1 56.1 5.9 − 3.1 − 0.7 16.0 − 6.2
         Feb 16.4 12.3 3.7 4.1 4.7 − 30.0 7.8 37.8 − 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.1         Mar 17.5 12.7 1.7 4.8 8.8 − 1.8 7.9 9.8 3.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 1.2 6.1
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30
  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
May 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 tions (net) 2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 14.8 2.0 − 19.7 11.9 13.2 − 1.9 15.1 − 4.9 3.6 4.5 11.1 − 4.6 2015          Aug 
28.6 37.4 − − 13.6 7.0 23.2 − 2.8 26.0 − 7.7 − 8.4 − 0.9 − 15.6 − 1.1          Sep 
32.9 − 64.1 − 103.4 67.9 82.9 2.2 80.7 − 10.2 − 4.8 − 7.1 21.9 1.4          Oct 
− 17.0 60.5 − 54.3 55.7 58.5 5.7 52.8 − 0.7 − 2.2 3.3 15.9 0.6          Nov 
− 71.4 − 38.0 − 4.3 54.1 44.2 14.4 29.7 9.0 0.9 − 28.3 − 22.6 − 10.8          Dec 
87.7 − 19.7 − 69.5 38.2 36.3 − 11.1 47.4 − 8.4 10.4 21.8 11.0 7.6 2016          Jan 
− 14.1 0.3 − 33.9 15.2 21.7 1.2 20.5 − 11.7 5.2 44.5 − 1.3 7.0          Feb 
31.8 31.7 − 38.9 55.9 42.6 3.7 38.9 11.0 2.3 − 6.2 − 11.9 1.7          Mar 
− 35.9 − 29.4 − 100.7 75.3 92.7 4.6 88.2 − 17.2 − 0.3 − 4.5 17.1 2.7          Apr 
20.1 12.5 − 33.8 35.2 47.5 2.3 45.3 − 20.2 7.9 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 2.0          May60.5 11.8 − 19.1 31.3 34.6 8.4 26.2 − 1.9 − 1.4 2.5 − 9.4 5.9          June
− 29.0 − 74.1 − 96.6 73.6 67.1 10.1 57.0 6.1 0.5 − 22.7 15.6 5.0          July− 54.7 40.8 − − 10.9 − 8.9 − 5.1 − 3.5 − 1.6 − 4.5 0.7 2.4 0.6 − 2.5          Aug 
2.7 42.5 − 2.5 18.3 23.7 2.2 21.5 1.4 − 6.7 − 4.8 − 1.7 − 5.9          Sep 
− 3.0 14.6 − 31.2 16.3 52.2 2.8 49.3 − 29.7 − 6.2 − 16.9 18.0 0.8          Oct 
5.1 18.6 − 89.4 84.7 95.4 1.7 93.6 − 8.8 − 1.9 − 1.8 7.0 1.2          Nov 
− 48.3 − 16.8 − 56.5 73.9 92.0 16.2 75.8 − 24.5 6.4 4.0 − 5.9 − 4.3          Dec 
62.7 49.9 − 29.6 6.5 − 6.6 − 11.9 5.3 3.2 9.9 − 17.5 12.9 − 0.8 2017          Jan 
− 18.4 − 23.2 − 30.2 30.8 30.7 3.0 27.7 − 2.0 2.1 − 8.5 − 3.2 6.0          Feb 
24.4 27.9 − 102.4 90.9 91.6 4.3 87.3 − 5.8 5.1 14.0 10.5 − 2.1          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7  Period
− 0.3 − 13.1 2.4 − 0.5 12.1 14.7 − 3.8 0.3 2.0 0.1 − 1.2 2015          Aug 
1.8 16.8 2.8 − 0.8 20.5 14.4 − 3.4 0.8 0.5 0.5 7.8          Sep 
− 0.6 − 25.3 3.0 − 0.3 31.4 30.7 − 3.8 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 3.7          Oct 
− 1.2 − 15.2 2.0 1.8 43.4 34.3 6.8 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.1          Nov 
10.3 15.2 2.6 2.3 − 16.2 − 21.3 6.3 3.0 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 0.2          Dec 
− 0.8 − 24.2 − 0.7 − 1.9 24.7 27.8 − 5.5 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.9 2016          Jan 
7.1 − 24.1 0.6 0.4 15.3 13.3 − 1.9 1.6 1.4 − 0.1 1.0          Feb 
21.0 3.1 2.1 0.6 − 5.5 − 12.5 10.9 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 2.0          Mar 
− 17.4 − 20.6 1.2 1.0 23.1 24.1 − 1.1 − 0.7 0.5 − 0.5 0.7          Apr 
18.7 − 19.6 2.9 − 0.5 19.9 21.5 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.7          May13.0 − 7.9 4.2 1.5 0.2 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.0 0.4          June
− 31.8 25.0 3.7 2.1 24.5 12.3 4.0 − 0.1 0.9 − 0.2 7.6          July
8.8 − 22.3 2.3 − 0.8 6.2 11.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4          Aug 8.6 − 21.2 4.7 − 0.6 7.2 3.0 5.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5          Sep 
− 8.8 18.7 3.2 − 0.5 1.4 12.0 − 10.2 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8          Oct 
6.9 − 47.7 1.9 0.3 37.8 36.2 3.3 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 1.7          Nov 
− 13.6 30.4 3.3 2.4 − 4.8 − 4.9 − 1.5 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 12.6 − 27.0 1.1 − 2.7 29.2 16.9 8.9 0.7 2.6 − 0.1 0.2 2017          Jan 
− 4.2 − 18.9 1.7 1.2 11.6 13.6 − 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 0.0          Feb 
14.2 − 2.5 1.8 1.1 0.7 2.4 3.5 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 1.8          Mar 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
May 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2015          Feb 26,795.6 16,338.0 12,698.5 10,638.0 1,276.5 784.0 3,639.5 1,144.2 2,495.3 5,402.4 5,055.2
         Mar 27,171.9 16,428.1 12,748.2 10,680.8 1,275.9 791.5 3,679.9 1,148.8 2,531.1 5,479.1 5,264.7
         Apr 26,839.9 16,452.1 12,746.4 10,664.2 1,274.8 807.4 3,705.7 1,152.9 2,552.8 5,418.1 4,969.7
         May 26,685.3 16,472.1 12,762.9 10,681.9 1,276.3 804.8 3,709.2 1,138.4 2,570.8 5,413.2 4,800.0         June 26,127.5 16,435.2 12,728.4 10,683.9 1,254.0 790.5 3,706.8 1,136.8 2,570.1 5,275.2 4,417.0
         July 26,346.9 16,514.6 12,785.5 10,682.8 1,301.0 801.7 3,729.1 1,135.4 2,593.7 5,296.1 4,536.2
         Aug 26,196.6 16,494.0 12,735.6 10,646.0 1,302.7 786.9 3,758.4 1,126.5 2,631.9 5,247.5 4,455.1         Sep 26,145.1 16,526.0 12,714.3 10,639.8 1,303.0 771.4 3,811.8 1,121.0 2,690.7 5,164.7 4,454.4
         Oct 26,337.3 16,576.0 12,732.6 10,661.8 1,288.0 782.8 3,843.4 1,125.0 2,718.5 5,251.2 4,510.1
         Nov 26,653.4 16,691.7 12,803.5 10,716.5 1,295.5 791.5 3,888.3 1,117.1 2,771.2 5,314.1 4,647.6         Dec 25,850.7 16,541.4 12,703.0 10,627.4 1,296.3 779.3 3,838.4 1,110.2 2,728.2 5,034.5 4,274.8
2016          Jan 26,414.5 16,689.5 12,731.2 10,656.8 1,306.9 767.5 3,958.2 1,127.1 2,831.2 5,149.6 4,575.4
         Feb 26,749.2 16,774.6 12,771.5 10,700.6 1,313.1 757.8 4,003.1 1,118.6 2,884.5 5,228.2 4,746.4         Mar 26,406.8 16,825.5 12,776.3 10,709.9 1,312.0 754.4 4,049.1 1,117.9 2,931.3 5,030.7 4,550.7
         Apr 26,557.6 16,909.0 12,815.8 10,721.4 1,325.7 768.7 4,093.2 1,127.9 2,965.3 5,173.9 4,474.7
         May 26,807.0 16,993.9 12,842.5 10,733.4 1,341.3 767.8 4,151.4 1,121.7 3,029.6 5,270.0 4,543.1         June 27,072.9 17,041.3 12,829.2 10,732.4 1,344.2 752.7 4,212.1 1,110.6 3,101.4 5,278.2 4,753.4
         July 27,135.0 17,093.6 12,852.6 10,737.6 1,359.6 755.3 4,241.1 1,111.6 3,129.5 5,326.7 4,714.7
         Aug 27,037.8 17,105.6 12,866.5 10,723.2 1,365.0 778.2 4,239.1 1,102.9 3,136.2 5,321.4 4,610.7         Sep 26,973.2 17,147.5 12,892.5 10,756.7 1,359.3 776.5 4,255.0 1,098.8 3,156.2 5,266.4 4,559.3
         Oct 27,051.5 17,205.0 12,925.5 10,787.5 1,363.1 775.0 4,279.5 1,101.1 3,178.4 5,422.1 4,424.3
         Nov 27,164.1 17,298.2 12,986.1 10,832.8 1,383.3 770.0 4,312.1 1,089.1 3,223.0 5,451.9 4,414.0         Dec 26,682.3 17,239.4 12,930.5 10,774.4 1,374.7 781.4 4,308.9 1,079.6 3,229.4 5,208.6 4,234.3
2017          Jan 26,772.9 17,331.5 12,966.2 10,779.0 1,400.8 786.4 4,365.3 1,097.5 3,267.8 5,376.1 4,065.3
         Feb 27,031.3 17,390.2 13,003.5 10,809.1 1,405.4 789.0 4,386.7 1,076.4 3,310.3 5,496.6 4,144.4         Mar 26,971.7 17,516.5 13,087.4 10,867.2 1,430.4 789.9 4,429.0 1,072.8 3,356.2 5,412.4 4,042.9
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2015          Feb 6,174.3 3,739.4 2,953.8 2,542.4 142.3 269.1 785.5 375.5 410.0 1,301.2 1,133.7
         Mar 6,272.2 3,758.2 2,967.1 2,546.4 144.1 276.5 791.2 374.0 417.2 1,306.4 1,207.5
         Apr 6,202.9 3,772.6 2,966.9 2,546.0 135.6 285.3 805.7 382.9 422.8 1,317.1 1,113.2
         May 6,140.5 3,770.8 2,972.2 2,555.9 135.0 281.3 798.6 370.7 427.9 1,317.8 1,052.0
         June 5,995.7 3,767.1 2,967.3 2,557.3 133.3 276.7 799.9 367.0 432.9 1,279.1 949.4
         July 6,058.3 3,803.0 2,993.0 2,561.0 153.8 278.2 810.0 368.0 442.0 1,274.1 981.2
         Aug 6,026.6 3,813.0 2,996.1 2,567.6 155.4 273.1 816.9 364.9 452.0 1,260.5 953.1
         Sep 6,041.7 3,824.0 2,996.1 2,572.5 157.2 266.4 827.9 364.5 463.4 1,257.0 960.7
         Oct 6,041.6 3,832.0 2,994.6 2,578.6 150.5 265.6 837.4 368.4 469.0 1,257.1 952.5
         Nov 6,104.5 3,864.8 3,019.5 2,594.8 153.5 271.2 845.3 363.9 481.3 1,236.6 1,003.2
         Dec 5,924.8 3,839.8 3,003.6 2,586.5 155.7 261.3 836.3 358.3 477.9 1,166.4 918.6
2016          Jan 6,057.5 3,858.0 3,004.8 2,592.8 154.8 257.3 853.1 362.0 491.2 1,191.2 1,008.3
         Feb 6,155.1 3,874.6 3,014.0 2,607.0 151.1 255.9 860.6 362.0 498.6 1,209.7 1,070.8
         Mar 6,060.3 3,885.2 3,015.6 2,607.8 151.8 256.0 869.6 361.6 508.0 1,163.7 1,011.4
         Apr 6,049.9 3,908.1 3,026.3 2,617.8 152.2 256.3 881.8 366.1 515.7 1,181.7 960.2
         May 6,090.9 3,934.4 3,043.0 2,629.7 153.3 260.0 891.4 362.8 528.6 1,187.1 969.4
         June 6,220.9 3,939.5 3,042.5 2,629.1 152.9 260.5 897.0 357.3 539.7 1,221.3 1,060.1
         July 6,245.3 3,968.2 3,054.3 2,639.3 155.3 259.7 913.9 360.3 553.6 1,228.3 1,048.8
         Aug 6,218.7 3,977.6 3,062.7 2,646.2 155.3 261.2 914.8 358.5 556.4 1,226.9 1,014.2
         Sep 6,201.9 4,001.6 3,075.1 2,655.3 157.6 262.1 926.5 357.2 569.3 1,215.0 985.4
         Oct 6,207.5 4,018.7 3,087.3 2,664.9 161.9 260.5 931.4 360.3 571.1 1,259.9 928.9
         Nov 6,185.7 4,046.1 3,107.1 2,680.4 165.0 261.7 939.0 355.5 583.5 1,242.8 896.8
         Dec 6,131.2 4,037.0 3,099.2 2,671.7 164.0 263.6 937.8 345.2 592.6 1,234.8 859.4
2017          Jan 6,129.8 4,054.1 3,112.0 2,682.7 165.0 264.3 942.1 345.2 596.8 1,258.3 817.4
         Feb 6,195.1 4,075.7 3,124.9 2,691.3 168.1 265.5 950.8 344.6 606.2 1,280.4 839.0
         Mar 6,176.3 4,089.6 3,136.7 2,701.2 169.6 266.0 952.8 340.6 612.3 1,281.1 805.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
May 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation 4 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
983.2 11,212.1 10,521.6 10,620.8 4,847.7 1,035.5 379.6 2,162.7 2,108.2 87.2 2015          Feb 
990.9 11,279.2 10,555.7 10,667.6 4,899.7 1,037.0 375.2 2,153.5 2,116.2 85.9          Mar 
999.8 11,274.1 10,601.6 10,702.3 4,972.1 1,028.0 369.2 2,131.8 2,117.3 83.9          Apr 
1,006.4 11,370.9 10,644.8 10,742.7 5,049.9 999.5 364.6 2,124.5 2,121.9 82.3          May
1,017.1 11,390.8 10,646.0 10,747.1 5,096.4 976.4 361.0 2,110.1 2,122.0 81.2          June
1,031.3 11,391.9 10,681.7 10,796.9 5,135.0 983.0 358.9 2,119.8 2,119.7 80.4          July
1,029.4 11,375.8 10,678.2 10,788.2 5,137.0 981.5 353.8 2,114.8 2,122.1 79.1          Aug 
1,026.5 11,410.5 10,694.5 10,796.3 5,162.5 977.4 350.6 2,110.9 2,116.6 78.3          Sep 
1,028.8 11,498.5 10,739.4 10,848.4 5,244.5 972.9 349.1 2,092.0 2,112.5 77.3          Oct 
1,034.5 11,524.1 10,774.1 10,869.8 5,288.4 970.8 343.9 2,081.4 2,109.6 75.7          Nov 
1,048.9 11,486.5 10,813.7 10,922.5 5,325.7 981.5 343.8 2,083.3 2,112.9 75.2          Dec 
1,037.7 11,611.6 10,852.2 10,953.0 5,365.0 973.3 344.1 2,074.6 2,121.8 74.3 2016          Jan 
1,038.9 11,620.9 10,871.7 10,975.9 5,385.0 967.8 340.6 2,085.3 2,124.1 73.1          Feb 
1,042.5 11,686.3 10,916.6 11,007.0 5,418.7 973.3 339.8 2,076.3 2,126.7 72.3          Mar 
1,047.1 11,715.5 10,978.0 11,072.8 5,504.2 963.0 337.5 2,071.0 2,126.5 70.5          Apr 
1,049.3 11,766.7 11,005.8 11,092.4 5,545.0 945.2 331.9 2,066.3 2,134.0 70.0          May
1,057.7 11,829.0 11,001.2 11,089.1 5,565.0 944.9 330.2 2,046.5 2,133.1 69.3          June
1,067.8 11,849.4 11,053.6 11,133.5 5,614.9 952.1 325.6 2,039.3 2,132.9 68.8          July
1,064.3 11,783.3 11,037.6 11,120.7 5,611.2 952.6 320.7 2,034.0 2,134.1 68.1          Aug 
1,066.5 11,788.7 11,032.3 11,130.4 5,636.9 960.1 315.0 2,021.8 2,129.2 67.4          Sep 
1,069.3 11,797.2 11,047.7 11,134.5 5,680.6 936.0 307.1 2,019.8 2,123.8 67.2          Oct 
1,071.1 11,882.7 11,108.1 11,212.7 5,780.1 926.6 303.3 2,014.3 2,121.9 66.6          Nov 
1,087.3 11,890.6 11,172.6 11,282.4 5,869.8 910.5 294.0 2,014.0 2,128.5 65.6          Dec 
1,075.4 11,945.4 11,152.3 11,267.2 5,867.1 912.8 286.6 1,997.4 2,138.2 65.1 2017          Jan 
1,078.4 11,953.0 11,170.9 11,290.5 5,891.6 918.0 284.5 1,991.6 2,140.2 64.6          Feb 
1,082.7 12,063.0 11,240.6 11,383.3 5,986.6 908.9 285.7 1,993.2 2,144.9 64.1          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
229.7 3,249.6 3,172.0 3,062.0 1,562.7 187.1 31.0 675.4 529.6 76.1 2015          Feb 
232.0 3,253.1 3,175.8 3,062.6 1,569.0 187.1 31.4 671.6 528.7 74.8          Mar 
233.8 3,265.4 3,191.1 3,080.3 1,598.9 187.3 31.7 661.3 528.5 72.7          Apr 
234.9 3,289.4 3,214.1 3,094.6 1,620.0 183.7 31.9 659.5 528.5 71.1          May
238.3 3,287.5 3,208.9 3,090.0 1,626.3 178.9 32.2 654.6 528.3 69.7          June
241.6 3,312.5 3,236.6 3,120.9 1,643.3 179.8 32.4 669.3 527.9 68.2          July
241.2 3,321.2 3,246.0 3,123.4 1,651.0 175.8 32.2 669.5 528.2 66.7          Aug 
240.3 3,330.8 3,253.8 3,131.7 1,667.0 172.0 31.7 666.7 529.0 65.3          Sep 
240.1 3,349.1 3,271.6 3,154.0 1,698.6 170.8 32.9 657.5 530.3 64.0          Oct 
241.9 3,386.8 3,309.9 3,182.3 1,732.8 168.6 33.2 653.8 531.1 62.8          Nov 
244.2 3,379.0 3,293.1 3,168.8 1,711.8 176.9 34.4 649.6 534.1 61.9          Dec 
242.2 3,398.2 3,312.7 3,191.1 1,739.2 172.6 35.6 647.9 535.1 60.7 2016          Jan 
242.7 3,412.8 3,319.7 3,197.4 1,747.9 172.1 35.8 645.5 536.7 59.4          Feb 
243.3 3,428.4 3,315.7 3,188.8 1,735.7 176.5 37.5 644.9 535.9 58.3          Mar 
244.2 3,429.1 3,334.3 3,208.5 1,759.1 178.5 38.3 640.3 535.1 57.2          Apr 
243.7 3,469.8 3,356.2 3,222.9 1,779.2 175.2 37.3 640.6 534.4 56.2          May
245.2 3,481.5 3,352.9 3,218.7 1,779.1 173.1 38.3 638.8 533.9 55.4          June
247.4 3,464.1 3,368.1 3,233.1 1,793.5 174.7 38.2 638.3 533.8 54.6          July
246.5 3,480.0 3,376.0 3,238.3 1,803.0 173.4 38.2 636.2 533.8 53.8          Aug 
245.9 3,494.5 3,380.7 3,247.0 1,807.9 179.4 38.3 635.0 533.3 53.1          Sep 
245.4 3,489.6 3,386.4 3,254.0 1,821.1 172.1 37.8 637.3 533.5 52.3          Oct 
245.7 3,536.5 3,424.0 3,288.1 1,857.7 171.0 37.4 636.6 533.7 51.7          Nov 
248.1 3,517.1 3,419.8 3,284.1 1,851.0 171.5 38.4 635.6 536.3 51.3          Dec 
245.4 3,526.3 3,439.3 3,306.3 1,873.8 174.0 38.7 632.1 537.1 50.6 2017          Jan 
246.6 3,532.6 3,448.3 3,313.4 1,881.5 175.3 38.8 630.0 537.9 50.0          Feb 
247.7 3,549.3 3,449.2 3,318.1 1,886.4 177.4 40.0 628.3 536.5 49.5          Mar 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
May 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securitieswith non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreedmaturities of notice of 
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
2015          Feb 272.1 319.1 142.1 99.8 11.6 40.0 20.2 5.3 352.4 342.3 447.3 2,510.5 1,788.6
         Mar 294.7 316.9 139.7 100.2 12.7 39.2 19.9 5.3 354.1 347.9 437.3 2,500.5 1,767.1
         Apr 251.4 320.4 144.8 97.9 12.8 39.5 20.3 5.1 336.7 329.0 458.8 2,469.3 1,747.7
         May 295.5 332.7 157.0 97.0 13.1 39.9 20.7 5.0 331.0 324.4 449.8 2,450.8 1,723.4         June 309.5 334.2 157.2 97.6 13.1 40.9 20.5 4.9 312.2 308.7 434.4 2,438.7 1,708.9
         July 266.4 328.6 149.2 100.3 13.3 38.8 22.3 4.9 301.3 298.1 457.1 2,410.6 1,685.1
         Aug 251.6 335.9 155.2 100.4 13.3 38.8 23.4 4.8 305.4 300.3 455.7 2,379.6 1,675.5         Sep 280.6 333.7 153.5 101.4 13.2 39.4 21.5 4.8 304.5 296.9 449.9 2,344.0 1,660.4
         Oct 315.5 334.6 157.4 98.6 13.2 39.6 20.9 4.7 297.6 288.1 471.8 2,337.6 1,640.5
         Nov 298.5 355.7 168.0 108.4 13.0 39.7 21.9 4.7 301.4 296.2 487.7 2,367.2 1,646.3         Dec 227.4 336.6 154.4 104.6 13.7 39.7 19.5 4.7 272.8 270.9 465.2 2,318.6 1,633.5
2016          Jan 315.1 343.4 160.9 102.3 14.3 39.7 21.0 5.2 294.5 292.9 475.6 2,300.6 1,614.2
         Feb 301.0 344.0 162.6 98.1 14.4 39.9 24.0 5.1 339.1 335.1 474.3 2,287.2 1,596.9         Mar 333.3 345.9 159.5 102.0 15.1 40.8 23.6 5.0 332.3 329.1 462.9 2,265.2 1,589.5
         Apr 297.6 345.2 161.9 97.2 15.4 42.2 23.5 4.9 327.9 323.1 480.3 2,269.5 1,585.5
         May 317.7 356.6 167.0 102.1 15.5 43.1 24.0 4.9 318.7 312.8 480.4 2,277.7 1,574.6         June 378.3 361.6 171.3 102.4 15.9 43.7 23.5 4.8 321.3 318.0 471.1 2,275.0 1,568.0
         July 349.2 366.7 174.1 101.6 18.2 43.8 24.2 4.8 298.6 297.4 486.2 2,251.4 1,542.4
         Aug 294.6 368.1 175.7 100.8 18.7 44.3 23.8 4.9 301.0 299.9 486.9 2,246.5 1,533.2         Sep 297.4 361.0 170.5 99.5 19.4 44.4 22.3 5.0 286.5 285.7 485.2 2,220.4 1,515.8
         Oct 295.3 367.4 182.2 94.1 19.8 44.7 21.3 5.3 266.4 265.7 503.2 2,215.4 1,498.7
         Nov 300.4 369.6 178.6 98.9 21.2 44.2 21.6 5.2 264.9 264.2 510.3 2,233.4 1,501.5         Dec 253.1 355.1 169.8 93.9 21.5 43.3 21.4 5.1 268.9 268.2 504.4 2,222.7 1,498.0
2017          Jan 316.2 362.0 170.7 99.5 21.3 43.4 21.7 5.5 250.2 249.5 517.2 2,210.9 1,491.8
         Feb 298.4 364.1 176.2 96.3 20.2 44.1 21.9 5.4 241.9 241.2 514.0 2,225.5 1,495.8         Mar 322.8 356.9 166.5 96.5 21.4 44.6 22.3 5.4 255.8 255.1 524.5 2,191.9 1,476.1
 German contribution (€ billion) 
2015          Feb 12.0 175.7 47.5 82.9 8.1 33.5 3.1 0.7 8.0 5.6 3.3 573.3 287.6
         Mar 14.7 175.8 47.7 82.3 9.2 32.8 3.1 0.7 7.6 5.2 3.3 573.0 285.6
         Apr 12.0 173.1 46.9 80.2 9.3 33.0 3.1 0.7 11.4 8.7 3.2 567.3 280.9
         May 13.4 181.4 54.6 80.0 9.7 33.3 3.2 0.6 5.0 3.8 3.3 557.3 272.4
         June 15.6 181.8 53.2 80.8 9.7 34.4 3.1 0.6 3.3 2.2 3.4 555.5 269.8
         July 12.4 179.3 49.8 83.6 9.8 32.3 3.1 0.6 4.5 3.3 3.4 558.4 267.2
         Aug 12.1 185.7 56.0 83.8 9.8 32.5 3.1 0.6 6.6 4.6 3.5 547.0 266.9
         Sep 14.0 185.1 54.4 84.5 9.7 32.8 3.1 0.6 7.0 4.9 4.0 547.0 272.6
         Oct 13.4 181.6 54.1 80.9 9.8 33.1 3.1 0.6 6.6 5.0 3.9 555.3 275.2
         Nov 12.3 192.2 55.6 90.2 9.5 33.2 3.1 0.6 6.1 4.5 3.8 562.5 270.9
         Dec 22.6 187.6 54.3 86.0 10.2 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.5 2.0 3.4 533.4 254.9
2016          Jan 21.8 185.2 54.5 83.2 10.5 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.8 2.7 3.7 534.8 257.0
         Feb 28.9 186.5 59.1 79.7 10.5 33.7 3.1 0.5 4.2 3.7 3.6 527.9 250.2
         Mar 49.3 190.2 57.4 84.1 10.8 34.3 3.1 0.5 3.2 2.0 3.4 518.7 250.5
         Apr 31.9 188.7 58.2 80.3 10.9 35.6 3.2 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.0 521.8 249.1
         May 50.6 196.3 60.4 84.9 11.1 36.2 3.3 0.5 3.5 2.4 2.5 530.9 244.9
         June 63.6 199.2 62.2 85.0 11.5 36.6 3.3 0.5 2.5 2.3 2.6 523.0 241.2
         July 31.9 199.1 59.9 85.2 13.3 36.8 3.3 0.5 3.4 3.2 2.4 524.2 241.2
         Aug 40.6 201.0 61.7 84.6 13.6 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 524.4 241.5
         Sep 49.3 198.3 59.7 83.5 14.0 37.2 3.4 0.5 2.9 2.9 2.4 516.7 240.8
         Oct 40.5 195.1 58.8 80.4 14.9 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 526.0 242.2
         Nov 47.4 201.0 59.5 84.2 16.1 37.3 3.3 0.6 3.0 3.0 2.3 542.1 251.4
         Dec 33.8 199.1 61.6 80.5 16.6 36.6 3.3 0.6 2.2 2.2 2.3 541.3 250.6
2017          Jan 21.2 198.8 55.1 86.6 16.4 36.9 3.2 0.6 4.8 4.8 2.2 553.4 261.4
         Feb 17.5 201.8 61.5 83.2 15.7 37.7 3.1 0.6 4.5 4.5 2.2 556.7 262.6
         Mar 31.6 199.5 58.7 82.5 16.4 38.2 3.1 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.1 551.9 263.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
May 2017
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
   
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year 
4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area (€ billion) 1
 
59.6 43.5 2,407.4 3,943.6 2,545.3 − 115.4 4,916.7 − 6,061.3 9,737.1 10,409.6 7,247.9 109.1 2015          Feb 
53.8 44.5 2,402.3 3,975.4 2,574.5 − 68.7 5,128.7 − 6,119.4 9,801.1 10,451.9 7,260.7 109.5          Mar 
57.3 46.0 2,366.1 4,003.4 2,541.7 − 78.5 4,834.6 − 6,203.6 9,869.7 10,554.2 7,168.2 107.6          Apr 
54.3 42.4 2,354.1 3,960.9 2,550.2 − 67.3 4,632.6 − 6,302.5 9,940.0 10,591.0 7,156.1 110.0          May
58.9 44.9 2,334.9 3,790.5 2,532.6 − 59.5 4,270.7 − 6,361.2 9,973.5 10,593.4 7,104.7 112.4          June
46.2 45.2 2,319.2 3,889.7 2,531.6 − 66.9 4,400.5 − 6,408.3 10,027.7 10,667.5 7,094.6 114.8          July
35.8 47.5 2,296.3 3,884.5 2,530.1 − 65.8 4,301.9 − 6,416.1 10,032.4 10,663.8 7,063.8 116.3          Aug 
32.7 46.5 2,264.8 3,808.9 2,534.0 − 52.8 4,319.4 − 6,438.2 10,040.3 10,657.8 7,032.2 117.3          Sep 
32.6 47.2 2,257.9 3,861.9 2,560.1 − 75.9 4,356.8 − 6,525.2 10,113.8 10,766.3 7,031.7 115.7          Oct 
31.1 49.2 2,286.9 3,915.5 2,565.3 − 77.1 4,534.8 − 6,592.2 10,180.4 10,831.8 7,053.7 121.9          Nov 
22.9 47.8 2,247.9 3,662.8 2,549.2 − 49.3 4,095.9 − 6,631.5 10,228.1 10,830.7 7,000.0 123.0          Dec 
28.9 50.6 2,221.0 3,810.5 2,573.0 − 76.5 4,387.6 − 6,665.8 10,264.0 10,898.4 6,987.8 123.6 2016          Jan 
33.4 54.2 2,199.6 3,922.3 2,609.9 − 98.0 4,554.5 − 6,688.2 10,278.2 10,932.4 7,012.9 122.8          Feb 
37.2 51.9 2,176.1 3,739.2 2,592.4 − 93.9 4,379.8 − 6,721.4 10,322.5 10,959.4 6,962.8 121.3          Mar 
41.7 50.0 2,177.8 3,927.0 2,604.3 − 98.9 4,285.0 − 6,815.2 10,399.0 11,061.6 6,970.8 122.7          Apr 
39.9 49.2 2,188.6 4,032.9 2,600.8 − 82.8 4,363.2 − 6,867.4 10,440.7 11,101.7 6,973.7 126.6          May
49.8 47.2 2,178.0 3,955.3 2,664.9 − 61.7 4,560.3 − 6,901.2 10,471.8 11,122.7 7,007.2 127.7          June
54.6 47.8 2,149.0 4,086.1 2,678.7 − 104.2 4,521.0 − 6,967.5 10,542.8 11,216.7 6,984.4 131.5          July
53.9 46.2 2,146.3 4,128.2 2,676.2 − 84.0 4,435.5 − 6,961.8 10,533.2 11,205.5 6,973.6 131.4          Aug 
48.7 46.1 2,125.6 4,083.2 2,698.3 − 44.0 4,388.4 − 6,984.4 10,550.7 11,207.6 6,962.4 131.3          Sep 
53.5 43.6 2,118.3 4,289.4 2,682.8 − 30.1 4,257.6 − 7,043.2 10,566.2 11,239.6 6,938.1 131.8          Oct 
54.7 42.8 2,135.9 4,331.5 2,662.2 − 54.3 4,262.4 − 7,145.5 10,659.5 11,337.1 6,928.3 136.4          Nov 
51.1 42.0 2,129.6 4,049.5 2,658.7 − 38.7 4,038.8 − 7,238.2 10,732.2 11,392.3 6,916.4 135.4          Dec 
47.3 45.8 2,117.8 4,254.5 2,644.1 − 13.1 3,888.3 − 7,227.8 10,732.4 11,416.2 6,873.2 139.1 2017          Jan 
52.0 47.1 2,126.4 4,374.6 2,696.2 − 14.8 3,962.5 − 7,262.0 10,767.4 11,450.9 6,928.3 140.1          Feb 
49.3 47.5 2,095.1 4,309.3 2,677.4 1.1 3,866.1 − 7,351.4 10,855.4 11,550.2 6,879.7 139.9          Mar 
 German contribution (€ billion) 
14.3 7.9 551.0 751.7 550.7 − 678.0 1,715.9 272.4 1,610.2 2,452.0 2,485.5 1,887.4 − 2015          Feb 
14.9 8.5 549.6 755.9 557.2 − 670.7 1,793.0 274.7 1,616.8 2,458.5 2,492.8 1,886.7 −          Mar 
18.9 8.3 540.2 770.7 553.7 − 666.9 1,698.4 276.9 1,645.8 2,485.8 2,527.5 1,861.4 −          Apr 
18.6 5.6 533.1 764.2 556.8 − 676.8 1,641.5 279.3 1,674.6 2,511.5 2,544.0 1,854.4 −          May
18.5 5.4 531.7 718.1 555.8 − 670.9 1,543.2 280.2 1,679.6 2,512.5 2,543.1 1,846.8 −          June
18.2 5.2 535.1 742.1 552.4 − 692.2 1,577.2 284.9 1,693.1 2,529.7 2,561.0 1,857.9 −          July
16.2 5.9 524.9 754.9 552.8 − 711.7 1,552.8 287.3 1,707.0 2,539.8 2,571.9 1,847.1 −          Aug 
21.9 8.0 517.2 736.7 553.5 − 709.5 1,572.5 290.1 1,721.4 2,551.4 2,592.3 1,836.0 −          Sep 
25.8 7.8 521.7 737.2 558.6 − 735.5 1,566.6 293.1 1,752.7 2,580.5 2,624.6 1,835.4 −          Oct 
26.4 9.6 526.5 724.9 553.7 − 754.5 1,621.4 295.2 1,788.4 2,624.1 2,670.0 1,830.6 −          Nov 
26.3 9.3 497.8 659.6 552.5 − 742.7 1,537.4 297.8 1,766.1 2,610.8 2,652.3 1,795.8 −          Dec 
25.2 11.2 498.4 702.8 560.8 − 766.0 1,620.7 297.1 1,793.6 2,633.8 2,676.6 1,801.7 − 2016          Jan 
25.5 11.8 490.7 739.6 574.8 − 790.7 1,683.0 297.7 1,807.0 2,644.8 2,689.9 1,804.6 −          Feb 
24.0 10.9 483.8 699.0 569.9 − 784.5 1,622.4 299.8 1,793.1 2,641.1 2,682.7 1,791.6 −          Mar 
23.9 11.7 486.1 753.1 575.6 − 803.0 1,566.8 300.9 1,817.3 2,663.6 2,705.9 1,795.3 −          Apr 
22.8 12.3 495.8 758.5 571.4 − 823.1 1,577.5 303.9 1,839.6 2,685.7 2,726.9 1,800.7 −          May
23.8 11.8 487.5 783.3 592.6 − 834.3 1,670.0 308.0 1,841.3 2,686.4 2,727.1 1,811.5 −          June
30.5 12.6 481.1 807.8 595.1 − 824.9 1,673.4 311.7 1,853.4 2,702.0 2,750.9 1,806.5 −          July
27.4 12.5 484.5 826.1 589.2 − 846.9 1,640.6 314.1 1,864.6 2,711.7 2,757.1 1,801.3 −          Aug 
26.4 12.9 477.4 851.2 594.2 − 876.5 1,616.7 318.8 1,867.6 2,719.5 2,764.2 1,797.3 −          Sep 
25.3 13.4 487.3 899.9 585.3 − 863.2 1,564.6 322.0 1,879.9 2,721.9 2,766.1 1,799.8 −          Oct 
22.7 14.6 504.7 905.9 578.0 − 918.6 1,536.5 323.9 1,917.2 2,762.9 2,805.6 1,808.9 −          Nov 
23.1 14.2 504.0 878.9 580.3 − 897.1 1,506.3 327.3 1,912.6 2,759.2 2,801.0 1,808.4 −          Dec 
22.8 14.4 516.2 930.2 573.7 − 926.5 1,465.7 328.3 1,928.9 2,784.9 2,829.2 1,810.0 − 2017          Jan 
22.2 15.2 519.2 972.2 586.4 − 944.3 1,484.8 330.1 1,943.0 2,797.0 2,841.1 1,823.9 −          Feb 
19.4 16.1 516.3 979.5 586.5 − 957.7 1,462.2 331.9 1,945.1 2,801.0 2,841.3 1,819.4 −          Mar 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary liabilities with such2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturities of over 2consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
May 2017
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors
Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2014          Oct 552.0 98.9 398.2 0.2 194.7 24.3 0.0 971.3 78.4 − 22.6 192.6 1 188.2
         Nov 562.0 95.2 412.5 0.3 193.3 31.0 0.0 973.6 76.1 − 5.7 188.3 1 192.8
         Dec 564.3 103.3 396.1 0.2 202.0 27.3 0.0 979.8 71.7 1.8 185.4 1 192.5
2015          Jan 576.4 119.0 454.4 0.5 217.9 50.2 0.0 1 005.5 66.3 9.8 236.3 1 292.1
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 589.2 142.6 375.0 0.4 230.8 42.4 0.0 1 005.4 62.1 2.7 225.3 1 273.1
         Apr 625.9 118.9 386.1 0.2 290.6 68.6 0.0 1 015.9 70.2 5.1 261.8 1 346.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 655.7 95.9 406.6 0.1 383.1 99.7 0.0 1 027.4 76.5 34.5 303.4 1 430.5
         July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 627.4 72.4 462.2 0.6 550.8 148.0 0.0 1 055.3 63.4 18.1 428.4 1 631.8
         Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 612.2 66.1 459.3 0.1 730.7 173.1 0.0 1 056.5 93.5 51.5 493.8 1 723.4
2016          Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1 072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1 826.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 607.8 62.9 461.7 0.1 907.6 230.5 0.0 1 063.4 115.6 73.9 556.5 1 850.4
         Apr 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1 000.1 262.0 0.0 1 069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1 901.3
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1 105.3 309.0 0.0 1 076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2 009.4
         July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1 227.1 323.1 0.0 1 087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2 067.7
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1 339.7 355.1 0.0 1 096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2 200.2
         Oct 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1 447.0 387.3 0.0 1 094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2 259.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1 570.2 439.4 0.0 1 103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2 366.3
2017          Jan 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1 670.8 434.4 0.0 1 119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2 472.6
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1 787.5 479.2 0.0 1 110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2 550.9
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2014          Oct 139.4 5.6 12.2 0.0 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.7 1.2 − 102.2 63.1 303.8
         Nov 141.0 8.0 14.9 0.1 45.5 9.0 0.0 231.4 0.9 − 89.5 57.6 298.0
         Dec 140.8 6.6 16.6 0.0 47.3 9.3 0.0 232.4 0.9 − 86.7 55.5 297.2
2015          Jan 141.9 13.4 30.7 0.0 50.4 14.9 0.0 237.3 1.2 − 92.3 75.3 327.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.2 6.6 30.9 0.0 52.4 12.4 0.0 237.0 1.5 − 92.6 74.7 324.1
         Apr 151.5 5.6 29.5 0.1 64.8 21.2 0.0 239.9 1.1 − 100.3 89.4 350.5
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 159.2 3.6 28.8 0.0 83.9 28.6 0.0 242.5 2.0 − 100.4 102.8 373.9
         July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 151.2 1.8 40.0 0.0 119.1 42.4 0.0 249.5 2.9 − 118.3 135.9 427.7
         Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 146.1 3.2 43.3 0.0 156.3 56.1 0.0 249.1 9.3 − 116.3 150.7 455.9
2016          Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.7 1.9 46.3 0.0 193.9 59.8 0.0 250.4 26.1 − 113.3 162.9 473.1
         Apr 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
         July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
         Oct 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2017          Jan 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes. 4From Aug. 2009, includes
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap operations.the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the na-
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following tional central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In ac-the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a cordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue ofsix-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
May 2017
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves) 7 money 8 period operations 3 operations 4 circulation 5 
ending in 1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 4.2 − 15.8 + 10.8 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 12.2 + 4.4 − 17.5 − 18.9 2014          Oct 
+
10.0 − 3.7 + 14.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 − 2.3 + 16.9 − 4.3 + 4.6          Nov 
+
2.3 + 8.1 − 16.4 − 0.1 + 8.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 4.4 + 7.5 − 2.9 − 0.3          Dec 
+
12.1 + 15.7 + 58.3 + 0.3 + 15.9 + 22.9 + 0.0 + 25.7 − 5.4 + 8.0 + 50.9 + 99.6 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 12.8 + 23.6 − 79.4 − 0.1 + 12.9 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 7.1 − 11.0 − 19.0          Mar 
+
36.7 − 23.7 + 11.1 − 0.2 + 59.8 + 26.2 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.1 + 2.4 + 36.5 + 73.3          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 29.8 − 23.0 + 20.5 − 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.1 + 0.0 + 11.5 + 6.3 + 29.4 + 41.6 + 84.1          June
−
12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 15.5 − 10.0 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 79.0 + 44.9 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 32.9 + 0.9 + 47.0 + 104.6          Sep 
−
8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 6.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 87.5 + 20.3 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 1.7 + 22.6 + 28.5 + 52.9          Dec 
−
0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2016          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 3.8 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 95.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 − 9.4 + 33.1 + 20.7 − 0.6 + 23.9          Mar 
+
19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1          June
+
25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5          Sep 
+
2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9          Dec 
−
12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2017          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3          Mar 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.8 + 1.5 + 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.5 2014          Oct 
+
1.5 + 2.4 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 12.7 − 5.5 − 5.8          Nov 
−
0.1 − 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 2.8 − 2.0 − 0.8          Dec 
+
1.1 + 6.7 + 14.1 − 0.0 + 3.1 + 5.6 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 0.3 − 5.7 + 19.8 + 30.4 2015          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
+ 1.2 − 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 3.5          Mar 
+
8.3 − 1.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 12.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.4 − 7.8 + 14.7 + 26.4          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 7.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 19.2 + 7.4 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 23.4          June
−
3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.1 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 16.6 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 17.0 + 13.1 + 33.2          Sep 
−
2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 2.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 18.1 + 15.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 15.0          Dec 
−
1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2016          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 9.8 + 0.0 − 2.1 + 8.1 + 10.7 − 11.5 − 3.8          Mar 
+
8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0          Apr 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3          June
+
6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4          July
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0          Sep 
+
0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5          Oct 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6          Dec 
−
4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2017          Jan 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1          Mar 
.
. . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statemen to f
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit institutions’ current accountbetween the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the holdings”. euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
May 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency
residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 2
 
2016 Sep                  2 3,341.8 413.1 311.3 77.3 234.0 30.5 17.3 17.3 −
                                9 3,358.7 413.1 311.6 77.3 234.3 30.4 17.2 17.2 −
                              16 3,372.4 413.1 312.3 77.3 235.0 29.9 17.0 17.0 −
                              23 3,391.4 413.1 314.5 77.3 237.3 29.6 17.8 17.8 −
                              30 3,438.1 412.6 315.2 77.8 237.4 33.9 19.6 19.6 −
         Oct                  7 3,451.4 412.6 313.7 77.8 235.8 32.5 19.0 19.0 −
                              14 3,469.3 412.6 313.0 77.8 235.2 33.3 18.2 18.2 −
                              21 3,494.9 412.6 313.1 77.8 235.3 35.3 18.5 18.5 −
                              28 3,507.4 412.6 311.5 78.3 233.1 36.1 17.9 17.9 −
         Nov                  4 3,518.5 412.6 312.9 78.2 234.7 36.1 17.6 17.6 −
                              11 3,534.3 412.6 314.3 78.2 236.1 32.4 17.1 17.1 −
                              18 3,553.4 412.6 314.6 78.2 236.4 32.5 18.3 18.3 −
                              25 3,566.2 412.6 314.1 77.4 236.6 32.3 18.2 18.2 −
         Dec                  2 3,587.4 412.6 314.4 77.4 237.0 34.0 17.4 17.4 −
                                9 3,609.8 412.6 316.5 77.5 239.1 36.1 17.9 17.9 −
                              16 3,630.7 412.6 319.5 77.5 242.0 36.9 18.1 18.1 −
                              23 3,685.7 412.6 317.8 77.1 240.6 35.5 18.3 18.3 −
                              30 3,662.9 382.1 327.9 78.8 249.1 30.7 19.1 19.1 −
2017 Jan                  6 3,672.6 382.1 326.6 78.7 247.8 31.9 18.5 18.5 −
                              13 3,697.3 382.1 326.9 78.7 248.2 34.7 17.5 17.5 −
                              20 3,719.6 382.1 325.7 78.7 247.0 31.4 19.0 19.0 −
                              27 3,740.8 382.1 323.6 78.7 245.0 35.8 18.8 18.8 −
2017 Feb                  3 3,749.5 382.1 323.4 78.7 244.8 34.7 19.8 19.8 −
                              10 3,770.9 382.1 323.2 78.4 244.7 36.4 18.9 18.9 −
                              17 3,787.9 382.1 324.7 77.8 246.9 34.7 19.0 19.0 −
                              24 3,808.2 382.1 324.4 77.8 246.6 35.6 19.1 19.1 −
         Mar                  3 3,820.3 382.1 323.8 77.8 246.1 34.1 19.4 19.4 −
                              10 3,839.9 382.1 325.3 77.8 247.6 34.6 19.7 19.7 −
                              17 3,856.9 382.1 324.6 77.9 246.8 33.0 18.7 18.7 −
                              24 3,877.0 382.1 326.4 77.8 248.5 32.8 19.5 19.5 −
                              31 4,100.7 404.2 323.4 77.6 245.8 33.9 20.2 20.2 −
         Apr                  7 4,116.4 404.2 323.1 77.7 245.4 31.6 18.6 18.6 −
                              14 4,130.0 404.2 321.8 77.7 244.2 31.6 19.8 19.8 −
                              21 4,139.4 404.2 321.6 77.7 243.9 31.4 19.0 19.0 −
                              28 4,148.0 404.2 319.6 77.5 242.1 34.6 17.2 17.2 −
         May                  5 4,156.8 404.1 319.7 77.4 242.4 34.6 16.8 16.8 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2015          June 880.1 113.8 54.5 20.6 33.8 −−−−
         July 903.5 113.8 53.3 19.9 33.4 −−−−
         Aug 930.8 113.8 53.1 20.2 32.9 −−−−
         Sep 936.9 109.0 53.0 20.1 32.8 −−−−
         Oct 956.3 109.0 53.1 20.1 33.0 −−−−
         Nov 1 002.6 109.0 52.6 20.0 32.6 0.0−−−
         Dec 1 011.5 105.8 53.7 20.3 33.4 − 0.0 0.0 −
2016          Jan 1 018.5 105.8 53.6 20.4 33.2 0.0−−−
         Feb 1 043.7 105.8 55.0 22.0 33.0 0.0−−−
         Mar 1 077.6 117.8 53.4 21.5 32.0 0.0−−−
         Apr 1 112.7 117.8 54.1 21.5 32.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 −
         May 1 159.5 117.8 54.9 21.5 33.4 0.0−−−
         June 1 214.0 129.0 55.7 21.5 34.1 0.7−−−
         July 1 209.4 129.0 56.0 21.5 34.5 0.2−−−
         Aug 1 239.2 129.0 56.1 21.4 34.7 0.3−−−
         Sep 1 305.3 128.8 55.0 21.3 33.7 2.3 0.4 0.4 −
         Oct 1 312.2 128.8 54.9 21.3 33.6 − 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
         Nov 1 376.5 128.8 55.0 21.1 33.9 0.1 0.4 0.4 −
         Dec 1 392.7 119.3 56.5 21.5 35.0 1.8 0.4 0.4 −
2017          Jan 1 449.7 119.3 56.4 21.5 34.9 0.1 1.8 1.8 −
         Feb 1 484.8 119.3 56.2 21.2 35.0 0.1 1.5 1.5 −
         Mar 1 558.0 126.2 55.7 21.1 34.7 2.7 1.7 1.7 −
         Apr 1 582.8 126.1 55.7 21.0 34.7 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
May 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General    On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government    reportingfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    date/opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    month  
1 
Eurosystem 2
 
526.5 43.8 482.7 − − 0.0 − 96.3 1 702.2 1 365.6 336.6 26.5 218.0 2016 Sep                  2
524.5 41.8 482.7 − − − − 94.8 1 721.4 1 385.2 336.2 26.5 219.2                                 9
524.4 41.6 482.7 − − 0.0 − 93.9 1 734.8 1 402.2 332.7 26.5 220.5                               16
526.0 43.2 482.7 − − 0.1 − 90.0 1 751.6 1 420.3 331.3 26.5 222.4                               23
552.6 38.7 513.8 − − 0.0 − 83.4 1 764.1 1 434.8 329.3 26.4 230.4                               30
548.2 34.4 513.8 − − 0.1 − 90.0 1 784.5 1 454.9 329.6 26.4 224.6          Oct                  7
546.8 32.9 513.8 − − 0.1 − 88.9 1 805.1 1 475.7 329.4 26.4 225.0                               14
547.3 33.4 513.8 − − 0.0 − 91.7 1 822.0 1 492.7 329.3 26.4 228.0                               21
548.3 36.0 512.2 − − 0.1 − 93.9 1 840.4 1 513.0 327.5 26.4 220.1                               28
545.1 32.7 512.2 − − 0.2 − 91.8 1 856.6 1 531.4 325.1 26.4 219.3          Nov                  4
543.7 31.4 512.2 − − 0.1 − 91.4 1 875.6 1 551.1 324.5 26.4 220.6                               11
544.9 32.6 512.2 − − 0.0 − 87.5 1 895.5 1 572.3 323.3 26.4 221.0                               18
546.1 33.7 512.2 − − 0.2 − 83.8 1 913.9 1 590.1 323.8 26.4 218.7                               25
546.6 36.0 510.5 − − 0.2 − 83.1 1 932.3 1 608.1 324.2 26.4 220.6          Dec                  2
546.5 35.8 510.5 − − 0.2 − 81.7 1 950.6 1 626.5 324.1 26.4 221.4                                 9
547.4 36.8 510.5 − − 0.1 − 79.8 1 967.1 1 644.0 323.1 26.4 222.9                               16
589.8 32.9 556.6 − − 0.4 − 71.7 1 982.3 1 659.5 322.9 26.4 231.3                               23
595.9 39.1 556.6 − − 0.2 − 69.1 1 974.9 1 654.0 320.9 26.5 236.8                               30
590.8 34.0 556.6 − − 0.2 − 70.9 1 987.0 1 666.1 320.9 26.5 238.5 2017 Jan                  6
589.1 32.3 556.6 − − 0.2 − 74.8 2 010.4 1 690.2 320.1 26.5 235.4                               13
589.0 32.3 556.6 − − 0.1 − 78.1 2 030.4 1 710.9 319.5 26.5 237.5                               20
588.7 34.0 554.5 − − 0.2 − 80.4 2 049.8 1 730.3 319.4 26.5 235.2                               27
586.3 31.6 554.5 − − 0.2 − 79.7 2 064.0 1 748.6 315.4 26.4 233.1 2017 Feb                  3
584.7 29.6 554.5 − − 0.6 − 81.4 2 083.9 1 768.7 315.2 26.4 234.0                               10
583.1 28.0 554.5 − − 0.6 − 81.0 2 101.8 1 787.9 313.8 26.4 235.1                               17
584.7 30.8 553.8 − − 0.1 − 81.1 2 119.6 1 807.1 312.5 26.4 235.2                               24
579.3 25.3 553.8 − − 0.2 − 83.5 2 136.5 1 825.9 310.6 26.4 235.2          Mar                  3
578.1 23.9 553.8 − − 0.5 − 82.7 2 153.8 1 844.2 309.6 26.4 237.1                               10
580.5 26.5 553.8 − − 0.2 − 86.3 2 172.9 1 862.9 309.9 26.4 232.4                               17
586.8 32.7 553.8 − − 0.3 − 82.5 2 188.5 1 878.7 309.8 26.4 232.0                               24
784.2 14.8 769.2 − − 0.3 − 69.8 2 192.8 1 887.1 305.7 26.4 245.9                               31
782.5 13.2 769.2 − − 0.1 − 81.4 2 211.3 1 906.3 305.0 26.4 237.4          Apr                  7
783.1 13.2 769.2 − − 0.7 − 80.7 2 225.9 1 921.4 304.5 26.4 236.5                               14
784.2 14.8 769.2 − − 0.2 − 82.0 2 236.2 1 933.0 303.2 26.4 234.5                               21
782.1 14.4 767.3 − − 0.4 − 78.2 2 247.4 1 946.9 300.5 26.4 238.4                               28
782.0 14.4 767.3 − − 0.3 − 78.6 2 257.5 1 959.9 297.6 26.4 237.1          May                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
43.3 2.5 40.7 − − 0.1 − 3.3 102.1 102.1 − 4.4 558.7 2015          June
42.2 2.1 40.0 − − 0.1 − 5.1 114.6 114.6 − 4.4 570.1          July
41.6 1.8 39.7 − − 0.1 − 4.6 124.4 124.4 − 4.4 588.9          Aug 
46.3 4.1 42.2 − − 0.0 − 4.2 136.8 136.8 − 4.4 583.2          Sep 
45.8 4.1 41.7 − − 0.0 − 3.8 149.1 149.1 − 4.4 591.2          Oct 
50.2 3.1 47.1 − − 0.0 − 3.5 161.7 161.7 − 4.4 621.2          Nov 
58.1 9.1 48.6 − − 0.3 − 3.5 172.3 172.3 − 4.4 613.7          Dec 
51.2 2.6 48.5 − − 0.0 − 2.8 185.0 185.0 − 4.4 615.7 2016          Jan 
44.9 1.9 43.0 − − 0.0 − 2.3 197.6 197.6 − 4.4 633.6          Feb 
49.7 3.7 46.0 − − 0.0 − 3.4 210.4 210.4 − 4.4 638.4          Mar 
49.7 4.2 45.5 − − 0.0 − 4.3 227.3 227.3 − 4.4 655.0          Apr 
48.8 3.8 45.0 − − 0.0 − 4.3 244.8 244.8 − 4.4 684.4          May
47.3 2.8 44.5 − − 0.0 − 5.2 261.8 261.8 − 4.4 710.0          June
46.4 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 279.9 279.9 − 4.4 688.0          July
46.3 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 292.6 292.6 − 4.4 705.0          Aug 
55.3 1.3 54.0 − − − − 5.7 309.3 309.3 − 4.4 744.1          Sep 
55.5 0.9 53.9 − − 0.7 − 5.4 326.7 326.7 − 4.4 736.2          Oct 
55.2 1.0 53.9 − − 0.3 − 4.8 345.4 345.4 − 4.4 782.3          Nov 
65.5 1.8 63.5 − − 0.1 − 3.0 357.7 357.7 − 4.4 784.1          Dec 
64.0 0.6 63.4 − − 0.0 − 4.1 375.7 375.7 − 4.4 823.9 2017          Jan 
63.9 0.7 63.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 392.6 392.6 − 4.4 842.4          Feb 
95.6 0.4 95.0 − − 0.2 − 3.9 408.8 408.8 − 4.4 859.0          Mar 
95.7 0.6 95.0 − − 0.1 − 4.2 421.4 421.4 − 4.4 872.8          Apr 
 
end of the quarter. 1For the Eurosystem: financial statements for specific weekly  
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
May 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 4
 
2016 Sep                  2 3,341.8 1,095.5 1,143.0 764.0 378.9 − − 0.1 4.1 − 217.0 118.2 98.8
                                9 3,358.7 1,095.6 1,163.4 777.5 385.9 − − 0.0 3.9 − 227.8 128.6 99.2
                              16 3,372.4 1,094.3 1,133.6 767.9 365.7 − − 0.0 3.9 − 258.9 157.3 101.6
                              23 3,391.4 1,092.2 1,127.2 764.4 362.8 − − 0.0 3.9 − 273.6 171.0 102.5
                              30 3,438.1 1,096.3 1,157.9 759.8 398.0 − − 0.1 3.8 − 261.0 155.4 105.6
         Oct                  7 3,451.4 1,097.2 1,186.9 777.4 409.4 − − 0.1 3.8 − 264.2 158.0 106.2
                              14 3,469.3 1,096.2 1,195.0 793.5 401.5 − − 0.0 3.5 − 276.9 171.4 105.5
                              21 3,494.9 1,095.1 1,178.3 781.2 397.0 − − 0.0 3.6 − 304.0 192.8 111.3
                              28 3,507.4 1,100.3 1,197.2 812.8 384.4 − − 0.0 3.4 − 290.5 186.2 104.3
         Nov                  4 3,518.5 1,102.5 1,256.7 801.1 455.6 − − 0.0 3.5 − 241.6 136.3 105.3
                              11 3,534.3 1,100.7 1,260.2 800.3 459.7 − − 0.1 3.8 − 258.8 150.7 108.1
                              18 3,553.4 1,099.3 1,261.5 802.5 459.0 − − 0.0 3.8 − 270.6 164.1 106.6
                              25 3,566.2 1,099.8 1,249.2 820.4 428.8 − − 0.0 3.5 − 290.2 184.7 105.5
         Dec                  2 3,587.4 1,108.4 1,301.3 849.7 451.6 − − 0.0 3.6 − 253.8 147.0 106.8
                                9 3,609.8 1,114.3 1,321.0 869.0 451.9 − − 0.1 3.4 − 249.0 144.9 104.1
                              16 3,630.7 1,117.4 1,298.1 879.7 418.4 − − 0.0 4.9 − 271.8 168.9 102.9
                              23 3,685.7 1,126.7 1,353.8 930.9 422.9 − − 0.0 8.8 − 238.0 133.1 104.9
                              30 3,662.9 1,126.2 1,313.3 889.0 424.2 − − 0.1 9.4 − 220.8 114.9 105.9
2017 Jan                  6 3,672.6 1,122.2 1,369.2 928.6 440.5 − − 0.0 8.9 − 213.8 110.2 103.6
                              13 3,697.3 1,115.5 1,396.8 935.3 461.4 − − 0.1 9.6 − 240.2 137.9 102.4
                              20 3,719.6 1,110.7 1,386.8 952.4 434.3 − − 0.2 9.7 − 281.8 177.7 104.0
                              27 3,740.8 1,109.0 1,385.7 978.9 406.7 − − 0.0 7.7 − 305.2 201.3 103.9
2017 Feb                  3 3,749.5 1,111.4 1,438.1 963.9 474.2 − − 0.0 10.0 − 237.5 130.5 107.0
                              10 3,770.9 1,110.9 1,451.1 955.3 495.8 − − 0.0 8.5 − 252.0 144.2 107.8
                              17 3,787.9 1,110.1 1,422.6 953.6 469.0 − − 0.0 9.5 − 293.9 185.6 108.3
                              24 3,808.2 1,110.8 1,434.8 957.4 477.4 − − 0.0 10.0 − 289.7 177.5 112.3
         Mar                  3 3,820.3 1,113.5 1,468.1 966.3 501.8 − − 0.0 11.5 − 254.5 140.4 114.0
                              10 3,839.9 1,113.8 1,491.9 966.3 525.5 − − 0.0 15.4 − 257.1 142.5 114.6
                              17 3,856.9 1,112.9 1,475.6 984.4 491.3 − − 0.0 15.3 − 297.9 178.4 119.4
                              24 3,877.0 1,111.2 1,455.1 946.2 508.9 − − 0.0 14.1 − 340.9 221.5 119.4
                              31 4,100.7 1,114.5 1,632.5 1,048.5 584.0 − − 0.0 15.1 − 304.8 178.9 125.9
         Apr                  7 4,116.4 1,119.2 1,721.1 1,132.9 588.2 − − 0.0 13.7 − 279.2 153.9 125.3
                              14 4,130.0 1,127.5 1,708.3 1,144.5 563.8 − − 0.0 13.2 − 298.1 164.7 133.4
                              21 4,139.4 1,121.6 1,682.0 1,123.0 559.0 − − 0.0 10.7 − 344.2 209.5 134.7
                              28 4,148.0 1,125.3 1,709.1 1,132.6 576.4 − − 0.0 12.9 − 306.2 172.0 134.3
         May                  5 4,156.8 1,125.1 1,773.1 1,172.7 600.4 − − 0.0 12.4 − 256.0 114.2 141.8
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2015          June 880.1 245.1 141.6 115.5 26.1 − − 0.0 − − 45.9 3.2 42.7
         July 903.5 248.6 155.8 118.0 37.8 − − − − − 44.3 2.3 42.0
         Aug 930.8 248.0 185.8 135.3 50.6 − − − − − 42.2 1.9 40.3
         Sep 936.9 247.5 173.5 139.4 34.1 − − 0.0 − − 56.8 2.3 54.5
         Oct 956.3 247.9 184.3 140.9 43.3 − − 0.0 − − 65.5 2.8 62.7
         Nov 1 002.6 249.0 212.4 154.3 58.0 − − 0.0 − − 79.3 2.9 76.4
         Dec 1 011.5 254.8 208.7 155.1 53.6 − − 0.0 − − 71.9 11.6 60.2
2016          Jan 1 018.5 249.9 228.7 172.7 56.0 − − − − − 75.6 10.7 64.8
         Feb 1 043.7 250.1 231.5 165.9 65.6 − − − − − 88.2 18.7 69.5
         Mar 1 077.6 251.9 227.3 167.8 59.6 − − − − − 108.8 39.9 69.0
         Apr 1 112.7 252.5 272.4 180.8 91.6 − − − − − 96.3 24.2 72.1
         May 1 159.5 253.4 293.2 200.0 93.2 − − − − − 121.2 41.8 79.4
         June 1 214.0 255.6 299.7 214.4 85.3 − − 0.0 − − 130.6 56.5 74.1
         July 1 209.4 258.0 320.7 235.4 85.4 − − 0.0 − − 101.4 25.3 76.1
         Aug 1 239.2 257.1 334.5 242.3 92.2 − − 0.0 0.0 − 110.4 33.5 76.9
         Sep 1 305.3 257.9 362.6 244.7 117.9 − − − 0.1 − 122.4 43.9 78.6
         Oct 1 312.2 259.2 380.0 260.5 119.5 − − − 0.3 − 110.8 35.6 75.3
         Nov 1 376.5 259.5 428.0 293.1 134.9 − − − 0.3 − 116.6 40.0 76.6
         Dec 1 392.7 264.9 411.4 284.9 126.4 − − − 0.5 − 105.8 32.5 73.4
2017          Jan 1 449.7 260.9 499.0 348.3 150.7 − − − 2.2 − 92.9 17.1 75.8
         Feb 1 484.8 261.3 507.1 347.0 160.1 − − − 1.7 − 97.3 12.4 84.9
         Mar 1 558.0 262.1 543.2 353.8 189.3 − − − 1.7 − 115.4 26.8 88.6
         Apr 1 582.8 264.7 591.2 402.7 188.5 − − − 4.1 − 88.9 20.0 68.9
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the 2According to the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment ismarket rates at the end of the quarter. 1For Eurosystem: financial statements for disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
May 2017
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
   
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability     Onto non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to     reportingarea residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    date/denominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    End of credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
2 accounts reserves    month 1 liabilities 3 
Eurosystem 4
 
85.6 3.2 8.6 8.6 − 58.5 204.5 − 420.9 100.8 2016 Sep                  2
72.6 3.1 8.2 8.2 − 58.5 204.0 − 420.9 100.8                                 9
84.0 3.0 8.7 8.7 − 58.5 205.8 − 420.9 100.8                               16
93.4 2.9 8.8 8.8 − 58.5 209.2 − 420.9 100.8                               23
122.8 2.8 8.8 8.8 − 58.1 207.3 − 418.5 100.8                               30
101.7 4.2 8.8 8.8 − 58.1 207.1 − 418.5 100.8          Oct                  7
97.7 5.6 9.3 9.3 − 58.1 207.6 − 418.5 100.8                               14
106.1 4.6 9.6 9.6 − 58.1 216.2 − 418.5 100.8                               21
108.2 5.5 9.7 9.7 − 58.1 215.1 − 418.5 100.8                               28
103.8 4.0 12.5 12.5 − 58.1 216.3 − 418.5 100.8          Nov                  4
101.5 3.8 10.6 10.6 − 58.1 217.4 − 418.5 100.8                               11
109.9 4.4 10.0 10.0 − 58.1 216.4 − 418.5 100.8                               18
117.4 2.8 10.5 10.5 − 58.1 215.2 − 418.5 100.8                               25
113.2 3.8 10.9 10.9 − 58.1 214.7 − 418.5 100.8          Dec                  2
112.0 6.2 12.2 12.2 − 58.1 215.4 − 418.5 99.5                                 9
127.3 7.1 12.2 12.2 − 58.1 215.6 − 418.5 99.5                               16
145.7 7.0 10.4 10.4 − 58.1 219.0 − 418.5 99.5                               23
205.7 3.6 9.3 9.3 − 59.3 221.4 − 394.4 99.5                               30
167.4 5.7 10.7 10.7 − 59.3 221.3 − 394.4 99.8 2017 Jan                  6
138.8 7.7 13.4 13.4 − 59.3 221.7 − 394.4 99.8                               13
133.8 7.3 9.7 9.7 − 59.3 226.4 − 394.4 99.8                               20
133.0 9.2 10.5 10.5 − 59.3 227.0 − 394.4 99.8                               27
151.5 9.2 9.4 9.4 − 59.3 228.7 − 394.4 100.1 2017 Feb                  3
144.8 8.5 11.9 11.9 − 59.3 229.6 − 394.4 100.0                               10
147.7 8.6 12.2 12.2 − 59.3 229.6 − 394.4 100.0                               17
159.9 9.5 11.0 11.0 − 59.3 228.2 − 394.4 100.6                               24
168.4 7.7 10.6 10.6 − 59.3 231.8 − 394.4 100.6          Mar                  3
157.0 6.0 12.8 12.8 − 59.3 231.7 − 394.4 100.6                               10
152.9 3.5 12.4 12.4 − 59.3 232.1 − 394.4 100.6                               17
153.5 5.0 12.0 12.0 − 59.3 231.0 − 394.4 100.6                               24
218.8 3.0 10.4 10.4 − 59.0 229.4 − 412.0 101.1                               31
168.5 3.9 11.6 11.6 − 59.0 226.6 − 412.0 101.4          Apr                  7
170.5 2.9 11.2 11.2 − 59.0 225.8 − 412.0 101.4                               14
169.1 3.0 10.5 10.5 − 59.0 225.7 − 412.0 101.4                               21
180.7 5.0 10.1 10.1 − 59.0 225.5 − 412.0 102.3                               28
175.2 4.1 11.4 11.4 − 59.0 226.3 − 412.0 102.3          May                  5
 Deutsche Bundesbank
9.2 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 15.2 23.5 280.2 113.1 5.0 2015          June
12.1 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.2 23.6 284.9 113.1 5.0          July
10.0 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.2 23.7 287.3 113.1 5.0          Aug 
16.2 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.1 24.0 290.1 108.2 5.0          Sep 
12.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 15.1 24.1 293.1 108.2 5.0          Oct 
13.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.1 24.2 295.2 108.2 5.0          Nov 
27.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.3 24.4 297.8 105.7 5.0          Dec 
16.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 15.3 25.0 297.1 105.7 5.0 2016          Jan 
28.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.3 22.0 297.7 105.7 5.0          Feb 
30.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 22.8 299.8 116.2 5.0          Mar 
30.7 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.9 22.9 300.9 116.2 5.0          Apr 
27.2 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.9 23.1 303.9 116.2 5.0          May
47.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.2 23.4 308.0 128.5 5.0          June
43.8 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 15.2 23.6 311.7 128.5 5.0          July
48.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 15.2 23.7 314.1 128.5 5.0          Aug 
70.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 15.1 24.0 318.8 128.0 5.0          Sep 
66.5 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.3 322.0 128.0 5.0          Oct 
74.7 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.4 323.9 128.0 5.0          Nov 
117.0 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 15.4 24.7 327.3 119.7 5.0          Dec 
100.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.4 25.2 328.3 119.7 5.0 2017          Jan 
121.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.4 24.5 330.1 119.7 5.6          Feb 
131.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.3 25.1 331.9 126.0 5.6          Mar 
125.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.3 25.3 335.2 126.0 5.6          Apr 
 
remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circulation is also allocated to according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its balance sheet the share of notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liabilitythe euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s related to banknote issue“. 3For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DM banknotes
capital. The difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2008 7,892.7 17.8 2,681.8 1,990.2 1,404.3 585.8 691.6 452.9 238.8 3,638.2 3,163.0 2,686.9 2,357.3
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.7 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2015          June 7,799.5 15.3 2,040.3 1,561.8 1,197.9 363.9 478.5 329.7 148.8 3,695.7 3,271.8 2,691.9 2,413.0
         July 7,867.6 15.6 2,049.3 1,569.4 1,209.5 359.9 479.9 332.5 147.4 3,722.3 3,299.7 2,716.2 2,415.5
         Aug 7,840.0 15.5 2,059.4 1,574.0 1,220.8 353.2 485.3 340.0 145.3 3,726.2 3,301.6 2,716.9 2,421.1         Sep 7,829.3 15.8 2,042.0 1,547.5 1,200.0 347.6 494.5 348.7 145.8 3,728.0 3,301.1 2,716.7 2,426.3
         Oct 7,856.5 16.5 2,082.1 1,584.2 1,240.4 343.8 497.9 352.0 145.9 3,727.4 3,302.2 2,716.0 2,431.7
         Nov 7,940.1 15.9 2,106.9 1,613.7 1,275.3 338.4 493.2 347.0 146.2 3,751.3 3,319.2 2,733.8 2,446.0         Dec 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016          Jan 7,823.5 16.5 2,057.4 1,562.4 1,257.7 304.8 494.9 352.3 142.6 3,727.4 3,307.6 2,729.1 2,443.1
         Feb 7,913.1 16.2 2,072.2 1,566.4 1,263.3 303.1 505.8 361.1 144.7 3,734.6 3,317.1 2,739.2 2,453.8         Mar 7,783.4 17.5 2,039.2 1,547.2 1,243.5 303.7 492.0 347.9 144.1 3,736.0 3,316.8 2,742.1 2,458.5
         Apr 7,806.5 17.2 2,089.1 1,594.3 1,291.0 303.3 494.8 352.8 142.0 3,747.3 3,329.8 2,753.3 2,467.1
         May 7,817.2 18.7 2,070.3 1,587.2 1,284.7 302.4 483.1 342.8 140.4 3,759.2 3,334.1 2,762.8 2,476.2         June 7,920.6 19.3 2,072.8 1,592.2 1,292.9 299.3 480.6 338.2 142.4 3,745.9 3,321.4 2,759.7 2,473.7
         July 7,942.1 19.7 2,086.0 1,604.7 1,308.1 296.6 481.2 341.4 139.8 3,758.8 3,333.6 2,766.6 2,479.7
         Aug 7,908.5 19.7 2,086.1 1,611.7 1,317.0 294.7 474.4 336.0 138.5 3,758.4 3,335.4 2,774.3 2,486.3         Sep 7,863.9 21.0 2,074.5 1,636.4 1,343.9 292.5 438.2 300.7 137.5 3,766.0 3,343.0 2,785.6 2,497.3
         Oct 7,868.7 22.8 2,079.5 1,641.2 1,349.4 291.8 438.3 301.6 136.7 3,773.0 3,349.9 2,793.6 2,502.5
         Nov 7,911.6 22.9 2,154.7 1,712.1 1,421.7 290.5 442.6 306.3 136.2 3,785.7 3,361.6 2,810.0 2,518.4         Dec 7,792.7 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017          Jan 7,889.3 24.6 2,210.1 1,777.0 1,490.7 286.3 433.1 299.8 133.3 3,769.9 3,347.6 2,813.5 2,519.3
         Feb 7,944.8 23.9 2,225.4 1,783.3 1,497.9 285.4 442.1 307.6 134.5 3,774.5 3,347.6 2,819.5 2,525.6         Mar 7,926.1 23.6 2,237.5 1,797.8 1,513.1 284.7 439.6 306.9 132.7 3,776.8 3,351.3 2,828.1 2,533.8
 Changes 3
2009 − 454.5 − 0.5 − 189.0 − 166.4 − 182.2 15.8 − 22.5 − 1.8 − 20.7 17.4 38.3 17.0 6.6
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 179.5 0.3 − 16.0 − 11.0 66.8 − 77.8 − 5.0 7.7 − 12.7 66.4 64.9 68.8 57.3
2016 184.6 6.5 120.4 178.5 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.4 53.4 88.8 81.0
2015          July 57.5 0.3 7.3 6.7 11.1 − 4.3 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 24.8 26.9 22.3 0.8
         Aug − 8.8 − 0.1 13.0 6.1 12.3 − 6.1 6.8 8.7 − 1.9 7.9 4.4 3.3 7.2
         Sep − 7.3 0.3 − 17.3 − 26.7 − 20.8 − 5.9 9.3 8.8 0.6 4.0 1.1 2.3 6.7
         Oct 25.1 0.7 39.8 36.4 40.4 − 4.0 3.4 3.3 0.1 − 2.1 0.4 − 0.9 6.1
         Nov 59.7 − 0.6 21.2 27.7 33.7 − 6.0 − 6.5 − 6.8 0.3 20.0 14.7 15.6 12.6
         Dec − 252.6 3.6 − 88.8 − 87.4 − 56.1 − 31.3 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 26.5 − 13.7 − 3.6 − 4.5
2016          Jan 169.4 − 3.1 45.1 39.8 39.9 − 0.1 5.3 7.3 − 2.0 12.0 7.7 4.3 4.4
         Feb 94.5 − 0.3 16.6 5.2 6.3 − 1.1 11.4 9.1 2.3 8.8 10.5 11.1 11.4
         Mar − 107.0 1.3 − 29.1 − 17.2 − 18.4 1.2 − 11.8 − 11.2 − 0.6 4.5 1.7 4.7 6.7
         Apr 31.0 − 0.3 49.9 47.2 47.6 − 0.4 2.7 4.8 − 2.1 13.0 14.4 12.6 9.9
         May 35.3 1.5 8.5 20.2 21.4 − 1.2 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 1.6 11.4 5.3 10.5 9.9
         June 108.2 0.7 3.7 5.6 8.2 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 4.2 2.3 − 10.4 − 11.4 − 1.7 − 1.2
         July 23.5 0.4 13.1 12.4 15.2 − 2.8 0.7 3.4 − 2.7 14.5 13.4 8.2 7.3
         Aug − 31.4 − 0.0 0.4 7.1 9.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 − 5.3 − 1.4 0.2 2.1 8.0 6.8
         Sep − 42.7 1.3 − 11.3 24.9 26.9 − 2.0 − 36.3 − 35.2 − 1.1 8.3 8.3 11.7 11.4
         Oct − 0.4 1.8 4.8 5.2 5.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.9 6.5 7.1 7.9 5.2
         Nov 26.1 0.1 72.3 69.4 71.4 − 2.0 2.8 3.4 − 0.5 11.7 11.3 15.8 15.2
         Dec − 121.7 3.1 − 53.6 − 41.3 − 37.8 − 3.5 − 12.3 − 11.7 − 0.6 − 23.1 − 17.0 − 4.4 − 6.1
2017          Jan 109.0 − 1.4 110.7 107.1 107.1 0.0 3.5 5.7 − 2.2 9.5 4.6 9.3 8.5
         Feb 47.3 − 0.7 14.0 5.6 6.8 − 1.2 8.4 7.1 1.2 4.3 0.3 6.3 6.5
         Mar − 18.1 − 0.3 12.3 14.5 15.2 − 0.7 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 1.8 2.6 4.0 8.7 8.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 
2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
329.6 476.1 342.8 133.4 475.1 348.1 172.1 127.0 27.6 99.4 1,279.2 1,008.6 275.7 2008
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.3 802.4 844.1 2016
278.9 579.9 332.5 247.4 423.9 275.2 144.1 148.7 30.0 118.7 1,110.5 851.9 937.6 2015          June
300.7 583.5 333.2 250.3 422.6 276.6 145.3 146.0 30.4 115.6 1,110.7 854.8 969.6          July
295.8 584.7 330.3 254.4 424.6 278.9 146.2 145.7 30.1 115.5 1,097.3 843.1 941.6          Aug 290.4 584.3 330.1 254.2 426.9 279.2 146.0 147.7 30.0 117.8 1,094.7 841.4 948.8          Sep 
284.3 586.1 333.2 252.9 425.2 278.4 146.7 146.8 30.8 116.1 1,090.1 833.3 940.4          Oct 
287.8 585.4 329.5 255.9 432.0 285.5 148.6 146.6 30.0 116.6 1,075.0 813.3 991.0          Nov 287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6          Dec 
286.1 578.4 328.4 250.1 419.8 275.5 149.5 144.3 29.2 115.2 1,026.3 765.1 996.1 2016          Jan 
285.4 578.0 328.0 249.9 417.4 274.6 153.0 142.8 29.5 113.4 1,031.4 767.7 1,058.7          Feb 283.6 574.7 327.8 246.9 419.2 273.3 149.1 145.9 29.3 116.6 992.1 727.7 998.5          Mar 
286.2 576.5 331.6 244.8 417.6 272.8 150.4 144.8 30.0 114.8 1,005.6 741.1 947.2          Apr 
286.6 571.3 329.5 241.9 425.1 280.0 153.3 145.1 28.9 116.2 1,012.9 750.5 956.2          May286.0 561.8 323.9 237.9 424.4 281.2 155.2 143.2 28.9 114.3 1,036.4 774.7 1,046.2          June
286.8 567.0 327.0 240.0 425.2 284.2 159.3 141.0 28.9 112.1 1,041.7 785.1 1,036.0          July
288.0 561.0 324.9 236.1 423.1 283.3 159.7 139.8 29.1 110.7 1,042.6 786.2 1,001.7          Aug 288.3 557.5 323.0 234.5 422.9 282.2 157.8 140.7 29.8 110.9 1,030.5 774.4 971.9          Sep 
291.0 556.4 326.3 230.0 423.0 284.6 162.1 138.5 29.5 108.9 1,077.9 823.1 915.5          Oct 
291.6 551.6 321.9 229.7 424.1 285.9 161.9 138.3 29.2 109.1 1,065.1 811.1 883.2          Nov 293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.3 802.4 844.1          Dec 
294.2 534.1 312.2 221.9 422.4 284.6 163.1 137.7 28.6 109.2 1,080.8 826.0 803.9 2017          Jan 
294.0 528.0 311.6 216.5 427.0 289.4 165.6 137.6 28.6 109.0 1,095.4 843.6 825.5          Feb 294.3 523.2 307.1 216.1 425.5 290.8 167.2 134.7 29.0 105.7 1,097.1 847.5 791.1          Mar 
Changes 3
10.5 21.3 − 5.1 26.4 − 20.9 − 20.9 − 7.1 0.0 − 3.9 3.9 − 182.5 − 162.3 − 99.8 2009
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 1.4 5.1 2.4 − 3.7 − 0.9 − 2.7 − 80.1 − 93.5 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.7 55.2 − 51.4 2016
21.5 4.6 1.8 2.8 − 2.1 0.6 0.8 − 2.7 0.4 − 3.0 − 7.0 − 3.9 32.0 2015          July
− 3.9 1.1 − 3.0 4.1 3.6 3.9 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 28.0          Aug 
− 4.4 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 2.9 1.8 0.1 1.1 − 0.4 1.5 − 1.5 − 1.0 7.2          Sep 
− 7.1 1.4 2.9 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 1.5 0.8 − 1.0 0.8 − 1.8 − 4.9 − 7.9 − 8.4          Oct 
3.0 − 0.9 − 3.8 2.9 5.3 5.7 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 0.4 − 31.5 − 35.3 50.6          Nov 
0.9 − 10.1 − 4.9 − 5.2 − 12.8 − 8.0 − 1.3 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 4.2 − 55.6 − 55.3 − 85.4          Dec 
− 0.1 3.4 3.8 − 0.4 4.3 1.4 4.3 2.9 − 0.2 3.1 24.8 22.8 90.5 2016          Jan − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.2 3.7 − 1.4 0.3 − 1.8 5.8 3.0 63.5          Feb − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.8 3.1 − 0.2 3.3 − 23.5 − 25.4 − 60.2          Mar 
2.7 1.8 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.3 1.7 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 12.9 13.1 − 44.4          Apr 0.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.9 6.1 5.7 1.4 0.4 − 1.0 1.4 1.0 3.7 13.0          May
− 0.5 − 9.7 − 5.7 − 4.0 1.0 2.0 2.4 − 1.0 0.0 − 1.0 24.7 25.5 89.5          June
0.8 5.3 3.1 2.2 1.0 3.2 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 6.6 11.8 − 11.1          July1.2 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.9 − 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 2.4 2.4 − 34.3          Aug 0.3 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.8 0.6 0.1 − 10.8 − 10.5 − 30.3          Sep 
2.8 − 0.9 3.5 − 4.3 − 0.6 1.9 4.0 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 42.8 44.1 − 56.4          Oct 
0.6 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 0.4 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 − 25.6 − 24.1 − 32.3          Nov 1.7 − 12.6 − 9.7 − 2.9 − 6.0 − 4.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 9.3 − 11.3 − 38.8          Dec 
0.8 − 4.7 0.0 − 4.8 4.9 3.7 4.2 1.2 0.1 1.1 30.5 31.1 − 40.2 2017          Jan 
− 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.6 − 5.4 4.0 4.2 2.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.2 8.1 11.6 21.6          Feb 
0.1 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 1.4 1.4 1.8 − 2.9 0.4 − 3.3 1.8 4.0 − 34.5          Mar 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2008 7,892.7 1,827.7 1,583.0 244.7 2,798.2 2,687.3 809.5 1,342.7 598.7 535.2 424.8 74.2 22.4
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.7 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2015          June 7,799.5 1,303.2 1,090.5 212.7 3,241.5 3,140.1 1,594.8 947.1 283.6 598.3 528.6 88.9 42.0         July 7,867.6 1,294.3 1,080.0 214.3 3,268.2 3,169.4 1,608.2 964.8 288.6 596.4 528.2 88.5 42.7
         Aug 7,840.0 1,281.1 1,072.9 208.1 3,279.0 3,182.1 1,625.2 961.8 286.7 595.1 528.5 86.5 41.3         Sep 7,829.3 1,281.8 1,076.3 205.5 3,274.0 3,174.2 1,624.8 954.9 283.2 594.5 529.3 87.9 41.9
         Oct 7,856.5 1,295.4 1,096.9 198.5 3,283.6 3,187.7 1,650.4 942.7 278.9 594.6 530.6 85.1 39.5
         Nov 7,940.1 1,312.0 1,108.5 203.5 3,307.5 3,215.4 1,672.6 948.6 287.1 594.2 531.5 82.8 39.5         Dec 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016          Jan 7,823.5 1,266.8 1,066.5 200.3 3,322.6 3,225.5 1,686.6 942.9 286.9 596.0 535.4 85.3 41.5
         Feb 7,913.1 1,264.9 1,062.1 202.8 3,324.6 3,227.5 1,694.0 937.1 283.2 596.3 537.0 86.0 42.5         Mar 7,783.4 1,252.3 1,058.8 193.5 3,319.6 3,221.8 1,682.6 944.7 290.4 594.4 536.2 86.8 40.1
         Apr 7,806.5 1,258.6 1,060.8 197.8 3,332.8 3,240.8 1,704.9 943.2 291.0 592.7 535.6 82.4 38.4
         May 7,817.2 1,230.3 1,027.5 202.8 3,348.6 3,253.7 1,717.2 945.3 292.6 591.1 535.0 84.9 41.7         June 7,920.6 1,241.7 1,039.1 202.6 3,350.9 3,250.2 1,718.1 942.1 290.9 590.0 534.5 89.4 44.9
         July 7,942.1 1,226.7 1,023.7 203.0 3,362.7 3,267.1 1,733.1 945.0 295.2 589.1 534.5 85.5 40.7
         Aug 7,908.5 1,211.5 1,016.5 195.0 3,369.5 3,274.0 1,744.5 941.2 292.8 588.4 534.6 85.5 40.4         Sep 7,863.9 1,194.8 1,029.1 165.7 3,372.1 3,274.9 1,743.8 944.0 297.4 587.1 534.0 88.0 41.4
         Oct 7,868.7 1,186.8 1,025.4 161.3 3,378.8 3,286.5 1,763.9 936.0 288.5 586.6 534.3 83.7 37.1
         Nov 7,911.6 1,205.6 1,042.2 163.4 3,420.0 3,320.5 1,795.0 939.3 292.8 586.1 534.4 89.8 43.4         Dec 7,792.7 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017          Jan 7,889.3 1,237.0 1,053.4 183.6 3,433.4 3,337.5 1,807.5 941.6 300.1 588.4 537.7 88.4 42.2
         Feb 7,944.8 1,245.6 1,055.3 190.3 3,435.3 3,336.9 1,812.7 935.8 295.0 588.5 538.3 89.6 41.7         Mar 7,926.1 1,259.8 1,077.3 182.5 3,433.8 3,334.5 1,813.5 934.4 296.4 586.6 537.0 91.1 39.6
 Changes 4
2009 − 454.5 − 235.4 − 224.6 − 10.8 31.9 43.9 205.0 − 220.4 − 259.3 59.3 50.3 − 9.6 − 4.1
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 179.5 − 61.1 − 49.6 − 11.5 104.9 105.5 153.7 − 36.9 − 10.0 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.2 − 0.3
2016 184.6 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2015          July 57.5 − 9.9 − 11.0 1.1 25.9 28.6 12.9 17.6 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.6
         Aug − 8.8 − 11.6 − 6.1 − 5.5 11.9 13.6 17.7 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.3 0.3 − 1.8 − 1.3         Sep − 7.3 0.8 3.6 − 2.8 − 4.9 − 7.7 − 0.4 − 6.7 − 3.3 − 0.6 0.8 1.4 0.6
         Oct 25.1 13.7 20.6 − 7.0 9.5 13.5 25.6 − 12.2 − 4.3 0.1 1.3 − 2.8 − 2.5
         Nov 59.7 14.4 10.3 4.1 22.2 26.3 21.0 5.6 8.0 − 0.3 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.2
         Dec − 252.6 − 42.5 − 41.5 − 1.0 1.0 0.9 − 1.4 0.1 4.5 2.2 3.0 − 1.8 − 4.12016          Jan 169.4 − 0.4 1.0 − 1.4 16.0 10.8 16.5 − 5.3 − 4.5 − 0.4 0.9 4.6 6.3
         Feb 94.5 − 0.5 − 3.3 2.7 4.3 4.2 7.4 − 3.5 − 1.8 0.3 1.6 0.7 1.0
         Mar − 107.0 − 10.1 − 1.9 − 8.3 − 3.2 − 4.6 − 10.1 7.4 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.8 1.1 − 2.3         Apr 31.0 6.3 2.0 4.3 13.1 18.9 22.2 − 1.5 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 1.6
         May 35.3 − 1.4 − 5.7 4.2 14.8 12.0 11.7 1.8 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.6 2.4 3.2
         June 108.2 13.0 12.4 0.6 2.2 − 3.0 1.0 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 3.9 3.2
         July 23.5 − 14.9 − 15.4 0.5 11.9 17.1 15.1 2.9 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 4.2
         Aug − 31.4 − 15.0 − 7.0 − 7.9 7.0 7.0 11.5 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 0.7 0.1 0.1 − 0.3
         Sep − 42.7 − 16.5 12.7 − 29.2 2.7 1.0 − 0.6 2.9 4.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 2.5 1.1
         Oct − 0.4 − 8.4 − 3.7 − 4.7 6.2 11.2 19.8 − 8.1 − 8.9 − 0.6 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4
         Nov 26.1 17.3 16.0 1.4 39.7 32.7 30.1 3.0 4.0 − 0.4 0.1 5.8 6.1
         Dec − 121.7 − 0.9 − 9.3 8.4 − 9.0 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 1.3 2.3 2.7 − 5.7 − 6.2
2017          Jan 109.0 32.8 20.7 12.1 23.0 19.7 13.3 6.4 9.1 − 0.0 0.7 4.4 5.1
         Feb 47.3 7.6 1.6 6.1 1.2 − 0.7 4.7 − 5.5 − 4.8 0.1 0.7 1.1 − 0.5
         Mar − 18.1 14.3 21.9 − 7.7 − 1.5 − 2.4 0.8 − 1.4 1.4 − 1.9 − 1.4 1.5 − 2.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Debt securities
issued 3 
in other member states 2 Deposits ofcentral governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years 3 residents Liabilities 1 
End of year or month
 
49.5 24.9 2.4 1.8 36.6 34.8 61.1 16.4 1,609.9 233.3 666.3 461.7 451.5 2008
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.5 591.5 906.3 2016
43.5 18.0 3.4 2.8 12.5 10.9 3.3 3.5 1,076.1 41.2 605.9 564.7 1,001.3 2015          June42.4 16.9 3.4 2.7 10.3 8.9 4.5 3.5 1,077.7 39.0 627.0 565.1 1,027.2          July
41.8 14.9 3.4 2.8 10.4 9.7 6.6 3.5 1,061.0 36.3 634.9 573.2 1,000.8          Aug 42.6 14.8 3.4 2.7 12.0 10.5 7.0 4.1 1,060.5 43.6 606.7 577.1 1,018.1          Sep 
42.2 15.5 3.4 2.8 10.8 8.7 6.6 4.1 1,069.9 48.1 609.1 578.5 1,009.4          Oct 
40.0 14.3 3.4 2.8 9.3 7.8 6.1 3.9 1,075.9 50.6 599.6 574.7 1,060.4          Nov 42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1          Dec 
40.4 15.0 3.3 2.7 11.8 8.4 2.8 3.8 1,021.1 49.5 583.5 566.5 1,056.5 2016          Jan 
40.1 14.9 3.3 2.7 11.2 8.5 4.2 3.7 1,020.2 51.2 595.3 579.5 1,120.8          Feb 43.5 18.6 3.3 2.7 11.0 8.3 3.2 3.5 1,014.7 49.0 557.1 576.3 1,056.7          Mar 
40.7 17.0 3.2 2.7 9.6 7.9 3.7 3.1 1,019.3 50.3 606.6 583.6 998.9          Apr 
40.0 15.9 3.2 2.7 10.0 8.1 3.5 2.7 1,029.8 49.8 611.6 583.9 1,007.0          May41.3 17.1 3.2 2.7 11.3 8.8 2.5 2.7 1,023.9 50.0 618.1 587.3 1,093.4          June
41.6 16.2 3.2 2.7 10.1 8.1 3.4 2.5 1,021.8 56.6 656.1 578.1 1,090.9          July
42.0 17.0 3.2 2.7 10.0 7.9 3.2 2.4 1,020.1 52.7 663.4 581.9 1,056.4          Aug 43.4 17.9 3.1 2.7 9.2 8.1 2.9 2.5 1,011.1 51.9 655.7 596.9 1,028.0          Sep 
43.6 16.6 3.1 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.2 2.4 1,019.6 50.7 710.2 594.9 972.9          Oct 
43.4 16.0 3.1 2.6 9.7 8.2 3.0 2.4 1,035.2 48.4 711.7 591.2 942.6          Nov 43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.5 591.5 906.3          Dec 
43.2 15.6 3.0 2.6 7.5 6.9 4.8 2.3 1,043.2 47.5 716.8 585.0 866.9 2017          Jan 
44.8 18.0 3.0 2.6 8.8 7.7 4.5 2.3 1,050.8 48.0 734.1 588.5 883.7          Feb 48.5 19.9 3.0 2.6 8.3 7.9 2.6 2.2 1,045.8 46.0 730.2 594.0 857.7          Mar 
Changes 4
− 5.7 − 7.7 0.1 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.8 19.4 − 5.0 − 104.6 − 87.1 − 95.3 − 0.3 − 65.0 2009
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 80.5 9.3 − 26.6 28.0 − 143.3 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.8 − 1.3 115.5 26.5 − 38.9 2016
− 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 2.0 1.2 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 2.4 17.4 − 0.7 26.6 2015          July
− 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8 2.0 0.1 − 10.3 − 2.6 13.0 9.7 − 23.6          Aug 
0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 0.5 0.5 − 0.2 7.3 − 27.9 4.0 19.9          Sep 
− 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.8 − 0.4 0.0 10.8 5.9 2.3 0.0 − 10.7          Oct − 2.4 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 2.3 − 16.8 − 6.7 51.2          Nov 
2.3 1.8 − 0.0 0.0 2.0 1.8 − 3.6 − 0.5 − 50.1 − 2.1 − 67.8 − 2.8 − 86.4          Dec 
− 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 − 1.3 0.3 0.3 5.8 1.3 59.2 − 2.2 90.4 2016          Jan − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.1 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.1 1.6 11.6 13.2 65.7          Feb 
3.5 4.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.2 4.8 − 1.8 − 30.7 − 0.2 − 66.4          Mar 
− 2.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.4 3.9 1.2 49.2 7.2 − 48.8          Apr − 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 4.9 − 0.7 0.9 4.3 12.4          May
0.7 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.7 − 1.0 0.0 − 5.0 0.3 8.4 3.9 86.7          June
0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.2 6.6 38.6 − 8.9 − 2.7          July
0.4 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.8 7.9 6.6 − 36.6          Aug 1.5 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 7.0 12.0 − 25.5          Sep 
0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 5.3 − 1.3 52.6 − 2.9 − 53.4          Oct 
− 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.6 − 0.2 0.1 7.3 − 2.6 − 5.5 − 6.1 − 26.5          Nov 
0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 6.8 − 1.3 − 69.7 − 0.2 − 34.3          Dec 
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.9 0.5 76.5 − 5.1 − 38.7 2017          Jan 
1.6 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 3.4 0.3 14.4 2.4 18.6          Feb 
3.6 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 2.6 − 3.9 6.1 − 25.6          Mar 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
 
 Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2016          Oct 1,720 7,911.9 293.3 2,449.5 1,940.5 505.5 4,039.1 370.5 2,912.3 0.5 749.9 118.8 1,011.2
         Nov 1,711 7,954.9 326.6 2,471.8 1,966.7 502.3 4,058.3 369.9 2,929.3 0.5 751.9 118.5 979.7         Dec 1,711 7,836.3 323.4 2,420.8 1,920.3 499.2 4,030.5 337.7 2,937.4 0.7 749.4 119.9 941.7
2017          Jan 1,701 7,933.7 385.4 2,476.4 1,978.8 495.7 4,050.5 359.6 2,939.6 0.6 744.5 119.4 901.9
         Feb 1,699 7,989.3 387.7 2,502.2 2,004.8 495.0 4,061.0 362.0 2,948.9 0.6 742.5 114.4 924.0         Mar 1,698 7,970.4 396.2 2,510.0 2,015.0 491.4 4,060.6 361.8 2,954.1 0.7 738.9 114.1 889.6
Commercial banks 6
2017          Feb 262 3,269.7 252.2 1,091.3 1,007.5 82.9 1,208.2 198.1 772.0 0.4 233.6 52.3 665.7
         Mar 263 3,239.3 236.8 1,103.2 1,021.1 80.9 1,204.6 193.7 776.2 0.5 232.1 51.4 643.2
   Big banks 7
2017          Feb 4 1,880.7 106.0 595.8 560.7 35.0 504.1 111.4 281.4 0.1 108.7 46.6 628.2
         Mar 4 1,837.0 89.3 597.9 562.8 34.6 497.1 108.0 281.2 0.1 107.5 45.8 606.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2017          Feb 154 974.6 65.3 251.2 206.8 43.6 622.8 61.6 446.8 0.3 112.7 4.8 30.4
         Mar 154 972.1 65.0 247.2 204.1 42.4 625.7 61.3 450.0 0.3 112.5 4.8 29.6
   Branches of foreign banks
2017          Feb 104 414.4 80.9 244.2 240.0 4.2 81.3 25.1 43.7 0.0 12.1 1.0 7.1
         Mar 105 430.2 82.6 258.1 254.2 4.0 81.8 24.4 45.0 0.1 12.1 0.8 6.8
Landesbanken
2017          Feb 9 922.8 38.2 269.8 203.5 66.2 495.6 48.5 362.8 0.1 82.9 10.6 108.6
         Mar 9 933.3 52.3 270.6 203.9 65.8 494.8 54.1 359.8 0.1 79.3 10.8 104.9
Savings banks
2017          Feb 399 1,169.3 28.6 184.9 65.8 119.0 925.8 48.2 723.6 0.0 153.7 14.2 15.8
         Mar 399 1,169.3 29.1 182.2 63.9 118.1 928.0 48.6 724.8 0.0 154.5 14.2 15.7
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2017          Feb 974 851.5 15.3 166.6 58.8 107.4 635.1 31.6 499.4 0.0 103.9 16.1 18.4         Mar 972 855.3 15.4 167.1 59.3 107.4 638.4 32.4 501.4 0.0 104.4 16.1 18.3
Mortgage banks
2017          Feb 15 274.6 0.7 45.5 31.5 14.0 218.9 2.8 178.6 − 37.5 0.2 9.3
         Mar 15 274.4 1.1 45.8 31.9 13.9 218.5 2.8 178.6 − 37.1 0.2 8.8
Building and loan associations
2017          Feb 20 220.5 1.8 59.4 42.5 16.9 154.7 1.3 129.4 . 24.1 0.3 4.2
         Mar 20 220.4 0.7 59.3 42.3 17.0 155.9 1.3 130.2 . 24.4 0.3 4.2
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2017          Feb 20 1,280.9 50.9 684.6 595.3 88.6 422.8 31.5 283.3 0.0 106.8 20.7 101.9
         Mar 20 1,278.5 60.8 681.7 592.6 88.2 420.4 29.0 283.1 0.0 107.1 21.0 94.5
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2017          Feb 139 1,125.5 124.0 427.5 384.6 42.0 476.6 71.2 291.1 0.3 110.9 4.4 93.0
         Mar 140 1,147.0 124.7 450.2 408.8 40.7 478.3 69.2 295.8 0.4 111.1 4.3 89.6
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2017          Feb 35 711.1 43.1 183.2 144.6 37.8 395.3 46.1 247.3 0.3 98.8 3.5 85.9
         Mar 35 716.9 42.1 192.0 154.6 36.7 396.5 44.8 250.9 0.3 99.0 3.5 82.8
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the Credit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplementfinancial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds risks lities 1   month standing 5 
All categories of banks
 
1,717.7 535.7 1,182.0 3,561.0 1,914.2 294.8 697.2 70.9 594.8 541.3 60.0 1,126.4 487.8 1,019.0 2016          Oct 
1,745.0 562.6 1,182.4 3,595.2 1,937.6 305.7 697.8 74.0 594.3 541.3 59.7 1,138.1 488.0 988.7          Nov 1,729.0 504.0 1,225.0 3,532.9 1,898.4 280.5 698.3 41.9 596.5 544.0 59.1 1,131.9 489.7 952.8          Dec 
1,798.7 589.5 1,209.1 3,593.0 1,938.1 305.2 695.2 73.0 596.4 544.6 58.1 1,140.0 487.9 914.0 2017          Jan 
1,819.8 622.1 1,197.6 3,599.6 1,946.2 305.1 694.2 76.4 596.5 545.3 57.6 1,151.0 488.0 930.9          Feb 1,845.9 625.5 1,220.4 3,580.4 1,930.7 303.1 695.3 57.8 594.6 543.8 56.8 1,147.8 491.8 904.6          Mar 
Commercial banks 6
892.5 448.7 443.7 1,411.0 859.5 181.6 242.6 61.5 102.5 94.0 24.7 172.9 166.7 626.7 2017          Feb 905.5 461.3 444.2 1,390.3 849.4 170.7 243.1 39.4 102.5 93.7 24.5 171.0 168.3 604.2          Mar 
Big banks 7
457.4 204.1 253.2 618.1 352.1 111.6 85.6 61.5 62.7 61.4 6.0 138.2 97.2 569.8 2017          Feb 457.8 209.3 248.4 594.9 339.0 101.3 86.1 39.4 62.5 61.1 6.0 136.6 97.9 549.8          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
195.3 68.4 126.9 635.2 402.5 45.6 130.4 0.0 39.2 32.3 17.4 34.4 61.1 48.6 2017          Feb 191.3 62.2 129.1 638.1 405.8 45.1 130.5 0.0 39.5 32.3 17.3 34.1 62.2 46.4          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
239.7 176.2 63.5 157.7 104.9 24.4 26.6 − 0.5 0.2 1.2 0.3 8.4 8.3 2017          Feb 256.4 189.8 66.6 157.4 104.6 24.4 26.6 − 0.5 0.3 1.2 0.3 8.1 8.0          Mar 
Landesbanken
263.8 64.8 199.0 290.1 120.0 59.0 97.6 12.7 13.0 10.2 0.5 210.0 52.9 106.0 2017          Feb 269.8 61.9 207.9 294.6 117.7 64.3 99.2 15.2 12.9 10.0 0.5 210.1 53.3 105.5          Mar 
Savings banks
132.3 8.7 123.6 879.6 532.3 14.9 15.3 − 293.3 265.7 23.9 13.7 101.2 42.5 2017          Feb 134.8 7.9 127.0 876.2 530.2 14.9 15.1 − 292.6 265.5 23.4 13.7 101.4 43.1          Mar 
 
Credit cooperatives
 
106.6 2.1 104.5 636.1 394.5 32.0 15.5 − 187.2 175.0 6.9 7.5 68.9 32.4 2017          Feb 109.7 1.9 107.8 635.7 395.0 32.5 15.4 − 186.1 174.2 6.6 7.6 69.2 33.1          Mar 
Mortgage banks
51.6 5.4 46.2 110.8 7.8 7.8 95.2 − 0.1 0.1 . 91.4 10.0 10.8 2017          Feb 52.6 4.9 47.7 109.6 7.3 7.7 94.5 − 0.1 0.1 . 91.7 10.4 10.1          Mar 
Building and loan associations
24.7 4.2 20.4 170.2 1.0 1.2 167.5 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 2.2 10.2 13.2 2017          Feb 24.0 4.6 19.4 170.3 0.9 1.2 167.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 2.2 10.9 12.9          Mar 
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
348.3 88.1 260.2 101.7 31.2 8.5 60.4 2.2 − − . 653.3 78.1 99.4 2017          Feb 349.4 83.0 266.4 103.7 30.0 11.7 60.4 3.2 − − . 651.5 78.3 95.6          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
422.2 258.5 163.8 532.9 365.6 59.4 78.2 9.2 21.2 20.7 8.5 21.9 52.1 96.4 2017          Feb 442.1 267.2 174.9 536.6 369.6 59.6 77.7 9.7 21.2 20.7 8.5 22.1 52.5 93.8          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
182.5 82.2 100.2 375.2 260.7 35.0 51.5 9.2 20.7 20.4 7.3 21.6 43.6 88.2 2017          Feb 185.8 77.5 108.3 379.3 264.9 35.2 51.2 9.7 20.7 20.4 7.3 21.7 44.3 85.8          Mar 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories. and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs)
Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2007 17.5 64.6 1,751.8 1,222.5 0.0 25.3 504.0 2.3 2,975.7 2,647.9 1.6 1.5 324.7
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2015          Oct 16.2 140.0 1,421.3 1,100.0 0.0 2.1 319.1 1.6 3,232.0 2,764.6 0.3 1.5 465.6
         Nov 15.7 152.2 1,438.4 1,122.6 0.0 2.6 313.2 1.6 3,249.0 2,775.2 0.3 1.0 472.5         Dec 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016          Jan 16.2 170.9 1,368.7 1,086.0 0.0 2.0 280.8 1.6 3,238.7 2,771.0 0.4 0.7 466.5
         Feb 15.9 164.3 1,379.8 1,098.3 0.0 1.8 279.7 1.6 3,248.0 2,781.4 0.4 1.5 464.7         Mar 17.2 166.6 1,358.5 1,076.3 0.0 2.0 280.2 1.6 3,247.2 2,785.9 0.3 1.2 459.7
         Apr 16.9 179.8 1,392.1 1,110.3 0.0 2.1 279.7 1.6 3,260.6 2,798.3 0.4 1.3 460.6
         May 18.4 197.2 1,367.7 1,086.7 0.0 1.8 279.2 1.5 3,264.8 2,805.3 0.3 1.4 457.8         June 19.1 213.5 1,356.7 1,078.8 0.0 1.6 276.2 1.7 3,252.1 2,797.2 0.3 1.8 452.9
         July 19.4 233.0 1,349.1 1,074.3 0.0 1.3 273.4 1.7 3,264.5 2,806.4 0.3 1.7 456.1
         Aug 19.4 240.9 1,348.1 1,075.2 0.0 1.2 271.7 1.7 3,265.9 2,810.9 0.3 1.3 453.5         Sep 20.7 246.0 1,368.1 1,097.3 0.0 1.2 269.5 1.7 3,274.2 2,819.9 0.3 1.6 452.4
         Oct 22.6 258.7 1,360.3 1,090.2 0.0 1.4 268.7 1.7 3,281.0 2,828.6 0.2 1.6 450.6
         Nov 22.6 291.7 1,397.6 1,128.8 0.0 1.1 267.6 1.7 3,293.1 2,840.0 0.2 1.3 451.6         Dec 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017          Jan 24.3 346.9 1,407.0 1,142.5 0.0 1.0 263.5 1.7 3,277.7 2,831.2 0.3 0.8 445.4
         Feb 23.6 346.6 1,413.8 1,150.2 0.0 1.1 262.5 1.8 3,279.0 2,836.8 0.3 0.8 441.1         Mar 23.4 352.1 1,423.3 1,160.3 0.0 1.3 261.6 1.7 3,283.0 2,840.6 0.3 1.0 441.1
Changes *
2008 − 0.1 + 39.4 + 125.9 + 90.1 + 0.0 + 30.6 + 5.2 − 0.8 + 92.0 + 47.3 − 0.4 + 1.8 + 43.3
2009
− 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011
− 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2015          Oct + 0.7 + 0.1 + 36.6 + 40.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.5 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 7.2         Nov − 0.6 + 12.3 + 17.3 + 22.7 − + 0.5 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 6.9
         Dec + 3.6 + 2.8 − 91.8 − 59.9 − − 0.9 − 31.0 + 0.1 − 15.1 − 11.1 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.5
2016          Jan − 3.1 + 15.9 + 22.2 + 23.4 − + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 4.5 + 6.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 2.4
         Feb − 0.3 − 6.5 + 11.9 + 13.1 − − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 9.6 + 10.6 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 1.7
         Mar + 1.3 + 2.3 − 21.3 − 22.1 − + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.8 + 4.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 5.0
         Apr − 0.3 + 13.2 + 33.6 + 34.0 − + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.8
         May + 1.5 + 17.4 + 3.9 + 4.8 − − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 8.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 2.7
         June + 0.7 + 16.4 − 10.9 − 7.8 − − 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 11.9 − 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 5.0
         July + 0.4 + 19.4 − 7.6 − 4.5 − − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2
         Aug − 0.0 + 7.9 − 1.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 2.6
         Sep + 1.3 + 5.1 + 20.0 + 22.1 − + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 9.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.1
         Oct + 1.8 + 12.7 − 7.3 − 6.6 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.7
         Nov + 0.1 + 33.0 + 37.3 + 38.7 − − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 12.1 + 11.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0
         Dec + 3.1 − 7.7 − 32.7 − 29.0 − − 0.3 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 19.0 − 16.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.8
2017          Jan − 1.4 + 62.9 + 42.1 + 42.6 − + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 3.3 + 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.4
         Feb − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.8 + 7.7 − + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2
         Mar − 0.3 + 5.5 + 9.5 + 10.2 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims 
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 51.1 109.4 1,478.6 122.1 1,356.5 0.0 20.0 2,579.1 779.9 1,125.4 555.4 118.4 36.4 2007
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
− 24.7 91.9 1,096.4 150.5 945.8 0.0 10.6 3,197.7 1,655.5 890.2 594.6 57.5 29.5 2015          Oct 
− 24.5 92.0 1,108.0 158.2 949.7 0.0 10.5 3,224.8 1,676.9 896.7 594.3 56.8 29.5          Nov − 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3          Dec 
− 20.3 90.0 1,066.1 145.0 921.1 0.0 6.0 3,233.8 1,689.6 893.3 596.1 54.8 29.3 2016          Jan 
− 20.2 89.8 1,061.7 151.8 909.9 0.0 5.9 3,236.2 1,697.4 887.8 596.4 54.6 29.3          Feb − 19.9 90.3 1,058.6 147.9 910.7 0.0 5.9 3,231.2 1,687.4 894.9 594.5 54.4 29.1          Mar 
− 19.8 89.8 1,060.2 149.7 910.4 0.0 5.9 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 592.7 54.0 29.0          Apr 
− 19.7 89.9 1,026.8 142.0 884.7 0.0 5.8 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 591.2 53.7 29.0          May− 19.6 89.9 1,038.6 152.5 886.0 0.0 6.0 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 590.0 53.1 28.7          June
− 19.5 90.1 1,022.8 140.0 882.7 0.0 5.9 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 589.1 52.7 28.6          July
− 19.4 90.3 1,015.7 137.3 878.3 0.0 5.9 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 588.4 52.2 28.7          Aug − 19.3 89.8 1,028.7 132.1 896.6 0.0 5.8 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 587.2 51.8 28.6          Sep 
− 19.1 89.7 1,025.1 137.1 887.9 0.0 5.7 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 586.6 51.3 28.6          Oct 
− 19.1 89.3 1,041.1 145.9 895.1 0.0 5.6 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 586.2 50.9 28.6          Nov − 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8          Dec 
− 20.3 90.8 1,052.6 136.9 915.6 0.1 5.5 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 588.5 49.5 30.6 2017          Jan 
− 20.3 89.4 1,054.6 141.4 913.1 0.0 5.6 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 588.5 49.0 30.5          Feb − 20.1 89.1 1,077.0 137.4 939.6 0.0 5.5 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 586.7 48.2 30.4          Mar 
Changes *
− − 5.4 + 7.8 + 124.3 + 23.0 + 101.3 − 0.0 − 3.6 + 207.6 + 54.3 + 156.6 − 20.2 + 17.0 − 1.3 2008− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016
− − 0.2 − 0.1 + 20.3 − 2.6 + 22.9 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 10.9 + 24.8 − 13.3 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 2015          Oct 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 11.6 + 7.7 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 27.0 + 21.5 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.0          Nov − − 0.1 − 2.0 − 42.4 − 27.1 − 15.2 − − 0.1 − 0.0 − 3.2 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 − 0.2          Dec 
− − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 13.9 − 13.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 15.8 − 5.8 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.0 2016          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 0.2 − 3.1 + 7.0 − 10.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.8 + 7.9 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0          Feb − − 0.3 + 0.5 − 3.2 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 5.0 − 10.0 + 7.0 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.2          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          May− − 0.1 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 10.8 + 2.0 − + 0.2 − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3          June
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 15.8 − 12.5 − 3.3 − − 0.1 + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0          July
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 7.1 − 2.7 − 4.4 − − 0.0 + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.0 − 5.3 + 18.3 − − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0          Sep 
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 3.2 + 1.5 − 4.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 + 16.0 + 8.8 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 −          Nov − + 0.0 + 1.6 − 8.2 − 16.4 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2          Dec 
− + 1.2 − 0.2 + 19.7 + 7.4 + 12.3 − − 0.1 + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 2017          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 1.4 + 2.0 + 4.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 22.4 − 4.1 + 26.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1          Mar 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs)
Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2007 0.3 1,433.5 1,105.9 803.6 302.4 13.4 314.2 0.5 908.3 492.9 197.5 295.4 27.5 387.9
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2015          Oct 0.3 1,138.7 900.4 617.1 283.4 2.9 235.3 1.1 772.2 446.5 116.4 330.1 6.1 319.6
         Nov 0.3 1,112.9 873.2 598.4 274.8 2.8 237.0 1.1 784.8 450.0 103.7 346.4 6.9 327.9         Dec 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016          Jan 0.3 1,080.5 844.9 570.2 274.8 1.9 233.6 1.0 766.7 440.2 101.3 338.8 8.9 317.6
         Feb 0.3 1,095.3 854.5 580.2 274.3 3.1 237.8 1.0 765.9 445.3 102.6 342.7 10.2 310.3         Mar 0.3 1,057.4 816.6 551.7 264.9 3.0 237.8 1.0 754.4 427.1 87.9 339.2 9.1 318.2
         Apr 0.3 1,064.5 824.2 559.7 264.5 3.3 237.1 1.0 762.5 440.0 99.9 340.0 9.4 313.1
         May 0.3 1,063.5 825.4 554.4 271.0 3.5 234.6 1.0 766.3 439.7 94.3 345.4 8.9 317.7         June 0.3 1,091.2 851.1 580.7 270.4 3.6 236.4 1.0 758.7 435.5 89.4 346.1 6.4 316.8
         July 0.3 1,089.1 854.6 586.5 268.0 2.7 231.9 1.0 766.0 448.5 100.1 348.4 4.1 313.4
         Aug 0.3 1,081.5 848.6 577.9 270.7 2.5 230.4 1.0 765.4 450.3 99.9 350.4 5.1 310.0         Sep 0.3 1,046.8 806.0 535.5 270.5 2.5 238.4 1.0 751.0 444.0 93.6 350.4 4.7 302.3
         Oct 0.3 1,089.3 850.4 571.3 279.0 2.1 236.8 1.0 758.1 454.5 102.9 351.6 4.2 299.3
         Nov 0.3 1,074.3 837.9 541.7 296.2 1.7 234.7 1.0 765.2 459.4 103.6 355.9 5.5 300.3         Dec 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017          Jan 0.3 1,069.4 836.4 537.3 299.0 0.8 232.2 1.7 772.9 468.4 109.0 359.4 5.3 299.1
         Feb 0.3 1,088.4 854.7 552.1 302.6 1.3 232.5 1.7 782.0 474.4 110.6 363.8 6.2 301.3         Mar 0.3 1,086.7 854.7 548.7 306.0 2.2 229.8 1.7 777.5 475.7 110.9 364.9 4.1 297.7
Changes *
2008 + 0.0 + 8.5 + 20.2 − 43.0 + 63.2 + 2.1 − 13.7 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 45.1 − 31.9 + 77.0 − 14.5 − 26.3
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2015          Oct + 0.0 − 20.2 − 20.2 − 13.9 − 6.3 − 1.5 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 7.7 + 8.5 + 9.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.9
         Nov + 0.0 − 38.2 − 39.4 − 25.9 − 13.5 − 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 4.9 − 2.7 − 5.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 6.8         Dec − 0.0 − 36.7 − 33.4 − 37.5 + 4.1 − 1.6 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 27.1 − 20.7 − 18.9 − 1.9 + 0.8 − 7.2
2016          Jan − 0.0 + 16.1 + 16.8 + 15.6 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 18.2 + 18.2 + 18.6 − 0.4 + 1.3 − 1.3
         Feb + 0.0 + 14.9 + 9.6 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 2.1 + 3.7 + 1.1 − 7.1
         Mar − 0.0 − 26.3 − 26.5 − 22.8 − 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 12.2 − 13.6 + 1.3 − 0.9 + 9.3
         Apr − 0.0 + 6.6 + 7.0 + 7.6 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 7.5 + 12.7 + 11.9 + 0.7 + 0.1 − 5.3
         May + 0.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 7.9 + 4.6 + 0.2 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 2.7 − 4.6 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 3.9         June + 0.0 + 28.8 + 26.7 + 26.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 − 0.0 − 5.5 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.4 − 2.8 + 0.1
         July − 0.0 − 1.0 + 4.4 + 6.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 8.0 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 2.3 − 3.3
         Aug + 0.0 − 6.7 − 5.0 − 8.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 − 3.3
         Sep − 0.0 − 44.3 − 42.2 − 42.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 5.3 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 2.5
         Oct − 0.0 + 38.4 + 40.6 + 34.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 9.0 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.1
         Nov + 0.0 − 25.6 − 22.6 − 35.0 + 12.3 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1
         Dec + 0.0 − 20.7 − 19.9 − 23.1 + 3.2 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 10.7 − 9.1 − 13.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 1.2
2017          Jan + 0.0 + 18.9 + 21.1 + 19.8 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 19.9 + 19.5 + 19.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Feb − 0.0 + 14.0 + 13.5 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.8
         Mar − 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 1.0 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 4.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
5.7 48.3 738.9 164.7 574.1 461.2 113.0 0.2 303.1 76.0 227.1 122.3 104.8 3.1 2007
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
13.5 35.2 656.9 362.9 294.0 212.7 81.3 0.1 243.4 134.6 108.8 56.6 52.3 0.8 2015          Oct 
13.6 34.8 649.0 373.8 275.2 190.5 84.6 0.1 243.2 136.3 106.9 55.7 51.2 0.8          Nov 13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7          Dec 
13.2 29.6 637.8 352.2 285.7 201.3 84.3 0.1 237.7 129.1 108.6 60.5 48.2 0.8 2016          Jan 
13.2 29.0 644.4 357.8 286.6 201.8 84.8 0.1 246.4 137.2 109.2 61.8 47.5 0.8          Feb 13.3 28.9 623.4 349.6 273.8 192.0 81.8 0.0 218.8 119.8 99.0 52.9 46.1 0.8          Mar 
13.3 28.9 658.0 344.2 313.8 234.1 79.6 0.0 233.6 126.9 106.7 62.0 44.8 0.8          Apr 
13.3 28.9 664.6 389.5 275.1 195.6 79.5 0.0 239.7 130.6 109.0 64.2 44.8 0.7          May13.1 29.2 679.1 397.7 281.4 203.4 77.9 0.0 235.5 132.8 102.7 57.2 45.5 0.7          June
13.1 29.4 706.1 408.3 297.8 217.9 80.0 0.0 244.0 129.1 114.9 68.2 46.6 0.7          July
13.1 29.4 701.3 398.5 302.8 220.1 82.7 0.0 248.3 127.3 121.0 74.9 46.1 0.7          Aug 13.1 29.4 679.5 366.0 313.5 231.3 82.2 0.0 233.3 124.6 108.7 62.0 46.7 0.7          Sep 
13.2 28.8 692.7 398.6 294.1 211.9 82.2 0.0 266.3 146.2 120.1 72.0 48.1 0.7          Oct 
13.2 28.9 703.9 416.7 287.2 203.2 84.0 0.0 266.2 138.3 128.0 79.1 48.9 0.7          Nov 13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7          Dec 
13.0 28.4 746.1 452.6 293.5 206.4 87.1 0.0 246.7 125.6 121.1 71.1 50.0 0.7 2017          Jan 
13.0 24.8 765.2 480.7 284.5 197.4 87.1 0.0 254.0 129.5 124.5 74.8 49.7 0.7          Feb 12.9 24.7 768.8 488.1 280.7 192.1 88.6 0.0 237.6 113.7 123.9 72.2 51.7 0.7          Mar 
Changes *
+ 0.7 − 3.1 − 50.1 + 52.2 − 102.3 − 120.7 + 18.5 + 0.1 − 12.4 + 16.1 − 28.5 − 19.4 − 9.1 − 0.6 2008− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016
− 0.2 − 0.1 − 18.2 + 15.2 − 33.4 − 33.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.8 + 2.0 + 3.1 − 1.1 − 0.2 2015          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.5 − 14.3 + 8.4 − 22.7 − 25.2 + 2.5 − − 2.3 + 0.6 − 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.6 + 0.1          Nov − 0.2 − 4.3 − 32.0 − 48.3 + 16.4 + 15.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 40.4 − 32.6 − 7.9 − 6.0 − 1.9 − 0.1          Dec 
+ 0.1 − 0.9 + 27.6 + 29.5 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.2 − + 36.9 + 26.4 + 10.6 + 11.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 2016          Jan 
+ 0.0 − 0.4 + 6.2 + 5.1 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.3 − + 8.9 + 8.3 + 0.6 + 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.0          Feb + 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.0 − 5.4 − 8.6 − 6.7 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 25.6 − 16.5 − 9.1 − 7.9 − 1.2 + 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 − 5.7 + 39.9 + 40.6 − 0.7 − + 14.7 + 7.1 + 7.6 + 9.1 − 1.4 − 0.0          Apr 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 44.1 − 41.3 − 40.6 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 3.3 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.2 − 0.1          May− 0.2 + 0.3 + 16.8 + 9.4 + 7.4 + 7.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 4.5 + 2.2 − 6.8 − 7.3 + 0.5 + 0.0          June
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.8 + 11.0 + 16.8 + 14.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.5 − 3.8 + 12.3 + 11.5 + 0.8 − 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 9.5 + 5.2 + 2.4 + 2.8 − + 4.5 − 1.7 + 6.2 + 6.7 − 0.5 − 0.1          Aug + 0.0 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 32.3 + 11.1 + 11.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 14.8 − 2.7 − 12.1 − 12.7 + 0.7 − 0.0          Sep 
+ 0.1 − 0.6 + 11.1 + 31.7 − 20.5 − 20.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 32.5 + 21.4 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 1.3 + 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 15.8 − 10.9 − 12.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 6.9 + 6.4 + 0.4 + 0.0          Nov − 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.2 − 42.7 + 33.5 + 30.2 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 60.5 − 38.2 − 22.3 − 24.1 + 1.8 + 0.0          Dec 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 52.9 + 79.0 − 26.1 − 26.2 + 0.1 − + 41.2 + 25.6 + 15.6 + 16.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2017          Jan 
− 0.1 − 3.6 + 15.9 + 26.6 − 10.7 − 10.3 − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          Feb − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 8.3 − 2.8 − 4.5 + 1.7 − − 16.0 − 15.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 + 2.1 − 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic
Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2007 2,975.7 2,649.5 331.2 301.8 301.5 0.3 29.4 28.2 1.2 2,644.6 2,168.3
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2015          Oct 3,232.0 2,764.9 268.0 212.4 211.7 0.7 55.6 54.8 0.8 2,964.0 2,433.8
         Nov 3,249.0 2,775.5 264.2 212.9 212.3 0.6 51.3 50.9 0.4 2,984.8 2,451.1
         Dec 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016          Jan 3,238.7 2,771.4 259.0 208.1 207.7 0.4 50.9 50.5 0.3 2,979.7 2,452.5
         Feb 3,248.0 2,781.8 266.3 214.3 213.6 0.7 52.0 51.2 0.8 2,981.7 2,456.1
         Mar 3,247.2 2,786.3 271.4 218.7 217.9 0.8 52.6 52.2 0.4 2,975.9 2,454.1
         Apr 3,260.6 2,798.7 273.9 217.9 217.2 0.8 56.0 55.5 0.5 2,986.6 2,466.5
         May 3,264.8 2,805.6 276.1 221.2 220.4 0.8 55.0 54.4 0.6 2,988.7 2,472.7
         June 3,252.1 2,797.5 268.8 217.8 216.8 1.1 51.0 50.3 0.7 2,983.3 2,472.8
         July 3,264.5 2,806.6 268.8 213.8 212.9 1.0 55.0 54.2 0.7 2,995.6 2,483.9
         Aug 3,265.9 2,811.2 262.2 208.1 207.5 0.6 54.1 53.4 0.7 3,003.8 2,497.1
         Sep 3,274.2 2,820.2 268.7 214.2 213.7 0.5 54.5 53.4 1.1 3,005.4 2,502.7
         Oct 3,281.0 2,828.8 269.7 212.6 212.0 0.6 57.1 56.1 1.0 3,011.3 2,512.3
         Nov 3,293.1 2,840.2 268.0 216.3 215.8 0.5 51.7 51.0 0.8 3,025.0 2,525.5
         Dec 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017          Jan 3,277.7 2,831.5 252.1 208.6 208.0 0.6 43.5 43.3 0.2 3,025.6 2,535.3
         Feb 3,279.0 2,837.1 252.8 209.7 209.1 0.7 43.1 42.9 0.1 3,026.2 2,541.5
         Mar 3,283.0 2,840.9 252.7 212.6 211.8 0.8 40.0 39.8 0.2 3,030.4 2,547.5
Changes *
2008 + 92.0 + 46.9 + 43.1 + 36.8 + 34.9 + 1.8 + 6.3 + 6.3 − 0.0 + 48.9 + 83.4
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2015          Oct + 1.2 + 8.6 − 3.8 − 6.0 − 5.9 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.2 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 5.7
         Nov + 16.7 + 10.3 − 0.9 + 3.4 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 3.9 − 0.4 + 17.6 + 14.1
         Dec − 15.1 − 11.0 − 8.6 − 5.1 − 4.7 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 6.5 + 0.3
2016          Jan + 4.5 + 6.7 + 3.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.1
         Feb + 9.6 + 10.5 + 7.6 + 6.4 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.6
         Mar − 0.8 + 4.5 + 5.3 + 4.7 + 4.6 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.4 − 6.0 − 2.2
         Apr + 13.3 + 12.4 + 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 0.1 + 10.7 + 12.3
         May + 5.7 + 8.3 + 2.2 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 7.7
         June − 11.9 − 7.3 − 6.5 − 2.5 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 5.4 + 0.2
         July + 13.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0
         Aug + 1.5 + 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.2 + 13.2
         Sep + 8.2 + 9.0 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 5.5
         Oct + 7.0 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 9.4
         Nov + 12.1 + 11.4 − 1.7 + 3.7 + 3.8 − 0.1 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 + 13.7 + 13.0
         Dec − 19.0 − 16.2 − 19.0 − 10.1 − 9.9 − 0.2 − 8.9 − 8.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.8
2017          Jan + 3.3 + 7.3 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 5.3
         Feb + 1.4 + 5.6 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 6.2
         Mar + 3.9 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 5.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
lending
prises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities 
1 claims 2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
1,987.3 207.7 1,779.6 181.1 46.5 476.2 332.5 31.9 300.6 143.7 − 4.7 2007
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 2016
2,220.0 253.2 1,966.8 213.8 22.7 530.2 278.5 29.3 249.2 251.8 − 2.0 2015          Oct 
2,233.7 256.1 1,977.6 217.4 22.5 533.8 278.6 28.1 250.5 255.1 − 2.0          Nov 
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1          Dec 
2,235.3 257.1 1,978.3 217.2 18.2 527.2 277.8 27.7 250.1 249.4 − 2.1 2016          Jan 
2,240.2 257.4 1,982.8 215.9 18.0 525.6 276.8 27.7 249.1 248.8 − 2.1          Feb 2,240.5 257.3 1,983.2 213.5 17.9 521.8 275.6 27.5 248.1 246.2 − 2.0          Mar 
2,249.9 258.6 1,991.3 216.6 17.8 520.1 276.1 27.5 248.7 244.0 − 2.0          Apr 
2,255.8 258.0 1,997.8 216.9 17.7 516.0 275.1 27.1 247.9 240.9 − 2.0          May2,256.9 258.7 1,998.2 216.0 17.8 510.4 273.5 26.9 246.6 236.9 − 1.8          June
2,266.8 258.5 2,008.2 217.1 17.7 511.7 272.7 25.9 246.8 239.0 − 1.8          July
2,278.8 260.6 2,018.1 218.4 17.6 506.6 271.5 25.9 245.6 235.1 − 1.8          Aug 2,283.5 261.0 2,022.5 219.3 17.5 502.7 269.6 25.4 244.2 233.1 − 1.8          Sep 
2,290.5 261.5 2,029.0 221.8 17.3 498.9 270.2 24.4 245.7 228.8 − 1.8          Oct 
2,302.5 264.0 2,038.5 223.0 17.3 499.5 270.9 24.3 246.6 228.6 − 1.8          Nov 2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8          Dec 
2,311.3 264.5 2,046.8 224.0 18.6 490.3 268.9 24.2 244.7 221.4 − 1.7 2017          Jan 
2,316.5 263.2 2,053.3 225.1 18.5 484.7 268.6 25.0 243.7 216.1 − 1.7          Feb 2,322.0 264.4 2,057.6 225.5 18.4 482.9 267.3 24.6 242.7 215.6 − 1.7          Mar 
Changes *
+ 28.8 + 12.0 + 16.8 + 54.7 − 5.3 − 34.5 − 23.2 − 2.3 − 20.8 − 11.4 − − 0.1 2008
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016
+ 11.6 + 1.9 + 9.7 − 5.9 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 − − 0.0 2015          Oct 
+ 10.5 + 2.0 + 8.6 + 3.6 − 0.2 + 3.5 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.3 + 3.4 − −          Nov 
− 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 6.8 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 1.5 − 5.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 3.0 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.6 − + 0.0 2016          Jan 
+ 4.8 + 1.0 + 3.7 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.6 − + 0.0          Feb 
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 2.6 − − 0.1          Mar 
+ 9.2 + 1.2 + 8.0 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 2.2 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 7.4 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 4.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 3.1 − − 0.0          May
+ 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 5.6 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 1.4 − 4.0 − − 0.2          June
+ 10.8 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 2.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 12.0 + 2.1 + 9.9 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − − 0.0          Aug 
+ 4.6 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 2.0 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 6.8 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.7 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 11.9 + 2.4 + 9.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0          Nov 
+ 3.4 − 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 4.8 + 0.3 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 5.0 − − 0.0 2017          Jan 
+ 5.1 − 1.3 + 6.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 5.3 − − 0.0          Feb 
+ 5.5 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − − 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2015 2,440.0 1,253.3 1,230.2 1,010.4 219.8 1,314.2 339.6 127.4 100.9 60.5 125.2 50.0 65.3 130.5
2016          Mar 2,458.5 1,227.2 1,235.2 987.0 248.2 1,328.6 342.5 133.3 101.9 62.2 126.6 50.1 62.6 131.6
         June 2,473.6 1,235.1 1,248.0 996.2 251.8 1,332.0 345.8 131.5 101.7 62.7 125.4 50.9 59.0 133.7         Sep 2,497.2 1,248.2 1,264.5 1,007.6 256.9 1,341.1 350.5 130.3 103.0 63.2 126.9 51.2 57.4 136.4         Dec 2,512.0 1,259.7 1,276.6 1,016.5 260.1 1,347.5 354.1 125.1 104.7 62.2 128.2 50.6 57.0 139.7
2017          Mar 2,533.8 1,267.0 1,283.2 1,022.4 260.8 1,364.4 356.6 129.4 105.2 66.9 131.5 50.5 55.9 141.0
 Short-term lending
2015 207.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 173.8 4.3 33.7 4.7 11.5 42.0 3.9 5.3 24.1
2016          Mar 218.0 − 7.7 − 7.7 185.1 4.1 39.4 4.9 13.0 43.6 4.0 5.3 24.6
         June 216.8 − 7.9 − 7.9 184.7 4.3 37.0 4.7 13.1 42.1 4.2 5.1 27.2         Sep 213.8 − 7.6 − 7.6 181.6 4.1 34.3 4.6 13.0 42.6 4.1 4.7 28.5         Dec 205.5 − 6.9 − 6.9 174.3 3.7 29.7 4.4 11.8 43.2 3.6 4.4 29.3
2017          Mar 211.8 − 6.9 − 6.9 181.3 3.7 33.6 4.5 13.6 44.8 3.8 4.2 28.6
 Medium-term lending
2015 256.0 − 35.2 − 35.2 181.3 13.3 23.8 5.1 10.4 16.4 4.4 11.7 41.1
2016          Mar 257.3 − 34.8 − 34.8 181.8 13.2 23.9 5.1 10.4 16.2 4.5 11.5 41.2
         June 258.7 − 34.7 − 34.7 182.1 13.2 23.7 5.1 10.5 16.6 4.5 11.1 40.4         Sep 261.0 − 34.8 − 34.8 183.4 13.4 24.3 5.7 10.5 16.5 4.6 11.0 41.1         Dec 264.1 − 34.5 − 34.5 186.4 13.5 23.6 5.5 10.5 17.2 4.5 11.2 41.8
2017          Mar 264.4 − 34.0 − 34.0 186.8 13.4 23.3 4.9 11.4 17.9 4.4 10.8 43.0
 Long-term lending
2015 1,976.3 1,253.3 1,186.4 1,010.4 176.0 959.1 322.0 70.0 91.2 38.5 66.9 41.7 48.3 65.3
2016          Mar 1,983.2 1,227.2 1,192.7 987.0 205.7 961.7 325.3 70.1 91.9 38.8 66.8 41.7 45.8 65.8
         June 1,998.2 1,235.1 1,205.5 996.2 209.3 965.3 328.3 70.7 91.9 39.1 66.8 42.1 42.8 66.0         Sep 2,022.5 1,248.2 1,222.1 1,007.6 214.5 976.1 332.9 71.7 92.7 39.7 67.8 42.4 41.6 66.9         Dec 2,042.4 1,259.7 1,235.1 1,016.5 218.6 986.8 336.9 71.8 94.8 39.9 67.7 42.5 41.4 68.6
2017          Mar 2,057.6 1,267.0 1,242.4 1,022.4 220.0 996.2 339.6 72.5 95.8 41.9 68.7 42.3 40.9 69.4
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2016          Q1 + 18.5 + 3.5 + 5.5 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 14.1 + 2.9 + 5.9 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 2.8 + 1.0
         Q2 + 17.4 + 7.0 + 12.9 + 8.9 + 4.0 + 5.7 + 3.4 − 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 3.7 + 3.3         Q3 + 24.5 + 12.4 + 16.0 + 10.9 + 5.1 + 10.2 + 4.2 − 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.3 − 1.6 + 2.7         Q4 + 14.4 + 9.1 + 12.4 + 8.4 + 4.0 + 6.0 + 3.8 − 5.2 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 3.2
2017          Q1 + 21.7 + 7.3 + 6.6 + 5.8 + 0.7 + 16.8 + 2.6 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 4.7 + 3.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.2
 Short-term lending
2016          Q1 + 10.6 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 11.4 − 0.0 + 5.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.4
         Q2 − 0.4 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.6         Q3 − 2.9 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3         Q4 − 7.6 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 − 6.6 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9
2017          Q1 + 6.3 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.7
 Medium-term lending
2016          Q1 + 1.4 − − 0.4 − − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Q2 + 2.7 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3         Q3 + 3.2 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.4 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.6         Q4 + 2.4 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7
2017          Q1 + 0.2 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.1
 Long-term lending
2016          Q1 + 6.5 + 3.5 + 6.1 + 5.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.6
         Q2 + 15.1 + 7.0 + 12.9 + 8.9 + 4.1 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 3.1 + 0.4         Q3 + 24.2 + 12.4 + 16.2 + 10.9 + 5.3 + 10.7 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.8         Q4 + 19.6 + 9.1 + 13.3 + 8.4 + 4.9 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.6
2017          Q1 + 15.1 + 7.3 + 7.2 + 5.8 + 1.4 + 9.4 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.8
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 
 
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debitbalanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans 
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons 2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
654.3 193.4 32.4 176.5 395.6 46.8 1,111.6 887.1 224.6 154.4 10.1 14.2 3.5 2015
660.2 194.8 34.4 177.4 397.2 47.1 1,115.9 889.2 226.6 156.8 10.3 14.1 3.4 2016          Mar 
667.2 198.4 34.6 178.1 399.4 46.9 1,127.6 898.7 228.9 159.6 9.8 14.0 3.5          June672.7 201.4 34.8 180.8 401.1 46.8 1,142.0 910.5 231.5 162.3 9.8 14.2 3.5          Sep 680.0 204.7 36.3 181.6 401.3 46.0 1,150.1 919.0 231.2 163.3 9.2 14.4 3.6          Dec 
684.0 206.2 38.8 179.7 403.8 46.3 1,154.8 922.9 231.9 165.5 9.2 14.6 3.7 2017          Mar 
Short-term lending
48.7 8.7 4.9 10.7 25.4 5.6 33.2 4.2 29.0 1.7 10.1 0.5 0.0 2015
50.3 8.1 6.5 10.5 25.6 6.2 32.4 3.7 28.7 1.8 10.3 0.5 0.0 2016          Mar 
51.2 8.6 6.1 10.7 25.5 5.9 31.6 3.6 28.1 1.8 9.8 0.5 0.0          June49.9 8.5 5.9 11.1 24.7 5.7 31.6 3.4 28.2 1.7 9.8 0.5 0.0          Sep 47.9 8.4 5.7 10.2 23.9 5.1 30.6 3.2 27.4 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0          Dec 
48.2 8.4 6.6 9.1 24.5 5.7 29.8 3.2 26.7 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 2017          Mar 
Medium-term lending
68.4 10.1 7.3 19.3 32.4 3.5 74.2 21.9 52.3 47.4 − 0.6 0.0 2015
69.1 10.1 7.2 19.4 32.7 3.5 74.9 21.5 53.3 48.1 − 0.6 0.0 2016          Mar 
70.1 10.6 7.3 19.0 33.0 3.6 76.0 21.4 54.6 49.3 − 0.6 0.0          June
69.7 10.7 7.3 18.9 33.0 3.7 77.1 21.4 55.7 50.3 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 
72.1 11.1 8.2 19.3 32.9 3.6 77.3 21.1 56.2 51.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec 
71.1 11.3 8.6 17.8 32.7 3.6 77.1 20.6 56.5 51.7 − 0.5 0.0 2017          Mar 
Long-term lending
537.3 174.6 20.2 146.5 337.8 37.7 1,004.2 861.0 143.3 105.3 − 13.0 3.5 2015
540.8 176.7 20.7 147.6 338.9 37.4 1,008.6 864.0 144.6 106.9 − 13.0 3.4 2016          Mar 
545.8 179.2 21.2 148.5 340.9 37.4 1,019.9 873.7 146.2 108.6 − 13.0 3.4          June
553.1 182.1 21.6 150.8 343.4 37.4 1,033.3 885.7 147.6 110.2 − 13.1 3.5          Sep 
560.0 185.2 22.4 152.2 344.5 37.3 1,042.3 894.7 147.6 110.5 − 13.3 3.5          Dec 
564.7 186.5 23.6 152.7 346.5 37.1 1,047.9 899.2 148.8 112.1 − 13.4 3.7 2017          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 6.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 4.4 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 7.3 + 3.1 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 11.8 + 9.5 + 2.3 + 2.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 6.4 + 2.7 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 1.7 − 0.1 + 14.1 + 11.8 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3+ 7.1 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 8.2 + 8.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0          Q4
+ 4.1 + 1.4 + 2.3 − 1.9 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 4.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2017          Q1
Short-term lending
+ 2.1 − 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 1.0 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 −          Q2− 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2017          Q1
Medium-term lending
+ 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.2 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
− 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2017          Q1
Long-term lending
+ 3.2 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2016          Q1
+ 5.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 11.4 + 9.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
+ 7.4 + 2.5 + 0.4 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q3
+ 6.8 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 4.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2017          Q1
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2014 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 257.0 669.7 29.4 640.3 607.8 66.0 30.9 26.2 1.7
2015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.52016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2016          Apr 3,249.8 1,709.6 893.5 235.9 657.7 42.2 615.5 592.7 54.0 29.0 19.7 1.7
         May 3,262.7 1,721.8 896.1 237.7 658.3 41.9 616.5 591.2 53.7 29.0 19.6 1.5         June 3,259.9 1,722.6 894.1 235.9 658.2 42.8 615.4 590.0 53.1 28.7 19.5 1.5
         July 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 238.0 658.8 44.5 614.3 589.1 52.7 28.6 19.3 1.0
         Aug 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 234.7 658.3 45.0 613.3 588.4 52.2 28.7 19.0 0.7         Sep 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 239.5 657.2 45.5 611.7 587.2 51.8 28.6 18.8 1.3
         Oct 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 229.9 658.8 45.8 613.1 586.6 51.3 28.6 18.7 1.1
         Nov 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 233.6 658.8 46.5 612.4 586.2 50.9 28.6 18.6 0.8         Dec 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2017          Jan 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 241.0 654.9 46.8 608.0 588.5 49.5 30.6 18.1 2.5
         Feb 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 237.3 654.1 46.5 607.6 588.5 49.0 30.5 17.6 1.5         Mar 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 237.8 653.1 47.8 605.3 586.7 48.2 30.4 17.2 0.9
Changes*
2015 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 13.6 − 14.7 + 7.6 − 22.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 − 5.7 − 1.2
2016 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 8.9 + 2.0 + 10.2 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.3
2016          Apr + 18.6 + 22.2 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 0.8 − 1.7 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
         May + 12.9 + 12.2 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 0.7 − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2         June − 2.5 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0
         July + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 + 2.1 + 0.6 + 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5
         Aug + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 3.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3         Sep + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.7 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7
         Oct + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 9.5 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Nov + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − − 0.2 − 0.3         Dec − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.8 − 2.0 + 0.5 − 2.5 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
2017          Jan + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 + 8.6 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.7
         Feb − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1         Mar − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.6
Domestic government End of year or month*
2014 186.7 52.4 128.2 84.5 43.7 7.5 36.2 3.8 2.3 29.1 4.8 0.5
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2016          Apr 196.0 60.8 127.7 79.9 47.8 11.0 36.9 3.7 3.7 27.6 2.6 1.3
         May 204.3 63.5 133.0 84.4 48.6 11.2 37.4 3.8 4.0 27.6 2.6 1.1
         June 204.0 62.1 134.0 84.6 49.4 11.6 37.8 3.9 4.0 27.3 2.6 0.2
         July 203.8 60.1 135.8 84.5 51.3 13.3 38.0 3.9 4.1 27.2 2.6 0.2
         Aug 206.1 62.4 135.6 83.6 52.1 13.7 38.4 4.0 4.1 27.3 2.6 0.0
         Sep 202.6 59.6 134.8 82.4 52.4 14.1 38.3 3.9 4.3 27.2 2.7 0.2
         Oct 199.1 58.8 132.1 78.9 53.2 14.9 38.3 3.9 4.3 27.2 2.7 −
         Nov 207.0 61.7 137.0 82.6 54.4 16.2 38.3 3.9 4.4 27.2 2.6 −
         Dec 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2017          Jan 202.2 55.1 138.7 84.7 54.1 16.4 37.7 3.8 4.5 26.7 2.5 −
         Feb 205.7 61.4 136.0 81.8 54.2 15.8 38.4 3.7 4.6 26.8 2.5 −
         Mar 204.0 58.9 136.8 81.4 55.4 16.5 38.9 3.7 4.7 26.7 2.5 −
Changes*
2015 + 10.1 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 0.8 + 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 1.2 − 2.1 + 0.1
2016 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.7 + 8.7 + 6.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.5
2016          Apr − 2.3 + 0.4 − 2.8 − 4.3 + 1.5 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1
         May + 8.2 + 2.6 + 5.2 + 4.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2         June − 0.2 − 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.9
         July − 0.2 − 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug + 2.1 + 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1         Sep − 3.8 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
         Oct − 3.5 − 0.8 − 2.7 − 3.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2
         Nov + 7.8 + 2.9 + 5.0 + 3.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −         Dec − 7.2 − 3.8 − 3.5 − 2.5 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
2017          Jan + 2.4 − 2.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 −
         Feb + 3.5 + 6.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar − 1.7 − 2.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits 3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2014 2,931.5 1,465.4 798.4 172.5 625.9 21.8 604.1 604.0 63.7 1.8 21.5 1.2
2015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
2016          Apr 3,053.8 1,648.8 765.8 156.0 609.8 31.2 578.6 589.0 50.3 1.4 17.1 0.3
         May 3,058.5 1,658.3 763.1 153.3 609.7 30.7 579.0 587.4 49.7 1.4 17.0 0.4         June 3,055.9 1,660.5 760.1 151.3 608.8 31.2 577.6 586.2 49.1 1.4 16.9 1.2
         July 3,071.8 1,677.0 761.1 153.6 607.5 31.2 576.3 585.2 48.6 1.4 16.7 0.8
         Aug 3,076.0 1,686.1 757.4 151.1 606.3 31.4 574.9 584.4 48.1 1.4 16.4 0.6         Sep 3,081.1 1,688.4 761.8 157.0 604.8 31.4 573.3 583.2 47.6 1.4 16.1 1.2
         Oct 3,095.6 1,709.2 756.7 151.1 605.6 30.9 574.8 582.7 47.0 1.4 16.0 1.1
         Nov 3,121.9 1,737.6 755.5 151.1 604.4 30.3 574.1 582.3 46.5 1.5 15.9 0.8         Dec 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
2017          Jan 3,144.2 1,757.4 757.1 156.3 600.8 30.4 570.3 584.7 45.0 3.8 15.6 2.5
         Feb 3,139.8 1,755.2 755.4 155.5 599.9 30.6 569.2 584.8 44.4 3.7 15.1 1.5         Mar 3,138.8 1,758.1 754.1 156.3 597.8 31.3 566.4 583.0 43.6 3.7 14.8 0.9
Changes*
2015 + 96.4 + 151.0 − 32.0 − 16.5 − 15.4 + 5.1 − 20.6 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 0.4 − 3.7 − 1.2
2016 + 101.7 + 124.2 − 8.9 − 2.2 − 6.7 + 3.8 − 10.5 − 8.0 − 5.7 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.9
2016          Apr + 20.9 + 21.8 + 1.4 + 3.8 − 2.3 + 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
         May + 4.8 + 9.6 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0         June − 2.2 + 2.3 − 2.8 − 1.8 − 1.0 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.9
         July + 15.9 + 16.4 + 1.0 + 2.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
         Aug + 4.3 + 9.1 − 3.5 − 2.4 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2         Sep + 5.4 + 2.3 + 4.6 + 5.9 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5
         Oct + 14.5 + 20.8 − 5.1 − 6.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov + 26.4 + 28.4 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3         Dec + 5.0 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 1.7 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1
2017          Jan + 17.2 + 17.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 1.7
         Feb − 4.3 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1         Mar − 1.0 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 2.1 + 0.7 − 2.8 − 1.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2014 1,007.9 457.1 529.1 104.1 425.0 10.4 414.6 6.9 14.9 1.8 16.4 1.2
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
2016          Apr 1,032.3 506.7 505.1 101.3 403.8 17.5 386.4 7.2 13.2 1.3 13.7 0.3
         May 1,035.5 513.4 501.5 98.2 403.3 17.0 386.3 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.7 0.4
         June 1,027.4 508.9 498.0 95.7 402.2 17.6 384.7 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.7 1.2
         July 1,027.0 506.7 499.6 98.2 401.4 17.5 384.0 7.4 13.4 1.3 13.6 0.8
         Aug 1,030.7 512.7 497.2 96.9 400.2 17.7 382.5 7.4 13.4 1.3 13.3 0.6
         Sep 1,035.0 512.9 501.4 103.0 398.4 17.8 380.7 7.3 13.4 1.3 13.1 1.2
         Oct 1,040.1 523.5 496.0 96.5 399.5 17.2 382.2 7.3 13.3 1.3 13.1 1.1
         Nov 1,043.0 527.1 495.6 96.6 399.0 17.0 382.0 6.9 13.3 1.3 13.0 0.8
         Dec 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
2017          Jan 1,048.4 532.9 495.6 102.1 393.6 17.6 376.0 6.9 13.0 2.9 12.8 2.5
         Feb 1,033.8 520.4 493.6 100.5 393.1 18.0 375.1 6.8 13.0 2.8 12.4 1.5
         Mar 1,034.5 522.7 492.1 101.3 390.8 18.4 372.4 6.8 12.9 2.8 12.1 0.9
Changes*
2015 + 22.7 + 46.0 − 22.1 − 3.8 − 18.3 + 3.7 − 22.0 + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.2
2016 + 4.6 + 15.9 − 11.2 − 1.2 − 10.1 + 3.2 − 13.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.9
2016          Apr + 2.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 3.3 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.3 + 6.8 − 3.6 − 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0         June − 7.8 − 4.4 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 + 0.5 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.9
         July − 0.1 − 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Aug + 3.8 + 6.0 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2         Sep + 4.7 + 0.2 + 4.4 + 6.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.5
         Oct + 5.0 + 10.6 − 5.4 − 6.5 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 3.0 + 3.6 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3         Dec − 10.6 − 8.8 − 1.5 + 1.7 − 3.2 + 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1
2017          Jan + 16.0 + 14.6 + 1.6 + 3.8 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 2.4 − − 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.7
         Feb − 14.2 − 12.6 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1         Mar + 0.7 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 2.4 + 0.4 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits
Time deposits 1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2014 1,923.6 1,008.3 980.1 173.3 673.0 133.8 28.2 269.3 254.7 27.8 185.0 41.8
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.6
2016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2016          Oct 2,055.5 1,185.7 1,150.8 202.8 800.4 147.6 34.9 260.7 247.0 24.9 181.0 41.0
         Nov 2,078.9 1,210.5 1,175.6 203.9 821.4 150.3 34.9 259.9 246.7 24.8 180.7 41.2
         Dec 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2017          Jan 2,095.7 1,224.5 1,189.6 211.3 828.3 150.0 34.9 261.5 248.0 24.9 181.8 41.3
         Feb 2,106.0 1,234.9 1,199.9 212.0 837.0 150.9 34.9 261.8 247.2 24.6 181.5 41.1
         Mar 2,104.3 1,235.4 1,200.2 208.2 841.4 150.5 35.2 262.1 247.1 25.1 181.5 40.5
Changes*
2015 + 73.7 + 105.0 + 101.1 + 15.6 + 75.4 + 10.1 + 3.9 − 9.9 − 8.1 − 3.0 − 4.5 − 0.7
2016 + 97.1 + 108.4 + 105.3 + 17.5 + 78.7 + 9.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.3
2016          Oct + 9.5 + 10.2 + 10.5 + 4.4 + 5.3 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1
         Nov + 23.4 + 24.8 + 24.8 + 1.7 + 20.9 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2
         Dec + 15.6 + 11.5 + 11.2 + 2.0 + 7.2 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.4
2017          Jan + 1.2 + 2.5 + 2.7 + 5.3 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2
         Feb + 9.9 + 10.4 + 10.3 + 0.7 + 8.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Mar − 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 3.7 + 4.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2014 186.7 10.5 2.6 2.4 5.5 0.1 14.6 40.2 13.4 10.4 15.8 0.7 14.1
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.5
2016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2016          Oct 199.1 7.6 3.6 1.4 2.5 0.1 13.8 49.9 14.4 17.1 17.4 1.0 13.0
         Nov 207.0 8.2 4.5 1.3 2.3 0.1 13.8 46.8 13.2 14.9 17.5 1.1 13.0
         Dec 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2017          Jan 202.2 6.9 3.5 1.1 2.2 0.1 13.5 48.7 13.3 17.7 16.6 1.1 12.8
         Feb 205.7 7.7 3.6 1.6 2.3 0.1 13.6 49.0 13.5 17.9 16.6 1.0 12.9
         Mar 204.0 7.9 3.6 1.9 2.3 0.1 13.5 51.0 13.4 20.0 16.6 1.0 12.8
Changes*
2015 + 10.1 − 1.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.6
2016 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3
2016          Oct − 3.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0
         Nov + 7.8 + 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − − 3.3 − 1.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Dec − 7.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 3.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.2
2017          Jan + 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.4 − 0.1 + 6.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Feb + 3.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar − 1.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Enterprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The figures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
   
 
 Savings deposits 3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year 2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  4 loans from repos   Period households securities) 5 
End of year or month*
 
14.6 68.4 200.9 11.4 189.5 597.2 587.7 9.4 48.8 0.0 5.0 − 2014
13.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 201513.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 2016
13.7 54.5 206.1 13.6 192.5 575.4 566.7 8.8 33.7 0.1 2.9 − 2016          Oct 
13.2 54.5 205.4 13.3 192.1 575.4 566.8 8.5 33.2 0.1 2.9 −          Nov 13.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 −          Dec 
13.5 54.3 207.2 12.9 194.3 577.8 569.4 8.4 31.9 0.9 2.8 − 2017          Jan 
14.6 55.1 206.7 12.6 194.1 578.0 569.7 8.4 31.3 0.9 2.7 −          Feb 15.0 55.1 207.0 12.9 194.1 576.2 567.9 8.3 30.7 0.9 2.7 −          Mar 
Changes*
− 1.8 − 12.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 − 11.5 − 11.1 − 0.5 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 2015
+ 0.6 − 1.0 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 7.9 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 2016
+ 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2016          Oct 
− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Nov 
+ 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec 
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2017          Jan 
+ 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Feb 
+ 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
48.0 25.3 11.2 7.0 4.5 0.4 88.0 11.1 60.6 15.4 0.9 − 2014
52.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 201556.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 2016
49.3 25.8 8.2 9.8 5.5 0.4 92.3 15.1 52.1 23.5 1.6 − 2016          Oct 
53.1 29.0 8.7 9.9 5.6 0.4 98.9 15.0 57.7 24.8 1.5 −          Nov 56.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 −          Dec 
49.4 25.4 8.4 10.0 5.7 0.4 97.2 13.0 57.5 25.2 1.5 − 2017          Jan 
53.1 28.9 8.3 10.2 5.7 0.4 95.9 15.4 54.0 25.0 1.5 −          Feb 51.7 27.1 8.2 10.7 5.7 0.4 93.4 14.7 51.4 25.8 1.5 −          Mar 
Changes*
+ 4.1 + 3.8 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.9 + 0.2 − 2015
+ 3.7 + 2.4 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.2 − 2016
− 2.0 − 1.7 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 2016          Oct 
+ 3.9 + 3.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − + 6.6 − 0.1 + 5.6 + 1.3 − 0.2 −          Nov 
+ 2.9 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 5.6 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          Dec 
− 6.6 − 6.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 3.6 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2017          Jan 
+ 3.7 + 3.5 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − − 0.7 + 2.5 − 3.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          Feb 
− 1.4 − 1.8 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 0.7 − 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.0 −          Mar 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities 2 facilities 2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2014 617.0 607.8 531.3 401.4 76.4 63.3 9.2 7.4 6.1 79.8 66.0 51.4 13.8
2015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.72016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2016          Nov 594.3 586.2 534.4 361.4 51.8 38.0 8.1 6.9 0.2 59.7 50.9 36.1 8.8
         Dec 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 1.6 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2017          Jan 596.4 588.5 537.7 354.6 50.7 37.2 8.0 6.9 0.2 58.1 49.5 35.2 8.6
         Feb 596.5 588.5 538.4 354.9 50.2 36.6 8.0 6.9 0.1 57.6 49.0 34.9 8.6         Mar 594.6 586.7 537.0 351.5 49.7 36.2 7.9 6.8 0.1 56.8 48.2 34.4 8.5
Changes*
2015 − 11.6 − 11.3 + 4.3 − 20.6 − 15.6 − 16.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 . − 15.1 − 10.1 − 6.6 − 5.1
2016 − 8.8 − 7.9 + 2.5 − 18.4 − 10.4 − 10.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 . − 5.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 0.0
2016          Nov − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.2
         Dec + 2.2 + 2.3 + 2.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1
2017          Jan − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 7.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.1
         Feb + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Mar − 1.9 − 1.9 − 1.4 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 . − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper
Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up toand including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non-
maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 guarantee 5 guarantee 5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2014 1,114.2 286.4 26.3 354.0 69.2 83.6 1.8 26.3 5.0 1,004.3 1.0 0.2 33.7 1.2
2015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.52016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2016          Nov 1,104.5 178.2 28.0 407.8 91.3 113.7 5.0 37.7 6.3 953.2 0.4 0.2 33.5 0.5
         Dec 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2017          Jan 1,106.2 173.5 27.0 404.4 87.6 107.1 4.3 37.2 6.0 961.9 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
         Feb 1,118.1 174.2 27.2 409.5 88.5 108.1 4.7 40.1 6.1 969.9 0.8 0.2 32.9 0.5         Mar 1,114.6 172.2 29.0 405.1 87.3 108.0 4.7 40.1 6.2 966.6 0.8 0.2 33.2 0.5
Changes*
2015 − 38.5 − 97.2 + 3.9 + 30.1 + 19.5 + 26.2 + 0.3 + 2.1 + 0.7 − 66.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 1.8 − 0.7
2016 + 22.1 − 12.0 − 2.1 + 23.0 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 8.8 + 0.1 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0
2016          Nov + 11.4 + 7.0 − 1.7 + 3.7 − 5.8 − 7.3 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 17.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 −         Dec − 6.4 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 −
2017          Jan + 8.1 − 3.5 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 3.3 − 4.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 12.5 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 −
         Feb + 11.9 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 5.1 + 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 8.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0         Mar − 3.6 − 2.0 + 1.9 − 4.5 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs)
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans 
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month 8 total 13 loans) 1 paper) 4 serves) 7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2015 21 213.6 43.1 0.0 17.5 15.8 93.4 17.5 21.4 2.0 21.3 159.2 5.3 2.4 9.9 98.5
2016 20 218.8 43.6 0.0 16.6 13.8 98.6 18.1 23.4 2.5 21.4 163.8 5.5 2.0 10.2 89.2
2017          Jan 20 220.0 44.2 0.0 16.7 13.7 98.7 18.3 23.8 2.6 22.0 164.2 5.6 2.2 10.2 6.3
         Feb 20 220.5 44.3 0.0 16.9 13.5 98.8 18.3 24.1 2.6 22.1 164.7 5.5 2.2 10.2 6.6
         Mar 20 220.4 43.0 0.0 17.0 13.3 99.7 18.5 24.4 2.6 21.5 164.8 5.5 2.2 10.9 7.4
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017          Jan 12 152.6 28.6 − 7.8 10.2 76.5 15.6 10.4 1.7 19.5 107.5 5.3 2.2 6.6 4.0         Feb 12 152.9 28.6 − 7.9 10.1 76.6 15.6 10.7 1.7 19.5 107.7 5.3 2.2 6.6 4.3         Mar 12 152.5 27.4 − 7.9 9.9 77.3 15.7 10.9 1.7 18.6 107.8 5.2 2.2 7.3 4.7
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017          Jan 8 67.4 15.6 0.0 8.9 3.4 22.1 2.7 13.4 0.8 2.5 56.8 0.3 − 3.6 2.4         Feb 8 67.6 15.7 0.0 9.0 3.4 22.2 2.7 13.4 0.8 2.6 56.9 0.3 − 3.6 2.3         Mar 8 67.9 15.6 0.0 9.2 3.3 22.4 2.8 13.5 0.8 2.8 57.0 0.3 − 3.7 2.7
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits
Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and ofwhich of Memo Amounts deposits
cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid intosavings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts 
9 tions 11 ceived 12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2015 28.1 2.5 8.2 51.5 31.2 44.4 19.9 4.2 5.3 3.6 19.2 15.6 8.1 9.5 8.3 0.4
2016 27.5 2.2 7.6 46.8 27.4 40.9 17.2 4.4 4.9 3.7 18.8 16.3 8.0 8.0 7.2 0.2
2017          Jan 2.5 0.0 0.6 3.8 2.3 3.2 1.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.4 16.5 8.2 0.6 0.0
         Feb 2.3 0.0 0.6 3.6 2.0 3.0 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.3 16.8 8.2 0.6 0.0
         Mar 2.4 0.0 0.7 4.1 2.1 3.6 1.5 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.8 16.9 8.0 0.6 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017          Jan 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.7 2.5 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.1 11.9 5.1 0.5 0.0
         Feb 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.3 2.2 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.0 12.1 5.0 0.4 0.0         Mar 1.6 0.0 0.4 3.0 1.5 2.7 1.1 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.4 12.2 4.9 0.5 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2017          Jan 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.1 0.1 0.0         Feb 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.2 0.2 0.0         Mar 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.1 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.7 3.1 0.2 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum contracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets 7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.02016 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2016          May 48 187 1,930.1 563.9 548.9 176.4 372.5 15.0 642.5 529.8 13.6 516.3 112.7 723.7 519.2
         June 49 188 2,036.5 569.2 553.5 182.3 371.2 15.6 674.8 556.9 14.1 542.8 117.9 792.5 593.8
         July 50 187 2,060.2 587.5 572.6 183.1 389.6 14.9 668.3 551.7 13.6 538.1 116.5 804.5 590.3
         Aug 50 187 1,959.7 569.3 553.9 187.9 366.0 15.4 643.3 528.5 13.9 514.6 114.7 747.1 544.6         Sep 50 187 1,916.6 595.9 581.3 200.4 380.9 14.6 629.3 524.9 14.3 510.6 104.4 691.4 511.1
         Oct 50 186 1,942.2 626.9 613.0 212.4 400.6 13.9 599.9 496.1 13.3 482.8 103.7 715.4 497.2
         Nov 50 185 1,928.8 592.4 578.4 205.9 372.5 14.0 622.8 516.4 14.1 502.3 106.4 713.7 495.0         Dec 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2017          Jan 51 192 1,877.2 603.8 590.4 215.5 375.0 13.4 586.0 492.4 14.1 478.4 93.6 687.4 461.8
         Feb 51 193 1,920.0 617.9 604.9 227.3 377.5 13.1 600.4 505.3 13.8 491.4 95.1 701.7 467.6
Changes *
2015 − 5 − 7 − 145.0 − 56.3 − 56.0 − 40.0 − 16.0 − 0.3 + 4.5 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 2.6 − 109.0 − 58.2
2016 + 0 − 7 + 29.1 + 49.3 + 52.9 + 43.7 + 9.2 − 3.5 − 56.4 − 24.6 + 0.5 − 25.1 − 31.8 + 24.9 − 14.8
2016          June
+ 1 + 1 + 105.9 + 4.4 + 3.8 + 5.9 − 2.2 + 0.6 + 33.6 + 27.7 + 0.5 + 27.2 + 5.9 + 68.4 + 75.4
         July + 1 − 1 + 24.0 + 18.7 + 19.4 + 0.7 + 18.7 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 3.5 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 1.0 + 12.2 − 2.6
         Aug − − − 100.4 − 17.6 − 18.2 + 4.9 − 23.0 + 0.5 − 24.1 − 22.5 + 0.3 − 22.7 − 1.7 − 57.2 − 45.2
         Sep − − − 42.9 + 27.4 + 28.1 + 12.5 + 15.6 − 0.7 − 12.8 − 2.7 + 0.4 − 3.1 − 10.1 − 55.6 − 32.4
         Oct − − 1 + 24.9 + 26.9 + 27.7 + 11.9 + 15.8 − 0.8 − 32.2 − 31.4 − 0.9 − 30.5 − 0.8 + 23.3 − 16.4
         Nov − − 1 − 15.5 − 44.0 − 43.9 − 6.5 − 37.4 − 0.2 + 12.5 + 11.3 + 0.7 + 10.6 + 1.1 − 3.8 − 9.1
         Dec + 1 + 6 − 55.9 − 10.2 − 9.9 − 1.0 − 8.9 − 0.3 − 44.3 − 28.4 + 0.4 − 28.8 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 11.1
2017          Jan − + 1 + 5.1 + 24.7 + 25.0 + 10.5 + 14.5 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 7.9 − 0.4 + 8.3 + 3.5 − 20.0 − 20.0
         Feb − + 1 + 41.4 + 9.6 + 10.1 + 11.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 + 8.8 + 7.9 − 0.2 + 8.1 + 0.9 + 13.0 + 2.9
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2016          May 24 57 350.4 115.3 103.9 49.0 54.9 11.4 170.6 138.2 22.9 115.3 32.4 64.5 −
         June 24 57 356.9 117.7 107.5 52.9 54.6 10.2 170.5 138.0 22.9 115.1 32.5 68.7 −
         July 19 56 355.3 116.3 106.2 51.8 54.5 10.1 170.3 137.4 23.7 113.7 32.9 68.7 −
         Aug 19 55 352.7 112.4 102.3 48.0 54.3 10.0 167.7 135.4 23.0 112.3 32.3 72.6 −         Sep 19 53 320.9 84.2 74.1 20.9 53.2 10.0 168.0 135.7 23.2 112.6 32.3 68.7 −
         Oct 19 53 316.6 81.4 71.3 20.5 50.8 10.1 157.9 126.3 22.9 103.4 31.5 77.3 −
         Nov 19 52 323.1 83.1 73.2 19.9 53.3 10.0 154.6 123.1 23.1 100.0 31.5 85.4 −         Dec 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2017          Jan 20 53 314.1 81.3 71.7 22.0 49.7 9.6 161.5 130.5 22.9 107.6 31.0 71.3 −
         Feb 20 53 315.4 80.7 71.2 30.9 40.4 9.5 162.0 130.8 23.1 107.7 31.2 72.7 −
Changes *
2015 − 4 − 5 − 23.9 − 33.3 − 28.7 − 33.3 + 4.6 − 4.6 + 6.5 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 0.3 + 2.9 −
2016 − 4 − 5 − 56.8 − 45.9 − 42.6 − 28.7 − 13.9 − 3.3 − 22.7 − 22.1 + 0.4 − 22.4 − 0.6 + 11.8 −
2016          June − − + 6.7 + 2.4 + 3.6 + 3.9 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 4.2 −
         July − 5 − 1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 −
         Aug − − 1 − 2.3 − 3.8 − 3.8 − 3.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.6 + 4.0 −
         Sep − − 2 − 31.5 − 28.0 − 28.0 − 27.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 3.9 −
         Oct − − − 5.6 − 3.6 − 3.5 − 0.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 10.6 − 9.8 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 0.8 + 8.6 −
         Nov − − 1 + 3.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 4.2 − 4.2 + 0.2 − 4.3 − 0.0 + 8.0 −
         Dec + 1 + 1 − 3.4 − 1.6 − 1.5 + 1.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 + 6.6 + 7.0 − 0.5 + 7.4 − 0.4 − 8.4 −
2017          Jan − − − 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 5.6 −
         Feb − − + 0.0 − 1.4 − 1.1 + 8.9 − 10.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
May 2017
IV  Banks
  
      
  
Deposits Other  liabilities 6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4 
Money
market of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing 5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 2014
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 20151,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 2016
1,130.1 746.9 358.9 388.0 383.2 20.7 17.2 3.6 362.5 111.0 49.7 639.4 523.0 2016          May
1,154.9 762.2 386.5 375.6 392.8 21.3 17.8 3.5 371.5 104.9 49.8 726.9 596.8          June
1,163.1 772.6 388.8 383.8 390.5 21.3 17.5 3.8 369.2 108.5 49.8 738.9 593.8          July
1,128.2 760.8 382.8 378.1 367.4 21.6 17.7 3.8 345.8 114.7 49.8 667.0 548.8          Aug 1,117.2 763.1 380.6 382.5 354.1 21.5 17.7 3.8 332.6 113.7 49.7 636.1 513.9          Sep 
1,186.7 833.2 422.0 411.2 353.4 21.6 17.8 3.8 331.9 108.9 49.6 597.0 491.1          Oct 
1,165.0 791.8 410.5 381.3 373.2 19.1 15.5 3.6 354.1 104.2 50.3 609.4 495.3          Nov 1,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0          Dec 
1,161.3 804.3 417.6 386.7 357.0 15.2 11.7 3.5 341.8 111.2 50.9 553.9 456.6 2017          Jan 
1,190.7 816.8 423.2 393.6 373.9 16.5 13.2 3.4 357.4 114.0 51.2 564.0 462.0          Feb 
Changes *
− 30.8 − 53.8 − 57.0 + 3.2 + 23.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 22.5 − 2.1 + 4.7 − 124.1 − 65.8 2015+ 66.8 + 76.8 + 65.6 + 11.2 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 29.6 + 1.2 − 18.1 − 17.3 2016
+ 24.0 + 14.3 + 27.6 − 13.2 + 9.6 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.1 − 6.5 + 0.0 + 87.5 + 74.4 2016          June
+ 9.0 + 11.2 + 2.2 + 8.9 − 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 2.2 + 3.8 + 0.0 + 12.0 − 2.1          July
− 34.3 − 11.2 − 6.0 − 5.2 − 23.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 23.4 + 6.4 + 0.1 − 71.9 − 44.4          Aug − 10.3 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 5.1 − 13.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 13.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 30.9 − 33.9          Sep 
+ 65.3 + 66.1 + 41.4 + 24.7 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 39.1 − 25.5          Oct 
− 31.1 − 50.5 − 11.5 − 39.0 + 19.4 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 0.2 + 21.9 − 6.8 + 0.7 + 12.3 − 2.6          Nov − 30.5 + 7.1 + 14.4 − 7.3 − 37.6 − 3.7 − 3.7 + 0.0 − 34.0 − 4.0 + 0.8 − 24.3 − 15.8          Dec 
+ 30.0 + 8.5 − 7.3 + 15.8 + 21.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 21.7 + 11.7 − 0.3 − 31.2 − 20.5 2017          Jan 
+ 24.8 + 8.0 + 5.6 + 2.4 + 16.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 15.4 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 10.2 + 2.3          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014
292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016
275.9 164.2 103.6 60.6 111.8 12.7 9.9 2.8 99.1 13.3 24.3 36.8 − 2016          May
284.5 163.7 101.1 62.6 120.8 12.1 9.3 2.7 108.7 12.3 24.0 36.1 −          June
282.4 162.9 98.9 64.1 119.4 11.5 8.7 2.7 108.0 12.5 24.4 36.0 −          July
281.4 167.7 99.9 67.8 113.7 11.0 6.3 4.8 102.7 12.4 24.4 34.5 −          Aug 
248.4 136.3 72.9 63.3 112.2 11.2 6.4 4.7 101.0 12.5 23.8 36.2 −          Sep 
243.7 140.6 76.3 64.3 103.1 10.8 6.3 4.5 92.3 12.7 23.9 36.3 −          Oct 
250.1 139.7 77.1 62.6 110.4 10.2 5.2 4.9 100.3 12.6 23.8 36.6 −          Nov 
247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 −          Dec 
240.0 131.4 70.5 61.0 108.5 12.2 6.8 5.4 96.3 13.5 24.0 36.7 − 2017          Jan 
239.3 129.5 70.4 59.1 109.8 13.0 7.6 5.4 96.8 13.9 24.1 38.2 −          Feb 
Changes *
− 12.3 − 11.2 − 1.5 − 9.7 − 1.1 − 7.2 − 4.0 − 3.2 + 6.1 − 4.0 + 0.4 − 7.9 − 2015
− 46.2 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 12.7 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 2.9 − 11.9 − 0.8 − 2.5 − 7.3 − 2016
+ 8.8 − 0.4 − 2.5 + 2.1 + 9.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 9.8 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 2016          June
− 2.0 − 0.7 − 2.2 + 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 −          July
− 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.0 + 3.8 − 5.7 − 0.4 − 2.4 + 2.0 − 5.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 −          Aug 
− 32.7 − 31.3 − 27.0 − 4.3 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.6 −          Sep 
− 5.8 + 3.7 + 3.4 + 0.3 − 9.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 −          Oct 
+ 4.4 − 2.1 + 0.8 − 2.9 + 6.6 − 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.4 + 7.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 −          Nov 
− 3.7 − 5.8 − 5.3 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.8 −          Dec 
− 5.8 − 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 2017          Jan 
− 1.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 2.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 −          Feb 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
May 2017
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance
Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.02012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.02013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.02014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.02015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.02016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017          Mar  
p 12,105.1 121.1 120.6 1,081.1 960.5 ...
         Apr . . . . . .
         May p ... ... 122.3 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance
German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base 2 in per cent Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7 beginning in 1 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 02011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 12012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 12013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 22014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 02016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017          Mar 3,428,973 28.3 34,290 34,125 373,971 339,845 0
         Apr . . . . . . .         May 
p 3,467,773 ... 34,678 34,513 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance
Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in 1 
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,153 556 2,1702011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,3242012 
3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,2632014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,3122015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,5782016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017          Mar 6,426 5,522 3,131 11,020 6,026 210 1,790
         Apr . . . . . . .         May 6,494 5,537 3,407 10,992 6,055 198 1,832
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and
securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in 1 banks in non-euro-area countries
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,7282011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,1532012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,4532013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,1592014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,1462016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017          Mar 2,237,807 2,953 477,831 587,448 122,929
         Apr . . . . .         May 2,244,724 1,684 509,025 586,013 126,323
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it was
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
May 2017
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
 
 
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code 1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July                13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00         June                15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                  8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June                13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June                11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                  9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July                1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May                13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2017 Apr                12 13,228 13,228 0.00−−−7
         Apr                19 14,750 14,750 0.00−−−7
         Apr                26 14,409 14,409 0.00−−−7
         May                  3 14,429 14,429 0.00−−−7
         May                10 13,679 13,679 0.00−−−7
         May                17 13,977 13,977 0.00−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2017 Feb                23 2,584 2,584 2 ... − − − 98
         Mar                24 233,473 233,473 0.00−−− 1,456
         Mar                30 1,314 1,314 2 ... − − − 91
         Apr                27 1,470 1,470 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR 2 
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2016          Oct − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.21 − 0.13 − 0.07
         Nov − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.21 − 0.13 − 0.07         Dec − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.22 − 0.14 − 0.08
2017          Jan − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.24 − 0.15 − 0.09
         Feb − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.24 − 0.17 − 0.11         Mar − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.24 − 0.17 − 0.11
         Apr − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.25 − 0.18 − 0.12
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
May 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 
1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016          Mar 
0.44 76,809 1.61 221,229 0.20 82,706 1.95 17,573
         Apr 0.44 77,166 1.59 220,954 0.19 83,708 1.92 17,490
         May 0.43 77,295 1.58 220,985 0.19 80,922 1.86 18,025
         June 0.42 77,303 1.56 220,707 0.16 78,910 1.80 18,063
         July 0.41 77,112 1.55 219,660 0.14 80,553 1.76 18,143
         Aug 0.41 75,607 1.53 219,332 0.14 79,332 1.72 18,124
         Sep 0.40 75,235 1.52 219,354 0.12 83,015 1.65 18,371
         Oct 0.40 75,245 1.51 218,836 0.13 80,349 1.60 18,507
         Nov 0.39 74,620 1.49 218,016 0.10 82,888 1.56 19,037
         Dec 0.38 74,227 1.48 220,035 0.10 81,192 1.54 19,097
2017          Jan 0.37 73,435 1.46 219,585 0.10 82,672 1.53 19,293
         Feb 0.35 73,708 1.45 219,045 0.10 83,514 1.52 19,144
         Mar 0.34 73,469 1.44 218,577 0.09 84,513 1.49 19,647
 
 
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2016          Mar 
2.63 5,014 2.34 27,371 3.24 1,052,498 7.49 54,287 4.29 80,695 4.38 307,355
         Apr 2.56 4,928 2.31 27,215 3.21 1,057,019 7.33 52,229 4.27 81,376 4.35 308,474
         May 2.57 4,959 2.29 27,187 3.19 1,059,863 7.36 52,678 4.24 81,793 4.33 309,250
         June 2.57 4,863 2.28 27,272 3.16 1,064,491 7.39 53,521 4.22 82,252 4.31 309,025
         July 2.50 4,836 2.25 27,233 3.13 1,069,851 7.26 51,406 4.20 82,844 4.29 310,390
         Aug 2.50 4,772 2.23 27,198 3.10 1,074,183 7.27 51,516 4.17 83,206 4.27 310,914
         Sep 2.49 4,645 2.22 27,195 3.07 1,079,270 7.29 52,985 4.15 83,297 4.24 310,507
         Oct 2.49 4,711 2.19 27,068 3.04 1,083,120 7.26 52,115 4.12 83,574 4.21 310,941
         Nov 2.42 4,538 2.13 27,004 3.02 1,087,318 7.17 51,035 4.09 83,826 4.19 311,454
         Dec 2.42 4,380 2.11 26,777 2.99 1,090,316 7.18 51,459 4.07 83,809 4.16 310,013
2017          Jan 2.43 4,463 2.10 26,399 2.96 1,090,663 7.21 51,134 4.04 83,791 4.13 310,789
         Feb 2.41 4,314 2.09 26,272 2.94 1,093,062 7.24 50,975 4.02 83,726 4.11 311,206
         Mar 2.47 4,342 2.07 26,205 2.91 1,097,146 7.32 51,522 4.01 84,065 4.09 311,213
  
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 Effective interest rate 1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016          Mar 
2.65 137,421 2.20 130,530 2.67 597,332
         Apr 2.66 136,364 2.18 131,883 2.64 601,069
         May 2.60 136,538 2.15 132,698 2.62 605,918
         June 2.62 135,941 2.13 133,455 2.60 604,497
         July 2.59 133,112 2.09 133,334 2.57 608,349
         Aug 2.60 129,449 2.08 134,293 2.55 613,121
         Sep 2.58 132,381 2.06 134,447 2.52 612,812
         Oct 2.53 132,273 2.04 134,868 2.50 615,105
         Nov 2.54 131,980 2.02 136,298 2.48 620,104
         Dec 2.57 125,998 2.01 136,477 2.45 623,831
2017          Jan 2.52 130,773 2.00 136,921 2.42 628,271
         Feb 2.55 132,264 1.99 136,362 2.41 631,862
         Mar 2.54 132,742 1.98 136,993 2.39 632,513
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated either
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The grossing-up procedure as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both
was changed according to the ECB (Guideline ECB/2014/15). The data published calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not anyhitherto from June 2010 to May 2015 were grossed-up again with the new method. other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation ofThe MFI interest rate statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
related volumes of euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non- sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
financial corporations domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associationsindividuals (including sole proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents inNon-financial corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
banks and other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods andregarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Re- services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
port are not specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education etc. 6Including overdrafts
can be found on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Reporting system / Banking (see also footnotes 13 to 15 p 47
   ). 
statistics
/ MFI interest rate statistics). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
May 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2016          Mar 
0.11 1,120,146 0.34 6,804 0.82 1,137 0.93 1,721 0.34 535,575 0.39 58,239
         Apr 0.10 1,140,220 0.35 5,852 0.69 994 0.94 1,130 0.32 534,792 0.38 57,125
         May 0.10 1,142,947 0.34 5,430 0.69 747 0.89 901 0.31 534,122 0.37 56,154
         June 0.08 1,149,604 0.27 6,027 0.73 759 0.83 935 0.30 533,649 0.36 55,415
         July 0.08 1,168,427 0.27 5,846 0.57 856 0.80 903 0.28 533,501 0.35 54,560
         Aug 0.08 1,171,644 0.33 5,081 0.61 1,148 0.86 961 0.27 533,503 0.34 53,749
         Sep 0.08 1,173,762 0.32 5,240 0.50 671 0.77 885 0.26 532,980 0.33 53,031
         Oct 0.07 1,184,012 0.30 6,402 0.44 716 0.75 933 0.25 533,209 0.32 52,223
         Nov 0.07 1,208,967 0.30 5,075 0.58 523 0.77 907 0.24 533,406 0.32 51,649
         Dec 0.07 1,220,413 0.23 5,583 0.51 621 0.68 967 0.24 536,031 0.32 51,299
2017          Jan 0.07 1,222,852 0.28 6,002 0.59 715 0.61 999 0.23 536,834 0.31 50,563
         Feb 0.06 1,233,193 0.31 4,688 0.47 617 0.70 773 0.22 537,566 0.31 49,971
         Mar 0.05 1,233,630 0.26 4,919 0.51 676 0.69 820 0.21 536,136 0.31 49,493
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016          Mar 
0.05 369,344 − 0.03 14,907 0.20 931 1.34 1,057
         Apr 0.05 377,546 − 0.01 10,820 0.13 851 0.40 439
         May 0.01 380,942 − 0.02 9,700 0.18 694 0.52 1,123
         June 0.01 376,365 − 0.02 10,619 0.16 689 0.46 858
         July 0.01 378,718 − 0.02 9,596 0.14 569 0.25 476
         Aug 0.01 388,519 − 0.06 9,727 0.19 451 0.39 286
         Sep 0.01 389,701 − 0.08 15,158 0.14 598 0.30 792
         Oct 0.00 399,216 − 0.03 10,736 0.14 577 0.36 521
         Nov − 0.00 400,064 − 0.11 13,017 0.24 951 0.39 1,490
         Dec − 0.00 401,493 − 0.12 15,159 0.22 1,205 0.36 538
2017          Jan − 0.00 400,475 − 0.05 11,356 0.22 754 0.40 314
         Feb − 0.00 397,363 − 0.07 10,802 0.13 631 0.54 336
         Mar − 0.01 395,641 − 0.09 12,613 0.19 450 0.79 309
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  5 
of which loans to sole proprietors
of which
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
2016          Mar 
2.02 7,255 1.87 2,578 1.77 3,549 2.70 996 2.09 2,710 1.96 2,167 2.81 756 2.03 1,796
         Apr 2.03 6,381 1.89 2,492 1.81 3,375 2.68 981 2.09 2,025 2.02 2,079 2.87 757 2.01 1,420
         May 2.00 5,898 1.92 1,926 1.77 2,921 2.71 876 2.03 2,101 2.01 1,859 2.97 647 1.97 1,372         June 2.02 6,820 1.93 2,359 1.84 3,200 2.58 1,134 1.98 2,486 2.09 1,953 2.67 898 1.89 1,769
         July 1.89 6,818 1.73 2,543 1.69 3,394 2.66 936 1.89 2,488 1.88 2,323 2.82 724 1.85 1,614
         Aug 2.02 5,949 1.95 1,989 1.94 2,699 2.80 793 1.85 2,457 1.99 1,789 2.96 589 1.89 1,569         Sep 1.89 6,462 1.76 2,153 1.76 3,266 2.69 807 1.81 2,389 1.88 2,013 2.89 610 1.78 1,638
         Oct 1.89 6,445 1.72 2,522 1.70 3,408 2.63 928 1.87 2,109 1.86 2,096 2.78 728 1.82 1,403
         Nov 1.92 6,305 1.89 2,070 1.79 3,051 2.71 837 1.81 2,417 2.00 1,920 2.78 647 1.76 1,572         Dec 1.93 7,774 1.89 2,343 1.86 3,262 2.61 1,085 1.79 3,427 1.98 2,257 2.71 881 1.76 2,255
2017          Jan 1.94 6,698 1.84 2,651 1.78 3,024 2.52 915 1.92 2,759 1.92 2,084 2.61 712 1.83 1,898
         Feb 1.94 5,484 1.86 1,916 1.69 2,540 2.56 803 1.99 2,141 1.95 1,579 2.75 568 1.93 1,466         Mar 2.01 7,097 1.88 2,130 1.80 3,237 2.72 1,032 1.99 2,828 2.01 2,120 2.84 767 1.93 1,896
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding over-
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, drafts. 10 Collected from December 2014. 
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
May 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges) renegotiated loans 9, 10 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
Total loans
2016          Mar 6.06 6.04 8,415 7.33 1,833 5.49 341 4.79 3,577 7.07 4,497
         Apr 6.21 6.19 8,734 7.33 1,814 5.89 310 4.88 3,548 7.16 4,876
         May 6.22 6.20 8,244 7.47 1,715 5.89 306 4.90 3,329 7.16 4,609
         June 6.20 6.18 8,940 7.47 1,864 5.73 314 4.87 3,616 7.15 5,010
         July 6.20 6.18 8,468 7.50 1,764 5.97 298 4.77 3,405 7.20 4,765
         Aug 6.09 6.06 8,301 7.36 1,643 5.89 328 4.70 3,402 7.09 4,571
         Sep 5.94 5.92 7,802 7.11 1,560 6.04 296 4.56 3,257 6.95 4,249
         Oct 5.95 5.93 7,579 7.10 1,482 6.04 300 4.52 3,127 6.99 4,152
         Nov 5.85 5.83 7,595 7.12 1,674 6.05 316 4.51 3,312 6.91 3,967
         Dec 5.69 5.67 6,552 7.06 1,399 6.09 320 4.40 3,026 6.83 3,206
2017          Jan 6.06 6.04 8,603 7.16 1,886 6.15 330 4.59 3,242 6.97 5,031
         Feb 5.82 5.80 8,187 6.92 1,619 6.15 273 4.37 3,094 6.69 4,820
         Mar 5.62 5.60 9,849 6.88 1,761 6.12 341 4.15 4,041 6.64 5,467
of which: collateralised loans 12
2016          Mar . 3.29 260 . . 2.58 25 3.71 158 2.65 77
         Apr . 3.49 206 . . 2.75 13 3.80 145 2.77 48
         May . 3.56 202 . . 2.69 18 3.95 135 2.79 49
         June . 3.62 213 . . 2.95 17 3.96 141 2.94 55
         July . 3.53 193 . . 2.85 18 3.82 135 2.86 40
         Aug . 3.52 216 . . 3.00 16 3.83 149 2.80 51
         Sep . 3.56 201 . . 2.86 17 3.87 134 2.97 50
         Oct . 3.51 189 . . 2.63 17 3.91 129 2.65 43
         Nov . 3.55 198 . . 2.48 15 3.93 140 2.66 43
         Dec . 3.38 207 . . 2.72 18 3.80 136 2.53 53
2017          Jan . 3.51 169 . . 2.85 13 3.78 118 2.92 38
         Feb . 3.65 188 . . 2.92 14 3.87 139 3.08 35
         Mar . 3.53 230 . . 2.84 14 3.85 163 2.74 53
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9,10  
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume 7 Volume 7 rate of charge  11 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 interest rate  1 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2016          Mar 1.85 1.82 22,396 1.94 4,799 2.10 2,618 1.82 2,256 1.70 8,246 1.86 9,276
         Apr 1.93 1.88 17,859 1.94 4,981 2.16 2,206 1.82 1,820 1.67 6,054 1.97 7,779
         May 1.86 1.79 17,968 2.03 3,654 2.19 2,133 1.83 1,698 1.62 6,635 1.83 7,502
         June 1.82 1.76 21,409 1.94 4,079 2.04 2,567 1.85 1,931 1.60 7,424 1.79 9,487
         July 1.78 1.73 20,287 1.83 4,970 2.01 2,464 1.79 1,866 1.59 7,230 1.75 8,727
         Aug 1.74 1.68 19,903 1.86 4,075 2.18 2,185 1.76 1,745 1.49 7,197 1.69 8,776
         Sep 1.70 1.64 18,636 1.79 3,854 2.01 2,062 1.75 1,658 1.48 6,555 1.66 8,361
         Oct 1.68 1.62 17,913 1.72 4,542 1.99 2,093 1.62 1,584 1.45 6,317 1.66 7,919
         Nov 1.67 1.62 20,223 1.72 4,687 1.88 2,611 1.66 1,614 1.43 7,008 1.68 8,990
         Dec 1.72 1.66 21,400 1.80 4,757 1.98 2,347 1.67 1,800 1.49 8,054 1.73 9,199
2017          Jan 1.82 1.77 19,804 1.84 5,711 2.08 2,283 1.66 1,780 1.59 7,454 1.86 8,287
         Feb 1.87 1.81 17,838 1.89 4,291 2.17 1,784 1.65 1,567 1.64 6,556 1.90 7,931
         Mar 1.87 1.82 22,196 1.86 4,945 2.08 2,428 1.69 1,932 1.67 7,609 1.89 10,227
of which: collateralised loans 12
2016          Mar . 1.74 9,786 . . 2.01 1,002 1.63 1,075 1.63 3,807 1.81 3,902
         Apr . 1.89 7,980 . . 2.17 848 1.53 843 1.62 2,827 2.14 3,462
         May . 1.71 7,343 . . 2.08 783 1.53 752 1.54 2,804 1.81 3,004
         June . 1.67 9,111 . . 1.96 956 1.55 849 1.53 3,475 1.75 3,831
         July . 1.65 8,675 . . 1.86 927 1.51 833 1.53 3,387 1.75 3,528
         Aug . 1.58 8,476 . . 1.97 770 1.46 770 1.41 3,410 1.67 3,526
         Sep . 1.55 7,930 . . 1.98 728 1.46 708 1.39 3,109 1.61 3,385
         Oct . 1.55 7,854 . . 1.89 764 1.43 768 1.39 3,023 1.65 3,299
         Nov . 1.51 9,115 . . 1.54 1,225 1.48 763 1.36 3,407 1.65 3,720
         Dec . 1.57 9,705 . . 1.85 863 1.55 878 1.41 3,968 1.66 3,996
2017          Jan . 1.67 8,932 . . 1.90 835 1.50 925 1.52 3,632 1.81 3,540
         Feb . 1.71 7,964 . . 2.06 643 1.50 796 1.57 3,181 1.82 3,344
         Mar . 1.72 9,905 . . 1.96 855 1.53 939 1.59 3,565 1.82 4,546
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the
footnote 12, see p 47  .11Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
May 2017
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 13 Revolving loans 13 
and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 Extended and overdrafts 14 Revolving loans 13 
credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 credit card debt credit card debt 15 and overdrafts 14 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 Volume 2 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 interest rate 1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2016          Mar 
8.81 42,187 8.80 35,211 15.42 3,982 3.84 68,638 3.85 68,394
         Apr 8.70 40,129 8.67 33,142 15.24 4,067 3.83 66,708 3.85 66,461
         May 8.72 40,781 8.75 33,466 15.21 4,135 3.70 67,212 3.71 66,974
         June 8.75 41,709 8.77 34,494 15.23 4,093 3.74 67,687 3.75 67,430
         July 8.61 39,874 8.62 32,504 15.22 4,152 3.66 65,412 3.67 65,180
         Aug 8.61 40,210 8.63 32,811 15.22 4,137 3.73 63,560 3.74 63,322
         Sep 8.62 41,559 8.66 33,900 15.13 4,269 3.70 66,057 3.71 65,773
         Oct 8.59 40,657 8.60 32,988 15.13 4,328 3.67 64,202 3.68 63,931
         Nov 8.50 39,342 8.51 31,782 15.13 4,222 3.61 64,064 3.63 63,786
         Dec 8.50 40,103 8.54 32,351 15.06 4,286 3.69 61,612 3.71 61,357
2017          Jan 8.55 39,784 8.54 32,190 15.12 4,309 3.61 64,182 3.63 63,925
         Feb 8.65 39,345 8.62 31,953 15.14 4,291 3.68 65,697 3.70 65,431
         Mar 8.66 40,215 8.61 32,949 15.13 4,273 3.67 65,990 3.68 65,698
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  16 
floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and renegotiated loans
Total 9, 10 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 Volume 7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2016          Mar 1.64 62,713 1.70 19,300 2.67 8,680 2.73 1,524 1.88 1,394 1.35 41,099 1.76 2,294 1.68 7,722
         Apr 1.55 57,589 1.60 19,803 2.60 8,290 2.74 1,645 1.82 1,410 1.23 38,162 1.56 1,933 1.68 6,149
         May 1.47 53,170 1.55 15,321 2.59 7,987 2.73 1,363 1.85 1,338 1.11 34,259 1.55 1,651 1.64 6,572         June 1.52 66,550 1.68 19,903 2.61 8,992 2.79 1,600 1.76 1,526 1.23 43,829 1.57 2,249 1.55 8,354
         July 1.46 62,584 1.55 21,116 2.44 8,339 2.67 1,484 1.72 1,554 1.16 41,120 1.88 2,329 1.53 7,758
         Aug 1.43 54,015 1.58 14,307 2.44 7,384 2.62 1,340 1.68 1,416 1.14 33,033 1.48 2,112 1.40 8,730         Sep 1.51 62,170 1.66 19,929 2.54 8,312 2.63 1,431 1.70 1,312 1.24 41,393 1.67 1,986 1.54 7,736
         Oct 1.43 59,422 1.50 20,936 2.44 8,219 2.63 1,417 1.65 1,258 1.16 40,159 1.69 1,960 1.44 6,409
         Nov 1.45 58,860 1.52 15,959 2.48 8,095 2.64 1,497 1.69 1,361 1.16 36,792 1.32 2,628 1.49 8,487         Dec 1.53 78,985 1.63 22,509 2.50 8,638 2.57 1,829 1.77 1,881 1.27 48,315 1.64 3,444 1.62 14,878
2017          Jan 1.33 64,819 1.54 18,857 2.42 8,119 2.60 1,328 1.86 1,423 1.01 43,339 1.40 2,830 1.57 7,780
         Feb 1.33 56,958 1.55 13,746 2.55 7,309 2.58 1,326 1.83 1,209 0.99 37,140 1.29 2,001 1.54 7,973         Mar 1.50 71,530 1.60 22,647 2.51 9,245 2.59 1,733 1.85 1,665 1.20 45,163 1.41 2,977 1.67 10,747
of which: collateralised loans 12
2016          Mar 1.62 10,561 . . 1.94 611 2.60 154 1.73 406 1.50 5,407 1.79 1,089 1.66 2,894
         Apr 1.59 9,251 . . 1.95 660 2.39 153 1.67 438 1.49 5,471 1.92 530 1.57 1,999
         May 1.58 5,951 . . 2.03 479 2.60 134 1.65 406 1.47 2,864 1.57 364 1.55 1,704         June 1.58 10,056 . . 1.91 601 2.51 159 1.64 468 1.56 4,885 1.72 1,003 1.46 2,940
         July 1.53 10,322 . . 1.87 681 2.38 161 1.53 544 1.35 5,526 1.95 929 1.61 2,481
         Aug 1.54 7,519 . . 2.01 523 2.54 119 1.51 410 1.40 3,645 1.71 452 1.57 2,370         Sep 1.59 9,002 . . 1.93 550 2.49 104 1.46 379 1.53 5,125 2.18 614 1.45 2,230
         Oct 1.49 8,746 . . 1.85 652 2.40 149 1.48 401 1.40 5,352 1.90 560 1.44 1,632
         Nov 1.49 8,480 . . 2.00 494 2.41 159 1.57 401 1.29 4,031 2.04 610 1.50 2,785         Dec 1.55 16,083 . . 1.91 662 2.46 176 1.57 569 1.39 8,076 1.96 1,310 1.62 5,290
2017          Jan 1.57 8,742 . . 1.80 692 2.24 141 1.81 505 1.41 4,626 2.05 518 1.60 2,260
         Feb 1.46 8,259 . . 2.07 464 2.44 158 1.78 399 1.33 4,051 1.73 512 1.40 2,675         Mar 1.48 11,857 . . 1.87 643 2.52 166 1.72 493 1.37 7,040 1.30 519 1.60 2,996
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p 44
  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  . For obligation of regular repayment of funds. 14Overdrafts are defined as debit
footnote 11, see p 46  .12Collected from June 2010. For the purposes of the balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether
interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if collateral (among others they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at leat the same value as bank. 15From June 2010 including convenience and extended credit card debt.
the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned. 13From June 2010 Convenience credit is defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the
including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower may period between payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billinguse or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior notice cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle becometo the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as funds due. 16The amount category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new
are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
May 2017
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Assets
Financial assets
Cash and
Debt securi- Ceded share
deposits with ties (inclu- Shares and Investment of insurance Other
End of banks ding financial Loans other fund technical financial Non-financial
year/quarter Total Total (MFIs) 1 derivatives) granted 2 equity 3 shares/units reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations and pension funds 4
  
2007 1,838.3 1,779.8 558.3 155.1 248.2 275.3 409.6 70.2 63.1 58.5
2008 1,770.6 1,714.8 574.5 159.4 243.3 228.9 379.7 65.8 63.4 55.82009 1,836.8 1,779.6 588.9 173.9 259.8 210.5 426.9 58.6 61.2 57.1
2010 1,961.9 1,900.5 570.9 210.4 267.2 223.5 501.4 59.9 67.2 61.4
2011 2,011.2 1,947.8 576.3 226.2 271.9 221.9 522.1 62.2 67.1 63.42012 2,162.8 2,095.7 560.1 287.2 277.9 223.8 619.5 63.1 64.2 67.12013 2,236.7 2,165.2 540.6 310.5 284.7 224.1 678.5 64.2 62.7 71.52014 2,444.5 2,367.3 523.2 384.5 300.5 232.5 790.1 68.8 67.6 77.2
2015 2,536.5 2,454.1 488.7 421.6 309.2 246.9 841.7 77.0 69.0 82.4
2016 2,665.3 2,578.5 459.2 469.8 317.4 266.6 914.2 79.4 71.9 86.9
2015          Q1 2,539.4 2,461.4 517.4 414.0 305.1 242.1 843.7 70.6 68.4 78.1
         Q2 2,489.5 2,410.8 509.4 396.7 304.8 238.9 819.2 72.6 69.2 78.6         Q3 2,507.3 2,427.5 498.0 412.5 308.0 241.6 823.8 74.7 68.9 79.8         Q4 2,536.5 2,454.1 488.7 421.6 309.2 246.9 841.7 77.0 69.0 82.4
2016          Q1 2,598.2 2,514.1 486.8 456.3 310.8 248.3 863.1 78.9 70.0 84.1
         Q2 2,637.2 2,552.5 478.6 480.8 312.6 248.5 882.7 78.7 70.6 84.7         Q3 2,693.1 2,608.4 470.9 486.8 315.9 261.8 922.9 79.0 71.2 84.7         Q4 2,665.3 2,578.5 459.2 469.8 317.4 266.6 914.2 79.4 71.9 86.9
Insurance corporations
2007 1,526.2 1,485.5 432.5 130.7 226.4 267.1 304.0 68.2 56.6 40.7
2008 1,454.7 1,416.5 436.7 133.7 221.7 221.4 284.3 63.4 55.2 38.2
2009 1,490.3 1,452.2 440.4 146.2 236.4 202.7 317.6 55.6 53.2 38.1
2010 1,553.3 1,513.1 420.0 170.9 243.2 210.7 356.5 56.5 55.4 40.3
2011 1,584.6 1,542.9 419.8 191.3 246.0 210.4 361.4 58.4 55.5 41.7
2012 1,694.4 1,651.1 405.1 246.2 251.7 211.4 425.1 59.0 52.7 43.3
2013 1,742.1 1,695.7 386.3 268.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 59.8 51.0 46.4
2014 1,892.0 1,842.7 371.6 327.4 271.4 215.9 542.3 63.9 50.2 49.3
2015 1,953.4 1,901.7 336.3 357.3 278.7 228.7 578.3 71.6 50.7 51.8
2016 2,049.5 1,996.2 307.1 397.8 285.9 247.1 632.0 73.7 52.6 53.3
2015          Q1 1,967.9 1,918.2 365.3 352.8 275.7 224.9 583.1 65.6 50.8 49.7
         Q2 1,925.8 1,875.9 357.5 337.9 275.3 221.6 564.6 67.5 51.5 49.9
         Q3 1,938.2 1,887.7 347.5 350.0 278.1 224.0 567.7 69.5 51.0 50.5
         Q4 1,953.4 1,901.7 336.3 357.3 278.7 228.7 578.3 71.6 50.7 51.8
2016          Q1 2,007.2 1,954.1 336.2 386.6 280.0 230.0 596.3 73.4 51.6 53.1
         Q2 2,034.0 1,980.7 328.6 408.0 281.7 229.6 607.7 73.1 51.9 53.2
         Q3 2,081.0 2,028.4 319.5 414.0 284.9 242.8 641.4 73.4 52.5 52.6
         Q4 2,049.5 1,996.2 307.1 397.8 285.9 247.1 632.0 73.7 52.6 53.3
Pension funds 4
2007 312.1 294.3 125.8 24.4 21.9 8.2 105.6 1.9 6.6 17.8
2008 315.9 298.3 137.8 25.6 21.6 7.4 95.3 2.4 8.2 17.5
2009 346.5 327.4 148.4 27.7 23.3 7.7 109.3 3.0 8.0 19.1
2010 408.5 387.4 150.9 39.5 24.0 12.8 144.9 3.5 11.8 21.1
2011 426.6 404.9 156.5 34.9 25.9 11.5 160.8 3.8 11.6 21.7
2012 468.4 444.6 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 4.1 11.5 23.8
2013 494.6 469.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 4.4 11.7 25.1
2014 552.5 524.6 151.7 57.1 29.1 16.7 247.8 4.9 17.4 27.8
2015 583.0 552.4 152.4 64.3 30.4 18.2 263.3 5.4 18.3 30.6
2016 615.8 582.2 152.1 72.0 31.5 19.5 282.2 5.7 19.3 33.5
2015          Q1 571.5 543.2 152.1 61.2 29.4 17.3 260.6 5.0 17.6 28.3
         Q2 563.7 534.9 151.8 58.8 29.6 17.3 254.7 5.1 17.7 28.8
         Q3 569.2 539.9 150.6 62.5 29.9 17.7 256.0 5.3 17.9 29.3
         Q4 583.0 552.4 152.4 64.3 30.4 18.2 263.3 5.4 18.3 30.6
2016          Q1 591.1 560.0 150.6 69.7 30.7 18.3 266.8 5.5 18.4 31.0
         Q2 603.2 571.7 150.0 72.8 30.9 18.8 275.0 5.5 18.6 31.5
         Q3 612.1 580.0 151.5 72.8 31.0 18.9 281.5 5.6 18.7 32.1
         Q4 615.8 582.2 152.1 72.0 31.5 19.5 282.2 5.7 19.3 33.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial funds“ refers to the institutional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Figures from 2016 Q3 on schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds supervised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Ar-have been revised. 1Including registered bonds, borrower’s note loans and Pfandbrie- rangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and public, church and municipal supple-
fe of monetary financial institutions. 2Including deposits retained on assumed reinsu- mentary pension funds) and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. So-
rance. 3Including participation certificates (“Genuss-Scheine“). 4The term “pension cial security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
May 2017
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities
Insurance technical reserves
Net equity of
households in
Unearned
Debt securities life insurance premiums and
(including and pension reserves for
End of financial Loans Shares and fund outstanding Other
year/quarter Total derivatives) received 1 other equity 2 Total reserves 3 claims liabilities Net worth 4 
Insurance corporations and pension funds 5
  
2007 1,838.3 11.7 88.9 214.8 1,377.9 1,119.2 258.7 78.2 66.9
2008 1,770.6 14.7 77.0 136.0 1,396.3 1,141.5 254.8 74.7 71.82009 1,836.8 16.2 71.6 136.2 1,460.5 1,211.6 249.0 73.1 79.2
2010 1,961.9 17.8 72.3 137.6 1,573.3 1,318.9 254.4 71.5 89.3
2011 2,011.2 17.0 72.1 111.8 1,625.0 1,360.3 264.7 71.5 113.82012 2,162.8 22.4 77.1 158.9 1,708.3 1,437.1 271.2 71.3 124.82013 2,236.7 16.9 81.8 197.7 1,794.1 1,514.4 279.7 71.7 74.52014 2,444.5 17.3 89.0 202.7 1,903.8 1,605.5 298.3 72.3 159.4
2015 2,536.5 18.3 96.6 226.0 1,995.9 1,683.2 312.8 71.9 127.8
2016 2,665.3 18.7 99.6 228.2 2,086.1 1,764.7 321.4 74.3 158.5
2015          Q1 2,539.4 19.0 90.4 223.1 1,942.6 1,635.6 307.0 73.0 191.4
         Q2 2,489.5 17.9 91.9 206.2 1,958.3 1,649.6 308.7 72.5 142.7         Q3 2,507.3 17.5 94.3 208.4 1,976.5 1,665.6 311.0 72.2 138.4         Q4 2,536.5 18.3 96.6 226.0 1,995.9 1,683.2 312.8 71.9 127.8
2016          Q1 2,598.2 17.7 97.8 231.7 2,027.1 1,707.3 319.9 73.2 150.6
         Q2 2,637.2 17.6 97.9 201.1 2,041.1 1,722.3 318.8 73.3 206.2         Q3 2,693.1 19.0 98.9 208.0 2,073.4 1,754.2 319.2 74.0 219.8         Q4 2,665.3 18.7 99.6 228.2 2,086.1 1,764.7 321.4 74.3 158.5
Insurance corporations
2007 1,526.2 11.7 86.4 206.7 1,090.1 831.7 258.3 75.7 55.6
2008 1,454.7 14.7 74.2 130.6 1,095.7 841.3 254.4 72.3 67.2
2009 1,490.3 16.2 68.3 130.8 1,136.4 887.8 248.5 71.1 67.5
2010 1,553.3 17.8 68.7 131.8 1,191.3 937.3 254.0 69.4 74.4
2011 1,584.6 17.0 68.3 107.0 1,224.3 960.1 264.2 69.6 98.3
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 69.5 97.4
2013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 68.8 49.2
2014 1,892.0 17.3 84.3 193.0 1,411.6 1,113.8 297.8 70.5 115.3
2015 1,953.4 18.3 91.6 215.1 1,472.9 1,160.6 312.3 70.2 85.4
2016 2,049.5 18.7 94.4 216.9 1,536.0 1,215.1 320.9 72.5 111.0
2015          Q1 1,967.9 19.0 85.6 212.5 1,443.0 1,136.4 306.6 71.2 136.6
         Q2 1,925.8 17.9 87.2 196.4 1,453.2 1,145.0 308.3 70.7 100.3
         Q3 1,938.2 17.5 89.5 198.5 1,464.5 1,154.0 310.5 70.5 97.6
         Q4 1,953.4 18.3 91.6 215.1 1,472.9 1,160.6 312.3 70.2 85.4
2016          Q1 2,007.2 17.7 92.8 220.6 1,499.3 1,179.8 319.4 71.4 105.4
         Q2 2,034.0 17.6 92.9 191.3 1,506.7 1,188.4 318.3 71.5 154.0
         Q3 2,081.0 19.0 93.8 197.9 1,534.3 1,215.6 318.7 72.2 163.8
         Q4 2,049.5 18.7 94.4 216.9 1,536.0 1,215.1 320.9 72.5 111.0
Pension funds 5
2007 312.1 − 2.4 8.1 287.8 287.5 0.3 2.5 11.2
2008 315.9 − 2.8 5.4 300.6 300.2 0.4 2.4 4.7
2009 346.5 − 3.2 5.4 324.2 323.7 0.4 1.9 11.7
2010 408.5 − 3.6 5.8 382.1 381.7 0.4 2.1 15.0
2011 426.6 − 3.8 4.8 400.6 400.2 0.5 1.9 15.5
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 1.8 27.3
2013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 2.9 25.3
2014 552.5 − 4.7 9.7 492.1 491.6 0.5 1.8 44.2
2015 583.0 − 4.9 11.0 523.0 522.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
2016 615.8 − 5.2 11.3 550.1 549.6 0.5 1.8 47.5
2015          Q1 571.5 − 4.7 10.5 499.7 499.2 0.5 1.8 54.8
         Q2 563.7 − 4.8 9.8 505.1 504.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
         Q3 569.2 − 4.8 9.9 512.0 511.6 0.5 1.7 40.7
         Q4 583.0 − 4.9 11.0 523.0 522.6 0.5 1.7 42.4
2016          Q1 591.1 − 5.0 11.2 527.9 527.4 0.5 1.7 45.3
         Q2 603.2 − 5.0 9.8 534.4 533.9 0.5 1.8 52.3
         Q3 612.1 − 5.1 10.1 539.1 538.6 0.5 1.8 56.0
         Q4 615.8 − 5.2 11.3 550.1 549.6 0.5 1.8 47.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on supervisory data of the Federal Financial between total assets and the remaining liability items. Own funds are the sum of net
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). *Valuation of securities based on current market worth and “shares and other equity“. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institu-
values; valuation of other items based on book values. Quarterly data and data as tional sector “insurance corporations and pension funds“ of the ESA. Pension fundsfrom 2015 are partially estimated. Figures from 2016 Q3 on have been revised. 1In- thus comprise company pension schemes (“Pensionskassen“, pension funds super-
cluding deposits retained on ceded business. 2Including participation certificates (“Ge- vised by BaFin, Contractual Trust Arrangements (CTAs; included as from 2010) and
nuss-Scheine“). 3Including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes and pre- public, church and municipal supplementary pension funds) and occupational pen-
mium reserves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium refund. 4As sion schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
defined in the European System of Accounts (ESA 1995), net worth is the difference

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
May 2017
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales
Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt buildingpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities 
3 ities 4 Total 5 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8 (non-MFIs) 2 associations 6 
2005 252,658 110,542 39,898 2,682 67,965 142,116 94,718 61,740 . 32,978 157,940
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,5832007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,5602008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,2542009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,5262012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,5802013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,646 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,3802014 64,027 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 95,988 53,068 − 12,124 − 11,951 77,143 10,961
2015 31,809 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 67,819 123,820 − 66,330 121,164 68,986 − 92,012
2016 69,798 27,069 19,177 17,905 − 10,012 42,728 173,193 − 58,012 187,500 43,705 − 103,395
2016          May 32,358 29,686 8,729 3,993 16,964 2,673 16,681 − 6,052 18,093 4,640 15,677
         June − 5,561 − 7,553 − 2,177 − 4,636 − 740 1,992 14,539 − 8,528 16,907 6,160 − 20,099
         July − 30,480 − 26,603 − 16,263 1,055 − 11,394 − 3,878 − 1,224 − 9,959 18,064 − 9,329 − 29,257
         Aug 19,190 18,041 7,011 − 942 11,972 1,149 11,826 − 10,241 13,001 9,066 7,364         Sep 17,625 12,468 6,106 3,712 2,650 5,157 23,838 − 4,025 17,786 10,077 − 6,214
         Oct − 8,977 − 6,357 640 3,347 − 10,344 − 2,619 10,962 − 7,635 17,287 1,310 − 19,939
         Nov − 193 2,417 − 5,172 − 377 7,966 − 2,611 6,331 − 2,469 18,652 − 9,852 − 6,524         Dec − 30,541 − 21,892 − 10,590 1,125 − 12,426 − 8,649 557 − 9,459 13,554 − 3,538 − 31,098
2017          Jan 24,125 22,501 12,008 4,586 5,908 1,624 20,434 − 7,443 18,146 9,731 3,692
         Feb 4,188 − 2,177 12,413 1,756 − 16,346 6,365 21,814 − 5,044 16,715 10,143 − 17,626         Mar 9,471 8,713 1,179 − 131 7,665 759 18,406 − 8,257 17,769 8,894 − 8,934
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales
Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13 
2005 32,364 13,766 18,597 1,036 10,208 − 9,172 31,329
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,7482007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,2992008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,1942009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,9712012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 6562013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,8512014 39,903 18,778 21,125 34,148 17,203 16,945 5,755
2015 40,293 7,668 32,625 26,058 − 5,421 31,479 14,235
2016 33,504 4,409 29,095 32,324 − 5,143 37,467 1,180
2016          May 5,592 288 5,304 6,962 2,838 4,124 − 1,370
         June 216 335 − 119 2,659 − 330 2,989 − 2,443
         July 2,882 464 2,418 2,620 − 2,128 4,748 262
         Aug 4,804 1,063 3,741 3,191 2,256 935 1,613         Sep 5,438 229 5,209 6,092 503 5,589 − 654
         Oct 1,984 204 1,780 − 1,464 − 221 − 1,243 3,448
         Nov 3,866 681 3,185 3,772 728 3,044 94         Dec 3,021 861 2,160 − 12 1,291 − 1,303 3,033
2017          Jan 2,045 39 2,006 1,260 − 247 1,507 785
         Feb 1,831 247 1,584 2,380 1,866 514 − 549         Mar 12,572 8,522 4,050 11,184 506 10,678 1,388
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 9Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 10Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Including Federal Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Net residents;  transaction  values. 11Domestic and foreign shares. 12Residual; also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
values. 5Domestic and foreign debt securities. 6Book values; statistically adjusted. 13Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
7Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
May 2017
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1 Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
bonds issued Debt securities
Corporate by German- issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public managed
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions (non-MFIs)  2 syndicates debt securities debt securities 3 
Gross sales  4 
2005 988,911 692,182 28,217 103,984 160,010 399,969 24,352 272,380 600
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834 69
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872 −
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974 −
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423 −
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731 −
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376 −
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529 −
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891 −
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321 −
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700 −
2016 5 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,370 416,110 −
2016          Aug 84,466 47,957 3,758 952 35,486 7,762 2,439 34,070 −
         Sep 110,645 60,863 720 143 46,130 13,870 9,464 40,318 −
         Oct 93,470 58,255 1,559 785 42,270 13,642 7,593 27,621 −
         Nov 72,858 40,706 2,017 211 29,840 8,639 2,842 29,309 −         Dec 56,403 32,710 340 48 23,727 8,595 9,060 14,634 −
2017          Jan 123,462 82,622 4,569 2,909 62,057 13,088 6,115 34,725 −
         Feb 99,851 70,911 2,669 733 48,391 19,118 4,105 24,835 −         Mar 95,842 47,729 3,548 756 31,244 12,182 4,691 43,421 −
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  6 
2005 425,523 277,686 20,862 63,851 49,842 143,129 16,360 131,479 4002006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711 692007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659 −2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407 −2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185 −
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863 −
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431 −2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888 −2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765 −2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037 −
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742 −
2016 
5 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144 −
2016          Aug 24,960 11,808 2,630 502 4,541 4,134 931 12,221 −         Sep 35,483 16,330 708 118 7,420 8,084 7,291 11,862 −
         Oct 32,702 14,677 1,559 785 4,690 7,644 6,327 11,698 −
         Nov 23,848 11,083 2,004 211 5,122 3,746 1,368 11,397 −         Dec 19,429 7,699 137 48 3,777 3,737 6,592 5,138 −
2017          Jan 41,887 26,101 3,344 1,861 15,975 4,921 4,857 10,929 −
         Feb 31,566 17,827 2,220 733 11,542 3,332 2,843 10,896 −         Mar 34,636 15,895 2,772 462 6,186 6,474 3,396 15,345 −
Net sales  7 
2005 141,715 65,798 − 2,151 − 34,255 37,242 64,962 10,099 65,819 − 35,9632006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482 − 19,2082007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093 − 29,7502008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302 − 31,6072009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482 − 21,037
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464 − 10,904
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289 − 5,9892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298 − 2,6052013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479 − 3,0572014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383 − 2,626
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174 − 1,441
2016 
5 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020 − 1,256
2016          Aug 19,464 5,831 3,209 − 34 4,897 − 2,241 − 342 13,975 −         Sep 13,990 4,456 − 421 − 1,385 4,802 1,461 3,807 5,727 −
         Oct − 4,225 425 286 − 1,680 105 1,714 4,024 − 8,675 − 15
         Nov 4,577 − 6,635 1,095 − 1,855 − 3,251 − 2,625 175 11,037 − 214         Dec − 26,763 − 10,987 − 1,766 − 428 − 5,419 − 3,374 1,714 − 17,490 −
2017          Jan 5,954 13,059 2,874 788 6,724 2,673 1,848 − 8,953 − 51
         Feb − 2,582 13,750 1,628 138 1,366 10,618 221 − 16,553 − 162         Mar 11,887 4,049 1,520 − 839 3,038 330 − 705 8,543 − 1,000
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital initial sales of newly issued securities. 5 Sectoral reclassification of debt
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including securities. e. 6Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 7Gross sales less
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Including Federal redemptions. 
Railways Fund, Federal Post Office and Treuhand agency. 4Gross sales means only

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
May 2017
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities Memo item
 Foreign  DM/euro
End of year Debt securities bonds issued
or month/ issued by Corporate by German-
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public managed
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities syndicates
2005 2,914,723 1,751,563 157,209 519,674 323,587 751,093 83,942 1,079,218 134,580
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701 115,3732007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794 85,6232008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097 54,0152009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581 32,978
2010 3,348,201
1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937 22,074
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226 16,085
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617 13,481
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138 10,4222014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520 7,797
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377 6,356
2016 
1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358 5,100
2016          Sep 3,094,523 1,182,162 133,160 66,664 642,143 340,195 269,875 1,642,486 5,330
         Oct 3,090,298 1,182,587 133,446 64,984 642,249 341,909 273,900 1,633,811 5,314
         Nov 3,094,875 1,175,952 134,541 63,129 638,998 339,284 274,075 1,644,848 5,100         Dec 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358 5,100
2017          Jan 3,074,066 1,178,024 135,649 63,489 640,303 338,583 277,637 1,618,405 5,049
         Feb 3,071,484 1,191,774
1 139,719 63,627 641,669 1 346,760 277,858 1,601,851 4,887
         Mar 3,083,371 1,195,823 141,239 62,787 644,707 347,090 277,153 1,610,395 3,887
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  2 Position at end-March 2017 
1,003,249 454,740 40,482 23,790 273,829 116,638 52,855 495,654 586    less than 2
672,589 299,890 41,645 15,950 158,592 83,702 47,799 324,901 146 2 to less than 4
444,150 175,893 26,264 8,158 88,005 53,464 38,475 229,781 266 4 to less than 6
332,207 103,548 19,073 6,404 56,784 21,287 25,480 203,180 1,362 6 to less than 8
212,668 72,412 9,645 5,902 32,987 23,878 13,590 126,665 529 8 to less than 10
125,688 32,066 3,499 1,242 12,814 14,512 14,380 79,242 30 10 to less than 15
78,061 16,220 152 991 12,075 3,001 8,135 53,706 − 15 to less than 20
214,759 41,055 478 350 9,620 30,608 76,438 97,266 967 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the
reclassification of debt securities. 2Calculated from month under review until final residual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values
contribution
(market capita- cash payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution of shares, merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims mining shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2005 163,071 − 1,733 2,470 1,040 694 268 − 1,443 − 3,060 − 1,703 1,058,532
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,6382007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,2142012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,1882013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,6582014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2016          Sep 176,583 11 49 2 0 − − 22 59 − 76 1,574,835
         Oct 176,733 150 196 0 45 − − 36 − 11 − 44 1,586,968
         Nov 176,793 60 120 2−−− − 5 − 5 6 1,571,446
         Dec 176,355 − 439 747 8−−0 − 1,164 − 29 1,676,397
2017          Jan 176,328 − 28 38 − 8 − − 34 − 21 − 18 1,716,525         Feb 176,382 54 112 −−−0 − 6 − 5 2 1,731,415
         Mar 178,273 1,891 2,229 1 0 − − 105 − 94 − 140 1,794,735
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued official and a regulated market on 1 November 2007) are included as well as enter-
out of company profits. 2Enterprises listed on the Regulated Market (the introduc- prises listed on the Open Market. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data of
tion of which marked the end of the division of organised trading segments into an the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
May 2017
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
 
 
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices 2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2016          Nov 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.4 1.0 2.0 142.37 112.33 490.37 10,640.30
         Dec 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.0 2.0 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017          Jan 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.0 2.0 141.33 110.45 530.99 11,535.31
         Feb 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.4 1.0 1.9 143.32 112.08 543.02 11,834.41         Mar 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.5 1.0 1.9 141.93 110.93 562.80 12,312.87
         Apr 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.4 1.0 1.8 141.87 111.03 570.29 12,438.01
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual figures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors 3 and loan associations 2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5 
2005 85,268 41,718 6,400 − 124 7,001 − 3,186 35,317 43,550 79,252 21,290 7,761 57,962 35,789 6,016
2006 47,264 19,535 − 14,257 490 − 9,362 − 8,814 33,791 27,729 39,006 14,676 5,221 24,330 22,508 8,2582007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,4692008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4382013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,709
2014 139,768 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,057 143,560 819 − 1,745 142,741 43,802 − 3,790
2015 180,762 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 34,626 173,417 7,362 494 166,055 34,131 7,3452016 155,955 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 36,586 162,883 2,877 − 3,172 160,006 39,757 − 6,928
2016          Sep 12,091 8,123 900 39 28 631 7,224 3,967 12,300 648 132 11,652 3,835 − 209         Oct 18,113 11,557 1,765 − 103 1,049 528 9,791 6,556 17,997 − 213 − 518 18,210 7,074 116
         Nov 11,131 11,845 2,820 67 2,053 346 9,025 − 714 12,125 − 616 − 780 12,741 66 − 994         Dec 20,446 16,366 1,388 − 37 1,016 253 14,977 4,081 20,017 − 614 − 756 20,631 4,837 429
2017          Jan 18,658 10,107 1,518 − 65 583 1,001 8,589 8,551 19,191 1,383 502 17,808 8,049 − 533
         Feb 14,721 11,872 2,730 − 62 1,782 603 9,141 2,849 14,854 1,263 452 13,591 2,397 − 133         Mar 12,726 7,318 3,636 − 64 2,626 704 3,682 5,408 11,937 133 − 176 11,804 5,584 788
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 
5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
May 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits − 10.74 34.02 36.59 27.00 15.17 3.25 7.05 18.84 7.44
Debt securities − 5.38 − 0.93 − 3.22 0.51 − 0.52 0.87 − 3.32 0.17 − 0.94
short-term debt securities 1.62 − 0.77 − 0.57 − 1.42 0.78 0.98 − 0.70 − 0.02 − 0.82
long-term debt securities − 7.00 − 0.15 − 2.65 1.93 − 1.29 − 0.10 − 2.62 0.19 − 0.11
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 1.88 0.73 − 2.60 0.94 − 0.38 0.51 − 2.54 − 0.04 − 0.52
Non-financial corporations − 0.05 − 0.79 0.69 − 0.32 − 0.52 0.66 − 0.12 0.01 0.15
Financial corporations − 1.26 1.93 − 2.49 0.87 0.58 0.31 − 1.80 − 0.53 − 0.47
General government − 0.57 − 0.41 − 0.81 0.39 − 0.44 − 0.46 − 0.62 0.47 − 0.20
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.50 − 1.66 − 0.62 − 0.42 − 0.14 0.37 − 0.78 0.21 − 0.41
Loans 18.52 27.00 10.37 5.08 − 0.25 4.88 − 8.00 − 0.62 14.11
short-term loans 33.19 25.81 6.66 0.75 1.47 − 0.08 − 2.49 − 4.65 13.88
long-term loans − 14.67 1.20 3.71 4.33 − 1.72 4.96 − 5.51 4.03 0.23
Memo item
to domestic sectors 14.15 8.78 − 3.69 2.74 − 3.43 4.09 − 6.53 − 2.90 1.64
Non-financial corporations − 0.42 0.84 − 8.35 1.02 0.02 5.63 − 12.25 − 2.54 0.81
Financial corporations 14.46 7.88 4.47 1.71 − 3.46 − 1.59 5.67 − 0.40 0.78
General government 0.11 0.06 0.18 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05
to the rest of the world 4.37 18.22 14.06 2.34 3.18 0.79 − 1.47 2.28 12.47
Equity and investment fund shares − 1.83 46.53 60.85 14.54 22.58 9.58 4.15 12.00 35.13
Equity 8.56 30.19 55.03 10.66 21.08 9.13 4.90 7.91 33.09
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 1.62 − 10.41 20.66 1.98 2.88 − 6.00 − 0.77 6.72 20.70
Non-financial corporations − 5.39 − 8.04 20.34 2.12 2.86 − 6.17 − 0.94 6.83 20.62
Financial corporations 3.78 − 2.37 0.31 − 0.14 0.02 0.17 0.17 − 0.11 0.08
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 4.85 12.45 10.13 − 4.48 3.02 0.66 − 0.59 1.37 8.69
Other equity 1 15.02 28.15 24.25 13.16 15.18 14.47 6.25 − 0.18 3.70
Investment fund shares − 10.38 16.35 5.82 3.87 1.50 0.45 − 0.75 4.08 2.04
Money market fund shares 0.23 0.21 0.36 − 0.06 0.35 − 0.30 − 0.10 − 0.03 0.79
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 10.61 16.13 5.46 3.93 1.15 0.75 − 0.65 4.11 1.25
Insurance technical reserves 1.10 3.03 2.56 0.92 0.68 0.59 0.78 0.73 0.46
Financial derivatives − 1.26 0.54 − 1.76 0.87 − 1.47 − 2.05 0.87 − 4.63 4.05Other accounts receivable − 77.10 29.85 − 26.22 0.45 14.70 6.77 − 11.33 − 12.72 − 8.95
Total − 76.69 140.04 79.17 49.35 50.89 23.89 − 9.81 13.78 51.31
External financing
Debt securities 1.26 7.78 23.71 0.46 − 1.17 10.40 4.60 2.88 5.82
short-term securities − 11.63 1.96 − 0.15 1.01 − 0.27 2.04 0.18 − 0.57 − 1.79
long-term securities 12.89 5.82 23.85 − 0.55 − 0.89 8.36 4.43 3.45 7.61
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 4.27 1.76 10.79 − 0.72 − 1.19 4.97 1.27 1.59 2.96
Non-financial corporations − 0.05 − 0.79 0.69 − 0.32 − 0.52 0.66 − 0.12 0.01 0.15
Financial corporations 4.12 2.07 9.97 − 0.44 − 0.60 3.59 1.96 1.56 2.86
General government 0.00 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 − 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00
Households 0.20 0.46 0.12 0.03 − 0.07 0.73 − 0.57 0.01 − 0.05
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.01 6.02 12.92 1.18 0.03 5.43 3.33 1.29 2.87
Loans − 7.26 47.58 49.70 0.51 − 2.60 29.87 6.50 16.42 − 3.09
short-term loans 0.55 29.91 14.52 − 0.03 2.92 15.01 − 2.47 2.77 − 0.80
long-term loans − 7.81 17.67 35.18 0.53 − 5.53 14.86 8.97 13.65 − 2.30
Memo item
from domestic sectors 10.90 20.72 26.30 − 3.20 − 9.61 25.70 − 7.68 10.51 − 2.24
Non-financial corporations − 0.42 0.84 − 8.35 1.02 0.02 5.63 − 12.25 − 2.54 0.81
Financial corporations 22.78 26.86 25.92 − 1.35 1.42 12.51 4.08 15.67 − 6.34
General government − 11.46 − 6.98 8.73 − 2.87 − 11.04 7.56 0.50 − 2.62 3.29
from the rest of the world − 18.16 26.86 23.41 3.71 7.00 4.17 14.18 5.91 − 0.85
Equity 31.11 16.63 8.95 9.78 0.85 3.60 2.05 2.18 1.12
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 0.34 7.36 21.96 0.73 11.39 − 2.67 3.30 4.33 17.00
Non-financial corporations − 5.39 − 8.04 20.34 2.12 2.86 − 6.17 − 0.94 6.83 20.62
Financial corporations 2.22 11.75 − 2.31 − 6.36 5.09 − 1.14 3.22 − 2.25 − 2.13
General government 0.03 0.11 0.07 0.02 0.01 0.04 0.05 0.01 − 0.02
Households 2.80 3.55 3.85 4.95 3.43 4.61 0.98 − 0.26 − 1.47
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 9.09 − 1.34 − 20.44 1.97 − 10.04 2.71 − 2.89 − 4.10 − 16.16
Other equity 1 22.37 10.61 7.43 7.08 − 0.50 3.56 1.64 1.95 0.29
Insurance technical reserves 6.41 5.06 5.06 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27 1.27
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 1.93 − 12.97 − 13.57 − 3.46 − 4.25 5.65 − 5.74 1.48 − 14.95
Other accounts payable − 0.79 15.79 31.19 − 8.42 − 7.75 6.65 0.70 − 0.81 24.66
Total 32.66 79.87 105.05 0.13 − 13.65 57.44 9.38 23.41 14.83
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
May 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 406.3 463.4 514.8 431.5 463.4 456.1 466.5 502.9 514.8
Debt securities 49.6 47.8 44.8 48.4 47.8 48.8 45.7 46.0 44.8
short-term debt securities 6.8 6.0 5.5 5.2 6.0 7.0 6.3 6.3 5.5
long-term debt securities 42.9 41.7 39.3 43.2 41.7 41.7 39.3 39.6 39.3
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 22.9 23.3 20.8 23.8 23.3 23.8 21.4 21.4 20.8
Non-financial corporations 4.6 3.6 4.4 4.2 3.6 4.3 4.2 4.3 4.4
Financial corporations 12.7 14.5 12.0 14.0 14.5 14.8 13.0 12.5 12.0
General government 5.7 5.2 4.4 5.6 5.2 4.8 4.2 4.6 4.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 26.7 24.4 24.0 24.7 24.4 24.9 24.3 24.5 24.0
Loans 455.4 485.2 494.5 484.8 485.2 487.8 480.0 478.4 494.5
short-term loans 356.2 383.7 390.5 381.9 383.7 382.5 380.4 375.4 390.5
long-term loans 99.2 101.5 104.0 102.9 101.5 105.3 99.6 103.0 104.0
Memo item
to domestic sectors 303.7 312.5 308.8 315.9 312.5 316.6 310.0 307.2 308.8
Non-financial corporations 212.4 213.3 204.9 213.3 213.3 218.9 206.7 204.1 204.9
Financial corporations 84.9 92.8 97.2 96.2 92.8 91.2 96.8 96.4 97.2
General government 6.4 6.4 6.6 6.4 6.4 6.5 6.5 6.6 6.6
to the rest of the world 151.7 172.7 185.7 168.9 172.7 171.2 170.0 171.2 185.7
Equity and investment fund shares 1,700.7 1,882.6 1,929.9 1,746.2 1,882.6 1,799.3 1,758.9 1,816.1 1,929.9
Equity 1,565.2 1,730.7 1,770.0 1,596.3 1,730.7 1,648.2 1,607.2 1,657.9 1,770.0
Listed shares of domestic sectors 262.2 273.0 292.3 239.0 273.0 248.1 239.4 265.1 292.3
Non-financial corporations 252.2 266.6 286.2 233.2 266.6 242.0 233.7 259.3 286.2
Financial corporations 10.0 6.3 6.1 5.9 6.3 6.1 5.7 5.8 6.1
Listed shares of the rest of the world 50.0 62.5 73.9 58.7 62.5 62.9 62.1 64.5 73.9
Other equity 1 1,252.9 1,395.2 1,403.8 1,298.6 1,395.2 1,337.2 1,305.6 1,328.2 1,403.8
Investment fund shares 135.5 151.9 159.9 149.8 151.9 151.1 151.7 158.2 159.9
Money market fund shares 1.2 1.4 1.9 1.0 1.4 1.0 1.1 1.0 1.9
Non-MMF investment fund shares 134.4 150.6 158.0 148.8 150.6 150.1 150.6 157.2 158.0
Insurance technical reserves 47.3 50.0 52.9 49.3 50.0 50.7 51.4 52.2 52.9
Financial derivatives 22.7 24.0 27.2 24.6 24.0 23.2 25.3 22.0 27.2Other accounts receivable 883.4 912.6 930.1 923.5 912.6 904.1 903.5 904.0 930.1
Total 3,565.4 3,865.6 3,994.3 3,708.3 3,865.6 3,770.1 3,731.4 3,821.6 3,994.3
Liabilities
Debt securities 150.9 156.8 183.8 158.1 156.8 173.1 179.0 183.0 183.8
short-term securities 1.8 3.0 2.9 3.3 3.0 5.1 5.3 4.7 2.9
long-term securities 149.1 153.7 180.9 154.8 153.7 168.0 173.7 178.3 180.9
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 60.2 58.7 72.0 60.7 58.7 65.9 68.2 71.2 72.0
Non-financial corporations 4.6 3.6 4.4 4.2 3.6 4.3 4.2 4.3 4.4
Financial corporations 39.8 40.0 51.7 41.3 40.0 46.0 49.1 50.9 51.7
General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households 15.8 15.0 15.7 15.2 15.0 15.6 14.9 15.9 15.7
Debt securities of the rest of the world 90.7 98.1 111.8 97.4 98.1 107.2 110.8 111.8 111.8
Loans 1,388.2 1,436.9 1,481.6 1,442.3 1,436.9 1,461.5 1,464.2 1,481.7 1,481.6
short-term loans 486.6 515.7 529.2 515.3 515.7 528.9 526.5 530.4 529.2
long-term loans 901.7 921.2 952.5 926.9 921.2 932.6 937.7 951.2 952.5
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,091.5 1,108.9 1,129.3 1,122.7 1,108.9 1,131.8 1,119.6 1,130.2 1,129.3
Non-financial corporations 212.4 213.3 204.9 213.3 213.3 218.9 206.7 204.1 204.9
Financial corporations 819.7 843.9 862.8 846.5 843.9 854.9 855.3 869.8 862.8
General government 59.4 51.7 61.5 62.9 51.7 57.9 57.7 56.3 61.5
from the rest of the world 296.7 328.0 352.4 319.6 328.0 329.7 344.6 351.4 352.4
Equity 2,543.6 2,673.9 2,749.3 2,490.6 2,673.9 2,570.6 2,490.5 2,665.4 2,749.3
Listed shares of domestic sectors 570.8 626.4 664.0 551.6 626.4 585.2 569.6 616.9 664.0
Non-financial corporations 252.2 266.6 286.2 233.2 266.6 242.0 233.7 259.3 286.2
Financial corporations 134.7 150.1 154.7 130.8 150.1 140.3 139.2 147.8 154.7
General government 35.2 43.4 44.4 41.1 43.4 41.5 40.4 40.8 44.4
Households 148.7 166.2 178.7 146.5 166.2 161.5 156.3 168.9 178.7
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 719.1 756.3 803.7 693.2 756.3 724.7 684.7 782.2 803.7
Other equity 1 1,253.7 1,291.2 1,281.6 1,245.8 1,291.2 1,260.8 1,236.2 1,266.4 1,281.6
Insurance technical reserves 250.3 255.4 260.4 254.1 255.4 256.6 257.9 259.2 260.4
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 54.0 42.0 38.4 44.7 42.0 49.8 46.7 50.7 38.4
Other accounts payable 978.6 999.7 1,031.1 991.2 999.7 981.2 985.1 993.7 1,031.1
Total 5,365.6 5,564.6 5,744.7 5,381.0 5,564.6 5,492.9 5,423.5 5,633.5 5,744.7
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
May 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 85.82 96.55 107.02 11.85 38.97 8.70 29.15 24.74 44.44
Currency 15.64 25.39 13.35 6.37 7.73 3.00 4.89 7.11 − 1.65
Deposits 70.18 71.16 93.68 5.48 31.24 5.70 24.26 17.63 46.09
Transferable deposits 73.84 100.96 105.26 15.01 32.22 7.24 28.09 23.41 46.52
Time deposits 8.74 − 9.22 1.28 − 4.21 0.44 0.83 2.16 − 1.73 0.02
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 12.41 − 20.58 − 12.87 − 5.32 − 1.43 − 2.37 − 5.99 − 4.05 − 0.45
Debt securities − 18.00 − 17.40 − 12.20 − 1.87 − 3.07 − 1.76 − 4.10 − 3.16 − 3.18
short-term debt securities − 0.67 0.75 − 0.10 0.28 − 0.13 0.10 − 0.62 0.10 0.33
long-term debt securities − 17.33 − 18.16 − 12.10 − 2.14 − 2.95 − 1.86 − 3.48 − 3.26 − 3.50
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 15.08 − 9.34 − 3.81 − 0.16 − 1.45 1.08 − 1.57 − 1.74 − 1.58
Non-financial corporations 0.02 0.39 0.02 0.02 − 0.07 0.67 − 0.59 0.03 − 0.09
Financial corporations − 12.52 − 6.80 − 2.22 0.44 − 0.78 0.74 − 0.36 − 1.29 − 1.31
General government − 2.58 − 2.93 − 1.61 − 0.61 − 0.60 − 0.33 − 0.63 − 0.48 − 0.18
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 2.93 − 8.06 − 8.39 − 1.71 − 1.62 − 2.84 − 2.53 − 1.42 − 1.60
Equity and investment fund shares 36.87 46.39 42.23 16.85 14.48 15.67 11.57 10.20 4.79
Equity 12.17 15.03 18.16 11.73 6.69 10.26 5.22 3.35 − 0.67
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 4.61 4.06 6.49 6.67 2.79 6.59 2.69 0.25 − 3.03
Non-financial corporations 2.69 3.77 3.22 6.03 2.76 4.52 0.69 − 0.30 − 1.69
Financial corporations 1.93 0.28 3.28 0.64 0.03 2.07 2.00 0.55 − 1.33
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 3.70 6.75 6.83 3.00 2.30 1.65 1.21 2.08 1.88
Other equity 1 3.86 4.22 4.83 2.07 1.60 2.02 1.32 1.02 0.47
Investment fund shares 24.70 31.36 24.07 5.12 7.79 5.41 6.35 6.86 5.46
Money market fund shares − 0.34 − 0.57 − 0.52 − 0.10 − 0.30 − 0.30 − 0.15 0.10 − 0.17
Non-MMF investment fund shares 25.04 31.93 24.60 5.22 8.09 5.71 6.50 6.76 5.63
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 22.97 20.08 17.36 4.79 5.12 4.67 4.18 4.32 4.18
Life insurance and annuityentitlements 31.89 31.36 39.90 6.26 7.19 19.62 7.56 8.99 3.73
Pension entitlement, claims ofpension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 36.84 30.32 27.13 5.71 6.79 3.12 6.58 5.71 11.73
Financial derivatives and employeestock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 
2 − 34.57 − 23.35 − 26.57 − 1.76 − 25.27 10.57 − 7.43 − 8.89 − 20.82
Total 161.82 183.94 194.87 41.83 44.20 60.59 47.51 41.91 44.87
  External financing
Loans 20.59 39.12 47.24 14.88 9.40 6.01 15.84 16.01 9.38
short-term loans − 1.98 − 3.17 − 4.31 − 1.51 − 1.40 − 0.42 − 0.91 − 0.93 − 2.05
long-term loans 22.57 42.29 51.55 16.39 10.80 6.43 16.76 16.94 11.42
Memo item
Mortage loans 24.87 36.56 41.71 14.08 10.46 4.29 12.16 14.33 10.94
Consumer loans 1.21 5.44 9.78 1.40 0.32 2.11 3.93 2.86 0.88
Entrepreneurial loans − 5.49 − 2.88 − 4.24 − 0.60 − 1.38 − 0.38 − 0.24 − 1.17 − 2.44
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 18.87 39.35 42.87 15.09 9.38 5.24 13.81 15.74 8.08
Loans from other financial institutions 1.72 − 0.23 4.37 − 0.22 0.02 0.77 2.04 0.27 1.30
Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 0.78 − 1.29 0.34 − 0.37 − 0.40 0.19 0.03 0.11 0.01
Total 21.37 37.84 47.58 14.51 9.01 6.20 15.88 16.12 9.39
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
May 2017
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2015 2016 
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,998.1 2,094.7 2,200.8 2,055.6 2,094.7 2,103.4 2,132.6 2,157.5 2,200.8
Currency 127.7 153.1 166.4 145.3 153.1 156.1 161.0 168.1 166.4
Deposits 1,870.4 1,941.6 2,034.4 1,910.3 1,941.6 1,947.4 1,971.6 1,989.5 2,034.4
Transferable deposits 981.4 1,082.4 1,188.0 1,050.1 1,082.4 1,089.8 1,117.9 1,141.5 1,188.0
Time deposits 256.4 246.8 248.7 246.4 246.8 248.3 250.4 248.7 248.7
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 632.7 612.4 597.7 613.8 612.4 609.3 603.4 599.3 597.7
Debt securities 162.2 139.8 127.4 144.0 139.8 137.1 133.5 130.6 127.4
short-term debt securities 2.1 2.9 2.7 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.3 2.4 2.7
long-term debt securities 160.1 136.9 124.7 141.0 136.9 134.2 131.2 128.3 124.7
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 102.4 89.4 85.6 92.2 89.4 89.6 87.8 87.1 85.6
Non-financial corporations 14.1 13.4 13.9 13.5 13.4 13.9 13.1 14.1 13.9
Financial corporations 78.7 69.5 66.7 71.5 69.5 69.4 69.0 67.8 66.7
General government 9.6 6.5 5.0 7.1 6.5 6.3 5.7 5.2 5.0
Debt securities of the rest of the world 59.8 50.3 41.8 51.8 50.3 47.6 45.7 43.5 41.8
Equity and investment fund shares 951.4 1,040.7 1,108.3 982.1 1,040.7 1,023.0 1,028.9 1,069.2 1,108.3
Equity 508.9 555.9 590.5 518.3 555.9 543.7 541.2 564.1 590.5
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 169.7 188.9 200.8 168.4 188.9 181.8 174.6 187.9 200.8
Non-financial corporations 142.1 158.7 169.8 140.2 158.7 154.1 148.6 160.6 169.8
Financial corporations 27.6 30.3 31.0 28.2 30.3 27.6 26.0 27.3 31.0
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 64.0 74.8 86.8 67.9 74.8 73.1 76.8 80.7 86.8
Other equity 1 275.3 292.2 303.0 282.0 292.2 288.9 289.7 295.5 303.0
Investment fund shares 442.5 484.8 517.8 463.8 484.8 479.3 487.8 505.1 517.8
Money market fund shares 4.0 3.4 2.8 3.7 3.4 3.1 3.0 3.0 2.8Non-MMF investment fund shares 438.5 481.4 515.0 460.1 481.4 476.3 484.7 502.1 515.0
Non-life insurance technical reservesand provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 307.3 324.4 337.8 320.0 324.4 327.7 331.1 334.5 337.8
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 885.6 919.5 963.1 911.8 919.5 940.4 948.7 958.5 963.1
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 752.1 785.4 812.6 770.6 785.4 788.6 795.1 800.8 812.6
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 
2 35.8 37.1 35.6 34.8 37.1 36.8 36.5 36.0 35.6
Total 5,092.6 5,341.6 5,585.5 5,218.8 5,341.6 5,357.1 5,406.4 5,487.2 5,585.5
  Liabilities
Loans 1,570.5 1,607.6 1,655.4 1,598.4 1,607.6 1,614.0 1,629.8 1,646.0 1,655.4
short-term loans 64.6 60.9 56.6 62.6 60.9 60.5 59.6 58.6 56.6
long-term loans 1,505.9 1,546.7 1,598.8 1,535.8 1,546.7 1,553.5 1,570.2 1,587.3 1,598.8
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,118.0 1,154.7 1,196.6 1,144.0 1,154.7 1,159.1 1,171.3 1,185.6 1,196.6
Consumer loans 188.9 191.9 201.8 192.2 191.9 194.0 197.8 200.9 201.8
Entrepreneurial loans 263.6 260.9 257.0 262.1 260.9 260.9 260.7 259.5 257.0
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,477.6 1,514.9 1,558.3 1,505.7 1,514.9 1,520.5 1,534.3 1,550.2 1,558.3
Loans from other financial institutions 92.9 92.7 97.1 92.7 92.7 93.5 95.5 95.8 97.1
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 16.4 14.8 15.5 16.3 14.8 15.7 15.7 16.1 15.5
Total 1,586.9 1,622.4 1,670.9 1,614.7 1,622.4 1,629.6 1,645.5 1,662.1 1,670.9
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2010 − 108.9 − 84.1 − 20.6 − 8.1 + 3.8 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 p − 5.4 − 8.1 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 5.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2014 p + 8.6 + 8.6 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 3.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 p + 20.9 + 10.0 + 4.6 + 4.2 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 pe + 23.7 + 7.7 + 4.7 + 3.1 + 8.2 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3
2015          H1  p + 14.4 + 2.4 + 3.7 + 5.6 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.2
         H2  p + 6.6 + 7.7 + 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
2016          H1  pe + 18.2 + 5.2 + 3.6 + 3.1 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4
         H2  pe + 5.5 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2010 2,088.8 1,334.0 629.6 143.1 1.3 81.0 51.7 24.4 5.5 0.1
2011 2,128.3 1,344.1 657.0 143.6 1.3 78.7 49.7 24.3 5.3 0.0
2012 2,204.9 1,387.9 685.5 148.2 1.2 79.9 50.3 24.9 5.4 0.0
2013 p 2,189.8 1,390.5 664.1 151.3 1.3 77.5 49.2 23.5 5.4 0.0
2014 p 2,189.6 1,396.5 657.0 152.5 1.4 74.9 47.8 22.5 5.2 0.0
2015 p 2,158.8 1,372.7 653.1 152.5 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.5 5.0 0.0
2016 p 2,140.4 1,366.9 637.0 152.7 1.1 68.3 43.6 20.3 4.9 0.0
2015          Q1 p 2,195.0 1,398.0 665.0 152.8 1.4 74.5 47.4 22.6 5.2 0.0
         Q2 p 2,160.8 1,380.6 644.6 152.6 1.4 72.6 46.4 21.7 5.1 0.0
         Q3 p 2,162.5 1,374.8 652.1 153.4 1.5 72.0 45.8 21.7 5.1 0.0
         Q4 p 2,158.8 1,372.7 653.1 152.5 1.4 71.2 45.3 21.5 5.0 0.0
2016          Q1 p 2,166.4 1,382.5 645.8 154.9 1.2 70.9 45.2 21.1 5.1 0.0
         Q2 p 2,169.3 1,391.2 642.1 154.4 1.1 70.2 45.0 20.8 5.0 0.0
         Q3 p 2,162.2 1,381.1 642.5 155.1 1.0 69.5 44.4 20.6 5.0 0.0
         Q4 p 2,140.4 1,366.9 637.0 152.7 1.1 68.3 43.6 20.3 4.9 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2010 1,110.3 556.2 426.2 127.9 1,219.2 634.5 203.5 118.0 59.4 63.9 139.9 − 108.9 986.5
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 124.1 61.4 67.5 113.1 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 p 1,258.4 650.6 465.0 142.8 1,263.7 666.5 217.9 133.1 60.7 56.0 129.4 − 5.4 1,119.9
2014 p 1,306.8 674.0 482.0 150.7 1,298.2 692.5 224.1 134.3 60.9 52.0 134.3 + 8.6 1,160.7
2015 p 1,354.8 706.3 500.8 147.8 1,333.9 723.4 228.6 139.5 64.3 47.3 130.8 + 20.9 1,212.5
2016 pe 1,411.4 738.2 523.1 150.1 1,387.7 755.8 235.8 151.7 66.5 43.4 134.6 + 23.7 1,268.2
as a percentage of GDP
2010 43.0 21.6 16.5 5.0 47.3 24.6 7.9 4.6 2.3 2.5 5.4 − 4.2 38.2
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.3 2.5 4.2 − 1.0 38.7
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.3
2013 p 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.2 39.6
2014 p 44.7 23.1 16.5 5.2 44.4 23.7 7.7 4.6 2.1 1.8 4.6 + 0.3 39.7
2015 p 44.7 23.3 16.5 4.9 44.0 23.9 7.5 4.6 2.1 1.6 4.3 + 0.7 40.0
2016 pe 45.1 23.6 16.7 4.8 44.3 24.1 7.5 4.8 2.1 1.4 4.3 + 0.8 40.5
Percentage growth rates
2010 + 1.8 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 6.1 + 4.2 + 1.5 + 2.9 + 5.7 + 1.9 − 1.7 + 23.9 . + 1.3
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.1 + 3.3 + 5.7 − 19.2 . + 6.0
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.6
2013 p + 3.1 + 4.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 5.2 − 1.3 − 11.2 + 14.8 . + 3.3
2014 p + 3.8 + 3.6 + 3.7 + 5.5 + 2.7 + 3.9 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 − 7.2 + 3.8 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.7 + 4.8 + 3.9 − 1.9 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 2.0 + 3.9 + 5.4 − 9.1 − 2.6 . + 4.5
2016 pe + 4.2 + 4.5 + 4.5 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 8.7 + 3.5 − 8.3 + 2.9 . + 4.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and lution Fund established at the European level. 
social contributions plus customs duties and levies from banks to the Single Reso-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 
4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2010 634.7 530.6 7.9 713.6 190.7 308.5 57.7 39.7 11.4 − 78.9 516.5 512.9 + 3.7 1,033.7 1,108.9 − 75.2
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.3 + 15.0 1,104.2 1,111.2 − 7.02012 
p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.9 + 17.3 1,171.1 1,179.0 − 7.9
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 532.0 + 4.7 1,198.1 1,205.2 − 7.0
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.4 551.1 + 3.2 1,245.1 1,236.8 + 8.4
2015 p 832.4 673.3 10.4 802.8 243.6 302.2 49.7 46.4 12.5 + 29.7 574.2 572.5 + 1.7 1,303.2 1,271.9 + 31.3
2014          Q1 p 188.2 153.6 2.0 193.9 56.7 77.9 20.0 7.8 2.3 − 5.7 132.8 136.1 − 3.3 296.0 305.0 − 9.0
         Q2 p 193.1 157.4 2.2 188.1 56.9 71.8 9.8 9.8 8.2 + 5.0 136.4 135.8 + 0.6 304.5 299.0 + 5.6
         Q3 p 192.2 157.5 3.4 193.5 57.1 71.2 17.7 11.3 4.0 − 1.4 136.3 137.4 − 1.1 303.1 305.5 − 2.4
         Q4 p 219.0 174.9 3.5 211.8 65.4 73.5 9.5 16.5 3.1 + 7.2 148.3 141.5 + 6.8 341.6 327.6 + 14.0
2015          Q1 p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
         Q2 p 208.4 167.7 1.5 185.2 59.5 72.8 7.2 9.1 3.0 + 23.1 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 325.0 301.8 + 23.2
         Q3 p 202.8 166.5 3.8 198.0 62.3 71.3 16.6 11.6 3.4 + 4.7 141.2 143.4 − 2.1 318.1 315.5 + 2.6
         Q4 p 221.5 178.2 2.6 219.3 63.4 77.4 7.3 17.3 3.5 + 2.2 152.7 145.3 + 7.4 348.4 338.8 + 9.6
2016          Q1 p 204.8 169.9 1.4 205.7 60.2 81.5 17.7 8.4 2.2 − 0.8 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 320.9 325.4 − 4.5
         Q2 p 217.5 176.6 2.4 194.8 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 339.2 314.9 + 24.3
         Q3 p 204.1 169.3 2.9 207.9 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 325.3 330.4 − 5.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012, also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans granted. 6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
 
 
€ billion
Central government
State government  2,3 Local government 3 
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2010 288.7 333.1 − 44.4 266.8 287.3 − 20.5 175.4 182.3 − 6.9
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.02012 
p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.8 372.4 + 9.5 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2014          Q1 p 69.8 80.4 − 10.6 80.3 81.0 − 0.7 45.1 50.0 − 4.8
         Q2 p 77.7 76.7 + 0.9 82.3 80.4 + 1.9 54.8 52.0 + 2.8
         Q3 p 82.5 85.3 − 2.9 82.7 80.4 + 2.3 53.9 54.4 − 0.5
         Q4 p 92.9 80.8 + 12.2 92.0 94.0 − 2.0 63.0 61.0 + 2.0
2015          Q1 p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2 p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 58.1 53.4 + 4.7
         Q3 p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 57.5 56.3 + 1.2
         Q4 p 91.5 83.4 + 8.1 94.1 96.8 − 2.8 69.0 65.9 + 3.0
2016          Q1 p 81.1 83.6 − 2.5 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
         Q2 p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
         Q3 p 85.2 88.6 − 3.5 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
         Q4 p 90.9 92.5 − 1.6 105.0 104.4 + 0.6 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. For the follow-cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and ing years, Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5 
2010 530,587 460,230 254,537 181,326 24,367 70,385 − 28 28,726
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,6152012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,4982013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,7752014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,791 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,679 + 148 27,836
2015          Q1 161,068 137,183 68,215 57,237 11,731 15,722 + 8,163 6,433
         Q2 167,763 143,248 76,762 59,298 7,188 24,814 − 299 6,633         Q3 166,468 143,854 79,783 59,551 4,520 23,006 − 392 7,558         Q4 177,978 156,200 84,089 64,613 7,499 29,461 − 7,684 6,618
2016          Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
         Q2 176,879 152,042 82,184 64,684 5,175 25,205 − 368 6,512         Q3 169,374 145,700 76,638 61,573 7,489 23,839 − 165 7,584         Q4 189,180 164,382 83,920 72,608 7,855 32,513 − 7,715 7,253
2017          Q1 ... 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 ... ... 6,606
2016          Mar . 57,691 30,150 24,894 2,647 . . 2,1632017          Mar . 61,899 33,033 26,960 1,905 . . 2,202
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- and gross national income accruing to the EU from central government tax rev-
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, enue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin, Bremen and Ham-
shares in energy tax revenue, compensation for the transfer of motor vehicle tax to burg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference between local govern-
central government and consolidation aid, which central government remits to state ment’s share in the joint taxes received by the state government cash offices in thegovernment. See the last column for the volume of these amounts which are period in question (see Table X. 6) and the amounts passed on to local governmentdeducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom duties and shares in VAT in the same period. 5 Volume of the positions mentioned under footnote 1. 
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2010 488,731 192,816 127,904 31,179 12,041 21,691 180,042 136,459 43,582 5,925 93,426 12,146 4,378 28,501
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,5172012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,8222013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,0402014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,310 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2015          Q1 146,924 66,225 41,557 13,134 5,438 6,097 51,852 40,050 11,803 143 22,268 5,207 1,228 9,741
         Q2 153,155 69,728 44,267 12,323 5,851 7,287 50,754 38,063 12,691 1,760 24,892 4,838 1,183 9,907         Q3 153,307 66,010 43,251 10,666 4,452 7,640 53,203 40,029 13,174 2,019 25,637 5,029 1,409 9,453         Q4 166,901 71,295 49,816 12,457 3,842 5,180 54,111 40,873 13,238 3,484 31,407 5,265 1,339 10,701
2016          Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
         Q2 162,096 74,489 45,311 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,054         Q3 155,524 68,137 44,656 11,898 5,546 6,037 53,906 40,877 13,029 2,046 24,857 5,263 1,316 9,824         Q4 175,797 78,076 52,275 14,422 6,134 5,245 56,071 42,593 13,478 3,656 31,247 5,454 1,293 11,415
2017          Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
2016          Mar 62,073 35,229 13,416 13,131 7,077 1,604 15,294 11,211 4,084 12 8,886 2,208 444 4,3832017          Mar 66,757 39,134 14,126 14,991 7,827 2,189 15,925 11,557 4,368 12 9,137 2,156 393 4,858
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in section 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2016: 49.4:48.3:2.2. The EU share is deducted from centralation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2016: 22.4:77.6. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
 
 
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Period Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits land and ance lottery business property
tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2010 39,838 11,713 13,492 10,284 8,488 6,171 1,990 1,449 5,290 4,404 1,412 1,039 47,780 35,712 11,315
2011 40,036 12,781 14,414 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 6,366 4,246 1,420 1,064 52,984 40,424 11,674
2012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,017
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,377
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,313 50,097 13,654
2015          Q1 4,704 3,783 2,223 5,825 2,454 1,806 570 904 2,760 1,668 426 353 14,288 10,912 2,982
         Q2 9,512 4,278 3,683 2,187 2,361 1,465 470 937 2,561 1,617 433 227 16,368 12,383 3,636
         Q3 10,159 3,714 3,981 2,436 2,108 1,643 496 1,102 3,021 1,335 401 272 15,180 11,118 3,697         Q4 15,220 4,155 5,034 1,972 1,883 1,678 534 930 2,906 1,670 452 236 14,561 11,339 2,899
2016          Q1 4,620 3,979 2,722 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 3,217 1,668 451 336 15,639 12,090 3,121
         Q2 9,860 4,470 4,139 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 2,952 2,283 451 267 16,740 12,635 3,715
         Q3 10,149 3,938 3,010 2,510 2,198 1,641 499 911 3,050 1,501 446 266 15,896 11,699 3,794
         Q4 15,461 4,468 4,315 2,038 1,899 1,728 532 806 3,189 1,554 460 251 17,039 13,673 3,024
2017          Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 ... ... ...
2016          Mar 2,925 1,940 1,482 782 868 579 131 180 1,094 776 151 187 . . .
2017          Mar 3,072 2,162 1,235 723 920 722 125 178 1,161 647 150 199 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans 6 estate assets
2010 250,133 172,767 76,173 248,076 211,852 14,343 + 2,057 19,375 18,077 1,120 73 105 4,464
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,379
2012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,315
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,250
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 p 285,827 202,274 82,616 288,291 246,438 17,381 − 2,464 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2014          Q1 64,138 44,355 19,534 64,615 55,266 3,897 − 477 32,669 28,668 3,781 121 99 4,251         Q2 66,857 47,145 19,453 64,697 55,085 3,891 + 2,160 35,181 31,167 3,791 126 97 4,260
         Q3 66,129 45,992 19,865 66,801 56,909 3,991 − 672 33,678 30,264 3,191 129 94 4,256
         Q4 71,927 51,577 20,096 69,548 59,225 4,192 + 2,379 36,442 32,901 3,317 129 94 4,275
2015          Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259         Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2016          Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213         Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2017          Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance cluding investment spending and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway of government cash benefits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves.
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the quarterly fig- End of year or quarter. 5Including cash. 6Excluding loans to other social security
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Including financial compensation payments. Ex- funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue
Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2010 37,070 22,614 2,929 7,927 45,213 16,602 4,125 9,297 5,256 740 5,322 − 8,143 5,207
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2014          Q1 7,844 6,696 299 − 8,693 4,379 311 1,605 . 199 1,239 − 849 −
         Q2 8,352 7,143 331 − 8,036 3,902 197 1,593 . 211 1,259 + 316 −         Q3 8,249 6,991 318 − 7,551 3,641 123 1,458 . 163 1,313 + 698 −         Q4 9,280 7,884 347 − 7,868 3,446 79 1,609 . 122 1,682 + 1,412 −
2015          Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −         Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
2016          Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −         Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2017          Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2010 179,529 160,797 15,700 175,804 56,697 30,147 28,432 11,419 10,609 7,797 9,554 + 3,725
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,4502012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,0252013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,8672014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 
p 223,492 206,823 14,000 222,973 70,492 36,008 37,252 13,873 14,230 11,672 10,977 + 519
2014          Q1 49,164 45,113 3,500 50,990 16,868 8,097 8,582 3,262 3,029 2,693 2,313 − 1,827         Q2 49,290 46,757 1,769 51,332 16,463 8,234 8,600 3,304 3,282 2,651 2,404 − 2,042         Q3 49,992 46,637 2,634 51,035 16,335 8,266 8,392 3,152 3,313 2,607 2,391 − 1,043         Q4 54,604 50,593 2,597 52,017 15,997 8,496 8,642 3,347 3,444 2,665 2,907 + 2,588
2015          Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501         Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996         Q4 55,872 52,085 2,875 54,124 16,553 8,773 8,998 3,449 3,618 2,834 3,102 + 1,747
2016          Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615         Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517         Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the butions from subsidised low-paid part-time employment. 3Federal grant and liquid-
sum of the quarterly figures, as the latter are all provisional. Excluding revenue and ity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after deducting reimbursements for ex-
expenditure as part of the risk structure compensation scheme. 2Including contri- penses for levying contributions incurred by other social insurance funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2010 21,864 21,659 21,539 2,933 9,567 4,673 869 1,028 + 325
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 3312012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 
p 32,025 31,956 30,997 3,825 10,914 6,837 979 1,415 + 1,028
2014          Q1 6,168 6,141 6,290 871 2,542 1,463 229 315 − 123         Q2 6,404 6,386 6,260 848 2,554 1,466 236 309 + 144         Q3 6,405 6,386 6,442 932 2,577 1,481 237 299 − 37         Q4 6,933 6,918 6,462 907 2,590 1,529 238 288 + 471
2015          Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472         Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236         Q4 8,198 8,180 7,571 966 2,722 1,682 240 295 + 626
2016          Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259         Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147         Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insurance contributions). 3For
dent fund. 1The final annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly fig- non-professional carers. 
ures, as the latter are all provisional. 2Since 2005 including special contributions for
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system
Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing 1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross 
2 Net loans deposits 3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs pe porations pe creditors 1 creditors pe 
2010 + 302,694 + 42,397 − 5,041 + 1,607 2010 2,088,785 4,440 691,401 207,062 133,351 1,052,532
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,128,324 4,440 641,685 206,631 123,064 1,152,5052012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,204,943 4,440 643,884 199,132 143,883 1,213,6032013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,189,775 4,440 634,669 190,555 145,785 1,214,3272014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,189,564 4,440 619,838 190,130 134,670 1,240,486
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,158,813 77,220 606,481 186,661 150,966 1,137,486
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 
p 2,140,368 196,320 572,527 179,755 175,358 1,016,408
2014          Q1 + 43,862 − 3,551 − 9,267 − 9,556 2014          Q1 2,178,713 4,440 631,241 190,306 130,966 1,221,760         Q2 + 58,444 + 9,500 + 6,281 + 10,589          Q2 2,185,126 4,440 628,341 189,569 131,976 1,230,800         Q3 + 47,215 − 8,035 − 2,111 − 10,817          Q3 2,186,288 4,440 629,604 188,907 129,636 1,233,701         Q4 + 43,018 − 292 + 1,907 + 10,675          Q4 2,189,564 4,440 619,838 190,130 134,670 1,240,486
2015          Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 2,195,020 12,335 625,817 189,048 142,040 1,225,780
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 2,160,801 34,310 612,663 187,280 141,307 1,185,241         Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091          Q3 2,162,548 54,990 616,499 188,165 142,763 1,160,130         Q4 + 32,541 − 5,929 + 2,344 − 142          Q4 2,158,813 77,220 606,481 186,661 150,966 1,137,486
2016          Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1 
p 2,166,362 100,051 607,793 183,160 144,155 1,131,204
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2 p 2,169,346 133,297 595,070 181,372 158,883 1,100,724
         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864          Q3 p 2,162,250 163,636 590,349 179,359 158,991 1,069,914
         Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333          Q4 p 2,140,368 196,320 572,527 179,755 175,358 1,016,408
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Federal  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2017
X Public finances in Germany
 
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
 
 
€ million
Loans from non-banks
Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6 
Central, state and local government
2010 1,732,851 87,042 391,851 195,534 8,704 628,957 1,975 302,716 21 111,609 4,440 2
2011 1,752,903 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 292,606 102 111,765 4,440 2
2012 1,791,672 57,172 417,469 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 289,225 70 113,198 4,440 2
2013 1,816,557 50,128 423,441 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 291,969 46 110,323 4,440 2
2014 1,817,587 27,951 429,633 259,186 2,375 703,812 1,187 277,296 42 111,664 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,821,890 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,905 1,155 290,509 42 111,561 4,440 2
         Q2 1,807,271 29,575 421,582 243,299 2,031 722,562 1,133 271,661 42 110,944 4,440 2
         Q3 1,811,599 26,213 424,534 256,613 1,677 715,763 1,106 270,467 42 110,741 4,440 2
         Q4 1,805,314 19,431 429,818 246,940 1,305 725,285 1,070 263,992 59 112,972 4,440 2
2016          Q1 p 1,814,572 21,804 427,090 240,281 1,205 730,533 1,051 279,084 59 109,023 4,440 2
         Q2 p 1,812,750 29,543 427,813 235,389 1,108 727,922 1,033 277,672 59 107,769 4,440 2
         Q3 p 1,804,565 31,237 433,493 245,945 922 717,358 1,021 262,894 59 107,194 4,440 2
         Q4 p 1,786,779 24,509 430,701 236,136 737 724,328 1,010 258,084 59 106,772 4,440 2
Central government7,8
2010 1,075,415 85,867 126,220 195,534 8,704 628,582 1,975 13,349 − 10,743 4,440 2
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2015          Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
         Q2 1,121,637 27,535 101,090 243,299 2,031 720,715 1,133 13,021 − 8,373 4,440 2
         Q3 1,119,670 24,157 98,087 256,613 1,677 713,766 1,106 11,776 − 8,046 4,440 2
         Q4 1,113,741 18,536 96,389 246,940 1,305 723,238 1,070 13,825 − 7,996 4,440 2
2016          Q1 1,124,391 20,526 98,232 240,281 1,205 728,457 1,051 22,533 − 7,664 4,440 2
         Q2 1,128,595 28,369 99,417 235,389 1,108 725,469 1,033 26,236 − 7,133 4,440 2
         Q3 1,114,708 30,626 102,053 245,945 922 714,903 1,021 7,794 − 7,002 4,440 2
         Q4 1,102,410 23,609 95,727 236,136 737 722,124 1,010 11,761 − 6,866 4,440 2
State government
2010 528,696 1,176 265,631 .... 167,429 1 94,459 . 1
2011 537,870 1,975 283,601 .... 154,844 62 97,387 . 1
2012 541,254 950 299,750 .... 139,116 52 101,386 . 1
2013 546,354 125 313,412 .... 134,439 35 98,343 . 1
2014 544,992 0 326,188 .... 120,101 5 98,697 . 1
2015          Q1 547,487 1,821 323,055 .... 123,943 5 98,662 . 1
         Q2 538,594 2,040 320,492 .... 117,935 5 98,121 . 1
         Q3 544,260 2,056 326,447 .... 117,506 5 98,245 . 1
         Q4 543,999 895 333,429 .... 110,674 5 98,996 . 1
2016          Q1 p 542,715 1,278 328,858 .... 117,194 5 95,379 . 1
         Q2 p 536,884 1,173 328,397 .... 112,651 6 94,657 . 1
         Q3 p 541,819 611 331,441 .... 115,550 6 94,212 . 1
         Q4 p 538,755 900 334,975 .... 108,948 6 93,927 . 1
Local government9
2010 128,740 . − . . 375 . 121,938 20 6,407 . .
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 128,380 40 4,929 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 133,916 18 3,029 . .
2013 137,697 . − . . 646 . 133,713 11 3,328 . .
2014 142,468 . − . . 1,297 . 136,686 37 4,448 . .
2015          Q1 147,362 . − . . 1,597 . 141,278 37 4,450 . .
         Q2 147,039 . − . . 1,847 . 140,705 37 4,450 . .
         Q3 147,669 . − . . 1,997 . 141,185 37 4,450 . .
         Q4 147,573 . − . . 2,047 . 139,493 54 5,980 . .
2016          Q1 p 147,466 . − . . 2,076 . 139,356 54 5,980 . .
         Q2 p 147,271 . − . . 2,453 . 138,785 54 5,980 . .
         Q3 p 148,038 . − . . 2,455 . 139,550 54 5,980 . .
         Q4 p 145,614 . − . . 2,204 . 137,376 54 5,980 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical ities arising from housing construction by the former GDR’s armed forces and from
Office. *Excluding direct intergovernmental borrowing. 1Including Treasury finan- housing construction in connection with the return of the troops of the former USSR
cing paper. 2Excluding issuers’ holdings of their own securities. 3Treasury notes stationed in eastern Germany to their home country; excluding debt securities in own
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4Mainly loans against bor- portfolios. 7In contrast to the capital market statistics, the debt incurred through the
rowers’ notes and cash advances. Including loans raised abroad. Other loans from joint issuance of Federal securities is recorded here under central government and itsnon-banks, including loans from public supplementary pension funds and liabilities special funds in accordance with the agreed allocation ratios. 8From January 2011, in-
arising from the investment assistance levy. 5Excluding offsets against outstanding cluding debt of the Restructuring Fund for Credit Institutions. 9Including debt of
claims. 6Old debt mainly denominated in foreign currency, in accordance with the municipal special purpose associations. Data other than year-end figures have been
London Debts Agreement, old liabilities arising from housing construction and liabil- estimated. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2015   2016
  2014   2015   2016   2014   2015   2016   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 110.0 111.8 113.5 5.0 1.6 1.6 1.9 1.7 1.9 0.9 4.0 1.0 0.5Construction 101.6 101.4 104.2 1.4 − 0.2 2.8 − 0.8 − 0.8 2.4 1.7 5.6 2.0 1.7Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 106.6 108.6 111.1 0.4 1.9 2.4 1.8 1.6 1.9 1.3 4.3 1.7 2.1Information and communication 125.9 129.1 133.1 4.8 2.5 3.1 2.8 2.5 3.0 2.5 4.1 3.1 2.9Financial and insuranceactivities 105.8 106.5 109.2 − 4.8 0.7 2.5 2.2 1.6 − 0.4 2.2 1.4 2.4 3.9Real estate activities 101.8 102.6 103.4 − 1.5 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.9 1.2 0.7 1.0 0.6 0.8Business services 
1 106.6 109.0 111.3 2.4 2.3 2.1 2.6 2.1 3.0 1.6 3.7 1.8 1.3
Public services, education and
health 103.1 105.2 107.0 0.7 2.0 1.7 2.3 2.1 1.6 1.4 2.2 1.8 1.4Other services 97.3 97.6 98.7 − 0.5 0.3 1.1 0.3 0.2 0.9 0.1 2.0 1.2 1.1
Gross value added 106.3 107.9 109.9 1.5 1.6 1.8 1.7 1.6 1.8 1.2 3.2 1.5 1.4Gross domestic product 
2 106.4 108.2 110.2 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.8 1.8 2.1 1.5 3.2 1.5 1.2
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 104.4 106.5 108.6 0.9 2.0 2.0 1.7 2.2 2.1 2.1 2.8 1.5 1.5
Government consumption 104.5 107.4 111.7 1.2 2.7 4.0 2.8 2.6 3.4 4.6 4.8 3.7 3.2
Machinery and equipment 106.8 110.7 111.9 5.5 3.7 1.1 1.8 4.4 6.4 3.9 4.4 − 0.5 − 2.6Premises 109.5 109.8 113.1 1.9 0.3 3.0 − 0.0 0.1 3.1 3.0 5.4 2.1 1.3Other investment 
4 111.4 113.5 116.5 4.0 1.9 2.6 1.6 1.8 2.1 2.4 2.7 2.7 2.5
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.1 0.0
Domestic demand 104.5 106.2 108.6 1.4 1.6 2.3 0.7 2.0 2.5 2.3 3.1 2.0 1.6Net exports 
6 . . . 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.6 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.2
Exports 118.0 124.1 127.4 4.1 5.2 2.6 6.7 4.9 3.6 1.3 4.6 1.3 3.3Imports 114.8 121.0 125.5 4.0 5.5 3.7 4.9 6.0 5.0 3.2 4.8 2.4 4.5
Gross domestic product 
2 106.4 108.2 110.2 1.6 1.7 1.9 1.8 1.8 2.1 1.5 3.2 1.5 1.2
At  current  prices  (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,594.4 1,636.0 1,679.2 1.8 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.7 2.8 2.7 3.2 2.1 2.6
Government consumption 561.1 583.7 616.1 3.5 4.0 5.6 4.1 3.8 4.9 6.3 6.2 5.1 4.7Machinery and equipment 191.5 200.2 204.4 6.1 4.6 2.1 2.6 5.3 7.4 5.1 5.4 0.5 − 1.6Premises 288.7 295.0 309.4 4.2 2.2 4.9 1.9 1.9 4.9 4.6 7.3 4.1 3.5Other investment 
4 105.0 108.6 112.9 5.5 3.5 3.9 3.2 3.3 3.7 3.8 4.0 4.0 3.9
Changes in inventories 5 − 7.4 − 20.2 − 28.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,733.2 2,803.3 2,893.9 2.8 2.6 3.2 1.8 2.9 3.6 3.2 3.9 2.9 2.9Net exports 190.7 229.5 238.8 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,334.8 1,418.8 1,441.4 3.9 6.3 1.6 8.6 6.2 4.2 0.7 2.7 − 0.0 3.0Imports 1,144.1 1,189.3 1,202.6 2.5 3.9 1.1 4.5 4.7 2.8 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 4.0
Gross domestic product 
2 2,923.9 3,032.8 3,132.7 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.8 3.7 4.2 3.2 4.7 2.8 2.5
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 105.6 106.2 106.9 1.0 0.6 0.6 0.8 0.5 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.6 1.1Gross domestic product 106.6 108.7 110.2 1.8 2.0 1.4 2.0 1.9 2.1 1.7 1.5 1.3 1.2Terms of trade 99.5 102.0 103.6 1.3 2.6 1.5 2.1 2.5 2.6 2.4 2.3 1.4 0.2
V  Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,485.5 1,539.9 1,593.2 3.9 3.7 3.5 3.8 3.8 3.9 4.2 3.4 3.3 3.1Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 694.1 723.4 745.2 2.4 4.2 3.0 3.6 4.1 5.3 1.7 9.9 1.0 0.2
National income 2,179.5 2,263.2 2,338.4 3.4 3.8 3.3 3.8 3.9 4.3 3.3 5.4 2.5 2.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 2,988.9 3,098.8 3,197.3 3.3 3.7 3.2 3.4 3.7 4.2 3.4 4.8 2.6 2.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2017. 1Professional, stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
May 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi- and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100  
  
% of total 1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2013 r 106.4 r 106.4 96.4 107.7 104.4 114.0 100.1 100.6 108.3 106.0 113.7 114.7
2014 r 108.1 r 109.5 92.7 109.8 106.2 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
2015 r 108.6 r 107.0 97.5 110.3 106.1 117.6 102.8 101.9 111.4 109.4 114.8 119.3
2016 r 109.8 109.6 96.2 111.7 107.3 119.3 105.9 103.0 113.0 111.4 114.8 121.6
 
2016          Q1 r 107.2 89.0 102.4 110.4 107.7 116.6 106.7 100.7 113.0 108.9 109.1 125.0
         Q2 r 109.2 110.9 89.0 111.5 108.2 118.9 104.2 101.1 114.5 109.2 112.9 124.2
         Q3 r 110.1 117.9 91.8 111.4 108.3 117.6 103.0 104.1 112.6 113.5 113.2 119.3
         Q4 r 112.9 120.5 101.6 113.3 104.8 124.1 109.6 106.1 111.7 114.1 124.1 117.7
2017          Q1 x,p 108.5 91.6 103.6 111.5 109.1 117.3 110.5 101.6 114.6 113.5 109.9 125.5
 
2016          Mar r 116.7 107.2 102.4 119.9 114.7 129.8 115.0 106.6 121.4 118.3 125.9 134.9
         Apr r 108.6 108.5 91.2 110.9 107.9 118.0 104.7 99.9 114.1 107.1 109.9 128.4
         May r 106.5 109.3 89.9 108.2 107.0 112.8 97.2 101.0 112.3 105.5 107.2 115.7
         June r 112.4 114.8 86.0 115.5 109.8 125.9 110.6 102.3 117.2 115.1 121.5 128.6
         July 2,r 110.4 120.8 91.7 111.4 109.2 117.5 99.3 102.7 113.6 111.9 111.1 121.7
         Aug 2,r 104.5 113.5 90.6 105.1 104.2 107.8 94.1 102.5 107.0 108.2 105.8 104.6
         Sep r 115.4 119.5 93.1 117.7 111.5 127.5 115.7 107.0 117.3 120.3 122.6 131.7
         Oct r 115.7 122.5 99.5 116.8 111.9 124.0 114.5 109.9 118.6 116.7 114.2 132.0
         Nov r 118.7 123.5 102.2 120.2 111.8 131.6 115.9 111.3 121.8 120.4 127.3 131.0
         Dec r 104.3 115.4 103.1 102.9 90.6 116.7 98.4 97.2 94.6 105.3 130.9 90.1
2017          Jan x 99.8 69.1 108.3 103.1 104.2 103.9 103.6 98.0 108.1 106.7 95.0 112.5
         Feb x 106.7 91.5 100.5 109.6 106.0 117.0 109.7 97.9 112.2 110.1 110.3 125.9
         Mar x,p 118.9 114.3 102.1 121.7 117.0 131.0 118.2 108.8 123.6 123.7 124.4 138.0
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2013 r + 0.1 r + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.9 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 1.8
2014 r + 1.6 r + 2.9 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.2
2015 r + 0.5 r − 2.3 + 5.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 r + 1.1 + 2.4 − 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.9
 
2016          Q1 r + 1.7 + 4.1 − 2.2 + 1.9 + 1.4 + 2.4 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.9
         Q2 r + 0.6 + 1.8 − 2.5 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 3.2
         Q3 r + 0.9 + 2.7 − 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 1.6
         Q4 r + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 2.6 + 1.4 + 1.0
2017          Q1 x,p + 1.2 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 0.6 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 4.3 + 0.7 + 0.4
 
2016          Mar r + 0.9 + 3.5 − 3.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 2.2 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 0.1
         Apr r + 1.0 + 2.0 − 4.3 + 1.6 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 2.6 − 2.0 + 6.3
         May r − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.7 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 3.6
         June r + 1.3 + 2.5 − 3.8 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 7.9 − 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 − 1.5 + 7.0
         July 2,r − 1.3 + 3.2 − 2.7 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 2.8 + 2.2 − 2.0 − 1.0 + 0.3 − 4.3 − 3.9
         Aug 2,r + 2.3 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 1.7 + 3.9 + 3.5 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 0.2 + 7.9
         Sep r + 1.8 + 2.8 − 1.5 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.7 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 3.1 + 2.2
         Oct r + 1.6 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 0.8 + 4.8 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 3.8 − 1.6 + 1.4
         Nov r + 2.5 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 3.6 + 2.2 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 4.0 + 4.9 + 1.2
         Dec r + 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 5.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.2
2017          Jan x − 0.4 − 5.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 1.0 + 4.2 − 1.3 + 0.8 + 5.0 − 0.2 − 2.1
         Feb x + 2.0 + 5.2 + 3.4 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 1.8 + 3.9 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 3.2 + 3.9 + 0.6
         Mar x,p + 1.9 + 6.6 − 0.3 + 1.5 + 2.0 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 4.6 − 1.2 + 2.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office, by way of estimates, to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey or the
II.12. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 1Share of gross value Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
added at factor cost of the production sector in the base year 2010. 2Influenced by

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
May 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2012 106.9 − 2.7 104.2 − 4.5 109.2 − 1.8 103.8 + 0.0 99.4 − 5.6 105.3 + 1.9
2013
109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.4 107.4 + 2.0
2014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.7 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2015 114.8 + 2.1 103.0 − 0.9 123.2 + 3.9 114.3 + 3.2 106.7 + 4.2 116.9 + 2.8
2016 115.7 + 0.8 102.1 − 0.9 125.3 + 1.7 115.3 + 0.9 112.6 + 5.5 116.2 − 0.6
2016          Mar 128.1 + 2.1 108.6 − 4.1 142.7 + 5.5 121.2 + 3.2 117.6 + 3.2 122.5 + 3.3
         Apr 113.2 − 2.4 104.8 + 0.9 119.5 − 4.7 110.1 − 0.5 118.3 + 14.0 107.2 − 5.2
         May 111.9 − 1.6 101.5 − 3.0 119.2 − 1.1 111.5 + 0.5 100.6 − 1.0 115.3 + 0.9
         June 118.7 − 3.9 103.0 − 3.5 130.4 − 4.5 114.2 − 0.1 111.2 + 2.9 115.2 − 1.0
         July 114.1 − 2.1 102.1 − 2.8 122.1 − 1.9 117.3 − 1.2 110.0 + 2.0 119.9 − 2.0
         Aug 103.3 + 0.6 92.9 − 0.5 109.0 + 0.6 114.6 + 4.4 101.9 + 2.5 119.0 + 4.8
         Sep 113.9 + 1.8 100.5 + 0.5 123.3 + 2.7 115.4 + 1.1 119.2 + 2.4 114.1 + 0.6
         Oct 118.7 + 4.4 105.0 + 2.2 128.4 + 6.6 117.8 − 1.9 129.3 + 12.6 113.8 − 6.6
         Nov 119.0 + 2.1 107.5 + 2.1 127.1 + 1.8 118.3 + 2.5 119.2 + 8.8 118.0 + 0.5
         Dec 121.2 + 9.6 93.6 + 3.7 143.0 + 13.9 104.2 − 2.0 103.7 + 5.1 104.2 − 4.4
2017          Jan 115.1 + 1.1 107.0 + 2.6 120.7 + 1.1 116.9 − 4.1 115.6 − 0.5 117.4 − 5.2
         Feb 119.0 + 6.0 111.8 + 10.4 123.8 + 3.7 121.7 + 4.1 116.6 + 11.8 123.4 + 1.7
         Mar p 133.6 + 4.3 119.2 + 9.8 144.1 + 1.0 130.9 + 8.0 134.5 + 14.4 129.6 + 5.8
From the domestic market
2012 103.9 − 5.3 103.3 − 5.8 105.4 − 4.9 99.1 − 4.3 101.9 − 7.5 98.2 − 2.9
2013 104.4 + 0.5 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.3 102.8 + 0.9 99.5 + 1.3
2014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.8 + 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2015
107.4 + 1.7 99.0 − 1.8 116.3 + 4.9 105.2 + 2.7 102.1 − 0.7 106.3 + 4.0
2016 107.4 + 0.0 96.8 − 2.2 118.7 + 2.1 103.4 − 1.7 105.6 + 3.4 102.6 − 3.5
2016          Mar 
116.8 − 4.5 102.1 − 5.8 132.8 − 3.8 109.0 − 1.7 116.4 + 7.3 106.4 − 4.7
         Apr 108.3 + 0.2 102.0 + 1.5 116.1 − 1.0 99.3 + 0.2 106.2 + 6.4 96.8 − 2.0
         May 105.0 − 0.8 95.8 − 5.2 114.6 + 3.0 102.5 + 1.7 95.1 + 3.1 105.1 + 1.2
         June 108.4 + 1.1 97.0 − 3.7 121.1 + 5.8 100.7 − 1.2 101.4 + 1.4 100.4 − 2.1
         July 105.6 − 6.0 97.6 − 3.8 113.6 − 8.0 105.1 − 5.1 102.9 − 1.6 105.9 − 6.1
         Aug 99.7 + 0.8 91.0 − 2.3 107.8 + 4.2 103.0 − 3.5 101.3 + 1.6 103.6 − 5.1
         Sep 104.4 − 0.9 92.8 − 3.5 116.0 + 1.5 104.0 − 3.5 115.8 + 0.7 99.8 − 5.1
         Oct 111.0 + 3.1 100.5 + 1.8 122.2 + 4.7 107.0 − 1.1 120.6 + 6.8 102.2 − 4.1
         Nov 111.3 + 0.8 102.4 + 0.4 120.9 + 1.4 107.5 − 0.7 114.6 + 5.7 105.0 − 3.0
         Dec 107.4 + 9.7 86.5 + 2.9 131.0 + 16.1 91.0 + 0.2 88.9 + 6.3 91.7 − 1.8
2017          Jan 106.2 + 0.5 100.8 + 2.1 112.0 − 1.0 103.6 + 0.2 104.6 + 1.6 103.2 − 0.4
         Feb 113.5 + 7.5 108.4 + 13.9 119.3 + 3.2 109.9 + 1.9 104.3 + 3.8 111.9 + 1.4
         Mar p 122.2 + 4.6 110.7 + 8.4 135.6 + 2.1 111.2 + 2.0 117.1 + 0.6 109.1 + 2.5
From abroad
2012 109.2 − 0.7 105.2 − 3.0 111.6 + 0.2 107.7 + 3.5 97.3 − 3.7 111.3 + 5.8
2013 113.5 + 3.9 104.8 − 0.4 118.4 + 6.1 110.7 + 2.8 100.8 + 3.6 114.1 + 2.5
2014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.5 123.4 + 4.2 118.0 + 6.6 102.0 + 1.2 123.5 + 8.2
2015 120.7 + 2.4 107.7 + 0.3 127.4 + 3.2 122.1 + 3.5 110.7 + 8.5 126.0 + 2.0
2016 122.4 + 1.4 108.3 + 0.6 129.4 + 1.6 125.5 + 2.8 118.8 + 7.3 127.8 + 1.4
2016          Mar 137.2 + 7.1 116.3 − 2.1 148.8 + 11.4 131.7 + 7.1 118.6 − 0.1 136.1 + 9.4
         Apr 117.1 − 4.4 108.0 + 0.1 121.6 − 6.7 119.4 − 1.0 128.8 + 20.0 116.1 − 7.3
         May 117.5 − 2.2 108.2 − 0.5 122.1 − 3.2 119.2 − 0.4 105.4 − 4.0 124.0 + 0.7
         June 127.1 − 7.0 110.1 − 3.2 136.2 − 9.3 125.7 + 0.6 119.8 + 4.0 127.7 − 0.4
         July 121.0 + 0.7 107.4 − 1.6 127.4 + 1.8 127.7 + 1.7 116.1 + 5.0 131.8 + 0.9
         Aug 106.2 + 0.4 95.1 + 1.4 109.8 − 1.3 124.5 + 10.7 102.5 + 3.3 132.0 + 12.7
         Sep 121.7 + 3.8 109.5 + 4.8 127.8 + 3.3 125.1 + 4.6 122.2 + 3.8 126.2 + 4.9
         Oct 124.9 + 5.4 110.3 + 2.6 132.3 + 7.7 127.1 − 2.4 136.9 + 17.6 123.7 − 8.3
         Nov 125.2 + 2.9 113.6 + 4.0 130.9 + 1.9 127.6 + 5.0 123.2 + 11.3 129.1 + 3.1
         Dec 132.4 + 9.4 102.0 + 4.5 150.4 + 12.7 115.4 − 3.5 116.6 + 4.2 114.9 − 6.1
2017          Jan 122.4 + 1.7 114.3 + 3.2 126.0 + 2.2 128.3 − 6.8 125.2 − 2.0 129.4 − 8.2
         Feb 123.5 + 4.9 115.9 + 6.8 126.6 + 4.0 131.7 + 5.6 127.4 + 18.4 133.2 + 2.1
         Mar p 142.8 + 4.1 129.2 + 11.1 149.4 + 0.4 147.8 + 12.2 149.7 + 26.2 147.1 + 8.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
May 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2012 114.7 + 7.1 121.4 + 8.2 132.3 + 9.7 124.2 + 9.3 91.7 + 0.2 107.9 + 5.8 118.8 + 5.4 103.4 + 7.8
2013 119.2 + 3.9 126.4 + 4.1 140.6 + 6.3 128.1 + 3.1 93.9 + 2.4 111.9 + 3.7 121.9 + 2.6 107.7 + 4.2
2014 118.5 − 0.6 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.8 − 1.0 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.7 − 0.2 104.0 − 3.4
2015 124.2 + 4.8 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.3 − 2.0 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.3 + 5.1
2016 142.3 + 14.6 153.8 + 15.1 193.5 + 17.0 143.0 + 15.0 107.5 + 9.1 130.7 + 13.9 137.1 + 11.8 126.9 + 16.1
 
2016          Feb 120.7 + 15.1 126.0 + 11.0 157.8 + 15.4 115.4 + 9.2 94.8 + 4.3 115.4 + 19.8 109.5 + 5.7 117.2 + 25.5
         Mar 164.7 + 15.5 168.4 + 12.3 227.4 + 19.9 146.7 + 9.9 117.0 − 3.0 160.9 + 18.9 150.0 + 9.6 154.5 + 19.1
         Apr 151.0 + 18.9 155.3 + 16.7 195.8 + 14.2 142.3 + 20.0 114.1 + 13.1 146.7 + 21.3 140.3 + 18.7 143.9 + 21.7
         May 157.4 + 18.5 176.1 + 27.4 209.6 + 24.8 173.7 + 32.6 117.6 + 16.3 138.7 + 9.0 156.0 + 19.4 137.9 + 14.2         June 165.1 + 19.8 181.0 + 24.3 223.3 + 27.7 174.6 + 25.4 117.0 + 9.6 149.3 + 14.8 161.4 + 20.4 145.6 + 15.0
         July 152.7 + 15.7 163.6 + 17.4 194.9 + 5.6 158.6 + 31.8 117.2 + 9.2 141.7 + 13.7 144.2 + 19.5 144.4 + 17.9
         Aug 138.9 + 12.2 148.6 + 14.2 184.1 + 16.8 141.5 + 14.9 99.7 + 3.1 129.2 + 9.9 132.3 + 10.9 127.5 + 11.0         Sep 144.5 + 7.6 161.6 + 6.8 225.5 + 11.5 133.1 − 0.5 120.3 + 16.6 127.4 + 8.6 129.6 + 1.0 127.1 + 12.3
         Oct 145.3 + 23.4 157.0 + 22.7 194.3 + 22.7 148.1 + 27.3 110.2 + 7.1 133.6 + 24.4 144.9 + 20.3 126.1 + 27.9
         Nov 127.1 + 7.0 139.7 + 1.9 189.4 + 24.4 121.7 − 15.9 95.1 + 12.0 114.5 + 13.9 124.3 − 11.5 104.8 + 26.0         Dec 131.1 + 6.2 150.0 + 10.9 171.8 + 2.8 153.8 + 22.6 95.6 − 5.5 112.2 + 0.4 141.0 + 22.8 104.6 − 8.7
2017          Jan 113.5 + 4.6 124.9 + 6.1 154.5 + 4.7 122.4 + 14.8 74.4 − 19.0 102.1 + 2.8 124.4 + 11.6 85.9 − 4.2
         Feb 130.2 + 7.9 144.3 + 14.5 176.0 + 11.5 139.1 + 20.5 97.3 + 2.6 116.2 + 0.7 127.4 + 16.3 114.8 − 2.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. 
Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations o 
of which
in stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco 
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current At prices inprices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annualpercent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2012 104.5 + 1.8 100.8 − 0.3 105.2 + 2.6 102.3 + 0.7 99.0 − 0.4 104.5 + 0.8 100.7 + 0.4 116.5 + 8.4
2013 106.2 + 1.6 101.3 + 0.5 109.0 + 3.6 103.0 + 0.7 95.4 − 3.6 102.3 − 2.1 103.4 + 2.7 123.5 + 6.0
2014 108.2 + 1.9 102.7 + 1.4 111.6 + 2.4 104.9 + 1.8 94.6 − 0.8 101.9 − 0.4 110.7 + 7.1 126.2 + 2.2
2015 3 112.2 + 3.7 3 106.7 + 3.9 114.8 + 2.9 105.2 + 0.3 95.6 + 1.1 104.6 + 2.6 116.6 + 5.3 3 151.5 + 20.0
2016 4 115.0 + 2.5 108.9 + 2.1 117.1 + 2.0 104.8 − 0.4 95.6 + 0.0 106.1 + 1.4 121.4 + 4.1 166.3 + 9.8
 
2016          Mar 115.5 + 2.6 109.5 + 2.7 117.2 + 1.3 98.0 − 7.5 91.4 + 1.8 112.6 + 0.4 123.7 + 4.1 173.0 + 19.7
         Apr 114.4 + 2.3 107.8 + 2.5 117.1 + 0.2 112.5 + 3.4 81.8 + 0.4 111.3 + 2.0 119.1 + 2.8 150.3 + 17.5
         May 114.8 + 1.7 108.1 + 1.5 118.6 + 0.9 108.5 + 0.8 79.4 − 1.9 109.4 + 1.2 118.4 + 5.0 157.3 + 6.0         June 112.0 + 1.9 106.0 + 1.8 116.1 + 1.7 102.9 − 2.4 85.2 + 4.3 103.4 + 1.2 117.3 + 3.3 153.3 + 6.4
         July 115.5 + 2.1 109.8 + 1.8 119.1 + 2.9 107.1 − 0.6 89.6 − 1.2 106.3 + 2.9 124.4 + 4.0 150.1 + 0.9
         Aug 111.1 + 1.7 105.7 + 1.5 115.8 + 0.5 96.5 + 0.6 84.5 − 1.6 101.2 + 2.2 118.1 + 5.8 152.8 + 4.2         Sep 110.6 + 0.6 104.4 + 0.1 112.3 + 2.1 100.2 − 10.7 87.9 − 5.5 101.2 − 0.9 119.8 + 5.3 156.7 − 0.8
         Oct 120.0 + 3.5 112.8 + 3.0 118.7 + 2.8 127.7 + 6.2 101.1 + 3.3 112.5 + 1.6 124.3 + 4.1 178.9 + 9.3
         Nov 120.7 + 2.3 113.5 + 1.3 118.7 + 2.0 108.0 + 3.7 109.1 − 1.3 112.4 − 1.8 126.5 + 3.2 198.5 + 6.9         Dec 138.4 + 2.7 130.5 + 1.2 137.6 + 2.8 125.1 + 0.6 153.3 + 3.4 115.8 + 2.1 135.7 + 3.7 213.9 + 4.8
2017          Jan 107.3 + 1.8 101.2 − 0.2 108.5 + 0.4 86.2 − 5.4 114.2 + 15.8 91.1 − 1.9 119.3 + 2.7 170.2 + 8.4
         Feb 105.4 + 3.6 98.6 + 1.2 109.0 + 3.1 80.4 + 0.2 93.7 + 9.2 93.3 − 0.7 116.6 + 2.6 160.2 + 4.0         Mar 120.9 + 4.7 112.4 + 2.6 121.4 + 3.6 107.3 + 9.5 103.1 + 12.8 115.8 + 2.8 124.8 + 0.9 179.6 + 3.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added integration of a larger online retail sales based enterprise that founded a business
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business establishment in Germany in May 2015. 4As of January 2016 figures are provisional,
statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates
1Including stalls and markets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3As of May 2015, for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
May 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions  2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 5,6 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2012 42,062 + 1.2 29,341 + 2.3 8,739 19,604 773 4,981 112 67 2,897 902 6.8 478
2013 42,327 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 124 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 42,662 + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 94 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,057 + 0.9 30,822 + 2.1 8,937 20,839 806 4,856 88 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 r 43,594 r + 1.2 8 31,482 8 + 2.1 8 9,021 8 21,389 8 834 8 4,806 ... 8 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2014          Q1 42,214 + 0.8 29,809 + 1.4 8,760 20,103 730 4,991 178 58 3,109 1,078 7.2 452
         Q2 42,626 + 0.9 30,080 + 1.7 8,829 20,255 753 5,043 72 56 2,886 900 6.6 487         Q3 42,849 + 0.8 30,284 + 1.7 8,896 20,344 800 5,065 50 37 2,860 909 6.6 512         Q4 42,958 + 0.7 30,614 + 1.6 8,956 20,625 796 5,018 77 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2015          Q1 42,512 + 0.7 30,360 + 1.8 8,833 20,551 756 4,863 169 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 42,985 + 0.8 30,671 + 2.0 8,895 20,740 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822 6.3 560         Q3 43,272 + 1.0 30,927 + 2.1 8,974 20,864 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595         Q4 43,457 + 1.2 31,329 + 2.3 9,049 21,201 837 4,828 77 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2016          Q1
r 43,060 r + 1.3 31,064 + 2.3 8,927 21,120 793 4,786 166 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 r 43,497 r + 1.2 p 31,326 p + 2.1 p 8,983 p 21,279 p 820 p 4,824 59 47 2,674 782 9 6.1 653
         Q3 r 43,789 r + 1.2 p 31,536 p + 2.0 p 9,039 p 21,391 p 858 p 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682
         Q4 r 44,032 r + 1.3 8 32,003 8 + 2.2 8 9,133 8 21,764 8 866 8 4,788 ... 8 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017          Q1 10 43,698 10 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,734 11 987 6.2 671
2013          Dec 42,490 + 0.5 29,884 + 1.2 8,783 20,161 731 5,048 114 45 2,874 923 6.7 4402014          Jan 42,164 + 0.7 29,736 + 1.4 8,739 20,060 726 4,977 189 63 3,136 1,104 7.3 425
         Feb 42,183 + 0.8 29,784 + 1.5 8,750 20,088 729 4,976 193 57 3,138 1,105 7.3 456         Mar 42,296 + 0.9 29,932 + 1.7 8,797 20,162 742 4,990 152 55 3,055 1,026 7.1 476         Apr 42,486 + 0.9 30,060 + 1.7 8,826 20,244 749 5,030 77 60 2,943 938 6.8 485         May 42,643 + 0.8 30,125 + 1.6 8,836 20,292 751 5,060 72 56 2,882 893 6.6 481         June 42,748 + 0.8 30,175 + 1.9 8,854 20,295 779 5,087 66 52 2,833 869 6.5 495         July 42,780 + 0.8 30,121 + 1.8 8,860 20,219 800 5,100 54 40 2,871 909 6.6 502         Aug 42,804 + 0.8 30,312 + 1.6 8,904 20,362 802 5,046 44 32 2,902 934 6.7 515         Sep 42,964 + 0.8 30,663 + 1.7 8,992 20,608 813 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518         Oct 43,053 + 0.8 30,676 + 1.6 8,980 20,645 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517         Nov 43,010 + 0.7 30,636 + 1.6 8,960 20,645 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515         Dec 42,810 + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,864 20,565 753 5,012 107 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015          Jan 42,443 + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,815 20,498 747 4,846 169 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb 42,464 + 0.7 30,342 + 1.9 8,819 20,546 756 4,821 183 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519         Mar 42,630 + 0.8 30,528 + 2.0 8,865 20,651 777 4,829 154 50 2,932 955 6.8 542         Apr 42,820 + 0.8 30,645 + 1.9 8,895 20,723 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552         May 43,002 + 0.8 30,718 + 2.0 8,901 20,776 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815 6.3 557         June 43,134 + 0.9 30,771 + 2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572         July 43,177 + 0.9 30,744 + 2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589         Aug 43,232 + 1.0 30,986 + 2.2 8,993 20,899 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597         Sep 43,408 + 1.0 31,330 + 2.2 9,076 21,150 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600         Oct 43,492 + 1.0 31,365 + 2.2 9,067 21,203 846 4,813 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612         Nov 43,526 + 1.2 31,384 + 2.4 9,059 21,243 842 4,845 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610         Dec 43,353 + 1.3 31,145 + 2.5 8,963 21,163 798 4,843 105 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016          Jan 
r 42,978 r + 1.3 30,967 + 2.3 8,904 21,060 784 4,775 169 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb r 43,022 r + 1.3 31,055 + 2.3 8,921 21,116 793 4,771 177 50 2,911 947 6.6 614
         Mar r 43,180 r + 1.3 31,195 + 2.2 8,951 21,205 804 4,783 152 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
         Apr r 43,329 r + 1.2 31,299 + 2.1 8,980 21,267 809 4,808 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640
         May r 43,516 r + 1.2 31,395 + 2.2 8,997 21,324 826 4,839 57 45 2,664 774 9 6.0 655
         June r 43,645 r + 1.2 p 31,374 p + 2.0 p 8,991 p 21,289 p 846 p 4,864 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665
         July r 43,637 r + 1.1 p 31,258 p + 1.7 p 8,974 p 21,188 p 852 p 4,861 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674
         Aug r 43,766 r + 1.2 31,658 + 2.2 9,070 21,475 864 4,805 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685
         Sep r 43,963 r + 1.3 32,009 + 2.2 9,157 21,731 869 4,770 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687
         Oct r 44,057 r + 1.3 32,046 + 2.2 9,154 21,775 871 4,768 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691
         Nov r 44,100 r + 1.3 8 32,035 8 + 2.1 8 9,135 8 21,788 8 875 8 4,811 ... 8 40 2,532 756 5.7 681
         Dec r 43,939 r + 1.4 8 31,844 8 + 2.2 8 9,062 8 21,729 8 835 8 4,799 ... 8 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017          Jan r 43,615 r + 1.5 8 31,703 8 + 2.4 8 9,016 8 21,645 8 825 8 4,722 ... 8 37 2,777 11 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb r 43,662 r + 1.5 8 31,772 8 + 2.3 8 9,031 8 21,691 8 828 8 4,715 ... 8 35 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
         Mar 10 43,818 10 + 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,569 861 5.8 706
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and mum of 0.3 % for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- 1.4 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maxi-
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: mum of 31.2 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 9From May 2016 calculated
end of month. 3From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal on the basis of new labour force figures. 10Initial preliminary estimate by the Fed-
voluntary service or a year of social or ecological work. 4Number within a given eral Statistical Office. 11From January 2017, persons receiving additional income
month. 5Mid-month level. 6Relative to the total civilian labour force. 7Excluding assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same time)
government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs, including jobs located shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social Security Codeabroad. 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2014 (SGB III). 
and 2015, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maxi-

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
May 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
 
 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which 1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 6 
prices of
industrial of which
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Consumer Con- producer- sold on
energy struction the prices price index
(national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial Housing
Total Food 2 Energy 3 Services rents 4 concept) index market 5 Exports Imports Energy 7 products 5 goods materials  8 
Period 2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2012 9 97.5 9 94.2 98.1 107.8 95.9 96.1 9 104.1 105.7 107.0 119.4 104.9 108.7 166.8 128.7
2013 99.1 97.4 98.7 109.8 97.4 97.3 105.7 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 160.2 117.6
2014 99.9 98.8 99.2 107.5 98.8 98.8 106.6 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 142.8 108.3
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 111.3 103.9 106.9 104.9 100.9 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.2 101.2 107.4 113.4 102.1 10 106.6 104.0 97.8 83.2 98.4
 
2015          June 100.1 100.1 99.8 102.8 99.5 100.0 107.0 104.4 105.4 105.3 102.5 113.3 103.4
         July 100.3 99.8 99.1 102.3 100.8 100.1 107.2 104.4 104.5 105.4 101.8 106.0 101.6
         Aug 100.3 99.7 99.6 100.2 101.0 100.1 107.2 111.5 103.9 102.1 104.9 100.3 91.5 96.0
         Sep 100.1 100.0 100.7 98.4 100.1 100.2 107.0 103.5 107.4 104.6 99.6 90.8 94.1
         Oct 100.1 100.4 101.2 97.6 100.0 100.3 107.0 103.1 108.9 104.4 99.3 91.6 93.4
         Nov 100.1 100.5 101.0 97.7 100.1 100.4 107.1 111.8 102.9 107.6 104.5 99.1 89.6 92.7
         Dec 100.1 100.2 100.4 95.0 101.2 100.4 107.0 102.4 107.3 104.1 97.9 77.5 89.4
2016          Jan 99.1 100.4 99.7 92.7 99.9 100.6 106.1 101.7 106.8 103.9 96.4 64.5 88.2
         Feb 99.5 100.8 99.9 91.8 100.6 100.7 106.5 112.5 101.2 106.0 103.4 95.8 64.0 88.6
         Mar 100.3 101.2 101.0 92.7 101.5 100.8 107.3 101.2 106.6 103.6 96.5 72.3 93.6
         Apr 99.8 101.6 101.5 93.6 99.7 100.9 106.9 101.3 105.9 103.5 96.4 75.1 95.5
         May 100.2 101.3 101.4 95.0 100.5 101.0 107.2 113.1 101.7 106.0 103.7 97.3 82.6 97.2
         June 100.3 101.0 100.7 96.2 100.9 101.1 107.3 102.1 106.4 103.9 97.8 87.9 98.9
         July 100.7 101.3 100.0 95.1 102.2 101.2 107.6 102.3 110.0 104.1 97.9 84.4 100.2
         Aug 100.6 100.9 100.3 94.3 102.3 101.4 107.6 113.7 102.2 106.7 104.0 97.7 83.9 98.6
         Sep 100.6 101.2 101.5 94.9 101.4 101.5 107.7 102.0 10 104.7 104.0 97.8 83.9 97.0
         Oct 100.8 101.2 102.0 96.2 101.2 101.7 107.9 102.7 108.8 104.3 98.7 96.2 99.8         Nov 100.8 102.0 102.0 95.2 101.1 101.8 108.0 114.1 103.0 111.2 104.8 99.4 95.4 108.5         Dec 101.8 102.6 101.6 97.3 102.8 102.0 108.8 103.4 113.1 105.2 101.3 106.6 114.0
2017          Jan 101.0 103.2 100.7 98.2 101.0 102.2 108.1 104.1 114.8 105.8 102.2 108.9 115.9
         Feb 101.7 104.6 101.0 98.4 101.9 102.3 108.8 115.5 104.3 116.2 106.0 102.9 110.2 118.9         Mar 101.8 103.4 102.6 97.5 102.0 102.4 109.0 104.3 117.6 106.0 102.4 99.7 116.4
         Apr 101.8 103.4 102.7 98.3 101.5 102.6 109.0 ... ... ... ... 100.4 110.1
Annual percentage change  
  
2012 9 + 2.1 9 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 5.6 + 1.3 + 1.2 9 + 2.0 + 2.7 + 1.6 + 5.3 + 1.5 + 2.2 + 7.5 − 5.3
2013 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 8.6
2014 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.8 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.7 10 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 16.8 − 1.6
 
2015          June + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.7 − 5.8 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 1.4 − 10.5 + 1.3 − 1.4 − 25.0 − 4.6
         July + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 6.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.3 − 8.3 + 1.2 − 1.7 − 26.5 − 5.1
         Aug + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 7.5 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 1.7 − 8.4 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 35.5 − 10.4         Sep − 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.9 − 9.2 + 1.1 + 1.2 +
 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 4.0 − 37.2 − 10.4
         Oct 
+ 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 − 8.7 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 5.0 + 0.2 − 4.1 − 32.5 − 11.6
         Nov + 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 7.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 1.5 − 2.5 + 3.9 + 0.3 − 3.5 − 29.3 − 13.1
         Dec + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.7 − 6.5 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 2.3 + 4.4 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 28.4 − 14.8
2016          Jan + 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 − 5.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.5 − 2.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 3.8 − 30.0 − 17.4
         Feb − 0.2 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 8.6 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.5 − 3.0 + 1.1 − 1.2 − 5.7 − 40.7 − 16.3
         Mar 
+ 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 8.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 1.4 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 33.7 − 12.6
         Apr − 0.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 8.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 6.6 − 35.0 − 9.6
         May + 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 8.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 5.5 − 29.3 − 7.2
         June
+ 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.2 + 0.9 − 1.3 − 4.6 − 22.4 − 4.4
         July + 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.9 − 7.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 5.3 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 20.4 − 1.4
         Aug + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 4.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 8.3 + 2.7         Sep + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.4
10 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 7.6 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.0 + 6.9         Nov + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 17.0         Dec + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 37.5 + 27.5
2017          Jan + 1.9 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 7.5 + 1.8 + 6.0 + 68.8 + 31.4
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 7.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 9.6 + 2.5 + 7.4 + 72.2 + 34.2         Mar + 1.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 3.1 + 10.3 + 2.3 + 6.1 + 37.9 + 24.4
         Apr + 2.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 ... ... ... ... + 33.7 + 15.3
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on transport fuels and lubricants. 4Net rents. 5Excluding value-added tax. 6For the
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw euro area, in euro. 7Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas. 8Food, beverages and to-
Materials: HWWI. 1Differences from the official figures are due to rounding. 2Inclu- bacco as well as industrial raw materials. 9From January 2012, increase in tobacco
ding alcoholic beverages and tobacco. 3Electricity, gas and other fuels well as tax. 10 From September 2016 onwards, provisional figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
May 2017
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 Mass income 4 Saving 6 ratio 7 benefits received 3 Disposable income 5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2009
1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 380.7 6.9 1,053.3 2.6 1,569.2 − 0.8 156.2 − 5.9 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.3
2013 1,167.5 3.0 778.4 2.9 389.1 0.4 1,167.5 2.0 1,719.8 1.4 154.1 − 2.2 9.0
2014 1,213.0 3.9 807.1 3.7 400.2 2.8 1,207.3 3.4 1,759.5 2.3 165.1 7.1 9.4
2015 1,260.6 3.9 836.6 3.6 415.5 3.8 1,252.0 3.7 1,811.2 2.9 175.2 6.1 9.7
2016 1,305.9 3.6 863.1 3.2 428.2 3.1 1,291.3 3.1 1,860.3 2.7 181.1 3.4 9.7
2015          Q3 311.3 4.0 211.1 3.8 103.9 3.6 315.0 3.7 454.8 3.0 37.1 6.0 8.2
         Q4 348.7 4.2 231.6 4.5 103.5 3.1 335.1 4.0 459.3 3.0 38.4 5.7 8.4
2016          Q1 305.3 4.5 202.2 4.4 107.6 1.8 309.8 3.5 459.7 2.7 59.6 3.1 13.0
         Q2 319.3 3.5 207.4 3.6 105.2 2.8 312.6 3.3 464.4 3.3 43.7 4.3 9.4
         Q3 321.9 3.4 217.1 2.9 108.3 4.2 325.4 3.3 464.5 2.1 37.9 2.2 8.2
         Q4 359.5 3.1 236.4 2.0 107.1 3.5 343.5 2.5 471.7 2.7 39.9 4.0 8.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2017. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax andcontributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee 3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2009 98.4 2.0 98.3 2.0 98.4 2.3 98.2 2.5 97.6 − 0.1
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.7 1.7 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.4 2.7 104.4 2.6 104.7 2.9 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.72013 107.0 2.5 107.0 2.5 107.3 2.5 107.3 2.5 108.4 2.02014 110.1 2.9 110.0 2.8 110.1 2.7 110.1 2.7 111.4 2.8
2015 112.6 2.2 112.4 2.2 112.6 2.2 112.7 2.3 114.4 2.7
2016 115.0 2.1 114.7 2.1 115.0 2.1 115.2 2.2 117.2 2.4
2015          Q4 125.6 2.3 125.3 2.2 125.7 2.2 113.5 2.3 125.1 2.7
2016          Q1 106.4 2.0 106.1 1.9 106.5 2.3 113.9 2.3 110.5 2.9
         Q2 107.9 2.1 107.7 2.2 107.7 1.9 114.9 2.1 114.6 2.1         Q3 117.4 2.1 117.1 2.2 117.5 2.2 115.8 2.2 115.3 2.4         Q4 128.3 2.2 128.0 2.2 128.4 2.2 116.1 2.3 128.1 2.4
2017          Q1 108.9 2.4 108.7 2.4 109.0 2.3 116.7 2.4 . .
2016          Sep 108.2 2.1 108.0 2.2 108.3 2.2 116.0 2.2 . .
         Oct 108.7 2.1 108.5 2.1 108.8 2.2 116.1 2.3 . .
         Nov 165.7 2.1 165.4 2.1 165.9 2.1 116.1 2.3 . .
         Dec 110.5 2.3 110.2 2.3 110.4 2.2 116.1 2.3 . .
2017          Jan 108.8 2.4 108.5 2.4 108.7 2.2 116.4 2.3 . .
         Feb 108.9 2.6 108.7 2.6 109.0 2.6 116.7 2.6 . .
         Mar 109.1 2.2 108.8 2.2 109.2 2.2 116.9 2.2 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such February 2017. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
May 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
End-of-year/end-of-halfyear data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2012 1,867.3 1,153.7 378.3 476.3 232.1 713.6 188.4 174.8 123.2 553.9 1,313.4 699.1 374.2 614.4 178.6 157.0
2013 1,902.2 1,171.1 385.0 485.2 232.4 731.1 187.5 175.8 136.5 569.6 1,332.6 706.0 377.5 626.6 191.0 163.1
2014 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 214.8 175.8
2015 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 233.1 180.3
2014          H2 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 214.8 175.8
2015          H1 2,163.8 1,346.9 453.6 539.8 270.0 816.8 217.9 197.4 127.0 622.4 1,541.4 830.0 440.6 711.4 223.0 173.2
         H2 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 233.1 180.3
2016          H1 2,256.6 1,381.0 462.4 549.8 272.0 875.6 226.7 194.3 140.5 607.4 1,649.2 895.4 464.6 753.8 243.9 173.7
as a percentage of total assets
2012 100.0 61.8 20.3 25.5 12.4 38.2 10.1 9.4 6.6 29.7 70.3 37.4 20.0 32.9 9.6 8.4
2013 100.0 61.6 20.2 25.5 12.2 38.4 9.9 9.2 7.2 29.9 70.1 37.1 19.8 32.9 10.0 8.6
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.3 8.5
2015 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.5 8.1
2014          H2 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.3 8.52015          H1 100.0 62.3 21.0 25.0 12.5 37.8 10.1 9.1 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.4 20.4 32.9 10.3 8.0
         H2 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.5 8.1
2016          H1 100.0 61.2 20.5 24.4 12.1 38.8 10.1 8.6 6.2 26.9 73.1 39.7 20.6 33.4 10.8 7.7
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2012 1,503.5 896.3 256.8 374.0 213.6 607.3 171.0 136.2 95.4 436.2 1,067.4 561.8 280.8 505.5 159.7 112.9
2013 1,523.6 908.2 257.2 384.6 215.6 615.4 171.2 136.1 104.1 450.9 1,072.6 560.4 280.5 512.2 170.2 114.92014 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 193.3 122.42015 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 208.7 127.6
2014          H2 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 193.3 122.42015          H1 1,743.3 1,047.8 293.3 432.1 257.1 695.4 201.0 151.7 103.6 487.1 1,256.2 670.0 336.1 586.2 194.9 127.3
         H2 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 208.7 127.6
2016          H1 1,818.4 1,059.3 296.6 432.5 254.2 759.1 210.1 149.1 112.3 466.0 1,352.3 717.9 351.0 634.4 219.2 128.8
as a percentage of total assets
2012 100.0 59.6 17.1 24.9 14.2 40.4 11.4 9.1 6.4 29.0 71.0 37.4 18.7 33.6 10.6 7.5
2013 100.0 59.6 16.9 25.2 14.2 40.4 11.2 8.9 6.8 29.6 70.4 36.8 18.4 33.6 11.2 7.5
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.7 7.4
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.7 7.2
2014          H2 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.7 7.42015          H1 100.0 60.1 16.8 24.8 14.8 39.9 11.5 8.7 5.9 27.9 72.1 38.4 19.3 33.6 11.2 7.3
         H2 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.7 7.2
2016          H1 100.0 58.3 16.3 23.8 14.0 41.8 11.6 8.2 6.2 25.6 74.4 39.5 19.3 34.9 12.1 7.1
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2012 363.7 257.4 121.5 102.4 18.4 106.3 17.4 38.6 27.8 117.7 246.0 137.2 93.4 108.8 18.9 44.1
2013 378.6 262.9 127.8 100.6 16.8 115.7 16.3 39.7 32.3 118.6 260.0 145.6 97.0 114.4 20.8 48.22014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.42015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2014          H2 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.42015          H1 420.5 299.1 160.3 107.7 12.9 121.4 17.0 45.7 23.4 135.3 285.2 160.0 104.4 125.2 28.0 45.9
         H2 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2016          H1 438.3 321.7 165.8 117.3 17.8 116.6 16.6 45.3 28.2 141.4 296.9 177.4 113.6 119.4 24.7 45.0
as a percentage of total assets
2012 100.0 70.8 33.4 28.1 5.1 29.2 4.8 10.6 7.6 32.4 67.6 37.7 25.7 29.9 5.2 12.1
2013 100.0 69.5 33.8 26.6 4.5 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.5 31.3 68.7 38.5 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2014          H2 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.62015          H1 100.0 71.1 38.1 25.6 3.1 28.9 4.0 10.9 5.6 32.2 67.8 38.1 24.8 29.8 6.7 10.9
         H2 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016          H1 100.0 73.4 37.8 26.8 4.1 26.6 3.8 10.3 6.4 32.3 67.7 40.5 25.9 27.3 5.6 10.3
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. 
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
May 2017
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA 1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in % 3 in % 3 % points 3 % % % in % 3 % points 3 %%% € billion € billion € billion
Total
2008 1,290.4 6.3 161.9 − 5.9 12.6 − 1.6 5.7 11.6 17.4 79.4 − 16.7 6.2 − 1.7 2.4 6.6 12.1
2009 1,158.6 − 10.7 135.6 − 16.9 11.7 − 0.9 3.9 9.4 15.7 55.9 − 29.2 4.8 − 1.3 − 0.1 4.9 9.3
2010 1,321.0 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.5 98.3 66.6 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.8 12.1
2011 1,414.4 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.4 10.9 17.4 93.9 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,533.0 6.6 189.3 3.1 12.4 − 0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 1.9 6.0 11.0
2013 1,541.1 − 0.6 187.1 − 2.8 12.1 − 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.3 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.8 10.9
2014 1,565.6 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.7 10.3 17.2 109.3 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,636.2 6.9 196.3 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.6 91.6 − 15.9 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.5 11.3
2011          H2 730.1 6.9 88.3 − 3.6 12.1 − 1.3 5.5 11.4 18.0 40.9 − 15.4 5.6 − 1.5 2.6 7.1 11.8
2012          H1 751.0 8.1 93.3 3.6 12.4 − 0.5 4.7 9.1 16.8 55.7 1.6 7.4 − 0.5 1.0 5.7 11.4
         H2 782.2 5.2 95.9 2.6 12.3 − 0.3 4.7 11.0 17.9 39.9 − 19.2 5.1 − 1.4 1.4 6.8 11.7
2013          H1 762.8 − 0.2 93.4 − 3.5 12.2 − 0.4 3.4 9.3 16.5 53.8 − 7.6 7.1 − 0.6 0.6 4.9 10.7
         H2 780.0 − 1.1 93.8 − 2.0 12.0 − 0.1 5.4 10.7 19.2 45.7 25.5 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.1 12.1
2014          H1 757.2 − 0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.7 9.5 16.0 57.8 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
         H2 808.7 2.9 101.5 5.2 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2015          H1 815.7 8.7 102.9 5.8 12.6 − 0.4 4.8 10.1 17.6 59.1 2.1 7.3 − 0.5 1.1 5.9 10.9
         H2 831.7 5.1 93.6 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.7 − 36.5 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.1 11.7
2016          H1 782.3 − 2.1 111.8 6.2 14.3 1.1 5.9 10.4 17.4 65.7 2.1 8.4 0.3 1.5 6.4 11.3
Groups with a focus on the production sector  4 
 
2008 949.2 7.2 120.0 − 6.4 12.7 − 1.8 5.7 11.4 15.6 60.5 − 17.2 6.4 − 1.9 2.3 6.8 11.6
2009 837.7 − 11.8 94.9 − 20.6 11.3 − 1.3 2.5 9.0 14.0 40.0 − 32.6 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.4 4.3 8.8
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.4 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.0
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.1 6.8 11.52012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.7 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 4.4 10.3 15.5 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.3 5.7 10.02014 1,197.3 1.0 147.9 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.1 9.6 15.3 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,283.3 7.0 144.0 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.1 10.4 15.5 65.2 − 19.7 5.1 − 1.7 1.8 6.5 10.02011          H2 552.5 8.7 60.8 − 9.1 11.0 − 2.2 4.8 10.6 15.6 29.3 − 20.2 5.3 − 2.0 1.6 6.6 10.92012          H1 580.1 9.5 73.3 5.2 12.6 − 0.5 5.7 10.5 14.9 46.8 3.5 8.1 − 0.5 1.9 6.1 10.5
         H2 593.9 6.1 67.5 5.3 11.4 − 0.1 4.4 10.5 15.9 34.9 0.2 5.9 − 0.3 0.6 6.2 10.2
2013          H1 588.8 − 0.1 71.7 − 4.8 12.2 − 0.6 3.1 9.3 15.0 43.1 − 10.9 7.3 − 0.9 0.6 5.3 9.7
         H2 591.7 − 1.4 67.1 − 0.3 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.4 15.8 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 10.9
2014          H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.2 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.0 46.2 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.4 9.6
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.7 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 15.8 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.7
2015          H1 636.8 8.8 80.1 7.9 12.6 − 0.1 5.1 10.0 15.4 48.8 5.7 7.7 − 0.2 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 647.1 5.2 63.9 − 13.4 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 10.9 15.5 16.4 − 52.3 2.5 − 3.2 1.7 6.8 10.3
2016          H1 610.8 − 2.9 83.9 1.2 13.7 0.5 6.6 10.3 15.3 50.6 − 7.4 8.3 − 0.4 1.7 6.4 9.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2008 341.1 3.7 41.9 − 4.3 12.3 − 1.0 5.8 12.4 19.2 19.0 − 14.6 5.6 − 1.2 2.6 6.6 12.7
2009 321.0 − 7.4 40.7 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 − 16.3 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.4 5.8 45.1 8.9 13.3 0.4 5.6 10.8 19.6 22.6 46.8 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.5 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 5.4 10.1 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.1 13.82012 359.2 2.8 48.5 − 3.4 13.5 − 0.9 5.1 10.0 22.7 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.02013 362.2 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.4 5.1 9.9 21.1 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.5 5.9 12.22014 368.3 1.0 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.2 6.0 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.3 4.8 14.8 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.12011          H2 177.6 1.0 27.5 13.4 15.5 1.7 7.1 12.2 22.4 11.6 0.7 6.6 − 0.0 4.3 7.5 14.22012          H1 170.9 3.3 20.0 − 2.6 11.7 − 0.7 2.6 8.0 21.0 8.9 − 9.8 5.2 − 0.7 − 0.4 4.5 13.9
         H2 188.3 2.3 28.5 − 4.0 15.1 − 1.0 5.2 11.2 23.7 5.1 − 73.2 2.7 − 5.2 2.7 7.4 15.3
2013          H1 174.0 − 0.5 21.7 1.4 12.5 0.2 3.9 8.0 19.2 10.7 12.8 6.2 0.7 0.9 4.6 12.8
         H2 188.3 0.3 26.7 − 6.7 14.2 − 1.1 5.6 11.3 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.3 13.4
2014          H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.6 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.6 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.4 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.4 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015          H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.7 10.8 16.1 0.9 7.3 12.2 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016          H1 171.5 1.1 27.9 27.9 16.3 3.5 5.2 10.4 23.4 15.0 62.7 8.8 3.3 1.1 6.5 15.2
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt return on sales. 3Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly large groups and in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in the Statistical
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 4Including groups in agriculture
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, and forestry. 
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
May 2017
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
 
 
€ million
2016
2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb p
Current account + 250,091 + 336,415 + 359,416 + 95,908 + 97,769 + 98,259 + 39,648 + 3,083 + 27,865 A
1 Goods
Exports 1,964,242 2,110,012 2,107,998 536,701 520,037 549,989 181,788 168,086 177,586
Imports 1,723,277 1,759,899 1,732,925 428,656 428,286 455,382 148,746 158,746 150,014
Balance + 240,964 + 350,111 + 375,073 + 108,045 + 91,752 + 94,606 + 33,042 + 9,340 + 27,571
2 Services
Receipts 713,996 775,948 787,137 194,906 206,896 205,174 73,798 61,921 58,881
Expenditure 628,632 706,018 739,045 178,075 181,381 211,135 74,817 61,149 53,223
Balance + 85,363 + 69,930 + 48,094 + 16,832 + 25,515 − 5,960 − 1,018 + 772 + 5,658
3 Primary income
Receipts 630,047 640,729 623,463 157,739 145,402 176,553 68,041 47,177 47,235
Expenditure 564,244 590,557 550,345 164,846 129,912 132,437 50,230 38,236 38,985
Balance + 65,800 + 50,174 + 73,118 − 7,106 + 15,490 + 44,115 + 17,811 + 8,941 + 8,250
4 Secondary income
Receipts 93,022 104,279 107,170 29,125 25,481 28,611 12,078 8,102 8,355
Expenditure 235,060 238,079 244,038 50,988 60,467 63,114 22,265 24,072 21,969
Balance − 142,036 − 133,799 − 136,868 − 21,863 − 34,986 − 34,503 − 10,187 − 15,970 − 13,614
Capital account + 14,167 − 13,251 − 1,348 − 216 + 1,061 − 547 + 753 − 229 + 1,152 B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 252,979 + 299,560 + 352,833 + 86,641 + 120,312 + 96,252 + 87,418 + 11,786 − 3,156 C
1 Direct investment + 61,184 + 237,130 + 165,268 − 33,475 + 115,124 + 33,362 + 21,418 + 16,879 − 154
By resident units abroad + 159,981 + 847,353 + 326,719 + 16,768 + 39,309 + 145,854 + 30,051 + 108,166 + 95,104
By non-resident units in the euro area + 98,799 + 610,225 + 161,451 + 50,244 − 75,816 + 112,492 + 8,634 + 91,288 + 95,258
2 Portfolio investment + 32,867 + 122,107 + 494,170 + 194,346 + 121,441 + 74,236 + 52,682 + 12,453 + 73,046
By resident units abroad + 459,120 + 399,293 + 395,319 + 122,351 + 127,179 + 13,369 + 22,744 + 43,613 + 53,758
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 139,790 + 18,716 + 22,471 + 1,968 + 14,895 + 24,614 + 10,721 + 24,266 + 9,595
Long-term debt securities + 226,811 + 368,644 + 371,692 + 112,692 + 104,782 + 14,651 + 9,350 + 24,618 + 33,683
Short-term debt securities + 92,520 + 11,935 + 1,157 + 7,690 + 7,503 − 25,896 + 2,673 − 5,271 + 10,480
By non-resident units in the euro area + 426,255 + 277,185 − 98,852 − 71,995 + 5,737 − 60,867 − 29,938 + 31,161 − 19,288
Equity andInvestment fund shares + 318,092 + 222,371 + 139,921 + 55,277 + 70,830 + 42,003 + 36,456 + 20,408 − 3,980
Long-term debt securities + 127,440 + 99,546 − 286,490 − 175,703 − 64,021 − 80,602 − 51,412 − 11,015 − 25,695
Short-term debt securities − 19,277 − 44,733 + 47,720 + 48,431 − 1,071 − 22,268 − 14,982 + 21,768 + 10,387
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 45,722 + 90,347 + 22,369 − 45,773 + 23,773 + 15,371 + 6,276 + 2,292 + 4,985
4 Other investment + 108,848 − 160,593 − 344,430 − 30,640 − 147,750 − 31,297 + 970 − 14,760 − 83,014
Eurosystem + 31,510 − 25,390 − 151,070 − 20,560 − 34,843 − 90,066 − 75,727 + 31,327 − 34,545
General government + 11,832 + 19,286 + 2,475 − 1,918 − 652 − 2,755 + 5,815 − 712 + 4,242
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 99,280 − 122,527 − 154,353 − 22,981 − 89,211 + 46,877 + 87,389 − 23,243 − 30,048
Enterprises and households − 33,775 − 31,964 − 41,477 + 14,822 − 23,044 + 14,647 − 16,508 − 22,131 − 22,664
5 Reserve assets + 4,361 + 10,569 + 15,458 + 2,185 + 7,724 + 4,580 + 6,073 − 5,077 + 1,981
Net errors and omissions − 11,277 − 23,604 − 5,233 − 9,048 + 21,481 − 1,459 + 47,017 + 8,932 − 32,173 D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
May 2017
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob) 1 
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Services Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items 
2 (fob/fob) 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5 
2002 + 41,655 + 142,103 + 6,008 − 45,440 − 25,596 − 29,413 − 4,010 + 8,038 − 2,065 − 29,606
2003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,2922004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,7482005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,9602006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,511
2007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,130
2008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,0882009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,6832010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,3512011 + 165,078 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 31,574 + 68,235 − 35,010 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 44,639
2012 + 193,590 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 64,858 − 38,894 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 41,759
2013 + 189,616 + 212,662 − 3,663 − 41,376 + 61,969 − 43,639 − 563 + 225,360 + 838 + 36,3072014 + 218,026 + 228,361 − 5,873 − 25,323 + 56,177 − 41,188 + 2,355 + 238,630 − 2,564 + 18,2482015 + 259,963 + 261,182 − 2,668 − 18,602 + 57,370 − 39,987 − 635 + 234,603 − 2,213 − 24,7252016 + 261,178 + 271,485 − 1,434 − 22,419 + 52,136 − 40,023 + 1,112 + 231,252 + 1,686 − 31,038
2014          Q2 + 45,959 + 54,885 − 1,426 − 4,811 + 3,046 − 7,160 − 28 + 57,793 − 610 + 11,861
         Q3 + 55,457 + 60,537 − 2,570 − 12,921 + 15,683 − 7,843 + 420 + 52,796 + 332 − 3,081         Q4 + 66,413 + 60,143 − 2,536 − 3,609 + 21,123 − 11,244 − 216 + 68,678 − 1,722 + 2,481
2015          Q1 + 59,401 + 60,330 − 1,426 − 2,104 + 17,030 − 15,855 + 298 + 29,421 − 21 − 30,277
         Q2 + 59,356 + 68,659 − 1,737 − 2,871 + 611 − 7,043 + 505 + 72,121 − 465 + 12,260         Q3 + 67,057 + 67,516 + 978 − 10,628 + 16,866 − 6,697 + 701 + 67,337 − 1,455 − 421         Q4 + 74,149 + 64,676 − 483 − 2,999 + 22,864 − 10,391 − 2,138 + 65,723 − 272 − 6,287
2016          Q1 + 64,277 + 64,120 + 621 − 3,383 + 16,933 − 13,394 − 269 + 36,928 + 1,228 − 27,080
         Q2 + 70,006 + 77,864 + 242 − 4,075 + 584 − 4,367 + 1,092 + 58,769 + 761 − 12,329         Q3 + 58,924 + 67,877 − 126 − 11,841 + 13,516 − 10,628 + 228 + 56,677 − 261 − 2,475         Q4 + 67,970 + 61,623 − 2,171 − 3,121 + 21,103 − 11,634 + 61 + 78,878 − 43 + 10,847
2017          Q1 + 65,125 + 66,737 + 1,459 − 3,312 + 15,619 − 13,919 − 91 + 70,224 − 360 + 5,190
2014          Oct + 21,848 + 23,022 − 1,230 − 4,061 + 5,489 − 2,602 − 151 + 16,777 + 203 − 4,920
         Nov + 19,065 + 18,269 − 216 − 1,207 + 5,543 − 3,541 + 158 + 20,848 + 30 + 1,625         Dec + 25,500 + 18,852 − 1,090 + 1,659 + 10,091 − 5,101 − 222 + 31,053 − 1,955 + 5,775
2015          Jan + 14,983 + 15,511 − 1,117 − 873 + 4,580 − 4,236 + 28 − 2,145 + 372 − 17,156
         Feb + 16,422 + 19,540 − 767 − 993 + 5,410 − 7,535 + 65 + 10,355 + 266 − 6,132         Mar + 27,996 + 25,280 + 458 − 238 + 7,039 − 4,084 + 204 + 21,211 − 660 − 6,989
         Apr + 21,755 + 22,266 − 1,084 − 514 + 2,898 − 2,895 + 377 + 30,681 − 69 + 8,549
         May + 11,465 + 20,915 − 690 − 1,177 − 6,268 − 2,005 + 483 + 16,041 − 78 + 4,093         June + 26,136 + 25,478 + 38 − 1,180 + 3,980 − 2,143 − 355 + 25,400 − 318 − 382
         July + 25,776 + 25,151 − 896 − 3,062 + 6,027 − 2,339 + 448 + 20,865 − 1,170 − 5,359
         Aug + 14,760 + 16,897 + 661 − 4,616 + 5,265 − 2,785 + 44 + 21,976 − 180 + 7,171         Sep + 26,521 + 25,469 + 1,213 − 2,950 + 5,575 − 1,573 + 209 + 24,497 − 105 − 2,233
         Oct + 22,205 + 23,927 + 147 − 4,630 + 6,013 − 3,105 − 85 + 20,171 + 154 − 1,949
         Nov + 25,362 + 22,542 + 4 − 685 + 6,368 − 2,863 + 183 + 24,896 − 548 − 649         Dec + 26,582 + 18,207 − 634 + 2,315 + 10,483 − 4,423 − 2,236 + 20,656 + 123 − 3,689
2016          Jan + 14,597 + 13,864 − 3 − 1,534 + 4,518 − 2,251 − 37 − 2,010 − 186 − 16,569
         Feb + 20,582 + 22,729 + 724 − 230 + 5,600 − 7,517 + 520 + 18,703 + 1,478 − 2,399         Mar + 29,099 + 27,528 − 99 − 1,619 + 6,815 − 3,626 − 752 + 20,235 − 64 − 8,111
         Apr + 28,103 + 27,954 − 116 − 876 + 2,727 − 1,702 + 1,287 + 24,454 + 696 − 4,936
         May + 17,885 + 23,371 + 511 − 906 − 4,001 − 579 + 268 + 13,095 + 776 − 5,058         June + 24,018 + 26,539 − 153 − 2,293 + 1,858 − 2,086 − 463 + 21,221 − 711 − 2,335
         July + 18,196 + 20,755 + 520 − 3,615 + 4,493 − 3,436 − 139 + 16,497 + 342 − 1,561
         Aug + 16,989 + 21,393 − 367 − 5,003 + 5,091 − 4,492 − 126 + 16,562 + 93 − 301         Sep + 23,739 + 25,730 − 279 − 3,222 + 3,932 − 2,700 + 493 + 23,618 − 695 − 614
         Oct + 18,797 + 20,877 + 163 − 3,579 + 5,082 − 3,584 − 182 + 29,216 − 145 + 10,601
         Nov + 24,547 + 23,683 − 385 − 787 + 5,680 − 4,029 − 90 + 24,588 + 140 + 131         Dec + 24,627 + 17,063 − 1,949 + 1,244 + 10,340 − 4,021 + 332 + 25,074 − 38 + 114
2017          Jan + 14,173 + 16,194 + 278 − 1,271 + 6,080 − 6,830 − 262 + 16,099 − 124 + 2,189
         Feb + 20,744 + 23,148 + 993 − 777 + 3,008 − 4,635 + 271 + 3,984 − 216 − 17,032         Mar  
p + 30,207 + 27,395 + 189 − 1,265 + 6,531 − 2,454 − 100 + 50,141 − 21 + 20,034
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the financial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital account. 3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
May 2017
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2016
 2017
Ländergruppe/Land  2014  2015  2016 Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  p 
All countries 1 Exports 1,123,746 1,193,555 1,206,856 101,431 107,971 97,389 98,794 102,405 118,248
Imports 910,145 949,245 954,825 82,187 85,862 78,807 83,876 82,383 92,863Balance + 213,601 + 244,310 + 252,031 + 19,245 + 22,109 + 18,582 + 14,918 + 20,023 + 25,385
I Exports 761,914 803,425 821,188 69,103 73,653 62,712 68,399 70,684 ...European countries
Imports 642,738 653,782 658,359 56,386 59,515 53,683 56,819 57,732 ...Balance + 119,176 + 149,643 + 162,829 + 12,717 + 14,138 + 9,029 + 11,579 + 12,952 ...
Exports 648,446 692,493 707,693 59,685 63,244 54,113 58,732 61,267 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 527,117 543,334 552,161 46,928 49,429 44,639 46,837 48,049 ...
Balance + 121,329 + 149,159 + 155,531 + 12,756 + 13,815 + 9,475 + 11,895 + 13,219 ...
Euro area (19) Exports 413,753 434,075 442,451 37,514 39,740 34,389 37,101 38,277 ...
Imports 350,550 356,643 359,565 30,466 31,776 29,113 30,404 31,253 ...Balance + 63,203 + 77,432 + 82,886 + 7,048 + 7,964 + 5,276 + 6,698 + 7,024 ...
of which
Austria Exports 55,807 58,217 59,778 5,126 5,401 4,531 4,737 5,009 ...
Imports 36,218 37,250 38,651 3,281 3,476 2,999 3,252 3,319 ...Balance + 19,590 + 20,967 + 21,127 + 1,844 + 1,925 + 1,532 + 1,486 + 1,690 ...
Belgium and Exports 47,345 46,196 47,080 3,851 4,100 3,718 3,927 4,150 ...Luxembourg Imports 42,548 40,116 41,111 3,367 3,632 3,303 3,426 3,627 ...
Balance + 4,797 + 6,079 + 5,970 + 484 + 468 + 415 + 501 + 523 ...
France Exports 100,580 102,762 101,379 8,503 9,242 7,772 8,576 8,678 ...
Imports 66,714 66,819 65,686 5,789 5,311 4,903 5,501 5,361 ...Balance + 33,866 + 35,943 + 35,694 + 2,714 + 3,930 + 2,870 + 3,075 + 3,317 ...
Italy Exports 54,240 57,987 61,440 5,401 5,582 4,597 5,118 5,350 ...
Imports 48,522 49,038 51,816 4,454 4,662 4,112 4,181 4,425 ...Balance + 5,718 + 8,949 + 9,623 + 947 + 920 + 485 + 937 + 925 ...
Netherlands Exports 72,736 79,191 79,004 6,706 6,822 6,580 6,899 6,847 ...
Imports 87,796 87,889 83,489 6,935 7,422 7,310 7,597 7,525 ...Balance − 15,060 − 8,697 − 4,485 − 228 − 600 − 729 − 698 − 677 ...
Spain Exports 34,820 38,715 40,605 3,399 3,866 3,102 3,409 3,624 ...
Imports 24,804 26,442 27,729 2,251 2,677 2,481 2,398 2,670 ...Balance + 10,016 + 12,273 + 12,876 + 1,148 + 1,188 + 621 + 1,010 + 954 ...
Other EU member Exports 234,693 258,417 265,241 22,171 23,504 19,724 21,630 22,991 ...states Imports 176,567 186,691 192,596 16,462 17,653 15,526 16,433 16,796 ...
Balance + 58,126 + 71,727 + 72,645 + 5,708 + 5,851 + 4,199 + 5,198 + 6,195 ...
of which
United Exports 79,163 89,018 86,147 6,552 7,248 6,057 6,719 7,314 ...Kingdom Imports 38,545 38,414 35,625 2,903 3,253 2,963 2,972 2,999 ...
Balance + 40,618 + 50,604 + 50,522 + 3,649 + 3,996 + 3,094 + 3,746 + 4,315 ...
Exports 113,468 110,932 113,495 9,418 10,410 8,599 9,667 9,416 ... 2 Other European
Imports 115,621 110,448 106,198 9,457 10,086 9,044 9,983 9,683 ... countries
Balance − 2,153 + 484 + 7,298 − 39 + 323 − 446 − 316 − 267 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 46,202 49,070 50,332 4,338 4,615 3,849 4,420 4,303 ...
Imports 39,392 42,089 43,941 3,944 4,373 3,689 4,023 3,765 ...
Balance + 6,810 + 6,981 + 6,391 + 394 + 241 + 161 + 397 + 538 ...
II Exports 358,337 387,398 382,990 32,075 34,090 34,518 30,141 31,508 ...Non-European
Imports 267,407 295,461 296,390 25,801 26,347 25,053 27,056 24,651 ... countries
Balance + 90,930 + 91,936 + 86,600 + 6,274 + 7,744 + 9,465 + 3,084 + 6,858 ...
Exports 22,505 23,897 24,502 2,036 2,004 2,172 1,893 2,345 ... 1 Africa
Imports 20,242 18,307 16,646 1,601 1,456 1,625 1,547 1,572 ...
Balance + 2,263 + 5,590 + 7,856 + 435 + 548 + 547 + 347 + 772 ...
Exports 135,293 156,982 147,695 12,006 13,200 11,987 12,040 12,208 ... 2 America
Imports 74,191 85,582 83,302 6,747 7,575 7,046 7,357 6,725 ...
Balance + 61,103 + 71,400 + 64,393 + 5,259 + 5,625 + 4,941 + 4,683 + 5,483 ...
of which
Exports 95,928 113,733 106,897 8,776 9,767 8,586 8,944 8,963 ... United States
Imports 49,207 60,217 57,897 4,651 5,271 4,647 4,927 4,633 ...Balance + 46,721 + 53,516 + 49,000 + 4,124 + 4,497 + 3,940 + 4,017 + 4,330 ...
Exports 190,973 196,297 200,417 17,126 17,937 19,444 15,415 16,136 ... 3 Asia
Imports 170,050 188,621 193,444 17,245 17,061 16,149 17,809 15,988 ...
Balance + 20,923 + 7,676 + 6,973 − 119 + 876 + 3,295 − 2,394 + 148 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 35,462 39,518 36,861 2,580 3,239 4,406 2,331 2,727 ...
Imports 7,865 7,330 6,571 574 587 542 460 513 ...Balance + 27,598 + 32,188 + 30,290 + 2,006 + 2,652 + 3,864 + 1,870 + 2,214 ...
Japan Exports 16,910 16,968 18,347 1,604 1,732 1,572 1,577 1,521 ...
Imports 19,007 20,180 21,937 1,866 1,926 1,729 1,938 1,842 ...Balance − 2,097 − 3,213 − 3,590 − 263 − 194 − 157 − 361 − 321 ...
Exports 74,369 71,284 76,092 6,285 7,054 7,255 6,273 6,297 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 79,828 91,930 93,815 8,729 8,482 8,066 8,758 7,386 ... of China 
2 
Balance − 5,459 − 20,646 − 17,723 − 2,444 − 1,428 − 810 − 2,485 − 1,089 ...Exports 48,476 51,510 51,897 5,253 4,344 4,523 3,901 4,025 ...
New industrial countries
Imports 38,782 42,478 42,853 3,686 3,715 3,609 4,077 3,770 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 9,695 + 9,032 + 9,044 + 1,568 + 629 + 913 − 176 + 255 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 9,566 10,221 10,377 907 949 916 792 820 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,924 2,951 2,999 208 255 233 344 366 ... polar regions
Balance + 6,641 + 7,271 + 7,378 + 699 + 694 + 683 + 448 + 454 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
May 2017
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services Primary income
of which
T
ele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel 1 services property services services services 2 income income 3 of employees
2012 − 32,775 − 10,189 − 35,422 + 8,793 + 3,030 + 1,442 − 9,459 + 3,103 + 2,187 + 61,666 + 1,005
2013 − 41,376 − 9,881 − 37,713 + 8,056 + 3,656 − 870 − 5,518 + 3,073 + 541 + 60,205 + 1,2232014 − 25,323 − 7,301 − 37,653 + 7,008 + 3,639 + 2,785 − 1,418 + 3,024 + 451 + 54,849 + 8772015 − 18,602 − 5,476 − 36,595 + 9,331 + 4,942 + 4,037 − 3,116 + 3,106 + 783 + 56,948 − 3612016 − 22,419 − 5,962 − 39,467 + 9,189 + 6,450 + 3,312 − 3,276 + 3,119 + 652 + 53,196 − 1,712
2015          Q3 − 10,628 − 1,653 − 14,475 + 2,501 + 926 + 321 − 364 + 779 − 488 + 18,557 − 1,203
         Q4 − 2,999 − 1,865 − 8,595 + 2,526 + 1,662 + 1,985 − 1,239 + 585 + 372 + 19,476 + 3,016
2016          Q1 − 3,383 − 1,660 − 6,305 + 2,095 + 1,215 + 219 − 819 + 852 + 756 + 16,817 − 640
         Q2 − 4,075 − 1,080 − 8,720 + 2,174 + 1,190 + 1,238 − 687 + 831 − 107 + 3,501 − 2,810         Q3 − 11,841 − 1,414 − 16,101 + 1,892 + 1,629 + 483 − 173 + 833 − 384 + 15,089 − 1,190         Q4 − 3,121 − 1,808 − 8,341 + 3,029 + 2,416 + 1,372 − 1,597 + 604 + 386 + 17,788 + 2,928
2017          Q1 − 3,312 − 1,002 − 5,956 + 2,006 + 1,023 + 461 − 1,512 + 723 + 748 + 15,990 − 1,119
2016          May − 906 − 223 − 3,208 + 817 + 775 + 242 − 86 + 243 − 81 − 3,562 − 358
         June − 2,293 − 465 − 4,011 + 668 − 12 + 930 + 35 + 296 − 6 + 3,862 − 1,997
         July − 3,615 − 366 − 4,510 + 706 + 538 − 239 − 324 + 288 − 158 + 5,025 − 374
         Aug − 5,003 − 623 − 6,400 + 621 + 827 + 51 − 207 + 257 − 117 + 5,611 − 404         Sep − 3,222 − 424 − 5,190 + 565 + 264 + 672 + 357 + 288 − 109 + 4,453 − 413
         Oct − 3,579 − 480 − 5,329 + 640 + 1,081 − 14 − 166 + 198 + 175 + 5,491 − 583
         Nov − 787 − 773 − 1,988 + 1,321 + 727 + 29 − 728 + 209 + 151 + 5,940 − 412         Dec + 1,244 − 555 − 1,025 + 1,068 + 609 + 1,357 − 702 + 197 + 60 + 6,357 + 3,923
2017          Jan − 1,271 − 470 − 1,575 + 831 + 289 − 317 − 660 + 201 + 271 + 6,219 − 410
         Feb − 777 − 298 − 1,459 + 478 + 484 + 62 − 498 + 277 + 272 + 3,072 − 335         Mar  
p − 1,265 − 234 − 2,921 + 697 + 249 + 716 − 354 + 244 + 205 + 6,699 − 373
1Since 2001, the sample results of a household survey have been used on the 3Includes, inter alia, taxes on leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU
expenditure side. 2Domestic public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on as well as subsidies received from the EU. 
services, not included elsewhere; including the receipts from foreign military bases.
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government
All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation 1 households 3 
2012 − 38,894 − 25,446 − 5,167 + 5,206 − 13,448 − 2,952 − 2,952 − 413 + 1,745 − 2,158
2013 − 43,639 − 28,923 − 4,733 + 6,174 − 14,715 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 563 + 1,105 − 1,6682014 − 41,188 − 28,106 − 5,972 + 8,101 − 13,082 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 2,355 + 2,898 − 5422015 − 39,987 − 24,925 − 6,648 + 9,830 − 15,062 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 635 + 2,377 − 3,0122016 − 40,023 − 26,238 − 8,376 + 9,934 − 13,785 − 4,250 − 4,233 + 1,112 + 3,324 − 2,212
2015          Q3 − 6,697 − 3,781 − 1,197 + 1,211 − 2,916 − 885 − 881 + 701 + 877 − 176
         Q4 − 10,391 − 6,832 − 2,111 + 1,002 − 3,560 − 885 − 881 − 2,138 + 279 − 2,418
2016          Q1 − 13,394 − 10,097 − 2,840 + 1,307 − 3,297 − 1,089 − 1,086 − 269 − 521 + 253
         Q2 − 4,367 − 844 − 1,567 + 5,561 − 3,523 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 1,092 + 2,219 − 1,127         Q3 − 10,628 − 6,860 − 1,702 + 1,772 − 3,768 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 228 + 887 − 659         Q4 − 11,634 − 8,437 − 2,267 + 1,294 − 3,197 − 1,055 − 1,049 + 61 + 739 − 679
2017          Q1 − 13,919 − 7,811 − 2,663 + 1,774 − 6,108 − 1,157 − 1,153 − 91 + 71 − 161
2016          May − 579 + 584 − 409 + 3,027 − 1,163 − 351 − 350 + 268 + 358 − 90
         June − 2,086 − 753 − 649 + 1,312 − 1,333 − 351 − 350 − 463 + 426 − 889
         July − 3,436 − 2,304 − 451 + 384 − 1,132 − 352 − 350 − 139 + 88 − 227
         Aug − 4,492 − 2,983 − 983 + 264 − 1,510 − 350 − 350 − 126 + 145 − 271         Sep − 2,700 − 1,573 − 268 + 1,124 − 1,127 − 351 − 350 + 493 + 653 − 160
         Oct − 3,584 − 2,831 − 659 + 329 − 754 − 352 − 350 − 182 − 11 − 170
         Nov − 4,029 − 2,910 − 451 + 27 − 1,119 − 353 − 350 − 90 + 244 − 334         Dec − 4,021 − 2,696 − 1,157 + 937 − 1,325 − 351 − 350 + 332 + 507 − 175
2017          Jan − 6,830 − 3,731 − 1,622 + 189 − 3,099 − 386 − 384 − 262 − 85 − 178
         Feb − 4,635 − 2,699 − 699 + 714 − 1,936 − 385 − 384 + 271 + 8 + 263         Mar  
p − 2,454 − 1,381 − 342 + 871 − 1,073 − 385 − 384 − 100 + 147 − 247
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
May 2017
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2016
2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q3 Q4 Q1 p Jan Feb Mar p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 301,030 + 249,102 + 382,910 + 43,925 + 33,053 + 226,779 + 106,702 + 54,164 + 65,914
1 Direct investment + 83,960 + 101,357 + 69,323 + 14,710 + 21,373 + 47,697 + 13,924 + 3,904 + 29,869
Equity + 56,733 + 67,801 + 61,655 + 13,456 + 15,717 + 16,807 + 7,209 + 3,904 + 5,694
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 18,535 + 9,711 + 13,224 + 5,960 − 79 + 6,219 + 2,587 + 815 + 2,817
Debt instruments + 27,227 + 33,556 + 7,668 + 1,254 + 5,655 + 30,891 + 6,716 + 1 + 24,174
2 Portfolio investment + 146,979 + 122,005 + 96,602 + 19,344 − 573 + 31,082 + 11,342 + 10,795 + 8,944
Shares 2 + 8,935 + 19,561 + 17,288 + 8,014 + 3,383 + 5,526 + 1,167 + 1,581 + 2,778
Investment fund shares 3 + 42,057 + 34,626 + 36,586 + 8,902 + 9,923 + 16,808 + 8,551 + 2,849 + 5,408
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 95,025 + 73,519 + 48,826 + 5,249 − 9,718 + 5,852 + 1,208 + 3,858 + 786
Short-termdebt securities 
5 + 963 − 5,700 − 6,098 − 2,821 − 4,161 + 2,896 + 416 + 2,507 − 28
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 31,896 + 26,202 + 32,792 + 10,523 + 13,473 − 53 − 388 + 3,093 − 2,757
4. Other investment 7 + 40,759 + 1,750 + 182,507 − 392 − 1,177 + 148,413 + 81,948 + 36,587 + 29,879
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 76,296 − 90,287 + 18,747 − 29,468 − 1,411 + 72,179 + 40,996 + 21,160 + 10,023
Long-term + 21,139 − 2,803 + 45,099 + 7,704 + 27,253 + 12,896 + 1,889 + 3,682 + 7,325Short-term + 55,156 − 87,484 − 26,353 − 37,172 − 28,664 + 59,283 + 39,107 + 17,478 + 2,698
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 − 2,952 − 19,122 − 7,932 − 10,673 − 28,623 + 170 + 1,136 − 6,806 + 5,840
Long-term + 6,364 + 12,513 + 1,254 + 979 + 886 − 291 − 96 − 341 + 146Short-term − 9,316 − 31,635 − 9,186 − 11,652 − 29,509 + 461 + 1,232 − 6,465 + 5,694
General government + 17,295 − 12,205 + 1,202 + 4,693 − 9,717 − 699 − 2,918 + 3,832 − 1,613
Long-term − 405 − 7,557 − 5,331 − 1,157 − 447 − 1,385 − 1,594 + 312 − 103Short-term + 17,700 − 4,648 + 6,533 + 5,850 − 9,270 + 686 − 1,324 + 3,520 − 1,510
Bundesbank − 49,880 + 123,364 + 170,491 + 35,056 + 38,574 + 76,764 + 42,733 + 18,402 + 15,629
5. Reserve assets − 2,564 − 2,213 + 1,686 − 261 − 43 − 360 − 124 − 216 − 21
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 62,400 + 14,499 + 151,658 − 12,751 − 45,825 + 156,555 + 90,603 + 50,180 + 15,773
1 Direct investment + 11,930 + 47,284 + 46,695 + 7,072 − 7,520 + 22,906 + 3,332 + 7,283 + 12,292
Equity + 23,558 + 20,935 + 12,126 + 2,279 − 886 + 4,746 + 1,271 + 2,044 + 1,431
of whichReinvestment of earnings 
1 + 3,325 + 4,375 + 5,905 + 3,017 + 378 + 3,588 + 1,103 + 1,311 + 1,174
Debt instruments − 11,628 + 26,349 + 34,569 + 4,793 − 6,634 + 18,160 + 2,060 + 5,239 + 10,860
2 Portfolio investment + 13,483 − 74,941 − 111,309 − 29,084 − 51,609 − 21,240 + 3,943 − 18,401 − 6,782
Shares 2) + 6,314 + 9,725 − 985 + 1,198 + 6,402 + 1,506 + 784 − 642 + 1,364
Investment fund shares 3 − 3,790 + 7,345 − 6,928 − 2,175 − 449 + 122 − 533 − 133 + 788
Long-termdebt securities 
4 + 14,131 − 101,208 − 95,730 − 24,063 − 29,253 − 12,954 + 9,260 − 13,298 − 8,917
Short-termdebt securities 
5 − 3,171 + 9,197 − 7,666 − 4,044 − 28,308 − 9,914 − 5,569 − 4,327 − 17
3. Other investment 7 + 36,987 + 42,156 + 216,272 + 9,261 + 13,304 + 154,889 + 83,328 + 61,298 + 10,263
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 32,480 − 41,166 + 86,802 + 884 − 23,705 + 106,728 + 94,909 + 22,124 − 10,305
Long-term − 14,558 − 19,536 + 5,834 + 5,499 + 7,425 + 2,371 − 68 − 1,106 + 3,545Short-term + 47,039 − 21,630 + 80,968 − 4,615 − 31,130 + 104,357 + 94,977 + 23,230 − 13,850
Enterprises andhouseholds 
9 + 16,355 + 10,459 + 1,988 − 24,742 − 3,712 + 12,717 − 360 + 5,930 + 7,147
Long-term + 2,960 + 15,960 + 6,716 + 4,260 + 1,142 + 2,453 + 1,376 + 2,972 − 1,896Short-term + 13,395 − 5,501 − 4,728 − 29,001 − 4,854 + 10,265 − 1,736 + 2,959 + 9,042
General government − 5,575 − 11,521 + 1,796 − 3,257 − 7,892 + 1,161 + 2,261 + 1,017 − 2,117
Long-term − 931 − 3,942 − 2,847 − 242 − 1,041 − 2,850 − 2,435 − 68 − 347Short-term − 4,645 − 7,579 + 4,642 − 3,015 − 6,850 + 4,012 + 4,695 + 1,086 − 1,769
Bundesbank − 6,273 + 84,383 + 125,686 + 36,375 + 48,613 + 34,282 − 13,482 + 32,226 + 15,538
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 238,630 + 234,603 + 231,252 + 56,677 + 78,878 + 70,224 + 16,099 + 3,984 + 50,141
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
May 2017
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets
Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reportingperiod Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment 2 liabilities 3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999          Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,6702003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,801 318,9072016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 607,574 382,876
2014          Aug 681,324 156,411 106,079 13,794 7,339 29,199 476,732 464,303 48,181 379,994 301,330
         Sep 696,802 156,367 104,629 14,113 7,751 29,873 492,348 479,920 48,087 386,210 310,592
         Oct 681,790 154,133 101,929 14,125 7,628 30,450 481,136 468,708 46,521 396,338 285,452
         Nov 682,969 155,424 103,245 14,045 7,520 30,615 480,294 467,866 47,250 400,642 282,327         Dec 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015          Jan 751,062 176,741 121,607 14,895 6,488 33,751 527,698 515,266 46,623 451,800 299,262
         Feb 744,552 172,120 116,647 14,956 6,361 34,157 525,795 513,365 46,637 443,519 301,033         Mar 767,856 176,922 119,988 15,311 5,944 35,679 544,130 531,701 46,804 434,696 333,160
         Apr 762,437 171,758 116,812 14,967 5,796 34,184 544,620 532,192 46,058 436,061 326,376
         May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 436,637 321,863         June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 439,905 316,357
         July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 444,709 318,537
         Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 440,954 340,331         Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 462,529 311,899
         Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 468,522 318,172
         Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 482,779 330,541         Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,801 318,907
2016          Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 473,130 334,841
         Feb 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 489,503 349,833         Mar 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 492,170 345,205
         Apr 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 496,892 359,375
         May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 504,193 380,694         June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 522,326 399,906
         July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 524,399 379,646
         Aug 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 532,418 386,274         Sep 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 558,598 399,262
         Oct 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 553,741 393,977
         Nov 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 565,357 425,752         Dec 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 607,574 382,876
2017          Jan 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 593,933 440,870
         Feb 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 626,341 434,553         Mar 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 641,786 433,253
         Apr 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 614,540 474,604
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro opening
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
May 2017
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents
Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received operations operations
All countries
 
2013 787,308 282,026 505,282 325,614 179,668 164,454 15,214 939,252 144,884 794,368 632,110 162,258 95,302 66,957
2014 833,644 279,559 554,085 365,230 188,856 174,058 14,798 959,833 154,566 805,267 636,328 168,939 102,126 66,8132015 866,912 265,170 601,743 409,858 191,885 177,397 14,488 1,003,050 150,054 852,996 672,312 180,684 109,062 71,6222016 855,814 241,683 614,131 412,871 201,260 187,086 14,174 1,025,815 128,831 896,984 708,734 188,250 115,808 72,443
2016          Oct 868,860 258,827 610,033 411,397 198,636 183,656 14,980 1,025,421 131,137 894,285 710,440 183,844 108,693 75,151
         Nov 875,646 253,380 622,266 420,289 201,977 187,115 14,862 1,030,121 128,304 901,817 716,558 185,259 110,605 74,655         Dec 855,814 241,683 614,131 412,871 201,260 187,086 14,174 1,025,815 128,831 896,984 708,734 188,250 115,808 72,443
2017          Jan 861,809 239,100 622,710 422,879 199,831 185,609 14,222 1,027,892 123,897 903,995 723,238 180,757 107,842 72,916
         Feb 859,012 232,639 626,372 421,305 205,068 190,478 14,590 1,038,330 125,004 913,326 724,197 189,129 113,847 75,282         Mar 886,832 232,235 654,597 437,369 217,228 202,862 14,366 1,067,080 127,099 939,981 743,887 196,094 121,726 74,368
Industrial countries 1
 
2013 697,475 278,723 418,753 296,675 122,077 108,620 13,458 852,420 143,577 708,843 594,623 114,220 79,543 34,6762014 733,191 274,660 458,531 330,034 128,497 115,398 13,099 869,392 153,412 715,980 595,396 120,583 85,122 35,4612015 761,648 261,267 500,381 368,033 132,348 119,309 13,038 906,968 145,136 761,832 635,205 126,627 90,716 35,9112016 748,340 237,789 510,551 371,663 138,888 126,211 12,677 931,963 124,504 807,460 674,402 133,058 95,933 37,125
2016          Oct 761,862 255,051 506,811 370,609 136,201 122,792 13,410 930,970 126,278 804,692 675,842 128,850 91,292 37,558
         Nov 768,273 249,439 518,834 379,053 139,781 126,442 13,338 936,319 123,939 812,380 682,507 129,873 92,688 37,185         Dec 748,340 237,789 510,551 371,663 138,888 126,211 12,677 931,963 124,504 807,460 674,402 133,058 95,933 37,125
2017          Jan 752,958 235,258 517,700 380,068 137,632 125,029 12,604 936,221 120,397 815,824 689,166 126,659 89,129 37,530
         Feb 747,595 228,425 519,170 377,934 141,236 128,239 12,997 943,381 121,211 822,170 689,721 132,448 94,191 38,257         Mar 770,368 228,228 542,140 391,222 150,918 138,100 12,819 972,647 122,681 849,966 710,292 139,674 101,840 37,834
EU member states 1
 
2013 589,286 264,271 325,014 237,949 87,066 76,539 10,527 713,044 129,044 583,999 504,337 79,663 53,340 26,3232014 617,489 259,516 357,973 266,777 91,196 80,585 10,611 724,674 138,894 585,780 502,054 83,726 56,580 27,1472015 626,482 243,139 383,344 289,190 94,153 83,665 10,488 743,011 134,564 608,448 524,316 84,132 58,384 25,7482016 605,613 219,938 385,675 288,730 96,945 86,930 10,016 757,649 114,258 643,390 555,414 87,976 61,160 26,817
2016          Oct 622,564 236,208 386,356 289,219 97,137 86,411 10,725 758,208 114,615 643,593 556,450 87,143 60,271 26,872
         Nov 625,614 230,963 394,651 295,122 99,529 88,970 10,559 761,902 113,900 648,002 560,271 87,731 61,015 26,716         Dec 605,613 219,938 385,675 288,730 96,945 86,930 10,016 757,649 114,258 643,390 555,414 87,976 61,160 26,817
2017          Jan 609,464 217,258 392,206 294,482 97,723 87,860 9,863 761,687 107,975 653,712 567,612 86,100 58,805 27,295
         Feb 605,236 210,465 394,771 293,345 101,426 91,179 10,248 767,240 110,276 656,963 567,253 89,710 62,133 27,577         Mar 617,474 209,352 408,122 300,381 107,740 97,669 10,071 792,837 108,991 683,847 588,582 95,265 67,996 27,268
of which: Euro-area 2
 
2013 428,179 197,430 230,749 174,605 56,143 49,968 6,175 603,366 101,722 501,645 448,142 53,502 36,671 16,8322014 456,469 204,043 252,426 194,207 58,219 51,999 6,220 606,525 107,694 498,831 444,401 54,430 37,498 16,9322015 465,919 195,751 270,168 208,862 61,305 54,730 6,575 598,884 93,947 504,937 452,298 52,639 37,994 14,6442016 445,368 167,575 277,794 213,498 64,295 57,575 6,721 609,399 75,639 533,760 477,891 55,869 41,068 14,801
2016          Oct 455,918 181,124 274,794 211,046 63,748 57,061 6,687 617,492 85,178 532,315 477,303 55,012 40,074 14,938
         Nov 455,203 177,147 278,057 213,176 64,880 58,238 6,642 615,201 80,742 534,459 479,132 55,327 40,611 14,716         Dec 445,368 167,575 277,794 213,498 64,295 57,575 6,721 609,399 75,639 533,760 477,891 55,869 41,068 14,801
2017          Jan 444,996 165,652 279,345 214,462 64,882 58,182 6,700 613,663 73,752 539,911 485,880 54,031 39,036 14,995
         Feb 443,805 161,817 281,989 215,485 66,504 59,343 7,161 622,955 77,170 545,785 488,796 56,989 41,686 15,303         Mar 448,962 157,469 291,494 221,192 70,302 63,295 7,007 638,261 72,120 566,141 505,113 61,029 45,740 15,288
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2013 89,826 3,303 86,523 28,937 57,586 55,829 1,757 86,829 1,307 85,522 37,487 48,035 15,755 32,2802014 100,400 4,849 95,551 35,193 60,358 58,659 1,699 90,439 1,153 89,285 40,931 48,354 17,003 31,3522015 104,276 3,094 101,182 41,825 59,358 57,908 1,450 91,912 947 90,964 36,908 54,057 18,346 35,7112016 106,063 2,647 103,416 41,192 62,224 60,727 1,497 90,708 1,401 89,307 34,132 55,175 19,875 35,300
2016          Oct 105,660 2,646 103,014 40,753 62,261 60,691 1,570 90,518 1,208 89,310 34,373 54,938 17,362 37,576
         Nov 105,996 2,791 103,205 41,200 62,005 60,481 1,524 90,431 1,252 89,178 33,850 55,328 17,875 37,453         Dec 106,063 2,647 103,416 41,192 62,224 60,727 1,497 90,708 1,401 89,307 34,132 55,175 19,875 35,300
2017          Jan 107,458 2,600 104,858 42,799 62,059 60,441 1,618 89,304 1,382 87,922 33,872 54,050 18,681 35,369
         Feb 110,007 2,942 107,064 43,359 63,705 62,113 1,593 92,355 1,446 90,909 34,276 56,633 19,625 37,008         Mar 115,044 2,761 112,283 46,112 66,171 64,625 1,547 91,226 1,457 89,769 33,396 56,374 19,857 36,517
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 including Croatia. r Corrected. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
May 2017
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
1999 1.6523 1.5840 . 7.4355 121.32 8.3104 8.8075 1.6003 0.65874 1.0658
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.94562003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.13122004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.25562007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2016          May 1.5461 1.4626 7.3864 7.4386 123.21 9.3036 9.2948 1.1059 0.77779 1.1311
         June 1.5173 1.4477 7.4023 7.4371 118.45 9.3278 9.3338 1.0894 0.79049 1.1229
         July 1.4694 1.4428 7.3910 7.4390 115.25 9.3690 9.4742 1.0867 0.84106 1.1069
         Aug 1.4690 1.4557 7.4537 7.4408 113.49 9.3030 9.4913 1.0881 0.85521 1.1212         Sep 1.4768 1.4677 7.4819 7.4475 114.22 9.1971 9.5655 1.0919 0.85228 1.1212
         Oct 1.4470 1.4594 7.4198 7.4402 114.47 9.0009 9.7073 1.0887 0.89390 1.1026
         Nov 1.4331 1.4519 7.3883 7.4406 116.93 9.0807 9.8508 1.0758 0.86894 1.0799         Dec 1.4356 1.4070 7.2983 7.4362 122.39 9.0252 9.7095 1.0750 0.84441 1.0543
2017          Jan 1.4252 1.4032 7.3189 7.4355 122.14 8.9990 9.5110 1.0714 0.86100 1.0614
         Feb 1.3886 1.3942 7.3143 7.4348 120.17 8.8603 9.4762 1.0660 0.85273 1.0643         Mar 1.4018 1.4306 7.3692 7.4356 120.68 9.0919 9.5279 1.0706 0.86560 1.0685
         Apr 1.4241 1.4408 7.3892 7.4376 118.29 9.1993 9.5941 1.0727 0.84824 1.0723
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics. 1Up to March 2005, ECB
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000. 
11 Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
May 2017
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
 
 
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 Based on consumer price indices
26 selected industrial countries  5 In real terms
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
26 terms the deflators labour terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
37 37 56 consumer domestic national consumer Euro  area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices  4 Total countries countries countries  6 countries  5 countries  6 countries  7 
1999 96.3 96.0 96.1 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.8 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.1 86.5 85.9 85.2 87.9 85.8 91.7 97.3 85.1 90.7 92.9 91.9 90.8
2001 87.8 87.1 86.5 86.1 90.5 86.9 91.5 96.3 85.9 90.0 92.9 91.4 90.82002 90.1 90.2 89.5 89.5 95.0 90.5 92.2 95.4 88.5 90.5 93.5 91.9 91.72003 100.7 101.3 100.4 100.7 106.9 101.4 95.6 94.5 97.6 94.7 97.1 96.5 96.72004 104.5 105.0 103.3 104.2 111.5 105.1 95.9 93.2 100.0 95.0 98.5 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.5 101.2 102.3 109.5 102.5 94.7 91.9 99.0 92.8 98.5 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.5 100.4 101.1 109.4 101.8 93.5 90.3 98.4 91.1 98.6 96.5 95.82007 106.3 106.2 102.3 103.4 112.9 103.8 94.4 89.4 102.4 91.3 100.9 97.9 97.02008 109.4 108.3 103.7 106.7 117.1 105.8 94.5 88.0 105.4 90.4 102.2 97.8 97.12009 110.8 109.0 104.5 111.5 120.0 106.8 94.7 88.8 104.6 90.9 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.3 96.2 103.5 111.5 97.8 92.2 88.5 98.2 87.1 98.8 93.6 92.0
2011 103.3 100.2 94.1 102.0 112.2 97.2 91.8 88.2 97.6 86.2 98.2 92.8 91.32012 97.6 95.0 88.6 95.9 107.0 92.4 90.0 88.2 92.6 83.6 95.9 89.8 88.22013 101.2 98.2 91.7 98.9 111.9 95.5 92.4 88.7 98.4 85.6 98.3 91.6 90.22014 101.8 97.8 91.9 100.0 114.7 96.1 93.2 89.6 98.9 86.4 98.5 91.8 91.0
2015 92.4 88.4 83.6 89.6 106.5
p 87.8 90.8 90.7 90.6 83.0 94.7 86.9 p 86.3
2016 94.8 90.1 p 85.7 p 90.6 110.4 p 90.0 91.5 91.2 91.8 84.2 p 95.2 p 87.8 p 87.4
2014          May 103.6 99.5 93.3 101.3 116.1 97.3 93.5 89.5 99.9 87.1 98.8 92.6 91.5
         June 102.7 98.7 115.1 96.5 98.7 92.3 91.2
         July 102.3 98.2 114.7 95.9 98.7 92.2 91.1
         Aug 101.5 97.5 91.1 99.4 114.0 95.3 92.9 89.6 98.1 86.1 98.4 91.8 90.7         Sep 99.9 95.9 112.3 93.9 98.0 91.0 89.9
         Oct 99.1 95.0 111.8 93.2 97.6 90.4 89.4
         Nov 99.0 94.9 89.5 97.3 111.9 93.2 92.7 90.0 97.1 85.4 97.7 90.3 89.5         Dec 99.0 94.8 113.1 93.9 97.6 90.2 89.8
2015          Jan 95.2 91.0 108.9 90.1 95.7 88.2 87.5
         Feb 93.3 89.5 84.1 91.3 107.0 88.7 90.8 90.5 91.0 83.0 95.3 87.6 86.9         Mar 90.6 86.9 103.8 85.9 94.2 86.1 85.2
         Apr 89.7 86.1 102.4 84.7 94.0 85.7 84.5
         May 91.6 87.8 82.4 88.3 104.7 86.5 90.4 90.6 89.7 82.3 94.6 86.6 85.6         June 92.3 88.5 106.0 87.6 94.7 86.9 86.1
         July 91.3 87.5 105.1 86.6 94.3 86.3 85.6
         Aug 93.0 88.9 83.9 89.7 108.1 88.9 90.9 90.8 90.9 83.2 94.9 87.2 87.0         Sep 93.8 89.7 109.6 90.1 95.1 87.6 87.7
         Oct 93.6 89.6 109.0 89.6 95.1 87.6 87.4
         Nov 91.1 87.1 84.1 89.3 106.0
p 86.8 91.0 91.0 90.8 83.3 94.1 86.3 p 85.9
         Dec 92.5 88.3 108.0 p 88.3 94.3 86.7 p 86.5
2016          Jan 93.6 89.1 109.9 p 89.5 94.5 87.1 p 87.3
         Feb 94.7 90.0 p 85.5 p 90.5 111.3 p 90.8 91.5 91.3 91.6 84.1 95.0 87.6 p 87.7
         Mar 94.1 89.5 110.0 p 89.9 95.0 87.4 p 87.3
         Apr 94.8 90.1 110.6 p 90.2 95.3 87.8 p 87.5
         May 95.1 90.5 p 85.9 p 90.8 111.1 p 90.7 91.5 91.3 91.7 84.4 95.2 88.1 p 87.9
         June 94.7 90.3 110.5 p 90.3 94.9 87.8 p 87.5
         July 94.9 90.4 110.2 p 89.9 95.2 87.9 p 87.3
         Aug 95.2 90.6 p 86.0 p 90.6 110.6 p 90.2 91.6 91.1 92.1 84.3 95.4 88.0 p 87.5
         Sep 95.4 90.7 110.9 p 90.3 95.5 88.0 p 87.6
         Oct 95.5 90.8 110.6 p 90.1 95.8 88.1 p 87.5
         Nov 95.0 90.2 p 85.6 p 90.3 110.3 p 89.6 91.5 91.1 91.9 84.0 95.2 87.7 p 87.1
         Dec 94.2 89.6 109.2 p 88.9 p 95.2 p 87.7 p 87.0
2017          Jan 94.4 p 89.7 109.7 p 89.1 p 95.1 p 87.5 p 86.8
         Feb 93.9 p 89.3 ... ... 108.8 p 88.3 ... ... ... ... p 94.9 p 87.3 p 86.4
         Mar 94.4 p 89.6 109.2 p 88.4 p 95.1 p 87.4 p 86.4
         Apr 94.1 p 89.5 108.8 p 88.2 p 94.9 p 87.3 p 86.2
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German New Zealand, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to and Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Data for Argentina are currently
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November not available due to the state of emergency in the national statistical system declared2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2015, pp  40-42). For more by the government of Argentina on 7 January 2016. As a consequence, Argentina isdetailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 not included in the calculation of the EER-38 CPI deflated series from February 2016.(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB The policy regarding the inclusion of Argentina will be reconsidered in the future de-
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral pending on further developments. 5Euro area countries (from 2001 including
exchange rates of the euro against the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, fromlia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Hong Kong, 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia,Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 6Euro area countries (see
wage indices were not available, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes footnote 5) and countries belonging to the EER-19 group. 7Euro area countries and
countries belonging to the EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, countries belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2). 

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability ReviewMonthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2016 see the index attached 
to the January 2017 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
June 2016
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2016 and 2017 and 
an outlook for 2018
– The macroeconomic impact of quantitative 
easing in the euro area
– Structure and dynamics of manufacturing 
production depth as reflected in the financial 
statements of German enterprises
July 2016
– Evolution of the Bank Lending Survey 
since the onset of the financial crisis
– Approaches to resolving sovereign debt 
 crises in the euro area– Bank recovery and resolution – the new 
TLAC and MREL minimum requirements
August 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2016
– Distributional effects of monetary policy
– Globalisation and the transmission of global 
financial shocks to the euro-  ar ea countries 
– implications for (national)  economic policy
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2015
October 2016
– Local government finances: Development 
and selected aspects
– Significance and impact of high-  fr equency 
trading in the German capital market
November 2016
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2016
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2017 and 2018 and 
an outlook for 2019
– Wage dynamics amid high euro-area un -
employmentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2017  
83•

– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2015
January 2017
– The Eurosystem’s bond purchases and the ex-
change rate of the euro
– Recent developments in the indebtedness of 
the private non-  financial sector in selected  
euro-  area countries
February 2017
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2017
– German balance of payments in 2016
– Federal states’ cyclical adjustment in the con-
text of the debt brake
April 2017
– The role of banks, non-  banks and the centr al 
bank in the money creation process
– Demographic change, immigration and the 
potential output of the German economy
May 2017
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics 1, 2
 2 C apital market statistics 1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics 1, 2
 4 Seasonal ly adjusted business statistics 1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics 2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
1997 3
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 1999 3
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich   von Währung und Wirtschaft, Mar ch 
2013 3
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 2005 3
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 2006 3
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2017  
84•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20172, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification,  
January 20172
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2 010 to 
2015, May 20162
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2015, 
December 20162
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2012 bis 2013 , 
May 20162, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013 2
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the  
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 1 0 F oreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20161, 2
 1 1 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 1 2 T echnologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
05/ 2017  
A model-based analysis of the macroeconomic 
impact of the refugee migration to Germany
06/ 2017  
Scarcity effects of QE: a transaction-level analy -
sis in the Bund market
07/ 2017  
Bank stress testing under different balance 
sheet assumptions
08/ 2017  
The effects of US monetary policy shocks: 
applying   external instrument identification to a 
dynamic factor model
09/2017  
Drivers of systemic risk: Do national and Euro -
pean perspectives differ? 
10/2017  
Interest rate risk of life insurers – evidence from 
accounting data
11/2017  
Growth expectations, undue optimism, and 
short-run fluctuations
12/2017  
Chow-Lin X N: how adding a panel dimension 
can improve accuracy
13/2017  
Asymmetric arbitrage trading on offshore and 
onshore renminbi markets
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 and series 2.For footnotes, see p 86•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2017  
85•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank A ct, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2017  
86•

