Monthly Report
November 2018
Vol. 70  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 16 November 2018.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
The potential global economic impact of the USA- China trade dispute  ..............................  11
Recent wage developments in the euro area  ......................................................................  20
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  22
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  23
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  35
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  44
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  54
Selected technical information on the official tax estimate  .................................................  58Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
5

Overview
German economy held back 
by temporary one- off effects
The global economy is likely to have lost some 
momentum during the third quarter, particu -
larly within the group of advanced economies. 
Whereas the strong economic upturn levelled 
off only slightly in the United States, growth in 
the euro area slowed markedly, and output 
even declined somewhat in Japan. However, in 
the latter two cases, temporary pressures 
played a role. By contrast, economic growth in 
the United Kingdom was distinctly more brisk. 
Among the emerging market economies, 
growth in the Chinese economy, whilst still 
high by international standards, dipped slightly. 
Overall, the global economy remains buoyant, 
albeit with significant regional differences.
According to current projections by the Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF), the global up -
turn will continue at the same pace this year 
and in 2019, which would dash any hopes that 
may have arisen in the meantime of an acceler -
ation in economic growth. The IMF substan -
tially lowered its growth projections for a num -
ber of emerging market economies, in particu -
lar. It also factored in potential repercussions of 
recent measures in the trade dispute between 
the US and China, thus reducing its growth 
projections for 2019 by 0.2 percentage point 
for each country. According to NiGEM simula -
tions performed by the Bundesbank, if the 
trade dispute were to escalate further, its ad -
verse effects could intensify and have a dis -
tinctly negative impact on the global economy. 
In addition to a sudden tightening of global fi -
nancing conditions, the IMF staff likewise see 
this as a major downside risk to the global up -
turn.
Developments in the financial markets have re -
flected the somewhat slower momentum in 
global activity since the middle of the year. In 
addition, negative political influences again be -came slightly more pronounced. These include, 
for example, the trade disputes between the 
US and China as well as the Italian govern -
ment’s disregard for the European fiscal rules. 
Given that economic growth remains solid, 
interest rates on government bonds picked up, 
especially in the US, which is still experiencing 
rapid growth and where the Federal Reserve 
continued to implement its policy of gradually 
increasing key interest rates as announced. In 
the euro area, higher risk premiums for individ -
ual countries played a role, particularly for Italy. 
On the other hand, since safe haven debt se -
curities such as German Federal securities were 
in demand in this market environment, yields 
on Bunds remained practically unchanged. The 
equity markets initially moved sideways amid 
fluctuations. However, towards the end of the 
third quarter, the abovementioned stress fac -
tors exerted considerable pressure on prices. 
European stocks – notably bank equities – suf -
fered particularly sharp price losses. In addition, 
amid higher risk aversion among market par -
ticipants, measures of uncertainty in expect -
ations, which had so far been at relatively low 
levels in the equity markets, increased markedly 
worldwide. Despite some distinct price drops in 
the equity and bond markets, overall, the euro 
recorded only moderate changes vis-  à- vis the 
US dollar, the yen and the pound sterling from 
the end of June. Signs of a slight easing came 
from a few emerging market economies as 
their currencies, which had depreciated sub -
stantially until into August, recently stabilised 
against the euro and their bond yields fell – in 
some cases considerably.
As indicated in June 2018, the Governing 
Council of the ECB decided at its September 
meeting to reduce the net purchases under the 
expanded asset purchase programme to €15 
billion per month after September 2018. The 
Council also confirmed that it expects to dis -
continue net purchases after the end of De -
cember 2018 subject to confirmation of its cur -Global economy 
still buoyant 
during the third 
quarter despite 
clear regional 
differences
Upswing con -
tinues according 
to IMF, although 
projections 
lowered slightlyRising govern -
ment bond 
yields and 
 falling prices 
in the equity 
markets
Monetary 
 policy: ECB 
 Governing 
Council reduces 
monthly asset 
purchasesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
6

rent assessment of the medium- term inflation 
outlook by newly available data. The ECB Gov -
erning Council kept its policy rates unchanged 
during the reporting period and maintained the 
enhanced forward guidance on key interest 
rates given in June 2018.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregate M3 
in the euro area tailed off significantly in the 
third quarter of 2018 and was therefore mark -
edly lower than during the last two years. This 
was mainly due to the scaling back of the 
monthly net asset purchases by the Eurosystem 
at the beginning of the year as well as to the 
subdued growth in enterprises’ bank deposits. 
Looking at the counterparts, monetary devel -
opments were largely supported by the on -
going recovery in lending to the non-  financial 
private sector. Against the background of high 
capacity utilisation and sound levels of con -
sumer confidence, loans to non- financial cor -
porations and households again recorded con -
siderable inflows. The lively demand for credit 
was bolstered by the still favourable financing 
conditions for households and enterprises.
Economic output in Germany dipped slightly in 
the third quarter of 2018. According to the 
Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real 
gross domestic product contracted by 0.2% in 
seasonal and calendar adjusted terms com -
pared to the previous quarter. The main cause 
of this decline was a strong temporary one- off 
effect in the automotive sector. Major prob -
lems linked to the introduction of a new EU-  
wide standard for measuring exhaust emissions 
led to significant production stoppages as well 
as to a slump in motor vehicle exports. At the 
same time, private consumption was temporar -
ily absent as a driving force of the economy. 
Besides the reduced supply of vehicles pro -
duced domestically – and potentially also the 
debate about bringing in a ban on cars with 
high emissions levels – the exceptionally hot, 
dry weather during the summer may have been 
another contributing factor. Despite these tem -
porary one- off effects, the economic boom in 
Germany continues. Aggregate production capacity utilisation remains well above average. 
The German economy will probably expand 
quite strongly again towards the end of the 
year.
The manufacturing sector recorded a sharp fall 
in output as a result of the temporary produc -
tion stoppages in the automotive sector, thus 
playing a major part in the decline in economic 
output during the third quarter. Moreover, the 
construction sector grew considerably more 
slowly than in the second quarter, when con -
struction activity had expanded sharply. The 
upswing in the service industries may have con -
tinued. On the demand side, the weakness was 
quite broadly based. Only investment in new 
machinery and equipment and in new build -
ings as well as, to a certain extent, government 
consumption expenditure provided positive 
momentum. Large import volumes are likely to 
have been used to build up inventories in some 
cases.
In the third quarter, too, the labour market situ -
ation was one of very high levels of employ -
ment and low unemployment. Employment 
was somewhat more buoyant following mod -
erate growth in the previous quarter. This was 
mainly due to the ongoing fairly strong increase 
in positions subject to social security contribu -
tions. Despite having already reached a low 
level, unemployment saw a notable decrease in 
the reporting quarter. At the same time, the al -
ready large number of vacancies continued to 
grow. Leading indicators show persistently high 
demand for labour over the next few months.
The economic situation, which has been fa -
vourable for quite some time now, and grow -
ing labour shortages were reflected over the 
course of the reporting quarter, too, in rising 
negotiated pay rates above the longer- term 
average. At 2.8%, the year- on- year increase in 
negotiated rates of basic pay in the third quar -
ter of 2018 was significant, as in the second 
quarter. Actual earnings are also likely to have 
again picked up strongly in the third quarter. 
Following the conclusion of the latest pay Monetary 
dynamics in the 
euro area driven 
by loan growth
Slight decline 
in German 
 economic out -
put in the third 
quarter, mainly 
due to tempor -
ary one- off 
effectsSharp fall in 
 output for 
industry caused 
by automotive 
sector
Very high 
employment 
levels and low 
unemployment
Continued high 
underlying 
momentum in 
negotiated pay 
ratesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
7

agreement in the chemical industry, which will 
see wages climb sharply by around 3¾% in an -
nualised terms, this year’s pay round has all but 
come to an end. Pay agreements were charac -
terised, in most instances, by markedly higher 
wage growth than in the past two years, and 
they were concluded for longer periods in 
many cases. Furthermore, it was often agreed 
that large hikes in negotiated rates of pay 
would occur at the start of the agreement 
period, followed by lower or no rises later on. 
In some industries, employees also had the op -
tion of choosing between wage increases or 
more leisure time in lieu thereof.
Consumer prices (HICP) in the third quarter 
were again up markedly on the preceding 
three- month period, recording an increase of 
0.5% in seasonally adjusted terms. Given the 
steadily mounting crude oil prices up to then, 
energy prices went up by roughly as much as in 
the previous quarter. As a result of abnormal 
weather conditions, food prices likewise con -
tinued to climb, albeit at a slower pace than in 
the second quarter. In the case of clothing and 
footwear, though, which are likewise subject to 
fairly strong price fluctuations, there were ex -
ceptionally large discounts. Overall, however, 
non- energy industrial goods prices grew at a 
markedly faster pace than in previous quarters. 
For instance, vehicle sales prices increased by 
0.8%. The prices of services continued to rise 
moderately. The partial or full abolition of 
charges for day care facilities for small children 
in a number of federal states had a dampening 
effect here.1 By contrast, far more had to be 
spent on other services. This was particularly 
the case for those services –  cleaning being 
one such example – where wages represent a 
high share of costs. Compared with the previ -
ous year, annual headline HICP inflation in -
creased from 1.9% to 2.1%.2 Excluding energy 
and food, however, the rate decreased margin -
ally from 1.2% to 1.1%. After factoring out the 
abolition of charges for day care facilities for 
small children and the volatile components of 
clothing and travel, it rose slightly.Having experienced a setback in the third quar -
ter, the German economy is expected to see 
fairly strong growth again in the final quarter 
of 2018. Output and exports of motor vehicles  
are thus expected to return to normal before 
the year is out. The manufacturing sector as a 
whole likewise looks set for marked growth. 
For instance, demand for imported intermedi -
ate goods was very buoyant in the past quar -
ter. Although new orders have not yet been 
able to break the steady downward trend that 
took hold at the start of the year, industry order 
books remain well filled. In addition, ifo Insti -
tute data indicate that short- term output ex -
pectations remain well above their long- term 
average. In addition, private consumption is ex -
pected to re- assume its role as a major eco -
nomic driver following the dip in the third 
quarter. The still outstanding income and la -
bour market prospects are expected to again 
provide a boost.
One indication of this is the continued high 
demand  among households for housing loans 
and consumer credit, which was bolstered by 
still favourable financing conditions. Lending to 
non- financial corporations likewise increased 
significantly during the quarter under review, 
albeit to a slightly lesser extent than in the pre -
vious quarter. According to the banks surveyed 
in the BLS, corporate demand for credit was 
driven primarily by financing needs for fixed in -
vestment and the low general level of interest 
rates. The banks surveyed also reported that 
they had, on balance, further eased their credit 
standards for loans to enterprises.
Germany’s government finances are continuing 
to benefit from the highly favourable under -
lying conditions. In light of this, a far larger 
general government surplus is on the cards this 
year. Revenue from taxes and social contribu -Inflation rate up 
further in Q3 
from elevated 
levelGerman 
 economy back 
on expansionary 
course by 
 year-end
Renewed signifi -
cant expansion 
in lending to 
domestic private 
sector
Another signifi -
cant improve -
ment in govern -
ment finances 
in 2018
1 This affected Lower Saxony, Hesse, Berlin and 
Brandenburg . With state- weighted fees accounting for 
0.04% of HICP , this reduced the headline rate by around 
0.05 percentage point.
2 The headline CPI figure was +2.1% compared with 
+2.0%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
8

tions is rising rapidly. In addition, the strain on 
government coffers is being eased by falling 
unemployment and dwindling interest expend -
iture. Overall, this represents only a moderate 
increase in spending. The debt ratio is still on a 
downward path and could fall below the 60% 
threshold this year already.
As things stand, the framework conditions for 
government finances will remain favourable in 
the medium term, too. At the same time, fiscal 
policy will be eased by stepping up expenditure 
and lowering taxes. As a result, the surplus is 
expected to decrease as of next year, particu -
larly in structural but also in unadjusted terms. 
Specifically, there are plans to increase benefits 
for pensions, healthcare and long- term care. In 
addition, central, state and local government 
intend to raise spending on, inter alia, child -
care, education, transport and digital policy. 
Given the measures that have been provided 
for, the burden of taxes and social contribu -
tions is set to decline only moderately in the 
medium term. Social contribution rates will 
thus change little on balance – despite the still 
low level of demographic pressure and highly 
positive labour market performance. The envis -
aged tax cuts are to be partly offset by add -
itional revenue from progressive taxation.
With a view to providing tax relief, it was 
agreed, inter alia, that the solidarity surcharge 
would be partially abolished from 2021 on -
wards. The surcharge is received by central 
government alone and was explained by the 
heavy financial burden of German reunifica -
tion. Amongst other things, central govern -
ment awards grants to state government for 
infrastructure reconstruction in eastern Ger -
many, but these are set to be discontinued at 
the end of 2019. During the period in which 
the solidarity surcharge is expected to still exist to a partial extent, central government intends 
to co- finance state government tasks (primarily 
education) on a larger scale. Mixed financing 
would experience a revival and responsibilities 
would thus be further blurred. In order to 
strengthen the individual responsibility of state 
governments and safeguard clear revenue and 
task structures, it would instead be worth con -
sidering a fundamental effort at reform. In this 
way, it would be possible to forgo the legally 
questionable partial continuation of the soli -
darity surcharge and avoid an increase in mixed 
financing. Objectives concerning tax revenue, 
burden- sharing among taxpayers and the dis -
tribution of taxes between the respective levels 
of government would then, if necessary, be 
met by reforming the regular tax system.
In view of the fact that government finances 
are currently  in very good shape, it appears 
that longer- term challenges are, to some ex -
tent, being put on the back burner. In particu -
lar, demographic developments are putting sig -
nificant pressure on the finances of the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme. The new pen -
sion package will make it even more difficult to 
ensure sustainability. So far, how pension fi -
nances are to be balanced in the longer term 
remains to be seen. What is needed, ultimately, 
is a consistent combination of key parameters. 
Besides the pension level, contribution rates 
and central government grants, these param -
eters also include the statutory retirement age. 
In future, it would be a logical move to tether 
this to rising life expectancy. Furthermore, even 
disregarding the pension package, substantial 
additional tax resources will have to be mobil -
ised for the statutory pension insurance 
scheme. If an excessive levy burden is to be 
avoided, it will be necessary to bear in mind the 
mounting burdens of both taxes and social 
contributions.Lower surplus in 
coming years 
due to fiscal  
loosening
Fundamental 
reform instead 
of partial con -
tinuation of soli -
darity surcharge 
and expansion 
of mixed 
 financingDecisions on 
sustainable 
statutory 
 pension insur -
ance scheme 
postponedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
9

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
The global economy is likely to have lost some 
momentum during the third quarter, particu -
larly within the group of advanced economies. 
Although the strong economic upturn levelled 
off only slightly in the United States, growth in 
the euro area slowed markedly, and output 
even contracted somewhat in Japan. However, 
in the latter two cases, temporary pressures 
played a role. By contrast, the pace of eco -
nomic growth in the United Kingdom picked 
up noticeably. Amongst the emerging market 
economies, growth in the Chinese economy, 
still high by international standards, dipped 
slightly. In Russia and Brazil, economic recovery 
is likely to have continued at a sluggish pace. 
Overall, the global economy remains buoyant, 
albeit with significant regional differences. Ac -
cording to monthly data provided by the Dutch 
Centraal Planbureau (CPB), international goods 
trade appears to have picked up speed again 
following a sideways movement in the first half 
of the year.
According to current projections by the Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF), the global up -
turn will continue at the same pace in both this 
year and in 2019. Compared with the July esti -
mate, the IMF slightly reduced its projection for 
global growth in both 2018 and 2019 to 3.7% 
(weighted in terms of purchasing power parity) 
in October. Any hopes that may have arisen in 
the meantime of an acceleration in economic 
growth were therefore dashed. Growth projec -
tions for a number of emerging market econ -
omies, in particular, were lowered substantially. 
This was mainly driven by country- specific fac -
tors, but tighter financing conditions as well as 
geopolitical tensions also played a role. Fur -
thermore, the IMF staff factored in the poten -
tial repercussions of the measures recently 
taken in the trade dispute between the USA 
and China.1 Growth projections for 2019 were consequently reduced by 0.2 percentage point 
for both countries. These adjustments are simi -
lar in scale to the effects on gross domestic 
product (GDP) resulting from the Bundesbank’s 
NiGEM simulations of new trade barriers be -
tween the USA and China (see the box on 
p. 11ff.). According to the simulations, if the 
trade dispute were to escalate further, its ad -
verse effects could intensify and have a dis -
tinctly negative impact on the global economy. 
The IMF staff see this, alongside a sudden 
tightening of global financing conditions, as a 
major downside risk to the global upturn.
The price of crude oil has decreased signifi -
cantly since the start of October 2018. Prior to 
this, however, uncertainties surrounding the 
extent of available production capacity to com -
pensate for possible production losses in Iran 
and Venezuela had driven up prices substan -
tially. In the first week of October, the spot 
price for a barrel of Brent crude oil was a little 
more than US$85 – its highest level since Octo -
ber 2014. However, some major oil- producing 
countries succeeded in expanding their produc -
tion. In addition, inventories grew substantially 
in the United States. The US  Administration 
also agreed with certain countries to allow 
them to continue importing Iranian oil even 
after the entry into force of sanctions. Against 
this background, the prices of crude oil recently 
fell significantly. As this report went to press, 
the spot price for a barrel of Brent was as little 
as US$66. Twelve- month oil futures traded at a 
slight premium. The prices of other commod -
ities have showed uneven movement over the 
past few months. On the whole, the non-  
energy commodity price index compiled by the 
Hamburg Institute of International Economics 
(HWWI) remained virtually unchanged, record -Global economy 
still buoyant in 
Q3, albeit with 
clear regional 
differences
Continued 
upswing accord -
ing to the IMF, 
even though 
projections 
lowered slightlyRecent substan -
tial decline in 
crude oil price
1 For details of the protectionist trade measures factored 
into the baseline, see IMF, Global Prospects and Policies, 
World Economic Outlook, October 2018, p. 12.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
10

The potential global economic impact of the USA- China 
trade dispute
Protectionist sentiment is regarded as a sig-
nifi  cant downside risk for the global econ-
omy. In the past two years, trade rhetoric, 
in particular, was initially intensifi  ed. Isol-
ated symbolic moves imposed by the 
US Administration, such as the introduction 
of tariffs on steel and aluminium imports, 
affected only a small percentage of inter-
national trade.1 In the past few months, 
however, the dispute between the United 
States and China has escalated.2 Citing in-
tellectual property rights violations, the 
United States slapped import tariffs on Chi-
nese goods beginning in early July 2018, 
gradually extending them to cover nearly 
half of all imports from China. Following 
the announced increase in January 2019, 
the new measures will entail an effective 
rate of a considerable 25% on imports. The 
Chinese side initially responded tit- for- tat, 
but then moved away from this approach 
following the latest intensifi  cation of the 
confl  ict. Since the end of September, there-
fore, new tariffs have weighed less on US 
products destined for the Chinese market 
than vice versa.3 However, a further escal-
ation does not appear to be out of the 
question. US government representatives 
have, in fact, threatened on several occa-
sions to slap additional tariffs on all imports 
from China.
An extended version of the NiGEM global 
economic model can be used to study the 
aggregate impact of additional tariffs be-
tween the United States and China.4 In this 
framework, surcharges on bilateral export 
prices are used to model tariffs.5 In line with 
the decisions taken by the governments in-
volved, the burdens gradually increase from 
the third quarter of 2018 to the fi  rst quarter 
of 2019.6 The additional customs receipts 
are assumed to be transferred to house-holds as income tax cuts.7 Other trade or 
economic policy moves, such as the greater 
degree of US fi  scal accommodation, are not 
considered in the analysis.8
The introduction of new import tariffs trig-
gers a variety of responses in NiGEM. Tariffs 
directly increase the domestic price of for-
1 If, in addition, the tariffs on washing machines and 
solar panels imposed by the USA at the beginning of 
2018 and the retaliatory measures taken by major trad-
ing partners are considered, at mid- year less than 
0.5% of world trade was affected by trade barriers cre-
ated by new tariffs.
2 In other trade disputes involving the USA, on the 
other hand, there are signs of détente. For instance, 
the governments of the United States, Canada and 
Mexico recently came to an agreement in principle on 
an arrangement to replace the North American Free 
Trade Agreement (NAFTA). An accord on a reworked 
agreement between the United States and South 
Korea had been reached prior to this. Furthermore, the 
USA has launched negotiations with the EU and Japan.
3 The Chinese government’s response to criticism of 
relatively high trade barriers included reductions on im-
port duties for cars and car parts and a reduction, ef-
fective as of November of this year, in tariff rates on a 
signifi  cant portion of Chinese imports. In addition, it 
held out the prospect of additional reforms. These 
measures are not taken into account in the simulations 
below.
4 NiGEM is the global economic model developed by 
the UK- based National Institute of Economic and So-
cial Research (NIESR). It models economic intercon-
nectedness between over 60 economies and regions 
via foreign trade and the interest rate- exchange rate 
nexus. The expanded “US  Tariff & BREXIT” version 
makes it possible to analyse trade policy measures. The 
model has New Keynesian features, especially forward- 
looking elements on the fi  nancial and labour markets. 
For further information, see https:// nimodel.niesr.ac.uk
5 For similar studies based on selected announcements 
concerning the USA- China trade dispute, see I. Liadze 
(2018), Trade wars – any winners?, National Institute 
Economic Review No 245, p. F47; and I. Liadze (2018), 
Trade war – the saga continues, National Institute of 
Economic and Social Research, NiGEM Observations, 
No 13.
6 It was additionally assumed that the tariff barriers 
would slowly be reduced as from 2025. Throughout 
the simulation period, net export prices do not re-
spond to additional tariffs.
7 It could alternatively be presumed, for instance, that 
customs receipts are used to reduce the budget defi  cit 
or increase government expenditure.
8 For an analysis of this, see Deutsche Bundesbank, 
The potential macroeconomic impact of US tax reform, 
Monthly Report, February 2018, pp. 14-16.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
11

eign goods in the fi  rst instance. Although 
this curbs demand for imports and boosts 
domestic production, consumers’ purchas-
ing power takes a hit, as the higher prices 
are passed through directly to them. The 
higher infl  ation rate, moreover, drives up 
interest rates. All this dampens domestic ac-
tivity. The assumed income tax relief only 
softens this effect. Owing to rising interest 
rates, the domestic currency appreciates as 
well, which erodes price competitiveness in 
foreign business. On the whole, within the 
framework of this model even a unilateral 
increase in trade barriers does harm to the 
country’s own economy.9
In the current USA- China dispute, the nega-
tive impacts of additional tariffs imposed by 
one side are amplifi  ed whenever the other 
side retaliates. According to the simulation, 
as early as in the coming year the adopted 
measures, on balance, will reduce US eco-
nomic growth by just over one- quarter per-
centage point relative to a scenario without 
additional tariffs. Whereas the retarding ef-
fects in China are initially smaller, they last 
longer. In the medium term, real GDP in 
both economies remains 0.5% below the 
baseline. Should the dispute escalate fur-
ther, considerably higher losses are possible. 
In the scenario of an expansion of US tariffs 
to all bilateral imports, China’s medium- term GDP losses would be close to 1%. US 
losses would be only slightly smaller.
Bilateral trade disputes radiate to third 
countries through a variety of channels. Al-
though those countries’ exporters –  un-
affected by the imposition of tariffs – can 
gain market share owing to their relatively 
improved price competitiveness, the reduc-
tion in US and Chinese output, ceteris pari-
bus, will reduce demand for products from 
other economies. In addition, dampening 
impacts of higher infl  ation rates and inter-
est rates could spill over from the United 
States and China to other economic areas 
through the exchange rate channel. In the 
simplifi  ed NiGEM model world, the drags 
prevail most of the time. The real GDP 
losses relative to the baseline are percep-
tible in precisely those countries which are 
closely interconnected with the United 
States and China through trade links. The 
losses for the euro area and particularly 
Germany tend to remain limited, however.10 
9 This result occurs not only in earlier NiGEM studies 
but also in comparable simulations using the Bundes-
bank’s DSGE model. See Deutsche Bundesbank, The 
danger posed to the global economy by protectionist 
tendencies, Monthly Report, July 2017, pp. 77-91.
10 In the simulation calculations, Germany’s own ex-
port prices adjust relatively strongly, reducing the Ger-
man economy’s comparative vulnerability. Exports 
therefore are considerably more resilient than would 
be expected following the severe damper to foreign 
demand.Trade policy moves in the USA-China dispute
 
DateUS measures Chinese measures
Additionally affected trade 
 valuesEffective 
 average tariff 
rate (%)Additionally affected trade 
 valuesEffective 
 average tariff 
rate (%) US$ billion % of imports1US$ billion % of imports1
6 July 2018 34 6.5 25.0 34 18.1 25.0
23 August 2018 16 3.1 25.0 16 8.5 25.0
24 September 2018 200 38.2 10.0 60 31.9 6.9
1 January 20192 –2 – 25.0 . . .
Sources: Peterson Institute for International Economics, US Census Bureau and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Bilateral imports of 
goods and services; data taken from the US foreign trade statistics. 2 Increase in the tariff rate on goods on which new tariffs 
were imposed in September; no additional products affected.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
12

A further escalation of the dispute reduces 
the volume of global trade in the medium 
term by more than 1.5% compared with a 
scenario without additional tariffs.
Compared with the results of other studies, 
the dampening impacts of trade disputes 
are, in some cases, more strongly pro-
nounced in NiGEM. Thus, for instance, IMF 
simulations using the Global Integrated 
Monetary and Fiscal Model (GIMF), a dy-
namic stochastic general equilibrium model, 
suggest a markedly smaller loss of US GDP 
in the medium term. Some economies – in-
cluding the euro area – could even benefi  t 
from the USA- China trade dispute.11 Since 
international trade relations are modelled in 
a less detailed fashion in NiGEM than in the 
GIMF model, the aggregate losses could be 
overstated somewhat. However, the IMF 
and other institutions likewise regard con-
siderably larger income losses as possible. 
Thus, in simulations, tariff scenarios are 
generally augmented by additional shocks, 
which dampen investment demand in par-
ticular.12 Lastly, neither NiGEM nor the GIMF 
model takes account of sectoral develop-
ments and interconnectedness through 
cross- border value chains. The disruptive ef-
fects of trade barriers could therefore be 
underreported. Hence, it seems advisable 
not to underestimate the potential drag of 
restrictive trade policy measures on third 
parties, too.11 The IMF analysis additionally incorporates the gen-
eral tariffs on imports of steel and aluminium imposed 
by the United States in March 2018, its trading part-
ners’ responses and a slight increase in the strength of 
China’s retaliation as from 2019. See IMF, Global Trade 
Tensions, World Economic Outlook, October 2018, 
pp. 33-35.
12 Typically, citing confi  dence and uncertainty effects, 
either risk premia on international capital markets go 
up, or investment or output growth are marked down 
directly. See IMF (2018), op. cit.; A. G.  Dizioli and 
B.  van Roye (2018), Macroeconomic implications of 
increasing  protectionism, Economic Bulletin, Issue 6, 
ECB, pp. 35-38; A. Berthou, C. Jardet, D. Siena and 
U. Szczerbowicz (2018), Quantifying the losses from a 
global trade war, Banque de France Eco Notepad, blog 
entry of 19 July 2018; Bank of Finland, Trade policy 
tensions casting shadow on economic horizon, Eco-
nomic Bulletin 4/ 2018, pp. 40-47; and European Com-
mission, European Economic Forecast Autumn 2018, 
Institutional Paper No 089, November 2018.Potential implications of the USA-China 
trade dispute for major economies’ real 
GDP
Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  using  NiGEM.  1 Simulations 
based on US Tariff & BREXIT Expanded Model V3.18c. Customs 
receipts used to reduce household income tax rates.  Monetary 
policy responses in accordance with standard rules.  2 Import 
tariffs of 25% imposed on all US imports from China  as from 
Q2 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank– 1.8 – 1.5 – 1.2 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 0.3 0Results of NiGEM simulations1, percentage deviation of real GDP 
from baseline in 2023
Canada
Italy
WorldIncludes only measures adopted
United KingdomGermanyFranceEuro areaJapan
Memo item:
World tradeMexicoUS tariffs expanded to cover all imports from China 2
USAChinaDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
13

ing an October level only slightly below that of 
July.
In line with high but declining year- on- year 
rates of change for crude oil prices, annual en -
ergy price inflation in industrial countries de -
creased from almost 10% in June to 7% in Sep -
tember on the year. Headline consumer price 
inflation during this period accordingly slipped 
from 2.3% to 2.1%. By contrast, the core rate, 
excluding energy and food, fell only slightly to 
1.5%.Selected emerging market 
economies
In the third quarter, according to official data, 
growth in China decelerated further on the 
year to 6.5% – its lowest rate since the finan -
cial crisis. In spite of an escalation of the trade 
dispute with the United States, foreign trade 
has remained buoyant thus far. In the third 
quarter, imports of goods in US dollar terms 
were up by more than one- fifth from the figure 
for the same quarter a year earlier, and exports 
rose by just under 12%. Overall, consumption 
activity remained robust. Sentiment among 
households remained optimistic, even though 
the survey data were slightly down from their 
early- year peaks. Annual consumer price infla -
tion increased slightly in the third quarter to 
2.3%. Excluding energy and food, the rate of 
change remained subdued at 1.9%.
In India, the positive macroeconomic develop -
ments continued. Economic growth even ac -
celerated to 8.2% year- on- year in the second 
quarter. However, this rapid pace will probably 
not be fully maintained. Industrial output 
growth, for instance, has been markedly 
weaker over the past few months. Similarly, ac -
cording to surveys, business confidence de -
creased slightly at the current end. Most re -
cently, price inflation declined noticeably, par -
ticularly in the case of food. On average for the 
months from July to September, consumer 
prices increased by 3.9% on the year. The infla -
tion rate thus broadly corresponded with the 
medium- term target set by the Reserve Bank of 
India, which nevertheless continued to grad -
ually tighten its monetary policy and raised its 
policy rate to 6.5% in August.
In Brazil, seasonally adjusted real GDP in the 
second quarter rose by 0.2% on the quarter 
and by 1.0% on the year. The economic recov -
ery thus failed to make any meaningful pro -
gress. In the third quarter as well, for which 
official data are not yet available, growth ap -
peared to have been only marginally higher. No 
lasting improvement can yet be identified in Slightly 
decreased 
consumer  price 
inflation in 
industrial coun -
tries of lateGradual slow -
down in growth 
in China
Strong GDP 
growth in India
Pace of growth 
still slow in 
Brazil World market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and food
and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance LP and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 9 November 2018, or 1 to 15 November 2018 
for crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201835
30405060708090100110120Monthly averages, log scale
5060708090100110
60708090100US dollar basis,
2012 = 100
Industrial
commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
14

the labour market. The unemployment rate de -
clined slightly to 12.1% after seasonal adjust -
ment in the third quarter, but the employment 
growth of the past few months was primarily 
attributable to the informal sector. In line with 
this, wage growth remained weak. At last re -
port, consumer prices rose significantly, and 
the average of the third quarter exceeded its 
previous- year level by 4.4%. The inflation rate 
was thus close to the target set by the Central 
Bank of Brazil.
In Russia, the pace of economic growth re -
mained subdued even though oil price devel -
opments continued to be favourable in the 
third quarter. A preliminary estimate by the 
Russian Federal State Statistics Office showed a 
decline in annual economic growth to 1.3%. 
This is consistent with the picture derived from 
the business cycle indicators. Consumer confi -
dence and the business climate continued to 
deterioriate during the summer months, and 
motor vehicle sales were down from the previ -
ous quarter. At the same time, consumer price 
inflation accelerated markedly again. In the 
third quarter, the annual rate of consumer price 
inflation expanded to 3.0% from 2.4% in the 
preceding quarter. The seasonally adjusted un -
employment rate held steady at 4.8%.
United States
In the United States, economic activity re -
mained brisk in the third quarter of 2018. Real 
GDP , according to the first official estimate, in -
creased by 0.9% from the second quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. The fact that this 
upswing could not entirely keep up with the 
even higher rate of the preceding period was 
partly due to a normalisation of foreign busi -
ness. Following a sharp increase in the second 
quarter, exports, for example, were lower, in 
line with expectations. Furthermore, business 
investment, which had been quite buoyant up 
to that point, began to stumble, partly due to a 
probably temporary setback in the mining sec -
tor. Against the backdrop of the expansionary fiscal policy stance, public and private con -
sumption remained an important driver of eco -
nomic upturn. Household consumption ex -
penditure increased by approximately 1% for 
the second consecutive quarter, after adjust -
ment for seasonal and price variations. In the 
future, private consumption may again increas -
ingly emulate the flatter expansionary path of 
disposable income, as the scope for expend -
iture created by the tax reform is likely to have 
been all but exhausted. The decline in the sav -
ing ratio since the beginning of the year is indi -
cative of this. However, the exceptionally good 
labour market situation should continue to bol -
ster consumer spending. In October, the un -
employment rate stood at 3.7%, its lowest 
level since 1969, while wage growth firmed. 
Labour income per hour worked accelerated 
substantially in real terms as well, although 
consumer price inflation remained strong. In 
October, the CPI exceeded the previous year’s 
level by 2.5%. In this setting, the US Federal Re -
serve maintained its stance of a gradual nor -Persistently 
moderate 
growth in Russia
Slightly slowed 
growth in Q3China’s foreign trade and aggregate 
growth
Sources:  NBS,  General  Administration  of  Customs  of  the 
People’s  Republic  of  China  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 Nominal, in US dollar terms.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 20180+3+6+9Year-on-year percentage change
Enlarged scale
Real GDP20100102030
––+++
Goods exports1Goods imports1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
15

malisation of monetary policy and raised its 
policy rate by 25 basis points in September.
Japan
The expansion of the Japanese economy did 
not continue in the third quarter. According to 
a preliminary official estimate, seasonally ad -
justed real GDP even decreased by 0.3% com -
pared with the second quarter, in which it had 
grown by as much as 0.8%. Production losses 
resulting from natural disasters are likely to 
have been a major factor here.2 Private con -
sumption was unable to match the level at -
tained in the preceding quarter. Business in -
vestment activity also dipped slightly. A signifi -
cant contraction in exports coincided with a 
marked drop in imports. The labour market re -
mained robust throughout the period. The un -
employment rate held firm at an extremely low 
level in the third quarter, and domestic con -
sumer price inflation remained weak. In Sep -tember, the annual core inflation rate (exclud -
ing energy and food) remained unchanged at 
0.2%. Against this backdrop, the Japanese cen -
tral bank maintained its accommodative stance.
United Kingdom
In the UK, economic growth accelerated again 
in the third quarter. After adjustment for the 
usual seasonal variations, price- adjusted GDP in 
the third quarter was up by 0.6% from the pre -
vious period, during which it had already risen 
by 0.4%. Firming economic activity was primar -
ily due to a considerable expansion of manu -
facturing output following a second- quarter 
decline. Additionally, construction output rose 
significantly. By contrast, the services sector, 
which is of particular importance in the United 
Kingdom, expanded only moderately. In line 
with the somewhat increased aggregate 
growth dynamic, the labour market situation 
remained favourable in the third quarter. At last 
report the unemployment rate, at 4.1%, was 
only slightly above the extremely low level of 
the previous quarter. The annual increase of 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP) was static in October at 2.4%. The Bank 
of England adhered to its monetary policy 
stance.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-6),3 the eco -
nomic upswing intensified in the third quarter 
of 2018. Real GDP rose sharply compared with 
the previous quarter in most countries. On the 
expenditure side, economic growth continues 
to be buoyed up by vigorous private consump -
tion being supported by the improved labour 
market situation. In the summer, the unemploy -Blip in economic 
growth due to 
natural disastersEconomic 
activity  firming
Summer upturn 
stepped upIndicators of private consumption in the 
United States
Sources:  Bureau  of  Economic  Analysis,  Haver  Analytics  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 201896979899100101102103104Seasonally adjusted
6.06.57.07.58.02017 = 100, log scale
Real private consumptionReal disposable income
Nominal savings
As a percentage of disposable income, lin scale
2 In July, unusually heavy rainfall caused flooding in the 
west of the country. In September, economic activity was 
impaired in the aftermath of a typhoon and an earthquake.
3 This group comprises the non- euro area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, i.e. Poland, the Czech Re -
public, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
16

ment rate dropped to a new low of 3.9%, 
0.9 percentage point lower than in the summer 
of 2017.
Consumer price inflation rose perceptibly on 
the year to 2.4% in the third quarter. HICP rates 
ranged from 1.4% in Poland to 2.3% in the 
Czech Republic, 3.5% in Hungary, 3.6% in Bul -
garia and 4.6% in Romania. The key factors be -
hind the increase in consumer prices were not 
only the rise in energy prices due to crude oil 
prices but also domestic inflationary pressures, 
which were increasing in some countries. This 
is linked to the strong wage growth, which had 
been boosted in some areas by a considerable 
hike in the minimum wage at the beginning of 
the year. Excluding energy and food, prices in 
the third quarter were up by 1.1% on the year, 
with a broad spectrum ranging from 0.2% in 
Poland to over 2% in the Czech Republic, Bul -
garia and Romania. Owing to the distinct in -
crease in consumer prices, in early November 
the Czech Republic’s central bank raised its pol -
icy rates for the third time this year.
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
The euro area saw only a moderate rise in eco -
nomic activity in the summer. According to Eu -
rostat’s flash estimate, real GDP in the third 
quarter of 2018 was up by a paltry 0.2% on the 
quarter after seasonal adjustment, with the 
year- on- year figure falling to 1.7%. Temporary 
production losses in Germany’s automotive in -
dustry are likely to be a major reason behind 
this further slowdown in growth. The forces 
fuelling economic activity generally appear to 
be intact despite a further dip in sentiment. 
This is suggested by the significant increase in 
exports and firming investment activity, which 
were accompanied by a marked pick- up in im -
ports. That said, the underlying pace of real 
GDP growth has slowed distinctly since the be -
ginning of the year.Once again, there was likely only a slight rise in 
private consumption expenditure in the third 
quarter, with retail sales even declining margin -
ally after price and seasonal adjustment. Never -
theless, there was a marked increase in new 
motor vehicle registrations. Registrations were 
probably brought forward to August in antici -
pation of a new exhaust testing standard ap -
plicable from 1 September 2018. Private con -
sumption was bolstered by improvements in 
the labour market situation. Despite the rise in 
consumer prices, the real value of disposable 
income is likely to have picked up somewhat. 
However, households’ assessment of the la -
bour market outlook deteriorated again. Con -
sumer confidence remained at a high level, 
however, in spite of a slight downturn.
The upturn in investment likely continued at a 
slower pace in the third quarter. Investment in 
machinery and equipment probably picked up 
again distinctly despite aggregate growth de -
celerating somewhat. Production of capital Consumer 
prices rising 
perceptibly 
Moderate eco -
nomic growthPrivate 
 consumption 
showing little 
momentum
Investment 
activity intactAggregate output in the euro area *
98100102104106108110112
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2018
Source: Eurostat. * Affected by a level shift in Irish GDP from 
Q1 2015 onwards.
Deutsche Bundesbank–3–2–10+1Lin scale
Quarter-on-quarter change%2010 = 100, log scale
GDPPrice and seasonally adjusted, quarterly dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
17

goods, for instance, was stepped up substan -
tially in the third quarter, and enterprises’ pro -
pensity to invest was fostered by high levels of 
capacity utilisation. Despite the slowdown in 
growth since the beginning of the year, the 
capacity utilisation rate for industry fell only 
slightly. Construction investment, primarily in 
the housing sector, probably saw further gains. 
Construction output increased moderately in 
the third quarter. Furthermore, the business cli -
mate index for construction has remained at a 
very high level to date.
Foreign business emitted positive growth stim -
uli in the summer, with earnings from exports 
to third countries rising noticeably despite the 
woes afflicting the motor vehicle industry. In 
addition to the firming of demand in certain 
key sales markets, the marginal improvement in 
price competitiveness observed since the spring 
is also likely to have contributed to this. Exports 
to the United States saw especially robust 
growth, and sales to China also picked up. Meanwhile, exports to the United Kingdom, 
Russia and Turkey continued their slide. Exports 
expanded markedly in real terms as well. In 
keeping with the pick- up in final demand, a 
clear rise in imports was recorded after price 
adjustment, with imports of capital goods 
showing the strongest growth. Intra- euro area 
trade remained subdued in the third quarter.
Industrial activity in the euro area has been dis -
tinctly losing momentum since the start of 
2018. As in the previous quarter, industrial pro -
duction stagnated in the third quarter. Produc -
tion losses in the automotive industry were a 
major factor in this (for more information on 
this development in Germany, see p. 46 f.). Ex -
cluding motor vehicles, capital goods produc -
tion expanded robustly in the third quarter. The 
production of consumer goods remained lack -
lustre, and the production of intermediate 
goods shrank somewhat.
Regional growth patterns appear to be quite 
mixed. Whilst aggregate output contracted 
somewhat in Germany, most member states 
saw an increase in the third quarter. In France, 
economic growth picked up steam again after 
having been held back by one- off factors such 
as tax hikes and strikes in the first half of the 
year. Real GDP grew by 0.4% from the preced -
ing quarter after seasonal adjustment. Private 
consumption also rose perceptibly due to im -
provements in the income situation. Gross fixed 
capital formation continued to expand consid -
erably. Exports increased markedly not least 
due to the aircraft industry eliminating its pro -
duction bottleneck. In Italy, overall economic 
output stagnated after having risen by 0.2% in 
the previous quarter. Sluggish industrial activity, 
in particular, had had a negative impact. On 
the expenditure side, the slowdown in growth 
was probably caused by a weaker rise in invest -
ment. Private consumption expenditure is likely 
to have expanded slightly on the back of the 
notable increase in real disposable income. This 
is supported by the marginal gain in retail sales. 
Foreign business is also likely to have provided 
a positive growth stimulus, with Italian goods Encouraging 
growth stimulus 
from exportsIndustrial output 
stagnating
Economic out -
put up in most 
countriesIndustrial activity in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and European Commission. 1 Balances of in-
dustrial business survey responses.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18889296100104108112Seasonally adjusted
–40–30–20–100+10
70758085Capacity utilisation
as a percentage of the standard level 
of full capacity utilisationLin scale
Industrial confidence12015 = 100, log scale
Industrial output
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
18

exports up noticeably in the third quarter after 
price adjustment. Spain’s cyclical upswing con -
tinued in the summer months. Real GDP sur -
passed the preceding quarter’s level again by 
0.6%, and domestic demand remained very 
buoyant. In particular, investment expenditure 
rose substantially. Exports, by contrast, re -
corded a significant decline, especially in ser -
vices. Economic output expanded markedly in 
Slovakia and Latvia as well, while aggregate 
output also grew quite considerably in Belgium 
and Austria. Real GDP was up only slightly in 
the Netherlands and Portugal.
Euro area labour market conditions continued 
to improve in the third quarter. The number of 
unemployed people in the third quarter fell by 
275,000 compared to the second quarter of 
2018, after seasonal adjustment, and by 1.4 
million on the year. The standardised un -
employment rate stood at 8.1% in September. 
The figure one year earlier had been as high as 
8.9%. Employment grew by 2.0 million people 
in the third quarter, or by 1.3% compared to 
one year earlier. The upward trend in wages 
firmed in the light of favourable developments 
in the labour market (see the box on p. 20). 
The sideways movement in the unemployment 
rate since July and the recent decline in the la -
bour shortages of industry and services may 
signal that the slowdown in the pace of cyclical 
growth since the beginning of the year is now 
having an impact on the labour market as well.
Consumer prices in the euro area rose in the 
third quarter of 2018 by a seasonally adjusted 
0.5% compared to the preceding quarter, rep -
resenting another considerable increase. Owing 
to a hike in crude oil prices, energy prices went 
up sharply for the fourth consecutive quarter. 
Food products likewise became markedly more 
expensive; this was particularly the case for un -
processed food. This was affected by the un -
usually dry weather in several European coun -
tries, which in some cases resulted in major 
losses in vegetable yields. Prices for services 
continued along their moderate upward trajec -
tory, while non- energy industrial goods prices still rose only slightly. Annual headline HICP in -
flation increased markedly from 1.7% to 2.1%. 
HICP consumer prices excluding energy and 
food were up by 1.0% in the third quarter 
compared to one year earlier, which is much 
the same as in the preceding three quarters.
The rise in consumer prices continued in Octo -
ber, particularly in the case of energy prices, 
while seasonally adjusted food price inflation 
largely stalled. Inflation for other components 
remained moderate. Accordingly, annual head -
line HICP inflation increased to 2.2% The rate 
excluding energy and food also rose, to 1.1%. 
The fact that dampening one- off effects (espe -
cially the reductions in motor vehicle insurance 
premiums that came into effect in Germany in 
October last year as well as in university tuition 
fees in Italy) were excluded from the year-  on- 
year comparison was a factor in this regard.
The persistently positive sentiment in the euro 
area, despite a gradual decline, suggests that Further improve -
ment in the 
labour market
Consumer prices 
up considerably 
again in summerPalpable 
increase in 
headline and 
core rates in 
OctoberContributions to unprocessed 
food price inflation in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat, ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Differ-
ences  between  inflation  rate  and  contributions  are  due  to 
rounding.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 20183210123456
–––Fish
Meat
Vegetables
FruitHICP for unprocessed food 1
Year-on-year percentage change
of which:
Contributions 
in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
19

Recent wage developments in the euro area
Following a prolonged period of weakness, 
euro area wage growth has been accelerating 
continuously since mid-2016, especially in the 
fi  rst half of 2018. Gross wages per employee 
were up in the fi  rst quarter of 2018 by 1.9% 
on the year after seasonal and calendar ad-
justment and in the second quarter by 2.4%. 
Their growth in 2017 had been merely 1.6%.1 
Considerable increases in negotiated wages 
are one of the primary factors behind the ac-
celeration in growth. According to ECB statis-
tics, they picked up in the fi  rst quarter by 
1.8% on the year and in the second quarter 
by 2.2%. This contrasted with growth in the 
past year of only 1.5%.
According to an estimated wage Phillips 
curve, which explains the annual change in 
gross wages per employee by the lagged con-
sumer price infl  ation rate, labour productivity 
growth and the lagged unemployment rate,2 
the improved labour market situation is the 
primary cause of accelerated growth in the 
fi  rst half of the year. Although the euro area unemployment rate, at 8.3% in the second 
quarter of 2018, remained above its pre- crisis 
level, in the past year it had already dropped 
below the average of the period from the fi  rst 
quarter of 2000 to the second quarter of 
2018, on which this estimate is based. Ac-
cording to the estimate, positive stimuli were 
emitted not only by the improving labour 
market situation but also by productivity 
growth, and the dampening effects of the 
low infl  ation rates subsided. In addition, in the 
second quarter wage growth corresponded 
quite largely to the development of the deter-
minants captured here, having fallen short of 
them in the previous quarters. This could be a 
sign that additional factors which in the re-
cent past had weighed on wage growth were 
no longer relevant in the second quarter of 
2018. These may have included the after- 
effects of nominal downward rigidities, which 
had initially stifl  ed signifi  cant wage adjust-
ments during the last economic downturn. 
The absence of wage cuts later weighed on 
wage developments. For instance, in Italy, ne-
gotiated wages in the public sector were in-
creased sharply in the second quarter, after 
having been frozen since 2010. On the other 
hand, it is possible that deferred pay increases 
were being made up. In that case, the recent 
movement in the underlying tendency could 
be somewhat overstated.
When assessing wage and employment data, 
it should generally be noted that, at the cur-
rent end, they should be regarded as provi-
sional and are frequently revised. They should 
therefore be taken with the proverbial grain 
of salt. Nevertheless, on balance, the data 
would appear to indicate that the upward 
wage trend in the euro area has stabilised.
1 In each of the fi  rst and second quarters of 2018, 
gross hourly wages rose by 1.8%, following 1.4% last 
year.
2 For more on the specifi  cation of the wage Phillips 
curve used here, see also Deutsche Bundesbank, The 
Phillips curve as an instrument of analysis and forecast-
ing infl  ation in Germany, Monthly Report, April 2016, 
pp. 31-45; and Deutsche Bundesbank, Wage dynamics 
amid high euro area unemployment, Monthly Report, 
December 2016, pp. 33-55.Estimated components of wage growth 
based on the wage Phillips curve*
Sources:  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Deviations 
from the mean over the Q1 2000 to Q2 2018 estimation peri-
od.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 181.00.80.60.40.200.20.40.60.8
–––––++++Year-on-year change
Consumer prices
Labour productivity
Unemployment rate
ResidualGross wage 
per employee
Percentage changeContributions in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
20

the economic upturn is set to continue. Though 
the Purchasing Managers’ Index for the whole 
economy fell to its lowest level in two years 
– particularly in manufacturing, for which the 
index recently saw considerable deterioration – 
the indices for manufacturing and market ser -
vices do still signal an expansion in aggregate 
output. Moreover, the European Commission’s 
indicators of business and consumer sentiment still remained well above their long- term aver -
ages, despite a significant downturn in recent 
months. Favourable financing conditions, the 
continuing improvements in the labour market 
and the vibrant global economy are continuing 
to provide buoyancy. If additional disruptions 
are kept at bay, euro area economic output 
should still see accelerated growth in the final 
quarter of 2018.Stronger eco -
nomic growth 
again in the 
fourth quarterDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
21

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
As envisaged in June 2018, the Governing 
Council of the ECB decided at its September 
meeting to reduce the net purchases under the 
expanded asset purchase programme (APP) to 
€15 billion per month after September 2018. It 
anticipates discontinuing net purchases after 
the end of December 2018 subject to incoming 
data confirming its medium- term inflation out -
look. The Governing Council reiterated this 
after its monetary policy meeting in October. It 
also still intends to reinvest the principal pay -
ments from maturing securities for an extended 
period of time after the end of the net asset 
purchases, and in any case, for as long as ne -
cessary to maintain favourable liquidity condi -
tions and an ample degree of monetary ac -
commodation.The ECB Governing Council kept the key inter -
est rates unchanged in the reporting period. 
The main refinancing rate thus remains at 0%, 
while the marginal lending rate stands at 
0.25% and the deposit facility rate at -0.40%. 
With regard to how policy rates will develop in 
the future (forward guidance), the Governing 
Council continues to expect them to remain at 
their present levels at least through the sum -
mer of 2019, and in any case for as long as 
necessary to ensure the continued sustained 
convergence of inflation to levels that are 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
Incoming information, including the projec -
tions made by ECB experts in September 2018, 
largely confirmed the Governing Council’s pre -
vious assessment of an ongoing, broad- based 
expansion of the euro area economy and grad -
ually rising inflationary pressures. Although the 
Governing Council stated after the October 
meeting that these figures were somewhat 
weaker than expected, it did not amend its pre -
vious assessment. The underlying strength of 
the euro area economy and rising domestic 
cost pressure continue to provide reason to be 
confident that the convergence of inflation to -
wards levels below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term will continue in the near future 
as well as after the reduction and discontinu -
ation of net asset purchases. In the view of the 
Governing Council, although uncertainties re -
garding global factors and volatility on the fi -
nancial markets continue to play a role, the 
risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook 
can still be assessed as balanced. Moreover, it 
should be noted that any downward risks for 
economic growth need not necessarily be re -
flected in corresponding risks for inflation.
As at 9 November, the Eurosystem held assets 
totalling €2,553.0 billion within the scope of 
the APP , with the growth in stocks slowing fur -
ther due to monthly purchases being reduced 
to €15 billion. At €2,089.2 billion, the largest ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to reduce 
monthly secur -
ities purchasesECB Governing 
Council leaves 
policy rates and 
forward guid -
ance unchanged
Confidence in 
sustained rise in 
inflation intact
Monthly pur -
chase volume 
reduced to €15 
billion as of 
OctoberMoney market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. • Average 
1 to 14 November 2018.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 20180.40.200.20.40.6
––+++
01020Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points% Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR 1
EONIA 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
22

Money market management and liquidity needs
During the two reserve periods from 1 August 
2018 to 30 October 2018, euro area liquidity 
needs stemming from autonomous factors in-
creased slightly (see table below). At an aver-
age of €1,356.7 billion in the September- 
October 2018 reserve period, they exceeded 
the average of the most recent period before 
the reporting period (June- July 2018) by €10.9 
billion. Within the two periods considered, 
the sum of the autonomous factors was be-
tween €1,279.5 billion and €1,395.8 billion. 
The higher liquidity needs were driven chiefl  y 
by two factors: fi  rst, by an increase in govern-
ment deposits with the Eurosystem, which 
amounted to an average of €283.1 billion in 
the September- October 2018 period, and 
were thus €19.7 billion up on the average of 
the June- July 2018 period, and, second, by 
the increase of €10.7 billion in banknotes in 
circulation. A contrary movement was shown, 
however, by the sum of net foreign assets and 
other factors, which are considered together 
because of liquidity- neutral valuation effects; liquidity was provided by their aggregate 
increase  of €19.5 billion. The minimum re-
serve requirement in the reserve period of 
September- October amounted to €126.7 bil-
lion, representing an overall increase of €2.0 
billion.
There was slight reduction in the outstanding 
tender volume during the reporting period. 
During the reserve period of September- 
October 2018, it averaged around €735 bil-
lion, and was thus nearly €12 billion below 
the corresponding fi  gure in the June- July 2018 
period (see chart on p. 26). The main reason 
for the decline was the targeted longer- term 
refi  nancing operations (TLTROs). First, at end- 
September, all eight TLTRO- I matured for a 
total of as much as €8.9 billion. Originally, 
around €432 billion had been allotted in these 
operations, but this amount decreased signifi  -
cantly due to early repayments. In addition, 
voluntary early repayments from the fi  rst and 
second TLTRO- II were settled on the same 
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2018
1 August
to
18 September19 September
to
30 October
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  8.6 –  2.1
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 24.3 – 44.0
3 Net foreign assets 1 +  2.4 – 12.3
4 Other factors 1 + 14.7 + 14.7
Total + 32.8 – 43.7
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations +  0.9 +  3.9
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  4.3 – 12.1
(c) Other operations + 31.3 + 33.1
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.0 +  0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 19.0 + 39.4
Total +  8.9 + 64.3
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) + 41.8 + 20.3
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  2.0 +  0.0
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
23

day. However, as in June 2018, scarcely any 
use was made of this possibility of repayment, 
as only €3.6 billion of the possible €430.2 bil-
lion was repaid in advance. This represents a 
total of around €722 billion still outstanding 
in the four TLTRO- II. The overall volume of 
standard tenders showed little change at a 
very low level during the period under consid-
eration, albeit with appreciable shifts between 
the main refi  nancing operation and the three- month tenders. Demand in the main refi  nan-
cing operation rose to an average of €6.9 bil-
lion in the September- October 2018 period 
(+€4.8 billion compared with the June- July 
2018 period), while the outstanding amount 
of the three- month tenders fell by €3.5 billion 
to €3.7 billion during the same period.
Most of the central bank liquidity continued 
to be provided by the Eurosystem through the 
monetary policy asset purchase programmes, 
which accounted for around 78% of the total 
liquidity made available through the Eurosys-
tem’s open market operations in the reporting 
period. The average balance sheet holdings of 
all purchase programmes in the September- 
October 2018 period were €2,623 billion, rep-
resenting an increase of €64 billion compared 
to the corresponding average holdings during 
the June- July 2018 reserve period (see also the 
adjacent table).
Excess liquidity again showed fl  uctuations 
within the context of existing bandwidths 
during the reporting period (see chart on 
p. 25). It reached an average value of €1,874 
billion during the September- October 2018 
reserve period, thus increasing by €40 billion 
compared to the June- July 2018 period. In the 
August- September 2018 period, excess liquid-
ity was even higher for a time at an average 
of €1,893 billion, before falling back due 
mainly to the increased liquidity needs from 
autonomous factors.
In view of the very comfortable liquidity con-
ditions, overnight rates continued to be 
geared to the rate on the deposit facility (see 
the chart above). During the reserve period of 
September-October 2018, EONIA stood at 
-0.37% on average, which was 1 basis point 
below the average of the previous period. The 
underlying turnover of €4.0 billion and €3.2 
billion respectively in the preceding period 
meant sustained low volumes of unsecured 
overnight money. Secured overnight money, 
on the other hand, was mainly traded below 
the deposit facility rate. On the GC Pooling 
platform, overnight trades in the ECB basket 
were executed at -0.42% on average in the 
two periods considered, which was 2 basis Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as 
at 9 Novem-
ber 2018
Active programmes
 PSPP + 53.5 2,089.2
CBPP3 +  4.7 261.5
CSPP +  8.7 175.0
ABSPP 1 –  0.4 27.4
Completed programmes 
 SMP –  5.5 73.0
CBPP1 –  0.2 4.3
CBPP2 –  0.0 4.0
1 Decline mainly due to maturities that were higher than 
the purchases with value date in this period.
Deutsche BundesbankCentral bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
20180.60.50.40.30.20.10
––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
1,6001,8002,000Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for the reserve
maintenance period 2EONIA
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
24

points higher than in the previous reporting 
period. Overnight money in the ECB EXTended 
basket, with its larger set of eligible securities, 
traded at -0.40% on average in the 
September- October 2018 period, compared 
with -0.41% in the previous period. During 
the September- October 2018 period, aggre-
gate turnover across both baskets amounted 
to €5.8 billion on average, which was well 
below the €8.8 billion of the previous period. 
The end of the quarter in September 2018 
had a particular impact on secured overnight 
money rates in the ECB basket, which were 
traded at -0.59% – 18 basis points lower than 
the previous day – although there was also a 
fall of 7 basis points to  -0.47% in the ECB 
EXTended basket. EONIA, on the other hand, 
was traded 1 basis point higher at -0.35% at 
the end of the quarter.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor  purchase  programme  (CSPP).  2 Current  account  holdings  minus  the  minimum  reserve  requirement  plus  the  deposit  facility. 
3 Volume so small it is hardly visible. 4 The marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank2,0001,5001,00050005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,500
––––+++++++
April May June July August September October November
2018Current account 
holdings in excess 
of the reserve 
requirementDeposit facility 4Purchase
programmes 1
Main refinancing
operations 3
Three-month 
tenders 3
Second series of
targeted longer-
term refinancing 
operations
(TLTRO-II)First series of
targeted longer-
term refinancing 
operations
(TLTRO-I) 3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
25

proportion of these securities holdings were at -
tributable to the public sector purchase pro -
gramme (PSPP). The average remaining matur -
ity of the PSPP portfolio has now fallen slightly 
to 7.5 years. The outstanding amounts acquired 
to date under the third covered bond purchase 
programme (CBPP3) and the asset- backed se -
curities purchase programme (ABSPP) came to 
€261.5 billion and €27.4 billion respectively. 
Purchases made under the corporate sector 
purchase programme (CSPP) totalled €175.0 
billion as at 9 November.
On 26  September the first series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO- I) 
expired as scheduled, with €8.9 billion still out -
standing at last report. At the same time, there 
was another voluntary repayment option for 
two operations in the second series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO- II). 
In total, institutions paid back loans amounting 
to around €3.6 billion to the Eurosystem, with 
the second voluntary repayment coming in even lower than the first voluntary repayment 
one quarter earlier. The low repayments high -
lighted the fact that these operations continue 
to offer attractive conditions. Higher repay -
ments would be expected when the residual 
maturity of each operation is less than one 
year, which will be the case for the first TLTRO- 
II in June 2019. At these points in time, the vol -
ume of each TLTRO-  II applicable for the net 
stable funding ratio (NSFR) will be halved. Ac -
cordingly, institutions will have to source 
longer- term refinancing increasingly on the 
market as required.
Although the level of excess liquidity rose and 
fell in line with fluctuations in the autonomous 
factors, it ultimately remained stable overall, as 
has been the ongoing trend since the end of 
last year. It was last recorded at €1,869 billion. 
As a result of the renewed reduction in net pur -
chases of securities under the APP as of Octo -
ber, it is not anticipated that excess liquidity will 
rise by any significant amount in the future.First series of 
TLTROs expired 
in SeptemberLevel of excess 
liquidity remains 
stableOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 201803006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,0003,300€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
26

During the reporting period, the unsecured 
overnight money market rate (EONIA) again re -
mained largely within a narrow range of be -
tween -0.36% and -0.37%, with small rises up 
to a maximum value of -0.34% at the end of 
the months. Although the secured overnight 
rate (STOXX GC  Pooling) kept within a range 
below the -0.40% deposit facility rate, it grew 
noticeably close to that rate over an extended 
period before declining again at the current 
end. The three- month EURIBOR was essentially 
unchanged in the reporting period, standing at 
-0.32% at last report.
For a time, the money market forward rates de -
rived from the EONIA swap curve recorded a 
marked rise – particularly in longer maturities – 
which, to some extent, has since reversed. At 
the same time, the monetary policy meetings in 
September and October had little impact on 
the situation of forward rates. The temporary 
rise is likely to have been driven primarily by 
developments in longer- term yields in the 
United States transmitted via international 
interest rate linkages. At present, forward rates 
are again below the level that was observed 
following the ECB Governing Council monetary 
policy meeting in June. As before, an increase 
in the deposit facility rate – depending on the 
assumed size of the first interest rate hike – is 
factored into forward rates in the period from 
the fourth quarter of 2019 to the second quar -
ter of 2020, which still implies a later point in 
time than the interest rate expectations indi -
cated in surveys.1Money market 
rates remain 
largely 
unchanged
Money market 
forward rates 
rise due to inter -
national interest 
rate linkagesMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
202468
–++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households 5Securities-based lending to 
general governmentContribution of components in percentage points
Percentage growth 
in M3Percentage growth
in M3
Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage points
1 Estimates as to how large the first interest rate hike might 
plausibly be can be derived from surveys on interest rate 
expectations and range from 10 to 25 basis points. For 
more information on the discrepancy between the time 
frame for the first interest rate hike derived from money 
market forward rates and interest rate surveys respectively, 
see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monetary policy and banking 
business, Monthly Report, August 2018, p. 26.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
27

Monetary developments 
in the euro area
Growth in the broad monetary aggregate M3 
tailed off significantly in the third quarter of 
2018. At the end of the quarter, the annual M3 
growth rate fell to 3.5% and was thus distinctly 
below the 5% mark around which it had 
hovered in 2016 and 2017. The main reason for 
this was ultimately the further reduction in 
monthly net asset purchases by the Eurosystem 
at the beginning of the year, which contributed 
to lower growth in deposits held by enter -
prises. By contrast, the granting of loans to the 
private non- financial sector maintained its mo -
mentum, which had a positive effect. Against 
the background of high capacity utilisation and 
sound levels of consumer confidence in the 
euro area, loans to non- financial corporations 
and households again recorded considerable 
inflows. The lively demand for credit was bol -
stered by the still favourable financing condi -
tions for households and enterprises in the 
euro area.
In the third quarter of 2018, monetary growth 
was once again driven primarily by growth in 
overnight deposits. However, in recent quar -
ters, these inflows were significantly lower than 
in the previous year. Furthermore, an unusually 
high outflow of short- term time deposits – es -pecially those of other financial corporations – 
caused M3 growth to slow in the reporting 
quarter. With regard to all of the deposits in -
cluded in M3, households remained the largest 
source of growth (see chart on p. 29). In light 
of their pronounced aversion to risk and the 
narrow interest rate spread between the differ -
ent forms of deposit, households maintained 
their strong preference for highly liquid over -
night deposits and short- term savings deposits. 
By contrast, growth in deposits from financial 
and non- financial corporations weakened over -
all in recent quarters. Against the backdrop of 
weaker overall acquisition of financial assets in 
these sectors, there was no discernible evi -
dence of major shifts into other domestic and 
foreign assets by the middle of the year.2
Among the counterparts, the granting of loans 
to the euro area private sector again made the 
largest contribution to monetary growth. As in 
the previous quarters, the rise in lending was 
driven by considerable net growth in loans to 
non- financial corporations and households. 
This continued the upward trend in these two 
credit segments. Year- on- year growth in lend -
ing to non- financial corporations – adjusted for 
sales and securitisation – thus rose further over Monetary 
dynamics 
weaker than in 
previous year; 
lending growth 
remains main 
driver
M3 growth still 
dominated by 
increasing over -
night deposits, 
but build- up of 
deposits from 
business sector 
on the declineLoans to private 
non- financial 
sector continue 
to see significant 
growthConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2018 Q3 2018 Q2
Holdings against central government 2 101.8 – 21.5
Monetary aggregate M3 51.9 182.9
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 126.5 169.5
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) – 45.3 19.2
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 29.3 –  5.8
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 41.5 – 26.0
of which:
Capital and reserves 34.6 5.1
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities 6.9 – 31.1Assets 2018 Q3 2018 Q2
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 100.5 88.6
Loans 86.3 52.7
Loans, adjusted 1 83.4 105.7
Securities 14.2 35.9
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 58.3 35.9
Loans – 12.8 –  4.3
Securities 71.4 39.8
Net external assets 41.8 – 65.8
Other counterparts of M3 –  5.8 77.1
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 Financial accounts data for the third quarter of 2018 are 
not yet available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
28

the course of the reporting quarter, from 4.0% 
at the end of June to 4.3% at the end of Sep -
tember. Once again, lending growth in the 
non- financial corporate sector was driven 
mainly by banks in Germany and France, but 
Italy and some smaller core countries also 
made contributions (see chart on p. 30).
Demand for loans amongst enterprises was 
bolstered by the fact that interest rates for cor -
porate loans in the euro area as a whole 
hovered close to their record lows again in the 
reporting quarter. In addition, the banks report -
ing to the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) stated 
that, in the reporting quarter, their credit stand -
ards and credit terms and conditions for cor -
porate loans had been further eased in net 
terms. Besides citing the low general level of 
interest rates as the main factor, bank man -
agers also attributed the observed increase in 
demand to a rise in financing needs for fixed 
investment, inventories and working capital, as 
well as mergers, acquisitions and restructuring. 
Conversely, as indicated in previous surveys, the 
responding banks believed that internal finan -
cing resources, when viewed in isolation, had a 
dampening effect on demand.
In the reporting quarter, inflows also continued 
to be recorded for loans to households, the an -
nual growth rate of which rose to 3.1% at the 
end of the quarter. Growth was driven by both 
housing and consumer loans, although the 
contribution to growth from consumer loans 
waned slightly in the third quarter. Compared 
with a year earlier, it was again loans for house 
purchase which made the largest contribution 
to aggregate credit growth (2.4  percentage 
points), one that was even somewhat higher 
than the previous quarter’s. Similar to the cor -
porate sector, net inflows to housing loans 
were recorded mainly by banks in Germany 
and France; Italy and some other core coun -
tries, too, contributed to the increase in net 
lending, albeit to a lesser extent.
According to the assessment made by the 
banks surveyed as part of the BLS, the demand for loans for house purchase in the reporting 
quarter was supported not only by the persist -
ently low general level of interest rates but also 
by housing market prospects and price devel -
opments in this segment. In addition, demand 
in the housing market is likely to have been 
stimulated by the continued increase in em -
ployment and households’ disposable income. 
In the third quarter of 2018, the lending pol -
icies for loans for house purchase remained 
almost  unchanged for the euro area banks par -
ticipating in the survey.
Besides loans, securities contributed to monet -
ary growth in the reporting quarter; these went 
mainly to the euro area general government 
sector and, to a lesser extent, also to com -
panies in the private sector. Both balance sheet 
items continued to be supported substantially 
by the Eurosystem’s monthly net asset pur -
chases under the APP , despite the fact that they 
were more than halved compared with a year 
earlier as a result of the APP being scaled back Demand for 
corporate  loans 
supported by 
further easing 
of supply- side 
policies
Loans to house -
holds record 
stable inflowsDemand for 
housing loans 
supported by 
persistently low 
interest rates
Securities remain 
important pillar 
for M3 growth 
despite Eurosys -
tem monthly net 
purchases under 
APP being 
halvedM3 deposits by money-holding sector in 
the euro area
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 Non-
financial corporations and quasi-corporations. 3 Non-monetary 
financial  corporations  and  quasi-corporations.  4 Excluding 
central government.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201860300306090120150180210
––+++++++€ billion, three-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Financial corporations 3Non-financial corporations 2Households1
General government 4
Monetary 
aggregate M3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
29

as from January this year. In addition to the 
Euro system, credit institutions expanded their 
holdings of government bonds in seasonally 
adjusted terms as well. In contrast to the previ -
ous quarter, during which credit institutions in 
Italy acquired Italian government debt secur -
ities on a large scale, the overall net build- up of 
debt securities by commercial banks was spread 
more broadly across the euro area again in the 
reporting quarter.
The MFI sector’s net external asset position, 
too, supported monetary growth in the quarter 
under review. However, as in the last few quar -
ters, the impact of this counterpart remained volatile. Overall, the further reduction in pur -
chases under the APP at the beginning of the 
year has not yet led to a reversal of the capital 
flows from cross- border securities investment. 
Although domestic investors’ interest in foreign 
securities has declined noticeably since the be -
ginning of the year, there has been no material 
strengthening of foreign investors’ demand for 
euro area securities to date. One of the reasons 
for this is likely to have been the persistent 
negative yield spreads between the euro area 
and the majority of other economic areas, as 
well as the heightened level of political uncer -
tainty in some parts of the euro area.
For the first time since the summer of 2011, the 
MFI sector’s longer- term financial liabilities 
started recording clear net inflows again, 
which, per se, had a dampening effect on 
monetary growth. On the one hand, the in -
crease in monetary capital was due to an inten -
sified build- up of capital and reserves; on the 
other hand, the increase was attributable to a 
net rise in longer- term bank debt securities in 
the hands of the money- holding sector. It is 
likely that banks’ interest in this form of finan -
cing is gradually picking up again for two rea -
sons; first, for the purpose of locking in interest 
rates, and second, against the backdrop of de -
clining maturities for the Eurosystem’s long-  
term refinancing operations.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers in the third quarter of 2018 was 
again dominated by sustained inflows into 
overnight deposits. Once again, mainly house -
holds and –  to a much lesser extent  – non-  
financial corporations expanded their stock of 
overnight deposits. In addition to the persist -
ently low level of interest rates (see the chart 
on p. 31), this is likely to have been attributable 
to the sustained increase in disposable income Net external 
assets supported 
monetary 
growth in 
the reporting 
quarter, too
Build- up of 
 capital and 
reserves as well 
as of  long-term 
bank bonds sup -
ports monetary 
 capital
Deposit growth 
still dominated 
by build- up 
of overnight 
depositsLending to the euro area’s non-financial 
private sector*
6050403020100102030405060
––––––++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankExtended by the euro area’s MFI sector 2
... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–20–100+10+20+30+40+50
To households 3To non-financial corporations1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
30

and the continued good business situation of 
German enterprises.
Besides overnight deposits, only short- term 
savings recorded inflows; however, these were 
low. All other types of deposit were scaled 
back markedly in some cases. For example, in 
the quarter under review, domestic banks on 
balance recorded a negative flow of deposits 
from financial corporations, one reason being 
that other financial institutions heavily reduced 
their time deposits in order to invest in other, 
sometimes higher- yielding instruments. More -
over, insurance and pension funds continued to 
reduce their longer- term time deposits, shifting 
to higher- yielding forms of investment – a de -
velopment which began in 2010.3
Banks’ lending business with the domestic non- 
bank sector was less dynamic in the reporting 
quarter than one quarter earlier. On the one 
hand, this was the result of the continued de -
cline in loans and securities-based lending to 
the public sector. On the other hand, there was 
also a significant reduction in securities-based 
lending to the domestic private sector, with 
banks both scaling back their stocks of corpor -
ate bonds and selling shares and other variable- 
yield securities from domestic enterprises. This 
development is likely to have been attributable, 
not least, to price losses and the temporary 
high level of uncertainty in the European cap -
ital markets.
Conversely, lending to the domestic private 
sector saw an increase of a similar magnitude 
to that of previous quarters. The main contri -
bution came from loans to households, the an -
nual growth rate of which increased slightly to 
3.7% at the end of the quarter. The growth of 
this credit aggregate was sustained by the ro -
bust expansion of loans for house purchase 
and consumer credit. Furthermore, although 
less relevant in quantitative terms, there were 
also significant inflows to other loans to house -
holds in the reporting quarter for the first time 
since early 2012; these consisted mainly of 
loans to self- employed persons.In addition to the favourable income and asset 
situation of German households, the persist -
ently high demand for bank loans in the quar -
ter under review was also spurred on by the 
still advantageous funding conditions. Accord -
ing to MFI interest rate statistics, the interest 
rate on long- term housing loans stood at 1.9% 
at the end of the third quarter, remaining close 
to its historical low of September 2016. At the 
same time, banks’ lending policies supported 
household demand for loans for house pur -
chase in the quarter under review. Although Financial corpor -
ations’ invest -
ment behaviour 
increasingly 
driven by yields
Lending business 
with non- banks 
weaker on 
 balance
Lending to pri -
vate sector posi -
tive; households 
record largest 
inflowsFunding condi -
tions remain 
favourableInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new 
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike 
the overall volume of contracts (i.e. deposit contracts on the 
balance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new 
business (i.e. all contracts concluded in the course of a month) 
is explicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 201801234% p.a., monthly data
0123Overall volume1
New business2... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Acquisition of financial assets 
and the search for yield in Germany, May 2018, pp. 30 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
31

the banks taking part in the BLS hardly lowered 
their credit standards for housing loans at all in 
the third quarter, they narrowed their margins 
notably in some cases. By contrast, the sur -
veyed banks reported that they had slightly 
tightened credit terms and conditions for con -
sumer credit and other loans on the whole.
The other mainstay of lending business with 
the domestic private sector came in the form of 
loans to non- financial corporations. Once 
again, the latest expansion covered all matur -
ities but was less dynamic overall compared 
with the previous quarter. However, the slow -
down is likely to represent, at least in part, a countermovement to the exceptionally strong 
growth witnessed in the second quarter. At 
5.8% at the end of the quarter, year- on- year 
growth in this credit aggregate was largely 
stable and remained well above the long- term 
average.
According to the BLS banks, demand for loans 
to enterprises in the reporting quarter was 
driven primarily by financing needs for fixed in -
vestment and the low general level of interest 
rates. In Germany, interest rates on short- term 
loans to enterprises tended to decline further in 
the reporting quarter, while interest rates on 
longer- term loans moved sideways. This had 
the effect that, at the end of September, do -
mestic enterprises paid interest amounting to 
2.1% for small- volume and 1.0% for large-  
volume loans in the short- term segment, while 
interest on long- term loans stood at 1.9% and 
1.7% respectively of late.
In the reporting quarter, enterprises’ demand 
for bank loans was also supported by banks’ 
lending policies. According to the data from 
the BLS banks, the requirements for potential 
borrowers were relaxed marginally again on 
balance. Banks made somewhat stronger ad -
justments to credit terms and conditions, 
which, according to the respondents, were re -
laxed moderately overall. For instance, the sur -
veyed credit institutions again tightened their 
margins on average- risk loans markedly on bal -
ance, while slightly tightening their margins on 
riskier loans. Moreover, the banks accommo -
dated their corporate customers somewhat 
with regard to non- interest rate charges. Banks 
again cited the highly competitive environment 
as the reason for imposing less restrictive credit 
terms and conditions.
The BLS for October contained additional ques -
tions on participating banks’ funding condi -
tions, the impact of the Eurosystem’s expanded 
APP , and the impact of the Eurosystem’s nega -
tive deposit facility rate on lending. The Ger -
man banks reported that, given the situation in 
the financial markets, their funding situation Renewed note -
worthy increase 
in lending to 
non- financial 
corporationsFurther decline 
in interest rates 
on short- term 
loans
Lending policies 
advantageous 
on the whole
Funding condi -
tions largely 
unchangedLending and deposits of monetary 
 fi  nancial institutions in Germany*
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2018
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 36.7 26.9
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 5.9 – 7.1
over 2 years – 1.0 – 6.0
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 1.2 0.3
over 3 months – 1.0 – 1.2
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 4.7 – 5.6
Securities – 6.9 – 5.7
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 33.5 29.1
of which: to households 3 14.7 15.0
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 16.7 10.3
Securities 5.3 – 6.7
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding central 
government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non- 
fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
32

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until 
May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 
2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is 
calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 3 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit 
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the num-
ber of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: differ-
ence between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the  number of respondents 
reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 4 Expectations for 2018 Q4.
Deutsche Bundesbank10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 20181.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 180.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
603003060
––++Credit to non-financial corporations
%
p.a.
%
%%
p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to 
€1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase4... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
... loans for house purchaseBank interest
rates on loans
for house purchase2
with an initial rate 
fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
33

had hardly changed compared with the pre -
ceding quarter. With regard to the Eurosys -
tem’s expanded APP , the banks reported, on 
the one hand, further improvements in their 
financing conditions. On the other hand, how -
ever, the programme continued to place a 
strain on their profitability. Unlike in previous 
survey rounds, the questioned banks no longer 
reported that the programme had made a 
noteworthy contribution to improving their 
liquidity  position. In the upcoming six months, 
no net purchases of assets are to be made 
under the APP from January 2019 onwards as 
per the ECB  Governing Council’s decision of 
14 June 2018. The surveyed banks expect to 
see their funding conditions deteriorate in this 
period for the first time since the question was 
introduced. The negative interest rate on the 
deposit facility was another key factor in banks’ 
net interest income shrinking over the past six 
months. At the same time, the negative de -
posit rate per se brought about a slight increase 
in the volume of loans to enterprises and to 
households.
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
3210123456
–––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2Up to 1 year
More than 1 year and
up to 5 years
More than 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal percentage 
growth rateLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal percentage 
growth rateMaturity contributions in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
34

Financial markets
Financial market setting
From the end of June 2018, international finan -
cial markets were shaped by a somewhat less 
dynamic global economy. In addition, negative 
political influences again became slightly more 
pronounced. These include, for instance, the 
trade disputes between the United States and 
China, and the Italian government’s failure to 
comply with European fiscal rules. With eco -
nomic growth remaining solid, interest rates on 
government bonds picked up, especially in the 
US, which is experiencing rapid growth and 
where the Federal Reserve continued imple -
menting its policy of gradually increasing key 
interest rates as announced. In the euro area, 
higher risk premia for individual countries 
played an important role. This was particularly 
the case in Italy, where the debate surrounding 
the government’s budget plans prompted mar -
ket participants to avoid Italian sovereign 
bonds, which pushed yields considerably 
higher. Meanwhile, since safe haven debt se -
curities such as German Federal securities were 
in demand in this market environment, yields 
on Federal bonds (Bunds) remained practically 
unchanged. Equity markets initially moved side -
ways amid fluctuations. However, towards the 
end of the third quarter, the above- mentioned 
headwinds exerted considerable pressure on 
prices. European stocks – notably bank equi -
ties – suffered particularly steep price losses. In 
addition, amid higher risk aversion among mar -
ket participants, implied volatility, which had so 
far been at relatively low levels in equity mar -
kets, picked up markedly worldwide. Despite 
some distinct price drops in equity and bond 
markets, the euro saw only moderate changes 
overall against the US dollar, the yen and pound 
sterling from the end of June. Signs of a slight 
easing came from a few emerging market 
economies as their currencies, which had de -
preciated substantially into August, recently 
stabilised against the euro and their bond yields 
fell – in some cases considerably.Exchange rates
From the end of June, the euro exchange rate 
fluctuated but ultimately recorded only minor 
net changes against the currencies of import -
ant trading partners. This period did see it de -
preciate against the US dollar, however. In mid- 
August, as expectations of an interest rate hike 
in the United States firmed up and with anxiety 
surrounding the exposures of some European 
banks in Turkey temporarily heightened, the 
euro hit its lowest point so far this year, at 
US$1.13. However, declining risk aversion and 
surprisingly upbeat economic data coming out 
of Germany led the single currency to a recov -
ery over the remainder of the month. The 
 euro’s upward tendency was subsequently 
interrupted only briefly by unexpectedly strong 
economic data concerning GDP growth and 
labour  market performance on the other side 
of the Atlantic. It culminated in the euro reach -
ing a rate of US$1.18 at the start of the last 
week in September – the highest it had been in 
over two months.
In the weeks that followed, however, the euro 
surrendered its gains against the US dollar. The 
discussion around the Italian government’s 
draft budget, which – as mentioned above – 
was reflected in higher risk premia for Italian 
sovereign bonds, placed broad pressure on the 
euro. Since the formation of Italy’s new gov -
ernment, the euro- US dollar exchange rate re -
mained more moderate in its direct response to 
a widening of the yield spread between Italian 
bonds and German Bunds with comparable 
maturities than in the preceding year and a 
half; the spread widened by a considerable 
margin, however. In October, September’s sur -
prisingly weak figures for inflation in the euro 
area, which weighed on interest rate expect -
ations, and predominantly upbeat US economic 
indicators placed distinct pressure on the euro, 
such that in November it reached a new low Rising govern -
ment bond 
yields and share 
price losses in 
the spotlightEuro down 
against the 
US dollar, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
35

for the year; it ended the reporting period at 
US$1.13, 3.0% below its end-  June 2018 level.
From mid-  August, the euro- yen exchange rate 
followed a similar path to the euro- US dollar 
rate, indicating that news from the euro area 
was the principal driver behind exchange rate 
movements. As against the US dollar, in mid-  
August the euro thus also reached a low for 
the year against the Japanese currency, at 
¥126. As turbulence in the foreign exchange 
markets of a number of emerging market econ -
omies subsided, market participants’ risk aver -
sion decreased, which tends to stimulate cap -
ital outflows from Japan. Against this backdrop, the euro had already recovered markedly by 
the end of August. Even though higher than 
anticipated Japanese inflation figures put the 
brakes on this movement for a time, the euro 
continued to profit from the more relaxed state 
of affairs in the financial markets of some 
emerging market economies in September. It 
consequently stood at close to ¥133 as the 
month drew to a close, which was the highest 
it had been in five months. Temporary increases 
in yields on long- term Japanese government 
bonds subsequently provoked a turnaround. In 
October, news from Italy led the euro to further 
losses against the yen – as was the case with 
the US dollar. At last count, the euro was trad -
ing at ¥128, which was 0.7% lower than at the 
beginning of the third quarter.
Along with the tensions in the euro area re -
ferred to above, reports on the status of nego -
tiations on the United Kingdom’s withdrawal 
from the EU have proved to be important de -
terminants for the euro- pound sterling ex -
change rate of late. In August, the pound was 
weighed down by mounting concerns that the 
United Kingdom could end up leaving without 
a deal having been negotiated. The euro thus 
ended the month at the highest it had been all 
year, trading at £0.91. However, it subsequently 
lost value again through to mid- October. This 
came amid news that the EU and the United 
Kingdom were apparently moving closer to 
agreement with each other again and as Lon -
don reported unexpectedly upbeat economic 
data, including on GDP and retail sales. After 
the second half of October was marked by 
stalling Brexit negotiations and a correspond -
ing appreciation of the euro, the growing pol -
itical uncertainty of late in the United Kingdom 
surrounding a negotiated draft withdrawal 
agreement led to stronger fluctuations in the 
exchange rate. At the end of the reporting 
period, the euro stood at £0.88 and thus 0.3% 
below its value at the end of June 2018.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro re -
mained virtually unchanged on balance (-0.8%) … but practic -
ally unchanged 
against the 
yen …… and against 
pound sterling
Euro more or 
less unchanged 
in effective 
termsExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries. An increase indicates an appreciation 
of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A SOND J FMAM J J A SOND
2017 20181.101.151.201.25
125130135140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105Daily data, log scale
¥US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange 
rate: US$1.17891
... yenLaunch exchange
rate: ¥133.731
... pound sterling
Launch exchange
rate: £0.71111
Nominal effective exchange rate2
Q1 1999 = 100
Launch exchange rate: 103.121Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
36

against the start of the third quarter. That said, 
it did record some gains, for instance against 
the renminbi (+1.7%). Amongst other head -
winds, China’s currency faced pressure stem -
ming from the country’s trade dispute with the 
United States. Outside the group of 19 partner 
currencies, the euro experienced pronounced 
fluctuations against the currencies of certain 
emerging market economies. At last count, it 
was trading 14.4% stronger against the Turkish 
lira than it had been at the end of the second 
quarter, and had been higher still for a time. In 
addition to monetary policy measures, the eas -
ing of a political conflict between Turkey and 
the United States helped the lira to recover 
from mid-  September onwards. The euro appre -
ciated by 20.2% against the Argentine peso. 
Here, too, the situation eased somewhat from 
the end of August after the International Mon -
etary Fund had expanded its credit lines and 
Argentina’s central bank and government had 
moved to further tighten up monetary policy 
and fiscal policy, respectively.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  investment
From the end of June 2018, yields on ten- year 
government bonds rose overall in the various 
currency areas – in some cases markedly. Most 
notably, interest rates in the United Sates saw a 
rather strong surge in net terms, climbing 25 
basis points to 3.1%. For the most part, these 
rising interest rates were attributable to higher 
term premia, that is to say premia that invest -
ors receive in exchange for holding securities 
with longer maturities in their portfolios. It is 
likely that interest rate risk in connection with 
real rates of return was a key motivation for 
market participants here. One reason behind 
the rising premia could have been the growing 
uncertainty among market participants over 
how the contentious state of international 
trade policy and mounting US sovereign debt 
would impact growth in the long run. In add -
ition, safe haven flows by investors anxious 
about economic developments in some emer -ging market economies were reversed as con -
ditions in certain markets – some of which had 
been critical – stabilised. From the end of Au -
gust, in particular, effects stemming from these 
reversed flows could have been another con -
tributor to the calculated increase in term pre -
mia. By contrast, monetary policy’s part in the 
rising ten- year yields was rather marginal. At its 
September meeting, the Federal Reserve con -
firmed its plans to continue tightening up mon -
etary policy, progressing with a further interest 
rate hike. The markets had been expecting this.
On balance, the yield on ten- year Bunds has 
barely changed in comparison with the end of 
June, up by 1 basis point to 0.3%. Unlike in the 
United States, both the yield component of the 
average expected short- term interest rates for 
ten years ahead and the term premium com -
ponent remained largely static. As a conse -
quence, the spread between the United States 
and Germany broadened again to the widest it On balance, 
yield on ten- year 
US Treasuries up 
and …
… ten- year 
Bunds virtually 
unchangedBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual matu-
rity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 20180.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
Germany
JapanEuro areaUnited States
United
KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
37

has been since the end of the 1980s, at 277 
basis points.
The yield curve derived from yields on Federal 
securities barely moved compared with the end 
of June. By the end of September, there had 
been a moderate increase in yields across all maturities. The decisions of the ECB’s Govern -
ing Council to scale back the monthly pace of 
the net asset purchases under the expanded 
asset purchase programme (APP) to €15 billion 
as of October did not appear to elicit any direct 
response from yields, though. In October, how -
ever, the impact of Italian fiscal policy and ele -
vated volatility in global equity markets then 
generated a flight to quality. Towards the end 
of the reporting period, these safe haven flows 
went up a gear owing to the uncertainty sur -
rounding whether the draft deal for the United 
Kingdom’s withdrawal from the EU would 
achieve a majority in the UK parliament. This 
caused another parallel downward shift in the 
yield curve. At last count, bonds with maturities 
of up to six years were again in negative terri -
tory.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP- weighted average) widened by 
24 basis points. The wider yield spread be -
tween Italian bonds and Bunds features par -
ticularly large in this difference, having in -
creased by 76 basis points to 316 basis points. 
The risk premia being demanded by buyers of 
Italian government bonds thus reached a level 
not seen since 2013. Rating agencies also took 
a critical view of Italy’s fiscal policy. In mid-  
October, the ratings agency Moody’s down -
graded the creditworthiness of Italian govern -
ment bonds a notch to Baa3 and, at the end of 
that month, Standard and Poor’s issued a 
negative outlook for Italy’s current rating. In 
European government bond markets, the yield 
movements in Italy have so far been regarded 
as a predominantly country- specific factor. This 
was also reflected in a broader dispersion of 
yield spreads over German Bunds. The measure 
of dispersion is sensitive to country- specific 
outliers in the yield spread. The widening of 
yield spreads for Greek government bonds can 
likewise largely be traced back to domestic de -
velopments. Speculation regarding state aid for 
Greek banks, which still have a very large pro -
portion of non- performing loans on their 
books, prompted concerns in bond markets Barely any shift 
in the yield 
curve on 
balance Yield spreads 
over Bunds in 
certain euro 
area countries 
widenedYield curve on the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest 
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.20.40.6
––––+++
Residual maturity in years15 November 201829 June 201828 September 2018% p.a.
Spreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Bunds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 201801002003004005006007008009001,0001,1001,200Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland
FranceGreece
PortugalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
38

about additional fiscal burdens. Measuring 422 
basis points, the yield spread of Greek bonds 
was, at last count, 56 basis points wider than it 
had been at the end of June. Following the end 
of the last assistance programme, Greece is 
continuing to hold off on re- entering the bond 
issuance market for now.
At last count, yields on ten- year UK gilts stood 
around 10 basis points higher than at the end 
of June, at 1.4%. Yields on UK bonds initially 
moved in line with the broader international 
trend, and when the Bank of England raised its 
policy rates to 75 basis points on 2  August, 
long- term yields barely moved in response. 
They have fallen markedly of late, however, 
amid the above- mentioned political uncertainty 
in the United Kingdom. The yield on ten- year 
Japanese government bonds climbed to 0.1%, 
leaving it 8 basis points higher than at the end 
of June when this report went to press. Yields 
thus remained within the now broader corridor 
specified by the Bank of Japan as part of its 
yield curve control programme.
Five- year forward inflation rates five years 
ahead derived from inflation swaps have re -
mained virtually unchanged at 1.7% (-4 basis 
points) since the end of June. The long- term 
survey- based inflation expectations collected 
by Consensus Economics are still higher than 
that, at 1.8%. The difference between these 
two values is possibly attributable to scarcity, 
liquidity and inflation risk premia, which can af -
fect market- based measures and dilute their in -
formative value as economic indicators. Both 
market- based and survey- based deflation prob -
abilities are negligible for the coming years.
Yields on European corporate bonds have in -
creased somewhat since the end of the second 
quarter. Bonds issued by BBB- rated financial 
corporations with a residual maturity of be -
tween seven and ten years were yielding 2.9% 
as this report went to press, up 26 basis points. 
Yields on non- financial corporate bonds with 
the same maturity climbed by 29 basis points 
to 2.1%. The significant increase in yields on Italian government bonds spilled over only par -
tially to the corporate sector there. That said, 
yields on Italian corporate bonds did register an 
above- average increase. Yield spreads of Euro -
pean financial and non- financial corporate 
bonds over Bunds widened by 23 basis points 
and 25 basis points, respectively, with Bund 
yields remaining more or less unchanged on 
balance. Wider spreads are consistent with in -
creased uncertainty in equity markets and point 
to a decreasing risk appetite among market 
participants. This is somewhat more pro -
nounced still for high- yield bonds than for in -
vestment grade corporate bonds, with yield 
spreads of the former having widened at an Increased yields 
in the United 
Kingdom and 
Japan
Forward and 
survey- based 
inflation expect -
ations steady
Corporate bond 
yields somewhat 
higherForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 1 Brent blend (for delivery in 
one month).
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 20181.82.12.42.7Weekly averages
20406080100%
00.30.60.9Five-year forward inflation rate 
in five years based on swapsConsensus inflation expectations
in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
Memo item:
Crude oil price1
Difference between forward inflation
rates in the United States and the euro areaPer-
cent-
age
pointsUS$1.21.51.82.1
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
39

above- average pace. At the end of the period 
under review, spreads were above the very low 
levels observed prior to the onset of the finan -
cial crisis in July 2007, but still close to their 
five- year averages. Overall, then, financing con -
ditions for European enterprises can still be 
considered relatively favourable.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €310 billion in the third quarter of 
2018 and was therefore below its previous-  
quarter level (€326 billion). After deducting re -
demptions and taking account of changes in 
issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net issu -
ance of bonds came to €12 billion. In addition, 
foreign borrowers placed debt securities worth 
€20½ billion in the German market. The out -
standing volume of debt instruments in the 
German market therefore rose by €32½ billion 
in the period under review.
The public sector issued bonds totalling €8 bil -
lion net in the third quarter. This figure also in -
cludes issues by resolution agencies set up for 
German banks, which are ascribed to the pub -
lic sector for statistical purposes. The Federal 
Government itself mainly issued five- year Fed -
eral notes (Bobls; €9½ billion), 30- year Bunds 
(€5 billion) and Treasury discount paper (Bubills; 
€3½ billion). At the same time, there were net 
redemptions of ten- year Bunds (€9 billion) 
and  also of two- year Federal Treasury notes 
(Schätze; €2 billion). In the quarter under re -
view, state governments issued bonds of their 
own to the value of €3 billion in net terms.
Domestic credit institutions increased their cap -
ital market debt in the quarter under review by 
€4½ billion, following net redemptions in the 
same amount in the second quarter. They pri -
marily issued mortgage Pfandbriefe and other 
bank debt securities which can be structured 
flexibly (€5 billion and €4 billion, respectively). 
Specialised credit institutions, meanwhile, re -
deemed debt securities totalling €3½ billion 
net.Net issuance in 
the bond market
Rise in public 
sector capital 
market debt
Net issuance 
by credit 
institutions Yield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBOXX indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 20180100200300400500600700
100200300400500High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB Financials 2
BBB Non-financials 2By rating categoryBasis points, daily data
Investment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2017 2018
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 18.3 16.0 39.2
Credit institutions – 23.6 – 11.1 0.5
of which:
Foreign debt securities –  5.5 –  1.2 8.0
Deutsche Bundesbank 34.3 19.2 18.0
Other sectors 7.5 8.0 20.6
of which:
Domestic debt securities – 15.0 3.2 9.3
Non-residents – 26.5 – 18.0 – 6.9
Shares
Residents 13.2 24.4 7.5
Credit institutions –  3.0 0.9 – 2.1
of which:
Domestic shares –  0.8 1.3 0.4
Non-banks 16.2 23.5 9.7
of which:
Domestic shares 5.3 6.2 0.2
Non-residents –  2.3 3.6 0.3
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 10.5 12.9 16.1
Investment in retail funds 8.9 4.1 3.6
of which:
Equity funds 3.6 –  1.6 0.6
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
40

Domestic enterprises redeemed debt securities 
worth €½ billion net in the third quarter. On 
balance, this was mainly attributable to other 
financial institutions, whereas non-  financial 
corporations were net issuers of bonds.
In the third quarter, German non-  banks were 
the main buyers in the domestic bond market, 
adding paper worth a net €20½ billion to their 
portfolios. The focus of buyer interest here was 
on foreign paper. The Bundesbank acquired 
debt securities in the amount of €18 billion, for 
the most part under the Eurosystem’s asset 
purchase programmes. Domestic credit institu -
tions increased their bond portfolio by €½ bil -
lion, mainly through the acquisition of foreign 
bonds. By contrast, non- resident investors 
parted with German debt securities to the tune 
of €7 billion net. On balance, these bonds were 
almost entirely issued by the public sector.
Equity market
International equity markets were still being 
driven primarily by robust economic activity 
and positive earnings prospects as the third 
quarter got under way. In the United States, in 
particular, the adopted tax cuts, a government 
spending programme and favourable labour 
market data continued to buoy investor confi -
dence. Against this backdrop, headwinds for 
equity markets, such as persistent uncertainty 
about international trade relations and the con -
sequences of Brexit, as well as concerns sur -
rounding the indebtedness of some emerging 
market economies, did not dampen share 
prices for long.
From the end of September, however, the 
slightly less optimistic prospects for the global 
economy, mounting fears of an escalating 
trade conflict between the United States and 
China, and intermittent geopolitical uncertain -
ties were the main factors which put inter -
national equity markets under significant pres -
sure. This correction particularly affected tech -
nology shares, which up until then had racked up above- average price gains, but other sectors 
that are heavily dependent on international 
trade, such as the European automotive sector, 
also took a hit. The falls in stock prices might 
also have been exacerbated by the rise in gov -
ernment bond yields, which increases the dis -
count factor used to discount future company 
profits. In the euro area, the aforementioned 
political debate surrounding the Italian govern -
ment’s draft budget ultimately weighed on the 
prices of Italian shares and European financials 
stocks in particular. At the same time, market 
participants revised downwards their medium- 
term profit expectations for European com -
panies. Alongside higher risk aversion, implicit Low 
redemptions  by 
enterprises
Domestic 
 non-banks and 
Bundes bank  
main buyers of 
debt securities
Equity markets 
still influenced 
by robust eco -
nomic activity 
initially, …
… equity prices 
under pressure 
since end- 
September, …Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cal-
culated using the prices of index options. For the euro area, 
calculated from options on the EURO STOXX 50.
Deutsche BundesbankLin scale
Implied volatility1Bank indicesDaily data
%Beginning of 2016 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
8090100110120130140
60708090100110120130140150160
10203040
2016 2017 2018Euro area (EURO STOXX)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
VSTOXX
VIXDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
41

volatility increased appreciably and remained 
above its respective five-  year average right up 
to the present.
However, in spite of this deterioration in the 
equity market backdrop, there has been no evi -
dence overall of a permanent flight from equi -
ties to safe haven investments on either side of 
the Atlantic. Measured in terms of the broad 
EURO STOXX index, European equities have lost 
6.8% of their value since the end of June, a lit -
tle less than German stocks (CDAX: -7.5%). In 
contrast to European shares, the US S&P 500 
index edged higher (up 0.4% overall), which is 
probably attributable in part to the fact that 
the quarterly reporting season for US com -
panies got off to a mostly positive start. Indices 
for the United Kingdom (FTSE All Share) and for 
Japan (Nikkei 225) fell by 8.2% and 2.2%, re -
spectively.
Bank shares underperformed the total market 
indices on both sides of the Atlantic. While 
shares of US banks nudged downwards 
(-0.2%), those of European credit institutions 
slid by 11.6%. In the euro area, shares of Greek 
and Italian banks suffered particularly heavy 
losses (-46.9% and -20.7%, respectively). One 
of the reasons for the fall in share prices of 
Greek banks were fresh concerns among in -
vestors about the recoverability of non- per-
forming loans, which are impeding banks’ ef -
forts to strengthen their capital base. Shares in 
Italian banks were heavily impacted by the fall -
ing prices of Italian government bonds, which 
credit institutions there hold in large amounts 
(sovereign- bank nexus).
With little change in expected company profits 
for the year, the losses in the EURO STOXX 
index sent the price/  earnings ratio lower (and 
the earnings yield higher), indicating a lower 
valuation of shares than at the end of the 
second quarter.1 For the S&P 500 index, the 
price/ earnings ratio remained virtually un -… but no 
permanent  flight 
to safe haven 
investments
Bank shares 
underperform 
total market
Valuations down 
in euro area, 
almost constant 
in United StatesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2017 2018
Q3 Q2 Q3p
I. Current account + 64.0 + 64.3 + 51.6 
1. Goods 1 + 68.9 + 69.6 + 56.1 
2. Services 2 – 11.8 –  3.6 – 11.6 
3. Primary income + 17.9 +  3.8 + 19.1 
4. Secondary income – 11.0 –  5.4 – 12.0 
II. Capital account +  0.9 +  0.1 –  1.0 
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 55.0 + 70.5 + 30.7 
1. Direct investment –  0.8 + 32.1 +  1.4 
Domestic investment 
abroad + 20.6 + 55.6 + 22.0 
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 21.4 + 23.5 + 20.6 
2. Portfolio investment + 58.5 + 23.7 + 37.1 
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 30.4 +  6.1 + 28.4 
Shares 3 +  5.1 –  1.4 +  3.9 
Investment fund shares 4+ 10.7 +  4.4 +  4.2 
of which:
Money market fund 
shares +  0.1 –  0.0 –  1.4 
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 + 15.2 +  4.4 + 21.0 
of which:
Denominated in euro 6 +  6.4 +  5.9 + 18.5 
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –  0.7 –  1.3 –  0.7 
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 28.1 – 17.5 –  8.8 
Shares 3 –  2.3 +  3.5 –  1.6 
Investment fund shares +  0.7 –  3.0 –  0.4 
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 – 21.1 – 18.7 –  8.6 
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 8 – 19.0 – 21.7 –  8.0 
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –  5.3 +  0.7 +  1.7 
3. Financial derivatives 9 +  2.1 +  9.6 + 10.1 
4. Other investment 10 –  5.0 +  5.4 – 17.4 
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 – 12.5 – 13.2 –  7.3 
Enterprises and 
 households 12 –  3.8 – 11.3 +  5.9 
General government –  8.7 –  4.3 –  8.8 
Bundesbank + 20.0 + 34.3 –  7.1 
5. Reserve assets +  0.2 –  0.4 –  0.5 
IV. Errors and omissions 13 –  9.9 +  6.0 – 19.8 
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 
6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: 
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the Bun-
desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as 
non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13   Statistical errors and omissions, 
resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi  nan-
cial account and the balances on the current account and the 
capital account.
Deutsche Bundesbank1 The earnings yield is the inverse of the price/ earnings 
ratio.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
42

changed. A further indicator that can be used 
to assess stock market valuation is the implied 
equity risk premium, which is derived from a 
dividend discount model. Unlike the price/ earn-
ings ratio, this risk premium is a relative meas -
ure that takes account of alternative invest -
ments in government bonds and can therefore 
be interpreted as a premium that investors de -
mand for a risky investment over a safe one. 
The equity risk premium for the EURO STOXX 
increased marginally in the reporting period, 
while it fell for the United States. As such, it is 
currently slightly higher than the average of the 
last five years for the EURO STOXX, indicating a 
moderate valuation level in the European stock 
market. For the S&P 500, by contrast, it remains 
below the average of the last five years.
Domestic enterprises issued €1 billion worth of 
new shares in the third quarter of 2018, the 
bulk of which were non-  listed securities. The 
volume of foreign equities outstanding in the 
German market rose by €7 billion. German 
non- banks were, on balance, by far the main 
purchasers of equity instruments (€9½ billion). 
Foreign investors purchased equities for €½ bil -
lion in net terms, while domestic credit institu -
tions scaled back their equity portfolio by €2 
billion.
During the quarter under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €19½ 
billion, after raising funds totalling €17 billion in 
the previous three- month period. The fresh 
cash mainly accrued to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€16 billion). 
Among the asset classes, mixed securities-  
based funds, in particular, attracted large in -
flows (€10½ billion). Open- end real estate 
funds and funds of funds also placed new 
shares in the market (€4½ billion and €4 bil -
lion, respectively). Foreign funds distributed in 
the German market attracted inflows of €4 bil -
lion net in the third quarter of 2018. Domestic non- banks were the main buyers, adding mu -
tual fund shares worth €23 billion to their port -
folios. Their focus was predominantly on Ger -
man paper. German credit institutions pur -
chased mutual fund shares for €1½ billion net, 
while non-resident investors sold domestic 
fund shares worth €½ billion net.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows totalling €37 billion in 
the third quarter of 2018, there were also net 
capital exports in the field of direct investment, 
though these were significantly lower, at €1½ 
billion.
German companies invested €22 billion abroad 
in net terms in the third quarter, compared 
with €55½ billion in the previous quarter. They 
increased their equity capital by €21 billion, of 
which €8 billion was reinvested earnings, and 
transferred only small amounts abroad via 
intra- group credit transactions (€½ billion). 
Major destinations for German direct invest -
ment were Luxembourg (€6 billion) and the 
Netherlands (€3½ billion).
Foreign direct investment in Germany came to 
a net €20½ billion between July and Septem -
ber 2018 (compared with €23½ billion in the 
prior three- month period). Foreign enterprises 
increased both their equity capital (€7½ billion) 
and their intra- group loans (€13 billion), the lat -
ter being mainly financial credits. From a geo -
graphical point of view, as in the previous quar -
ter, there was again a significant flow of capital 
from the Netherlands to Germany (€12 billion), 
primarily in the form of reverse flows. In these 
transactions, foreign subsidiaries make funds 
available to their parent companies resident in 
Germany. Enterprises located in Switzerland 
also invested in Germany (€5½ billion).Equity issuance 
and acquisition
Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
sharesDirect invest -
ment sees 
capital  exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad
Direct invest -
ment in 
 Germany by for -
eign enterprisesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
43

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
Economic output in Germany dipped slightly in 
the third quarter of 2018. According to the 
Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real 
gross domestic product (GDP) contracted by 
0.2% in seasonal and calendar- adjusted terms 
as compared to the previous quarter. This de -
cline was mainly caused by a strong temporary 
one- off effect in the automotive sector. Major 
problems in connection with the introduction 
of a new EU- wide standard for measuring ex -
haust emissions led to significant production 
stoppages and a steep drop in motor vehicle 
exports. At the same time, private consumption 
was temporarily absent as an important force 
driving the economy. This was probably due to 
the reduced supply of domestically produced 
vehicles – and potentially also the debate about 
a driving ban for vehicles with high emissions levels  – as well as the exceptionally hot, dry 
weather during the summer months. Despite 
these temporary one- off effects, the economic 
boom in Germany continues. Utilisation of ag -
gregate production capacity remains well 
above average. The German economy will 
probably expand quite strongly again towards 
the end of the year.
The manufacturing sector recorded a sharp fall 
in output as a result of the temporary produc -
tion stoppages in the automotive sector and 
was therefore a major factor in the decline in 
economic output during the third quarter. 
Moreover, the construction sector grew consid -
erably more slowly than in the second quarter, 
when construction activity had expanded 
sharply. The upswing in the service industries 
may have continued. On the demand side, the 
weakness was fairly broadly based. Only invest -
ment in new machinery and equipment and in 
new buildings as well as, to a certain extent, 
government consumption expenditure pro -
vided positive momentum. Large- scale imports 
are likely to have been used, in part, to replen -
ish inventories.
German exporters’ foreign business fell signifi -
cantly in the third quarter of 2018 in price-  
adjusted terms. This was largely because of the 
considerable difficulties the automotive sector 
experienced with the introduction of the EU-  
wide emissions test procedure WLTP (World -
wide harmonised Light vehicles Test Proced -
ure). Had this sector’s exports not declined, 
exports would not have decreased slightly, they 
would have risen by 1% – according to data up 
until August. In regional terms, deliveries to 
euro area partner countries (by value) remained 
unchanged from the previous quarter overall – 
according to provisional seasonally adjusted 
figures available up to September. Exports to 
non- euro area countries, by contrast, fell no -
ticeably. Exports of goods to the United King -
dom, which is still part of the EU, dropped par -Slight decline in 
German eco -
nomic output in 
the third quar -
ter, mainly due 
to temporary 
one- off effects
Sharp fall in 
industrial output 
caused by auto -
motive sector
Exports lower 
because of a 
sharp drop in 
automotive 
deliveriesOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018104106108110112114116
–10+1+2+32010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
44

ticularly sharply, probably also as a result of 
extremely weak motor vehicle deliveries. In 
addition, German companies faced lower de -
mand in Russia and the newly industrialised 
Asian economies. Business with China, mean -
while, flourished. Goods deliveries to the 
United States, where the economy is currently 
experiencing strong growth, also expanded 
perceptibly. The German export industry re -
ported a considerable increase in sales to Japan 
and the southern and eastern Asian emerging 
market economies.
Given the lacklustre economy and, in particular, 
the weak exports in the third quarter of 2018, 
business investment in machinery and equip -
ment is likely to have been moderate, particu -
larly as the nominal sales of capital goods pro -
ducers in Germany fell sharply. This was not 
only attributable to the automotive industry, 
which had to significantly lower its output in 
the quarter under review because of the one-  
off effect of the WLTP . Domestic sales in mech -
anical engineering and by producers of com -
puters, electronic and optical products were 
also down on the previous quarter. Weak do -
mestic sales by German manufacturers of cap -
ital goods were, however, probably more than 
offset by higher imports. The strong growth of 
commercial vehicle registrations in the third 
quarter could also have boosted investment ac -
tivity somewhat, assuming that some of these 
vehicles came from inventories rather than all 
coming straight from the factory or from im -
ports.
Construction investment appears to have 
achieved only moderate growth during the 
third quarter of 2018. According to data up 
until August, growth in nominal sales in the 
main construction sector was appreciably lower 
than in the second quarter. Investment in com -
mercial buildings is likely to have fallen, while 
private housing investment has probably risen.
Household consumption was down on the 
quarter in the third quarter of 2018. The sharp 
increase in energy prices probably limited con -sumers’ scope for spending. Retail sales were 
even actually down on the previous quarter, 
with turnover in textiles, clothing and footwear 
particularly hard hit. This could be linked to the 
exceptionally hot and dry summer this year. By 
contrast, demand for electrical household ap -
pliances as well as furniture and furnishings 
was much higher than in the second quarter. A 
significant increase in sales was also recorded 
in online and mail order trade, which was 
therefore able to match the high rate of growth 
of the second quarter. Although restaurants 
and hotels probably benefited from the stable 
weather conditions, sales fell short of the high 
level of the second quarter here, too. In add -Growth in busi -
ness investment 
in machinery 
and equipment 
probably only 
moderate
Construction 
investment likely 
to have grown 
moderately
Dip in private 
consumption 
during the 
 summer90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201890100110
8590100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 190100 100110
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesof which:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
45

ition to retail and hospitality, trade in motor 
vehicles  is also likely to have had a negative im -
pact on private consumption. This is probably 
due mainly to the introduction of the new 
emissions test procedure in September 2018, 
which was associated with temporary delivery 
difficulties in the automotive industry and a 
higher motor tax burden. For instance, registra -
tions of new cars by households slumped in 
September. However, motor vehicle traders 
had increased the number of one- day registra -
tions of vehicles back in August, technically 
rendering them second hand. It is not yet clear 
to what extent private demand was satisfied by 
dealers selling such second- hand cars. In add -
ition to these repercussions of the new emis -
sions test procedure, it is also possible that the 
mooted driving bans for vehicles with high 
emissions levels could have unsettled con -
sumers and caused them to postpone buying a 
car.Imports rose sharply in real terms during the 
third quarter of 2018. There was strong de -
mand, in particular, for intermediate goods, 
which were probably used to replenish inven -
tories given that the quarter was weak overall. 
In a regional breakdown, imports of goods 
from the euro area countries displayed particu -
larly strong growth – according to provisional 
seasonally adjusted figures available up to Sep -
tember. However, imports from outside the 
euro area also expanded. A quite considerable 
increase in imports of goods from the United 
States was striking. Imports from China and 
Japan also displayed marked growth. The same 
is true of the eastern and southern Asian emer -
ging market economies. Meanwhile, imports 
from the newly industrialised Asian countries 
were slightly down on the quarter in the re -
porting period. Deliveries of goods from the 
United Kingdom even declined very signifi -
cantly. This was probably largely down to a 
one- off development in other transport equip -
ment, where imports had spiked in the previ -
ous quarter before normalising in the third 
quarter.
Sectoral trends
Industrial output declined sharply in the third 
quarter of 2018. It fell 1½% on the previous 
quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. The main 
reason for the steep drop were large- scale pro -
duction stoppages in the automotive industry, 
which were related to considerable difficulties 
switching to the new WLTP emissions test pro -
cedure. According to a simple mechanical cal -
culation, this could have depressed GDP growth 
by an estimated 0.4 percentage point in the 
third quarter.1 Excluding the automotive indus -
try, industrial output remained unchanged on 
the quarter. Consequently, production of cap -
ital goods shrank most overall. However, the Strong import 
demand despite 
slight decline 
in economic 
 activity
Industrial output 
sharply lower 
due to a slump 
in automotive 
productionOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018Industry
95100105110
859095100105110115120
Construction1
Main construction2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
Industry excl. 
automotive
1 It was assumed that the output of motor vehicles would 
otherwise have increased as in the previous quarters. No 
account was taken of negative spillover effects on other 
sectors via production linkages. With this in mind, the ac -
tual effects could therefore be somewhat higher.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
46

production of intermediate goods also fell 
sharply. Supply chains mean that manufactur -
ers of these goods are also likely to have been 
affected, at least in part, by the lower output in 
the automotive sector. The output of consumer 
goods expanded strongly, by contrast. Here, 
production of pharmaceutical products grew 
particularly strongly, probably because certain 
cancer treatments were launched.
According to Ifo Institute data, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing 
was perceptibly lower in the third quarter than 
in the previous quarter. Again, the steep drop 
in output in the motor vehicle industry is likely 
to have been key. Thus, only manufacturers of 
capital goods reported a significant drop in 
capacity utilisation. Capacity utilisation in the 
intermediate goods sector, by contrast, re -
mained unchanged on the quarter, whilst util -
isation of production capacity in the consumer 
goods sector actually rose considerably.
Output growth in the construction sector 
slowed in the third quarter of 2018, though ex -
pansion was still perceptible, at ½% on the 
previous quarter. However, positive catalysts 
came only from the finishing trades, where 
output expanded considerably during the 
period under review. Output in the main con -
struction sector, meanwhile, remained un -
changed on the quarter. A slight increase in 
civil engineering construction work and a sig -
nificant drop in activity in the construction of 
buildings balanced each other out. Nonethe -
less, the economic indicators suggest that the 
construction boom in Germany continued dur -
ing the third quarter. According to the Ifo Insti -
tute, capacity utilisation in the main construc -
tion sector remained exceptionally high. Fur -
thermore, a significant proportion of construc -
tion companies continued to complain that a 
lack of labour was preventing them from fur -
ther expanding output. And not least, the con -
struction boom was reflected in increasingly 
higher construction prices.Economic output in the service industries likely 
increased slightly in the third quarter of 2018. 
Wholesale and retail trade sales will, however, 
have put in a fairly muted performance, as 
wholesalers’ business followed weak industrial 
output and dropped markedly in real terms. 
Price- adjusted retail sales were also down on 
the previous quarter. This is likely due to the 
exceptionally dry and hot weather during the 
summer months. And not least, sales in motor 
vehicles could have dropped as a result of the 
production stoppages in the automotive indus -
try. However, other services sectors probably 
continued to benefit from favourable business 
developments. This is, in any case, suggested 
by the assessment of the business situation in 
this sector, which improved noticeably during 
the reporting period according to the Ifo Insti -
tute.Industrial cap -
acity utilisation 
lower
Construction 
output signifi -
cantly higher
Services sector 
likely expanded 
slightlyOutput in the automotive industry and 
registrations of passenger cars
95100105110115Seasonally adjusted
2015 2016 2017 2018
Sources  of  the  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office, 
Association of the German Automotive Industry (VDA). 1 Brand 
new vehicles.
Deutsche Bundesbank350400450500550600
2002503003502015 = 100, log scale
Manufacture of motor vehicles and
motor vehicle parts
(industrial output)
Manufacture of passenger cars
Thous.Thous.
Passenger car registrations1Lin scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
47

Labour market
In the third quarter, too, the labour market situ -
ation was characterised by very high levels of 
employment and low unemployment. Employ -
ment was somewhat more buoyant again fol -
lowing moderate growth in the previous quar -
ter. This was mainly due to the still fairly strong 
growth in jobs subject to social security contri -
butions. Unemployment dropped noticeably in 
the reporting quarter from an already low level. 
At the same time, the already large number of 
vacancies continued to grow. Leading indica -
tors show persistently high demand for labour 
over the next few months.
Employment growth accelerated slightly from 
the second to the third quarter of 2018, but 
was unable to match the momentum of the 
preceding quarters. After seasonal adjustment, 
an average of 118,000 more people were in 
work in Germany during the summer months 
than in the previous quarter. This translates into 
an increase of 0.3%. According to first esti -
mates by the Federal Employment Agency (BA), 
the number of people in jobs subject to social 
security contributions rose by 140,000, or 
0.4%, in the first two months of the reporting 
quarter alone compared with the average of 
the second quarter. In other words, the cur -
rently favourable labour market situation for 
employees has seen a strong expansion in jobs 
with full social security coverage. This is to the 
detriment of other forms of employment: both 
the number of people in low- paid part- time 
work and that of self- employed has been sink -
ing considerably for some time now.
At sector level, the increase in jobs subject to 
social security contributions has been broad 
based. Business services such as IT and logistics 
have experienced particularly strong growth, 
but health and social services as well as busi -
ness and support services (not including tem -
porary agency workers) have also seen signifi -
cant gains. Similarly, employment in manufac -
turing and construction increased perceptibly. 
In the finance and insurance sectors, staff cuts Very high 
employment 
levels and low 
unemployment
Strong growth in 
jobs subject to 
social security 
contributions
Growth broadly 
based across 
sectors, but 
strong decline in 
temporary 
agency workLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018Oct.42.042.543.043.544.044.545.0
29.029.530.030.531.031.532.032.533.005001,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200Oct.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Oct.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Scale enlarged
Unsubsidised vacancies 2Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
July-
Aug.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
48

did not continue. Only temporary agency work, 
which is characterised by high fluctuation, wit -
nessed a considerable drop in the number of 
jobs, as has been the case all this year to date.
The official unemployment figure continued to 
decline in the third quarter. On an average of 
the reporting period, the registered unemploy -
ment figure was 35,000 lower than in the 
second quarter after seasonal adjustment. The 
unemployment rate fell by 0.1 percentage point 
to 5.1%. The number of unemployed persons 
was down again in October. Much like in the 
second quarter, the positive development in 
the third quarter was solely attributable to a fall 
in the number of long- term job seekers receiv -
ing the basic welfare allowance. Unemploy -
ment covered by the statutory insurance 
scheme is already very low and did not fall any 
further.
While enterprises’ demand for labour is high, 
the labour supply is growing at a slower pace. 
The number of unemployed persons is low and 
the number of people who are in work but 
would like to increase their working hours is 
declining in step with unemployment. More -
over, labour market participation in Germany 
has risen to the highest level in Europe over the 
past few years and it is becoming increasingly 
difficult to mobilise additional members of the 
workforce. This is why immigration has a cru -
cial role to play. In arithmetical terms, of the 
715,000 additional jobs subject to social secur -
ity contributions that existed in August 2018 
compared with August 2017, only a little under 
half could be filled by German nationals. The 
gap was filled, in particular, by persons from 
eastern European EU Member States and from 
the eight main countries of origin of asylum 
seekers. Immigration has been clearly on the 
wane for quite some time now, however. Data 
from the Federal Statistical Office reveal that 
immigration to Germany was down by one-  
sixth on balance in 2017 compared with the 
previous year. According to the data available 
so far, the decline continued at the same pace 
in the first five months of the current year.Labour market tightness is therefore intensify -
ing. It is becoming increasingly difficult for en -
terprises to find suitable skilled labour. Data from 
the Federal Employment Agency show that the 
average vacancy period is 112 days at the cur -
rent time, which is one month more than three 
years ago. In fields such as care of the elderly 
and plumbing/ heating, vacancies remain unfilled 
for even longer than expected, at six months on 
average. The labour shortage is gearing up in 
other professional fields. According to the Fed -
eral Employment Agency, the unemployment 
rates for qualified personnel in specific careers 
are just under 2% for specialists and experts and 
less than 4% for skilled workers with vocational 
training.2 This suggests that recruitment is being 
hampered by a lack of personnel.Unemployment 
only falling 
among 
 long-term 
unemployed 
persons receiv -
ing basic wel -
fare allowance
Growth in 
labour supply …
… lags behind 
increasing 
demand for 
labour2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201800.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
% points
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5%
Q3
H1Wage driftNegotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay).
Deutsche BundesbankH1
2 See Federal Employment Agency, Statistik/ Arbeitsmarkt -
berichterstattung, Berichte: Blickpunkt Arbeitsmarkt – 
Fachkräfteengpassanalyse , June 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
49

The relevant leading indicators suggest that en -
terprises’ demand for labour remains excep -
tionally high. The number of job vacancies re -
ported to the Federal Employment Agency is 
on an upward trend. However, the number of 
vacancies could also rise due to changes in en -
terprises’ reporting procedures and the longer 
vacancy period. The persistently high level of 
the Ifo employment barometer could likewise 
be a result of difficulties in filling vacant pos -
itions. The more labour supply becomes the 
limiting factor for an increase in employment, 
the more a persistently high demand for labour 
amongst firms can be accompanied by a slow -
down in employment growth. The slightly downward trend is likely to continue for regis -
tered unemployment. The leading indicator for 
unemployment in the labour market barometer 
of the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) 
is still marginally in positive territory.
Wages and prices
Reflecting the favourable economic situation 
and growing labour shortages, negotiated pay 
rates continued to rise at rates above the 
longer- term average in the reporting quarter. 
At 2.8%, the year- on- year increase in negoti -
ated rates of basic pay in the third quarter of 
2018 roughly matched the significant increase 
seen in the second quarter. While negotiated 
wages in the production sector including con -
struction continued to increase substantially in 
the third quarter in comparison with the previ -
ous year, the year- on- year rates in the services 
sectors fell markedly. The low wage increases 
agreed at financial service providers, in the 
wholesale and retail trade and for the cleaning 
of buildings were key factors in this develop -
ment. As fewer collectively agreed special pay -
ments were due than in the second quarter, in 
the economy as a whole the 2.8% year- on- year 
increase in negotiated wage rates including 
additional benefits was weaker in the third 
quarter of 2018 than in the second quarter 
(3.3%). Actual earnings are likely to have 
shown robust growth again in the third quar -
ter.
Following the conclusion of the latest pay 
agreement in the chemical industry, which will 
see wages climb sharply by around 3¾% in an -
nualised terms, this year’s pay round has all but 
come to an end. Pay agreements were charac -
terised, in most instances, by markedly higher 
wage growth than in the past two years, and 
they were concluded for longer periods in 
many cases. Furthermore, it was often agreed 
that large hikes in negotiated rates of pay 
would occur at the start of the agreement 
period, followed by lower or no rises later on. 
In some industries, employees also had the op -Leading indica -
tors suggest 
demand for 
labour will con -
tinue to grow 
in short termStrong under -
lying momen -
tum in negoti -
ated pay rates 
continues
2018 pay round 
with distinctly 
higher wage 
increases on 
the wholeEinfuhrpreise
Export pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201895100105110
95100105
95100105
0123
+++2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2Producer prices1Log scale
%
Oct.95100105
Oct.Import pricesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
50

tion of choosing between wage increases or 
more leisure time in lieu thereof.
Consumer prices (HICP) in the third quarter 
were again up markedly on the preceding 
three- month period, recording an increase of 
0.5% in seasonally adjusted terms. Given the 
steady rise in crude oil prices up to then, en -
ergy prices went up by roughly as much as in 
the previous quarter. As a result of abnormal 
weather conditions, food prices likewise con -
tinued to climb, albeit at a slower pace than in 
the second quarter. In the case of clothing and 
footwear, though, which are likewise subject to 
fairly strong price fluctuations, there were ex -
ceptionally large discounts. Overall, however, 
non- energy industrial goods prices grew at a 
markedly faster pace than in previous quarters, 
in part because the euro has continued to de -
preciate against the US dollar. For instance, ve -
hicle sales prices increased by 0.8%. The prices 
of services continued to rise moderately. The 
partial or full abolition of charges for day care 
facilities for small children in a number of fed -
eral states had a dampening effect here.3 By 
contrast, significantly more had to be spent on 
other services. This was particularly the case for 
those services – cleaning being one such ex -
ample – where wages represent a high share of 
costs. Compared with the previous year, annual 
headline HICP inflation increased from 1.9% to 
2.1%.4 Excluding energy and food, however, 
the rate decreased marginally from 1.2% to 
1.1%. After factoring out the abolition of 
charges for day care facilities for small children 
and the volatile components of clothing and 
travel, it rose slightly.
In October, consumer prices increased by a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.2%. Energy prices went up 
again significantly as a result of crude oil prices 
continuing to rise up until the middle of the 
month. Prices for services were moderately 
higher across the board. By contrast, in the 
case of industrial goods excluding energy, the 
significant rate at which prices had previously 
risen slowed somewhat. Food prices remained 
unchanged on the whole. Annual headline HICP inflation went up from 2.2% to 2.4%.5 
Excluding energy and food, the distinct rise in 
inflation from 1.2% to 1.5% was partly due to 
the fact that prices for motor vehicle insurance 
and travel services were cut substantially in 
 October 2017.
In the coming months, the inflation rate is likely 
to be somewhat weaker due to the more sub -
dued rise in energy and food prices. Excluding 
energy and food, the rate of 1½%, which is 
high in a longer- term comparison, could be 
maintained. For example, the import and in -
dustrial producer prices for industrial goods ex -
cluding energy are on a comparatively clear up -
ward trajectory in terms of their trend. At the 
same time, higher crude oil prices could indir -
ectly affect inflation excluding energy and 
food, for example in travel services.
Orders received and outlook
Having experienced a setback in the third quar -
ter, the German economy is expected to see 
fairly strong growth again in the final quarter 
of 2018. Output and exports of motor vehicles 
are thus expected to return to normal before 
the year is out. The manufacturing sector as a 
whole likewise looks set to report marked 
growth. For instance, demand for imported 
intermediate goods was very buoyant in the 
past quarter. Although new orders have not yet 
been able to break the steady downward trend 
that took hold at the start of the year, industry 
order books remain well filled. In addition, Ifo 
Institute data indicate that short- term output 
expectations remain well above their long- term 
average. In addition, private consumption is ex -
pected to re- assume its role as a major eco -
nomic driver. The still outstanding income and Inflation rate up 
further in Q3 
from elevated 
level
Rate significantly 
above 2% in 
October …… but rates not 
expected to be 
quite as high in 
coming months
German econ -
omy back on 
expansionary 
course by end 
of year
3 This affected Lower Saxony, Hesse, Berlin and Branden -
burg. With state- weighted fees accounting for 0.04% of 
HICP , this reduced the headline rate by around 0.05 per -
centage point.
4 The headline CPI figure was +2.1% compared with 
+2.0%.
5 The CPI figure was 2.5% compared with 2.3%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
51

labour market prospects are expected to again 
provide a boost.
Sentiment in the German economy deterior -
ated again somewhat of late, after brightening 
significantly during the third quarter. According 
to the Ifo Institute surveys, there was a particu -
lar deterioration in business expectations. Fur -
thermore, sentiment suggests that mainly 
export- oriented firms are looking to the future 
with less confidence. The business climate 
index in manufacturing posted a particularly 
strong decline and thus continued the steady 
downward trend that took hold at the start of 
the year. Short- term export expectations were 
also less favourable here than in the third quar -
ter. By contrast, there was only a slight deteri -
oration in sentiment in the wholesale and retail 
trade and other services sectors. In the main 
construction sector, the business climate even 
posted a new record high, driven by a signifi -
cantly improved assessment of the current situ -
ation. The most recent autumn survey by the 
German Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
(DIHK), which covers a longer time horizon of 
12 months, indicates similar sentiment. Here 
again, the deterioration was mainly seen in the 
expectations of large enterprises in the indus -
trial sector, which are, in general, particularly 
strongly integrated into global value chains. 
According to the DIHK, this is mainly due to 
concerns about global trade policy.
In the third quarter of 2018, new industrial 
orders fell significantly short of their level in the 
previous quarter. Nevertheless, the downward 
trend that took hold at the start of the year 
weakened somewhat. Broken down by region, 
negative impulses mainly emanated from flag -
ging external demand. There was a stronger 
decrease in new orders from the euro area 
than from non- euro area countries. By con -
trast, enterprises received significantly more 
orders from customers in Germany, with large 
orders made on an irregular basis making up a 
particularly large portion of these. Excluding 
large orders, the volume of new domestic 
orders contracted, too. Despite the rather sub -Sentiment 
deteriorated 
again somewhat 
of late
Fewer new 
orders but 
orders situation 
still favourableDemand for industrial goods and
construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only-
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 20189095100105110115
–50+5+10
9095100105110115
9095100105110
July-
Aug.July-/
Aug.
105110115120125130135140
–50+5+10+15+20Volume, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
2010 = 100
%%TotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
52

dued inflow of new orders, German industrial 
firms are not, however, likely to suffer a lack of 
orders. This is indicated by firms’ assessment of 
the stocks of orders that have still not been 
processed, which according to the Ifo Institute 
remain well above their long- term average. Ac -
cording to Federal Statistical Office data, the 
order backlog in September was also consider -
ably higher than in the second quarter.
The buoyant construction activity in Germany is 
also likely to continue unabated in the final 
quarter of 2018, but activity in the sector is not 
expected to expand substantially. Demand for 
construction work remained very high. On an 
average of July and August – the most recent 
months for which statistics are available – the 
intake of orders in the main construction sector 
was up distinctly on the previous quarter. The 
number of building permits granted, which has 
been more or less stable at a high level for 
quite some time now, also indicates that the 
construction boom is showing no signs of 
slowing down. However, capacity constraints 
in construction are still preventing sustained 
strong output growth. According to the Ifo In -stitute, equipment utilisation in the main con -
struction sector is still very high, as is the share 
of construction firms reporting production 
hold- ups owing to the shortage of skilled work -
ers.
Following the weak summer, private consump -
tion is likely to grow again significantly in the 
final quarter of 2018. Primarily sales of textiles, 
clothing and footwear are expected to see a 
distinct countermovement, after turnover in 
these areas slumped during the summer on ac -
count of the weather. Furthermore, car sales 
are likely to pick up again following the turbu -
lence in the previous quarter, even if consumers 
are still unsettled due to the continuing debate 
about a ban on motor vehicles with high emis -
sions levels. Underlying conditions for con -
sumption remain excellent overall. Employees 
are benefiting from significant wage increases 
while the unemployment rate is marking fresh 
lows. This is reflected in consumer sentiment. 
The consumer climate index compiled by the 
market research institution Gesellschaft für 
Konsumforschung (GfK ) remains at an excep -
tionally high level.Construction 
capacity utilisa -
tion remains 
highPrivate con -
sumption to 
recover at end 
of yearDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
53

Public finances*
General government budget
Germany’s government finances are continuing 
to benefit from the highly favourable under -
lying conditions. A far larger general govern -
ment surplus is on the cards this year (2017: 
+1.0% of gross domestic product (GDP)). In 
structural terms, too, i.e. factoring out cyclical 
and temporary effects, the budgetary situation 
is expected to see renewed improvement. The 
debt ratio is still on a downward path and 
could fall below the 60% threshold this year 
already. It had fallen to 61.5% by the middle of 
the year, down from 63.9% at the end of 2017.
Growth in revenue from taxes and social contri -
butions remains strong this year. On the ex -
penditure side, there is no nuclear fuel tax re -
payment to be made, unlike in 2017.1 In add -
ition, the strain on government coffers is being 
eased by falling unemployment and dwindling 
interest expenditure. These positive factors are 
outweighing the significant spending hikes in 
other areas. For example, fixed asset formation 
is rising sharply, while payments to the EU are 
up considerably (from an unusually low level 
last year).
As things stand, the framework conditions for 
government finances will remain favourable in 
the medium term. Positive economic and 
labour   market developments are expected, 
though they are fraught with considerable un -
certainty. In addition, interest expenditure is 
likely to further diminish in significance. The 
debt ratio will decline and the average rate of 
interest will probably also fall to a slightly lower 
level. At the same time, fiscal policy will be 
eased by stepping up expenditure and lowering 
taxes. The surplus is therefore likely to shrink 
markedly, particularly in structural but also in 
unadjusted terms. From the current perspec -
tive, fiscal policy is thus procyclical. However, 
the risk of this resulting in cyclical excesses and 
thereby also, for example, sending general price pressures soaring appears limited. This 
notwithstanding, government investment in 
construction, to give one example, will have to 
be monitored so that additional spending in 
view of high capacity utilisation is not swal -
lowed up by price increases.
In view of the surpluses, a whole raft of budget- 
burdening measures are envisaged. Specifically, 
there are plans to expand benefits for pensions, 
healthcare and long- term care as of next year. 
In addition, central, state and local government 
intend to raise spending on childcare, educa -
tion, transport, digital policy, internal security 
and defence. Under the measures specified so 
far, the burden of taxes and social contribu -
tions will remain largely unchanged over the 
medium term. First, this holds for social contri -
butions – despite the still low level of demo -
graphic pressure and highly positive labour 
market performance. This is linked, amongst 
other things, to the benefit expansions. These 
mean that the contribution rate for the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme is not set to de -
crease, while the rate for the public long- term 
care insurance scheme is to be raised signifi -
cantly (by 0.5 percentage point). The envisaged 
reduction in the contribution rate for the un -
employment insurance scheme (0.5 percentage 
point) merely offsets this.2 Second, the income 
tax cuts specified so far will be offset by add -Another signifi -
cant improve -
ment in govern -
ment finances in 
2018 …
… due to 
dynamic rev -
enue growth 
amidst overall 
moderate rise in 
expenditure
Lower surplus in 
coming years 
due to fiscal 
looseningSpending 
increases in 
many areas as 
well as moder -
ate tax cut
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). As yet, there are no current quarterly data available 
for local government or the statutory health and public 
long- term care insurance schemes. These will be analysed 
in upcoming issues of the Monthly Report.
1 This absence is more important than the expected in -
crease in temporary burdens resulting from calls on guaran -
tees issued by Hamburg and Schleswig- Holstein in connec -
tion with the privatisation of HSH Nordbank.
2 Members of the statutory health insurance scheme will 
see their contributions go down on balance, as the supple -
mentary contribution set by individual health insurance in -
stitutions will be financed equally by employer and em -
ployee in future. At the same time, however, this will place 
a corresponding financial strain on enterprises and the 
statutory pension insurance scheme.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
54

itional revenue from progressive taxation. In 
2021, the partial discontinuation of the solidar -
ity surcharge – which has been announced, but 
not yet fleshed out – would reduce the tax bur -
den to a more marked extent.3 Viewed across 
the period since reunification, however, the tax 
ratio is still likely to be relatively high.
In view of the fact that government finances 
are in very good shape, it appears that longer- 
term challenges are, to some extent, being put 
on the back burner. These stem largely from 
demographic developments, which are acceler -
ating the hike in spending on pensions, long-  
term care and healthcare while simultaneously 
putting the brakes on growth in tax and contri -
bution receipts. In particular, the finances of 
the statutory pension insurance scheme will 
come under considerable pressure going for -
ward. The latest pension package further in -
creases the financial burden and will make it 
more difficult to ensure sustainability.4
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue5 was up by 4½% on the year in the 
third quarter of 2018 (see the chart above and 
the table on p. 56). On balance, this growth is 
almost entirely attributable to wage tax, turn -
over tax and corporation tax. Wage tax rev -
enue was boosted by positive labour market 
and wage developments and the progressive 
tax scale. A smaller tax cut at the start of the 
year had a dampening effect.6 The picture for 
profit- related taxes was mixed. Corporation tax 
revenue again rose sharply from last year’s al -
ready high level. By contrast, assessed income 
tax revenue stagnated, and receipts from with -
holding tax on interest income and capital 
gains were down slightly. There was a signifi -
cant decrease in revenue from non- assessed 
taxes on earnings, the main component of 
which is investment income tax on dividends. This was expected following very strong growth 
in the second quarter and is probably due to 
the fact that a substantial share of profits were 
distributed earlier this year. There was a consid -
erable pick- up in turnover tax, which fluctuates 
during the course of the year. Furthermore, 
there was no repeat of the previous year’s nu -
clear fuel tax repayment.7
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue (including local government taxes) will 
increase by 5½% in 2018 as a whole (for se -
lected inputs for the estimate, see p.  58). 
Growth is thus higher than implied by the 
macroeconomic reference variables for tax rev -Demographic 
challenges for 
statutory pen -
sion insurance 
scheme, in 
 particular
Considerable 
growth in tax 
revenue in Q3Tax estimate: 
dynamic growth 
in year as a 
wholeTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 20182024681012
–++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
3 For information on the solidarity surcharge, see p. 60.
4 For information on the statutory pension insurance 
scheme, see pp. 62 f.
5 Including tax revenue transferred to the EU. Receipts 
from local government taxes are not yet not known for the 
reporting quarter and are therefore not included.
6 The basic income tax allowance and child tax allowance 
were raised and the other tax brackets “shifted to the 
right” (specified tax rates only apply to higher taxable in -
come). Child benefits were also increased. As these are set 
off against wage tax, revenue collected from wage tax is 
lower.
7 More specifically, interest payments of €1 billion were 
made to nuclear power plant operators in the third quarter 
of 2017. They were linked to a ruling of the Federal Consti -
tutional Court which resulted in all nuclear fuel tax pay -
ments being refunded. Unlike in the national accounts, the 
nuclear fuel tax repayment is recorded in the government 
finance statistics as a deduction from revenue (negative tax 
revenue).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
55

enue and fiscal drag.8 Specifically, 1 percentage 
point of the growth rate is due to the fact that 
there is no nuclear fuel tax repayment to be 
made, unlike in 2017. The projected increase is 
dampened, on balance, by legislative changes. 
By contrast, intra- year developments have a 
positive impact: in particular, revenue from cor -
poration tax and non- assessed taxes on earn -
ings has so far risen more rapidly than could be 
expected based on legislative changes and 
macroeconomic assumptions.
Still, revenue growth of 4% is forecast for 2019. 
There are two main reasons for the slowdown 
compared to 2018. First, cash basis effects in 
relation to court rulings will serve to curb 
growth slightly rather than boosting it as in 
2018. Second, it is expected that revenue from 
profit- related taxes will (only just) increase in 
line with the macroeconomic reference vari -
ables. A revenue increase of 4½% is then fore -
cast for 2020, while the average annual growth 
rate will hit close to 4% in the medium term up to 2023. This is primarily based on the macro -
economic assumptions and fiscal drag. The tax 
ratio (as defined in the government finance 
statistics) is therefore projected to go up signifi -
cantly to 23.4% by the end of the projection 
horizon (2017: 22.4%). In particular, the un -
bridled effects of the progressive income tax 
scale under current legislation will make them -
selves felt from 2019 onwards. However, the 
dynamic growth in profit- related taxes this year 
will also have a part to play.
Compared with the previous estimate in May, 
revenue expectations have been raised slightly Robust revenue 
growth forecast 
up to 2023Tax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 to Q3Estimate 
for 2018 1,2Q3
2017 2018 2017 2018
Year-on-year changeYear- on- 
year 
change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 492.3 523.4 + 31.1 +  6.3 +  5.6 165.9 173.2 + 7.3 +  4.4
of which:
Wage tax 140.8 149.8 +  9.0 +  6.4 +  6.3 47.3 50.4 + 3.1 +  6.6
Profi  t-related taxes 89.6 96.3 +  6.7 +  7.5 +  6.2 28.0 27.7 – 0.2 –  0.8
Assessed income tax 3 44.6 45.2 +  0.7 +  1.5 +  1.3 12.7 12.7 – 0.0 –  0.3
Corporation tax 22.4 25.9 +  3.5 + 15.6 + 13.9 6.0 7.2 + 1.2 + 19.2
Investment income 
tax4 22.6 25.2 +  2.6 + 11.5 +  8.6 9.2 7.9 – 1.3 – 14.6
Turnover taxes 5 168.2 174.2 +  6.0 +  3.6 +  3.7 56.5 59.2 + 2.7 +  4.8
Other consumption-  
related  taxes 6 64.6 64.9 +  0.3 +  0.5 +  0.7 22.6 22.8 + 0.2 +  0.8
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of October 2018. 2 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 4 With-
holding tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax. 6 Taxes on 
energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting 
and lottery, beer, fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8 The progressive income tax scale has the effect of in -
creasing the relative tax burden when (real and inflation-  
offsetting) income rises. In this context, bracket creep is 
defined as the share of the additional burden attributable 
to price changes. In the case of specific excise duties, price 
effects work in the opposite way: the revenue collected 
from these types of taxes is almost exclusively based on 
quantity. The relative burden therefore falls when prices 
rise (all other things being equal). In quantitative terms, 
however, the effect of the progressive income tax scale is 
far and away the dominant one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
56

overall. The downward revision of the macro -
economic assumptions and an administrative 
order in connection with a court ruling will 
make for lower revenue (see the technical com -
ments on p. 58). However, the favourable de -
velopment of profit- related taxes will have a 
positive impact this year. This will be carried 
forward into the subsequent years as a baseline 
effect. Expected shortfalls resulting from court 
rulings have been postponed, in part, from this 
year to next. All in all, this latest tax estimate 
envisages a €3 billion hike in revenue in the 
current year compared with the May estimate. 
By contrast, the projected amount for 2019 
was lowered by €2½ billion. Increases in rev -
enue of between €2½ billion and €1½ billion 
are expected for the years from 2020 onwards.
Overall, however, tax revenue is expected to 
rise more slowly than indicated in the current 
estimate. The forecast is generally based on 
current legislation and therefore disregards tax 
cuts that have not yet been passed into law. 
Under the Family Relief Act (Familienentlas -
tungsgesetz)  passed by the Federal Cabinet, 
child benefits and income tax allowances are to 
be raised (the latter gradually). Furthermore, 
there is provision under the Act to offset the 
bracket creep of 2018 and 2019 by shifting the 
income tax scale in two stages. The revenue 
shortfall is expected to total around €4 billion in 2019 and to be in the order of €10 billion per 
year thereafter. The partial abolition of the soli -
darity surcharge planned for 2021 would then 
halve its revenue to just over €10 billion. With 
respect to revenue from profit- related taxes, 
there is the potential for setbacks following 
strong growth during the economic upturn of 
recent years. However, the strong momentum 
could also reflect structural factors, at least 
partly, such as the more effective curbing of tax 
evasion and avoidance.
Central government budget
Central government posted a deficit of €4 bil -
lion in the third quarter of 2018. The result 
marked a €1 billion improvement on the year. 
Revenue rose by 3½%. On the one hand, tax 
revenue was pushed down by a greater num -
ber of contributions from gross revenue to the 
EU budget. On the other hand, the last part of 
the nuclear fuel tax repayment was paid in the 
third quarter of 2017. Expenditure grew moder -
ately by 2½%. Unlike last year, Deutsche Bahn 
did not receive a capital injection, which had a 
dampening effect. In addition, interest expend -
iture declined. This was offset by a €3 billion 
increase in allocations to the energy and cli -
mate fund.Tax estimate 
forecasts slightly 
higher revenue 
than May 
 estimate
Moderate tax 
cuts foreseeableReduced deficit 
in Q3 despite 
high allocation 
to energy and 
climate fundOﬃ   cial tax estimate fi  gures and the Federal Government’s macroeconomic projection 
Item 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Tax revenue1
€ billion 775.3 804.6 841.2 875.2 907.4 940.7
As % of GDP 22.9 22.9 23.0 23.2 23.3 23.4
Year-on-year change (%) 5.5 3.8 4.5 4.0 3.7 3.7
Revision of previous tax estimate (€ billion) 3.2 – 2.3 2.3 2.0 1.5 .
Real GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2018) 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.3 1.3 1.3
Spring projection (April 2018) 2.3 2.1 1.4 1.4 1.4 .
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2018) 3.5 3.8 3.7 3.2 3.2 3.2
Spring projection (April 2018) 4.2 4.1 3.3 3.3 3.3 .
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates (October 2018) and the Federal Ministry of Economic Affairs and Energy. 1 Including 
EU shares in German tax revenue and receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
57

Selected technical information on the oﬃ   cial tax estimate
Macroeconomic assumptions
The offi   cial tax estimate is based on the 
Federal Government’s latest macroeco-
nomic projection (see the table on p. 57). 
This comprises a short- term projection for 
the current year, the next year and (in the 
autumn) for the year after, as well as a 
medium- term projection covering the years 
subsequent to that. In the medium- term 
projection, it is assumed that any output 
gap existing at the end of the short- term 
projection horizon will be closed by the 
fi  nal year of the medium- term projection. 
Uniform rates of economic growth are ap-
plied for these years. The upward revision 
for 2020 is because that year now forms 
part of the short- term projection for the 
fi  rst time and favourable economic devel-
opment is again expected then (growth 
slightly above potential). In spring, 2020 
was still encompassed by the medium- term 
projection, with a growth rate below the 
potential rate so as to close a positive out-
put gap.
Applicable tax law
The tax estimate is based on the tax legisla-
tion applicable at the time. This means, for 
example, that the revenue loss stemming 
from the Family Relief Act (Familienentlas-
tungsgesetz) that has now been adopted by 
the Bundestag has not yet been factored in. 
By contrast, the estimate includes, in par-
ticular, an income tax cut this year which is 
partly intended to offset bracket creep 
caused by infl  ation last year. Furthermore, 
lapsing refunds of corporation tax credit 
play a major role, resulting in higher tax rev-
enue from 2018 onwards.Impact of court rulings
The tax estimate also factors in the impact 
of court rulings. These can have a signifi  -
cant effect on revenue growth and some 
were made quite some time ago. One rul-
ing of the Federal Constitutional Court last 
year had particular repercussions; nuclear 
fuel tax was declared unconstitutional and 
was therefore paid back in full (with inter-
est, in some cases) (€7½ billion). Revenue 
losses of this kind are recognised in the 
years of the projection as well, especially in 
the case of profi  t- related taxes. In addition, 
the current estimate takes into account rev-
enue shortfalls stemming from an adminis-
trative order in connection with a decision 
on interest paid on tax arrears.1
In terms of statistical recording, the burden-
ing effects of court rulings on government 
fi  nances are reported in different ways in 
the fi  nancial statistics (on which the tax es-
timate is based) and the national accounts. 
In the fi  nancial statistics, they reduce tax 
revenue when the repayments are made 
(cash basis accounting). In the national ac-
counts, however, they are recorded as gov-
ernment spending (capital transfers) as 
soon as the decision takes legal effect. This 
means that the point at which the effects 
are recorded in the national accounts some-
times lies well in advance of the cash out-
fl o w .
1 Letter of the Federal Ministry of Finance dated 
14 June 2018 in conjunction with Federal Fiscal Court 
Decision IX B 21/ 18 of 25 April 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
58

After three quarters, the central government 
budget is on a much better footing than last 
year. The surplus climbed from €1½ billion to 
€14 billion. The budget plan finalised in the 
summer projected a significant deterioration in 
the outturn for 2018 as a whole (€7 billion de -
crease compared with the result in 2017). In a 
year- on- year comparison, there will be some 
additional burdens in the final quarter. For ex -
ample, the new digitalisation fund is to receive 
€2½ billion. In addition, state and local govern -
ments are set to be reimbursed for spending on 
incoming refugees (€1½ billion). Nevertheless, 
rather than the projected deficit, there will 
probably be an even higher surplus at the end 
of the year compared with 2017. As a result, it 
will not be necessary to tap the refugee reserve 
in the amount of €1½ billion as was originally 
planned. It will probably be possible to con -
tinue topping it up much more, meaning that it 
could reach an amount in the order of €35 bil -
lion instead of the envisaged €22½ billion.9
In early July, the Federal Cabinet presented a 
draft budget for 2019 with a deficit of €5½ bil -
lion.10 The higher deficit compared with that 
envisaged for 2018 was the result not only of 
projects from the coalition agreement but also 
of further tax cuts to compensate for bracket 
creep. By way of precaution, an unexplained 
global revenue shortfall item of €7 billion was 
also included.
In the meantime, various burdens have been 
agreed on, provision for which was made in 
the aforementioned global item. Next year, 
central government will transfer shares in turn -
over tax revenue in the total amount of €6½ 
billion to state and local government. In doing 
so, it will continue to cover a proportion of, 
inter alia, the financial burdens associated with 
refugee immigration. State government is also 
set to recover income from turnover tax now 
that the debts of the “German Unity Fund”, 
which are serviced by central government, 
have been repaid in arithmetical terms. In add -
ition, allocations of funds to improve child day 
care will play a smaller role.The latest tax estimate, with revenue shortfalls 
of €½ billion, was also factored into the final 
deliberations of the Bundestag’s Budget Com -
mittee. On the expenditure side, the agree -
ment to continue assuming refugee costs was 
taken into account. Accordingly, the amounts 
budgeted for contributions to the accommoda -
tion costs of those receiving unemployment 
benefit II were raised significantly. The spending 
authorisations for the Federal Ministry of Inter -
ior (for information technology and internal se -
curity) as well as development aid were also 
expanded substantially. In addition, more fund -
ing was earmarked for regional aid, defence 
and transport (in particular, measures to ad -
dress excessive emissions by diesel vehicles). In 
return, the precautionary global additional Renewed signifi -
cant surplus to 
be expected for 
2018 budget 
outturn
Budget plan for 
2019: govern -
ment draft with 
marked deterior -
ation in balance
Budgetary bur -
dens in aid of 
state and local 
governmentFinal deliber -
ations make 
 further use of 
fiscal spaceCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q45051015
–+++
–50+5+10+15+20
2018
20172016Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
2016€ billion
2018
2017
9 For more details on reserves, see Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Excursus: the use of reserves and off- budget entities by 
central and state government, Monthly Report, August 
2018, pp. 69 ff.
10 For more detailed information, see Deutsche Bundes -
bank, Public finances, Monthly Report, August 2018, 
pp. 61f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
59

spending item previously included in the 
budget plans was eliminated. Furthermore, fig -
ures for interest expenditure and allocations to 
the energy and climate fund were lowered. On 
balance, the deficit is expected to increase by 
€½ billion to €6 billion. A slightly higher re -
serve withdrawal of €5½ billion and coin sei -
gniorage will make it possible to continue 
avoiding net borrowing.
Structural net borrowing is limited under the 
terms of the debt brake. Adjustments also have 
to be made for relief from the cyclical compon -
ent (€4½ billion) and financial transactions (€½ 
billion). Furthermore, the structural deficit is to 
include the deficit of the relevant off- budget 
entities (€3 billion).11 Structural net borrowing 
thus amounts to around €8 billion, with the 
total being capped at €11½ billion by the debt 
brake. Adherence to this ceiling is therefore 
only achieved with the planned withdrawal of 
funds from reserves.
However, overall, the central government 
budget should close the coming year, too, with 
a much better outturn than planned. As in the 
previous years, developments were far more fa -
vourable when implementing the 2018 budget 
and this is largely set to be carried forward as a 
baseline effect. Under the coalition agreement, 
any such additional financial scope would be 
predominantly used for defence and develop -
ment aid. However, other measures – such as 
tax cuts – are also being discussed on a broader 
scale.12
In addition to moderate income tax cuts, the 
coalition agreement already paves the way for 
a partial abolition of the solidarity surcharge. 
Since 1998, this add- on to income tax and cor -
poration tax has amounted to 5.5%. It flows 
into the central government budget and, as an 
“add- on”, is contingent on the existence of 
particular financing needs in this budget. It was 
originally justified by central government hav -
ing to bear heavy financial burdens of German 
reunification. However, the special- need sup -
plementary central government grants for re -construction in eastern Germany paid by cen -
tral government to state government will be 
discontinued at the end of 2019. Yet the soli -
darity surcharge is to continue and is likely to 
still be generating income of just over €20 bil -
lion in 2020. The coalition agreement envis -
ages abolishing this surcharge for most taxpay -
ers only as of 2021. But even after this date, 
corporations and persons with higher incomes 
are to continue paying. This is likely to still bring 
in income in excess of €10 billion.
During the period in which the solidarity sur -
charge is expected to still exist to a partial ex -
tent, central government intends to co- finance 
state government tasks (primarily education). 
This kind of return to larger-scale mixed finan -
cing would further blur responsibilities, with a 
presumable knock- on effect on the efficient 
use of funds. Instead, it would be worth 
strengthening states’ individual responsibilities.
An extensive effort at reform could ensure that 
government tasks and their financing are 
strictly assigned to the individual government 
levels. In this way, it would be possible to forgo 
the legally questionable (partial) continuation 
of the solidarity surcharge and avoid an in -
crease in mixed financing. Objectives concern -
ing tax revenue, burden- sharing among tax -
payers and the distribution of taxes between 
the respective levels of government would Clear structural 
deficit planned
Yet certain 
scope for 
 additional 
expenditure or 
tax cuts still 
likely
Increasingly dif -
ficult to justify 
solidarity sur -
charge as add- 
on to income 
taxes for costs 
of unificationStrengthen 
states’ individual 
responsibility 
rather than 
increase mixed 
financing
Consider abol -
ishing solidarity 
surcharge 
entirely and 
instigating 
 fundamental 
reform
11 Figure taken from the draft finalised in the summer. No 
revision has yet been made.
12 Higher funds in the refugee reserve have also been seen 
as a source of fiscal policy scope to date. However, it does 
not seem advisable to plan a depletion of the reserve on a 
regular basis; see Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: the use 
of reserves and off- budget entities by central and state 
government, Monthly Report, August 2018, pp. 69 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
60

then, if necessary, have to be met by reforming 
the regular tax system.13
Central government’s off- budget entities14 re-
corded a surplus of €3 billion in the third quar -
ter of 2018, compared with a balanced budget 
in the same period last year. This was driven by 
central government transfers to the energy and 
climate fund. In addition, the fund’s revenue 
from CO2 certificates grew because prices had 
gone up considerably. The new digitalisation 
fund will receive a €2½ billion transfer from 
central government by the end of the year. 
Overall, the surplus is expected to be higher 
than in 2017 (€3 billion).
In the coming year, if certificate prices remain 
high, the energy and climate fund could post a 
notable surplus despite cuts in central govern -
ment transfers. The repayment fund for 
inflation- linked Federal securities is not due to 
make any repayments and is thus also likely to 
record a marked surplus. By contrast, an in -
crease in outflows from the fund to promote 
municipal investment could push up its deficit. 
Revenue from the mobile phone frequency 
auction scheduled for next spring is earmarked 
for the digitalisation fund. Whether the rev -
enue of at least €10 billion assumed in the co -
alition agreement is actually generated also de -
pends on the auction terms including the cov -
erage requirements. Moreover, some of the 
proceeds will possibly not be received until a 
later date. However, the crucial point here 
should be to quickly ensure a good, cost-  
efficient provision of the relevant services 
throughout Germany. All in all, the off- budget 
entities are expected to run a clear surplus next 
year, too.
State government budgets15
State government core budgets posted a sur -
plus of €4 billion in the third quarter of 2018. 
The clear drop on the previous year (by €3½ 
billion) is predominantly due to one- off effects. 
As a result, revenue rose rather moderately on the whole (1½%). While tax revenue grew con -
siderably (4%), there was no repeat of the €1 
billion capital repayment from BayernLB as in 
the previous year. By contrast, expenditure shot 
up (5½%). This was evidently due to the state 
of North Rhine-  Westphalia shifting the lion’s 
share of payments to its higher education es -
tablishments into this reporting quarter. In the 
previous year, those establishments received Off- budget 
entities record 
clear surplus …
… and pro -
spects good 
for 2019, too
Q3 results 
strained by 
 one-off effectsState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q43036912
–++++
03691215182124
2018
20172016Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20162018
2017€ billion
13 There may be concerns that higher income tax revenue 
received by state and local government could magnify the 
differences in financial capacity in Germany too strongly 
even under the revenue- sharing scheme. However, these 
could be countered by adjusting the various levels’ tax rev -
enue shares. For instance, a greater share of income tax 
could be assigned to central government, with state and 
local government receiving a higher share of turnover tax. 
State governments’ individual responsibility could be 
strengthened by means of (limited) state- specific sur -
charges or discounts on income tax. See also Deutsche 
Bundesbank, State government finances: comparison of 
developments, debt brakes and fiscal surveillance, Monthly 
Report, October 2018, p. 38.
14 In line with the Federal Ministry of Finance’s quarterly 
overviews. These notably do not include bad banks and 
other entities keeping commercial accounts.
15 The following results are based on the monthly cash 
statistics on the core budgets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
61

most of their transfers in the second quarter. 
There was also a surge in spending on invest -
ment. Personnel expenditure – a major com -
ponent of state government spending  – 
showed only muted growth as last year’s level 
was elevated by back- payments for changes in 
wages and civil servant remuneration. Growth 
in other operating expenditure and transfers to 
local government was also no more than mod -
erate.
In the first three quarters taken together, the 
surplus climbed steeply by €7 billion to €22 bil -
lion. On the one hand, the states of Hamburg 
and Schleswig- Holstein are expecting another 
round of high, one- off burdens (€5 billion) be -
fore the year draws to a close as their guaran -
tee will be called on when HSH Nordbank is 
privatised. On the other hand, the fine (just 
under €1 billion) from Audi in connection with 
emissions from diesel vehicles is having a posi -
tive impact. Another contributory factor is the 
turnover tax funds (€1½ billion) that central 
government is planning to transfer to state 
government to help relieve the strain of 
refugee- related expenses. All in all, the surplus 
for the year as a whole is likely to be higher 
even than last year (€14 billion) despite excep -
tional burdens.
The medium-  term outlook, too, remains very 
positive on the whole. According to the latest 
tax estimate, growth in tax revenue will dip 
only moderately in the period from 2019 to 
2023 (to an average of 4%). But these figures 
do not factor in shortfalls due to planned 
changes in legislation, in particular the Family 
Relief Act. However, they will be offset by add -
itional revenue from turnover tax as central 
government has ruled to continue providing 
funds for integration assistance. In addition, 
central government will transfer the turnover 
tax revenue that it received back to state gov -
ernment now that the debts of the “German 
Unity Fund” have been repaid in imputed 
terms. Given these overall exceptionally good 
general conditions, expenditure is also ex -
pected to rise dynamically. This is true, in par -ticular, for personnel costs, other operating ex -
penditure and spending on investment.16
Social security funds
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The finances of the statutory pension insurance 
scheme continued to develop favourably in the 
third quarter of 2018. At €1½ billion, the deficit 
was €1 billion lower than last year. Revenue 
soared (5%) due to very positive employment 
and wage growth. By contrast, expenditure 
rose at a much weaker rate (3½%). This amount 
is more or less in line with the average pension 
increase in Germany in the middle of the year. 
The rise in the number of pensions was again 
very limited.
The positive trend is set to continue in the final 
quarter of 2018. The surplus for the year as a 
whole is thus expected to be much higher than 
last year (2017: €½ billion). As a result, the re -
serves are likely to rise accordingly and exceed 
the upper bound of the fluctuation band, or 
1.5 times monthly expenditure, by an even 
greater margin.
Without the agreed benefit expansions, the 
contribution rate would probably have been 
cut markedly at the start of 2019.17 However, 
this cut will now no longer be implemented as 
the funds are required to finance the pension 
package (above all, “mothers’ pensions”). As a 
result, there will be no relief for employees or 
enterprises and the pension adjustment in 
2020 will also be lower accordingly.18Yet very large 
surplus on the 
cards for 2018 
as a whole …
… and medium- 
term outlook 
remains very 
positiveDeficit lower in 
Q3 due to sharp 
rise in contribu -
tion receipts
Much better 
result expected 
for year as a 
whole, too
No cut in contri -
bution rate due 
to pension 
 package
16 For more information on state government finances, 
see Deutsche Bundesbank, October 2018, op cit.
17 Deutsche Rentenversicherung  recently estimated that 
the contribution rate could potentially be cut by 0.4 per -
centage point; see Deutscher Bundestag, Wortprotokoll 
der 25. Sitzung des Ausschusses für Arbeit und Soziales, 
Protokoll- Nr . 19/ 25.
18 For more information on the pension package, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Report, 
August 2018, pp. 66 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
62

The pension package also contains new limits 
for the pension level19 and contribution rate up 
to the end of 2025. More specifically, the pen -
sion level may not fall below 48%, and the 
contribution rate is not to exceed 20%. How -
ever, due to the additional spending on 
mothers’ pensions and pensions for persons 
with reduced earning capacity, which were re -
solved at the same time, these limits will be 
met earlier. The new limit for the pension level 
also means that the planned changes in contri -
bution rates in other branches of the social se -
curity system will have a financial impact on the 
pension insurance scheme. For instance, the 
contribution rates for the public long- term care 
insurance scheme and the unemployment in -
surance scheme are set to be adjusted at the 
start of 2019 (+0.5  percentage point and 
-0.5 per  cent age point, respectively). The chan-
ges in contribution rates more or less equal 
themselves out for employees. However, pen -
sion recipients will feel the strain because they 
will be paying the higher contributions to the 
public long- term care insurance scheme on 
their own and not reaping the benefits from 
the cut in the rate for the unemployment insur -
ance scheme. This will bring about an initial fall 
in the (relative) pension level. If, over the course 
of time, the corresponding limit takes effect, 
there will be greater adjustments to (gross) 
pensions to ensure that the limit is not under -
shot. As a result, more contribution receipts 
and central government funds will be needed.
When, as of the mid-2020s, the baby boomer 
generation enters retirement, this will up the 
pressure on pension system finances. The previ -
ously agreed limits of 22% for the contribution 
rate and 43% for the pension level will con -
tinue to apply up to 2030. The latest pension 
package implies that the pension level and the 
contribution rates will also be higher post 
2025. This will make it more difficult to comply 
with the contribution rate ceiling. At the end of 
November, central government will present its 
annual pension insurance report. If the mid-  
term outlook shows that the contribution rate 
is close to breaching the limit, the government will have to propose suitable measures to pre -
vent this.
In the first instance, a pensions commission has 
been tasked with examining how the pension 
system finances are to be balanced in the 
longer term. By March 2020, this commission is 
to present proposals for reform for the period 
post 2025. Ultimately, the financial situation 
can only be sustainable if the central param -
eters are combined consistently. Besides the Pension system 
finances hit by 
changes to con -
tribution rates in 
other branches
Even more diffi -
cult to comply 
with longer- term 
ceiling for con -
tribution rate up 
to 2030Longer- term 
decisions 
 postponedFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). Preliminary quarterly figures. The fi-
nal annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary  quarterly  figures  as  the  latter  are  not  revised  sub-
sequently.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4432101234
––––++++
–5–4–3–2–10+1Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201820172016
2017
201620182016 2017 20180123456
2016 2017 20180123456 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
19 The pension level is the standard pension benefit in re -
lation to average earnings, in each case after deduction of 
social contributions.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
63

pension level, contribution rates and central 
government grants, these parameters also in -
clude the statutory retirement age. In the long 
term, it would be a logical move to follow 
other countries and tether the statutory retire -
ment age to expected changes in further life 
expectancy.20 It would also be welcome for the 
pension level to take account of longer work -
ing lives. A final cause for concern is that cen -
tral government grants will already increase 
sharply even before factoring in the pension 
package. Central government thus needs to 
mobilise substantial additional tax resources, 
and the financial contribution required of it will 
be inflated even further by the pension pack -age. If an excessive levy burden is thus to be 
avoided, it is crucial to limit both social contri -
butions and taxes.
Federal Employment Agency
In the third quarter of 2018, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency posted a surplus of just over 
€2½ billion in the core budget.21 This was €½ 
billion higher than last year. Revenue went up 
by 4%. The strong growth in contribution re -
ceipts was countered in particular by a fall in 
revenue from reduced insolvency benefit con -
tributions. Expenditure stood at around the 
level of the previous year. Spending on un -
employment benefits and the active labour 
market policy declined moderately. By contrast, 
administrative expenditure shot up. This was 
due to the negotiated pay increase in the pub -
lic sector. As the agreement that was made in 
March 2018 was not implemented until Au -
gust, back- payments were necessary.
Thanks to the exceptionally good economic 
conditions, the Federal Employment Agency is 
likely to record a very high surplus for the year 
as a whole, and may even exceed the €6 billion 
mark attained last year even though special 
transfers to the civil servants’ pension fund 
were €1½ billion higher in the first half of 
2018.22 The surplus would thus again be sub -
stantially above the budget estimate of €2½ 
billion. The free reserves, which are already at a 
high level, could continue to climb to around 
€23 billion (0.7% of GDP). The pension reserve 
is expected to grow considerably to around 
€8½ billion.
At the start of 2019, the contribution rate is 
initially to be cut by 0.5 percentage point to Q3 surplus
somewhat
higher than
last year
Higher surplus 
and further 
growth in 
reserves likely 
for year as a 
wholeFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency *
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201820172016
2017
2016
20182016 2017 2018–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2016 2017 2018963036912
–––++++ Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
20 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: longer- term 
pension  developments, Monthly Report, August 2016, 
pp. 68 ff.
21 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are recorded as expenditure and thus reduce the 
core budget balance.
22 As a result, the future civil servant pension obligations 
should be covered earlier than originally planned.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
64

2.5% but will be fixed at 2.6% as of 2023. As 
of 2019, an additional amount of around €½ 
billion is to be earmarked annually for spending 
on advanced vocational training. Both meas -
ures appear manageable especially in light of 
the favourable medium-  term outlook for the labour market. Further significant surpluses are 
even on the cards. There should be no difficulty 
complying with central government’s target of 
maintaining a minimum level of 0.65% of GDP 
for the free reserves in good times.Surpluses to 
 persist despite 
considerable 
contribution rate 
cut in 2019Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
65

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
66

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43 •
2. Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43 •
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
4. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
3•

6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  78 •
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ....................................................  78 •
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
8. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  81 •
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
 Economic and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
November 2018
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 EONIA  5,7 EURIBOR  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2017         Jan. 8.4 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.5 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb. 8.4 4.7 4.6 4.8 4.3 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2         Mar. 9.0 5.0 5.1 4.8 4.8 2.8 − 1.2 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2
         Apr. 9.2 5.0 4.8 4.9 4.5 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         May 9.2 5.1 4.9 4.9 4.3 2.6 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 9.6 5.2 4.9 4.8 4.1 2.8 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         July 9.3 5.0 4.6 4.8 3.8 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2
         Aug. 9.6 5.4 5.0 4.9 3.8 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0         Sep. 9.9 5.4 5.2 5.1 3.9 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         Oct. 9.5 5.4 5.0 5.0 3.7 2.5 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Nov. 9.2 5.3 4.9 4.8 3.9 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.35 − 0.33 0.9         Dec. 8.7 5.1 4.6 4.7 3.6 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.34 − 0.33 0.9
2018         Jan. 8.8 5.3 4.6 4.5 3.5 2.9 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb. 8.4 4.9 4.3 4.2 3.3 2.6 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2         Mar. 7.6 4.4 3.7 3.9 2.8 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Apr. 7.0 4.2 3.8 3.9 2.8 2.7 − 0.7 − 0.37 − 0.33 1.0
         May 7.5 4.6 4.0 4.1 3.2 3.2 − 1.0 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 7.5 4.8 4.5 4.1 3.1 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1
         July 6.9 4.4 4.0 4.0 3.4 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.0
         Aug. 6.4 3.9 3.4 3.6 3.3 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1         Sep. 6.8 4.2 3.5 ... 3.2 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.37 − 0.32 1.3
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, overnight index average. 6 Euro interbank offered rate. 7 See also footnotes to Table
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by VI.4, p. 43  .8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2. External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which: Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 EUR 1 = USD ...
2017         Jan. − 7,077 + 6,106 + 23,342 + 39,132 − 8,790 + 8,141 − 10,043 − 5,096 1.0614 93.9 89.1
         Feb. + 19,091 + 18,038 + 31,258 + 20,665 + 73,508 + 8,144 − 73,080 + 2,021 1.0643 93.4 88.9         Mar. + 44,810 + 36,988 − 5,009 − 66,478 + 30,449 + 7,916 + 22,382 + 722 1.0685 94.0 89.2
         Apr. + 17,361 + 23,885 + 16,981 + 40,487 + 11,691 + 1,648 − 32,689 − 4,157 1.0723 93.7 89.0
         May + 8,317 + 28,589 + 29,818 + 56,523 − 33,737 + 3,740 + 2,166 + 1,126 1.1058 95.6 90.5         June + 32,661 + 33,683 + 63,354 − 2,349 + 16,611 − 6,644 + 54,163 + 1,573 1.1229 96.3 91.2
         July + 38,356 + 30,738 + 37,440 + 6,143 + 25,547 − 2,681 + 13,623 − 5,193 1.1511 97.6 92.4
         Aug. + 34,660 + 24,391 + 736 − 22,320 + 70,436 − 5,531 − 41,175 − 674 1.1807 99.0 93.6         Sep. + 47,516 + 33,420 + 78,205 + 24,453 + 29,898 − 2,104 + 19,545 + 6,413 1.1915 99.0 93.6
         Oct. + 37,385 + 28,848 + 29,065 + 13,606 + 54,468 − 612 − 35,702 − 2,695 1.1756 98.6 93.1
         Nov. + 37,201 + 35,049 − 2,026 − 68,135 + 33,562 + 510 + 25,873 + 6,164 1.1738 98.5 93.0         Dec. + 44,807 + 31,020 + 92,238 + 42,836 − 20,621 + 4,571 + 67,057 − 1,604 1.1836 98.8 93.3
2018         Jan. + 9,705 + 11,708 − 1,146 + 30,735 + 14,130 − 1,640 − 46,653 + 2,282 1.2200 99.4 93.9
         Feb. + 24,904 + 24,819 + 22,200 + 22,327 + 40,187 + 72 − 40,267 − 119 1.2348 99.6 93.9         Mar. + 47,018 + 37,133 + 104,332 + 70,346 − 36,362 − 2,935 + 64,070 + 9,213 1.2336 99.7 94.2
         Apr. + 33,307 + 26,577 − 8,407 + 43,083 + 30,768 + 12,054 − 90,682 − 3,629 1.2276 99.5 p 93.9
         May + 13,370 + 25,733 + 29,783 − 7,236 + 50,197 + 15,547 − 31,070 + 2,345 1.1812 98.1 p 92.8         June + 32,782 + 31,599 + 62,467 + 27,329 − 40,414 + 12,921 + 54,763 + 7,869 1.1678 97.9 p 92.6
         July + 29,960 + 23,349 + 6,134 − 19,229 + 34,049 + 5,664 − 10,005 − 4,346 1.1686 99.2 p 93.8
         Aug. + 20,493 + 16,065 + 27,392 + 4,575 + 71,294 + 7,480 − 59,228 + 3,272 1.1549 99.0 p 93.4         Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1659 99.5 p 93.9
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1484 98.9 p 93.4
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International XII.10 and 12, pp.
82-83   .2  Including employee stock options. 3  Against the
Monetary Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 1  See also Tables currencies of the EER-19 group. 4  Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2018
I. Key economic data for the euro area
 
3. General economic indicators
  
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2015 2.1 1.7 1.7 1.9 0.1 1.1 − 0.4 25.1 0.9 3.02016 1.9 1.5 2.2 3.5 2.5 1.2 − 0.2 5.0 1.1 2.12017 2.4 1.7 2.2 4.9 2.8 2.2 1.5 7.2 1.6 4.6
2017         Q2 2.5 1.5 0.9 5.8 2.7 1.6 1.4 6.2 1.4 4.4
         Q3 2.8 1.4 2.2 3.9 2.1 2.5 1.4 13.2 1.3 5.5         Q4 2.7 1.9 2.2 4.8 2.3 2.8 1.8 6.5 1.3 4.3
2018         Q1 2.4 1.5 1.4 3.3 2.6 2.0 2.6 9.3 1.2 4.0
         Q2 2.2 1.5 2.3 3.7 2.7 1.6 1.8 9.0 1.5 5.3         Q3 1.7 ... 1.1 ... ... 1.6 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 2
 Annual percentage change
2015 2.6 − 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 1.5 1.0 35.9 1.1 3.42016 1.6 4.5 1.1 3.0 3.9 0.3 2.6 1.8 1.9 4.92017 3.0 2.9 3.4 8.0 3.9 2.4 4.8 − 2.2 3.6 8.5
2017         Q2 2.4 4.0 3.1 12.4 2.9 1.6 3.4 − 6.6 3.8 9.2
         Q3 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.3 2.5 3.2 4.5 3.4 4.6 11.4         Q4 4.1 1.9 5.0 4.9 4.7 4.1 1.9 0.5 4.0 4.9
2018         Q1 3.2 2.7 4.0 5.6 5.1 2.4 − 0.5 − 2.2 3.5 4.5
         Q2 2.4 1.3 3.1 2.6 4.0 1.2 1.7 4.1 1.9 0.1         Q3
e 0.8 ... p 0.5 4.0 2.3 0.6 1.9 p 5.8 − 0.2 3.0
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 As a percentage of full capacity
2016 81.7 80.0 84.6 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 − 76.3 72.62017 83.1 81.8 86.6 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 − 76.8 74.52018 84.2 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 86.0 70.8 ... 78.1 76.4
2017         Q3 83.3 82.0 86.9 73.9 82.6 84.7 72.0 − 77.0 74.5
         Q4 84.0 82.9 87.7 74.8 83.6 85.2 71.2 − 77.6 74.2
2018         Q1 84.5 82.1 88.2 75.5 83.1 86.2 70.4 − 78.3 75.8
         Q2 84.3 81.2 87.8 73.9 84.3 85.9 71.2 − 78.1 76.3         Q3 84.2 79.9 87.8 75.2 84.7 85.9 70.7 − 77.9 77.4         Q4 83.9 80.8 87.1 73.0 84.1 85.9 70.9 ... 77.9 75.9
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 4
 As a percentage of civilian labour force
2015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 10.0 11.9 9.92016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 8.4 11.7 9.62017 9.1 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.4 21.5 6.7 11.2 8.7
2018         May 8.2 6.3 3.5 5.1 7.6 9.1 19.3 5.8 10.4 7.7
         June 8.2 6.4 3.5 5.0 7.6 9.1 19.1 5.8 10.6 7.7
         July 8.1 6.6 3.4 5.3 7.5 9.2 19.1 5.8 10.2 7.6
         Aug. 8.1 6.5 3.4 5.4 7.4 9.3 18.9 5.6 9.8 7.4         Sep. 8.1 6.3 3.4 ... 7.3 9.3 ... 5.4 10.1 7.2
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.3 ... ...Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2018
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2015 5 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.12017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2018         May 1.9 2.3 2.2 3.1 1.0 2.3 0.8 0.7 1.0 2.4
         June 2.0 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.2 2.3 1.0 0.7 1.4 2.7
         July 2.1 2.7 2.1 3.3 1.4 2.6 0.8 1.0 1.9 2.7
         Aug. 2.0 2.6 1.9 3.5 1.4 2.6 0.9 0.9 1.6 2.8         Sep. 2.1 2.8 2.2 3.5 1.4 2.5 1.1 1.2 1.5 3.3
         Oct.
e 2.2 3.2 2.4 4.5 1.7 2.5 1.8 1.1 e 1.7 3.2
 
 General government financial balance 6
 As a percentage of GDP
2015 − 2.0 − 2.5 0.8 0.1 − 2.8 − 3.6 − 5.6 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 1.42016 − 1.6 − 2.4 0.9 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 0.12017 − 1.0 − 0.9 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 2.7 0.8 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.6
 
 General government debt 6
 As a percentage of GDP
2015 89.9 106.5 70.8 9.9 63.6 95.6 175.9 76.8 131.6 36.82016 89.1 106.1 67.9 9.2 63.0 98.2 178.5 73.4 131.4 40.32017 86.8 103.4 63.9 8.7 61.3 98.5 176.1 68.4 131.2 40.0
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical are provisional. 1  Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted. 2  Manufacturing,
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations. 3  Manufacturing: quarterly

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2018
I. Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1
 Annual percentage change
2.0 3.9 9.5 2.0 1.2 1.8 4.2 2.3 3.6 2.0 20152.4 2.4 5.2 2.2 2.0 1.9 3.1 3.1 3.2 4.8 20164.1 1.5 6.7 2.9 2.6 2.8 3.2 4.9 3.0 4.2 2017
4.5 0.1 6.9 2.9 2.3 2.7 3.4 4.2 3.3 4.4 2017          Q2
3.7 0.5 7.3 2.8 2.5 2.7 3.0 4.2 2.7 4.6          Q33.8 2.7 5.5 2.7 2.4 2.4 3.7 6.3 3.2 3.6          Q4
3.7 3.3 4.9 2.8 3.7 1.7 3.7 4.5 2.8 3.9 2018          Q1
3.8 3.1 5.9 3.1 2.7 2.2 4.5 3.8 2.5 3.9          Q22.2 ... ... 2.4 2.4 ... 4.6 ... 2.4 ...          Q3
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
4.2 1.5 6.3 − 3.3 2.2 2.1 6.0 5.1 3.4 5.1 20152.8 0.8 − 4.7 2.2 2.9 2.4 3.7 7.8 1.7 9.2 20166.8 2.6 3.9 2.0 4.5 3.5 3.1 8.3 3.3 7.5 2017
6.2 1.2 2.5 1.4 3.9 2.7 0.3 7.5 2.7 6.5 2017          Q2
8.7 5.4 4.7 2.2 6.3 5.6 2.9 8.5 3.1 7.1          Q37.0 5.2 1.6 2.1 5.8 2.4 3.7 10.9 5.4 6.7          Q4
6.5 5.5 − 3.3 3.0 6.3 2.0 0.3 8.4 2.9 3.4 2018          Q1
4.5 1.9 − 1.6 0.5 6.2 0.4 2.9 6.6 1.2 9.2          Q22.2
p − 0.6 p − 3.7 p − 2.0 ... − 1.3 1.5 p 3.7 p 0.4 ...          Q3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
75.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 201677.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 201777.5 ... 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 2018
77.6 80.1 80.0 83.1 86.9 80.9 84.4 85.1 78.7 61.5 2017          Q3
77.4 81.1 82.8 83.1 88.0 81.7 83.0 85.2 79.1 59.1          Q4
77.8 83.1 81.1 83.9 88.8 81.6 83.7 85.0 79.7 60.4 2018          Q1
77.5 82.0 77.6 83.6 88.7 81.4 86.3 86.0 80.3 60.9          Q277.2 80.8 83.2 84.4 88.7 82.0 84.0 84.6 79.3 61.8          Q377.4 ... 79.1 84.0 88.5 81.2 87.6 85.6 78.6 62.5          Q4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
9.1 6.5 5.4 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 20157.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.0 19.6 13.0 20167.1 5.6 4.0 4.9 5.5 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.2 11.1 2017
5.8 5.2 3.7 3.9 4.7 7.0 6.8 5.3 15.4 8.1 2018          May
5.8 5.2 3.8 3.9 4.8 6.8 6.8 5.3 15.2 7.9          June
6.3 5.2 3.9 3.8 4.9 6.8 6.7 5.3 15.0 7.6          July
6.2 5.2 3.8 3.9 4.9 6.9 6.6 5.3 15.0 7.5          Aug.6.2 5.0 3.8 3.7 4.9 6.6 6.6 5.2 14.9 7.4          Sep.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Oct.Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2018
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
 Annual percentage change
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 20163.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 2017
2.9 2.1 1.7 1.9 2.1 1.4 2.7 2.2 2.1 1.0 2018          May
2.6 2.4 2.0 1.7 2.3 2.0 2.9 2.3 2.3 1.7          June
2.3 2.5 2.1 1.9 2.3 2.2 2.6 2.1 2.3 1.4          July
1.8 2.4 2.4 1.9 2.3 1.3 2.9 2.0 2.2 1.7          Aug.2.4 2.7 2.5 1.6 2.1 1.8 2.7 2.2 2.3 1.7          Sep.
2.8 2.8 2.1 1.9 ... 0.8 2.5 2.3 2.3 1.9          Oct.
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
− 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 1.0 − 4.4 − 2.6 − 2.8 − 5.3 − 1.3 2015
0.3 1.6 0.9 0.0 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.3 20160.5 1.4 3.5 1.2 − 0.8 − 3.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 3.1 1.8 2017
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
42.6 22.2 58.6 64.6 84.8 128.8 52.2 82.6 99.3 108.0 201539.9 20.7 56.3 61.9 83.0 129.2 51.8 78.7 99.0 105.5 201639.4 23.0 50.9 57.0 78.3 124.8 50.9 74.1 98.1 96.1 2017
data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter. 4Monthly data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards.
data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted 6  According to Maastricht Treaty definition. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
November 2018
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2017         Feb. 46.4 31.2 4.1 15.2 35.3 − 46.7 52.8 99.5 14.3 − 6.2 − 0.5 − 3.0 24.0
         Mar. 151.6 92.7 25.4 58.8 62.6 − 8.8 − 51.4 − 42.6 − 14.7 1.6 − 0.5 − 22.7 6.8
         Apr. 54.7 24.5 20.1 30.2 27.6 − 38.6 77.9 116.5 − 22.6 − 12.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 9.6
         May 48.4 24.0 16.3 24.4 35.1 0.7 − 4.0 − 4.7 16.0 − 7.7 − 2.4 17.0 9.1         June 24.1 29.4 0.4 − 5.3 − 5.3 58.2 − 108.4 − 166.6 − 4.8 − 13.6 − 0.1 − 6.3 15.2
         July 6.9 − 0.0 15.2 7.0 9.4 6.7 105.8 99.1 − 6.7 − 7.8 − 0.9 − 2.5 4.6
         Aug. 12.1 − 20.3 − 15.6 32.4 38.4 − 27.1 − 2.9 24.2 7.5 − 5.8 − 0.8 − 2.9 17.1         Sep. 54.8 43.1 − 13.7 11.7 17.1 6.5 − 34.7 − 41.2 − 24.2 − 12.0 − 0.9 − 30.0 18.7
         Oct. 64.9 53.3 − 9.3 11.6 11.4 − 69.4 87.3 156.7 − 30.2 − 27.0 − 0.6 − 7.2 4.6
         Nov. 127.8 99.1 22.1 28.7 34.8 18.6 − 1.0 − 19.6 3.8 4.5 − 0.8 − 2.5 2.6         Dec. − 107.3 − 89.4 − 8.6 − 17.9 − 8.6 14.9 − 153.2 − 168.1 − 3.2 11.3 − 0.6 − 5.6 − 8.3
2018         Jan. 124.7 84.0 26.4 40.8 27.6 − 42.3 152.9 195.2 10.5 − 8.5 − 0.1 20.2 − 1.1
         Feb. 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 5.0 20.8 − 11.8 46.8 58.6 − 18.2 0.1 − 0.5 − 12.5 − 5.3         Mar. 65.6 61.0 1.7 4.5 6.9 82.7 − 64.6 − 147.3 13.0 − 5.6 − 0.4 2.0 17.0
         Apr. 66.4 65.4 52.1 1.1 − 0.7 − 74.9 41.0 115.9 − 7.0 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 2.3
         May 122.2 88.2 11.1 34.1 39.9 − 35.9 120.5 156.4 − 7.3 − 7.4 − 0.4 1.1 − 0.6         June − 6.4 − 21.5 − 20.6 15.0 18.0 77.4 − 66.4 − 143.8 − 11.5 − 5.0 − 0.4 − 10.7 4.7
         July 69.2 67.8 20.5 1.4 4.0 − 26.1 40.4 66.5 10.9 6.2 − 0.6 − 8.4 13.7
         Aug. − 8.3 − 20.4 − 7.0 12.1 23.0 − 24.6 − 1.6 23.1 6.8 − 8.3 − 0.4 4.6 10.9         Sep. 33.4 25.3 − 11.4 8.1 10.1 55.0 − 33.6 − 88.7 23.6 − 12.6 − 0.5 21.7 15.0
  
  
b) German contribution
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2017         Feb. 17.3 12.5 3.9 4.9 5.5 − 30.2 7.5 37.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.8
         Mar. 18.2 12.7 1.8 5.5 9.5 − 3.6 6.3 9.9 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 5.5
         Apr. 14.9 7.8 − 1.5 7.1 5.4 − 19.0 − 7.3 11.6 9.3 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.3 11.9
         May 13.8 13.3 3.5 0.6 7.9 7.1 − 13.0 − 20.1 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 1.8 1.4         June 11.8 11.5 6.2 0.4 2.6 22.7 16.2 − 6.4 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.4 2.8 5.6
         July 18.1 12.8 1.8 5.3 3.5 − 10.3 − 23.0 − 12.7 − 4.0 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.5
         Aug. 13.6 10.2 − 0.6 3.4 8.3 14.7 − 13.8 − 28.5 4.5 0.1 − 0.8 3.5 1.7         Sep. 17.8 14.1 − 1.8 3.7 8.0 − 22.3 9.2 31.5 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.3 2.3
         Oct. 15.9 8.6 0.4 7.3 6.5 6.1 − 11.4 − 17.5 − 11.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 9.5 − 0.1
         Nov. 27.2 16.7 6.4 10.5 11.2 23.1 − 2.6 − 25.7 2.6 3.3 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.1         Dec. − 5.4 − 3.5 4.3 − 1.8 1.0 − 48.9 − 8.1 40.8 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 1.9 5.3
2018         Jan. 19.1 21.3 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.3 10.1 28.1 18.0 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 14.2 − 5.6
         Feb. 5.1 10.7 − 1.7 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 20.7 11.6 32.4 − 5.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 2.9         Mar. 7.2 9.7 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.6 7.9 − 5.2 − 13.1 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 4.0 2.2
         Apr. 7.3 7.2 0.9 0.1 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 13.9 − 8.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.1 1.9
         May 19.2 21.2 5.0 − 2.1 2.4 − 10.7 29.8 40.6 − 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 4.1 − 4.6         June 16.7 17.9 2.1 − 1.1 1.3 − 18.2 − 20.4 − 2.1 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 3.1 8.1
         July 12.7 9.7 0.0 2.9 0.9 26.0 − 0.3 − 26.3 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.7 5.9
         Aug. 4.1 5.7 − 8.7 − 1.6 2.8 − 8.5 − 11.6 − 3.1 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 1.7 1.8         Sep. 19.3 18.3 1.7 1.0 4.1 − 4.1 8.0 12.1 12.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 7.6 7.8
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report, p.
30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
November 2018
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 a) Euro area 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which: ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl. money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 17.4 − 26.7 − 29.5 31.0 31.3 2.9 28.4 − 1.9 1.6 − 8.6 − 4.1 6.0 2017          Feb.
24.2 26.7 − 106.5 92.5 92.9 4.4 88.5 − 5.6 5.2 14.8 11.9 − 1.0          Mar.
− 5.4 − 9.4 − 53.5 72.4 101.9 6.8 95.1 − 31.2 1.7 − 5.9 − 4.3 − 16.4          Apr.
13.4 − 13.3 − 33.0 30.2 42.0 0.4 41.6 − 20.9 9.1 − 11.7 − 4.7 6.1          May20.4 21.4 − 45.4 74.6 82.7 9.5 73.2 − 10.5 2.3 − 16.6 − 20.6 − 0.2          June
− 7.7 − 15.7 − 43.7 31.5 35.9 6.0 29.9 − 6.2 1.8 − 24.1 13.6 − 3.3          July
− 18.3 − 59.8 − 55.7 45.5 30.9 − 2.3 33.2 8.1 6.4 2.6 9.1 − 5.2          Aug.
41.3 23.5 − 20.6 23.3 47.9 0.9 47.0 − 21.6 − 3.0 7.0 − 4.1 10.5          Sep.
− 43.4 53.8 − 15.3 12.1 22.7 1.9 20.8 − 7.9 − 2.8 19.8 8.9 − 7.8          Oct.
− 8.8 72.9 − 78.6 73.2 81.7 0.9 80.8 − 7.7 − 0.9 17.2 − 3.8 1.3          Nov.− 21.2 − 88.5 − 20.6 62.5 65.2 16.1 49.1 − 6.8 4.1 − 31.8 − 26.5 − 7.4          Dec.
41.3 21.3 − 9.3 − 1.8 − 19.0 − 15.2 − 3.8 5.6 11.7 − 7.8 19.6 − 11.8 2018          Jan.
13.5 10.4 − − 13.0 − 9.5 5.1 0.3 4.8 − 17.3 2.7 − 4.8 − 11.3 4.4          Feb.13.8 50.3 − 71.2 68.2 65.5 8.7 56.8 − 3.7 6.4 8.2 − 1.4 7.9          Mar.
− 19.7 − 31.7 − 49.9 29.6 48.4 4.2 44.2 − 20.8 2.0 − 3.8 12.6 0.9          Apr.
7.1 17.9 − 68.7 93.3 95.8 4.9 90.9 − 9.8 7.2 24.9 − 12.4 − 6.8          May
21.4 − 42.9 − 103.9 109.0 91.3 11.4 79.8 13.9 3.8 − 5.7 − 8.6 6.0          June
7.6 32.8 − − 8.2 − 10.0 − 6.3 6.7 − 13.1 − 8.3 4.7 6.7 10.3 − 5.2          July
2.9 − 41.7 − − 1.0 − 6.3 − 4.4 2.9 − 7.3 − 7.1 5.3 3.8 − 1.4 0.2          Aug.
40.8 10.1 − 13.9 48.2 72.5 2.1 70.4 − 21.1 − 3.2 − 10.4 − 23.0 − 5.0          Sep.
 
 
  b) German contribution 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  10 
of which: Components of the money stockIntra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl. money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
− 4.2 − 18.9 1.7 1.2 11.6 13.6 − 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 0.0 2017          Feb.
14.2 − 2.7 1.8 1.1 0.5 2.4 3.5 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.0          Mar.
− 6.7 − 8.9 3.3 1.6 2.3 10.3 − 7.1 − 0.0 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.8          Apr.
7.7 − 8.7 2.9 − 0.7 19.2 18.3 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 0.8          May7.1 0.7 4.7 0.9 20.7 20.6 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.1 0.6          June
2.5 14.8 2.1 2.1 − 5.6 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.4 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6          July
7.4 5.1 3.7 − 1.3 11.2 14.7 − 2.9 − 0.3 0.1 0.2 − 0.5          Aug.9.6 − 14.2 3.5 − 0.3 5.9 5.6 0.8 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 0.3          Sep.
− 14.2 43.1 2.1 0.8 4.5 14.3 − 9.3 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5          Oct.
6.2 8.7 1.2 − 0.0 32.7 33.8 − 1.7 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.2          Nov.
10.0 − 58.0 3.8 2.0 − 8.8 − 10.1 0.4 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.8          Dec.
− 24.3 35.5 − 0.0 − 2.8 13.1 11.5 2.4 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 2018          Jan.
9.2 − 21.2 2.0 − 0.3 1.7 5.2 − 4.4 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 0.7          Feb.8.3 0.6 6.9 − 1.5 3.1 − 0.5 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1          Mar.
− 15.2 14.5 1.3 1.9 5.3 14.7 − 8.6 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr.
11.7 − 42.5 5.4 − 0.1 39.3 38.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.1          May17.7 − 26.3 3.6 2.5 4.8 − 6.4 14.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.1 − 2.6          June
− 21.0 57.8 3.1 2.2 − 0.5 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.6 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.9          July
13.7 − 14.2 5.3 0.5 − 0.4 2.4 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 1.7          Aug.12.2 − 32.8 3.9 − 0.3 23.7 27.3 − 2.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.6          Sep.
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
November 2018
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
AssetsLending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro area Otheryear/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  
2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2016         Aug. 27,038.0 17,105.7 12,866.5 10,723.2 1,365.1 778.2 4,239.2 1,103.0 3,136.2 5,321.4 4,610.8
         Sep. 26,973.5 17,147.5 12,892.5 10,756.7 1,359.3 776.5 4,255.0 1,098.8 3,156.2 5,266.4 4,559.5
         Oct. 27,047.7 17,202.9 12,923.4 10,785.5 1,363.1 774.8 4,279.6 1,101.2 3,178.4 5,421.5 4,423.3
         Nov. 27,162.1 17,295.4 12,983.3 10,830.1 1,383.3 770.0 4,312.1 1,089.2 3,222.9 5,452.5 4,414.3         Dec. 26,715.8 17,273.1 12,963.7 10,810.3 1,372.2 781.2 4,309.4 1,079.7 3,229.7 5,208.4 4,234.3
2017         Jan. 26,797.3 17,356.0 12,994.9 10,815.3 1,393.4 786.2 4,361.1 1,097.6 3,263.5 5,377.9 4,063.4
         Feb. 27,058.8 17,417.4 13,033.2 10,845.9 1,398.4 788.9 4,384.2 1,076.5 3,307.8 5,497.8 4,143.6         Mar. 27,010.2 17,549.8 13,115.7 10,902.1 1,423.7 789.8 4,434.2 1,073.0 3,361.2 5,418.3 4,042.0
         Apr. 27,101.0 17,594.8 13,130.3 10,897.5 1,429.8 803.0 4,464.5 1,075.7 3,388.8 5,450.9 4,055.3
         May 27,016.8 17,632.4 13,145.3 10,895.9 1,451.1 798.3 4,487.1 1,062.5 3,424.6 5,361.2 4,023.3         June 26,693.8 17,611.0 13,132.7 10,895.2 1,441.3 796.2 4,478.3 1,063.1 3,415.2 5,196.3 3,886.5
         July 26,650.9 17,603.9 13,118.6 10,866.0 1,460.1 792.5 4,485.3 1,060.3 3,425.0 5,229.1 3,818.0
         Aug. 26,683.7 17,610.2 13,087.0 10,853.0 1,444.2 789.7 4,523.2 1,054.6 3,468.6 5,199.6 3,874.0         Sep. 26,562.3 17,654.9 13,129.8 10,905.5 1,433.3 791.0 4,525.1 1,046.0 3,479.1 5,172.0 3,735.3
         Oct. 26,761.0 17,733.2 13,189.6 10,968.3 1,423.0 798.3 4,543.6 1,046.2 3,497.5 5,292.8 3,735.0
         Nov. 26,790.6 17,846.4 13,272.3 11,037.5 1,431.0 803.8 4,574.1 1,038.2 3,535.9 5,247.3 3,696.9         Dec. 26,319.7 17,708.2 13,167.2 10,942.6 1,425.7 798.9 4,541.0 1,028.7 3,512.2 5,064.5 3,547.0
2018         Jan. 26,336.0 17,819.0 13,241.5 10,990.9 1,449.1 801.5 4,577.5 1,041.3 3,536.3 5,253.2 3,263.7
         Feb. 26,299.0 17,821.3 13,240.1 10,993.1 1,456.9 790.2 4,581.2 1,025.2 3,556.0 5,342.1 3,135.6         Mar. 26,292.6 17,880.1 13,279.3 11,031.8 1,467.0 780.6 4,600.7 1,022.9 3,577.8 5,258.4 3,154.2
         Apr. 26,515.5 18,032.8 13,433.3 11,128.1 1,490.1 815.1 4,599.5 1,024.7 3,574.8 5,334.9 3,147.8
         May 26,916.1 18,104.1 13,514.5 11,202.1 1,504.6 807.7 4,589.6 1,019.4 3,570.3 5,543.5 3,268.5         June 26,772.3 18,098.6 13,484.6 11,194.2 1,503.4 787.0 4,614.0 1,016.4 3,597.7 5,456.9 3,216.8
         July 26,782.1 18,157.0 13,549.8 11,236.5 1,526.0 787.2 4,607.2 1,012.3 3,594.9 5,465.9 3,159.2
         Aug. 26,808.5 18,121.9 13,526.7 11,223.6 1,523.8 779.3 4,595.3 1,001.5 3,593.8 5,484.5 3,202.1         Sep. 26,773.2 18,149.4 13,540.6 11,249.3 1,508.4 782.9 4,608.8 1,000.6 3,608.2 5,454.2 3,169.5
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2016         Aug. 6,218.9 3,977.8 3,062.7 2,646.2 155.3 261.2 915.1 358.5 556.6 1,226.9 1,014.2
         Sep. 6,202.1 4,001.8 3,075.1 2,655.3 157.6 262.1 926.8 357.2 569.5 1,215.0 985.4
         Oct. 6,208.1 4,019.0 3,087.3 2,664.9 161.9 260.5 931.7 360.3 571.4 1,260.2 928.9
         Nov. 6,186.1 4,046.1 3,107.1 2,680.4 165.0 261.7 939.0 355.5 583.5 1,243.2 896.8         Dec. 6,131.1 4,037.0 3,099.2 2,671.7 164.0 263.6 937.8 345.2 592.6 1,234.7 859.4
2017         Jan. 6,131.6 4,054.1 3,112.0 2,682.7 165.0 264.3 942.1 345.2 596.8 1,260.2 817.4
         Feb. 6,196.5 4,075.7 3,124.9 2,691.3 168.1 265.5 950.8 344.6 606.2 1,281.9 839.0         Mar. 6,176.3 4,089.6 3,136.8 2,701.2 169.6 266.0 952.8 340.6 612.3 1,281.0 805.7
         Apr. 6,174.4 4,103.1 3,143.3 2,709.1 170.4 263.9 959.8 342.3 617.5 1,264.2 807.1
         May 6,160.2 4,114.5 3,157.3 2,719.6 172.6 265.0 957.2 332.2 624.9 1,234.6 811.2         June 6,106.3 4,120.6 3,165.9 2,722.5 173.2 270.2 954.7 330.8 623.9 1,238.6 747.1
         July 6,069.0 4,135.9 3,176.7 2,731.5 175.2 269.9 959.2 332.6 626.7 1,201.4 731.7
         Aug. 6,084.5 4,152.3 3,186.3 2,741.6 174.3 270.3 966.1 327.8 638.3 1,185.1 747.2         Sep. 6,076.7 4,167.7 3,200.9 2,757.6 174.3 269.1 966.8 323.2 643.6 1,194.6 714.3
         Oct. 6,082.0 4,185.9 3,210.4 2,766.1 174.6 269.8 975.4 324.0 651.4 1,188.5 707.7
         Nov. 6,088.7 4,211.0 3,227.4 2,777.0 178.7 271.6 983.6 321.5 662.1 1,177.2 700.5         Dec. 6,051.1 4,202.2 3,222.8 2,768.6 180.4 273.8 979.4 318.5 660.9 1,163.4 685.4
2018         Jan. 6,074.8 4,214.9 3,242.3 2,786.5 181.6 274.2 972.5 317.0 655.6 1,176.4 683.5
         Feb. 6,051.9 4,220.1 3,253.3 2,799.4 183.1 270.8 966.8 311.4 655.4 1,195.1 636.8         Mar. 6,053.7 4,228.1 3,260.9 2,809.5 183.0 268.4 967.2 309.7 657.5 1,184.4 641.2
         Apr. 6,046.4 4,233.3 3,267.7 2,816.0 184.4 267.4 965.6 310.5 655.0 1,178.5 634.6
         May 6,148.1 4,248.4 3,280.8 2,824.1 186.8 269.8 967.6 306.5 661.1 1,226.7 673.0         June 6,120.9 4,264.2 3,297.3 2,838.8 187.5 271.0 966.9 304.3 662.7 1,201.8 654.9
         July 6,089.3 4,274.2 3,307.9 2,849.4 187.0 271.5 966.3 304.9 661.4 1,194.2 620.9
         Aug. 6,121.9 4,279.7 3,313.6 2,863.9 183.8 265.9 966.0 300.5 665.5 1,189.8 652.4         Sep. 6,119.7 4,295.2 3,331.3 2,880.3 185.3 265.7 963.9 297.5 666.4 1,194.6 629.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on
p.12   ).
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
November 2018
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which: up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,064.3 11,783.5 11,037.8 11,120.8 5,611.4 952.6 320.7 2,034.0 2,134.1 68.1 2016          Aug.
1,066.5 11,788.9 11,032.4 11,130.6 5,637.1 960.1 315.0 2,021.8 2,129.2 67.4          Sep.
1,069.9 11,797.6 11,048.0 11,134.9 5,680.6 936.9 307.6 2,018.8 2,123.8 67.2          Oct.
1,071.2 11,883.1 11,108.5 11,213.1 5,780.3 926.8 303.3 2,014.3 2,121.9 66.6          Nov.1,087.5 11,929.6 11,211.6 11,321.5 5,826.7 911.7 294.0 2,050.9 2,172.7 65.6          Dec.
1,075.6 11,985.1 11,191.6 11,306.4 5,823.9 914.2 286.6 2,034.5 2,182.1 65.0 2017          Jan.
1,078.5 11,994.0 11,210.5 11,330.1 5,849.1 919.5 284.5 2,028.8 2,183.6 64.6          Feb.1,082.9 12,103.6 11,279.9 11,422.6 5,945.0 910.9 285.3 2,029.0 2,188.3 64.1          Mar.
1,089.7 12,141.3 11,323.3 11,456.5 6,022.2 886.9 278.6 2,015.2 2,190.1 63.7          Apr.
1,090.2 12,151.7 11,338.9 11,444.1 6,044.4 861.0 273.0 2,004.8 2,199.0 62.0          May1,099.7 12,214.1 11,384.0 11,483.6 6,113.6 854.2 265.6 1,986.8 2,201.6 61.9          June
1,105.6 12,209.8 11,392.9 11,476.5 6,123.8 848.8 262.8 1,976.5 2,206.2 58.4          July
1,103.3 12,226.8 11,422.8 11,505.1 6,146.8 857.8 260.6 1,969.7 2,212.6 57.7          Aug.1,104.2 12,271.6 11,432.3 11,519.7 6,196.9 843.3 256.2 1,956.4 2,210.0 56.8          Sep.
1,106.2 12,217.2 11,420.3 11,507.4 6,217.3 846.5 250.5 1,929.6 2,207.3 56.2          Oct.
1,107.1 12,249.3 11,471.5 11,544.7 6,291.5 832.2 245.9 1,912.8 2,206.7 55.5          Nov.1,123.2 12,285.1 11,542.2 11,617.0 6,348.8 834.7 242.1 1,925.3 2,211.3 54.9          Dec.
1,108.0 12,317.5 11,527.3 11,609.3 6,348.5 840.5 236.7 1,914.2 2,213.6 55.8 2018          Jan.
1,108.3 12,329.4 11,524.3 11,602.8 6,352.2 831.1 232.3 1,915.9 2,216.1 55.1          Feb.1,117.0 12,393.9 11,580.8 11,661.0 6,417.2 831.5 226.3 1,909.0 2,222.2 54.8          Mar.
1,121.2 12,401.0 11,610.7 11,680.2 6,455.0 817.5 222.2 1,907.0 2,224.2 54.4          Apr.
1,126.1 12,502.2 11,690.6 11,763.0 6,548.2 810.9 217.6 1,900.6 2,231.7 54.0          May1,137.6 12,613.4 11,776.9 11,845.0 6,624.0 821.4 214.8 1,894.8 2,236.3 53.7          June
1,145.3 12,605.4 11,760.5 11,826.8 6,604.1 817.0 212.1 1,899.5 2,241.0 53.1          July
1,148.3 12,590.1 11,748.2 11,799.4 6,589.9 811.4 208.9 1,890.1 2,246.4 52.7          Aug.1,150.3 12,662.0 11,778.8 11,833.1 6,658.8 794.7 206.4 1,877.3 2,243.7 52.2          Sep.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
246.5 3,480.0 3,376.0 3,238.3 1,803.0 173.4 38.2 636.2 533.8 53.8 2016          Aug.
245.9 3,494.5 3,380.7 3,247.0 1,807.9 179.4 38.3 635.0 533.3 53.1          Sep.
245.4 3,489.6 3,386.4 3,254.0 1,821.1 172.1 37.8 637.3 533.5 52.3          Oct.
245.7 3,536.5 3,424.0 3,288.1 1,857.7 171.0 37.4 636.6 533.7 51.7          Nov.248.1 3,517.1 3,419.8 3,284.1 1,851.0 171.5 38.4 635.6 536.3 51.3          Dec.
245.4 3,526.3 3,439.3 3,306.3 1,873.8 174.0 38.7 632.1 537.1 50.6 2017          Jan.
246.6 3,532.6 3,448.3 3,313.4 1,881.5 175.3 38.8 630.0 537.9 50.0          Feb.247.7 3,549.3 3,449.2 3,318.1 1,886.4 177.4 39.9 628.4 536.5 49.5          Mar.
249.3 3,540.9 3,447.5 3,317.0 1,895.9 170.7 40.0 624.7 536.6 49.0          Apr.
248.6 3,566.1 3,465.8 3,327.4 1,910.5 167.5 40.2 624.1 536.4 48.7          May249.5 3,590.5 3,482.0 3,339.9 1,928.7 165.5 40.3 621.4 535.7 48.3          June
251.6 3,583.1 3,472.8 3,333.0 1,927.8 162.6 40.3 619.5 537.9 44.9          July
250.4 3,600.7 3,483.1 3,338.6 1,938.3 159.0 40.3 619.3 537.5 44.1          Aug.250.1 3,616.3 3,486.8 3,345.9 1,945.0 162.3 39.6 617.9 537.5 43.5          Sep.
250.9 3,606.4 3,490.8 3,352.9 1,958.5 158.8 38.6 616.2 538.0 42.7          Oct.
250.9 3,646.8 3,521.5 3,383.7 1,990.6 157.1 37.4 618.2 538.3 42.1          Nov.252.9 3,647.9 3,515.8 3,378.5 1,976.2 162.0 37.7 620.4 540.7 41.5          Dec.
250.1 3,632.5 3,522.3 3,390.7 1,994.6 161.5 36.4 616.5 539.5 42.2 2018          Jan.
249.8 3,642.4 3,523.0 3,388.4 1,995.9 160.2 35.3 615.5 540.0 41.5          Feb.248.3 3,652.2 3,524.1 3,389.6 1,998.1 164.6 34.2 612.1 539.4 41.0          Mar.
250.3 3,641.8 3,529.8 3,395.0 2,013.5 157.6 33.6 610.6 539.1 40.6          Apr.
250.2 3,693.8 3,568.4 3,425.0 2,048.0 154.6 33.0 610.2 539.0 40.3          May252.7 3,716.5 3,574.0 3,423.0 2,039.4 165.5 32.6 607.2 538.5 39.8          June
256.0 3,694.1 3,571.0 3,429.7 2,053.1 161.2 32.2 605.8 538.0 39.4          July
256.4 3,703.1 3,568.1 3,417.3 2,051.8 153.7 34.0 601.1 537.7 38.9          Aug.256.1 3,737.2 3,588.3 3,437.1 2,076.9 153.2 33.2 597.4 537.8 38.6          Sep.
volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra -Eurosystem
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability ite ms“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
November 2018
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont’d)
  
 
Liabilities (cont’d)Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which: market of which:
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund Denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2016         Aug. 294.6 368.1 175.7 100.8 18.7 44.3 23.8 4.9 301.0 299.9 495.5 2,253.2 1,534.5
         Sep. 297.4 361.0 170.5 99.5 19.4 44.4 22.3 5.0 286.5 285.7 493.7 2,227.1 1,517.1
         Oct. 295.3 367.4 182.2 94.3 19.9 44.5 21.3 5.3 267.8 267.1 511.8 2,221.7 1,503.9
         Nov. 300.4 369.6 178.7 98.8 21.1 44.2 21.6 5.2 264.9 264.2 518.8 2,238.9 1,505.8         Dec. 253.0 355.1 168.6 93.9 21.5 43.3 22.6 5.1 268.9 268.2 512.8 2,226.4 1,503.6
2017         Jan. 316.7 362.0 169.5 99.5 21.3 43.4 22.9 5.5 250.1 249.5 524.2 2,205.3 1,488.5
         Feb. 299.9 364.1 175.0 96.2 20.2 44.1 23.1 5.4 241.7 241.0 520.1 2,216.6 1,493.9         Mar. 324.0 357.0 165.4 96.5 21.5 44.6 23.6 5.4 256.5 255.8 532.0 2,188.7 1,479.9
         Apr. 318.6 366.2 176.4 92.4 23.7 44.7 23.5 5.5 250.4 249.7 527.7 2,160.3 1,466.8
         May 332.1 375.5 181.6 94.5 25.3 45.2 24.2 4.7 238.5 237.8 522.9 2,168.4 1,491.1         June 352.5 378.0 181.2 95.7 26.6 45.8 24.0 4.7 221.7 221.0 502.2 2,151.7 1,479.7
         July 345.0 388.3 191.0 95.2 26.7 46.2 24.4 4.8 197.4 196.8 515.9 2,130.1 1,471.4
         Aug. 326.7 395.0 197.1 94.8 27.8 46.2 24.4 4.7 199.6 198.9 525.0 2,115.2 1,464.4         Sep. 362.5 389.5 193.2 91.9 28.1 47.5 24.1 4.7 206.6 205.9 520.8 2,095.6 1,448.1
         Oct. 318.9 390.9 197.9 87.6 28.3 48.3 24.1 4.7 226.5 225.8 529.8 2,086.5 1,430.8
         Nov. 310.2 394.4 197.6 89.5 29.8 49.0 23.8 4.6 243.4 242.8 526.1 2,100.0 1,446.0         Dec. 289.0 379.1 191.1 81.5 31.5 46.8 23.5 4.6 211.2 210.7 499.7 2,081.5 1,436.8
2018         Jan. 330.1 378.0 186.2 84.3 31.1 47.5 24.1 5.0 203.0 202.5 519.3 2,075.2 1,442.0
         Feb. 343.7 382.9 191.5 83.5 30.4 47.8 24.8 4.8 198.5 198.0 508.0 2,077.7 1,433.5         Mar. 357.6 375.3 181.4 85.8 29.5 48.6 25.1 4.8 206.7 206.1 506.5 2,082.2 1,438.1
         Apr. 337.8 383.0 190.3 84.7 28.4 49.7 25.1 4.7 227.6 227.1 519.1 2,090.1 1,439.6
         May 344.9 394.3 196.4 87.2 29.8 51.0 25.2 4.7 252.9 252.4 506.7 2,102.1 1,442.1         June 366.3 402.1 199.2 91.7 29.9 51.9 24.8 4.7 247.3 246.7 497.8 2,097.7 1,441.6
         July 374.0 404.6 203.0 88.4 30.9 52.8 24.8 4.7 253.9 253.4 508.3 2,080.0 1,436.2
         Aug. 377.0 413.7 208.3 90.6 31.0 54.4 24.8 4.6 257.7 257.2 506.8 2,088.1 1,443.1         Sep. 414.1 414.7 210.7 87.8 32.4 54.8 24.4 4.6 247.3 246.8 483.8 2,108.7 1,457.5
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2016         Aug. 40.6 201.0 61.7 84.6 13.6 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 524.4 241.5
         Sep. 49.3 198.3 59.7 83.5 14.0 37.2 3.4 0.5 2.9 2.9 2.4 516.7 240.8
         Oct. 40.5 195.1 58.8 80.4 14.9 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 526.0 242.2
         Nov. 47.4 201.0 59.5 84.2 16.1 37.3 3.3 0.6 3.0 3.0 2.3 542.1 251.4         Dec. 33.8 199.1 61.6 80.5 16.6 36.6 3.3 0.6 2.2 2.2 2.3 541.3 250.6
2017         Jan. 21.2 198.8 55.1 86.6 16.4 36.9 3.2 0.6 4.8 4.8 2.2 553.4 261.4
         Feb. 17.5 201.8 61.5 83.2 15.7 37.7 3.1 0.6 4.5 4.5 2.2 556.7 262.6         Mar. 31.6 199.5 58.7 82.5 16.5 38.2 3.1 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.1 551.8 263.6
         Apr. 25.0 198.9 59.0 79.4 18.8 38.2 3.0 0.6 3.5 3.5 2.1 546.7 264.9
         May 32.7 206.1 61.6 81.6 20.6 38.7 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 542.6 263.2         June 39.8 210.9 63.4 82.6 22.0 39.3 3.0 0.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 542.7 266.0
         July 42.3 207.8 60.3 81.5 22.6 39.8 3.0 0.7 3.3 3.3 2.1 534.5 264.9
         Aug. 49.7 212.4 64.0 81.0 23.6 40.1 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.4 2.3 534.4 267.8         Sep. 59.5 210.9 63.2 78.5 24.3 41.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.3 529.1 264.0
         Oct. 45.3 208.2 64.4 73.5 24.7 41.9 3.0 0.7 2.3 2.3 2.0 521.8 252.3
         Nov. 51.7 211.4 65.5 73.0 26.2 43.1 2.9 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 518.3 251.1         Dec. 61.7 207.7 69.3 66.3 27.8 40.6 2.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.7 512.7 256.4
2018         Jan. 37.4 204.4 61.6 70.3 27.5 41.4 2.8 0.8 4.3 4.3 1.7 518.8 262.8
         Feb. 46.7 207.4 66.3 69.2 26.8 41.5 3.0 0.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 522.7 263.8         Mar. 55.0 207.6 63.2 72.7 25.8 42.3 3.0 0.6 2.9 2.9 2.2 523.5 265.6
         Apr. 39.7 207.0 63.1 72.5 24.4 43.3 3.0 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 524.1 270.0
         May 51.4 217.4 68.6 74.9 25.7 44.5 3.1 0.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 536.8 274.3         June 69.1 224.5 70.7 79.2 25.6 45.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 2.0 531.3 274.8
         July 48.1 216.4 63.4 76.6 26.5 46.2 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.8 1.9 526.6 277.0
         Aug. 61.7 224.1 67.3 78.9 26.4 47.7 3.1 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.9 527.7 282.0         Sep. 73.9 226.2 69.6 76.9 27.8 48.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.9 536.1 287.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
p. 10    ).9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
November 2018
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item:
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (from 2002 German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which: MonetaryIntra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
53.9 46.2 2,153.1 4,113.9 2,676.2 − 85.1 4,435.5 − 6,962.0 10,533.4 11,214.3 6,980.4 131.4 2016          Aug.
48.7 46.1 2,132.3 4,069.0 2,698.3 − 45.1 4,388.5 − 6,984.6 10,550.9 11,216.3 6,969.2 131.3          Sep.
51.2 41.2 2,129.4 4,282.2 2,683.4 − 28.4 4,241.7 − 7,043.7 10,568.3 11,245.5 6,948.6 131.8          Oct.
52.3 40.3 2,146.3 4,323.0 2,662.6 − 55.8 4,255.5 − 7,146.0 10,660.0 11,341.1 6,939.2 136.4          Nov.46.7 39.6 2,140.2 4,043.0 2,654.2 − 42.2 4,035.5 − 7,194.1 10,734.6 11,396.4 6,959.2 135.4          Dec.
42.5 43.4 2,119.5 4,248.8 2,646.2 − 16.1 3,878.0 − 7,183.7 10,734.7 11,418.3 6,914.1 139.1 2017          Jan.
47.3 44.8 2,124.6 4,380.1 2,696.3 − 20.2 3,951.6 − 7,218.4 10,769.9 11,452.3 6,963.9 140.1          Feb.45.9 44.9 2,097.9 4,320.4 2,677.0 − 3.0 3,852.2 − 7,309.1 10,859.4 11,555.4 6,917.9 140.0          Mar.
33.1 41.5 2,085.8 4,403.3 2,662.8 1.1 3,864.2 − 7,406.4 10,925.6 11,602.7 6,877.7 142.1          Apr.
39.9 41.7 2,086.8 4,336.3 2,659.2 3.1 3,846.5 − 7,437.3 10,938.1 11,618.6 6,862.7 145.0          May40.4 40.8 2,070.5 4,137.3 2,631.1 10.0 3,725.9 − 7,516.1 11,007.6 11,658.3 6,800.8 145.5          June
37.5 39.2 2,053.4 4,182.8 2,616.1 9.6 3,683.6 − 7,544.5 11,032.5 11,694.2 6,755.5 148.0          July
33.0 39.3 2,042.9 4,179.6 2,647.6 − 0.7 3,687.4 − 7,572.0 11,073.6 11,746.0 6,768.7 148.5          Aug.41.9 38.9 2,014.8 4,157.5 2,650.6 17.1 3,538.1 − 7,620.8 11,098.3 11,765.8 6,730.9 150.4          Sep.
36.0 37.1 2,013.4 4,339.3 2,665.6 13.6 3,576.3 − 7,646.5 11,114.4 11,785.5 6,717.8 148.7          Oct.
40.9 37.5 2,021.6 4,289.1 2,657.4 46.1 3,572.0 − 7,724.4 11,175.5 11,855.8 6,701.0 151.3          Nov.35.8 35.3 2,010.3 4,097.9 2,730.5 25.7 3,265.0 − 7,786.2 11,233.6 11,872.1 6,772.4 146.0          Dec.
28.5 29.9 2,016.8 4,414.5 2,714.5 − 43.5 3,027.4 − 7,767.9 11,221.0 11,869.1 6,753.9 148.1 2018          Jan.
34.9 28.5 2,014.2 4,505.6 2,707.9 − 29.1 2,892.8 − 7,777.2 11,217.7 11,863.3 6,745.8 147.5          Feb.42.5 28.2 2,011.5 4,348.3 2,719.7 − 7.2 2,925.8 − 7,841.1 11,283.6 11,931.2 6,748.4 147.5          Mar.
43.7 28.4 2,018.1 4,492.4 2,720.3 10.3 2,933.5 − 7,892.7 11,317.1 11,988.5 6,754.2 148.4          Apr.
38.1 28.1 2,036.0 4,707.4 2,699.3 13.8 3,005.5 − 7,995.1 11,420.1 12,068.3 6,745.6 147.0          May44.7 27.7 2,025.3 4,562.2 2,669.7 32.6 2,914.0 − 8,087.1 11,529.9 12,173.0 6,700.0 150.2          June
37.7 29.3 2,013.0 4,611.8 2,665.2 18.9 2,893.3 − 8,080.9 11,519.1 12,163.8 6,688.3 152.4          July
37.4 29.9 2,020.9 4,646.0 2,661.0 25.4 2,885.3 − 8,078.1 11,515.0 12,165.1 6,683.7 155.5          Aug.34.4 27.4 2,046.9 4,571.1 2,660.9 44.2 2,844.9 − 8,151.7 11,565.0 12,180.4 6,696.7 155.7          Sep.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
27.4 12.5 484.5 826.1 589.2 − 846.9 1,640.6 314.1 1,864.6 2,711.7 2,757.1 1,801.3 − 2016          Aug.
26.4 12.9 477.4 851.2 594.2 − 876.5 1,616.7 318.8 1,867.6 2,719.5 2,764.2 1,797.3 −          Sep.
25.3 13.4 487.3 899.9 585.7 − 863.2 1,564.6 322.0 1,879.9 2,721.9 2,766.1 1,800.2 −          Oct.
22.7 14.6 504.7 905.9 578.4 − 918.6 1,536.5 323.9 1,917.2 2,762.9 2,805.6 1,809.3 −          Nov.23.1 14.2 504.0 878.8 580.3 − 897.1 1,506.3 327.3 1,912.6 2,759.2 2,801.0 1,808.4 −          Dec.
22.8 14.4 516.2 930.2 575.5 − 926.5 1,465.7 328.3 1,928.9 2,784.9 2,829.2 1,811.9 − 2017          Jan.
22.2 15.2 519.2 972.2 587.9 − 944.3 1,484.8 330.1 1,943.0 2,797.0 2,841.1 1,825.3 −          Feb.19.5 15.9 516.4 979.6 586.5 − 957.7 1,462.2 331.9 1,945.1 2,801.0 2,841.1 1,819.5 −          Mar.
17.7 16.9 512.1 985.8 597.9 − 965.5 1,463.1 335.2 1,954.8 2,803.4 2,843.5 1,822.6 −          Apr.
18.4 16.8 507.4 957.7 595.0 − 967.6 1,461.9 338.1 1,972.1 2,821.5 2,861.2 1,814.4 −          May19.3 16.4 507.0 946.6 591.5 − 981.1 1,412.1 342.8 1,992.1 2,841.2 2,880.9 1,808.1 −          June
18.8 16.2 499.5 926.1 589.1 − 975.5 1,406.4 345.0 1,988.1 2,835.9 2,876.2 1,793.6 −          July
18.5 15.8 500.0 894.5 597.2 − 970.2 1,422.2 348.6 2,002.3 2,846.8 2,886.8 1,801.4 −          Aug.19.3 15.4 494.4 927.7 594.2 − 982.9 1,387.5 352.1 2,008.2 2,853.5 2,893.0 1,792.0 −          Sep.
18.6 15.7 487.5 913.6 596.3 − 946.7 1,386.3 354.2 2,023.0 2,859.6 2,898.2 1,785.4 −          Oct.
18.5 15.8 484.0 883.4 593.7 − 940.3 1,382.0 355.5 2,056.1 2,890.9 2,929.9 1,781.9 −          Nov.17.7 14.8 480.2 921.3 668.6 − 999.6 1,295.2 359.3 2,045.5 2,882.9 2,920.4 1,852.1 −          Dec.
16.0 14.2 488.5 931.6 656.8 − 974.7 1,303.7 359.3 2,056.2 2,894.2 2,930.5 1,846.2 − 2018          Jan.
16.7 14.3 491.6 968.4 653.3 − 1,003.8 1,263.2 361.3 2,062.1 2,896.6 2,933.5 1,844.1 −          Feb.16.0 13.9 493.6 953.5 657.7 − 1,016.5 1,278.1 368.2 2,061.3 2,901.1 2,936.2 1,847.4 −          Mar.
17.5 12.3 494.3 949.7 658.7 − 1,002.9 1,270.5 369.5 2,076.6 2,907.0 2,941.3 1,848.1 −          Apr.
19.0 13.1 504.7 997.9 662.3 − 1,044.2 1,297.9 374.9 2,116.6 2,946.8 2,982.4 1,862.6 −          May17.0 12.5 501.8 996.0 666.2 − 1,070.1 1,277.7 378.5 2,110.1 2,954.5 2,987.3 1,860.9 −          June
16.7 11.9 498.0 967.9 665.4 − 1,019.3 1,250.8 381.6 2,116.5 2,954.1 2,986.4 1,855.4 −          July
18.3 12.0 497.4 966.5 672.6 − 1,024.8 1,273.6 386.9 2,119.1 2,953.0 2,986.4 1,858.4 −          Aug.17.8 10.9 507.4 979.9 671.0 − 1,059.4 1,251.7 390.8 2,146.5 2,978.4 3,010.3 1,863.3 −          Sep.
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to three months (excluding central govern ments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to two years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the over two years and at agreed notice of over three months, debt securities w ith
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two maturities of over two years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
November 2018
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2016         Apr. 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1,000.1 262.0 0.0 1,069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1,901.3
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1,105.3 309.0 0.0 1,076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2,009.4
         July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1,227.1 323.1 0.0 1,087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2,067.7
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1,339.7 355.1 0.0 1,096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2,200.2
         Oct. 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1,447.0 387.3 0.0 1,094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2,259.4
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1,570.2 439.4 0.0 1,103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2,366.3
2017         Jan. 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1,670.8 434.4 0.0 1,119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2,472.6
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1,787.5 479.2 0.0 1,110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2,550.9
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 678.6 18.5 707.4 0.3 1,905.3 550.0 0.0 1,118.4 182.0 378.8 1,081.1 2,749.4         June 683.1 13.7 767.4 0.2 1,995.0 593.7 0.0 1,126.0 163.6 397.4 1,178.7 2,898.5
         July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2,076.1 595.3 0.0 1,136.3 229.8 379.4 1,169.2 2,900.8
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 639.0 5.5 768.6 0.3 2,150.2 611.4 0.0 1,142.5 181.8 385.1 1,242.7 2,996.7
         Oct. 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2,239.2 648.1 0.0 1,142.8 218.3 383.9 1,253.3 3,044.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 634.5 3.0 763.7 0.2 2,333.5 682.5 0.0 1,146.6 188.5 407.6 1,309.7 3,138.8
2018         Jan. 635.7 2.9 760.6 0.2 2,398.2 689.2 0.0 1,158.2 188.1 487.0 1,275.2 3,122.5
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 630.9 1.5 760.5 0.0 2,435.5 686.3 0.0 1,148.2 203.6 474.9 1,315.6 3,150.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 627.1 1.9 759.5 0.1 2,476.8 668.0 0.0 1,159.0 247.5 495.6 1,295.3 3,122.3         June 625.2 1.8 757.3 0.1 2,519.9 659.5 0.0 1,170.4 218.0 502.5 1,353.9 3,183.8
         July 635.1 2.1 744.2 0.1 2,558.4 652.2 0.0 1,183.6 263.4 533.8 1,306.9 3,142.6
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 637.5 3.0 739.9 0.1 2,589.7 671.2 0.0 1,192.2 239.1 519.1 1,348.7 3,212.0
         Oct. 625.2 6.9 727.8 0.1 2,622.8 631.8 0.0 1,194.3 283.1 504.4 1,369.0 3,195.1
Deutsche Bundesbank
2016         Apr. 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
         July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
         Oct. 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2017         Jan. 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 164.4 1.0 86.0 0.1 412.4 181.4 0.0 264.1 29.7 − 185.3 374.0 819.5         June 165.8 0.3 95.0 0.0 431.8 181.2 0.0 266.2 32.4 − 204.9 418.0 865.4
         July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 155.2 0.3 94.9 0.0 463.2 165.5 0.0 269.9 52.4 − 192.6 418.5 853.9
         Oct. 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 154.2 0.5 94.8 0.0 501.4 187.5 0.0 270.3 56.0 − 218.6 455.8 913.6
2018         Jan. 155.5 0.9 93.3 0.0 514.7 204.4 0.0 272.8 54.9 − 192.2 424.5 901.7
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 151.5 0.6 93.4 0.0 522.9 207.9 0.0 271.0 56.8 − 221.3 453.9 932.8
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 150.7 1.1 93.3 0.0 530.6 190.8 0.0 273.8 61.1 − 191.3 440.9 905.5         June 150.1 1.1 93.1 0.0 540.6 200.3 0.0 277.4 59.2 − 217.9 466.0 943.6
         July 151.9 0.4 91.8 0.0 547.6 196.8 0.0 280.0 69.4 − 194.1 439.6 916.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 152.1 0.4 91.5 0.0 556.2 192.9 0.0 282.0 65.2 − 178.9 439.0 913.9
         Oct. 148.1 0.5 88.5 0.0 563.5 160.0 0.0 282.6 81.3 − 183.4 460.0 902.6
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
November 2018
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9 2016          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1          June
+ 25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5          Sep.
+ 2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9          Dec.
− 12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2017          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 16.2 − 10.5 + 153.1 + 0.0 + 117.8 + 70.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 21.7 + 56.6 + 120.2 + 198.5          May
+ 4.5 − 4.8 + 60.0 − 0.1 + 89.7 + 43.7 + 0.0 + 7.6 − 18.4 + 18.6 + 97.6 + 149.1          June
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 17.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 74.1 + 16.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 48.0 + 5.7 + 73.5 + 95.9          Sep.
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 94.3 + 34.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 29.8 + 23.7 + 56.4 + 94.6          Dec.
+ 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 64.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 11.6 − 0.4 + 79.4 − 34.5 − 16.3 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 37.3 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 10.0 + 15.5 − 12.1 + 40.4 + 27.6          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 3.8 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 41.3 − 18.3 + 0.0 + 10.8 + 43.9 + 20.7 − 20.3 − 27.8          May
− 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 43.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 11.4 − 29.5 + 6.9 + 58.6 + 61.5          June
+ 9.9 + 0.3 − 13.1 + 0.0 + 38.5 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 13.2 + 45.4 + 31.3 − 47.0 − 41.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 2.4 + 0.9 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 31.3 + 19.0 + 0.0 + 8.6 − 24.3 − 14.7 + 41.8 + 69.4          Sep.
− 12.3 + 3.9 − 12.1 + 0.0 + 33.1 − 39.4 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 44.0 − 14.7 + 20.3 − 16.9          Oct.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0 2016          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3          June
+ 6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0          Sep.
+ 0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6          Dec.
− 4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2017          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 4.9 + 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.0 + 25.9 + 27.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 6.6 − 15.6 + 33.0 + 62.5          May
+ 1.5 − 0.7 + 9.0 − 0.1 + 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.6 − 19.6 + 44.0 + 45.9          June
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 4.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 15.4 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 9.0 + 5.8 + 2.1          Sep.
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 16.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 9.9 − 21.0 + 33.1 + 50.4          Dec.
+ 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 13.3 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.1 + 26.4 − 31.3 − 11.9 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.2 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 1.9 − 29.1 + 29.4 + 31.1          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 − 17.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 4.2 + 30.0 − 13.0 − 27.3          May
− 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 10.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 3.6 − 1.8 − 26.6 + 25.1 + 38.1          June
+ 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 10.2 + 23.9 − 26.4 − 27.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 4.2 + 15.2 − 0.6 − 2.5          Sep.
− 4.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 32.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 16.1 − 4.5 + 21.1 − 11.2          Oct.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
November 2018
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
  
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claimsexternal loans residents with banks, arising from
As at Gold and other denominated security the creditreporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility underdate assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2018 Apr.               20 4,544.0 374.1 294.9 69.3 225.6 28.9 15.4 15.4 −
                              27 4,554.3 374.1 296.2 69.4 226.8 28.6 18.8 18.8 −
         May                 4 4,552.6 374.1 295.8 69.3 226.5 28.8 17.0 17.0 −
                              11 4,562.1 374.1 296.6 69.3 227.4 26.5 17.3 17.3 −
                              18 4,561.6 374.1 295.8 69.3 226.5 26.1 17.1 17.1 −
                              25 4,562.7 374.1 299.8 69.2 230.6 25.7 13.9 13.9 −
         June                 1 4,567.7 374.1 298.5 69.2 229.3 27.0 15.8 15.8 −
                                8 4,577.2 374.1 301.0 69.2 231.8 26.2 15.8 15.8 −
                              15 4,578.5 374.1 301.9 69.2 232.8 24.4 15.8 15.8 −
                              22 4,585.6 374.0 305.5 72.0 233.5 21.8 16.3 16.3 −
                              29 4,592.5 373.2 317.8 73.7 244.1 18.6 17.4 17.4 −
         July                 6 4,593.3 373.2 314.3 73.7 240.6 22.0 16.7 16.7 −
                              13 4,599.9 373.2 312.6 73.8 238.8 22.9 15.9 15.9 −
                              20 4,605.0 373.2 313.5 73.9 239.6 22.9 18.0 18.0 −
                              27 4,612.0 373.2 314.2 73.8 240.4 24.0 17.3 17.3 −
2018 Aug.                 3 4,602.3 373.2 314.9 74.0 240.8 23.2 18.2 18.2 −
                              10 4,608.1 373.2 316.5 74.0 242.5 21.9 18.2 18.2 −
                              17 4,614.0 373.2 315.9 74.0 242.0 21.4 16.9 16.9 −
                              24 4,619.4 373.2 316.9 74.0 243.0 22.8 17.4 17.4 −
                              31 4,621.4 373.2 316.8 73.9 242.9 20.8 18.0 18.0 −
         Sep.                 7 4,634.0 373.2 317.0 74.0 243.0 20.7 19.2 19.2 −
                              14 4,638.8 373.2 317.8 74.0 243.8 20.7 19.3 19.3 −
                              21 4,645.8 373.2 318.1 73.9 244.2 20.3 18.4 18.4 −
                              28 4,619.8 355.5 319.4 73.8 245.6 18.4 20.0 20.0 −
         Oct.                 5 4,625.0 355.5 320.0 73.8 246.2 18.5 17.7 17.7 −
                              12 4,632.9 355.5 320.7 73.8 246.9 18.2 19.4 19.4 −
                              19 4,628.3 355.5 320.0 73.8 246.2 19.6 18.7 18.7 −
                              26 4,624.8 355.5 318.7 73.8 244.9 19.4 19.5 19.5 −
         Nov.                 2 4,622.2 355.5 318.7 74.9 243.9 20.2 19.1 19.1 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2018 Apr.               20 1,681.8 116.6 49.0 18.0 31.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 −
                              27 1,706.5 116.6 48.6 18.0 30.6 0.0 2.7 2.7 −
         May                 4 1,730.7 116.6 48.7 18.0 30.7 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
                              11 1,700.4 116.6 48.4 18.0 30.4 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
                              18 1,752.4 116.6 48.1 18.0 30.1 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
                              25 1,777.6 116.6 48.8 18.0 30.9 0.0 0.8 0.8 −
         June                 1 1,799.4 116.6 48.4 18.0 30.4 0.0 2.7 2.7 −
                                8 1,783.7 116.6 48.4 18.0 30.4 0.0 1.5 1.5 −
                              15 1,794.6 116.6 48.4 18.0 30.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 −
                              22 1,793.2 116.5 49.1 18.8 30.3 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
                              29 1,823.0 116.3 50.8 19.2 31.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
         July                 6 1,744.4 116.3 50.9 19.2 31.7 0.1 1.3 1.3 −
                              13 1,743.6 116.3 50.7 19.2 31.5 0.0 1.0 1.0 −
                              20 1,744.8 116.3 50.7 19.2 31.5 0.1 3.1 3.1 −
                              27 1,745.0 116.3 51.1 19.2 31.9 0.1 1.5 1.5 −
2018 Aug.                 3 1,753.5 116.3 51.3 19.2 32.1 0.1 2.1 2.1 −
                              10 1,729.5 116.3 51.1 19.2 32.0 0.1 2.9 2.9 −
                              17 1,744.6 116.3 50.7 19.2 31.5 0.1 1.3 1.3 −
                              24 1,737.9 116.3 50.5 19.2 31.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 −
                              31 1,768.2 116.3 50.4 19.2 31.3 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
         Sep.                 7 1,741.9 116.3 50.4 19.2 31.2 0.0 3.7 3.7 −
                              14 1,739.5 116.3 50.4 19.2 31.3 0.0 3.5 3.5 −
                              21 1,753.9 116.3 50.6 19.2 31.4 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
                              28 1,817.3 116.3 50.3 19.2 31.1 0.0 4.4 4.4 −
         Oct.                 5 1,762.5 110.8 51.3 19.1 32.1 0.0 2.1 2.1 −
                              12 1,749.4 110.8 51.3 19.1 32.2 0.0 3.3 3.3 −
                              19 1,763.5 110.8 51.2 19.1 32.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 −
                              26 1,766.4 110.8 50.6 19.1 31.5 0.0 3.5 3.5 −
         Nov.                 2 1,769.2 110.8 51.0 19.4 31.6 0.0 2.2 2.2 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrum ents are valued at the
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB. 
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
November 2018
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for governmentfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    As atopera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
761.0 1.6 759.3 − − 0.1 − 48.7 2,751.5 2,485.6 265.9 24.9 244.5 2018 Apr.                20
761.9 2.8 759.1 − − 0.0 − 50.0 2,760.8 2,496.6 264.2 24.9 239.1                               27
761.7 2.6 759.1 − − 0.0 − 48.3 2,762.2 2,499.4 262.8 24.9 239.8          May                  4
761.1 2.0 759.1 − − 0.1 − 50.6 2,771.7 2,509.0 262.6 24.9 239.2                               11
758.7 2.0 756.6 − − 0.1 − 47.6 2,777.9 2,514.2 263.7 24.9 239.5                               18
759.0 2.1 756.6 − − 0.2 − 47.3 2,781.1 2,517.8 263.3 24.9 236.9                               25
758.3 1.6 756.6 − − 0.1 − 48.9 2,785.3 2,524.0 261.3 24.9 235.0          June                  1
757.8 1.2 756.6 − − 0.0 − 46.3 2,794.7 2,533.1 261.7 24.9 236.3                                 8
757.8 1.1 756.6 − − 0.1 − 46.7 2,795.5 2,535.1 260.4 24.9 237.3                               15
758.2 1.5 756.6 − − 0.1 − 43.9 2,803.7 2,544.0 259.7 24.9 237.2                               22
744.8 2.7 742.0 − − 0.1 − 39.2 2,806.1 2,547.0 259.1 24.5 250.9                               29
744.3 2.3 742.0 − − 0.1 − 37.9 2,810.7 2,551.8 258.9 24.5 249.8          July                  6
744.0 1.9 742.0 − − 0.1 − 32.8 2,822.1 2,563.0 259.1 24.5 251.9                               13
744.0 2.0 742.0 − − 0.1 − 30.8 2,827.4 2,568.6 258.8 24.5 250.7                               20
742.6 2.0 740.5 − − 0.1 − 29.4 2,835.4 2,577.2 258.2 24.5 251.4                               27
743.3 2.5 740.5 − − 0.3 − 30.3 2,827.4 2,572.4 255.0 24.5 247.2 2018 Aug.                  3
743.3 2.7 740.5 − − 0.0 − 26.1 2,834.2 2,579.2 255.0 24.5 250.3                               10
743.3 2.7 740.5 − − 0.1 − 30.8 2,838.7 2,583.5 255.2 24.5 249.3                               17
743.3 2.8 740.5 − − 0.1 − 30.4 2,843.6 2,588.4 255.2 24.5 247.4                               24
741.6 2.5 739.0 − − 0.0 − 30.9 2,848.5 2,593.0 255.5 24.5 247.1                               31
742.7 3.6 739.0 − − 0.0 − 31.4 2,858.1 2,602.6 255.5 24.5 247.2          Sep.                  7
743.3 4.2 739.0 − − 0.1 − 31.5 2,863.2 2,607.7 255.5 24.5 245.4                               14
744.0 5.0 739.0 − − 0.0 − 33.7 2,868.7 2,613.6 255.1 24.5 244.8                               21
732.1 6.4 725.5 − − 0.1 − 29.8 2,869.2 2,615.1 254.1 24.4 251.0                               28
732.8 7.2 725.5 − − 0.1 − 28.4 2,877.5 2,623.2 254.2 24.4 250.4          Oct.                  5
732.8 7.3 725.5 − − 0.1 − 29.6 2,879.5 2,625.9 253.6 24.4 252.7                               12
733.4 7.9 725.5 − − 0.0 − 34.2 2,877.3 2,626.2 251.1 24.4 245.3                               19
733.4 7.7 725.5 − − 0.2 − 30.8 2,879.8 2,630.0 249.8 24.4 243.4                               26
734.3 8.0 726.2 − − 0.1 − 26.9 2,878.7 2,629.9 248.8 24.4 244.3          Nov.                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
94.2 0.9 93.3 − − 0.0 − 3.9 530.3 530.3 − 4.4 882.4 2018 Apr.                20
95.2 2.0 93.2 − − − − 3.8 533.2 533.2 − 4.4 901.9                               27
95.1 1.9 93.2 − − 0.0 − 3.8 535.4 535.4 − 4.4 924.8          May                  4
94.7 1.5 93.2 − − 0.0 − 6.0 537.5 537.5 − 4.4 890.5                               11
94.5 1.3 93.2 − − − − 5.4 539.2 539.2 − 4.4 941.3                               18
94.6 1.4 93.2 − − − − 6.0 540.1 540.1 − 4.4 966.1                               25
93.8 0.7 93.1 − − 0.0 − 6.8 542.2 542.2 − 4.4 984.6          June                  1
93.4 0.3 93.1 − − 0.0 − 6.1 544.6 544.6 − 4.4 968.6                                 8
93.4 0.3 93.1 − − 0.0 − 5.8 542.9 542.9 − 4.4 981.8                               15
93.4 0.3 93.1 − − 0.0 − 6.2 546.2 546.2 − 4.4 975.6                               22
92.0 0.4 91.6 − − 0.0 − 3.8 546.8 546.8 − 4.4 1 007.0                               29
91.9 0.3 91.6 − − − − 6.4 543.7 543.7 − 4.4 929.4          July                  6
92.1 0.5 91.6 − − 0.0 − 6.2 547.0 547.0 − 4.4 926.0                               13
92.1 0.5 91.6 − − − − 6.3 549.5 549.5 − 4.4 922.2                               20
92.1 0.6 91.5 − − 0.0 − 6.2 552.3 552.3 − 4.4 921.0                               27
92.1 0.5 91.5 − − 0.1 − 6.0 552.2 552.2 − 4.4 929.0 2018 Aug.                  3
91.9 0.4 91.5 − − − − 4.4 553.5 553.5 − 4.4 905.0                               10
91.9 0.4 91.5 − − − − 5.7 554.6 554.6 − 4.4 919.6                               17
91.9 0.4 91.5 − − 0.0 − 4.8 555.9 555.9 − 4.4 911.9                               24
92.0 0.4 91.5 − − − − 4.7 557.0 557.0 − 4.4 941.4                               31
91.8 0.3 91.5 − − − − 6.8 559.9 559.9 − 4.4 908.4          Sep.                  7
92.2 0.7 91.5 − − − − 5.7 558.9 558.9 − 4.4 908.1                               14
92.0 0.5 91.5 − − 0.0 − 6.9 561.1 561.1 − 4.4 919.4                               21
88.5 0.5 87.9 − − 0.1 − 3.5 564.4 564.4 − 4.4 985.3                               28
88.5 0.5 87.9 − − − − 5.0 564.7 564.7 − 4.4 935.7          Oct.                  5
88.6 0.6 87.9 − − − − 6.7 562.3 562.3 − 4.4 922.0                               12
88.5 0.5 87.9 − − 0.0 − 7.3 562.7 562.7 − 4.4 935.5                               19
88.2 0.3 87.9 − − 0.0 − 6.8 564.9 564.9 − 4.4 937.1                               26
88.4 0.3 88.1 − − 0.0 − 5.8 566.8 566.8 − 4.4 939.8          Nov.                  2

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
November 2018
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
  
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro(covering Fine- area creditthe tuning Deposits institutions Debt
As at Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Otherdate liabilities lation  
1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 3
 
2018 Apr.               20 4,544.0 1,159.4 1,973.4 1,293.3 680.0 − − 0.0 10.7 − 383.8 265.2 118.6
                              27 4,554.3 1,165.2 1,983.7 1,342.2 641.3 − − 0.1 8.6 − 377.1 254.4 122.6
         May                 4 4,552.6 1,168.9 2,022.2 1,361.8 660.4 − − 0.1 9.0 − 319.9 194.0 126.0
                              11 4,562.1 1,169.4 2,032.4 1,359.8 672.5 − − 0.1 10.9 − 337.3 210.8 126.6
                              18 4,561.6 1,169.5 1,997.5 1,338.3 659.1 − − 0.1 9.2 − 376.1 246.5 129.6
                              25 4,562.7 1,167.4 1,968.8 1,321.8 647.0 − − 0.1 7.2 − 402.8 266.6 136.2
         June                 1 4,567.7 1,172.1 2,049.1 1,382.3 666.7 − − 0.1 8.5 − 310.6 176.8 133.8
                                8 4,577.2 1,173.8 2,051.5 1,383.0 668.3 − − 0.1 9.7 − 309.3 175.5 133.9
                              15 4,578.5 1,174.3 1,986.6 1,344.2 642.3 − − 0.1 7.9 − 367.4 230.6 136.7
                              22 4,585.6 1,175.0 1,954.5 1,311.9 642.4 − − 0.2 8.1 − 402.9 263.6 139.3
                              29 4,592.5 1,181.5 1,906.0 1,231.8 674.2 − − 0.0 13.8 − 374.2 239.6 134.5
         July                 6 4,593.3 1,185.5 2,004.6 1,329.6 674.9 − − 0.1 9.1 − 350.0 221.0 129.0
                              13 4,599.9 1,187.3 1,992.4 1,324.1 668.3 − − 0.0 6.4 − 377.2 243.9 133.3
                              20 4,605.0 1,187.0 1,931.6 1,299.0 632.5 − − 0.2 6.5 − 445.7 305.9 139.8
                              27 4,612.0 1,188.6 1,949.7 1,314.5 635.1 − − 0.1 6.4 − 441.4 301.9 139.4
2018 Aug.                 3 4,602.3 1,192.0 2,032.7 1,380.8 651.6 − − 0.3 5.9 − 332.7 198.9 133.8
                              10 4,608.1 1,192.9 2,035.9 1,354.1 681.6 − − 0.1 4.4 − 335.1 215.1 120.0
                              17 4,614.0 1,194.4 1,999.3 1,317.2 681.6 − − 0.4 6.7 − 370.2 252.6 117.7
                              24 4,619.4 1,190.3 1,979.4 1,314.9 663.8 − − 0.7 5.8 − 398.2 280.3 117.8
                              31 4,621.4 1,193.0 2,024.8 1,355.3 668.8 − − 0.7 5.2 − 359.7 241.2 118.5
         Sep.                 7 4,634.0 1,193.7 2,048.0 1,356.4 691.4 − − 0.2 8.4 − 350.6 224.9 125.7
                              14 4,638.8 1,192.7 2,013.2 1,351.0 662.1 − − 0.2 6.1 − 384.7 261.3 123.4
                              21 4,645.8 1,191.8 1,987.9 1,333.5 654.5 − − 0.0 9.7 − 420.2 292.7 127.5
                              28 4,619.8 1,194.8 1,951.4 1,311.9 639.5 − − 0.0 7.4 − 409.3 284.2 125.1
         Oct.                 5 4,625.0 1,196.4 2,023.1 1,381.6 641.4 − − 0.1 6.4 − 386.2 265.4 120.8
                              12 4,632.9 1,195.7 2,033.7 1,378.9 654.7 − − 0.0 7.0 − 383.3 261.7 121.6
                              19 4,628.3 1,194.0 1,999.4 1,379.7 619.7 − − 0.0 8.1 − 416.9 293.2 123.8
                              26 4,624.8 1,195.4 1,997.1 1,405.5 591.5 − − 0.1 6.3 − 412.8 288.2 124.6
         Nov.                 2 4,622.2 1,200.7 2,050.7 1,433.0 617.4 − − 0.2 4.8 − 342.6 217.9 124.7
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2018 Apr.               20 1,681.8 273.1 617.5 426.4 191.0 − − 0.0 6.1 − 107.2 54.8 52.3
                              27 1,706.5 275.6 634.6 447.9 186.7 − − 0.0 3.1 − 110.1 57.8 52.3
         May                 4 1,730.7 275.4 666.5 472.2 194.3 − − 0.0 4.2 − 91.7 38.1 53.6
                              11 1,700.4 277.3 641.7 452.6 189.1 − − 0.0 5.9 − 97.8 43.9 54.0
                              18 1,752.4 279.2 658.2 468.8 189.4 − − 0.0 4.8 − 123.5 69.2 54.3
                              25 1,777.6 278.9 673.4 470.8 202.6 − − 0.0 3.6 − 130.9 71.0 60.0
         June                 1 1,799.4 275.9 703.9 480.6 223.3 − − 0.0 4.1 − 107.2 47.1 60.1
                                8 1,783.7 277.0 676.9 468.7 208.2 − − 0.0 5.7 − 114.9 54.4 60.5
                              15 1,794.6 277.8 654.5 449.0 205.4 − − 0.0 3.8 − 149.1 90.2 58.9
                              22 1,793.2 278.7 642.8 450.2 192.6 − − 0.0 3.5 − 158.0 95.5 62.5
                              29 1,823.0 277.9 653.5 439.1 214.4 − − 0.0 4.4 − 133.6 71.2 62.4
         July                 6 1,744.4 279.4 649.0 440.6 208.4 − − 0.0 3.9 − 105.7 43.9 61.9
                              13 1,743.6 280.7 634.3 436.9 197.4 − − 0.0 3.3 − 121.0 59.5 61.5
                              20 1,744.8 281.4 616.2 433.2 183.0 − − 0.0 3.9 − 137.6 72.3 65.3
                              27 1,745.0 282.6 618.1 432.0 186.1 − − 0.0 4.0 − 141.8 76.6 65.2
2018 Aug.                 3 1,753.5 281.1 649.1 465.3 183.7 − − 0.0 3.7 − 108.4 45.3 63.0
                              10 1,729.5 281.9 629.0 428.1 200.9 − − 0.0 2.3 − 104.9 56.6 48.3
                              17 1,744.6 283.3 621.5 425.5 196.0 − − 0.0 4.3 − 120.7 72.2 48.5
                              24 1,737.9 283.7 615.3 428.2 187.1 − − 0.0 3.2 − 119.6 70.8 48.7
                              31 1,768.2 280.6 661.0 457.6 203.4 − − 0.0 3.0 − 107.9 58.5 49.3
         Sep.                 7 1,741.9 281.4 645.3 448.9 196.4 − − 0.0 5.3 − 101.8 56.6 45.2
                              14 1,739.5 282.0 598.0 419.7 178.3 − − 0.0 3.9 − 140.2 94.8 45.4
                              21 1,753.9 282.9 596.4 426.1 170.2 − − 0.0 7.1 − 156.5 95.5 61.0
                              28 1,817.3 281.0 644.0 473.4 170.6 − − 0.0 3.9 − 143.2 76.6 66.5
         Oct.                 5 1,762.5 282.1 629.3 466.6 162.7 − − 0.0 3.5 − 138.4 72.1 66.3
                              12 1,749.4 282.4 621.7 458.0 163.7 − − 0.0 4.8 − 129.4 64.0 65.4
                              19 1,763.5 282.6 619.8 460.1 159.6 − − 0.0 5.6 − 146.1 87.4 58.6
                              26 1,766.4 284.3 621.0 481.9 139.1 − − 0.0 4.3 − 142.6 84.2 58.5
         Nov.                 2 1,769.2 282.5 652.4 500.8 151.6 − − 0.0 2.9 − 106.8 48.8 57.9
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8%
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as anitems for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1In accordance with the accounting value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
November 2018
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to  area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    As atdenominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    reporting credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
1 accounts reserves    date liabilities  2 
Eurosystem 3
 
257.1 7.6 11.1 11.1 − 54.9 230.5 − 351.2 104.4 2018 Apr.                20
262.7 8.6 10.9 10.9 − 54.9 227.1 − 351.2 104.4                               27
273.9 7.4 11.8 11.8 − 54.9 228.8 − 351.2 104.5          May                  4
257.1 7.1 10.5 10.5 − 54.9 226.9 − 351.2 104.4                               11
256.6 6.2 9.8 9.8 − 54.9 226.3 − 351.2 104.4                               18
258.4 7.8 11.6 11.6 − 54.9 228.1 − 351.2 104.4                               25
272.3 8.6 10.8 10.8 − 54.9 225.4 − 351.2 104.4          June                  1
276.0 10.7 10.1 10.1 − 54.9 225.7 − 351.2 104.4                                 8
285.0 9.9 10.1 10.1 − 54.9 226.8 − 351.2 104.4                               15
288.2 8.1 10.5 10.5 − 54.9 228.0 − 351.2 104.4                               22
348.0 4.5 10.5 10.5 − 56.1 233.0 − 360.4 104.4                               29
276.5 6.2 10.5 10.5 − 56.1 229.9 − 360.4 104.4          July                  6
269.9 4.8 10.8 10.8 − 56.1 230.0 − 360.4 104.4                               13
267.2 4.8 11.5 11.5 − 56.1 229.7 − 360.4 104.4                               20
257.1 6.8 11.3 11.3 − 56.1 229.8 − 360.4 104.4                               27
269.1 6.4 11.3 11.3 − 56.1 231.3 − 360.4 104.4 2018 Aug.                  3
267.3 7.1 11.2 11.2 − 56.1 233.3 − 360.4 104.4                               10
271.6 6.5 10.5 10.5 − 56.1 233.8 − 360.4 104.4                               17
271.8 9.1 10.1 10.1 − 56.1 233.8 − 360.4 104.4                               24
267.5 6.9 10.2 10.2 − 56.1 233.0 − 360.4 104.4                               31
257.4 7.3 10.0 10.0 − 56.1 237.6 − 360.4 104.4          Sep.                  7
265.7 6.8 11.0 11.0 − 56.1 237.6 − 360.4 104.4                               14
258.3 6.2 11.3 11.3 − 56.1 239.4 − 360.4 104.4                               21
301.8 4.4 11.0 11.0 − 56.0 237.0 − 342.3 104.4                               28
256.7 4.7 11.8 11.8 − 56.0 237.0 − 342.3 104.4          Oct.                  5
255.9 5.4 11.5 11.5 − 56.0 237.7 − 342.3 104.4                               12
255.6 5.4 11.8 11.8 − 56.0 234.3 − 342.3 104.4                               19
263.4 5.5 10.1 10.1 − 56.0 231.4 − 342.3 104.4                               26
269.6 5.2 10.0 10.0 − 56.0 235.9 − 342.3 104.4          Nov.                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
149.5 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 14.2 27.3 368.2 111.5 5.7 2018 Apr.                20
155.2 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.2 27.3 368.2 111.5 5.7                               27
163.4 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.2 27.6 369.5 111.5 5.7          May                  4
148.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 27.7 369.5 111.5 5.7                               11
157.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.2 27.8 369.5 111.5 5.7                               18
161.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.2 27.9 369.5 111.5 5.7                               25
173.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 28.1 374.9 111.5 5.7          June                  1
174.1 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 28.2 374.9 111.5 5.7                                 8
174.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 28.6 374.9 111.5 5.7                               15
174.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 28.9 374.9 111.5 5.7                               22
213.3 − 0.3 0.3 − 14.6 28.3 378.5 112.9 5.7                               29
165.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.6 28.9 378.5 112.9 5.7          July                  6
163.4 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.6 28.9 378.5 112.9 5.7                               13
164.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.6 29.0 378.5 112.9 5.7                               20
157.3 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.6 29.0 378.5 112.9 5.7                               27
166.5 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.6 29.3 381.6 112.9 5.7 2018 Aug.                  3
166.6 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.6 29.3 381.6 112.9 5.7                               10
170.3 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.6 29.3 381.6 112.9 5.7                               17
171.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.6 29.4 381.6 112.9 5.7                               24
166.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.6 29.4 386.9 112.9 5.7                               31
158.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.6 29.5 386.9 112.9 5.7          Sep.                  7
165.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.6 29.5 386.9 112.9 5.7                               14
160.7 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.6 29.8 386.9 112.9 5.7                               21
191.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.6 29.8 390.8 112.9 5.7                               28
160.3 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.5 29.4 390.8 107.5 5.7          Oct.                  5
162.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.5 29.6 390.8 107.5 5.7                               12
160.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.5 29.7 390.8 107.5 5.7                               19
165.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 29.8 390.8 107.5 5.7                               26
172.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.5 30.1 394.6 107.5 5.7          Nov.                  2
 
basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/li ability related to bank-
banknotes issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note issue“. 2For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DEM banknotes still in circu-
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according lation. 3 Source: ECB. 
to the aforementioned accounting procedure and the value of euro banknotes put

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.02017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2016         Dec. 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017         Jan. 7,889.3 24.6 2,210.1 1,777.0 1,490.7 286.3 433.1 299.8 133.3 3,769.9 3,347.6 2,813.5 2,519.3
         Feb. 7,944.8 23.9 2,225.4 1,783.3 1,497.9 285.4 442.1 307.6 134.5 3,774.5 3,347.6 2,819.5 2,525.6         Mar. 7,926.1 23.6 2,237.5 1,797.8 1,513.2 284.6 439.7 306.9 132.7 3,776.8 3,351.3 2,828.1 2,533.8
         Apr. 7,954.6 24.7 2,276.6 1,847.6 1,563.1 284.6 428.9 298.2 130.8 3,780.1 3,357.1 2,836.6 2,541.1
         May 7,947.0 25.6 2,286.5 1,864.4 1,579.4 285.0 422.1 290.1 132.0 3,782.1 3,360.7 2,847.3 2,552.6         June 7,849.7 27.3 2,245.7 1,830.9 1,548.9 282.1 414.8 284.2 130.6 3,780.7 3,364.7 2,859.4 2,559.7
         July 7,818.7 26.6 2,258.5 1,840.3 1,560.2 280.0 418.2 289.0 129.2 3,787.1 3,370.5 2,867.1 2,567.3
         Aug. 7,807.7 27.5 2,243.1 1,828.2 1,553.7 274.5 415.0 286.9 128.0 3,792.2 3,377.0 2,876.6 2,576.3         Sep. 7,811.3 28.4 2,262.7 1,847.3 1,578.3 269.0 415.4 288.4 127.0 3,799.4 3,385.3 2,890.2 2,589.5
         Oct. 7,825.7 28.4 2,285.3 1,873.3 1,604.0 269.2 412.1 285.1 127.0 3,804.7 3,393.5 2,899.1 2,598.2
         Nov. 7,849.9 28.0 2,312.8 1,901.5 1,633.0 268.5 411.3 285.5 125.8 3,818.1 3,411.2 2,919.0 2,612.6         Dec. 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018         Jan. 7,817.2 29.2 2,296.1 1,891.0 1,624.5 266.5 405.1 280.3 124.9 3,813.9 3,407.5 2,930.5 2,622.5
         Feb. 7,790.8 29.6 2,298.1 1,892.3 1,627.0 265.2 405.9 280.6 125.2 3,814.1 3,406.5 2,938.1 2,633.4         Mar. 7,746.6 35.1 2,254.6 1,852.5 1,585.3 267.1 402.1 274.9 127.2 3,814.9 3,410.8 2,946.8 2,644.4
         Apr. 7,781.1 33.8 2,300.8 1,892.1 1,625.1 267.0 408.7 280.6 128.0 3,818.5 3,417.4 2,956.1 2,650.7
         May 7,882.8 35.0 2,314.0 1,900.7 1,630.1 270.6 413.3 284.6 128.6 3,823.8 3,418.9 2,963.0 2,656.6         June 7,804.7 35.0 2,266.6 1,853.0 1,584.7 268.2 413.6 285.5 128.1 3,832.7 3,430.8 2,979.9 2,672.2
         July 7,784.2 34.7 2,276.2 1,852.8 1,585.7 267.1 423.4 295.9 127.5 3,840.0 3,437.3 2,987.0 2,679.3
         Aug. 7,828.0 35.1 2,294.8 1,865.2 1,597.6 267.6 429.6 301.1 128.5 3,840.6 3,431.8 2,987.4 2,690.7         Sep. 7,800.0 35.8 2,267.8 1,846.4 1,577.7 268.7 421.4 291.0 130.4 3,854.4 3,447.2 3,006.2 2,708.5
 Changes 3
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.72011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.72012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.82013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.62014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.02017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2017         Jan. 108.8 − 1.4 110.7 107.1 107.1 0.0 3.5 5.7 − 2.2 9.4 4.6 9.3 8.5
         Feb. 47.4 − 0.7 14.0 5.6 6.8 − 1.2 8.4 7.1 1.2 4.3 0.3 6.3 6.5         Mar. − 13.0 − 0.3 13.1 14.9 15.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 3.2 4.3 9.0 8.9
         Apr. 40.0 1.1 41.0 50.7 50.5 0.2 − 9.7 − 7.8 − 1.9 4.7 6.8 9.4 8.2
         May 8.8 0.9 12.6 18.0 17.1 0.9 − 5.4 − 6.8 1.4 4.0 4.6 9.0 9.9         June − 85.4 1.7 − 38.0 − 31.5 − 29.2 − 2.3 − 6.5 − 5.2 − 1.4 0.5 5.3 13.2 8.0
         July − 14.3 − 0.7 14.5 10.5 12.2 − 1.7 4.0 5.2 − 1.2 8.6 7.1 8.9 8.6
         Aug. − 4.7 0.9 − 14.3 − 11.6 − 6.3 − 5.3 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.2 5.6 6.8 9.9 9.3         Sep. 4.8 0.9 21.8 21.5 26.0 − 4.5 0.3 1.2 − 0.9 6.9 7.1 12.0 13.5
         Oct. 8.6 0.1 21.9 25.5 25.4 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.7 0.1 4.6 8.0 8.6 8.6
         Nov. 33.4 − 0.4 28.9 28.8 29.4 − 0.6 0.0 1.2 − 1.1 14.8 18.7 19.0 13.5         Dec. − 126.4 4.1 − 90.1 − 74.7 − 72.0 − 2.7 − 15.4 − 15.0 − 0.4 − 15.2 − 10.0 0.1 − 2.4
2018         Jan. 124.2 − 2.9 82.2 70.9 68.7 2.2 11.3 11.5 − 0.2 14.7 8.2 12.4 13.0
         Feb. 6.3 0.3 0.5 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.7 7.7 10.7         Mar. − 37.4 5.5 − 42.9 − 39.5 − 41.4 1.9 − 3.4 − 5.3 2.0 2.7 5.6 10.1 12.3
         Apr. 28.9 − 1.3 45.6 39.7 39.9 − 0.2 5.9 5.1 0.9 4.0 7.1 9.8 6.3
         May 85.0 1.3 12.4 9.1 5.7 3.4 3.4 2.8 0.5 12.9 9.4 15.3 14.3         June − 77.2 − 0.1 − 47.4 − 47.7 − 45.4 − 2.3 0.3 0.9 − 0.5 9.9 12.8 17.9 16.4
         July − 14.4 − 0.3 10.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 10.1 10.7 − 0.6 7.8 6.8 5.9 6.1
         Aug. 41.9 0.4 19.8 13.8 13.0 0.8 5.9 4.9 1.0 0.6 − 5.6 0.4 11.3         Sep. − 26.9 0.8 − 26.7 − 18.6 − 19.7 1.1 − 8.1 − 10.1 2.0 14.6 16.0 19.4 18.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro area
to non-banks in other Member States residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which: Secur- of which: Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016          Dec.
294.2 534.1 312.2 221.9 422.4 284.6 163.1 137.7 28.6 109.2 1,080.8 826.0 803.9 2017          Jan.
294.0 528.0 311.6 216.5 427.0 289.4 165.6 137.6 28.6 109.0 1,095.4 843.6 825.5          Feb.294.3 523.2 307.1 216.1 425.5 290.8 167.2 134.7 29.0 105.7 1,097.1 847.5 791.1          Mar.
295.5 520.5 307.9 212.6 423.0 287.1 167.8 135.8 29.9 105.9 1,080.7 832.2 792.5          Apr.
294.6 513.4 298.9 214.6 421.4 288.5 166.8 132.9 28.9 103.9 1,056.3 808.0 796.5          May299.7 505.4 296.4 208.9 416.0 283.4 162.6 132.6 29.9 102.6 1,064.9 817.0 731.1          June
299.8 503.4 298.3 205.1 416.6 285.0 164.1 131.7 29.9 101.8 1,028.5 780.9 717.9          July
300.4 500.4 293.4 207.0 415.2 283.8 165.2 131.4 30.0 101.4 1,011.0 765.3 733.9          Aug.300.7 495.1 289.0 206.1 414.1 283.0 167.9 131.1 29.8 101.3 1,021.2 776.3 699.6          Sep.
301.0 494.4 289.2 205.3 411.2 281.6 167.7 129.6 30.4 99.2 1,014.2 768.9 693.0          Oct.
306.4 492.2 287.3 205.0 406.8 276.8 164.2 130.0 29.8 100.2 1,005.3 759.4 685.6          Nov.308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9          Dec.
308.0 477.0 282.8 194.2 406.4 278.6 163.9 127.8 29.7 98.0 1,009.1 758.2 668.9 2018          Jan.
304.7 468.4 277.4 191.0 407.6 280.5 165.9 127.1 29.6 97.5 1,026.5 775.9 622.5          Feb.302.4 463.9 275.5 188.4 404.1 278.3 164.9 125.9 29.8 96.1 1,016.8 763.8 625.3          Mar.
305.4 461.2 276.2 185.0 401.2 275.1 165.1 126.0 29.9 96.2 1,009.2 757.3 618.9          Apr.
306.4 455.9 272.3 183.6 404.9 280.2 167.4 124.8 29.8 95.0 1,052.9 799.1 657.1          May307.7 450.8 270.0 180.8 402.0 278.4 166.4 123.6 29.9 93.7 1,032.5 777.4 637.9          June
307.7 450.3 270.8 179.5 402.7 281.2 169.9 121.5 29.7 91.8 1,028.8 770.8 604.5          July
296.8 444.3 266.4 178.0 408.9 286.1 173.1 122.8 29.7 93.1 1,021.0 762.2 636.6          Aug.297.7 440.9 263.4 177.5 407.3 284.1 171.7 123.1 29.6 93.5 1,028.8 770.3 613.1          Sep.
Changes 3
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
0.8 − 4.7 0.0 − 4.8 4.9 3.7 4.2 1.2 0.1 1.1 30.4 31.0 − 40.2 2017          Jan.
− 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.6 − 5.4 4.0 4.2 2.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.2 8.2 11.7 21.6          Feb.
0.2 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 1.2 1.7 2.1 − 2.9 0.4 − 3.3 5.5 7.5 − 34.5          Mar.
1.2 − 2.6 0.8 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 3.3 1.1 1.2 0.9 0.3 − 8.2 − 7.4 1.4          Apr.
− 0.8 − 4.4 − 6.4 2.0 − 0.6 2.3 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 12.7 − 13.1 4.0          May
5.2 − 7.9 − 2.3 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 3.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.3 15.6 15.3 − 65.2          June
0.3 − 1.7 2.0 − 3.7 1.4 2.4 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 24.4 − 24.9 − 12.3          July
0.6 − 3.0 − 4.9 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.9 − 11.3 16.0          Aug.
− 1.5 − 4.9 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 8.3 9.0 − 33.1          Sep.
0.1 − 0.7 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.2 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 6.6          Oct.
5.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 4.3 − 3.1 0.4 − 0.6 1.0 − 2.5 − 3.6 − 7.3          Nov.2.5 − 10.1 − 2.8 − 7.2 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 5.4 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.3 − 9.5 − 16.9          Dec.
− 0.6 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 6.5 7.7 6.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.2 29.4 24.6 0.7 2018          Jan.
− 3.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 − 3.3 1.0 1.7 1.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 10.6 11.1 − 5.4          Feb.− 2.2 − 4.5 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 5.5 − 8.2 2.8          Mar.
3.5 − 2.6 0.7 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 3.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 13.2 − 11.9 − 6.2          Apr.
0.9 − 5.8 − 4.3 − 1.5 3.5 4.6 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 30.9 29.9 27.5          May1.5 − 5.0 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 20.4 − 21.8 − 19.2          June
− 0.2 0.9 2.2 − 1.3 0.9 3.1 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 31.6          July
− 10.9 − 6.0 − 4.5 − 1.5 6.2 4.9 3.1 1.3 0.0 1.2 − 11.0 − 11.5 32.1          Aug.
1.0 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 1.7 − 1.4 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 7.9 8.2 − 23.5          Sep.
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home Member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country States Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.22017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2016         Dec. 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017         Jan. 7,889.3 1,237.0 1,053.4 183.6 3,433.4 3,337.5 1,807.5 941.6 300.1 588.4 537.7 88.4 42.2
         Feb. 7,944.8 1,245.6 1,055.3 190.3 3,435.3 3,336.9 1,812.7 935.8 295.0 588.5 538.3 89.6 41.7         Mar. 7,926.1 1,259.8 1,077.3 182.5 3,433.9 3,334.5 1,813.5 934.4 296.4 586.6 537.0 91.2 39.6
         Apr. 7,954.6 1,254.1 1,075.4 178.8 3,452.0 3,352.3 1,840.8 925.4 290.7 586.2 536.9 91.2 41.7
         May 7,947.0 1,259.3 1,079.9 179.4 3,463.2 3,360.6 1,848.6 926.4 292.7 585.7 536.8 93.5 44.2         June 7,849.7 1,235.2 1,054.2 181.0 3,477.7 3,362.0 1,865.6 911.8 290.3 584.6 536.2 107.1 44.8
         July 7,818.7 1,239.8 1,062.3 177.5 3,470.9 3,353.4 1,862.3 907.6 287.9 583.4 538.2 107.5 45.8
         Aug. 7,807.7 1,243.3 1,065.8 177.4 3,486.1 3,368.4 1,880.5 905.5 285.7 582.4 537.9 108.3 47.5         Sep. 7,811.3 1,256.2 1,071.9 184.3 3,494.8 3,371.4 1,886.8 902.8 284.3 581.8 537.9 114.7 50.7
         Oct. 7,825.7 1,272.0 1,081.9 190.1 3,505.8 3,388.0 1,912.7 893.9 277.3 581.5 538.4 109.2 46.3
         Nov. 7,849.9 1,275.5 1,081.0 194.5 3,542.9 3,417.4 1,939.9 896.5 276.9 581.0 538.6 113.6 52.1         Dec. 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018         Jan. 7,817.2 1,249.4 1,060.8 188.6 3,539.8 3,419.1 1,944.5 892.2 276.8 582.4 539.7 110.6 46.4
         Feb. 7,790.8 1,246.9 1,058.2 188.8 3,536.8 3,416.5 1,945.4 888.9 273.3 582.1 540.4 109.7 47.1         Mar. 7,746.6 1,238.1 1,057.5 180.6 3,537.7 3,413.3 1,944.1 888.1 274.7 581.2 539.9 115.3 48.7
         Apr. 7,781.1 1,233.9 1,053.5 180.4 3,551.3 3,430.7 1,967.4 882.9 270.2 580.4 539.6 108.8 46.7
         May 7,882.8 1,232.4 1,037.1 195.3 3,582.2 3,462.4 1,998.3 884.0 271.4 580.1 539.5 109.4 47.7         June 7,804.7 1,224.7 1,035.7 189.0 3,582.9 3,463.7 1,991.4 893.1 281.1 579.2 539.1 109.0 44.0
         July 7,784.2 1,228.5 1,042.2 186.3 3,584.2 3,462.9 1,997.6 887.1 277.5 578.2 538.6 108.8 44.5
         Aug. 7,828.0 1,229.6 1,043.7 185.9 3,595.2 3,474.5 2,014.0 882.9 276.6 577.6 538.3 106.9 45.1         Sep. 7,800.0 1,220.4 1,034.2 186.2 3,594.0 3,473.8 2,017.5 879.0 273.7 577.3 538.4 108.8 48.2
 Changes 4
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.22011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.52012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.42013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.32014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.92017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2017         Jan. 108.8 32.8 20.7 12.1 23.0 19.7 13.3 6.4 9.1 − 0.0 0.7 4.4 5.1
         Feb. 47.4 7.6 1.6 6.1 1.2 − 0.7 4.7 − 5.5 − 4.8 0.1 0.7 1.1 − 0.5         Mar. − 13.0 14.8 22.2 − 7.4 − 1.0 − 2.1 1.1 − 1.3 1.5 − 1.9 − 1.4 1.6 − 2.1
         Apr. 40.0 − 4.4 − 1.3 − 3.1 19.1 18.7 27.8 − 8.7 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.2 2.2
         May 8.8 6.7 5.3 1.5 12.7 9.5 8.7 1.3 2.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.5 2.6         June − 85.4 − 22.2 − 24.3 2.1 15.3 11.1 17.5 − 5.4 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 0.7 4.7 0.7
         July − 14.3 5.3 8.9 − 3.5 − 5.3 − 7.4 − 2.4 − 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.4 0.7 1.1
         Aug. − 4.7 4.1 3.8 0.3 15.8 15.5 18.5 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 1.7         Sep. 4.8 3.0 − 3.8 6.7 8.4 2.9 6.1 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.6 0.0 6.4 3.2
         Oct. 8.6 15.2 9.8 5.5 10.3 16.0 25.5 − 9.1 − 7.1 − 0.3 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.4
         Nov. 33.4 4.6 − 0.3 4.9 37.9 30.2 27.9 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 0.2 4.6 5.9         Dec. − 126.4 − 36.9 − 27.7 − 9.2 − 13.1 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 4.6 − 2.6 1.9 2.4 − 4.9 − 9.6
2018         Jan. 124.2 17.6 13.1 4.5 12.2 9.1 8.7 0.9 3.2 − 0.5 0.2 2.4 4.0
         Feb. 6.3 − 3.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.5 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 0.2 0.4 − 1.1 0.7         Mar. − 37.4 − 8.3 − 0.5 − 7.9 1.3 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 5.7 1.6
         Apr. 28.9 − 4.5 − 3.8 − 0.6 13.5 17.5 22.8 − 4.6 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 6.6 − 2.0
         May 85.0 − 3.5 − 17.3 13.9 29.2 30.2 29.9 0.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 0.9         June − 77.2 − 7.8 − 1.5 − 6.3 0.7 1.2 − 6.9 9.0 9.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 3.8
         July − 14.4 4.7 7.2 − 2.5 1.8 − 0.4 6.5 − 5.9 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 41.9 2.0 2.6 − 0.6 10.7 11.3 16.1 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.0 0.6         Sep. − 26.9 − 9.2 − 9.5 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 3.8 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 0.3 0.0 1.9 3.1
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which: from Money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- repos with
of which: of which: central non-banks fund euro Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 201663.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016          Dec.
43.2 15.6 3.0 2.6 7.5 6.9 4.8 2.3 1,043.2 47.5 716.8 585.0 866.9 2017          Jan.
44.8 18.0 3.0 2.6 8.8 7.7 4.5 2.3 1,050.8 48.0 734.1 588.5 883.7          Feb.48.6 19.9 3.0 2.6 8.3 7.9 2.6 2.2 1,045.7 45.9 730.2 594.1 857.6          Mar.
46.6 18.3 3.0 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.5 2.2 1,042.1 43.9 749.0 598.3 853.4          Apr.
46.4 17.2 3.0 2.6 9.1 7.8 2.4 2.1 1,042.5 44.6 724.9 603.2 849.4          May59.3 20.1 3.0 2.6 8.6 7.9 1.8 2.2 1,039.2 44.8 689.8 610.2 793.5          June
58.8 19.1 3.0 2.6 10.0 7.9 3.3 2.2 1,029.2 43.9 684.2 606.2 782.9          July
57.8 18.3 3.0 2.6 9.4 7.9 3.4 2.4 1,024.7 42.6 643.1 608.1 796.7          Aug.61.0 20.5 2.9 2.6 8.7 8.0 2.6 2.4 1,015.2 42.2 669.5 612.4 758.2          Sep.
59.9 18.3 2.9 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.3 2.2 1,008.9 40.7 667.9 612.7 753.9          Oct.
58.6 16.7 2.9 2.6 11.8 8.3 2.6 2.2 1,004.7 40.1 664.4 609.8 747.9          Nov.63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8          Dec.
61.3 18.9 2.9 2.6 10.0 8.9 4.3 2.1 1,002.6 35.4 682.4 666.5 670.0 2018          Jan.
59.7 18.2 2.9 2.6 10.7 8.8 3.8 2.1 1,006.3 36.0 690.3 678.6 625.9          Feb.63.8 22.6 2.9 2.6 9.1 8.3 2.9 2.3 1,014.0 35.2 641.0 675.0 635.6          Mar.
59.2 18.0 2.9 2.5 11.7 8.4 2.4 2.2 1,016.6 34.7 672.9 677.3 624.6          Apr.
58.8 16.8 2.9 2.5 10.4 8.8 1.6 2.0 1,031.1 36.4 707.2 679.7 646.6          May62.2 21.7 2.9 2.5 10.2 9.3 1.3 2.1 1,022.2 33.7 670.8 680.2 620.5          June
61.5 19.0 2.9 2.5 12.4 10.0 1.8 2.0 1,016.9 33.1 681.9 682.2 586.7          July
58.9 16.4 2.8 2.5 13.9 10.6 1.2 2.0 1,021.2 35.0 690.5 684.5 603.8          Aug.57.8 17.4 2.8 2.5 11.5 9.2 1.3 2.0 1,034.5 33.8 681.7 687.3 578.7          Sep.
Changes 4
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.9 0.5 76.7 − 5.1 − 38.9 2017          Jan.
1.6 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 3.4 0.3 14.4 2.4 18.7          Feb.3.7 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.2 6.2 − 26.1          Mar.
− 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.0 1.4 − 1.8 22.7 5.6 − 5.3          Apr.
− 0.1 − 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 7.8 0.9 − 18.5 7.0 − 5.7          May
4.0 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 0.1 1.0 0.3 − 31.9 8.9 − 56.0          June
− 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 10.6          July
− 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 39.0 2.7 13.0          Aug.
3.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.7 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.5 25.3 4.7 − 25.6          Sep.
− 1.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.6          Oct.
− 1.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 0.3 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 7.1          Nov.
4.7 3.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 2.3 − 59.2 5.6 − 16.1          Dec.
− 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 15.8 − 2.2 84.0 − 17.5 11.0 2018          Jan.
− 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 5.0 10.8 − 1.0          Feb.
4.1 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 0.2 9.4 − 0.8 − 48.1 − 3.0 12.1          Mar.
− 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 28.0 1.7 − 8.4          Apr.
− 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 7.3 1.4 29.3 0.1 23.6          May
3.3 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.4 0.1 − 9.2 − 2.7 − 36.6 0.4 − 24.3          June
− 0.6 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.7 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 0.6 12.3 2.6 − 32.6          July
− 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 2.8 1.9 7.5 2.3 17.3          Aug.− 1.2 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.2 − 0.0 13.7 − 0.7 − 8.9 2.4 − 24.1          Sep.
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
  
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2018         Apr. 1,625 7,826.7 508.0 2,409.6 1,929.4 476.9 4,078.6 357.1 3,023.3 0.5 689.4 112.9 717.6
         May 1,623 7,929.0 525.6 2,429.1 1,950.0 475.8 4,099.8 364.6 3,033.9 0.5 693.2 117.7 756.8         June 1,615 7,851.0 485.4 2,415.9 1,938.6 474.0 4,094.1 352.3 3,043.9 0.6 689.6 117.9 737.7
         July 1,604 7,830.5 498.7 2,401.5 1,923.5 474.5 4,108.4 357.9 3,055.8 0.5 685.9 117.6 704.3
         Aug. 1,601 7,875.6 497.7 2,411.7 1,931.3 476.8 4,117.2 355.9 3,070.1 0.5 682.6 111.3 737.7         Sep. 1,591 7,848.1 518.2 2,377.8 1,893.6 480.6 4,126.4 355.9 3,079.5 0.5 683.4 110.6 715.1
Commercial banks 6
2018         Aug. 263 3,148.7 320.4 1,004.1 925.6 78.0 1,252.7 198.2 841.5 0.4 209.1 49.0 522.5
         Sep. 262 3,105.7 328.5 974.4 895.5 78.3 1,251.2 196.6 843.4 0.4 207.6 48.2 503.4
   Big banks 7
2018         Aug. 4 1,826.5 149.9 560.5 528.7 31.8 597.8 113.5 367.2 0.1 114.4 43.3 475.1
         Sep. 4 1,793.6 136.7 564.0 531.9 32.1 594.7 110.0 369.2 0.1 113.1 42.6 455.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2018         Aug. 149 888.8 92.9 191.1 147.3 43.5 559.4 55.4 416.3 0.3 86.9 5.0 40.4
         Sep. 148 878.9 84.9 189.5 145.5 43.7 559.0 56.0 415.6 0.3 86.6 4.9 40.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2018         Aug. 110 433.4 77.6 252.5 249.6 2.6 95.6 29.3 58.0 0.0 7.9 0.7 7.0
         Sep. 110 433.2 106.9 220.9 218.1 2.5 97.6 30.7 58.6 0.1 7.9 0.7 7.1
Landesbanken
2018         Aug. 8 886.1 58.9 269.6 201.8 67.2 460.0 53.8 344.3 0.0 59.4 10.2 87.5
         Sep. 8 891.9 58.1 274.6 204.9 68.9 463.7 54.7 346.5 0.0 60.2 10.2 85.3
Savings banks
2018         Aug. 385 1,227.8 46.0 175.9 62.2 113.5 974.3 48.3 765.9 0.0 159.9 14.1 17.4
         Sep. 385 1,227.9 43.6 175.0 61.0 113.8 977.9 48.8 768.6 0.0 160.4 14.1 17.3
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2018         Aug. 895 919.5 20.0 172.1 65.3 106.2 690.7 32.8 546.3 0.0 111.4 17.0 19.6
         Sep. 887 919.5 20.2 168.5 61.5 106.3 693.8 34.2 547.5 0.0 112.0 17.0 20.0
Mortgage banks
2018         Aug. 12 224.9 3.6 29.0 18.5 10.5 185.7 3.0 161.2 − 21.4 0.1 6.5
         Sep. 11 224.4 3.5 28.4 18.0 10.5 185.9 2.8 161.8 − 21.4 0.1 6.4
Building and loan associations
2018         Aug. 20 233.9 1.5 56.1 40.1 16.0 171.4 1.2 144.4 . 25.8 0.3 4.6
         Sep. 20 234.5 1.4 56.0 40.1 15.9 172.1 1.2 145.1 . 25.9 0.3 4.7
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2018         Aug. 18 1,234.6 47.2 704.8 617.9 85.5 382.5 18.6 266.4 − 95.6 20.6 79.6
         Sep. 18 1,244.0 62.8 700.8 612.6 86.8 381.8 17.7 266.7 − 96.1 20.6 78.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2018         Aug. 143 1,153.8 134.9 424.9 388.0 36.4 494.6 76.7 325.6 0.3 90.3 3.3 96.1
         Sep. 144 1,144.0 156.1 395.1 358.4 36.2 496.7 78.4 328.3 0.3 88.0 3.2 92.8
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2018         Aug. 33 720.4 57.3 172.4 138.4 33.8 399.0 47.4 267.6 0.3 82.4 2.5 89.1
         Sep. 34 710.7 49.2 174.2 140.3 33.7 399.1 47.8 269.7 0.3 80.1 2.5 85.7
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,738.2 528.9 1,209.3 3,722.1 2,109.8 289.5 688.9 81.3 587.7 546.1 46.2 1,115.8 513.6 737.0 2018          Apr.
1,766.0 559.7 1,206.3 3,757.2 2,143.1 291.3 690.6 82.4 587.4 546.0 44.8 1,133.6 515.7 756.4          May1,747.3 554.8 1,192.5 3,732.2 2,119.8 293.7 687.7 61.7 586.4 545.5 44.5 1,119.0 522.7 729.7          June
1,749.9 539.0 1,210.9 3,746.3 2,132.1 296.1 688.8 72.9 585.4 544.9 44.0 1,110.8 524.8 698.7          July
1,752.7 521.6 1,231.0 3,763.8 2,149.5 298.9 687.2 83.4 584.7 544.6 43.5 1,116.1 524.5 718.6          Aug.1,745.1 543.8 1,201.3 3,752.1 2,155.7 283.9 685.3 66.8 584.3 544.6 43.0 1,126.6 526.3 698.0          Sep.
Commercial banks 6
870.6 388.3 482.3 1,495.1 936.9 173.5 267.7 67.8 99.3 92.5 17.7 157.6 180.1 445.3 2018          Aug.
860.8 391.6 469.2 1,476.9 932.1 161.6 266.6 51.1 99.2 92.5 17.4 158.4 181.8 427.7          Sep.
Big banks 7
436.6 144.7 291.9 760.6 446.6 111.3 116.7 67.8 82.5 76.7 3.5 120.4 106.7 402.3 2018          Aug.
437.1 154.4 282.7 745.8 442.8 100.2 116.8 51.1 82.5 76.8 3.5 121.0 106.7 383.1          Sep.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
175.4 74.3 101.1 577.6 379.6 39.9 127.3 − 16.6 15.6 14.2 37.0 64.9 33.9 2018          Aug.
165.5 67.6 97.9 574.5 378.5 39.1 126.4 − 16.6 15.5 13.9 37.2 66.6 35.2          Sep.
Branches of foreign banks
258.7 169.3 89.4 156.9 110.6 22.3 23.8 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.3 8.5 9.0 2018          Aug.
258.3 169.6 88.6 156.7 110.8 22.3 23.4 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.3 8.5 9.4          Sep.
Landesbanken
254.2 53.4 200.8 295.9 132.1 58.2 92.6 10.9 12.4 12.3 0.6 195.3 50.8 90.0 2018          Aug.
258.1 65.1 193.0 297.5 136.6 56.6 91.4 11.3 12.4 12.2 0.5 198.0 50.8 87.6          Sep.
Savings banks
128.5 3.1 125.5 929.3 593.4 14.8 14.9 − 287.7 263.6 18.5 14.8 114.9 40.3 2018          Aug.
129.6 5.1 124.6 928.1 592.7 14.6 14.9 − 287.6 263.6 18.3 14.7 114.9 40.6          Sep.
 
Credit cooperatives
 
116.5 1.1 115.4 684.3 445.6 34.5 14.2 − 184.7 175.8 5.2 9.6 79.1 30.1 2018          Aug.
115.9 1.5 114.4 683.7 445.0 34.6 14.3 − 184.7 175.9 5.1 9.5 79.2 31.2          Sep.
Mortgage banks
43.1 3.0 40.1 76.2 3.1 3.3 69.9 − − − . 90.1 8.8 6.7 2018          Aug.
43.5 2.9 40.5 75.8 3.2 2.8 69.8 − − − . 89.5 8.8 6.9          Sep.
Building and loan associations
26.2 4.1 22.1 181.6 3.3 2.6 175.1 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 3.1 11.6 11.5 2018          Aug.
25.7 5.0 20.7 182.0 3.3 2.5 175.6 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 3.3 11.6 11.9          Sep.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
313.6 68.8 244.8 101.4 35.1 12.0 52.8 4.7 − − . 645.7 79.2 94.7 2018          Aug.
311.5 72.6 238.9 108.1 42.8 11.2 52.7 4.4 − − . 653.1 79.2 92.0          Sep.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
449.0 252.5 196.4 538.6 386.5 48.1 77.3 8.1 20.4 20.0 6.5 23.8 50.3 92.2 2018          Aug.
437.0 245.6 191.4 538.9 387.6 47.1 77.6 8.0 20.3 19.8 6.4 24.6 52.0 91.4          Sep.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
190.3 83.3 107.0 381.7 275.8 25.8 53.5 8.1 20.2 19.8 6.4 23.5 41.7 83.2 2018          Aug.
178.7 75.9 102.8 382.2 276.8 24.8 54.2 8.0 20.1 19.6 6.3 24.3 43.5 82.0          Sep.
loan contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt 2018) and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” statistics, Table I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to by foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category
November 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- ”Branches (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation
und Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April of the banks majority-owned by foreign banks included in other ba nking categories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  
1 
End of year or month *
 
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.82017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2017         Apr. 24.4 400.2 1,424.8 1,161.7 0.0 1.1 262.0 1.7 3,288.9 2,848.6 0.3 1.1 438.9
         May 25.4 426.0 1,415.5 1,152.3 0.0 1.1 262.1 1.7 3,292.9 2,851.3 0.2 1.8 439.6         June 27.0 417.8 1,391.1 1,130.4 0.0 1.2 259.4 1.7 3,296.8 2,855.9 0.2 1.1 439.6
         July 26.4 420.0 1,398.0 1,139.4 0.0 1.4 257.2 1.7 3,302.5 2,865.2 0.3 1.0 436.0
         Aug. 27.3 421.3 1,384.2 1,131.4 0.0 1.4 251.3 1.7 3,308.9 2,869.4 0.2 0.8 438.5         Sep. 28.1 409.2 1,416.1 1,168.3 0.0 1.3 246.5 1.7 3,317.6 2,878.2 0.3 0.7 438.4
         Oct. 28.1 472.7 1,378.5 1,130.6 0.0 0.9 247.0 1.7 3,326.1 2,887.0 0.3 0.8 438.0
         Nov. 27.7 457.1 1,422.2 1,175.1 0.0 0.8 246.3 1.8 3,343.7 2,899.6 0.2 1.2 442.6         Dec. 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018         Jan. 29.0 448.1 1,421.7 1,176.0 0.0 0.7 245.1 2.5 3,339.3 2,904.9 0.3 1.0 433.1
         Feb. 29.3 460.7 1,409.5 1,165.3 0.0 0.8 243.3 2.9 3,338.3 2,910.6 0.2 1.2 426.4         Mar. 34.8 440.7 1,389.5 1,143.5 0.0 0.9 245.2 3.2 3,342.5 2,919.6 0.3 1.0 421.7
         Apr. 33.5 464.4 1,405.8 1,159.9 0.0 0.8 245.1 3.6 3,348.5 2,926.7 0.2 1.6 420.0
         May 34.8 475.7 1,398.4 1,153.4 0.0 1.0 244.1 4.1 3,350.0 2,928.6 0.2 2.3 418.8         June 34.7 437.6 1,388.9 1,146.3 0.0 1.0 241.6 4.5 3,361.8 2,941.9 0.2 1.8 417.7
         July 34.4 456.8 1,369.6 1,128.2 0.0 1.1 240.3 4.8 3,368.0 2,949.9 0.2 2.2 415.6
         Aug. 34.8 455.2 1,383.7 1,141.5 0.0 1.2 241.0 5.3 3,368.5 2,956.8 0.2 1.6 409.9         Sep. 35.6 471.0 1,349.1 1,105.9 0.0 1.3 241.9 5.9 3,384.0 2,971.7 0.2 1.8 410.2
Changes *
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.92012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.72013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.82014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.92017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2017         Apr. + 1.1 + 48.1 + 1.7 + 1.3 − − + 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.3
         May + 0.9 + 25.8 − 9.4 − 9.5 − − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7         June + 1.7 − 8.2 − 23.5 − 20.9 − + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0
         July − 0.7 + 2.2 + 6.9 + 9.0 − + 0.2 − 2.2 − + 5.6 + 9.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
         Aug. + 0.9 + 1.3 − 13.8 − 8.0 − + 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.6         Sep. + 0.8 − 12.1 + 34.1 + 38.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.5
         Oct. + 0.1 + 63.5 − 37.6 − 37.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
         Nov. − 0.4 − 15.6 + 43.7 + 44.4 − − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 17.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.6         Dec. + 4.1 − 64.6 − 10.3 − 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.1
2018         Jan. − 2.9 + 55.6 + 13.7 + 12.1 − + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 11.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 4.4
         Feb. + 0.3 + 12.7 − 12.3 − 10.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 6.7         Mar. + 5.5 − 20.0 − 19.9 − 21.9 − + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 4.7
         Apr. − 1.3 + 23.6 + 16.8 + 16.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 6.4 + 7.1 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.3
         May + 1.3 + 11.4 − 5.8 − 4.9 − + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 10.4 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.2         June − 0.1 − 38.1 − 9.5 − 7.1 − + 0.0 − 2.4 + 0.4 + 11.8 + 13.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
         July − 0.3 + 19.3 − 19.3 − 18.1 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 6.2 + 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.1
         Aug. + 0.4 − 1.6 + 15.6 + 14.8 − + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 7.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.8         Sep. + 0.8 + 16.0 − 34.6 − 35.7 − + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 15.5 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
− 20.1 88.8 1,074.8 140.7 934.2 0.0 5.5 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 586.2 47.8 30.3 2017          Apr.
− 20.0 88.7 1,079.5 142.0 937.5 − 5.5 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 585.7 47.0 30.4          May− 19.7 88.4 1,053.9 125.6 928.3 0.0 5.5 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 584.7 46.6 29.8          June
− 19.6 88.5 1,061.7 125.0 936.6 0.0 5.4 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 583.5 46.0 29.9          July
− 19.6 88.9 1,065.1 121.2 943.9 0.0 5.4 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 582.4 45.4 30.0          Aug.− 19.5 88.1 1,071.5 120.2 951.3 0.0 5.3 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 581.8 45.3 30.0          Sep.
− 19.4 87.9 1,081.0 122.8 958.2 0.0 5.3 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 581.5 44.8 29.9          Oct.
− 19.4 88.1 1,079.8 125.9 953.9 0.0 5.3 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 581.0 44.3 30.1          Nov.− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0          Dec.
− 18.9 88.2 1,060.1 116.0 944.1 0.0 5.0 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 582.4 42.9 30.4 2018          Jan.
− 19.0 88.5 1,056.6 110.3 946.4 0.0 5.0 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 582.2 42.3 30.9          Feb.− 18.9 88.5 1,056.3 118.6 937.7 0.0 5.0 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 581.3 41.8 31.5          Mar.
− 18.8 89.2 1,052.8 118.2 934.6 0.0 5.0 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 580.5 41.3 31.9          Apr.
− 18.8 93.8 1,035.9 107.1 928.9 0.0 5.0 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 580.2 40.9 32.4          May− 18.7 94.0 1,034.3 122.0 912.2 0.0 4.9 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 579.3 40.6 32.6          June
− 18.5 94.4 1,041.4 118.8 922.6 0.0 4.9 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 578.2 40.0 32.8          July
− 18.4 88.0 1,042.8 117.3 925.5 0.0 4.8 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 577.6 39.5 33.1          Aug.− 18.3 87.9 1,033.4 117.1 916.2 0.0 4.8 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 577.3 39.1 33.9          Sep.
Changes *
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 2017          Apr.
− − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.6 + 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          May− − 0.4 + 0.0 − 24.6 − 16.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6          June
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.8 − 0.5 + 8.3 − − 0.0 − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2          July
− − 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 − 3.9 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Aug.− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.3 − − 0.1 + 4.3 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1          Sep.
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 − + 0.0 + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0          Oct.
− − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 3.1 − 4.2 − + 0.0 + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1          Nov.− − 0.3 + 0.5 − 27.3 − 15.0 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1          Dec.
− − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 5.2 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 2018          Jan.
− − 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.5 − 5.8 + 2.3 − + 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5          Feb.− − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 8.3 − 8.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5          Mar.
− − 0.1 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 4.6 − 16.9 − 11.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5          May− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 15.0 − 16.6 − − 0.1 + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3          June
− − 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.7 − 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2          July
− + 0.0 − 6.0 + 2.8 − 1.5 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5          Aug.− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 9.3 − − 0.0 − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6          Sep.
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium marketbanknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesand Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.62017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2017         Apr. 0.3 1,063.7 833.7 529.7 304.0 1.9 228.0 1.7 774.4 477.4 114.5 362.9 4.8 292.2
         May 0.3 1,037.5 804.3 506.9 297.4 2.2 231.0 1.9 771.7 475.9 112.3 363.6 5.1 290.8         June 0.3 1,043.5 812.2 515.4 296.8 2.3 229.0 1.9 756.2 461.8 102.5 359.3 6.3 288.1
         July 0.3 1,018.5 788.2 493.2 295.0 2.3 227.9 2.1 751.5 458.0 102.6 355.4 6.1 287.4
         Aug. 0.2 1,000.5 772.3 478.4 293.9 2.2 226.0 2.1 743.9 454.3 104.0 350.3 6.0 283.6         Sep. 0.3 1,007.0 780.1 484.7 295.4 1.9 225.1 2.1 743.3 457.8 107.9 349.9 6.7 278.8
         Oct. 0.3 996.7 769.4 473.5 295.9 1.9 225.3 2.1 739.9 457.9 104.8 353.1 6.5 275.6
         Nov. 0.3 988.3 761.0 467.6 293.4 1.4 225.9 2.2 736.5 454.9 105.5 349.3 6.4 275.2         Dec. 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018         Jan. 0.3 985.4 758.1 466.7 291.4 1.8 225.5 2.2 735.1 450.6 105.6 345.0 5.5 279.1
         Feb. 0.3 999.3 770.8 477.7 293.1 2.1 226.3 2.3 742.5 459.1 111.5 347.7 6.2 277.2         Mar. 0.3 993.3 759.8 469.7 290.0 2.2 231.3 2.4 736.2 456.1 108.7 347.4 6.5 273.6
         Apr. 0.3 1,003.7 769.6 478.3 291.3 2.3 231.8 2.4 730.1 453.9 105.2 348.7 6.8 269.4
         May 0.3 1,030.6 796.6 501.0 295.6 2.3 231.7 2.5 749.9 470.2 112.9 357.2 5.3 274.4         June 0.3 1,027.1 792.4 501.1 291.2 2.3 232.4 2.5 732.4 454.6 97.7 356.9 5.9 271.8
         July 0.2 1,031.9 795.4 502.7 292.7 2.3 234.2 2.6 740.4 464.1 103.9 360.2 6.1 270.2
         Aug. 0.2 1,027.9 789.8 496.9 292.9 2.3 235.8 2.6 748.7 469.5 107.6 362.0 6.5 272.7         Sep. 0.3 1,028.7 787.7 496.7 291.1 2.3 238.6 2.7 742.5 464.0 102.4 361.6 5.3 273.2
Changes *
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.62012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.52013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.62014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.52017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2017         Apr. + 0.0 − 16.1 − 14.2 − 15.4 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 4.9
         May − 0.0 − 17.3 − 20.9 − 18.6 − 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.6         June − 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.7 + 10.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 9.3 − 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.2
         July − 0.0 − 16.8 − 16.1 − 18.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1
         Aug. − 0.0 − 19.5 − 17.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 3.5         Sep. + 0.1 + 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 3.5
         Oct. + 0.0 − 13.4 − 13.6 − 12.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.4 + 2.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
         Nov. − 0.0 − 3.2 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.1         Dec. − 0.0 − 21.1 − 19.6 − 25.1 + 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 11.1 − 11.9 + 0.8 − 2.2 + 2.5
2018         Jan. + 0.0 + 30.6 + 28.8 + 29.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 15.8 + 12.3 + 12.8 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 2.3
         Feb. − 0.0 + 8.4 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3         Mar. − 0.0 − 3.1 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 3.4
         Apr. + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 4.3
         May − 0.0 + 16.9 + 17.3 + 17.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 14.7 + 12.1 + 7.0 + 5.1 − 1.5 + 4.2         June + 0.0 − 4.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 17.4 − 15.4 − 15.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
         July − 0.0 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 10.4 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 0.1 − 1.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 6.4 − 7.9 − 7.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 7.3 + 4.7 + 3.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3         Sep. + 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 − 7.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 − 1.3 − 1.1 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
12.9 24.8 751.4 429.4 322.0 234.2 87.7 0.0 271.9 132.3 139.7 89.0 50.6 0.7 2017          Apr.
12.8 24.6 732.4 464.0 268.4 181.8 86.5 0.0 269.4 134.1 135.3 85.0 50.3 0.6          May12.5 24.4 720.3 463.2 257.1 170.1 87.0 0.0 259.9 123.7 136.1 75.7 60.4 0.6          June
12.5 24.4 692.4 441.0 251.4 165.5 85.9 0.0 282.5 137.7 144.8 84.4 60.5 0.6          July
12.4 24.4 648.0 389.2 258.9 174.0 84.9 0.0 286.0 133.1 152.9 92.5 60.4 0.5          Aug.12.4 24.8 691.5 430.5 261.0 176.6 84.3 0.0 279.1 133.5 145.7 84.3 61.4 0.5          Sep.
12.3 24.8 687.6 433.6 254.0 169.4 84.7 0.0 282.8 132.3 150.5 87.9 62.6 0.4          Oct.
12.4 24.7 694.2 428.8 265.4 179.7 85.7 0.0 284.4 140.6 143.8 81.7 62.1 0.4          Nov.12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3          Dec.
12.0 24.2 711.8 450.8 261.0 172.7 88.3 0.0 275.0 130.5 144.6 82.2 62.3 0.3 2018          Jan.
12.1 23.7 715.7 441.2 274.5 185.5 89.0 0.0 279.6 134.8 144.8 85.5 59.3 0.3          Feb.12.2 24.0 668.6 385.6 283.0 196.4 86.5 0.0 272.9 126.3 146.6 87.8 58.8 0.3          Mar.
12.3 23.6 685.3 410.6 274.7 188.3 86.4 0.0 282.6 138.4 144.2 85.2 59.0 0.3          Apr.
12.2 23.7 730.1 452.6 277.4 188.0 89.4 0.0 285.8 140.5 145.4 86.9 58.5 0.3          May12.1 23.7 713.1 432.8 280.3 187.1 93.1 0.0 259.1 123.3 135.8 78.9 56.9 0.3          June
11.9 23.0 708.4 420.2 288.2 197.2 91.0 0.0 273.1 129.4 143.7 84.1 59.6 0.3          July
11.9 23.1 709.8 404.3 305.5 217.7 87.8 0.0 278.8 129.5 149.2 90.1 59.1 0.3          Aug.11.8 22.4 711.7 426.7 285.0 197.3 87.7 0.0 269.3 133.2 136.1 79.2 56.9 0.1          Sep.
Changes *
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 12.8 − 56.2 + 43.4 + 43.7 − 0.4 − + 34.4 + 18.2 + 16.2 + 17.1 − 0.9 − 2017          Apr.
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 13.8 + 36.5 − 50.3 − 49.8 − 0.5 − − 0.9 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0          May− 0.3 − 0.2 − 9.0 + 0.6 − 9.6 − 10.5 + 0.9 − − 17.8 − 10.0 − 7.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.9 − 19.7 − 4.2 − 3.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 24.0 + 14.4 + 9.6 + 9.3 + 0.3 − 0.0          July
− 0.1 + 0.0 − 42.9 − 51.2 + 8.3 + 9.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.6 − 4.0 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Aug.− 0.0 + 0.4 + 42.4 + 41.0 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.7 − − 7.2 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 8.4 + 0.9 + 0.0          Sep.
− 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 2.4 − 8.3 − 8.3 + 0.0 − + 3.0 − 1.4 + 4.4 + 3.4 + 1.1 − 0.1          Oct.
+ 0.1 − 0.0 + 9.4 − 3.6 + 13.0 + 11.6 + 1.4 − + 2.3 + 8.6 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 0.0          Nov.− 0.3 − 0.4 − 33.3 − 38.4 + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.5 − − 42.5 − 31.0 − 11.6 − 13.4 + 1.8 − 0.1          Dec.
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 57.4 + 63.5 − 6.1 − 5.0 − 1.1 − + 35.0 + 21.4 + 13.6 + 14.4 − 0.8 − 0.0 2018          Jan.
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 10.9 + 12.0 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 4.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 − 3.2 + 0.0          Feb.+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 45.8 − 55.0 + 9.1 + 11.5 − 2.3 − − 6.4 − 8.3 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Mar.
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.1 + 22.9 − 9.8 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.9 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 39.7 + 40.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 2.3 − + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − − 17.3 − 19.9 + 2.7 − 1.0 + 3.7 − − 26.8 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 8.0 − 1.6 −          June
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 12.2 + 9.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − + 13.9 + 6.3 + 7.6 + 5.4 + 2.2 −          July
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 16.4 + 16.3 + 20.0 − 3.7 − + 5.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Aug.− 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 22.1 − 21.2 − 20.9 − 0.3 − − 9.8 + 3.6 − 13.3 − 11.2 − 2.2 − 0.2          Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.02017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2017         Apr. 3,288.9 2,849.0 253.7 210.6 209.8 0.8 43.1 42.8 0.3 3,035.2 2,558.1
         May 3,292.9 2,851.5 249.3 211.0 210.0 0.9 38.4 37.5 0.8 3,043.5 2,568.8         June 3,296.8 2,856.1 251.1 214.1 213.5 0.6 37.0 36.5 0.5 3,045.7 2,577.7
         July 3,302.5 2,865.5 249.4 210.2 209.5 0.7 39.2 38.8 0.3 3,053.1 2,589.2
         Aug. 3,308.9 2,869.6 242.8 207.6 207.0 0.6 35.2 35.0 0.2 3,066.1 2,601.2         Sep. 3,317.6 2,878.5 246.2 214.1 213.5 0.6 32.2 32.0 0.2 3,071.3 2,608.7
         Oct. 3,326.1 2,887.3 248.0 215.3 214.7 0.6 32.7 32.6 0.2 3,078.1 2,616.7
         Nov. 3,343.7 2,899.8 248.0 215.4 214.9 0.5 32.6 31.9 0.7 3,095.6 2,636.3         Dec. 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018         Jan. 3,339.3 2,905.2 249.7 217.4 216.8 0.6 32.3 31.9 0.4 3,089.6 2,645.2
         Feb. 3,338.3 2,910.8 247.6 219.8 219.3 0.6 27.8 27.1 0.6 3,090.7 2,650.4         Mar. 3,342.5 2,919.9 253.5 225.6 224.9 0.7 27.9 27.6 0.2 3,089.0 2,653.3
         Apr. 3,348.5 2,926.9 254.0 223.0 222.1 0.9 31.0 30.3 0.7 3,094.5 2,664.6
         May 3,350.0 2,928.9 254.5 226.6 225.4 1.2 27.9 26.8 1.1 3,095.5 2,667.7         June 3,361.8 2,942.2 257.0 229.8 228.9 0.9 27.2 26.3 0.9 3,104.7 2,681.4
         July 3,368.0 2,950.1 256.7 225.4 224.7 0.7 31.3 29.8 1.5 3,111.3 2,692.5
         Aug. 3,368.5 2,957.0 250.5 223.9 223.1 0.8 26.6 25.7 0.9 3,118.0 2,700.6         Sep. 3,384.0 2,971.9 255.9 232.3 231.6 0.7 23.6 22.5 1.1 3,128.1 2,711.1
Changes *
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.42012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.92013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.62014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.82017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2017         Apr. + 5.9 + 8.1 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 10.6
         May + 3.9 + 2.5 − 4.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 5.2 + 0.5 + 8.0 + 7.8         June + 4.0 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 3.3 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 8.8
         July + 5.6 + 9.4 − 1.8 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 11.4
         Aug. + 6.4 + 4.1 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 13.0 + 12.0         Sep. + 7.3 + 8.9 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 6.5 − 0.0 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.8
         Oct. + 8.6 + 8.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 8.0
         Nov. + 17.7 + 12.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 17.6 + 17.8         Dec. − 11.1 − 5.5 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 4.7 + 3.6
2018         Jan. + 6.9 + 11.0 + 8.0 + 6.5 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.7
         Feb. − 1.0 + 5.5 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 − 4.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 5.0         Mar. + 4.2 + 9.2 + 5.9 + 5.8 + 5.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.9
         Apr. + 6.4 + 7.0 + 0.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 11.7
         May + 10.4 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 9.9 + 12.4         June + 11.8 + 13.3 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 9.3 + 13.6
         July + 6.2 + 7.9 − 0.3 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 9.9
         Aug. + 0.7 + 7.1 − 6.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 4.7 − 4.1 − 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.2         Sep. + 15.5 + 14.9 + 5.6 + 8.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.3 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 10.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 2017
2,331.2 265.4 2,065.9 226.8 18.4 477.2 265.1 23.6 241.5 212.0 − 1.7 2017          Apr.
2,342.6 266.2 2,076.4 226.2 18.3 474.8 261.3 23.4 238.0 213.4 − 1.7          May2,346.1 267.4 2,078.7 231.6 18.0 468.0 260.0 23.0 237.0 208.1 − 1.6          June
2,357.7 268.3 2,089.4 231.5 18.0 463.9 259.4 23.1 236.3 204.5 − 1.6          July
2,369.2 269.4 2,099.8 232.0 18.0 464.9 258.4 22.9 235.5 206.5 − 1.6          Aug.2,376.0 269.6 2,106.3 232.7 17.9 462.7 257.0 22.4 234.6 205.7 − 1.6          Sep.
2,383.4 270.9 2,112.5 233.2 17.8 461.4 256.6 22.7 234.0 204.8 − 1.6          Oct.
2,397.7 274.4 2,123.3 238.6 17.8 459.3 255.4 22.8 232.6 204.0 − 1.6          Nov.2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7          Dec.
2,405.7 274.8 2,130.8 239.5 17.4 444.4 250.9 22.0 228.9 193.6 − 1.5 2018          Jan.
2,414.1 275.1 2,139.0 236.3 17.5 440.3 250.3 21.9 228.4 190.1 − 1.5          Feb.2,419.5 275.2 2,144.2 233.8 17.4 435.8 247.9 22.1 225.8 187.9 − 1.6          Mar.
2,428.6 277.1 2,151.5 236.0 17.3 430.0 245.9 21.9 224.1 184.0 − 1.5          Apr.
2,431.2 270.8 2,160.4 236.6 17.3 427.7 245.5 21.9 223.6 182.2 − 1.5          May2,443.3 275.3 2,168.0 238.1 17.2 423.4 243.7 21.0 222.7 179.7 − 1.5          June
2,454.6 277.7 2,176.9 237.9 17.0 418.7 241.0 20.3 220.8 177.7 − 1.5          July
2,467.5 279.3 2,188.2 233.1 17.0 417.4 240.6 21.1 219.5 176.8 − 1.3          Aug.2,476.9 280.1 2,196.8 234.1 16.9 417.1 241.0 20.5 220.5 176.1 − 1.3          Sep.
Changes *
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017
+ 9.3 + 1.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 2.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 3.6 − − 0.0 2017          Apr.
+ 8.5 + 0.8 + 7.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.4 − − 0.0          May+ 3.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 5.4 − 0.3 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 5.4 − − 0.1          June
+ 11.4 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − + 0.0          July
+ 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 2.0 − − 0.0          Aug.+ 6.6 + 0.2 + 6.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.9 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 12.4 + 3.5 + 9.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.8 − −          Nov.+ 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 8.3 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 − + 0.1          Dec.
+ 5.7 + 1.6 + 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.9 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 3.4 − − 0.1 2018          Jan.
+ 8.2 + 0.3 + 8.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5 − − 0.0          Feb.+ 5.4 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 2.2 − + 0.0          Mar.
+ 9.1 + 1.8 + 7.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 3.9 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 11.8 + 2.6 + 9.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.8 − + 0.0          May+ 12.1 + 4.5 + 7.6 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 2.6 − − 0.1          June
+ 10.1 + 2.5 + 7.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.9 − − 0.0          July
+ 13.1 + 1.6 + 11.5 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.9 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 9.2 + 0.5 + 8.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2016 2,512.0 1,259.7 1,276.6 1,016.5 260.1 1,347.5 354.1 125.1 104.7 62.2 128.2 50.6 57.0 139.7
2017         Sep. 2,589.5 1,296.7 1,315.7 1,046.9 268.8 1,392.7 366.5 131.8 109.7 67.1 133.3 50.9 53.0 146.0
         Dec. 2,610.1 1,304.3 1,326.6 1,053.0 273.6 1,403.1 368.5 131.3 112.6 67.3 133.3 50.2 51.5 147.9
2018         Mar. 2,644.4 1,317.6 1,338.2 1,061.5 276.7 1,429.5 373.4 136.0 115.2 69.4 137.5 50.1 51.2 151.4
         June 2,672.2 1,333.8 1,357.5 1,074.2 283.3 1,445.5 380.1 139.2 114.2 71.9 136.5 50.5 51.0 152.8         Sep. 2,708.5 1,349.5 1,377.7 1,086.8 290.8 1,476.9 389.6 140.5 115.9 73.0 138.8 53.5 50.8 157.0
 Short-term lending
2016 205.5 − 6.9 − 6.9 174.3 3.7 29.7 4.4 11.8 43.2 3.6 4.4 29.32017         Sep. 213.5 − 6.5 − 6.5 183.5 3.6 33.8 4.0 14.0 45.2 3.9 4.3 28.1
         Dec. 210.6 − 6.5 − 6.5 180.8 3.6 32.3 4.0 13.6 45.2 3.4 4.0 27.4
2018         Mar. 224.9 − 6.8 − 6.8 195.3 3.8 36.6 5.0 14.9 48.4 3.5 4.2 29.1
         June 228.9 − 7.1 − 7.1 199.2 4.0 36.7 4.8 16.6 47.3 3.9 4.2 28.5         Sep. 231.6 − 7.4 − 7.4 201.9 4.3 37.3 4.2 16.6 48.7 4.2 4.0 29.4
 Medium-term lending
2016 264.1 − 34.5 − 34.5 186.4 13.5 23.6 5.5 10.5 17.2 4.5 11.2 41.82017         Sep. 269.6 − 33.9 − 33.9 190.2 13.6 23.1 5.1 11.2 18.2 4.4 10.4 45.6
         Dec. 273.5 − 34.0 − 34.0 193.1 14.0 23.6 5.1 11.3 18.2 4.3 10.3 46.7
2018         Mar. 275.2 − 34.0 − 34.0 194.0 14.4 23.3 5.0 11.7 18.6 4.2 10.4 47.0
         June 275.3 − 34.7 − 34.7 195.1 15.0 25.5 4.4 11.8 18.2 4.2 10.4 47.5         Sep. 280.1 − 35.6 − 35.6 199.4 15.6 24.9 4.4 12.2 18.3 4.4 11.1 48.0
 Long-term lending
2016 2,042.4 1,259.7 1,235.1 1,016.5 218.6 986.8 336.9 71.8 94.8 39.9 67.7 42.5 41.4 68.62017         Sep. 2,106.3 1,296.7 1,275.3 1,046.9 228.3 1,018.9 349.3 74.9 100.5 41.9 69.9 42.6 38.3 72.2
         Dec. 2,125.9 1,304.3 1,286.1 1,053.0 233.1 1,029.2 351.0 75.4 103.5 42.4 70.0 42.4 37.2 73.8
2018         Mar. 2,144.2 1,317.6 1,297.3 1,061.5 235.8 1,040.2 355.2 76.1 105.2 42.8 70.4 42.3 36.7 75.3
         June 2,168.0 1,333.8 1,315.7 1,074.2 241.5 1,051.1 361.1 77.0 105.0 43.5 71.0 42.4 36.4 76.8         Sep. 2,196.9 1,349.5 1,334.6 1,086.8 247.8 1,075.6 369.7 78.4 107.4 44.2 71.8 44.9 35.7 79.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2017         Q3 + 29.5 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 14.5 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.0
         Q4 + 18.7 + 9.7 + 12.7 + 7.8 + 4.9 + 8.9 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.5 + 1.5
2018         Q1 + 33.6 + 10.6 + 11.1 + 8.1 + 3.0 + 26.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.4
         Q2 + 37.0 + 15.4 + 17.8 + 11.8 + 6.0 + 23.1 + 6.6 + 4.1 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.6         Q3 + 35.2 + 8.5 + 19.4 + 11.1 + 8.3 + 19.3 + 6.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 2.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 4.1
 Short-term lending
2017         Q3 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Q4 − 2.8 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.8
2018         Q1 + 14.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 14.4 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.7
         Q2 + 4.0 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6         Q3 + 2.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.9
 Medium-term lending
2017         Q3 + 2.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3
         Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.1
2018         Q1 + 2.0 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
         Q2 + 8.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 7.3 + 0.6 + 3.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6         Q3 + 4.6 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.5
 Long-term lending
2017         Q3 + 27.2 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 12.8 + 5.4 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.7
         Q4 + 17.6 + 9.7 + 12.6 + 7.8 + 4.8 + 8.7 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.1
2018         Q1 + 17.4 + 10.6 + 10.8 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 10.3 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6
         Q2 + 24.1 + 15.4 + 16.9 + 11.8 + 5.1 + 11.7 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6         Q3 + 27.8 + 8.5 + 18.2 + 11.1 + 7.1 + 13.5 + 5.2 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 2.7
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
680.0 204.7 36.3 181.6 401.3 46.0 1,150.1 919.0 231.2 163.3 9.2 14.4 3.6 2016
700.9 211.2 41.1 185.7 410.4 48.3 1,182.2 945.4 236.7 170.4 8.9 14.6 3.7 2017          Sep.
709.0 214.9 42.3 186.4 411.2 47.7 1,192.3 954.3 237.9 171.6 8.6 14.8 3.7          Dec.
718.8 217.2 44.1 188.5 414.4 48.2 1,200.0 961.1 239.0 173.3 8.4 14.9 3.7 2018          Mar.
729.3 221.8 47.3 190.7 415.5 48.3 1,211.8 973.7 238.1 173.0 8.4 14.9 3.8          June747.4 231.1 48.2 194.8 430.6 48.6 1,216.6 984.4 232.2 172.2 8.4 15.0 3.7          Sep.
Short-term lending
47.9 8.4 5.7 10.2 23.9 5.1 30.6 3.2 27.4 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 201650.2 9.6 6.7 10.0 23.7 5.5 29.4 2.9 26.5 1.7 8.9 0.5 0.0 2017          Sep.
50.9 10.1 6.8 10.3 23.3 5.0 29.3 2.9 26.4 1.6 8.6 0.5 0.0          Dec.
53.5 10.2 7.9 10.7 23.7 5.8 29.0 3.0 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.6 − 2018          Mar.
57.2 10.7 10.2 10.6 23.5 5.7 29.2 3.1 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.5 −          June57.4 11.6 10.3 10.2 24.0 5.7 29.2 3.2 26.0 1.5 8.4 0.5 0.0          Sep.
Medium-term lending
72.1 11.1 8.2 19.3 32.9 3.6 77.3 21.1 56.2 51.0 − 0.5 0.0 201672.2 11.9 9.1 18.3 32.9 3.6 78.9 20.2 58.6 54.0 − 0.5 0.0 2017          Sep.
73.5 12.1 9.3 18.3 32.7 3.6 79.9 20.0 59.9 55.2 − 0.6 0.0          Dec.
73.9 12.6 9.3 18.3 32.8 3.4 80.7 19.7 61.0 56.5 − 0.5 0.0 2018          Mar.
73.0 13.0 9.7 19.2 31.0 3.4 79.6 19.7 59.9 55.4 − 0.5 0.0          June76.2 14.1 9.8 20.0 31.7 3.5 80.1 20.0 60.2 55.8 − 0.5 0.1          Sep.
Long-term lending
560.0 185.2 22.4 152.2 344.5 37.3 1,042.3 894.7 147.6 110.5 − 13.3 3.5 2016578.5 189.8 25.3 157.4 353.8 39.3 1,073.8 922.3 151.6 114.8 − 13.6 3.7 2017          Sep.
584.6 192.6 26.2 157.8 355.3 39.2 1,083.1 931.4 151.6 114.8 − 13.7 3.7          Dec.
591.3 194.5 27.0 159.4 357.9 39.1 1,090.3 938.5 151.9 115.3 − 13.7 3.7 2018          Mar.
599.1 198.1 27.4 160.9 361.1 39.2 1,103.0 950.9 152.1 116.0 − 13.9 3.7          June613.8 205.3 28.0 164.7 374.9 39.5 1,107.2 961.2 146.0 114.9 − 14.0 3.7          Sep.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 8.9 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 14.9 + 12.1 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2017          Q3
+ 8.5 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 9.8 + 8.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
+ 11.0 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 2.9 + 3.6 + 0.5 + 7.5 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 14.5 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 14.0 + 11.1 + 2.8 + 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 9.6 + 4.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.4 + 2.3 + 6.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
+ 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 2017          Q3
+ 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 3.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Q2− 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2017          Q3
+ 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 3.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 8.6 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.6 − + 0.2 − 0.0 2017          Q3
+ 6.5 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 7.7 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 7.0 + 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 7.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 12.3 + 11.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 6.9 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 14.2 + 13.0 + 1.2 + 6.0 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.52016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.92017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2017         Oct. 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 212.7 640.7 54.5 586.2 581.5 44.8 29.9 15.7 1.1
         Nov. 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 212.4 645.0 55.3 589.7 581.0 44.3 30.1 15.1 1.6         Dec. 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2018         Jan. 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 211.5 642.6 55.8 586.8 582.4 42.9 30.4 16.1 1.4
         Feb. 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 209.9 641.8 54.4 587.4 582.2 42.3 30.9 15.9 1.1         Mar. 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 212.9 637.8 52.6 585.2 581.3 41.8 31.5 15.8 0.6
         Apr. 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 210.7 635.6 50.7 584.9 580.5 41.3 31.9 15.1 0.9
         May 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 210.8 636.9 51.9 585.0 580.2 40.9 32.4 14.8 0.7         June 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 221.2 635.6 51.4 584.2 579.3 40.6 32.6 15.3 0.7
         July 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 218.3 634.0 52.0 582.1 578.2 40.0 32.8 14.9 1.5
         Aug. 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 215.1 632.8 53.8 579.0 577.6 39.5 33.1 14.9 0.5         Sep. 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 210.9 633.0 54.7 578.3 577.3 39.1 33.9 14.8 0.3
Changes*
2016 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 8.9 + 2.0 + 10.2 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.32017 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 24.7 − 2.8 + 10.1 − 12.8 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.8
2017         Oct. + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6
         Nov. + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.4         Dec. − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 − 4.8 + 0.6 + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0
2018         Jan. + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 + 3.9 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Feb. − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3         Mar. − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 + 3.0 − 3.9 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.5
         Apr. + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 1.3 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2
         May + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2         June + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 + 10.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.0
         July + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 2.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.8
         Aug. + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 3.2 − 1.1 + 1.9 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 1.0         Sep. − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2017         Oct. 207.6 60.0 139.5 72.6 67.0 24.4 42.6 3.7 4.4 25.8 2.3 0.0
         Nov. 211.1 61.1 142.2 72.3 69.9 25.8 44.1 3.6 4.2 25.8 2.3 0.0         Dec. 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018         Jan. 202.1 55.0 139.0 69.6 69.4 27.0 42.4 3.7 4.4 26.1 2.4 −
         Feb. 204.3 58.8 137.5 68.7 68.7 26.2 42.5 3.7 4.4 26.1 2.4 −         Mar. 205.9 57.2 140.6 72.2 68.4 25.2 43.2 3.7 4.4 26.0 2.3 −
         Apr. 205.1 56.9 140.2 72.3 67.9 23.8 44.1 3.7 4.4 26.0 2.3 −
         May 215.9 62.8 145.0 74.7 70.3 25.1 45.2 3.8 4.3 26.0 2.2 −         June 221.4 63.3 150.0 79.3 70.7 24.9 45.8 3.8 4.3 25.8 2.2 −
         July 214.9 57.0 149.9 77.3 72.6 25.8 46.8 3.8 4.3 25.7 2.2 0.7
         Aug. 223.9 62.7 153.2 79.1 74.0 25.7 48.3 3.8 4.3 25.7 2.2 −         Sep. 221.1 60.4 152.7 76.9 75.9 27.1 48.8 3.8 4.3 25.6 2.2 −
Changes*
2016 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.7 + 8.7 + 6.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.52017 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 2.4 − 14.1 + 11.7 + 10.7 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3
+ 0.0
2017         Oct. − 3.5 + 1.1 − 4.5 − 5.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov. + 4.1 + 1.6 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Dec. − 11.1 − 2.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.6 − 4.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
2018         Jan. + 0.4 − 3.9 + 4.3 + 3.8 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 −
         Feb. + 2.2 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Mar. + 1.6 − 1.6 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
         Apr. − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 −
         May + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.8 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.0 −         June + 5.3 + 0.5 + 4.9 + 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         July − 6.4 − 6.3 − 0.1 − 2.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7
         Aug. + 9.1 + 5.7 + 3.3 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7         Sep. − 2.9 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 2.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.92017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.6
2017         Oct. 3,188.8 1,856.9 713.8 140.1 573.7 30.1 543.5 577.8 40.3 4.1 13.4 1.1
         Nov. 3,215.7 1,882.9 715.3 140.1 575.2 29.5 545.6 577.5 40.1 4.3 12.8 1.6         Dec. 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.6
2018         Jan. 3,226.8 1,894.3 715.1 142.0 573.2 28.7 544.5 578.8 38.6 4.4 13.8 1.4
         Feb. 3,221.5 1,890.8 714.2 141.1 573.0 28.2 544.9 578.5 38.0 4.9 13.6 1.1         Mar. 3,215.8 1,890.8 710.1 140.7 569.4 27.4 542.1 577.6 37.4 5.5 13.5 0.6
         Apr. 3,234.4 1,914.4 706.1 138.5 567.7 26.9 540.8 576.8 37.0 5.9 12.8 0.9
         May 3,255.5 1,939.8 702.7 136.1 566.6 26.8 539.7 576.4 36.6 6.4 12.6 0.7         June 3,251.8 1,933.3 706.7 141.8 564.9 26.5 538.4 575.5 36.3 6.9 13.1 0.7
         July 3,258.2 1,945.7 702.4 141.0 561.4 26.1 535.3 574.5 35.7 7.0 12.8 0.8
         Aug. 3,261.1 1,957.3 694.7 135.9 558.8 28.1 530.7 573.8 35.3 7.4 12.7 0.5         Sep. 3,261.8 1,962.1 691.2 134.1 557.1 27.6 529.5 573.5 34.8 8.2 12.6 0.3
Changes*
2016 + 101.7 + 124.2 − 8.9 − 2.2 − 6.7 + 3.8 − 10.5 − 8.0 − 5.7 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.92017 + 104.1 + 141.3 − 25.1 − 10.6 − 14.4 − 0.7 − 13.8 − 5.3 − 6.7 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.8
2017         Oct. + 19.2 + 23.9 − 4.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7
         Nov. + 26.2 + 25.6 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.4         Dec. + 5.2 − 0.9 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.8 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1
2018         Jan. + 7.2 + 11.8 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Feb. − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3         Mar. − 5.6 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 0.8 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5
         Apr. + 19.4 + 23.7 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2
         May + 21.1 + 25.3 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2         June − 3.6 − 6.5 + 4.2 + 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0
         July + 6.6 + 12.4 − 4.2 − 0.8 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. + 2.8 + 11.6 − 7.7 − 5.1 − 2.6 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4         Sep. + 1.0 + 5.2 − 3.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.92017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.6
2017         Oct. 1,038.4 561.0 457.7 90.0 367.7 17.8 349.8 6.9 12.9 2.8 10.9 1.1
         Nov. 1,047.0 567.1 459.8 90.6 369.3 17.3 352.0 6.9 13.1 2.9 10.4 1.6         Dec. 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.6
2018         Jan. 1,051.4 573.9 458.0 93.6 364.4 16.0 348.4 6.9 12.6 2.6 11.4 1.4
         Feb. 1,036.8 560.8 456.5 92.5 364.0 15.5 348.6 7.0 12.5 2.7 11.2 1.1         Mar. 1,026.9 555.0 452.5 92.1 360.5 14.9 345.6 7.0 12.4 2.8 11.1 0.6
         Apr. 1,034.1 566.2 448.6 89.6 359.0 14.6 344.4 7.1 12.3 2.9 10.5 0.9
         May 1,042.4 578.3 444.6 87.0 357.7 14.6 343.0 7.2 12.3 2.9 10.2 0.7         June 1,030.4 562.4 448.5 92.7 355.8 14.2 341.6 7.2 12.4 2.9 10.7 0.7
         July 1,033.0 569.8 444.0 91.5 352.5 14.0 338.5 7.2 12.1 2.6 10.4 0.8
         Aug. 1,028.5 573.1 436.2 86.3 349.9 16.3 333.6 7.2 12.0 2.5 10.3 0.5         Sep. 1,021.9 570.3 432.5 84.5 348.0 16.0 332.0 7.2 11.9 2.6 10.3 0.3
Changes*
2016 + 4.6 + 15.9 − 11.2 − 1.2 − 10.1 + 3.2 − 13.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.92017 + 19.5 + 40.2 − 20.0 − 4.7 − 15.4 − 0.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.8
2017         Oct. + 11.0 + 14.7 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.7
         Nov. + 7.9 + 5.7 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4         Dec. − 5.7 − 8.2 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.1
2018         Jan. + 11.5 + 14.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Feb. − 14.5 − 13.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3         Mar. − 9.9 − 5.9 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.5
         Apr. + 8.1 + 11.2 − 3.0 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2
         May + 8.3 + 12.1 − 3.9 − 2.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2         June − 11.9 − 15.9 + 4.1 + 5.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0
         July + 2.7 + 7.4 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. − 4.5 + 3.4 − 7.8 − 5.2 − 2.6 + 2.3 − 4.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4         Sep. − 6.5 − 2.7 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.62016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.52017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2018         Apr. 2,200.2 1,348.3 1,310.8 228.2 926.6 156.0 37.5 257.5 243.7 21.8 184.7 37.3
         May 2,213.1 1,361.5 1,323.2 231.2 935.5 156.5 38.3 258.1 244.3 21.7 185.3 37.2         June 2,221.4 1,370.9 1,332.7 228.7 946.4 157.5 38.2 258.2 244.4 21.7 185.6 37.1
         July 2,225.2 1,375.9 1,338.7 235.3 946.2 157.2 37.2 258.4 244.5 21.5 185.9 37.1
         Aug. 2,232.5 1,384.1 1,346.4 243.2 950.9 152.3 37.7 258.6 244.5 21.4 186.3 36.7         Sep. 2,239.8 1,391.8 1,353.8 239.8 961.9 152.1 38.0 258.7 244.6 21.3 186.8 36.6
Changes*
2016 + 97.1 + 108.4 + 105.3 + 17.5 + 78.7 + 9.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.32017 + 84.7 + 101.1 + 99.8 + 17.5 + 77.8 + 4.5 + 1.3 − 5.0 − 5.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 1.3
2018         Apr. + 11.3 + 12.5 + 12.0 + 5.0 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0
         May + 12.8 + 13.2 + 12.4 + 3.0 + 8.8 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.0         June + 8.3 + 9.4 + 9.5 − 2.5 + 10.9 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1
         July + 3.9 + 5.0 + 6.0 + 6.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0
         Aug. + 7.3 + 8.2 + 7.7 + 3.2 + 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2         Sep. + 7.5 + 7.9 + 7.6 − 3.4 + 10.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.52016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.22017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2018         Apr. 205.1 8.4 4.1 1.4 2.7 0.1 13.0 45.0 11.2 18.1 14.4 1.2 13.0
         May 215.9 8.8 4.5 1.4 2.8 0.1 12.9 45.7 10.8 19.3 14.4 1.2 13.0         June 221.4 9.3 4.9 1.6 2.6 0.1 12.7 49.3 11.3 22.4 14.4 1.2 13.0
         July 214.9 10.0 5.1 2.2 2.6 0.1 12.7 47.9 11.6 20.4 14.8 1.2 13.0
         Aug. 223.9 10.6 6.1 1.7 2.6 0.1 12.7 48.0 10.7 21.4 14.7 1.2 12.9         Sep. 221.1 9.2 5.1 1.4 2.6 0.1 12.7 48.3 11.2 21.4 14.5 1.2 12.9
Changes*
2016 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.32017 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 − 0.5
2018         Apr. − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 10.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0         June + 5.3 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.6 + 0.5 + 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         July − 6.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 −
         Aug. + 9.1 + 0.6 + 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1         Sep. − 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 201513.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 201614.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 2017
13.9 48.8 208.7 12.3 196.4 569.7 562.0 7.7 24.7 3.0 2.4 − 2018          Apr.
13.8 49.2 208.9 12.2 196.7 569.2 561.5 7.7 24.3 3.5 2.4 −          May13.8 49.1 209.1 12.3 196.8 568.3 560.6 7.7 23.9 4.0 2.4 −          June
13.9 49.5 208.9 12.2 196.7 567.3 559.7 7.6 23.6 4.4 2.4 −          July
14.1 49.6 208.9 11.8 197.1 566.6 559.0 7.6 23.2 5.0 2.4 −          Aug.14.1 49.6 209.1 11.6 197.5 566.4 558.8 7.6 23.0 5.6 2.4 −          Sep.
Changes*
+ 0.6 − 1.0 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 7.9 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 2016+ 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 2017
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 2018          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          May− 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          June
+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 −          July
+ 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          Aug.+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 −          Sep.
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
52.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 201556.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 201661.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 2017
55.4 27.9 7.6 14.3 5.6 0.0 96.3 13.6 45.0 36.5 1.1 − 2018          Apr.
61.0 32.6 8.2 14.6 5.6 0.0 100.4 14.9 45.8 38.6 1.1 −          May60.5 31.0 9.3 14.6 5.6 0.0 102.3 16.1 45.9 39.2 1.1 −          June
56.7 27.4 9.1 14.5 5.6 0.0 100.4 12.9 45.6 40.7 1.1 −          July
63.2 32.6 10.1 14.8 5.7 0.0 102.2 13.3 45.9 41.8 1.1 −          Aug.60.0 29.8 9.8 14.8 5.6 0.0 103.6 14.2 44.3 44.0 1.1 −          Sep.
Changes*
+ 3.7 + 2.4 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.2 − 2016+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 11.8 +11.6 − 0.4 − 2017
+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 2018          Apr.
+ 5.5 + 4.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − + 4.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 −          May− 0.5 − 1.7 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 1.7 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.0 −          June
− 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 1.9 − 3.2 − 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 −          July
+ 6.5 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 − + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.0 −          Aug.− 3.3 − 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 2.2 + 0.0 −          Sep.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At 3 on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.72016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.72017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2018         May 587.4 580.2 539.6 340.6 40.6 29.5 7.2 6.4 0.1 44.8 40.9 29.9 3.9
         June 586.4 579.3 539.1 339.4 40.1 29.1 7.2 6.3 0.1 44.5 40.6 29.8 4.0
         July 585.4 578.2 538.6 337.4 39.7 28.7 7.1 6.3 0.1 44.0 40.0 29.5 4.0
         Aug. 584.7 577.6 538.4 336.7 39.2 28.3 7.1 6.3 0.1 43.5 39.5 29.3 4.0         Sep. 584.3 577.3 538.4 335.2 38.9 28.0 7.0 6.2 0.1 43.0 39.1 29.0 3.9
Changes*
2016 − 8.8 − 7.9 + 2.5 − 18.4 − 10.4 − 10.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 . − 5.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 0.02017 − 6.2 − 5.6 + 1.5 − 13.1 − 7.1 − 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 . − 7.2 − 6.7 − 4.4 − 0.5
2018         May − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9
         June − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0
         July − 1.1 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Aug. − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0         Sep. − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
  
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiablerate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  
1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.52016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.52017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2018         May 1,103.2 146.5 27.0 376.1 89.7 107.7 4.4 31.3 7.5 964.3 0.3 0.2 30.4 0.4
         June 1,088.9 141.9 26.1 364.4 83.4 101.1 4.2 29.4 7.1 958.3 0.5 0.2 30.1 0.5
         July 1,080.7 139.7 26.4 354.2 81.4 99.2 4.3 27.7 7.2 953.8 0.6 0.2 30.0 0.5
         Aug. 1,085.9 139.8 27.5 351.3 82.8 101.9 4.3 28.0 7.2 956.0 0.8 0.2 30.2 0.5         Sep. 1,096.1 140.4 27.0 351.5 83.8 102.3 4.1 23.6 7.1 970.2 0.7 0.2 30.6 0.4
Changes*
2016 + 22.1 − 12.0 − 2.1 + 23.0 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 8.8 + 0.1 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.02017 − 30.8 − 29.7 − 2.1 − 36.7 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 − 22.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0
2018         May + 17.6 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 12.2 + 2.5 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
         June − 14.3 − 4.6 − 0.9 − 11.7 − 6.3 − 6.6 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 5.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0
         July − 8.1 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 10.2 − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Aug. + 5.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.0         Sep. + 10.1 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 + 14.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2016 20 218.8 43.6 0.0 16.6 13.8 98.6 18.1 23.4 2.5 21.4 163.8 5.5 2.0 10.2 89.2
2017 20 229.2 41.8 0.0 15.8 12.3 104.4 24.8 25.1 2.6 23.0 168.6 9.5 3.0 11.0 83.6
2018         July 20 233.5 42.0 0.0 15.9 12.1 107.4 25.5 25.6 2.7 23.5 170.8 10.4 3.1 11.6 7.3
         Aug. 20 233.9 41.6 0.0 16.0 12.0 107.9 25.6 25.8 2.7 23.5 171.2 10.4 3.1 11.6 7.2         Sep. 20 234.5 41.5 0.0 15.9 12.0 108.7 25.6 25.9 2.7 23.0 171.7 10.3 3.3 11.6 6.9
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         July 12 163.0 26.2 − 6.8 9.1 83.3 22.0 11.7 1.7 21.0 111.1 10.2 3.1 7.9 4.5
         Aug. 12 163.2 25.8 − 6.8 9.1 83.7 22.1 11.8 1.7 21.0 111.3 10.1 3.1 7.9 4.4         Sep. 12 163.7 25.7 − 6.8 9.0 84.3 22.1 11.9 1.7 20.6 111.7 10.1 3.3 7.9 4.3
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         July 8 70.6 15.9 0.0 9.1 3.0 24.1 3.5 14.0 0.9 2.6 59.7 0.3 − 3.7 2.8
         Aug. 8 70.8 15.9 0.0 9.1 3.0 24.3 3.5 14.0 1.0 2.5 59.8 0.3 − 3.7 2.7         Sep. 8 70.8 15.8 0.0 9.1 3.0 24.4 3.5 14.0 1.0 2.4 60.0 0.3 − 3.7 2.6
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2016 27.5 2.2 7.6 46.8 27.4 40.9 17.2 4.4 4.9 3.7 18.8 16.3 8.0 8.0 7.2 0.2
2017 26.7 2.3 7.6 45.3 26.0 39.6 16.4 4.1 4.5 3.4 18.7 16.4 7.4 7.1 6.2 0.2
2018         July 2.1 0.0 0.7 4.1 2.4 3.8 1.5 0.5 0.5 0.4 1.8 17.4 7.3 0.6 0.0
         Aug. 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.6 2.0 3.3 1.2 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.7 17.3 7.3 0.5 0.0         Sep. 2.1 0.0 0.5 3.2 1.7 3.0 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.6 17.1 7.2 0.6 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         July 1.4 0.0 0.4 3.1 1.8 2.9 1.1 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.4 12.4 4.1 0.4 0.0
         Aug. 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.3 2.6 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.4 12.2 4.0 0.4 0.0         Sep. 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.3 1.1 2.2 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.2 12.2 4.0 0.5 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         July 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.6 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.0 3.2 0.1 0.0
         Aug. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.1 3.3 0.1 0.0         Sep. 0.7 0.0 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 5.0 3.2 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV.  Banks
  
13.  Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which:
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in thesubsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  
7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.02016 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.32017 52 187 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2017         Nov. 51 187 1,712.1 516.9 505.0 187.2 317.9 11.9 562.5 481.7 13.6 468.1 80.9 632.7 416.0
         Dec. 52 187 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2018         Jan. 50 184 1,741.4 508.5 496.7 201.0 295.7 11.8 536.6 454.7 13.2 441.5 81.9 696.3 444.0
         Feb. 50 183 1,670.4 510.1 497.5 210.0 287.5 12.5 526.2 450.5 12.7 437.8 75.7 634.1 413.4         Mar. 50 183 1,594.2 507.4 495.1 188.2 306.8 12.4 506.8 426.9 12.9 414.0 79.9 580.0 385.2
         Apr. 49 182 1,634.4 504.6 491.8 187.1 304.8 12.7 524.6 443.8 10.8 433.1 80.8 605.2 408.0
         May 48 181 1,612.2 497.1 484.2 190.3 293.9 12.8 531.9 452.8 14.5 438.3 79.1 583.2 364.2         June 48 182 1,533.3 473.3 461.3 182.2 279.1 11.9 510.3 431.6 14.5 417.1 78.7 549.8 350.1
         July 48 182 1,523.3 472.0 459.9 186.8 273.1 12.1 523.2 443.2 23.6 419.6 80.0 528.1 328.8
         Aug. 48 182 1,501.4 450.4 438.8 183.2 255.6 11.6 524.4 442.6 22.5 420.1 81.8 526.6 328.2
Changes *
2016 + 0 − 7 + 29.1 + 49.3 + 52.9 + 43.7 + 9.2 − 3.5 − 56.4 − 24.6 + 0.5 − 25.1 − 31.8 + 24.9 − 14.8
2017 + 1 − 4 − 216.7 − 52.5 − 49.4 − 7.9 − 41.5 − 3.1 − 10.9 − 10.0 − 1.4 − 8.6 − 0.9 − 74.6 − 60.4
2017         Dec. + 1 − − 63.5 − 20.0 − 18.0 + 9.9 − 27.9 − 2.0 − 29.8 − 35.0 − 0.5 − 34.5 + 5.2 − 6.7 − 11.1
2018         Jan. − 2 − 3 + 95.9 + 22.3 + 20.2 + 4.0 + 16.2 + 2.1 + 17.0 + 19.5 + 0.1 + 19.4 − 2.5 + 73.5 + 46.4
         Feb. − − 1 − 72.6 − 2.9 − 3.6 + 9.0 − 12.6 + 0.7 − 16.0 − 9.2 − 0.5 − 8.8 − 6.7 − 63.8 − 33.9         Mar. − − − 75.6 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 21.8 + 21.0 − 0.2 − 17.5 − 21.8 + 0.2 − 22.0 + 4.3 − 53.6 − 26.9
         Apr. − 1 − 1 + 39.1 − 7.0 − 7.3 − 1.2 − 6.2 + 0.3 + 13.6 + 13.2 − 2.2 + 15.3 + 0.5 + 24.1 + 19.4
         May − 1 − 1 − 24.6 − 15.2 − 15.1 + 3.2 − 18.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 3.8 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 24.4 − 50.3         June − + 1 − 79.0 − 24.1 − 23.2 − 8.1 − 15.1 − 0.9 − 21.5 − 21.2 − 0.0 − 21.1 − 0.3 − 33.5 − 14.3
         July − − − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.6 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 15.2 + 13.5 + 9.1 + 4.4 + 1.6 − 21.1 − 20.3
         Aug. − − − 22.4 − 23.1 − 22.6 − 3.6 − 19.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 1.7 − 2.0 − 1.5
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2017         Nov. 20 50 277.3 74.1 67.5 27.8 39.7 6.6 145.5 117.9 22.6 95.3 27.6 57.7 −
         Dec. 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2018         Jan. 20 50 274.8 71.5 64.6 25.6 39.0 6.9 146.3 119.8 22.2 97.6 26.5 56.9 −
         Feb. 20 50 273.9 73.0 66.4 26.6 39.8 6.6 147.0 120.3 22.7 97.7 26.6 53.9 −         Mar. 20 50 276.0 72.3 65.8 26.5 39.3 6.5 150.3 123.1 22.5 100.6 27.2 53.4 −
         Apr. 20 50 267.7 64.4 58.0 23.6 34.3 6.4 147.7 120.7 21.7 99.0 27.0 55.7 −
         May 20 50 274.5 67.0 60.5 26.3 34.1 6.6 149.3 121.6 21.8 99.8 27.6 58.2 −         June 20 48 269.1 64.2 57.9 24.5 33.4 6.3 148.8 122.5 21.9 100.5 26.3 56.1 −
         July 19 47 248.5 62.2 56.0 24.5 31.5 6.3 136.5 112.6 13.5 99.1 23.8 49.8 −
         Aug. 19 47 245.8 56.7 50.6 21.1 29.5 6.1 137.9 113.2 13.4 99.8 24.7 51.1 −
Changes *
2016 − 4 − 5 − 56.8 − 45.9 − 42.6 − 28.7 − 13.9 − 3.3 − 22.7 − 22.1 + 0.4 − 22.4 − 0.6 + 11.8 −2017 − − 3 − 33.3 − 4.9 − 2.4 + 3.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 8.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 20.2 −
2017         Dec. − − + 0.1 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 4.5 − 0.4 + 4.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 −
2018         Jan. − − + 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.8 + 0.3 −
         Feb. − − − 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 3.0 −         Mar. − − + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.5 − 0.5 −
         Apr. − − − 9.2 − 8.5 − 8.2 − 2.9 − 5.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.2 −
         May − − + 4.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.7 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 2.5 −         June − − 2 − 5.4 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 1.8 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 2.1 −
         July − 1 − 1 − 20.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 12.2 − 9.7 − 8.4 − 1.3 − 2.5 − 6.4 −
         Aug. − − − 3.4 − 6.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.4 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
November 2018
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of which:paper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 20151,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 20161,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
1,051.4 695.8 352.4 343.4 355.6 16.0 13.1 2.8 339.6 95.1 49.4 516.2 412.2 2017          Nov.
1,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2          Dec.
1,040.4 688.7 379.5 309.2 351.8 15.6 14.0 1.6 336.2 109.6 51.4 539.9 442.8 2018          Jan.
1,013.9 653.6 383.8 269.8 360.3 14.9 13.2 1.6 345.4 105.7 51.4 499.5 413.3          Feb.1,006.2 672.6 386.6 285.9 333.6 14.7 13.0 1.7 318.9 97.3 50.9 439.9 387.6          Mar.
1,015.5 678.3 389.4 288.9 337.2 14.8 13.2 1.6 322.5 99.6 51.1 468.2 399.6          Apr.
1,034.4 685.7 411.6 274.1 348.7 13.5 11.9 1.5 335.2 104.5 51.7 421.6 358.5          May
973.0 658.6 407.0 251.7 314.4 12.4 10.9 1.5 301.9 109.6 51.7 399.0 347.1          June
972.2 662.1 405.8 256.3 310.1 10.8 9.3 1.5 299.3 101.5 53.1 396.5 323.8          July
957.3 651.9 404.6 247.4 305.3 10.4 8.8 1.5 295.0 108.1 53.2 382.8 325.2          Aug.
Changes *
+ 66.8 + 76.8 + 65.6 + 11.2 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 29.6 + 1.2 − 18.1 − 17.3 2016− 97.3 − 80.7 − 52.1 − 28.6 − 16.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 17.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 86.5 − 58.1 2017
− 47.9 − 10.3 + 20.4 − 30.6 − 37.7 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.9 − 37.7 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 17.6 − 10.8 2017          Dec.
+ 48.2 + 13.9 + 6.7 + 7.2 + 34.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 34.6 + 15.0 − 0.5 + 41.4 + 49.2 2018          Jan.
− 31.1 − 39.4 + 4.4 − 43.8 + 8.3 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 40.4 − 32.9          Feb.− 6.1 + 20.5 + 2.8 + 17.7 − 26.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 26.4 − 7.9 − 0.5 − 59.6 − 24.3          Mar.
+ 5.5 + 2.0 + 2.8 − 0.8 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 28.2 + 8.4          Apr.
+ 11.5 + 0.3 + 22.2 − 21.8 + 11.2 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 12.5 + 2.5 + 0.6 − 46.6 − 47.6          May− 61.7 − 27.3 − 4.6 − 22.7 − 34.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 33.3 + 4.9 + 0.1 − 22.5 − 11.6          June
+ 0.6 + 4.7 − 1.2 + 6.0 − 4.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 7.5 + 1.3 − 2.6 − 22.3          July
− 16.4 − 11.5 − 1.2 − 10.3 − 4.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 13.6 + 0.4          Aug.
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017
207.8 98.1 53.3 44.8 109.7 11.9 6.1 5.8 97.8 12.9 23.1 33.6 − 2017          Nov.
207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 −          Dec.
206.0 96.1 50.3 45.8 110.0 12.1 6.3 5.9 97.8 13.0 24.0 31.7 − 2018          Jan.
205.2 94.1 50.6 43.6 111.1 12.0 6.2 5.8 99.1 13.8 23.6 31.3 −          Feb.207.3 96.0 50.4 45.5 111.3 11.2 5.3 5.9 100.1 13.7 23.9 31.1 −          Mar.
200.4 90.3 48.5 41.7 110.1 11.6 5.7 5.9 98.6 13.4 23.8 30.1 −          Apr.
206.7 95.4 49.8 45.6 111.2 12.3 6.4 5.9 98.9 13.4 23.9 30.5 −          May202.6 95.4 50.9 44.5 107.2 12.1 6.1 6.0 95.1 12.7 23.8 30.0 −          June
184.1 77.4 40.3 37.2 106.7 12.3 6.3 5.9 94.4 12.7 22.9 28.8 −          July
181.4 78.7 40.2 38.5 102.8 9.5 5.6 3.8 93.3 12.7 22.9 28.7 −          Aug.
Changes *
− 46.2 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 12.7 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 2.9 − 11.9 − 0.8 − 2.5 − 7.3 − 2016− 32.8 − 33.7 − 22.0 − 11.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2017
− 0.1 − 1.4 − 3.5 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 1.1 − 2017          Dec.
+ 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 2018          Jan.
− 1.7 − 2.4 + 0.3 − 2.7 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.8 −          Feb.+ 2.4 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 −          Mar.
− 7.7 − 6.2 − 1.9 − 4.3 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 −          Apr.
+ 4.9 + 4.4 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 −          May− 4.2 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 4.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.5 −          June
− 18.2 − 17.8 − 10.6 − 7.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.1 −          July
− 3.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 4.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 − 2.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 −          Aug.
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
November 2018
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.02013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.02014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.02015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.02016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.02017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018         Aug. 12,710.2 127.1 126.7 1,348.7 1,222.0 0.0
         Sep. 12,705.7 127.1 126.7 1,369.0 1,242.3 0.0         Oct.  
p 12,717.6 127.2 126.8 ... ... ...
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 12013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 22014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 02016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 02017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018         Aug. 3,540,040 27.9 35,400 35,245 438,992 403,747 1
         Sep. 3,537,002 27.8 35,370 35,216 460,046 424,830 1         Oct.  
p 3,552,796 27.9 35,528 35,374 ... ... ...
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,324
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,2632014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,3122015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,5782016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,8592017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018         Aug. 7,117 4,860 3,397 11,525 6,479 100 1,766
         Sep. 7,195 4,905 3,303 11,554 6,510 93 1,655         Oct. 7,212 4,940 3,420 11,522 6,576 97 1,607
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,4532013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,1592014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,1462016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,7762017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018         Aug. 2,417,835 1,505 430,763 578,742 111,196
         Sep. 2,421,759 666 428,594 577,771 108,207         Oct. 2,433,091 755 430,896 577,119 110,937
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
November 2018
VI. Interest rates
 
1. ECB interest rates 2. Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code  1 
2005 Dec.                 6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr.                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan.                1 2.57 2009 Jan.                1 1.62
         July               13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar.                 8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov.                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dec.                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan.                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug.                 9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct.               11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan.                1 0.12
         Dec.               13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan.                1 1.14
2013 May                 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan.                1 −0.13
2007 Mar.               14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov.                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan.                1 1.21
2014 June               11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan.                1 −0.63
2008 July                 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep.                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct.                 8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan.                1 1.37
         Oct.                 9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec.                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan.                1 −0.83
         Nov.               12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec.               10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar.                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan.                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July               1 3.19
2009 Jan.               21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00
         Mar.               11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan.                1 3.32
         Apr.                 8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2018 Oct.               17 7,860 7,860 0.0 0−−−7
         Oct.               24 7,683 7,683 0.0 0−−−7
         Oct.               31 8,007 8,007 0.0 0−−−7
−
         Nov.                 7 6,551 6,551 0.0 0−−−7
         Nov.               14 6,736 6,736 0.0 0−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2018 July               26 797 797 2 ... − − − 98
         Aug.               30 1,454 1,454 2 ... − − − 91
         Sep.               27 1,261 1,261 2 ... − − − 84
         Nov.                 1 1,490 1,490 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4. Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR  2 
Monthlyaverage EONIA  
1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2018         Apr. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19
         May − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19         June − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.27 − 0.21 − 0.18
         July − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.18
         Aug. − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.27 − 0.21 − 0.17         Sep. − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.27 − 0.21 − 0.17
         Oct. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.26 − 0.20 − 0.15
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published v ia
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the Reuters. 2Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by
EURIBOR. 1Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for inter- Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
bank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
November 2018
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ depositswith an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2017         Sep. 0.31 67,904 1.36 215,817 0.08 77,405 1.25 22,356
         Oct. 0.30 67,393 1.35 215,503 0.08 76,092 1.18 23,093
         Nov. 0.30 66,679 1.34 215,034 0.08 77,669 1.12 24,421         Dec. 0.29 66,585 1.34 216,841 0.06 78,428 1.07 25,136
2018         Jan. 0.29 66,589 1.32 216,681 0.05 78,112 1.05 26,055
         Feb. 0.28 65,984 1.31 216,585 0.04 75,362 1.03 26,887         Mar. 0.27 65,081 1.30 216,572 0.05 72,699 1.01 26,676
         Apr. 0.27 64,883 1.29 216,237 0.04 69,677 0.99 26,913
         May 0.27 64,743 1.28 216,238 0.06 68,665 0.97 26,848         June 0.26 64,554 1.27 216,143 0.03 68,825 0.94 26,966
         July 0.26 64,623 1.26 215,907 0.03 67,013 0.93 26,859
         Aug. 0.25 64,215 1.25 216,126 0.03 67,659 0.92 27,206         Sep. 0.24 63,849 1.25 216,273 0.03 66,871 0.90 27,188
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2017         Sep. 2.42 3,934 2.00 25,996 2.75 1,131,500 7.12 49,521 3.91 86,239 4.00 312,467
         Oct. 2.38 4,208 1.99 25,925 2.73 1,135,284 7.14 48,762 3.89 86,683 3.98 312,869
         Nov. 2.44 3,898 1.98 25,924 2.71 1,139,714 7.00 48,352 3.87 87,393 3.96 312,973         Dec. 2.44 3,851 1.97 25,850 2.68 1,143,333 6.98 48,885 3.87 87,210 3.95 311,861
2018         Jan. 2.33 3,906 1.96 25,566 2.66 1,144,088 7.07 48,461 3.85 87,632 3.93 312,287
         Feb. 2.31 3,869 1.95 25,474 2.65 1,147,522 7.07 48,468 3.84 87,842 3.92 312,671         Mar. 2.31 3,983 1.94 25,497 2.62 1,153,724 7.03 49,131 3.82 88,481 3.91 311,587
         Apr. 2.32 3,933 1.93 25,480 2.60 1,157,212 6.99 48,590 3.79 89,131 3.90 312,321
         May 2.31 4,024 1.93 25,609 2.58 1,162,731 7.04 48,209 3.76 84,759 3.89 312,220         June 2.27 4,139 1.92 25,721 2.56 1,169,692 7.03 48,827 3.74 85,404 3.88 311,756
         July 2.27 4,217 1.90 25,586 2.54 1,174,210 7.00 48,360 3.75 85,994 3.86 312,593
         Aug. 2.28 4,215 1.89 25,643 2.52 1,180,809 7.00 48,053 3.75 86,634 3.85 313,801         Sep. 2.27 4,305 1.89 26,196 2.50 1,186,398 6.99 49,161 3.74 86,204 3.85 313,320
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2017         Sep. 2.45 135,493 1.93 135,872 2.28 654,806
         Oct. 2.39 136,523 1.92 136,647 2.26 657,911
         Nov. 2.42 137,523 1.91 138,041 2.25 664,018         Dec. 2.47 133,105 1.90 137,708 2.22 664,374
2018         Jan. 2.34 141,326 1.88 138,344 2.20 668,281
         Feb. 2.39 142,819 1.88 138,735 2.19 672,403         Mar. 2.39 145,640 1.87 139,810 2.18 672,250
         Apr. 2.33 145,705 1.86 140,823 2.16 675,236
         May 2.26 149,325 1.78 138,956 2.15 678,530         June 2.29 149,189 1.76 140,052 2.13 680,131
         July 2.20 148,897 1.74 142,697 2.12 684,893
         Aug. 2.22 148,026 1.74 144,021 2.11 688,709         Sep. 2.22 150,891 1.74 144,942 2.10 691,969
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined eff ective rates. Both
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans bu t not any
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administrat ion, preparation of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan a ssociations
corporations include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the re porting agents in
other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and
specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education, e tc.6Including overdrafts
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 on p. 
47   ). 
are collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
November 2018
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8  of
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2017         Sep. 0.03 1,285,601 0.15 3,992 0.31 598 0.65 636 0.19 537,108 0.30 43,509
         Oct. 0.03 1,294,797 0.18 3,750 0.28 800 0.65 696 0.19 537,700 0.28 42,721
         Nov. 0.03 1,314,663 0.17 4,022 0.39 696 0.72 747 0.18 537,935 0.27 42,074         Dec. 0.03 1,322,096 0.13 4,043 0.35 880 0.59 627 0.18 540,332 0.28 41,475
2018         Jan. 0.03 1,319,368 0.19 4,348 0.31 866 0.71 780 0.18 539,145 0.28 42,193
         Feb. 0.03 1,328,779 0.26 4,181 0.31 652 0.80 737 0.17 539,604 0.27 41,465         Mar. 0.02 1,334,702 0.30 3,995 0.38 470 0.74 765 0.17 539,077 0.27 41,021
         Apr. 0.02 1,347,466 0.31 4,240 0.32 552 0.60 712 0.17 538,787 0.26 40,559
         May 0.02 1,360,605 0.36 4,235 0.42 446 0.62 587 0.16 538,616 0.27 40,277         June 0.02 1,370,363 0.30 4,294 0.51 597 0.66 737 0.16 538,165 0.26 39,811
         July 0.02 1,375,299 0.27 5,005 0.40 626 0.63 693 0.16 537,703 0.26 39,331
         Aug. 0.01 1,383,683 0.30 5,135 0.43 516 0.67 677 0.15 537,459 0.26 38,903         Sep. 0.01 1,391,356 0.31 4,831 0.40 476 0.64 645 0.15 537,478 0.25 38,579
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2017         Sep. − 0.02 414,461 − 0.08 10,040 0.09 351 0.37 704
         Oct. − 0.02 425,806 − 0.10 9,134 0.04 412 0.26 1,456
         Nov. − 0.02 428,784 − 0.08 9,337 0.09 897 0.22 1,237         Dec. − 0.02 425,477 − 0.07 13,102 0.09 351 0.28 1,477
2018         Jan. − 0.02 429,587 − 0.07 11,368 0.01 520 0.30 1,271
         Feb. − 0.02 419,428 − 0.09 8,751 0.11 186 0.32 932         Mar. − 0.02 418,683 − 0.08 10,133 0.13 347 0.31 427
         Apr. − 0.03 430,412 − 0.11 8,954 0.06 314 0.35 815
         May − 0.03 440,268 − 0.04 9,576 0.11 490 0.34 587         June − 0.03 424,633 − 0.10 11,185 0.06 240 0.23 447
         July − 0.02 429,934 − 0.13 11,466 0.08 354 0.29 754
         Aug. − 0.02 436,893 − 0.06 10,147 0.07 303 0.46 723         Sep. − 0.02 433,077 − 0.10 9,835 0.07 347 0.23 375
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million
2017         Sep. 5.67 5.65 8,212 7.11 1,465 6.09 305 4.31 3,579 6.72 4,328
         Oct. 5.67 5.65 8,338 7.07 1,495 6.06 302 4.30 3,758 6.81 4,278
         Nov. 5.63 5.61 8,216 7.10 1,410 6.09 306 4.31 3,827 6.80 4,083         Dec. 5.39 5.37 6,701 6.83 1,004 5.81 297 4.15 3,315 6.63 3,089
2018         Jan. 5.85 5.83 9,288 7.26 1,729 6.04 328 4.32 3,860 6.96 5,100
         Feb. 5.70 5.68 8,315 7.09 1,451 6.15 258 4.28 3,497 6.72 4,560         Mar. 5.44 5.43 9,545 7.04 1,732 5.97 287 4.10 4,259 6.53 4,999
         Apr. 5.66 5.64 9,413 7.17 1,772 6.14 290 4.27 3,912 6.64 5,211
         May 5.87 5.85 9,002 7.40 1,846 6.12 292 4.42 3,737 6.91 4,973         June 5.87 5.85 9,052 7.39 1,870 6.25 279 4.39 3,737 6.92 5,036
         July 6.02 6.00 9,543 7.42 2,140 6.64 312 4.57 3,715 6.93 5,516
         Aug. 6.08 6.02 9,242 7.44 1,938 7.95 395 4.59 3,702 6.91 5,145         Sep. 6.06 6.01 8,032 7.33 1,629 8.14 372 4.60 3,105 6.79 4,555
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  .+For deposits with an agreed maturity and all means that all outstanding deposit and lending business at the end of the month has
loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business covers to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of inter est.7Estimated. The
all new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the bank. volume of new business is extrapolated to form the underlying tota l using a
The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates of all new grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including
agreements concluded during the reporting month. For overnight deposits, deposits fidelity and growth premiums. 9Excluding overdrafts. 10Annual percentage rate of
redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business charge, which contains other related charges which may occur fo r enquiries,
is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the sake of simplicity. This administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
November 2018
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)Loans to households for other purposes  
5  with an initial rate fixation of
of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
Loans to households
2017         Sep. 1.99 5,275 1.80 1,455 1.79 2,341 2.60 804 1.99 2,130
         Oct. 2.08 5,682 1.91 1,915 1.91 2,646 2.64 854 2.07 2,182
         Nov. 1.98 5,587 1.84 1,569 1.76 2,471 2.63 873 1.96 2,243         Dec. 2.00 6,193 1.80 1,624 1.80 2,705 2.76 958 1.92 2,530
2018         Jan. 2.01 6,017 1.94 2,035 1.85 2,693 2.62 888 1.97 2,436
         Feb. 1.97 5,062 1.77 1,470 1.77 2,161 2.50 753 1.99 2,148         Mar. 2.03 5,883 1.87 1,424 1.77 2,440 2.58 950 2.08 2,493
         Apr. 2.12 5,995 2.02 1,826 1.95 2,612 2.65 1,008 2.09 2,375
         May 2.04 5,257 1.84 1,476 1.87 2,165 2.48 737 2.07 2,355         June 2.06 6,370 1.93 1,713 1.87 2,607 2.58 903 2.07 2,860
         July 2.06 6,380 1.88 2,123 1.94 2,532 2.35 910 2.08 2,938
         Aug. 2.07 5,365 1.83 1,452 1.99 2,124 2.51 756 2.00 2,485         Sep. 2.09 5,004 1.76 1,425 1.99 2,278 2.57 675 2.05 2,051
of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2017         Sep. 2.04 3,411 . . 1.84 1,436 2.81 598 1.90 1,377
         Oct. 2.13 3,707 . . 1.98 1,694 2.82 628 2.00 1,385
         Nov. 2.07 3,725 . . 1.94 1,592 2.80 662 1.88 1,471         Dec. 2.09 4,266 . . 2.00 1,822 2.83 753 1.85 1,691
2018         Jan. 2.07 4,146 . . 1.99 1,817 2.72 679 1.89 1,650
         Feb. 2.07 3,412 . . 2.01 1,390 2.61 564 1.93 1,458         Mar. 2.07 4,103 . . 1.87 1,645 2.65 741 2.02 1,717
         Apr. 2.18 4,204 . . 2.05 1,850 2.75 793 2.04 1,561
         May 2.11 3,558 . . 2.09 1,373 2.50 560 2.00 1,625         June 2.07 4,528 . . 1.92 1,869 2.58 692 2.02 1,967
         July 2.13 4,266 . . 2.09 1,755 2.46 647 2.05 1,864
         Aug. 2.13 3,553 . . 2.12 1,431 2.56 563 1.98 1,559         Sep. 2.06 3,456 . . 1.92 1,598 2.60 532 2.02 1,326
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans  3  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) Renegotiated loans  9 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2017         Sep. 1.92 1.86 17,363 1.91 3,289 2.04 2,025 1.71 1,571 1.71 5,950 1.96 7,817
         Oct. 1.90 1.85 18,128 1.90 3,955 2.08 2,134 1.70 1,634 1.68 6,611 1.96 7,749
         Nov. 1.90 1.84 18,793 1.89 3,525 2.04 2,170 1.72 1,640 1.68 6,550 1.94 8,433         Dec. 1.86 1.79 17,473 1.87 3,242 2.04 2,150 1.69 1,553 1.65 6,084 1.86 7,686
2018         Jan. 1.88 1.82 19,643 1.90 4,529 2.03 2,354 1.69 1,798 1.65 6,864 1.92 8,627
         Feb. 1.90 1.84 18,839 1.95 3,687 2.07 2,090 1.73 1,624 1.68 6,400 1.92 8,725         Mar. 1.94 1.89 20,592 1.95 3,981 2.05 2,256 1.73 1,773 1.74 7,047 1.98 9,516
         Apr. 1.94 1.89 21,351 1.92 4,645 2.09 2,369 1.72 1,895 1.77 7,418 1.96 9,669
         May 1.96 1.91 19,514 1.97 3,803 2.09 2,193 1.74 1,735 1.77 6,847 2.00 8,739         June 1.95 1.90 21,464 1.98 4,691 2.07 3,226 1.76 1,882 1.75 6,771 1.97 9,585
         July 1.94 1.88 22,177 1.94 4,907 2.16 2,675 1.74 1,994 1.73 7,666 1.95 9,842
         Aug. 1.93 1.87 20,493 1.96 3,401 2.13 2,337 1.70 1,753 1.71 6,974 1.97 9,429         Sep. 1.92 1.86 17,864 1.96 3,046 2.11 1,973 1.71 1,544 1.69 5,923 1.94 8,424
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2017         Sep. . 1.78 7,701 . . 1.97 711 1.53 797 1.63 2,707 1.92 3,486
         Oct. . 1.77 8,217 . . 1.97 780 1.53 782 1.62 3,095 1.92 3,560
         Nov. . 1.76 8,464 . . 1.93 771 1.53 796 1.60 3,031 1.90 3,866         Dec. . 1.69 7,644 . . 1.97 685 1.51 740 1.57 2,733 1.77 3,486
2018         Jan. . 1.75 9,069 . . 2.00 837 1.57 946 1.59 3,283 1.88 4,003
         Feb. . 1.76 8,579 . . 2.02 702 1.53 803 1.61 2,946 1.86 4,128         Mar. . 1.81 9,154 . . 1.96 831 1.61 871 1.67 3,271 1.94 4,181
         Apr. . 1.82 9,782 . . 2.08 866 1.55 907 1.71 3,606 1.91 4,403
         May . 1.84 8,392 . . 2.02 733 1.55 834 1.71 3,043 1.96 3,782         June . 1.83 9,040 . . 2.00 1,087 1.61 901 1.71 3,025 1.94 4,027
         July . 1.83 9,622 . . 2.06 914 1.60 960 1.69 3,575 1.94 4,173
         Aug. . 1.82 8,424 . . 2.02 807 1.54 792 1.65 2,911 1.96 3,914         Sep. . 1.82 7,495 . . 2.13 664 1.51 715 1.65 2,604 1.95 3,512
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . For   
footnote 11, see p. 47   .  

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
November 2018
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12 Revolving loans  12 
and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 Extended and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 
Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 credit card debt Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2017         Sep. 8.44 39,630 8.48 31,635 15.09 4,393 3.52 67,886 3.54 67,559
         Oct. 8.47 39,133 8.48 31,101 15.10 4,493 3.41 67,481 3.42 67,162
         Nov. 8.30 38,672 8.35 30,489 15.11 4,386 3.45 67,793 3.46 67,457         Dec. 8.21 39,538 8.35 31,187 14.94 4,303 3.47 65,936 3.49 65,625
2018         Jan. 8.33 39,136 8.38 31,128 14.92 4,369 3.36 68,733 3.37 68,418
         Feb. 8.36 39,233 8.39 31,380 14.92 4,334 3.40 70,798 3.42 70,488         Mar. 8.31 39,818 8.36 31,844 14.87 4,340 3.41 71,713 3.43 71,381
         Apr. 8.29 39,308 8.35 31,176 14.85 4,408 3.29 72,449 3.30 72,100
         May 8.29 39,115 8.38 30,991 14.79 4,376 3.35 71,010 3.37 70,690         June 8.26 39,717 8.34 31,627 14.77 4,370 3.30 74,485 3.32 74,136
         July 8.19 39,373 8.29 31,035 14.74 4,430 3.25 73,268 3.26 72,921
         Aug. 8.20 39,040 8.27 30,862 14.73 4,390 3.21 72,775 3.23 72,415         Sep. 8.17 40,096 8.26 31,781 14.67 4,421 3.18 76,148 3.19 75,723
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of
Renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2017         Sep. 1.38 66,182 1.52 19,843 2.50 8,124 2.60 1,446 1.86 1,236 1.08 43,731 1.24 2,419 1.63 9,226
         Oct. 1.35 66,679 1.47 19,173 2.48 8,209 2.59 1,490 1.81 1,214 1.05 45,005 1.25 2,354 1.59 8,407
         Nov. 1.40 63,110 1.49 16,676 2.50 8,257 2.57 1,582 1.87 1,423 1.09 41,581 1.32 2,565 1.58 7,702         Dec. 1.43 78,501 1.52 21,693 2.45 8,207 2.55 1,862 1.82 1,628 1.15 49,208 1.51 5,166 1.63 12,430
2018         Jan. 1.22 69,664 1.49 18,190 2.48 8,321 2.53 1,607 1.92 1,361 0.89 50,613 1.72 2,238 1.55 5,524
         Feb. 1.32 53,831 1.48 13,339 2.47 7,501 2.57 1,390 1.97 1,123 0.94 36,050 1.43 1,794 1.68 5,973         Mar. 1.42 69,102 1.52 18,706 2.48 8,966 2.52 1,744 1.93 1,470 1.09 44,944 1.50 3,379 1.74 8,599
         Apr. 1.39 65,864 1.46 18,840 2.44 8,704 2.54 1,749 1.94 1,527 1.04 43,667 1.64 2,828 1.73 7,389
         May 1.20 72,958 1.36 17,150 2.31 9,732 2.40 1,395 1.95 1,290 0.85 51,023 1.59 2,988 1.73 6,530         June 1.31 84,383 1.42 24,657 2.24 11,612 2.44 1,531 1.97 1,470 0.97 55,948 1.64 3,981 1.73 9,841
         July 1.19 81,709 1.41 22,096 2.09 10,235 2.41 1,466 1.93 1,578 0.85 55,149 1.53 3,956 1.74 9,325
         Aug. 1.18 66,072 1.41 16,124 2.05 9,274 2.44 1,316 1.86 1,311 0.85 44,950 1.73 2,130 1.64 7,091         Sep. 1.27 76,589 1.40 22,010 2.05 9,739 2.61 1,497 1.94 1,180 0.99 52,910 1.75 3,011 1.66 8,252
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2017         Sep. 1.52 9,811 . . 1.83 535 2.50 132 1.77 351 1.41 5,743 1.64 370 1.62 2,680
         Oct. 1.46 9,398 . . 1.90 557 2.61 131 1.77 349 1.25 5,480 2.19 304 1.64 2,577
         Nov. 1.60 8,531 . . 1.95 545 2.41 147 1.74 414 1.40 5,212 2.68 423 1.74 1,790         Dec. 1.59 13,235 . . 1.92 627 2.65 167 1.75 426 1.44 7,644 2.33 1,098 1.56 3,273
2018         Jan. 1.53 7,387 . . 1.92 627 2.36 148 1.90 426 1.32 4,529 1.93 357 1.73 1,300
         Feb. 1.55 6,461 . . 1.96 428 2.77 134 1.79 324 1.30 3,638 1.54 457 1.88 1,480         Mar. 1.62 11,118 . . 1.92 608 2.46 160 1.78 396 1.44 6,583 1.68 1,010 1.93 2,361
         Apr. 1.57 8,174 . . 1.91 620 2.50 152 1.83 434 1.26 4,155 2.07 764 1.77 2,049
         May 1.61 7,425 . . 1.93 540 2.47 158 1.77 354 1.38 4,223 1.82 639 1.92 1,511         June 1.68 12,565 . . 1.88 647 2.60 182 1.82 380 1.42 7,324 2.60 1,202 1.83 2,830
         July 1.55 9,982 . . 1.95 707 2.74 155 1.81 468 1.25 5,263 1.81 1,205 1.85 2,184
         Aug. 1.56 7,174 . . 2.10 507 2.74 151 1.76 302 1.32 4,296 2.50 348 1.68 1,570         Sep. 1.56 10,319 . . 1.89 576 2.57 124 1.83 309 1.33 6,391 2.52 646 1.79 2,273
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . (d) there is no obligation of regular repayment of funds. 13Overdrafts are defined as
11For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured debit balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdraf ts regardless of
if collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed be tween customers and the
in at least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or bank. 14Including convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is
assigned. 12Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without payment transactions effected with the card during one billing cycle and the date at
giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become d ue.15The amount
decrease as funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
November 2018
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1. Assets
  
 € billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and fund Financial technical Non-financial Remainingyear/quarter Total deposits  
2 securities Loans  3 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
 
2016         Q1 1,999.4 344.7 372.5 278.7 230.0 595.8 5.2 68.8 52.9 50.9
         Q2 2,023.3 339.2 391.8 279.3 229.6 608.2 4.8 66.5 52.8 51.0
2016         Q3  1 2,219.9 378.7 397.3 387.3 280.2 613.9 5.3 46.1 31.4 79.9
         Q4 2,190.1 361.5 371.3 374.6 308.6 623.6 3.3 44.1 32.4 70.6
2017         Q1 2,189.3 355.4 377.5 367.6 297.7 635.7 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
         Q2 2,177.9 343.9 378.8 365.2 301.9 643.7 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6         Q3 2,187.4 331.1 386.0 370.9 305.5 650.3 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.3         Q4 2,211.6 320.8 386.9 354.2 336.1 671.1 2.9 48.2 34.3 57.3
2018         Q1 2,217.4 344.3 394.6 327.0 343.2 663.0 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.4
         Q2 2,225.6 347.4 400.1 319.9 347.0 667.9 2.2 53.5 34.1 53.6
Life insurance
2016         Q1 1,095.7 219.8 186.2 159.2 35.3 428.0 2.5 15.6 31.9 17.2
         Q2 1,116.7 216.6 199.6 160.7 35.6 438.0 2.4 14.9 32.0 16.9
2016         Q3  1 1,247.0 242.9 203.0 241.2 47.0 445.8 4.0 10.2 18.7 34.0
         Q4 1,197.3 231.3 182.7 223.0 50.7 456.9 2.1 9.6 19.1 21.9
2017         Q1 1,170.4 223.8 185.3 217.2 37.2 462.6 1.8 8.2 19.1 15.3
         Q2 1,172.7 215.6 189.4 217.6 38.6 467.1 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3         Q3 1,177.4 207.6 193.5 220.6 38.4 472.4 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0         Q4 1,192.7 199.1 192.4 226.0 41.3 487.6 1.8 8.6 19.9 16.0
2018         Q1 1,187.5 213.0 199.0 206.9 43.1 480.8 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
         Q2 1,194.9 216.1 202.0 200.9 46.3 486.0 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
Non-life insurance
2016         Q1 527.6 113.6 107.8 55.5 49.6 140.6 1.5 32.8 14.5 11.8
         Q2 532.8 110.5 112.5 55.8 49.3 144.5 1.4 32.8 14.4 11.7
2016         Q3  1 592.3 123.8 103.2 93.6 50.8 154.4 0.5 28.5 8.6 28.8
         Q4 584.2 118.9 98.9 91.8 56.8 152.5 0.5 26.8 9.0 29.0
2017         Q1 606.5 120.2 102.4 92.0 56.9 157.3 0.3 34.0 9.1 34.2
         Q2 603.3 116.7 103.9 91.2 58.5 160.3 0.4 33.2 9.1 30.1         Q3 602.5 111.8 106.2 92.9 58.5 162.8 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4         Q4 606.6 111.5 108.0 82.2 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.4 9.7 26.5
2018         Q1 622.7 120.1 112.5 75.1 72.3 166.8 0.3 34.5 9.8 31.4
         Q2 621.2 120.0 115.2 72.9 73.3 167.3 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
Reinsurance  4 
2016         Q1 376.0 11.3 78.5 64.0 145.1 27.3 1.1 20.4 6.4 21.9
         Q2 373.7 12.1 79.7 62.8 144.8 25.8 1.0 18.8 6.4 22.4
2016         Q3  1 380.7 12.0 91.0 52.5 182.3 13.8 0.8 7.3 4.0 17.0
         Q4 408.6 11.3 89.7 59.7 201.0 14.3 0.7 7.7 4.3 19.7
2017         Q1 412.5 11.4 89.8 58.4 203.6 15.9 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
         Q2 401.9 11.6 85.5 56.5 204.8 16.3 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2         Q3 407.5 11.7 86.3 57.5 208.6 15.1 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9         Q4 412.3 10.2 86.5 45.9 223.9 17.6 0.7 8.2 4.7 14.7
2018         Q1 407.2 11.2 83.1 45.0 227.8 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
         Q2 409.5 11.3 82.8 46.1 227.4 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
Pension funds  5 
2016         Q1 592.6 140.9 65.4 29.0 19.7 279.0 − 5.7 32.4 20.4
         Q2 605.0 138.7 67.7 29.2 20.6 288.8 − 6.0 33.5 20.5
2016         Q3  1 608.0 107.7 63.5 29.3 19.1 326.2 − 6.3 35.4 20.5
         Q4 609.6 106.4 61.1 29.7 19.9 328.1 − 6.7 37.0 20.8
2017         Q1 617.0 103.4 60.3 30.1 20.3 337.7 − 6.7 37.5 20.9
         Q2 624.5 102.7 60.6 30.3 20.7 344.3 − 6.8 38.1 21.1         Q3 633.7 100.6 61.7 30.3 21.2 353.1 − 7.0 38.6 21.3         Q4 645.5 96.0 63.5 30.6 21.6 364.5 − 7.1 40.3 21.8
2018         Q1 646.8 94.8 63.1 31.0 22.0 366.1 − 7.2 40.6 21.9
         Q2 652.7 95.2 62.8 31.5 22.9 369.9 − 7.3 41.1 22.1
1Data as of Q3 2016 are based on Solvency II supervisory data, valuation of listed se- 3Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, bor-
curities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB’s securities database. Up rowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 4Not including the reinsurance busi-
to and including Q2 2016 data are based on Solvency I supervisory data from the Fed- ness conducted by primary insurers, which is included there. 5The term “pension
eral Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin), supplemented by estimates and Bundes- funds“ refers to the institutional sector “pension funds“ of t he European System of
bank calculations. In case of pension funds, occasional data breaks are due to Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occu pational
changes in the calculation basis. 2Accounts receivable to monetary financial institu- pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 
tions, including registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
November 2018
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2. Liabilities
  
 € billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life/
Debt claims on
End of securities Shares and pension fund Financial Remainingyear/quarter Total issued Loans  
2 other equity Total reserves  3 Non-life  4 derivatives liabilities Net worth  7 
Insurance corporations
 
2016         Q1 1,999.4 17.7 93.1 204.2 1,495.6 1,177.2 318.4 0.0 70.7 118.0
         Q2 2,023.3 17.6 94.0 191.5 1,501.4 1,184.6 316.8 0.0 70.3 148.4
2016         Q3  1 2,219.9 30.7 73.7 383.0 1,579.4 1,396.9 182.5 1.5 151.5 −
         Q4 2,190.1 30.7 70.3 441.0 1,494.4 1,313.3 181.1 2.3 151.4 −
2017         Q1 2,189.3 30.5 57.2 448.5 1,511.7 1,309.5 202.2 1.8 139.5 −
         Q2 2,177.9 28.6 57.0 450.7 1,505.2 1,308.4 196.8 2.1 134.3 −         Q3 2,187.4 28.5 58.4 455.4 1,512.8 1,317.1 195.7 2.3 130.1 −         Q4 2,211.6 28.3 62.6 465.9 1,521.1 1,333.7 187.4 2.2 131.6 −
2018         Q1 2,217.4 28.0 61.9 460.3 1,538.6 1,333.3 205.3 1.5 127.0 −
         Q2 2,225.6 27.7 64.0 456.9 1,553.0 1,347.4 205.6 1.9 122.1 −
Life insurance
2016         Q1 1,095.7 0.0 26.0 23.6 938.7 923.4 15.2 0.0 30.7 76.7
         Q2 1,116.7 0.0 27.8 22.3 943.1 927.8 15.3 0.0 30.2 93.3
2016         Q3  1 1,247.0 3.8 25.9 96.0 1,066.2 1,066.2 − 0.7 54.4 −
         Q4 1,197.3 4.1 25.0 116.3 993.7 993.7 − 1.2 56.9 −
2017         Q1 1,170.4 4.1 12.5 116.3 991.7 991.7 − 0.9 44.8 −
         Q2 1,172.7 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.5 989.5 − 1.0 46.2 −         Q3 1,177.4 4.1 12.3 121.5 993.9 993.9 − 1.1 44.5 −         Q4 1,192.7 4.1 12.8 122.2 1,006.6 1,006.6 − 1.1 45.9 −
2018         Q1 1,187.5 4.0 13.3 119.8 1,006.9 1,006.9 − 0.7 42.7 −
         Q2 1,194.9 4.1 13.0 119.6 1,016.9 1,016.9 − 0.8 40.6 −
Non-life insurance
2016         Q1 527.6 0.0 14.6 62.1 399.6 253.8 145.9 0.0 17.5 33.8
         Q2 532.8 0.0 14.5 57.7 401.6 256.8 144.9 0.0 17.2 41.8
2016         Q3  1 592.3 0.9 6.6 120.0 407.4 310.1 97.3 0.0 57.3 −
         Q4 584.2 1.1 6.3 130.4 390.1 300.5 89.7 0.2 56.2 −
2017         Q1 606.5 1.1 7.3 134.0 408.9 300.8 108.2 0.1 55.0 −
         Q2 603.3 1.1 6.8 135.6 406.7 302.4 104.2 0.1 53.0 −         Q3 602.5 1.1 6.9 137.3 406.6 305.7 100.9 0.1 50.6 −         Q4 606.6 1.1 6.7 141.2 405.6 309.7 95.9 0.1 51.9 −
2018         Q1 622.7 1.1 7.7 141.2 422.7 311.1 111.6 0.0 50.0 −
         Q2 621.2 1.1 8.1 140.5 424.3 314.3 110.1 0.1 47.1 −
Reinsurance  5 
2016         Q1 376.0 17.7 52.5 118.5 157.3 − 157.3 0.0 22.5 7.5
         Q2 373.7 17.6 51.7 111.4 156.7 − 156.7 0.0 22.9 13.4
2016         Q3  1 380.7 26.0 41.3 167.0 105.8 20.5 85.3 0.8 39.8 −
         Q4 408.6 25.5 39.0 194.3 110.5 19.1 91.4 0.9 38.3 −
2017         Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
         Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −         Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.8 1.1 35.0 −         Q4 412.3 23.1 43.1 202.6 108.8 17.4 91.4 1.0 33.8 −
2018         Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 −
         Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 −
Pension funds  6 
2016         Q1 592.6 − 5.1 10.2 524.6 524.1 0.4 − 3.8 48.8
         Q2 605.0 − 5.4 9.6 530.7 530.2 0.4 − 3.4 56.0
2016         Q3  1 608.0 − 6.4 6.7 536.0 536.0 − − 3.3 55.6
         Q4 609.6 − 6.8 6.9 546.0 546.0 − − 2.4 47.5
2017         Q1 617.0 − 6.9 7.0 552.9 552.9 − − 2.5 47.8
         Q2 624.5 − 6.9 7.1 558.7 558.7 − − 2.5 49.4         Q3 633.7 − 6.9 7.2 565.2 565.2 − − 2.5 51.9         Q4 645.5 − 7.1 7.4 576.1 576.1 − − 2.5 52.4
2018         Q1 646.8 − 7.2 7.4 579.5 579.5 − − 2.6 50.0
         Q2 652.7 − 7.3 7.5 585.7 585.7 − − 2.6 49.6
1Data as of Q3 2016 are based on Solvency II supervisory data. Up to and including serves pursuant to ESA 1995. 4As of Q3 2016 insurance technical reserves “non-life“
Q2 2016 data are based on Solvency I supervisory data from the Federal Financial Su- pursuant to Solvency II. Up to and including Q2 2016 unearned prem iums and re-
pervisory Authority (BaFin), supplemented by estimates and Bundesbank calculations. serves for outstanding claims pursuant to ESA 1995. 5Not including the reinsurance
In case of pension funds, occasional data breaks are due to changes in the calcula- business conducted by primary insurers, which is included there. 6The term “pension
tion basis. 2Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered funds“ refers to the institutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of
bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 3As of Q3 2016 insurance Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational
technical reserves “life“ pursuant to Solvency II taking account of transitional mea- pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security fund s are not includ-
sures. Up to and including Q2 2016 long-term net equity of households in life insur- ed. 7Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and the liability item “Shares
ance (including ageing provisions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves and other equity“. of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premium refund) and pension fund re-

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
November 2018
VIII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
  
€ million
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign includingtotal Bank Corporate debt debt buildingpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities ities  
3 Total 4 Bundesbank sectors  6 residents  7 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  5 
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,5602008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,2542009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,5262012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,5802013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,646 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,3802014 64,774 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,409 − 12,124 − 11,951 74,484 14,366
2015 32,609 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 68,620 119,379 − 66,330 121,164 64,546 − 86,770
2016 72,270 27,429 19,177 18,265 − 10,012 44,840 174,162 − 58,012 187,500 44,674 − 101,8942017 54,930 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,368 145,410 − 71,454 161,012 55,852 − 90,477
2017         Nov. 28,537 22,066 893 6,338 14,835 6,471 25,664 3,359 13,355 8,950 2,873
         Dec. − 20,490 − 18,944 − 5,802 − 952 − 12,190 − 1,546 3,495 − 12,058 10,057 5,496 − 23,985
2018         Jan. 14,802 − 2,330 1,183 530 − 4,043 17,132 19,710 1,164 6,138 12,408 − 4,908
         Feb. 5,636 5,264 12,736 2,054 − 9,526 372 1,898 − 5,017 5,725 1,190 3,738         Mar. 25,191 17,065 11,318 820 4,927 8,125 18,942 1,950 7,268 9,724 6,249
         Apr. − 9,403 − 12,541 − 469 7,199 − 19,271 3,138 8,824 − 2,582 5,172 6,234 − 18,228
         May 20,653 20,327 6,728 2,570 11,028 327 1,462 − 1,553 7,676 − 4,661 19,192         June − 13,265 − 12,897 − 10,982 − 2,030 115 − 369 5,727 − 7,009 6,353 6,383 − 18,993
         July − 3,540 − 9,880 − 7,055 3,563 − 6,389 6,340 12,206 − 3,117 5,835 9,488 − 15,746
         Aug. 15,981 10,891 2,640 − 3,890 12,142 5,090 7,910 − 1,567 4,562 4,915 8,072         Sep. 19,856 11,015 8,990 − 84 2,109 8,841 19,037 5,189 7,652 6,196 819
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total 10 tutions  5 Other sectors  11 residents  12 
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,2992008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,1942009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,9712012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 6562013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,8512014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 − 449
2015 40,488 7,668 32,820 30,568 − 5,421 35,989 9,920
2016 33,491 4,409 29,082 31,261 − 5,143 36,404 2,2302017 48,645 15,570 33,075 47,482 7,031 40,451 1,163
2017         Nov. 3,310 110 3,200 4,121 1,198 2,923 − 811
         Dec. 13,617 484 13,133 15,596 2,898 12,698 − 1,979
2018         Jan. 7,746 153 7,593 9,297 867 8,430 − 1,551
         Feb. 15,184 1,122 14,062 15,596 − 3,709 19,305 − 412         Mar. − 939 1,023 − 1,962 − 7,256 − 3,672 − 3,584 6,317
         Apr. 2,843 3,219 − 376 − 33 − 2,546 2,513 2,876
         May 16,950 1,175 15,775 16,363 1,156 15,207 587         June 8,160 6,593 1,567 8,066 2,250 5,816 94
         July 4,644 549 4,095 4,709 257 4,452 − 65
         Aug. 4,807 193 4,614 6,372 473 5,899 − 1,565         Sep. − 1,556 225 − 1,781 − 3,533 − 2,837 − 696 1,977
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own 8Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices. 9Net pur-
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. chases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  re sidents;  
3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction transaction  values. 10Domestic and foreign shares. 11Residual; also including
values. 4Domestic and foreign debt securities. 5Book values; statistically adjusted. purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 12Net
6Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct in vestment) by
mutual funds. Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank. 7Net purchases or non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values. provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
November 2018
 VIII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 
 
Debt securities
Corporate issued by special-
Mortgage Public purpose Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe debt securities (non-MFIs)  2 debt securities credit institutions
Gross sales  3 
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,8722008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,9742009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,3762012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,5292013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,8912014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700
2016 
4 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,370 416,110
2017 4 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,289 362,333
2018         Feb. 96,820 59,349 3,387 564 43,208 12,189 3,434 34,036
         Mar. 100,288 58,524 3,781 1,229 44,183 9,331 6,202 35,561
         Apr. 123,774 67,848 1,487 97 58,169 8,094 27,752 28,175
         May 97,205 61,722 3,459 63 46,110 12,089 5,306 30,178         June 90,599 59,456 5,737 364 42,846 10,509 4,220 26,923
         July 106,400 65,758 3,016 784 53,034 8,925 6,455 34,187
         Aug. 101,600 64,709 1,549 184 50,391 12,584 5,293 31,597         Sep. 86,951 56,321 4,237 560 41,454 10,070 4,764 25,867
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four  years  5 
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,6592008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,4072009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,4312012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,8882013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,7652014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 
4 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017 4 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018         Feb. 27,037 11,485 2,917 254 4,196 4,118 2,194 13,358
         Mar. 40,145 18,509 3,400 1,080 11,579 2,450 4,095 17,542
         Apr. 49,383 12,888 1,187 22 8,840 2,839 25,454 11,040
         May 24,413 11,107 2,333 63 5,804 2,906 3,425 9,881         June 32,355 20,213 4,237 84 12,615 3,277 2,251 9,891
         July 28,315 10,970 3,016 604 5,273 2,078 4,707 12,638
         Aug. 27,181 12,138 1,305 133 4,488 6,212 2,962 12,081         Sep. 35,433 19,654 3,047 558 13,354 2,694 3,847 11,932
Net sales  6 
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,0932008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,3022009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,2892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,2982013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,4792014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 
4 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017 4 2,669 5,954 6,389 − 4,697 18,788 − 14,525 6,828 − 10,114
2018         Feb. 1,784 10,154 544 143 10,663 − 1,196 1,225 − 9,596
         Mar. 14,572 9,345 2,792 751 8,127 − 2,326 − 428 5,655
         Apr. − 15,565 751 50 − 639 3,478 − 2,138 5,636 − 21,952
         May 21,542 8,519 3,037 − 1,827 5,950 1,358 1,258 11,765         June − 11,298 − 10,143 2,597 − 869 − 6,515 − 5,356 − 627 − 528
         July − 9,530 − 6,298 1,570 − 107 − 7,834 73 3,562 − 6,794
         Aug. 11,892 2,687 886 − 481 − 1,396 3,679 − 3,774 12,979         Sep. 11,957 8,528 2,319 42 5,728 438 714 2,715
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Supplemen t 2 − Capital initial sales of newly issued securities. 4 Sectoral reclassification of debt
market statistics on pp. 23 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 6Gross sales less
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Gross sales means only redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
November 2018
VIII. Capital market
 
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
  
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
 
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special-purpose Other bank bonds Publicin years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,7942008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,0972009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201
1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,2262012 3,285,422
1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,1382014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 
1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017 1 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018         Mar. 3,098,082 1,193,483 146,252 57,900 673,304 316,027 303,362 1,601,237
         Apr. 3,082,517 1,194,234 146,302 57,260 676,782 313,889 308,998 1,579,285
         May 3,104,059 1,202,753 149,339 55,434 682,732 315,248 310,256 1,591,050         June 3,092,761 1,192,610 151,936 54,564 676,217 309,892 309,629 1,590,522
         July 3,083,231 1,186,312 153,506 54,457 668,383 309,965 313,191 1,583,728
         Aug. 3,092,960 1,185,591 154,392 53,976 666,987
1 310,236 1 2 310,662 1,596,707
         Sep. 3,104,917 1,194,119 156,711 54,018 672,715 310,674 311,376 1,599,422
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-September 2018 
1,014,710 448,089 43,024 21,141 279,868 104,054 65,836 500,784    less than 2
601,769 264,534 37,655 11,774 146,418 68,688 47,097 290,138 2 to less than 4
499,678 186,196 35,241 6,678 99,686 44,590 44,681 268,801 4 to less than 6
321,240 129,507 22,519 6,763 70,658 29,568 32,679 159,054 6 to less than 8
240,848 83,750 15,595 5,612 37,711 24,832 15,016 142,082 8 to less than 10
112,544 32,756 1,386 333 19,152 11,885 24,509 55,280 10 to less than 15
78,869 18,569 424 1,218 12,960 3,967 5,434 54,867 15 to less than 20
235,258 30,716 867 498 6,261 23,090 76,125 128,416 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for
reclassification of debt securities. 2Adjustments due to change of domicile of debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
issuers. 3Calculated from month under review until final maturity for debt securities
 
 
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulationat market values(market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims of shares, and of capital level at endend of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  
1 bonus shares real assets etc. of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,2142012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,1882013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,6582014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,3972017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 − − 457 − 661 − 1,615 1,933,733
2018         Mar. 180,086 308 553 2 42−0 − 2 3 9 − 3 1 1,874,136
         Apr. 180,359 273 239 64 11 − − 5 − 1 − 36 1,939,502
         May 179,930 − 429 142 18 5 − − 548 − 10 − 36 1,929,120         June 180,298 368 258 228 16 − − 7 − 52 − 75 1,867,155
         July 179,955 − 344 215 24 3 − − 344 − 100 − 141 1,929,117
         Aug. 180,004 47 171 112 13 − − 89 − 13 − 147 1,898,601         Sep. 180,260 256 189 195 1 − − 51 − 36 − 43 1,856,858
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and Deutsche
out of company profits. 2All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
November 2018
 VIII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Corporate German German With a residual With a residual
maturity of bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share maturity of more
9 to (non- index share price index than 9 years and € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total up to 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1,000
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.062017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018         May 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.6 1.0 2.3 141.11 109.76 572.08 12,604.89
         June 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.6 1.0 2.4 141.29 109.87 557.27 12,306.00
         July 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.9 2.5 140.83 108.50 580.49 12,805.50
         Aug. 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.9 2.5 141.24 109.06 567.19 12,364.06         Sep. 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.1 2.7 140.34 108.01 556.11 12,246.73
         Oct. 0.5 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.1 2.8 141.11 108.69 519.54 11,447.51
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of standing of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthl y figures are calcula-
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt ted on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annu al figures
securities and similar, debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero coupon are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts out- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which:
Sales of which: of which:
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,469
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4382013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,709
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,522 144,075 819 − 1,745 143,256 44,266 − 3,841
2015 181,888 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,750 174,529 7,362 494 167,167 35,257 7,3572016 155,511 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 36,142 162,429 2,877 − 3,172 159,552 39,315 − 6,9192017 142,669 94,921 29,560 − 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 47,747 146,108 4,938 1,048 141,170 46,700 − 3,441
2018         Mar. 8,732 8,718 − 937 222 − 1,923 493 9,656 14 11,397 813 − 239 10,584 253 − 2,666
         Apr. 8,430 8,351 1,860 − 66 1,401 223 6,491 80 11,470 961 469 10,509 − 389 − 3,039
         May 5,064 1,859 1,215 − 225 934 275 644 3,205 5,430 1,217 732 4,213 2,473 − 366         June 7,914 6,787 1,068 66 352 479 5,719 1,127 7,547 − 459 − 781 8,006 1,908 367
         July 7,640 5,476 1,163 − 57 587 308 4,313 2,164 7,318 607 66 6,711 2,098 323
         Aug. 8,570 8,402 1,519 − 27 783 407 6,884 168 8,622 − 215 − 324 8,837 492 − 52         Sep. 7,721 5,836 937 25 − 285 797 4,899 1,885 8,345 1,126 249 7,219 1,636 − 624
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
November 2018
IX. Financial accounts
  
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2017 2018 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 30.93 40.40 52.76 6.96 19.02 − 0.75 27.52 − 18.68 0.06
Debt securities − 1.20 − 3.40 − 5.65 − 0.95 − 0.65 − 1.05 − 3.01 0.65 0.55
Short-term debt securities − 0.84 − 0.58 − 2.26 0.23 − 1.89 − 0.26 − 0.34 − 0.12 − 0.02Long-term debt securities − 0.36 − 2.81 − 3.39 − 1.18 1.24 − 0.78 − 2.67 0.77 0.57
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 0.64 − 2.68 − 2.80 − 0.54 − 0.04 − 1.07 − 1.15 0.11 0.47
Non-financial corporations − 0.80 0.67 − 0.56 0.85 − 0.72 − 0.56 − 0.14 − 0.01 0.32Financial corporations 1.86 − 2.53 − 0.41 − 0.35 0.67 − 0.14 − 0.59 0.19 0.31General government − 0.42 − 0.82 − 1.82 − 1.03 0.01 − 0.37 − 0.43 − 0.07 − 0.15
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 1.83 − 0.72 − 2.85 − 0.41 − 0.61 0.02 − 1.86 0.54 0.08
Loans 27.15 10.01 39.45 25.43 5.50 2.73 5.79 0.16 − 9.06
Short-term loans 34.68 2.59 20.00 14.28 − 0.61 − 0.45 6.79 4.13 − 10.73Long-term loans − 7.52 7.42 19.45 11.15 6.11 3.18 − 1.00 − 3.97 1.68
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 6.26 − 4.70 18.09 9.04 − 0.02 − 1.43 10.49 2.19 − 7.93
Non-financial corporations 1.26 − 11.78 9.53 0.23 2.88 − 0.28 6.70 0.12 − 9.12Financial corporations 4.80 6.89 8.27 8.74 − 2.97 − 1.22 3.72 2.07 1.19General government 0.20 0.20 0.29 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.00 0.00
Loans to the rest of the world 20.89 14.71 21.36 16.38 5.52 4.16 − 4.70 − 2.03 − 1.13
Equity and investment fund shares 54.54 74.50 49.97 17.47 − 0.40 16.68 16.22 27.57 43.27
Equity 38.14 68.66 41.42 18.72 1.79 14.41 6.50 24.05 42.29
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 10.40 22.91 − 3.82 − 4.34 − 2.05 1.91 0.65 21.74 − 2.70
Non-financial corporations − 8.04 22.59 − 3.76 − 4.25 − 2.26 1.96 0.80 21.64 − 2.90Financial corporations − 2.36 0.31 − 0.06 − 0.09 0.21 − 0.04 − 0.14 0.10 0.20
Listed shares of the rest of the world 2.05 10.84 7.09 1.63 10.26 − 5.14 0.34 − 0.21 6.10
Other equity  
1 46.49 34.92 38.15 21.42 − 6.42 17.64 5.51 2.53 38.89
Investment fund shares 16.40 5.83 8.55 − 1.24 − 2.18 2.26 9.71 3.52 0.98
Money market fund shares 0.21 0.36 − 0.46 − 0.28 0.00 − 1.07 0.89 − 0.63 − 0.03Non-MMF investment fund shares 16.19 5.47 9.01 − 0.96 − 2.19 3.34 8.83 4.15 1.01
Insurance technical reserves 2.94 1.12 3.89 0.85 1.31 1.25 0.49 0.94 1.37Financial derivatives − 1.42 22.74 14.92 3.91 4.13 3.42 3.47 3.13 − 2.13Other accounts receivable 42.02 − 5.68 94.66 73.82 − 22.45 22.06 21.23 26.02 15.94
Total 154.96 139.68 250.00 127.49 6.47 44.34 71.70 39.79 50.00
External financing
Debt securities 7.78 23.71 8.56 7.57 − 0.52 0.96 0.55 2.79 2.36
Short-term securities 1.96 − 0.15 0.60 5.47 − 0.42 − 2.62 − 1.83 2.54 1.48
Long-term securities 5.82 23.85 7.95 2.11 − 0.10 3.58 2.37 0.24 0.89
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.70 10.82 7.13 3.31 1.24 0.76 1.83 2.48 1.65
Non-financial corporations − 0.80 0.67 − 0.56 0.85 − 0.72 − 0.56 − 0.14 − 0.01 0.32Financial corporations 2.05 10.06 9.13 3.18 2.08 1.48 2.39 2.19 1.38General government 0.02 0.01 0.01 − 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.01 − 0.01Households 0.42 0.08 − 1.45 − 0.71 − 0.14 − 0.16 − 0.42 0.29 − 0.05
Debt securities of the rest of the world 6.08 12.89 1.42 4.26 − 1.76 0.20 − 1.28 0.31 0.71
Loans 54.41 32.75 90.15 48.53 11.97 18.59 11.06 49.31 47.55
Short-term loans 40.67 0.37 20.35 11.30 3.06 7.96 − 1.97 24.44 18.60Long-term loans 13.74 32.38 69.80 37.24 8.91 10.63 13.03 24.87 28.95
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 23.73 14.47 51.80 26.18 7.98 10.42 7.22 35.99 17.60
Non-financial corporations 1.26 − 11.78 9.53 0.23 2.88 − 0.28 6.70 0.12 − 9.12Financial corporations 29.29 23.07 45.50 19.75 5.77 13.75 6.23 28.92 26.09General government − 6.82 3.18 − 3.23 6.20 − 0.68 − 3.04 − 5.71 6.94 0.63
Loans from the rest of the world 30.68 18.28 38.35 22.36 4.00 8.16 3.84 13.32 29.95
Equity 16.67 11.18 17.86 3.23 6.06 5.69 2.88 1.58 11.86
Listed shares of domestic sectors 7.42 27.31 6.93 − 4.55 2.68 3.43 5.36 19.82 4.46
Non-financial corporations − 8.04 22.59 − 3.76 − 4.25 − 2.26 1.96 0.80 21.64 − 2.90Financial corporations 11.70 − 2.10 9.53 − 0.78 6.21 0.26 3.83 − 5.23 4.50General government 0.11 0.07 0.51 0.07 0.13 0.16 0.15 0.16 0.15Households 3.66 6.74 0.65 0.41 − 1.39 1.05 0.59 3.26 2.71
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 1.40 − 25.79 − 2.59 4.88 − 1.28 − 1.47 − 4.71 8.91 6.20
Other equity  
1 10.65 9.66 13.53 2.91 4.66 3.74 2.23 − 27.15 1.20
Insurance technical reserves 5.60 3.60 7.25 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 10.81 − 0.13 3.69 2.60 2.23 1.00 − 2.12 1.72 3.50
Other accounts payable 22.73 28.83 − 4.06 27.86 − 26.51 − 8.46 3.04 19.79 27.82
Total 96.37 99.94 123.45 91.61 − 4.96 19.59 17.22 76.99 94.90
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
November 2018
IX. Financial accounts
  
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2017 2018 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 463.1 514.9 556.2 517.2 525.5 532.8 556.2 527.2 539.7
Debt securities 47.8 44.8 38.8 43.9 42.8 41.9 38.8 39.2 39.7
Short-term debt securities 6.0 5.5 3.3 5.8 3.9 3.6 3.3 3.1 3.1Long-term debt securities 41.7 39.3 35.6 38.1 39.0 38.3 35.6 36.0 36.6
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 20.8 18.2 20.3 20.2 19.3 18.2 18.2 18.7
Non-financial corporations 3.6 4.4 3.9 5.3 4.6 4.1 3.9 3.8 4.1Financial corporations 14.5 12.0 11.7 11.6 12.3 12.3 11.7 11.9 12.2General government 5.2 4.4 2.5 3.4 3.3 3.0 2.5 2.4 2.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 24.4 24.0 20.7 23.6 22.7 22.6 20.7 21.0 21.1
Loans 511.6 523.1 556.3 548.5 550.4 551.4 556.3 556.5 549.4
Short-term loans 409.4 414.3 431.1 428.5 426.1 424.7 431.1 435.7 426.3Long-term loans 102.2 108.8 125.2 120.0 124.3 126.6 125.2 120.9 123.0
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 335.8 331.1 349.2 340.1 340.1 338.7 349.2 351.3 343.7
Non-financial corporations 233.3 221.6 231.1 221.8 224.7 224.4 231.1 231.2 222.3Financial corporations 95.9 102.8 111.0 111.5 108.5 107.3 111.0 113.1 114.3General government 6.5 6.7 7.0 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0
Loans to the rest of the world 175.8 192.0 207.1 208.4 210.3 212.7 207.1 205.2 205.7
Equity and investment fund shares 1,890.8 1,938.8 2,079.0 2,020.5 2,007.0 2,035.8 2,079.0 2,071.3 2,118.6
Equity 1,738.9 1,778.9 1,908.9 1,859.7 1,848.9 1,874.5 1,908.9 1,900.4 1,945.8
Listed shares of domestic sectors 273.0 292.3 332.2 304.1 304.1 322.7 332.2 349.4 338.5
Non-financial corporations 266.6 286.2 325.3 298.6 297.9 315.9 325.3 342.2 330.9Financial corporations 6.3 6.1 6.8 5.5 6.2 6.9 6.8 7.1 7.6
Listed shares of the rest of the world 32.3 44.4 48.4 48.4 56.3 47.8 48.4 48.3 53.7
Other equity  
1 1,433.6 1,442.2 1,528.3 1,507.2 1,488.5 1,503.9 1,528.3 1,502.8 1,553.6
Investment fund shares 151.9 159.9 170.1 160.8 158.2 161.4 170.1 170.9 172.8
Money market fund shares 1.4 1.9 1.5 1.7 1.7 0.6 1.5 0.9 0.9Non-MMF investment fund shares 150.6 158.0 168.6 159.1 156.4 160.7 168.6 170.0 172.0
Insurance technical reserves 48.8 50.2 54.2 51.3 52.4 53.5 54.2 55.4 56.6Financial derivatives 42.7 60.1 51.3 55.7 52.1 51.6 51.3 50.7 44.8Other accounts receivable 927.6 962.0 1,033.1 1,044.5 991.1 1,038.8 1,033.1 1,088.1 1,107.7
Total 3,932.5 4,094.0 4,368.9 4,281.5 4,221.4 4,305.8 4,368.9 4,388.4 4,456.5
Liabilities
Debt securities 156.8 183.8 210.6 189.7 188.1 210.2 210.6 185.4 189.0
Short-term securities 3.0 2.9 3.4 8.3 7.9 5.3 3.4 5.9 7.4
Long-term securities 153.7 180.9 207.2 181.4 180.2 205.0 207.2 179.4 181.6
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 58.7 72.1 82.8 74.8 75.4 80.0 82.8 79.6 80.1
Non-financial corporations 3.6 4.4 3.9 5.3 4.6 4.1 3.9 3.8 4.1Financial corporations 40.0 51.9 64.3 54.4 55.9 61.0 64.3 61.2 61.5General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1Households 15.0 15.7 14.4 15.0 14.8 14.8 14.4 14.4 14.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 98.1 111.7 127.8 114.9 112.7 130.3 127.8 105.8 108.9
Loans 1,452.1 1,481.4 1,559.8 1,528.6 1,535.7 1,550.3 1,559.8 1,607.1 1,665.2
Short-term loans 559.4 562.8 578.9 573.9 573.9 580.7 578.9 602.8 632.2Long-term loans 892.6 918.6 980.8 954.8 961.7 969.6 980.8 1,004.3 1,032.9
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 1,119.7 1,129.0 1,176.5 1,154.1 1,161.1 1,169.5 1,176.5 1,211.3 1,225.3
Non-financial corporations 233.3 221.6 231.1 221.8 224.7 224.4 231.1 231.2 222.3Financial corporations 834.4 853.7 895.1 873.5 877.4 888.5 895.1 922.4 944.9General government 52.0 53.7 50.3 58.8 59.0 56.6 50.3 57.7 58.0
Loans from the rest of the world 332.4 352.4 383.3 374.5 374.6 380.8 383.3 395.8 439.9
Equity 2,695.7 2,773.4 3,054.5 2,895.0 2,916.4 3,001.4 3,054.5 2,949.1 2,970.7
Listed shares of domestic sectors 626.4 664.0 756.6 696.5 697.8 737.6 756.6 745.7 735.0
Non-financial corporations 266.6 286.2 325.3 298.6 297.9 315.9 325.3 342.2 330.9Financial corporations 150.1 154.7 180.2 161.3 166.4 173.4 180.2 163.6 164.5General government 43.4 44.4 51.8 47.0 46.7 51.0 51.8 48.7 49.0Households 166.2 178.7 199.2 189.7 186.8 197.4 199.2 191.1 190.7
Listed shares of the rest of the world 756.3 803.7 925.3 865.4 879.1 906.1 925.3 881.6 907.0
Other equity  
1 1,313.0 1,305.7 1,372.6 1,333.0 1,339.5 1,357.7 1,372.6 1,321.9 1,328.7
Insurance technical reserves 255.9 259.5 266.7 261.3 263.1 264.9 266.7 268.6 270.4Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 42.0 38.2 26.9 35.4 32.7 31.3 26.9 26.7 28.2
Other accounts payable 1,009.7 1,044.3 1,054.1 1,078.9 1,023.9 1,054.5 1,054.1 1,079.2 1,102.9
Total 5,612.1 5,780.5 6,172.5 5,988.9 5,959.9 6,112.7 6,172.5 6,116.0 6,226.2
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
November 2018
IX. Financial accounts
  
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2017 2018 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 96.67 114.85 103.43 12.35 30.16 18.03 42.89 16.67 43.35
Currency 25.51 21.17 16.99 3.64 5.57 2.46 5.32 6.34 10.53Deposits 71.16 93.68 86.45 8.72 24.59 15.58 37.57 10.33 32.82
Transferable deposits 100.96 105.26 99.72 13.26 29.95 20.65 35.86 12.14 33.90Time deposits − 9.22 1.28 − 4.03 − 1.59 − 2.32 − 2.47 2.34 1.15 1.98Savings deposits
(including savings certificates) − 20.58 − 12.87 − 9.24 − 2.96 − 3.04 − 2.61 − 0.64 − 2.95 − 3.06
Debt securities − 18.40 − 12.80 − 8.14 − 1.36 − 1.49 − 2.28 − 3.01 − 1.00 0.52
Short-term debt securities 0.75 − 0.16 − 0.20 0.37 0.18 − 0.34 − 0.41 − 0.37 − 0.01
Long-term debt securities − 19.15 − 12.63 − 7.93 − 1.72 − 1.67 − 1.94 − 2.60 − 0.63 0.53
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 10.06 − 4.14 − 5.09 0.01 − 0.67 − 1.88 − 2.56 − 0.01 0.16
Non-financial corporations 0.36 − 0.01 − 1.43 − 0.66 − 0.22 − 0.14 − 0.40 0.08 − 0.23Financial corporations − 7.42 − 2.48 − 2.68 1.01 − 0.17 − 1.55 − 1.97 0.07 0.61General government − 2.99 − 1.65 − 0.99 − 0.33 − 0.28 − 0.18 − 0.19 − 0.17 − 0.22
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 8.34 − 8.66 − 3.05 − 1.37 − 0.82 − 0.41 − 0.45 − 0.98 0.36
Equity and investment fund shares 47.95 45.78 55.13 12.11 12.32 14.08 16.62 17.73 8.00
Equity 16.62 21.65 14.69 3.40 2.21 5.11 3.97 7.35 2.73
Listed shares of domestic sectors 4.17 9.37 0.90 0.15 − 0.18 0.89 0.04 4.27 2.55
Non-financial corporations 3.88 6.09 0.54 0.48 − 1.42 1.01 0.47 3.12 1.63
Financial corporations 0.28 3.28 0.36 − 0.33 1.24 − 0.12 − 0.43 1.15 0.92
Listed shares of the rest of the world 8.00 6.94 9.66 2.25 1.69 2.94 2.77 1.47 − 0.88Other equity  
1 4.45 5.35 4.13 1.00 0.70 1.28 1.15 1.61 1.06
Investment fund shares 31.33 24.13 40.44 8.70 10.11 8.97 12.65 10.38 5.27
Money market fund shares − 0.57 − 0.53 − 0.28 − 0.22 0.04 − 0.16 0.05 − 0.40 − 0.03
Non-MMF investment fund shares 31.90 24.66 40.72 8.92 10.08 9.12 12.60 10.79 5.29
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 20.09 15.58 20.23 4.14 4.18 4.17 7.75 4.22 4.24
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 31.69 24.82 37.18 12.47 9.21 7.43 8.08 13.38 8.60
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 30.85 32.58 30.84 11.89 8.59 6.87 3.49 4.11 4.84
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  
2 − 17.31 − 19.50 − 27.34 10.34 − 10.20 − 0.94 − 26.55 14.47 − 14.08
Total 191.54 201.31 211.33 61.94 52.77 47.35 49.27 69.59 55.47
  External financing
Loans 38.20 47.46 55.55 7.90 16.64 18.56 12.45 10.81 20.12
Short-term loans − 3.17 − 4.31 − 2.19 − 0.35 − 0.34 − 1.09 − 0.40 − 0.02 0.11
Long-term loans 41.36 51.76 57.74 8.25 16.98 19.66 12.85 10.83 20.01
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 35.63 41.92 47.41 6.12 13.31 15.84 12.15 9.00 15.79Consumer loans 5.44 9.78 11.25 2.41 3.25 3.41 2.19 1.78 4.34Entrepreneurial loans − 2.88 − 4.24 − 3.11 − 0.62 0.07 − 0.68 − 1.89 0.04 − 0.01
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 39.35 42.87 49.99 7.10 15.54 16.93 10.42 11.00 17.65Loans from other financial institutions − 1.16 4.59 5.57 0.80 1.10 1.63 2.03 − 0.19 2.47Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00Other accounts payable − 1.14 − 0.23 0.74 0.11 0.06 0.02 0.54 0.02 0.00
Total 37.06 47.23 56.29 8.02 16.70 18.58 12.99 10.83 20.12
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
November 2018
IX. Financial accounts
  
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2017 2018 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,094.8 2,208.7 2,311.0 2,221.8 2,252.0 2,270.0 2,311.0 2,327.6 2,371.0
Currency 153.2 174.4 191.3 178.0 183.6 186.0 191.3 197.7 208.2
Deposits 1,941.6 2,034.4 2,119.6 2,043.8 2,068.4 2,084.0 2,119.6 2,130.0 2,162.8
Transferable deposits 1,082.4 1,188.0 1,287.7 1,201.2 1,231.2 1,251.8 1,287.7 1,299.8 1,333.7
Time deposits 246.8 248.7 245.4 247.9 245.6 243.1 245.4 246.6 248.6
Savings deposits
(including savings certificates) 612.4 597.7 586.5 594.7 591.7 589.1 586.5 583.6 580.5
Debt securities 139.8 127.4 120.5 126.7 125.4 123.6 120.5 117.7 118.1
Short-term debt securities 2.9 2.7 2.5 3.1 3.2 2.9 2.5 2.1 2.0
Long-term debt securities 136.9 124.7 118.0 123.6 122.2 120.7 118.0 115.6 116.0
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 89.4 85.6 82.5 86.1 86.2 85.1 82.5 81.2 81.4
Non-financial corporations 13.4 13.9 12.5 13.3 13.0 12.9 12.5 12.4 12.1Financial corporations 69.5 66.7 66.1 68.2 68.9 68.1 66.1 65.1 65.7General government 6.5 5.0 3.9 4.6 4.3 4.1 3.9 3.7 3.5
Debt securities of the rest of the world 50.3 41.8 37.9 40.6 39.3 38.5 37.9 36.4 36.7
Equity and investment fund shares 1,040.7 1,106.2 1,216.3 1,153.9 1,156.6 1,191.3 1,216.3 1,196.6 1,215.3
Equity 555.9 588.3 640.1 613.0 609.4 630.6 640.1 624.5 629.0
Listed shares of domestic sectors 188.9 200.8 226.4 213.0 211.1 223.7 226.4 217.3 214.2
Non-financial corporations 158.7 169.8 190.3 180.4 177.5 188.4 190.3 182.5 180.8
Financial corporations 30.3 31.0 36.1 32.6 33.6 35.4 36.1 34.8 33.4
Listed shares of the rest of the world 74.8 86.8 101.0 93.1 92.7 96.5 101.0 97.7 102.9
Other equity  
1 292.2 300.8 312.7 306.9 305.6 310.3 312.7 309.5 311.9
Investment fund shares 484.8 517.8 576.2 540.9 547.2 560.7 576.2 572.1 586.3
Money market fund shares 3.4 2.8 2.7 2.7 2.8 2.6 2.7 2.3 2.3
Non-MMF investment fund shares 481.4 515.0 573.5 538.2 544.4 558.1 573.5 569.8 584.1
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 324.3 339.9 360.1 344.0 348.2 352.3 360.1 364.3 368.6
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 919.5 947.8 991.4 962.4 973.2 981.9 991.4 1,004.8 1,013.4
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 786.6 819.2 850.1 827.3 832.1 839.7 850.1 854.2 859.0
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 37.1 32.6 31.1 32.4 32.2 31.7 31.1 31.5 31.8
Total 5,342.8 5,581.8 5,880.4 5,668.6 5,719.6 5,790.6 5,880.4 5,896.8 5,977.2
  Liabilities
Loans 1,606.6 1,654.7 1,711.9 1,662.6 1,680.5 1,699.1 1,711.9 1,722.6 1,737.9
Short-term loans 60.9 56.6 54.4 56.3 55.9 54.8 54.4 54.4 54.5
Long-term loans 1,545.8 1,598.1 1,657.5 1,606.3 1,624.6 1,644.3 1,657.5 1,668.2 1,683.4
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 1,153.8 1,195.8 1,247.4 1,202.0 1,218.3 1,234.7 1,247.4 1,257.4 1,275.0Consumer loans 191.9 201.8 211.8 204.2 207.4 210.6 211.8 212.8 213.4Entrepreneurial loans 260.9 257.0 252.7 256.4 254.8 253.8 252.7 252.5 249.5
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,514.9 1,558.3 1,610.0 1,565.4 1,582.3 1,599.2 1,610.0 1,620.9 1,633.7Loans from other financial institutions 91.8 96.4 101.9 97.2 98.3 99.9 101.9 101.8 104.2Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.1 15.4 16.6 16.6 16.4 16.7 16.6 17.6 17.2
Total 1,621.7 1,670.1 1,728.5 1,679.2 1,697.0 1,715.8 1,728.5 1,740.3 1,755.0
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 − 4.0 − 7.4 − 2.5 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.22014 + 16.7 + 13.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
2015 
p + 23.9 + 14.7 + 2.2 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 28.7 + 11.5 + 4.2 + 4.8 + 8.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 34.0 + 6.1 + 8.3 + 9.5 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
2016         H1  p + 19.5 + 7.6 + 3.5 + 1.7 + 6.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4
         H2  p + 9.3 + 3.8 + 0.7 + 3.1 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1
2017         H1  p + 19.8 + 1.5 + 5.1 + 6.2 + 7.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4
         H2  p + 14.2 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2
2018         H1  pe + 48.1 + 19.5 + 13.1 + 6.5 + 9.0 + 2.9 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2012 2,202.9 1,387.9 684.1 147.5 1.2 79.9 50.3 24.8 5.3 0.0
2013 2,188.1 1,390.4 663.2 150.5 1.3 77.4 49.2 23.5 5.3 0.02014 2,189.6 1,396.5 657.6 152.0 1.4 74.5 47.5 22.4 5.2 0.0
2015 
p 2,159.7 1,372.6 654.3 152.4 1.4 70.8 45.0 21.5 5.0 0.0
2016 p 2,143.9 1,366.8 637.5 153.9 1.1 67.9 43.3 20.2 4.9 0.0
2017 p 2,092.8 1,351.3 611.1 148.5 0.8 63.9 41.2 18.6 4.5 0.0
2016         Q1  p 2,168.3 1,382.5 647.6 154.6 1.2 70.5 44.9 21.0 5.0 0.0
         Q2  p 2,171.8 1,391.1 644.1 154.3 1.1 69.7 44.7 20.7 5.0 0.0
         Q3  p 2,165.4 1,381.1 644.7 155.1 1.0 69.0 44.0 20.5 4.9 0.0
         Q4  p 2,143.9 1,366.8 637.5 153.9 1.1 67.9 43.3 20.2 4.9 0.0
2017         Q1  p 2,117.3 1,351.0 627.5 152.5 1.2 66.3 42.3 19.7 4.8 0.0
         Q2  p 2,111.1 1,353.6 620.3 152.0 0.9 65.7 42.1 19.3 4.7 0.0
         Q3  p 2,104.5 1,353.0 618.3 150.4 0.8 64.8 41.7 19.0 4.6 0.0
         Q4  p 2,092.8 1,351.3 611.1 148.5 0.8 63.9 41.2 18.6 4.5 0.0
2018         Q1  p 2,069.9 1,338.6 600.4 148.0 1.0 62.7 40.5 18.2 4.5 0.0
         Q2  p 2,052.3 1,329.3 597.1 144.2 0.9 61.5 39.8 17.9 4.3 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 1,259.0 651.0 465.0 143.0 1,263.0 666.4 217.8 133.0 60.1 55.5 130.2 − 4.0 1,120.32014 1,308.5 673.6 482.0 153.0 1,291.8 691.1 224.4 137.7 60.1 47.0 131.6 + 16.7 1,160.2
2015 
p 1,356.5 704.2 500.8 151.5 1,332.6 721.7 229.8 143.8 64.1 42.3 130.9 + 23.9 1,212.0
2016 p 1,415.5 738.7 523.9 152.9 1,386.8 755.2 237.8 150.1 68.2 37.4 138.0 + 28.7 1,269.5
2017 p 1,473.8 772.5 548.6 152.8 1,439.8 784.5 246.7 156.3 72.4 33.8 146.1 + 34.0 1,327.9
As a percentage of GDP
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.3
2013 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.1 39.62014 44.5 22.9 16.4 5.2 44.0 23.5 7.6 4.7 2.0 1.6 4.5 + 0.6 39.5
2015 
p 44.5 23.1 16.4 5.0 43.7 23.7 7.5 4.7 2.1 1.4 4.3 + 0.8 39.8
2016 p 44.8 23.4 16.6 4.8 43.9 23.9 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.2 4.4 + 0.9 40.2
2017 p 45.0 23.6 16.7 4.7 43.9 23.9 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.0 4.5 + 1.0 40.5
Percentage growth rates
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.6
2013 + 3.1 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 3.2 + 2.6 + 5.1 − 2.2 − 12.0 + 15.4 . + 3.42014 + 3.9 + 3.5 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.3 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 15.4 + 1.1 . + 3.6
2015 
p + 3.7 + 4.5 + 3.9 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 6.6 − 9.9 − 0.6 . + 4.5
2016 p + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 0.9 + 4.1 + 4.6 + 3.5 + 4.4 + 6.5 − 11.7 + 5.5 . + 4.7
2017 p + 4.1 + 4.6 + 4.7 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 3.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 6.2 − 9.5 + 5.9 . + 4.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and levies from banks to the Single Reso-  lution Fund established at the European level. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.2 + 15.1 1,104.2 1,111.1 − 6.9
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 + 17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.3 1,236.7 + 8.6
2015 p 829.5 673.3 10.4 804.1 244.1 302.6 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,300.8 1,273.4 + 27.4
2016 p 862.1 705.8 9.0 843.4 251.3 320.5 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 18.7 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.0 1,329.2 + 25.8
2017 p 900.0 734.5 7.9 872.1 261.6 325.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 27.9 631.3 621.8 + 9.5 1,417.0 1,379.7 + 37.4
2016         Q1  p 206.1 169.9 1.4 205.5 60.0 81.2 17.7 8.4 2.2 + 0.6 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 322.2 325.3 − 3.0
         Q2  p 216.7 176.6 2.4 194.1 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 338.5 314.2 + 24.3
         Q3  p 207.1 169.3 2.9 210.9 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 328.2 333.4 − 5.2
         Q4  p 232.6 189.2 2.1 233.2 68.1 82.6 7.7 17.2 4.8 − 0.6 160.1 152.2 + 7.8 365.3 358.1 + 7.2
2017         Q1  p 216.0 180.4 0.9 199.6 62.9 80.3 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 16.4 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 338.0 326.4 + 11.6
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.6 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.7 + 13.4
         Q3  p 219.6 180.4 3.5 215.9 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 3.8 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 346.1 343.2 + 2.8
         Q4  p 243.8 196.3 2.1 244.4 69.8 84.7 6.9 19.2 4.1 − 0.6 168.2 158.0 + 10.2 383.4 373.8 + 9.6
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2016         Q1  p 81.1 82.2 − 1.1 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
         Q2  p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
         Q3  p 85.2 88.6 − 3.5 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
         Q4  p 90.9 93.9 − 3.0 104.3 104.4 − 0.0 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
2017         Q1  p 88.2 82.9 + 5.3 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.0 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
         Q3  p 88.6 93.6 − 5.0 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
         Q4  p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.7 109.2 − 4.5 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,4982013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,7752014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,368
2016         Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
         Q2 176,879 152,042 82,184 64,684 5,175 25,169 − 332 6,512         Q3 169,374 145,700 76,638 61,573 7,489 23,839 − 165 7,584         Q4 189,186 164,382 83,919 72,608 7,855 32,518 − 7,714 7,253
2017         Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
         Q2 177,090 149,915 76,391 66,605 6,918 27,631 − 456 6,825         Q3 180,407 155,250 82,576 66,718 5,957 25,517 − 361 7,467         Q4 195,537 170,139 92,507 71,019 6,613 34,060 − 8,662 6,471
2018         Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
         Q2 194,715 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 29,064 − 540 6,592         Q3 ... 161,683 84,952 69,414 7,317 ... ... 7,579
2017         Sep. . 60,441 32,219 25,989 2,233 . . 2,222
2018         Sep. . 63,890 33,539 27,810 2,541 . . 2,260
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,8222013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,0402014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2016         Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
         Q2 162,096 74,489 45,311 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,054         Q3 155,524 68,137 44,656 11,898 5,546 6,037 53,906 40,877 13,029 2,046 24,857 5,263 1,316 9,824         Q4 175,797 78,076 52,275 14,422 6,134 5,245 56,071 42,593 13,478 3,656 31,247 5,454 1,293 11,415
2017         Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
         Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121         Q3 165,923 75,218 47,253 12,720 6,034 9,211 56,481 42,571 13,911 2,214 25,114 5,580 1,315 10,673         Q4 182,288 82,077 54,707 14,873 6,843 5,654 58,128 43,846 14,282 3,868 31,587 5,384 1,243 12,149
2018         Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
         Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912         Q3 173,202 78,105 50,368 12,683 7,192 7,862 59,169 43,951 15,218 2,315 26,424 5,797 1,391 11,519
2017         Sep. 65,200 35,194 14,580 13,498 5,826 1,289 18,518 13,756 4,761 7 9,160 1,864 457 4,759
2018         Sep. 68,972 38,504 15,677 13,784 7,650 1,393 19,184 14,171 5,013 2 8,956 1,846 480 5,083
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2017: 50.7:46.6:2.7. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2017: 22.6:77.4. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2011 40,036 12,781 14,414 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 6,366 4,246 1,420 1,064 52,984 40,424 11,674
2012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2016         Q1 4,620 3,979 2,722 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 3,217 1,668 451 336 15,639 12,090 3,121
         Q2 9,860 4,470 4,139 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 2,952 2,283 451 267 16,740 12,635 3,715         Q3 10,149 3,938 3,010 2,510 2,198 1,641 499 911 3,050 1,501 446 266 15,896 11,699 3,794         Q4 15,461 4,468 4,315 2,038 1,899 1,728 532 806 3,189 1,554 460 251 17,045 13,679 3,024
2017         Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
         Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 − 5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 18,113 13,881 3,832         Q3 10,497 4,144 3,867 2,669 2,132 1,628 502 −324 3,394 1,497 417 273 16,698 12,443 3,824         Q4 15,622 4,677 4,261 2,070 1,906 1,786 538 727 3,257 1,438 456 233 17,118 13,670 3,082
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
         Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 18,827 14,548 3,853         Q3 10,423 4,353 3,886 2,752 2,128 1,677 531 674 3,592 1,463 464 278 ... ... ...
2017         Sep. 3,427 2,040 1,337 704 694 567 161 231 1,106 525 137 95 . . .
2018         Sep. 3,472 2,144 1,081 639 654 565 171 230 1,136 471 137 102 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,379
2012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,032
2016         Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213         Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115         Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2016         Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −         Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −         Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,0252013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,8672014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,041
2016         Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615         Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517         Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298         Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415         Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,557
2016         Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259         Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147         Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400         Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999         Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which: of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,125,337 11,785 606,137 206,631 53,983 1,246,801
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,202,864 12,126 630,053 199,132 60,157 1,301,3972013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,188,128 12,438 637,529 190,555 43,994 1,303,6122014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,189,569 12,774 608,040 190,130 44,949 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,159,746 85,952 595,457 186,661 45,028 1,246,649
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,143,904 205,391 572,779 179,755 41,737 1,144,2422017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017  
p 2,092,781 319,159 521,035 175,617 41,039 1,035,932
2016         Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1 2,168,305 108,746 610,257 183,160 41,396 1,224,746
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2 2,171,800 142,139 598,990 181,372 39,602 1,209,695         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864          Q3 2,165,378 172,567 585,591 179,359 38,912 1,188,949         Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333          Q4 2,143,904 205,391 572,779 179,755 41,737 1,144,242
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1  
p 2,117,281 239,495 558,767 178,219 39,561 1,101,238
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2  p 2,111,075 265,130 545,118 176,514 39,305 1,085,010
         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941          Q3  p 2,104,519 290,214 532,727 176,646 39,474 1,065,459
         Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95          Q4  p 2,092,781 319,159 521,035 175,617 41,039 1,035,932
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1  p 2,069,912 329,387 502,112 176,495 38,493 1,023,425
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2  p 2,052,296 344,279 483,251 179,856 38,102 1,006,808
         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2011 2,125,337 10,429 116,289 1,345,967 171,584 481,068 . .
2012 2,202,864 9,742 106,945 1,441,406 124,399 520,372 . .2013 2,188,128 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 100,363 520,638 . .2014 2,189,569 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,770 507,536 . .2015 2,159,746 14,303 65,676 1,499,098 85,041 495,627 . .
2016         Q1 2,168,305 11,976 69,372 1,491,129 104,405 491,423 . .
         Q2 2,171,800 12,181 76,710 1,485,041 111,114 486,754 . .         Q3 2,165,378 15,370 77,249 1,491,971 98,096 482,692 . .         Q4 2,143,904 15,845 69,715 1,484,378 91,352 482,615 . .
2017         Q1  
p 2,117,281 12,891 60,798 1,479,234 88,577 475,781 . .
         Q2  p 2,111,075 15,196 54,362 1,486,948 83,379 471,191 . .
         Q3  p 2,104,519 16,161 48,197 1,489,630 82,589 467,943 . .
         Q4  p 2,092,781 14,651 48,789 1,484,691 83,476 461,175 . .
2018         Q1  p 2,069,912 12,540 48,449 1,479,750 71,071 458,101 . .
         Q2  p 2,052,296 12,773 54,968 1,466,057 66,701 451,798 . .
Central government
2011 1,344,082 10,429 104,121 1,017,210 138,112 74,210 1,908 11,382
2012 1,387,857 9,742 88,372 1,088,796 88,311 112,636 1,465 11,3542013 1,390,440 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,970 122,852 2,696 10,3032014 1,396,496 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,756 1,202 12,8332015 1,372,604 14,303 49,512 1,139,039 45,256 124,494 2,932 13,577
2016         Q1 1,382,473 11,976 49,030 1,138,051 58,381 125,035 2,853 10,025
         Q2 1,391,131 12,181 59,399 1,129,874 65,168 124,508 2,803 11,367         Q3 1,381,054 15,370 61,408 1,134,326 46,832 123,117 2,634 9,042         Q4 1,366,840 15,845 55,208 1,124,445 50,004 121,338 2,238 8,478
2017         Q1  
p 1,350,988 12,891 45,510 1,124,430 48,082 120,075 2,465 7,469
         Q2  p 1,353,600 15,196 40,225 1,132,686 44,682 120,811 2,547 8,136
         Q3  p 1,352,975 16,161 34,216 1,136,873 45,235 120,490 2,674 10,160
         Q4  p 1,351,290 14,651 36,297 1,132,542 47,758 120,041 2,935 10,603
2018         Q1  p 1,338,592 12,540 35,921 1,133,358 37,206 119,567 2,953 9,864
         Q2  p 1,329,322 12,773 42,883 1,120,469 34,069 119,128 2,885 10,645
State government
2011 654,143 − 12,404 330,924 11,015 299,801 12,246 3,174
2012 684,123 − 18,802 355,756 12,314 297,252 13,197 2,9682013 663,225 − 6,847 360,706 11,573 284,099 12,141 2,6552014 657,633 − 8,391 361,916 19,003 268,323 14,825 2,2972015 654,287 − 16,169 362,376 18,510 257,232 15,867 4,218
2016         Q1 647,567 − 20,347 355,304 21,563 250,352 12,358 4,230
         Q2 644,144 − 17,318 357,069 23,456 246,301 13,860 4,061         Q3 644,655 − 15,848 359,618 26,149 243,040 11,685 3,871         Q4 637,471 − 14,515 361,996 16,054 244,907 11,408 3,376
2017         Q1  
p 627,512 − 15,308 356,832 15,301 240,071 10,407 3,527
         Q2  p 620,263 − 14,167 356,647 14,516 234,933 11,180 3,578
         Q3  p 618,271 − 14,021 355,342 16,095 232,813 13,313 3,581
         Q4  p 611,072 − 12,543 354,941 15,753 227,836 14,325 3,609
2018         Q1  p 600,408 − 12,583 349,945 13,947 223,932 13,307 3,740
         Q2  p 597,128 − 12,144 349,086 14,271 221,626 14,388 3,777
Local government
2011 143,439 − − 381 23,692 119,366 3,504 360
2012 147,499 − − 423 24,801 122,275 3,124 8022013 150,536 − − 646 25,441 124,449 2,523 5302014 151,995 − − 1,297 26,126 124,572 1,959 7342015 152,386 − − 2,047 27,004 123,335 2,143 463
2016         Q1 154,614 − − 2,076 26,916 125,622 2,348 476
         Q2 154,257 − − 2,453 26,476 125,328 2,216 503         Q3 155,086 − − 2,455 26,794 125,838 2,123 527         Q4 153,914 − − 2,404 26,529 124,982 1,819 566
2017         Q1  
p 152,462 − − 2,645 25,566 124,251 1,959 610
         Q2  p 151,995 − − 2,672 25,376 123,947 1,950 644
         Q3  p 150,360 − − 2,687 24,589 123,083 1,851 664
         Q4  p 148,487 − − 2,947 24,101 121,439 1,600 714
2018         Q1  p 147,961 − − 2,427 22,873 122,661 1,765 719
         Q2  p 144,150 − − 2,561 22,274 119,314 1,913 724
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2011 1,331 − − − 237 1,094 − 2,743
2012 1,171 − − − 195 976 − 2,6612013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,8722014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,1222015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,685
2016         Q1 1,211 − − − 458 753 − 2,828
         Q2 1,147 − − − 443 704 − 2,948         Q3 1,025 − − − 334 691 − 3,002         Q4 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2017         Q1  
p 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,226
         Q2  p 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,318
         Q3  p 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,433
         Q4  p 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2018         Q1  p 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,702
         Q2  p 883 − − − 383 500 − 4,040
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 984,256 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,997
2008 1,016,364 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 75,1442009 1,082,644 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,592
2010 1,334,021 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 239,112
2011 1,344,082 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 212,3222012 1,387,857 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,9472013 1,390,440 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,8222014 1,396,496 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 178,144
2015 1,372,604 14,303 1,070 1,188,551 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,750
2016 1,366,840 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,3422017 
p 1,351,290 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,800
2016         Q1 1,382,473 11,976 1,051 1,187,081 666,565 225,678 61,893 14,603 4,395 98,232 20,526 1,205 183,416
         Q2 1,391,131 12,181 1,033 1,189,273 675,794 220,840 49,675 14,550 3,099 99,417 28,369 1,108 189,676         Q3 1,381,054 15,370 1,021 1,195,734 664,034 231,375 50,869 14,570 3,097 102,053 30,626 922 169,949         Q4 1,366,840 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,342
2017         Q1  
p 1,350,988 12,891 995 1,169,939 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 168,158
         Q2  p 1,353,600 15,196 986 1,172,911 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,493
         Q3  p 1,352,975 16,161 977 1,171,089 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,726
         Q4  p 1,351,290 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,800
2018         Q1  p 1,338,592 12,540 951 1,169,279 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,773
         Q2  p 1,329,322 12,773 941 1,163,353 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,196
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
November 2018
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
    
  
  2016   2017   2018
  2015   2016   2017   2015   2016   2017   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2010 = 100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector(excluding construction) 112.6 118.0 120.8 2.5 4.8 2.4 3.2 4.2 − 0.6 2.6 3.5 1.7 3.2Construction 103.7 105.5 108.0 0.0 1.8 2.4 − 0.8 6.0 0.3 1.8 2.3 1.8 2.3Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 109.2 110.6 114.3 1.5 1.3 3.4 1.1 5.1 2.2 3.5 2.8 1.9 2.4Information and communication 128.5 132.9 137.6 2.2 3.4 3.6 2.1 4.4 3.2 3.4 3.4 3.7 4.8Financial and insuranceactivities 104.1 104.5 105.0 − 0.8 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.8Real estate activities 104.4 104.5 105.6 0.2 0.0 1.1 − 0.4 1.4 0.4 1.3 1.4 0.9 1.2Business services  
1 108.3 109.5 112.3 2.0 1.0 2.6 0.6 4.2 0.9 2.9 2.3 1.7 3.0
Public services, education andhealth 105.5 108.2 109.7 2.3 2.6 1.4 2.4 2.2 1.2 1.4 0.8 1.4 1.5Other services 100.0 98.9 100.1 0.9 − 1.1 1.2 − 1.1 2.7 0.1 1.4 0.4 0.1 1.4
Gross value added 108.6 111.1 113.5 1.5 2.2 2.2 1.5 3.5 0.7 2.3 2.3 1.5 2.4Gross domestic product  
2 108.8 111.3 113.7 1.7 2.2 2.2 1.4 3.4 0.9 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.3
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 106.2 108.4 110.3 1.7 2.1 1.8 1.5 2.1 1.8 2.1 1.1 1.6 1.0
Government consumption 108.1 112.3 114.1 2.9 4.0 1.6 3.2 1.7 1.4 1.5 1.7 0.8 1.0Machinery and equipment 111.3 113.8 118.0 4.1 2.2 3.7 − 2.2 4.2 1.7 4.1 4.7 4.7 5.4Premises 108.2 112.3 115.6 − 1.4 3.8 2.9 1.5 5.8 1.6 3.0 1.8 1.4 3.2Other investment  
4 118.5 124.7 126.3 5.4 5.2 1.3 3.3 2.2 1.2 0.4 1.5 0.4 0.4
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . − 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.6
Domestic demand 106.3 109.5 111.7 1.6 3.0 2.0 2.1 2.4 2.0 2.2 1.5 1.5 2.2
Net exports  6 . . . 0.2 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.6 1.1 − 0.9 0.1 0.8 − 0.1 0.4
Exports 124.9 127.8 133.7 5.3 2.3 4.6 2.5 7.3 1.8 4.9 4.7 2.2 4.2Imports 120.6 125.5 131.6 5.6 4.1 4.8 4.4 5.7 4.5 5.5 3.7 2.7 4.1
Gross domestic product  
2 108.8 111.3 113.7 1.7 2.2 2.2 1.4 3.4 0.9 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.3
At  current  prices  ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,630.9 1,675.6 1,732.2 2.3 2.7 3.4 2.7 3.9 3.4 3.6 2.7 3.0 2.6
Government consumption 587.4 615.5 638.9 4.2 4.8 3.8 3.9 3.4 3.4 3.9 4.4 3.2 3.6Machinery and equipment 201.2 206.5 215.2 5.0 2.6 4.2 − 1.9 4.4 2.1 4.5 5.7 5.1 6.0Premises 290.7 307.1 326.6 0.4 5.6 6.4 3.6 8.7 4.8 6.5 5.8 5.6 7.8Other investment  
4 113.6 120.4 123.9 6.9 6.0 2.9 4.6 3.5 2.8 2.1 3.1 2.6 2.6
Changes in inventories  5 − 19.1 − 12.8 − 7.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,804.7 2,912.3 3,029.5 2.5 3.8 4.0 3.3 4.2 4.0 4.3 3.6 3.4 4.3
Net exports 244.1 247.5 247.8 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,428.7 1,450.2 1,541.9 6.5 1.5 6.3 2.3 9.0 3.9 6.5 6.0 2.7 4.9Imports 1,184.6 1,202.8 1,294.1 4.1 1.5 7.6 4.0 9.9 8.0 7.2 5.5 3.1 5.2
Gross domestic product  
2 3,048.9 3,159.8 3,277.3 3.8 3.6 3.7 2.6 4.3 2.5 4.2 4.0 3.2 4.2
IV. Prices (2010 = 100)
Private consumption 106.2 106.9 108.6 0.6 0.7 1.6 1.1 1.8 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.4 1.6Gross domestic product 108.6 110.1 111.8 2.0 1.4 1.5 1.2 0.9 1.6 2.0 1.8 1.8 1.8Terms of trade 102.1 103.9 102.8 2.6 1.7 − 1.0 0.3 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.4
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,542.9 1,601.0 1,668.8 3.9 3.8 4.2 3.8 4.2 4.4 4.3 4.1 4.6 4.7Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 736.9 762.7 787.6 5.0 3.5 3.3 − 0.0 5.4 − 1.5 5.4 3.3 − 0.1 3.0
National income 2,279.8 2,363.7 2,456.4 4.2 3.7 3.9 2.7 4.6 2.5 4.7 3.9 2.9 4.1
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,114.6 3,222.4 3,346.3 4.0 3.5 3.8 2.6 4.4 2.8 4.3 3.8 3.1 4.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2018. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
November 2018
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
2. Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015 = 100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.60 29.44 36.96 2.28 10.92 10.27 9.95 12.73 14.14
Period
2014 98.8 101.9 95.2 99.3 99.9 98.8 97.5 100.1 99.7 99.0 100.0 99.8
2015 99.8 99.6 100.1 99.7 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.8 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.6
2016 101.5 105.3 98.7 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.7 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.12017 104.9 108.7 98.8 104.8 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.3
 
2017         Q3 106.5 116.6 92.4 105.8 107.4 104.7 106.3 105.2 107.8 109.5 103.0 105.2
         Q4 109.9 122.3 104.6 108.2 104.6 111.3 109.6 107.1 106.7 111.6 115.9 104.8
2018         Q1 102.7 87.8 105.1 105.2 106.1 104.3 108.9 104.7 107.3 108.3 100.5 109.5
         Q2 107.5 113.6 90.5 107.7 108.0 107.6 105.4 107.4 110.1 107.6 104.9 110.8         Q3
x 107.4 120.4 94.3 106.1 106.7 103.9 103.9 112.5 109.0 110.0 105.3 97.1
 
2017         Sep. 111.5 118.3 93.0 111.8 110.2 113.6 119.0 108.4 112.5 115.0 112.4 116.2
         Oct. 109.5 120.8 103.0 108.1 109.8 106.4 114.1 108.2 112.0 109.6 103.1 108.1
         Nov. 116.0 123.4 104.3 115.6 111.6 119.3 117.7 113.2 115.0 117.4 115.9 122.4         Dec. 104.3 122.7 106.6 100.9 92.4 108.2 97.1 99.8 93.2 107.9 128.6 83.8
2018         Jan. 95.7 75.2 106.0 98.5 102.4 93.8 102.7 102.8 101.5 102.0 87.9 99.4
         Feb. 98.8 83.0 101.6 101.4 102.6 100.7 105.4 99.4 104.9 104.3 97.1 105.3         Mar. 113.6 105.1 107.7 115.6 113.3 118.4 118.5 112.0 115.5 118.7 116.6 123.9
         Apr. 105.1 109.6 92.5 105.3 106.0 105.5 103.2 103.0 108.6 103.9 100.3 112.3
         May 106.7 114.1 90.2 106.7 108.2 104.8 102.8 109.6 109.4 105.9 101.7 108.2         June 110.6 117.1 88.9 111.1 109.8 112.6 110.3 109.6 112.3 112.9 112.7 111.9
         July
2,x 108.3 123.3 93.5 106.9 108.6 104.8 98.4 110.9 109.8 109.1 104.9 101.1
         Aug. 2,x 101.4 115.1 95.3 99.5 102.9 93.7 94.8 111.1 103.7 105.5 98.5 80.8
         Sep. x,p 112.4 122.8 94.2 112.0 108.6 113.2 118.4 115.5 113.5 115.4 112.6 109.5
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2014 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 3.8 + 2.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.1
2015 + 1.0 − 2.3 + 5.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.7 + 5.7 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.52017 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.1
 
2017         Q3 + 4.1 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 5.2 + 4.8 + 6.1 + 2.9 + 6.3 + 6.7 + 4.7 + 5.0
         Q4 + 4.7 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 5.3 + 6.3 + 5.4 + 3.1 + 3.2 + 5.9 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 5.7
2018         Q1 + 3.9 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 4.3 + 2.6 + 5.4 + 3.9 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 4.3
         Q2 + 2.9 + 2.2 − 3.5 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 3.5 − 0.2 + 7.0 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 4.5         Q3
x + 0.8 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 2.3 + 6.9 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 2.2 − 7.7
 
2017         Sep. + 4.0 + 3.8 − 2.6 + 4.5 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 5.6 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 5.4 + 5.3 + 4.7
         Oct. + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 4.4 + 0.6 + 2.3 + 0.7 + 5.0 + 3.5 + 3.8 − 2.7
         Nov. + 5.7 + 3.7 − 0.7 + 6.5 + 6.8 + 7.1 + 4.8 + 4.2 + 4.9 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 11.8         Dec. + 6.3 + 2.9 + 0.7 + 7.7 + 7.9 + 8.6 + 2.1 + 4.9 + 8.1 + 11.5 + 12.1 + 9.1
2018         Jan. + 6.1 + 16.6 − 4.6 + 5.8 + 5.0 + 6.0 + 3.7 + 7.3 + 4.9 + 6.4 + 5.6 + 5.4
         Feb. + 2.1 − 1.3 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 4.2 + 4.2 + 5.2 + 2.5 − 0.4         Mar. + 3.6 − 0.6 + 5.0 + 4.3 + 3.0 + 5.4 + 3.6 + 4.7 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 6.4 + 7.6
         Apr. + 1.9 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 3.8 − 2.5 + 4.4 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 2.9 + 4.8
         May + 3.6 + 4.2 − 4.9 + 4.1 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 0.3 + 9.2 + 2.7 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 3.6         June + 3.3 + 2.2 − 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 7.5 + 2.9 + 3.7 + 3.3 + 5.1
         July
2,x + 1.5 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 3.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 3.0 − 2.7
         Aug. 2,x + 0.2 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 2.8 − 3.5 + 8.3 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 3.8 − 15.5
         Sep. x,p + 0.8 + 3.8 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 6.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 5.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, dates. xProvisional; estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in
II.12. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
the production sector in the base year 2015. 2Influenced by a change in holiday

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
November 2018
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
3. Orders received by industry *
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
Total
2013 95.2 + 2.4 100.0 − 0.9 92.6 + 4.6 92.5 + 2.0 95.2 + 2.4 91.7 + 2.0
2014 97.8 + 2.7 100.6 + 0.6 96.2 + 3.9 96.8 + 4.6 95.8 + 0.6 97.1 + 5.9
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.8
2016 100.7 + 0.9 98.9 − 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.0 − 0.82017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2017         Sep. 110.3 + 11.0 108.9 + 11.8 111.8 + 11.4 107.0 + 6.2 126.2 + 13.4 100.7 + 3.5
         Oct. 112.9 + 9.0 113.6 + 11.5 112.9 + 7.9 109.7 + 6.3 128.0 + 5.3 103.7 + 6.8
         Nov. 114.8 + 10.9 118.2 + 13.8 113.1 + 9.5 111.4 + 8.1 129.7 + 17.1 105.4 + 4.8         Dec. 115.2 + 9.1 103.4 + 14.0 125.2 + 7.2 94.5 + 4.2 108.6 + 12.3 89.8 + 1.2
2018         Jan. 110.9 + 9.9 115.7 + 10.5 107.9 + 9.7 111.2 + 8.7 112.5 + 5.1 110.8 + 10.0
         Feb. 110.3 + 4.1 110.9 + 2.3 110.1 + 5.9 108.7 − 1.4 112.2 + 3.1 107.6 − 2.8         Mar. 121.6 + 3.8 121.2 + 4.1 122.9 + 3.6 113.6 + 2.9 123.6 − 2.1 110.4 + 4.9
         Apr. 108.4 + 1.6 116.0 + 7.4 104.7 − 1.7 101.5 − 0.6 114.1 + 2.5 97.3 − 1.8
         May 109.9 + 5.9 114.1 + 7.1 107.6 + 5.1 106.7 + 5.0 121.4 + 10.2 101.8 + 3.2         June 111.5 + 0.7 115.0 + 3.7 110.2 − 1.1 105.2 + 1.2 121.2 + 3.1 99.9 + 0.4
         July 106.9 + 1.0 114.7 + 5.4 101.7 − 2.0 109.6 + 1.7 120.3 + 10.4 106.1 − 1.2
         Aug. 98.9 − 0.1 103.8 − 1.0 94.8 + 0.6 106.4 − 1.4 116.6 + 1.2 103.1 − 2.3         Sep.
p 109.7 − 0.5 109.1 + 0.2 110.1 − 1.5 109.2 + 2.1 124.0 − 1.7 104.3 + 3.6
From the domestic market
2013 97.0 + 0.5 102.8 − 1.3 92.3 + 2.1 95.2 + 1.2 100.4 + 0.9 93.4 + 1.3
2014 98.1 + 1.1 101.7 − 1.1 95.2 + 3.1 97.1 + 2.0 100.4 + 0.0 96.0 + 2.8
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.9 + 2.2 98.0 − 1.8 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.8 101.7 + 3.8 108.7 + 5.4 99.3 + 3.1
2017         Sep. 107.5 + 10.7 105.9 + 13.0 109.4 + 9.7 104.5 + 5.9 121.1 + 7.1 98.9 + 5.4
         Oct. 111.0 + 7.7 112.4 + 10.8 110.2 + 5.2 108.7 + 7.1 128.7 + 8.9 101.9 + 6.3
         Nov. 112.7 + 9.3 114.1 + 10.9 111.7 + 7.9 111.6 + 10.0 123.0 + 10.4 107.7 + 9.7         Dec. 101.3 + 1.4 98.4 + 12.7 106.1 − 5.8 86.2 − 0.1 89.0 + 2.5 85.2 − 1.0
2018         Jan. 107.8 + 8.8 113.4 + 11.0 104.0 + 7.5 101.7 + 3.9 103.0 + 0.3 101.3 + 5.2
         Feb. 105.6 − 3.5 108.1 − 0.9 103.5 − 6.2 105.3 + 0.5 109.5 + 7.1 103.9 − 1.7         Mar. 119.7 + 4.3 119.4 + 5.9 121.6 + 3.1 109.0 + 3.6 122.1 + 5.3 104.6 + 3.0
         Apr. 105.0 − 4.6 108.7 + 2.7 103.0 − 11.4 97.9 + 4.9 115.5 + 13.2 91.9 + 1.7
         May 106.5 + 5.1 110.2 + 6.4 103.4 + 3.4 106.3 + 10.2 127.7 + 29.4 99.0 + 3.4         June 107.7 − 0.9 111.4 + 5.6 105.4 − 6.6 101.4 + 1.5 113.1 + 5.5 97.5 + 0.1
         July 109.8 + 2.4 113.7 + 5.1 107.1 + 0.4 105.4 + 0.5 109.4 + 6.8 104.1 − 1.5
         Aug. 98.3 − 2.9 102.3 − 4.4 94.2 − 1.3 103.1 − 3.0 114.7 + 3.5 99.2 − 5.3         Sep.
p 107.4 − 0.1 107.1 + 1.1 108.6 − 0.7 100.9 − 3.4 116.6 − 3.7 95.6 − 3.3
From abroad
2013 93.9 + 3.9 97.1 − 0.4 92.8 + 6.2 90.5 + 2.7 91.0 + 3.6 90.4 + 2.5
2014 97.5 + 3.8 99.5 + 2.5 96.7 + 4.2 96.5 + 6.6 92.0 + 1.1 97.9 + 8.3
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.4 + 0.6 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.0 + 7.2 101.1 + 1.32017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.5 109.0 + 7.0 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.8 104.4 + 3.3
2017         Sep. 112.5 + 11.2 112.1 + 10.6 113.2 + 12.2 109.0 + 6.4 130.3 + 18.6 102.1 + 2.1
         Oct. 114.4 + 10.1 114.9 + 12.2 114.5 + 9.6 110.5 + 5.7 127.4 + 2.6 105.0 + 7.0
         Nov. 116.4 + 12.1 122.7 + 16.9 113.9 + 10.5 111.3 + 6.6 135.1 + 22.4 103.6 + 1.2         Dec. 125.7 + 14.3 108.8 + 15.3 136.7 + 14.6 100.9 + 7.2 124.3 + 18.8 93.3 + 2.9
2018         Jan. 113.3 + 10.9 118.2 + 10.1 110.3 + 11.0 118.5 + 12.1 120.1 + 8.7 118.0 + 13.4
         Feb. 113.9 + 10.2 113.9 + 5.9 114.1 + 13.9 111.4 − 2.6 114.3 + 0.2 110.4 − 3.6         Mar. 123.1 + 3.4 123.1 + 2.2 123.7 + 3.9 117.2 + 2.4 124.8 − 7.3 114.8 + 6.3
         Apr. 111.0 + 6.5 123.8 + 12.1 105.8 + 5.1 104.3 − 4.3 112.9 − 5.0 101.5 − 4.1
         May 112.4 + 6.3 118.4 + 8.0 110.2 + 6.2 107.0 + 1.4 116.3 − 2.7 104.0 + 3.1         June 114.4 + 2.0 118.8 + 1.7 113.1 + 2.3 108.1 + 0.8 127.8 + 1.5 101.8 + 0.7
         July 104.7 − 0.1 115.8 + 5.8 98.4 − 3.5 112.8 + 2.5 129.0 + 12.9 107.6 − 1.0
         Aug. 99.3 + 2.1 105.5 + 2.7 95.1 + 1.8 109.0 − 0.2 118.1 − 0.5 106.1
+ 0.0
         Sep. p 111.4 − 1.0 111.3 − 0.7 111.0 − 1.9 115.7 + 6.1 130.0 − 0.2 111.0 + 8.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex-   
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics,  
Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
November 2018
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2014 118.5 − 0.6 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.8 − 0.9 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.8 − 0.1 104.0 − 3.4
2015 124.2 + 4.8 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.3 − 2.0 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.3 + 5.1
2016 142.3 + 14.6 153.8 + 15.1 193.5 + 17.0 143.0 + 15.0 107.5 + 9.1 130.8 + 13.9 137.1 + 11.8 127.0 + 16.22017 152.2 + 7.0 164.6 + 7.0 203.9 + 5.4 153.5 + 7.3 120.3 + 11.9 139.8 + 6.9 147.1 + 7.3 136.7 + 7.6
 
2017         Aug. 145.3 + 4.6 152.9 + 2.9 184.8 + 0.4 142.3 + 0.5 121.5 + 22.0 137.7 + 6.6 138.9 + 4.9 135.9 + 6.7
         Sep. 151.8 + 5.1 163.7 + 1.3 200.0 − 11.3 148.2 + 11.3 138.3 + 15.0 140.0 + 9.9 144.9 + 11.7 139.5 + 9.8
         Oct. 141.2 − 2.8 152.7 − 2.7 203.3 + 4.6 131.0 − 11.5 117.8 + 6.8 129.7 − 2.9 132.5 − 8.6 125.2 − 0.7
         Nov. 140.7 + 10.7 158.1 + 13.2 188.6 − 0.4 157.1 + 29.0 101.3 + 6.5 123.3 + 7.7 152.9 + 22.9 108.9 + 3.9         Dec. 166.7 + 27.0 199.5 + 32.8 247.1 + 43.2 196.0 + 27.4 116.3 + 21.9 133.9 + 19.1 174.7 + 23.9 126.2 + 20.4
2018         Jan. 123.8 + 9.1 135.6 + 8.5 170.0 + 10.0 129.5 + 5.7 86.0 + 15.6 112.0 + 9.7 130.3 + 4.7 98.6 + 14.8
         Feb. 154.2 + 18.3 157.6 + 9.2 186.6 + 6.0 154.8 + 11.3 108.7 + 11.6 150.8 + 29.8 167.1 + 31.2 127.9 + 11.4         Mar. 180.7 + 0.9 186.9 − 1.8 228.8 − 6.1 169.6 − 1.5 155.7 + 11.5 174.5 + 4.1 168.4 + 2.0 173.9 + 3.9
         Apr. 169.0 + 2.3 174.9 + 2.6 234.0 + 14.4 156.6 − 6.1 113.0 − 1.5 163.2 + 2.0 155.9 + 1.2 156.3 − 2.9
         May 177.3 + 14.0 182.6 + 12.4 216.0 + 6.8 177.3 + 24.0 132.9 − 6.5 172.0 + 15.8 174.9 + 26.3 164.2 + 6.6         June 183.4 + 5.9 190.3 + 1.2 237.0 − 0.6 170.2 + 3.5 158.1 − 0.7 176.4 + 11.4 168.4 + 7.9 177.1 + 7.6
         July 176.8 + 7.8 189.8 + 13.2 235.5 + 15.5 178.7 + 12.0 133.1 + 10.5 163.7 + 2.1 177.2 + 14.2 152.7 − 2.8
         Aug. 160.3 + 10.3 160.7 + 5.1 208.8 + 13.0 145.7 + 2.4 110.8 − 8.8 159.9 + 16.1 156.7 + 12.8 144.6 + 6.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; exclu- method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement 4 − construction. Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of which:In stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current
prices At 2010 prices  3 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2014 96.5 + 1.6 96.4 + 1.2 97.3 + 2.0 99.9 + 1.8 99.2 − 0.8 97.6 − 0.5 95.0 + 7.1 83.3 + 1.8
2015 4 100.1 + 3.7 4 100.1 + 3.8 100.1 + 2.9 100.2 + 0.3 100.2 + 1.0 100.2 + 2.7 100.0 + 5.3 4 100.0 + 20.0
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.1 + 2.0 101.7 + 1.6 101.0 + 0.8 99.9 − 0.3 101.5 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.82017
5 107.5 + 4.9 105.1 + 2.9 105.6 + 3.8 108.3 + 7.2 107.0 + 7.1 103.5 + 2.0 107.8 + 3.8 120.6 + 9.8
 
2017         Sep. 105.7 + 7.0 102.9 + 5.0 102.5 + 5.1 118.7 + 21.1 103.3 + 11.7 99.7 + 3.4 106.1 + 3.6 117.1 + 12.5
         Oct. 110.2 + 2.2 107.0 + 0.6 105.9 + 2.6 119.6 − 5.6 110.5 + 3.6 109.5 + 1.5 109.0 + 2.4 122.0 + 2.7
         Nov. 114.7 + 5.6 111.1 + 3.7 108.0 + 4.7 112.5 + 4.9 124.0 + 7.9 110.6 + 2.9 113.5 + 4.5 151.2 + 13.9         Dec. 129.2 + 4.0 125.3 + 2.4 125.2 + 4.3 128.0 + 3.2 162.7 + 2.6 113.0 + 2.6 123.2 + 4.8 154.4 + 7.8
2018         Jan. 100.4 + 4.3 97.8 + 2.6 99.1 + 4.6 90.1 + 1.5 110.9 − 1.0 90.9 + 4.2 107.9 + 6.5 120.0 + 6.6
         Feb. 96.3 + 2.4 93.6 + 1.1 98.1 + 3.9 78.9 − 3.8 93.0 + 1.5 88.8 − 0.6 104.8 + 5.4 108.9 + 2.6         Mar. 110.8 + 1.2 106.9 − 0.1 110.1 + 4.0 100.6 − 9.7 104.5 + 2.5 106.7 − 5.0 113.2 + 3.8 126.7 + 6.0
         Apr. 112.8 + 5.5 108.4 + 3.8 112.0 + 3.9 120.4 + 10.3 91.4 − 1.7 113.5 + 4.5 113.0 + 7.3 122.1 + 7.4
         May 110.2 + 2.5 105.8 + 0.8 111.9 + 5.0 110.3 − 0.7 90.2 + 0.6 106.1 − 1.0 107.9 + 1.1 119.4 + 3.9         June 109.3 + 3.4 105.0 + 1.2 111.4 + 6.1 106.4 − 3.8 100.2 + 4.9 101.2 − 1.3 109.4 + 2.8 114.3 + 1.8
         July 110.0 + 2.4 106.7 + 0.8 110.0 + 2.4 105.4 − 2.1 97.1 − 4.5 102.5 − 1.7 115.2 + 5.5 122.5 + 8.9
         Aug. 106.2 + 3.1 102.6 + 1.4 106.9 + 3.1 99.3 − 0.2 97.2 − 0.7 97.4 − 0.7 108.8 + 4.3 115.4 + 4.3         Sep. 107.9 + 2.1 103.0 + 0.1 105.7 + 3.1 109.7 − 7.6 107.0 + 3.6 100.3 + 0.6 111.1 + 4.7 124.6 + 6.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value added integration of a larger online retail sales-based enterprise that founded a business
tax;  for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement 4 − Seasonally adjusted busi- establishment in Germany in May 2015. 5As of January 2017 figures are provisional,
ness statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates
1Including stalls and markets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3Values at current for missing reports. 
prices deflated with retail price indices at 2010 weights. 4As of May 2015

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
November 2018
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
6. Labour market * 
  
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legalcategory
Solely
of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary social Unem- Temporary Security
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies,  4,6 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4,5 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2013 42,319 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 191 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 42,670 + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,071 + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,642 + 1.3 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 6552017 44,269 + 1.4 32,234 + 2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 113 24 2,533
7 855 5.7 731
2015         Q3 43,290 + 1.0 30,928 + 2.1 8,974 20,865 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595
         Q4 43,485 + 1.2 31,333 + 2.3 9,049 21,204 837 4,829 101 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2016         Q1 43,087 + 1.4 31,077 + 2.4 8,929 21,131 793 4,785 312 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 43,563 + 1.3 31,350 + 2.2 8,988 21,298 820 4,823 59 47 2,674 782 6.1 653         Q3 43,842 + 1.3 31,593 + 2.1 9,056 21,431 858 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682         Q4 44,076 + 1.4 32,014 + 2.2 9,137 21,770 866 4,781 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017         Q1 43,729 + 1.5 31,790 + 2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734
7 987 6.2 671
         Q2 44,195 + 1.5 32,064 + 2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 5.6 717         Q3 44,479 + 1.5 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763         Q4 44,672 + 1.4 32,759 + 2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 79 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1
r 44,371 r + 1.5 32,563 + 2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 179 22 2,525 909 5.7 760
         Q2 r 44,776 r + 1.3 8 32,789 8 + 2.3 8 9,295 8 22,406 8 842 8 4,696 ... 8 10 2,325 760 9 5.1 794
         Q3 10 45,035 10 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,311 784 5.1 828
2015         June 43,150 + 0.9 30,771 + 2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572
         July 43,191 + 0.9 30,744 + 2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589         Aug. 43,250 + 1.0 30,988 + 2.2 8,993 20,901 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597         Sep. 43,429 + 1.1 31,333 + 2.2 9,076 21,153 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600         Oct. 43,517 + 1.1 31,368 + 2.3 9,068 21,206 846 4,814 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612         Nov. 43,554 + 1.3 31,389 + 2.5 9,060 21,247 842 4,846 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610         Dec. 43,385 + 1.3 31,150 + 2.5 8,964 21,167 798 4,843 177 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016         Jan. 42,993 + 1.3 30,983 + 2.3 8,906 21,073 784 4,774 343 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb. 43,049 + 1.4 31,069 + 2.4 8,923 21,127 793 4,769 343 50 2,911 947 6.6 614         Mar. 43,218 + 1.4 31,209 + 2.2 8,954 21,217 804 4,782 252 52 2,845 888 6.5 635         Apr. 43,386 + 1.3 31,314 + 2.2 8,983 21,279 809 4,806 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640         May 43,580 + 1.3 31,410 + 2.3 9,000 21,337 826 4,838 57 45 2,664 774 6.0 655         June 43,724 + 1.3 31,443 + 2.2 9,010 21,339 846 4,865 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665         July 43,704 + 1.2 31,378 + 2.1 9,007 21,273 853 4,863 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674         Aug. 43,810 + 1.3 31,675 + 2.2 9,076 21,486 865 4,802 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685         Sep. 44,011 + 1.3 32,007 + 2.2 9,157 21,729 869 4,768 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687         Oct. 44,093 + 1.3 32,045 + 2.2 9,154 21,773 871 4,767 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691         Nov. 44,140 + 1.3 32,069 + 2.2 9,147 21,807 876 4,794 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681         Dec. 43,994 + 1.4 31,848 + 2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan. 43,644 + 1.5 31,707 + 2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777
7 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb. 43,694 + 1.5 31,774 + 2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675         Mar. 43,850 + 1.5 31,930 + 2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692         Apr. 44,024 + 1.5 32,013 + 2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706         May 44,205 + 1.4 32,131 + 2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 5.6 714         June 44,356 + 1.4 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731         July 44,375 + 1.5 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750         Aug. 44,445 + 1.4 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765         Sep. 44,618 + 1.4 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773         Oct. 44,683 + 1.3 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780         Nov. 44,737 + 1.4 32,830 + 2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772         Dec. 44,595 + 1.4 32,609 + 2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 183 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan.
r 44,318 r + 1.5 32,504 + 2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 256 21 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb. r 44,341 r + 1.5 32,551 + 2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 144 20 2,546 927 5.7 764
         Mar. r 44,453 r + 1.4 32,660 + 2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 136 24 2,458 859 5.5 778
         Apr. r 44,628 r + 1.4 32,782 + 2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 20 10 2,384 796 5.3 784
         May r 44,791 r + 1.3 8 32,829 8 + 2.2 8 9,306 8 22,431 8 842 8 4,707 ... 8 9 2,315 751 9 5.1 793
         June r 44,909 r + 1.2 8 32,853 8 + 2.1 8 9,322 8 22,429 8 851 8 4,737 ... 8 11 2,276 735 5.0 805
         July r 44,923 r + 1.2 8 32,836 8 + 2.2 8 9,337 8 22,392 8 859 8 4,736 ... 8 17 2,325 788 5.1 823
         Aug. r 45,002 r + 1.3 8 33,111 8 + 2.2 8 9,408 8 22,596 8 855 8 4,667 ... 8 22 2,351 804 5.2 828
         Sep. 10 45,179 10 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,256 759 5.0 834
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,204 742 4.9 824
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and of the Social Security Code (SGB III). 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- Employment Agency. In 2016 and 2017 the estimated values for Ge rmany deviated
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: from the final data by a maximum of 1.1% for employees subject to social contribu-
end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the tions, by a maximum of 0.4% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contribu-
total civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment tions, and by a maximum of 70.0% for cyclically induced short-time work. 9From
and seasonal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From January 2017 persons May 2018 calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 10Initial preliminary
receiving additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. benefit II at the same time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
November 2018
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
7. Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which:  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  6 
prices ofindustrial
of which:
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy struction the prices  of price index
(national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial Housing
Total Food  2 Energy  3 Services rents  4 concept) index market  5 Exports Imports Energy  7 products  5 goods materials  8 
Period 2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2013 99.1 97.4 98.7 109.8 97.4 97.3 105.7 97.0 102.9 120.7 99.4 105.2 160.2 117.6
2014 99.9 98.8 99.2 107.5 98.8 98.8 106.6 98.6 101.9 111.1 99.1 102.9 142.8 108.3
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.2 101.2 107.4 101.9 98.4 106.6 99.0 96.7 83.2 98.42017 102.1 104.0 102.3 97.5 102.5 102.9 109.3 105.3 101.1
9 115.2 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.1
 
2016         Dec. 101.8 102.6 101.6 97.3 102.8 102.0 108.8 99.6 113.1 100.3 100.1 106.6 114.0
2017         Jan. 101.0 103.2 100.7 98.2 101.0 102.2 108.1 100.3 114.8 100.7 100.8 108.9 115.9
         Feb. 101.7 104.6 101.0 98.4 101.9 102.3 108.8 103.9 100.5 116.2 100.9 101.4 110.2 118.9         Mar. 101.8 103.4 102.6 97.5 102.0 102.4 109.0 100.6 117.6 100.9 101.1 99.7 116.4
         Apr. 101.8 103.4 102.7 98.3 101.5 102.6 109.0 100.9 119.9 101.1 101.0 100.4 110.1
         May 101.6 103.5 102.7 96.9 101.5 102.8 108.8 104.9 100.8 120.9 100.8 100.0 93.1 104.2         June 101.8 103.6 102.0 96.1 102.5 102.9 109.0 100.8 121.3 100.6 99.0 85.7 100.4
         July 102.2 103.8 101.4 95.9 103.8 103.0 109.4 101.0 120.2 100.5 98.6 86.5 102.9
         Aug. 102.4 103.8 101.8 96.3 103.8 103.1 109.5 105.7 101.1 121.2 100.3 98.6 90.1 103.3         Sep. 102.4 104.1 102.9 97.5 102.8 103.2 109.6 101.5
9 115.9 100.5 99.3 96.3 102.8
         Oct. 102.3 104.8 103.2 97.4 102.2 103.3 109.6 101.6 114.3 100.6 99.9 101.6 102.7
         Nov. 102.6 104.8 103.2 98.7 102.6 103.5 109.9 106.5 101.7 114.7 100.8 100.6 110.3 103.8         Dec. 103.4 105.5 102.8 98.5 104.2 103.6 110.6 101.9 114.3 100.8 100.8 113.7 103.6
2018         Jan. 102.4 106.2 101.8 98.9 102.4 103.9 109.8 102.4 110.6 101.1 101.4 115.9 105.4
         Feb. 102.9 106.2 102.2 98.5 103.3 104.0 110.3 108.3 102.3 110.1 101.0 100.9 108.7 106.0         Mar. 103.3 106.4 103.2 97.9 103.7 104.1 110.7 102.4 111.4 101.1 100.8 109.5 104.9
         Apr. 103.2 106.8 103.4 99.5 102.7 104.3 110.7 102.8 110.8 101.3 101.4 116.7 106.1
         May 103.8 106.9 103.3 101.9 103.4 104.4 111.2 109.4 103.3 109.6 101.8 102.9 129.9 112.5         June 103.9 106.9 102.9 102.4 103.8 104.5 111.3 103.7 110.4 102.1 103.4 130.5 111.3
         July 104.3 106.6 101.9 102.3 105.5 104.7 111.6 103.9 112.4 102.2 103.3 129.9 105.8
         Aug. 104.3 106.4 102.5 103.1 105.0 104.8 111.7 111.0 104.2 115.6 102.4 103.3 130.5 105.7         Sep. 104.7 107.1 103.9 105.1 104.2 104.9 112.1 104.7 118.3 102.4 103.7 140.8 102.7
         Oct. 104.8 107.1 104.3 106.1 104.0 105.0 112.3 ... ... ... ... 144.7 105.5
Annual percentage change  
  
2013 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 4.0 − 8.6
2014 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 1.9 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.8 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 16.8 − 1.62017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.3 + 2.7
9 + 8.1 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 19.7 + 8.8
 
2016         Dec. + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 3.1 + 37.5 + 27.5
2017         Jan. + 1.9 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.3 + 7.5 + 1.8 + 5.2 + 68.8 + 31.4
         Feb. + 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 7.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 2.8 + 3.0 + 9.6 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 72.2 + 34.2         Mar. + 1.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 3.2 + 10.3 + 2.3 + 5.6 + 37.9 + 24.4
         Apr. + 2.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 3.3 + 13.2 + 2.6 + 5.8 + 33.7 + 15.3
         May + 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.8 + 14.1 + 2.1 + 4.0 + 12.7 + 7.2         June + 1.5 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 14.0 + 1.6 + 2.4 − 2.5 + 1.5
         July + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 9.3 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.7
         Aug. + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.4 + 2.6 + 13.6 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 7.4 + 4.8         Sep. + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.2
9 + 10.7 + 1.5 + 2.8 + 14.8 + 6.0
         Oct. + 1.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 5.1 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 5.6 + 2.9
         Nov. + 1.8 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.7 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.8 + 2.6 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 15.6 − 4.3         Dec. + 1.6 + 2.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 6.7 − 9.1
2018         Jan. + 1.4 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 3.7 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 6.4 − 9.1
         Feb. + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 1.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 10.8         Mar. + 1.5 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.8 − 5.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 9.8 − 9.9
         Apr. + 1.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 7.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 16.2 − 3.6
         May + 2.2 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 5.2 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 4.3 + 2.5 − 9.3 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 39.5 + 8.0         June + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 6.6 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 2.9 − 9.0 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 52.3 + 10.9
         July + 2.1 + 2.7 + 0.5 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 2.9 − 6.5 + 1.7 + 4.8 + 50.2 + 2.8
         Aug. + 1.9 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 7.1 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 4.6 + 2.1 + 4.8 + 44.8 + 2.3         Sep. + 2.2 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 7.8 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 4.4 + 46.2 − 0.1
         Oct. + 2.4 + 2.2 + 1.1 + 8.9 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.5 ... ... ... ... + 42.4 + 2.7
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on transport fuels and lubricants. 4Net rents. 5Excluding value added tax. 6For the
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw euro area, in euro. 7Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas. 8Food, beverages and to-
Materials: HWWI. 1Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. 2Inclu- bacco as well as industrial raw materials. 9From September 2017 onwards provisio-
ding alcoholic beverages and tobacco. 3Electricity, gas and other fuels as well as nal figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
November 2018
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
    
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age
€ billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.62012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.32013 1,167.4 3.0 778.3 2.8 388.1 0.1 1,166.4 1.9 1,717.2 1.3 153.7 − 2.5 8.92014 1,213.0 3.9 807.2 3.7 398.4 2.6 1,205.6 3.4 1,761.3 2.6 167.2 8.8 9.5
2015 1,261.4 4.0 837.2 3.7 416.5 4.5 1,253.7 4.0 1,805.7 2.5 174.8 4.5 9.7
2016 1,311.9 4.0 869.1 3.8 430.5 3.4 1,299.6 3.7 1,857.5 2.9 181.9 4.1 9.82017 1,366.6 4.2 902.9 3.9 444.8 3.3 1,347.7 3.7 1,922.0 3.5 189.8 4.3 9.9
2017         Q1 318.4 4.2 210.8 4.1 112.9 4.2 323.6 4.1 478.1 4.1 63.0 5.0 13.2
         Q2 333.2 4.2 215.2 3.6 109.9 3.7 325.1 3.6 478.9 3.2 44.9 2.1 9.4         Q3 337.4 4.3 227.7 4.1 111.7 2.6 339.5 3.6 480.0 3.7 39.9 4.2 8.3         Q4 377.6 4.0 249.2 3.7 110.3 2.9 359.5 3.5 485.1 2.9 42.0 6.0 8.7
2018         Q1 333.6 4.8 220.8 4.8 115.1 2.0 335.9 3.8 494.5 3.5 66.9 6.2 13.5
         Q2 349.6 4.9 225.8 4.9 112.2 2.1 338.0 4.0 494.0 3.2 48.9 8.8 9.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2018. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.7 1.7 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.4 2.7 104.4 2.6 104.7 2.8 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.72013 107.0 2.4 106.9 2.4 107.2 2.5 107.2 2.4 108.4 2.12014 110.1 2.9 109.9 2.8 110.1 2.7 110.1 2.7 111.5 2.8
2015 112.6 2.3 112.4 2.2 112.6 2.3 112.7 2.3 114.6 2.8
2016 114.9 2.1 114.7 2.1 115.0 2.1 115.2 2.2 117.3 2.42017 117.4 2.2 117.1 2.1 117.5 2.2 117.8 2.3 120.3 2.5
2017         Q2 110.1 2.1 109.8 2.1 110.2 2.4 117.6 2.4 117.6 2.6
         Q3 119.9 2.0 119.6 2.0 120.0 2.0 118.3 2.1 118.4 2.6         Q4 130.6 2.0 130.3 1.9 130.7 2.0 118.6 2.2 131.4 2.4
2018         Q1 111.5 2.3 111.3 2.3 111.4 2.1 119.4 2.2 116.8 2.9
         Q2 113.6 3.2 113.4 3.3 113.4 2.9 121.1 2.9 121.4 3.2         Q3 123.1 2.7 122.9 2.8 123.3 2.8 121.6 2.8 . .
2018         Mar. 112.2 2.7 111.9 2.8 111.7 2.2 119.7 2.3 . .
         Apr. 113.2 2.7 113.0 2.7 113.2 2.6 120.6 2.6 . .
         May 114.5 4.0 114.2 4.0 113.7 3.2 121.2 3.1 . .         June 113.2 3.0 113.0 3.0 113.3 3.0 121.4 3.1 . .
         July 142.8 2.9 142.5 2.9 143.0 2.9 121.5 2.9 . .
         Aug. 113.3 2.7 113.1 2.7 113.5 2.7 121.6 2.8 . .         Sep. 113.4 2.6 113.1 2.6 113.5 2.6 121.6 2.7 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such August 2018. as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
November 2018
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
  
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
Non- Trade of which:
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2014 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 207.2 175.8
2015 2,225.6 1,394.0 470.7 564.7 273.1 831.6 215.5 190.5 136.0 633.3 1,592.3 860.4 465.3 731.9 222.7 180.32016 2,366.2 1,476.7 493.0 594.9 288.9 889.5 226.8 217.9 150.4 671.8 1,694.4 888.2 481.6 806.2 249.0 192.82017
p 2,399.9 1,489.1 500.0 602.9 291.3 910.8 230.6 226.5 159.3 758.8 1,641.1 866.4 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2016         H1 2,255.6 1,380.4 462.4 549.3 272.0 875.2 226.6 195.1 140.4 607.1 1,648.5 894.8 464.6 753.7 243.8 174.9
         H2 2,366.2 1,476.7 493.0 594.9 288.9 889.5 226.8 217.9 150.4 671.8 1,694.4 888.2 481.6 806.2 249.0 192.8
2017         H1 2,383.1 1,469.8 501.7 582.8 288.6 913.3 238.2 220.7 149.8 701.1 1,682.0 886.5 496.9 795.5 246.1 194.9
         H2 p 2,399.9 1,489.1 500.0 602.9 291.3 910.8 230.6 226.5 159.3 758.8 1,641.1 866.4 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
As a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.0 8.5
2015 100.0 62.6 21.2 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.12016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.5 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.22017
p 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.1 38.0 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2016         H1 100.0 61.2 20.5 24.4 12.1 38.8 10.0 8.7 6.2 26.9 73.1 39.7 20.6 33.4 10.8 7.8
         H2 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.5 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.2
2017         H1 100.0 61.7 21.1 24.5 12.1 38.3 10.0 9.3 6.3 29.4 70.6 37.2 20.9 33.4 10.3 8.2
         H2 p 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.1 38.0 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2014 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 185.6 122.42015 1,781.1 1,076.8 304.0 446.3 259.0 704.3 198.8 147.0 104.3 485.0 1,296.1 689.4 353.1 606.7 198.3 127.52016 1,908.6 1,145.8 322.1 472.9 270.8 762.8 209.7 169.9 115.4 514.1 1,394.5 714.8 369.4 679.7 223.1 140.92017
p 1,935.4 1,149.4 323.1 474.5 277.2 786.0 212.5 176.0 128.1 588.2 1,347.1 697.5 381.6 649.7 215.5 148.4
2016         H1 1,817.3 1,058.7 296.6 432.0 254.2 758.6 210.0 149.8 112.2 465.7 1,351.6 717.4 350.9 634.3 219.2 129.9
         H2 1,908.6 1,145.8 322.1 472.9 270.8 762.8 209.7 169.9 115.4 514.1 1,394.5 714.8 369.4 679.7 223.1 140.9
2017         H1 1,921.2 1,136.9 324.7 463.5 273.1 784.3 224.2 171.9 125.3 550.0 1,371.2 708.2 378.1 663.0 224.3 153.1
         H2 p 1,935.4 1,149.4 323.1 474.5 277.2 786.0 212.5 176.0 128.1 588.2 1,347.1 697.5 381.6 649.7 215.5 148.4
As a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.2 7.4
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.1 7.22016 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.42017
p 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.3 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.0 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2016         H1 100.0 58.3 16.3 23.8 14.0 41.7 11.6 8.3 6.2 25.6 74.4 39.5 19.3 34.9 12.1 7.2
         H2 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.4
2017         H1 100.0 59.2 16.9 24.1 14.2 40.8 11.7 9.0 6.5 28.6 71.4 36.9 19.7 34.5 11.7 8.0
         H2 p 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.3 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.0 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.42015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.72016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.92017
p 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2016         H1 438.3 321.7 165.8 117.3 17.8 116.6 16.6 45.3 28.2 141.4 296.9 177.4 113.6 119.4 24.7 45.0
         H2 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.9
2017         H1 461.9 332.9 177.0 119.3 15.5 129.0 14.0 48.8 24.5 151.1 310.7 178.3 118.9 132.5 21.8 41.8
         H2 p 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
As a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.92016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.32017
p 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2016         H1 100.0 73.4 37.8 26.8 4.1 26.6 3.8 10.3 6.4 32.3 67.7 40.5 25.9 27.3 5.6 10.3
         H2 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.3
2017         H1 100.0 72.1 38.3 25.8 3.4 27.9 3.0 10.6 5.3 32.7 67.3 38.6 25.7 28.7 4.7 9.0
         H2 p 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
November 2018
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
  
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
Annual Annual change in Annual change inper- per- per- per- per-centage centage centage centage centage
Period change  
4 change  4 % points  4 % % % change  4 % points  4 %%% € billion  3 € billion  3 € billion  3 
Total
2010 1,320.9 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.6 98.3 66.6 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.9 12.1
2011 1,414.3 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.5 11.0 17.4 93.8 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.02012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 − 0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 1.9 6.1 11.02013 1,541.0 − 0.6 187.1 − 2.8 12.1 − 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.3 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 10.92014 1,565.6 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.7 10.3 17.2 109.3 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,635.3 6.9 196.1 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.8 91.6 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.6 11.3
2016 1,626.0 − 0.4 214.8 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.6 11.4 18.0 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.02017
p 1,722.8 5.2 244.5 14.5 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 143.9 33.2 8.4 1.7 2.5 6.8 12.2
2013         H1 762.7 − 0.2 93.4 − 3.6 12.2 − 0.4 3.4 9.3 16.5 53.8 − 7.6 7.1 − 0.6 0.6 4.9 10.7
         H2 780.0 − 1.1 93.8 − 2.0 12.0 − 0.1 5.4 10.8 19.2 45.7 25.5 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.2 12.1
2014         H1 757.2 − 0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.7 9.5 16.0 57.8 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
         H2 808.7 2.9 101.5 5.2 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2015         H1 815.2 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 4.8 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.2 − 0.5 1.1 5.8 10.9
         H2 831.3 5.1 93.5 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.7 − 36.7 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.1 11.7
2016         H1 782.7 − 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 5.9 10.4 17.7 65.6 2.9 8.4 0.4 1.6 6.4 11.3
         H2 843.3 1.1 103.0 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.8 11.9 19.1 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 2.9 7.5 12.5
2017         H1 844.9 6.8 125.8 14.4 14.9 1.0 5.6 10.1 17.2 78.5 29.3 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
         H2 p 881.1 3.7 118.5 14.7 13.5 1.3 6.8 12.0 19.2 64.9 38.4 7.4 1.8 3.2 7.5 12.4
Groups with a focus on the production sector  5 
 
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.4 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.02011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.1 6.8 11.52012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.7 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 4.4 10.3 15.5 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.3 5.7 10.02014 1,197.3 1.0 147.9 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.1 9.6 15.3 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,282.4 7.0 143.9 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.1 10.4 15.5 65.1 − 20.3 5.1 − 1.8 1.8 6.5 10.0
2016 1,267.1 − 1.0 156.4 6.0 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.5 16.0 80.5 4.4 6.4 0.3 2.7 6.3 10.42017
p 1,362.8 5.5 182.2 16.8 13.4 1.3 6.7 11.0 15.8 109.6 41.0 8.0 2.0 2.9 6.7 10.5
2013         H1 588.8 − 0.1 71.7 − 4.8 12.2 − 0.6 3.1 9.3 15.0 43.1 − 10.9 7.3 − 0.9 0.6 5.3 9.7
         H2 591.7 − 1.4 67.1 − 0.3 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.4 15.8 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 10.9
2014         H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.2 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.0 46.2 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.4 9.6
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.7 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 15.8 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.7
2015         H1 636.4 8.7 80.1 7.8 12.6 − 0.1 5.1 10.0 15.4 48.7 4.8 7.7 − 0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 646.6 5.3 63.8 − 13.4 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.5 16.4 − 52.4 2.5 − 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.3
2016         H1 611.2 − 2.6 83.9 1.3 13.7 0.5 6.6 10.5 15.7 50.7 − 6.5 8.3 − 0.3 2.8 6.4 9.9
         H2 655.9 0.5 72.5 11.9 11.1 1.1 6.1 11.2 16.0 29.8 34.8 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.5
2017         H1 678.6 7.2 98.4 18.6 14.5 1.4 5.9 9.9 16.0 63.9 37.5 9.4 2.1 2.2 5.8 10.5
         H2 p 684.9 3.9 83.7 14.6 12.2 1.2 6.6 11.8 16.5 45.6 46.4 6.7 1.9 3.4 7.3 10.8
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2010 340.2 5.8 45.1 9.0 13.3 0.4 6.0 11.2 19.7 22.6 47.0 6.7 1.8 3.4 6.0 12.82011 335.3 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 6.0 10.4 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.2 13.82012 359.1 2.8 48.0 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.22013 362.0 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.4 13.4 − 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.4 5.9 12.52014 368.3 1.1 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.1 6.0 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.2 4.8 14.8 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.4 58.4 14.6 16.3 1.8 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 24.7 8.8 1.5 2.5 8.3 15.52017
p 360.0 3.8 62.3 7.7 17.3 0.6 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 10.0 9.5 0.5 2.4 7.2 15.1
2013         H1 173.9 − 0.5 21.7 1.1 12.5 0.2 3.9 8.1 19.2 10.7 12.8 6.2 0.7 0.9 4.6 12.8
         H2 188.2 0.2 26.7 − 6.7 14.2 − 1.1 5.6 11.4 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.4 13.5
2014         H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.7 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.7 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.5 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.5 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.7 10.8 16.1 0.9 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 187.4 3.6 30.6 4.6 16.3 0.2 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.7 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2017         H1 166.3 4.8 27.4 − 0.2 16.5 − 0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 − 0.8 8.8 − 0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
         H2 p 196.2 2.8 34.7 14.9 17.7 1.9 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.3 20.2 9.8 1.4 3.0 7.8 17.9
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt return on sales. 3Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statemen t statistics, p. 3.
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. 4Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Supplement −
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
November 2018
XII. External sector
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2017 2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug.  p
Current account + 308,770 + 346,639 + 355,088 + 119,393 + 81,627 + 79,459 + 32,782 + 29,960 + 20,493A.
1. Goods
Exports 2,135,337 2,136,518 2,264,294 589,274 569,208 588,871 206,636 197,215 185,142Imports 1,784,550 1,766,321 1,933,542 494,358 495,548 504,962 175,037 173,867 169,077
Balance + 350,785 + 370,199 + 330,755 + 94,917 + 73,660 + 83,909 + 31,599 + 23,349 + 16,065
2. Services
Receipts 800,971 808,509 856,681 223,982 200,900 218,656 78,070 79,430 74,274Expenditure 748,527 764,271 755,459 197,958 177,929 187,494 64,958 64,908 64,824
Balance + 52,443 + 44,238 + 101,224 + 26,024 + 22,971 + 31,163 + 13,113 + 14,522 + 9,449
3. Primary income
Receipts 665,060 650,888 680,489 184,258 161,578 198,358 71,804 51,349 49,829Expenditure 621,692 581,073 615,835 154,414 133,571 204,674 72,138 46,985 43,530
Balance + 43,368 + 69,814 + 64,654 + 29,844 + 28,006 − 6,315 − 334 + 4,364 + 6,299
4. Secondary income
Receipts 114,843 108,095 111,780 30,200 25,949 30,355 10,248 8,421 8,315Expenditure 252,670 245,709 253,321 61,591 68,961 59,655 21,845 20,696 19,636
Balance − 137,827 − 137,612 − 141,543 − 31,391 − 43,010 − 29,300 − 11,597 − 12,275 − 11,321
Capital account + 16,566 + 3,132 − 26,207 + 1,654 + 2,563 + 1,387 + 996 + 1,037 + 1,036B.
Financial account (increase: +) + 267,248 + 344,767 + 395,402 + 119,277 + 125,386 + 83,843 + 62,467 + 6,134 + 27,392C.
1. Direct investment + 142,673 + 177,293 + 84,563 − 11,693 + 123,408 + 63,176 + 27,329 − 19,229 + 4,575
By resident units abroad +1,080,356 + 521,802 + 248,487 + 33,855 + 63,022 − 59,598 − 57,917 − 2,025 + 9,060By non-resident units in the euro area + 937,683 + 344,509 + 163,924 + 45,548 − 60,387 − 122,773 − 85,246 + 17,203 + 4,485
2. Portfolio investment + 199,249 + 478,497 + 283,022 + 67,409 + 17,955 + 40,551 − 40,414 + 34,049 + 71,294
By resident units abroad + 401,926 + 387,046 + 635,971 + 86,197 + 194,679 − 1,861 − 7,280 + 42,623 + 19,566
Equity and
investment fund shares + 15,478 + 19,987 + 173,845 + 22,349 + 55,391 + 6,319 − 11,377 + 26,009 + 2,329
Long-term debt securities + 378,796 + 359,327 + 396,387 + 54,000 + 110,786 + 12,208 − 6,603 + 30,065 + 9,320Short-term debt securities + 7,654 + 7,733 + 65,740 + 9,848 + 28,500 − 20,388 + 10,701 − 13,451 + 7,917
By non-resident units in the euro area + 202,678 − 91,447 + 352,949 + 18,788 + 176,723 − 42,412 + 33,134 + 8,574 − 51,729
Equity and
investment fund shares + 208,634 + 104,219 + 487,080 + 93,943 + 125,434 + 37,250 + 79,279 + 6,797 − 11,032
Long-term debt securities + 33,199 − 242,180 − 142,811 − 28,803 + 21,150 − 55,056 − 28,548 − 553 − 29,668Short-term debt securities − 39,158 + 46,513 + 8,679 − 46,354 + 30,139 − 24,605 − 17,597 + 2,330 − 11,029
3. Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 81,917 + 18,431 + 17,098 + 4,469 − 4,503 + 40,522 + 12,921 + 5,664 + 7,480
4. Other investment − 167,256 − 344,931 + 12,120 + 57,228 − 22,850 − 66,989 + 54,763 − 10,005 − 59,228
Eurosystem − 26,457 − 152,798 − 175,529 − 125,114 + 3,843 − 27,445 − 77,812 + 69,830 + 14,393General government + 20,154 + 12,380 + 18,760 + 28,059 − 2,065 − 4,023 − 215 − 471 − 4,386MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 120,160 − 123,767 + 137,116 + 109,621 − 20,215 − 40,365 + 131,297 − 77,415 − 66,488Enterprises and households − 40,793 − 80,745 + 31,772 + 44,663 − 4,412 + 4,843 + 1,492 − 1,949 − 2,747
5. Reserve assets + 10,664 + 15,480 − 1,400 + 1,865 + 11,376 + 6,585 + 7,869 − 4,346 + 3,272
Net errors and omissions − 58,089 − 5,003 + 66,522 − 1,769 + 41,197 + 2,999 + 28,690 − 24,863 + 5,863D.
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary  
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
November 2018
XII. External sector
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.)  1 
of which:
Supple-mentary Balance of of which: Errorstrade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  
2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,292
2004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,7482005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,9602006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,5112007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,130
2008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,088
2009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,6832010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,3512011 + 165,078 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 31,574 + 68,235 − 35,010 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 44,6392012 + 193,590 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 64,858 − 38,894 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 41,759
2013 + 190,092 + 212,662 − 3,663 − 41,376 + 62,444 − 43,639 − 563 + 225,360 + 838 + 35,831
2014 + 218,965 + 228,185 − 5,741 − 24,485 + 56,549 − 41,283 + 2,936 + 240,116 − 2,564 + 18,2152015 + 271,403 + 261,135 − 2,565 − 16,910 + 67,222 − 40,044 + 534 + 239,418 − 2,213 − 32,5202016 + 268,812 + 267,999 − 1,845 − 19,948 + 60,639 − 39,879 + 3,468 + 257,693 + 1,686 − 14,5872017 
r + 261,225 + 268,862 + 1,256 − 20,874 + 67,357 − 54,120 − 254 + 279,967 − 1,269 + 18,995
2015         Q4 + 78,172 + 64,632 − 435 − 2,391 + 26,238 − 10,307 − 2,004 + 68,701 − 272 − 7,467
2016         Q1 + 66,589 + 63,353 + 566 − 3,042 + 19,599 − 13,320 − 205 + 40,617 + 1,228 − 25,767
         Q2 + 69,819 + 76,770 − 54 − 3,707 + 125 − 3,370 + 1,009 + 62,621 + 761 − 8,207         Q3 + 61,051 + 66,795 − 346 − 11,309 + 16,175 − 10,610 + 307 + 59,558 − 261 − 1,801         Q4 + 71,353 + 61,082 − 2,012 − 1,889 + 24,740 − 12,579 + 2,356 + 94,897 − 43 + 21,188
2017         Q1  
r + 68,671 + 67,077 + 2,402 − 2,921 + 21,296 − 16,781 + 616 + 67,316 − 360 − 1,972
         Q2  r + 54,185 + 67,753 − 187 − 4,785 + 3,058 − 11,841 − 727 + 72,061 + 385 + 18,604
         Q3  r + 63,967 + 68,874 − 113 − 11,794 + 17,922 − 11,035 + 904 + 54,979 + 152 − 9,892
         Q4  r + 74,402 + 65,158 − 846 − 1,374 + 25,082 − 14,463 − 1,047 + 85,610 − 1,446 + 12,255
2018         Q1 + 71,112 + 64,605 − 1,397 − 630 + 21,620 − 14,483 + 214 + 69,348 + 699 − 1,977
         Q2 + 64,342 + 69,552 + 848 − 3,608 + 3,772 − 5,373 + 85 + 70,452 − 374 + 6,024         Q3  
p + 51,567 + 56,137 + 641 − 11,597 + 19,055 − 12,029 − 993 + 30,735 − 493 − 19,839
2016         Apr. + 28,952 + 27,797 − 179 − 661 + 3,533 − 1,718 + 1,303 + 26,217 + 696 − 4,039
         May + 17,745 + 23,050 + 409 − 838 − 3,921 − 546 + 277 + 14,290 + 776 − 3,733         June + 23,122 + 25,923 − 284 − 2,209 + 513 − 1,106 − 571 + 22,115 − 711 − 435
         July + 18,927 + 20,453 + 413 − 3,460 + 5,372 − 3,437 − 103 + 17,363 + 342 − 1,461
         Aug. + 17,632 + 20,933 − 435 − 4,807 + 6,016 − 4,510 − 101 + 17,217 + 93 − 314         Sep. + 24,492 + 25,409 − 324 − 3,042 + 4,788 − 2,662 + 511 + 24,977 − 695 − 26
         Oct. + 19,777 + 20,598 + 294 − 3,425 + 6,117 − 3,513 − 117 + 28,457 − 145 + 8,797
         Nov. + 25,394 + 23,647 − 347 − 255 + 6,949 − 4,948 − 69 + 22,295 + 140 − 3,031         Dec. + 26,182 + 16,837 − 1,959 + 1,790 + 11,675 − 4,119 + 2,541 + 44,145 − 38 + 15,422
2017         Jan.  
r + 12,379 + 16,200 + 171 − 979 + 6,851 − 9,693 − 145 + 7,119 − 124 − 5,115
         Feb.  r + 23,381 + 22,690 + 1,022 − 955 + 6,280 − 4,634 + 291 + 14,387 − 216 − 9,285
         Mar.  r + 32,911 + 28,187 + 1,209 − 987 + 8,165 − 2,453 + 470 + 45,810 − 21 + 12,429
         Apr.  r + 16,218 + 19,883 + 21 − 1,181 + 5,852 − 8,336 − 321 + 21,216 − 2 + 5,319
         May  r + 15,352 + 23,194 − 968 − 1,674 − 5,295 − 872 + 85 + 11,773 − 47 − 3,664
         June  r + 22,614 + 24,676 + 760 − 1,930 + 2,501 − 2,632 − 491 + 39,072 + 434 + 16,949
         July  r + 19,015 + 21,320 + 679 − 4,043 + 6,159 − 4,420 + 525 + 14,479 + 463 − 5,062
         Aug.  r + 18,054 + 21,764 − 765 − 5,392 + 5,158 − 3,476 + 174 + 8,062 − 912 − 10,167
         Sep.  r + 26,897 + 25,790 − 27 − 2,359 + 6,605 − 3,139 + 204 + 32,438 + 602 + 5,336
         Oct.  r + 19,522 + 21,065 + 393 − 3,846 + 6,527 − 4,224 − 206 + 15,799 + 1,176 − 3,517
         Nov.  r + 26,432 + 25,333 − 587 − 508 + 6,868 − 5,260 − 536 + 29,624 − 270 + 3,728
         Dec.  r + 28,448 + 18,759 − 652 + 2,980 + 11,687 − 4,979 − 305 + 40,187 − 2,353 + 12,044
2018         Jan. + 20,211 + 18,211 − 1,171 − 550 + 7,601 − 5,052 + 489 + 27,562 − 121 + 6,861
         Feb. + 21,437 + 20,698 + 351 + 710 + 5,419 − 5,390 + 19 + 19,584 + 583 − 1,872         Mar. + 29,464 + 25,696 − 576 − 791 + 8,600 − 4,041 − 294 + 22,202 + 236 − 6,967
         Apr. + 23,791 + 22,989 + 97 − 576 + 4,014 − 2,636 + 357 + 32,237 − 670 + 8,089
         May + 13,713 + 21,907 + 195 − 1,003 − 7,293 + 102 + 50 + 17,352 + 83 + 3,589         June + 26,838 + 24,655 + 555 − 2,029 + 7,050 − 2,839 − 321 + 20,862 + 213 − 5,654
         July + 15,094 + 18,442 + 1,101 − 4,297 + 5,613 − 4,664 − 203 + 7,561 + 266 − 7,329
         Aug. + 15,332 + 17,976 − 88 − 5,508 + 6,595 − 3,731 + 90 + 16,005 − 640 + 583         Sep.  
p + 21,141 + 19,719 − 372 − 1,792 + 6,847 − 3,633 − 880 + 7,168 − 119 − 13,094
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions resulting from the difference between the balance on the finan cial account
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account . 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
November 2018
 XII. External sector
 
 3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
  by country and group of countries*
 
 € million
 2018
Group of countries/country  2015  2016  2017 Jan./Aug. May June July Aug. Sep.  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,193,555 1,203,833 1,278,958 878,946 109,067 115,347 111,036 105,386 109,071
Imports 949,245 954,917 1,031,013 722,945 89,026 93,370 94,543 88,285 90,676Balance + 244,310 + 248,916 + 247,946 + 156,000 + 20,042 + 21,977 + 16,493 + 17,101 + 18,395
I. Exports 803,425 818,644 872,427 603,116 75,900 78,869 74,731 69,312 ...European countries
Imports 653,782 657,753 699,677 495,766 61,601 64,663 64,450 58,722 ...Balance + 149,643 + 160,891 + 172,749 + 107,350 + 14,299 + 14,206 + 10,281 + 10,589 ...
Exports 692,493 705,548 749,850 520,530 65,693 67,686 64,553 59,450 ... 1. EU Member States (28)
Imports 543,334 551,344 586,071 413,574 51,903 53,919 53,755 48,487 ...Balance + 149,159 + 154,204 + 163,780 + 106,955 + 13,791 + 13,767 + 10,798 + 10,963 ...
Euro area (19) Exports 434,075 441,092 471,213 329,547 40,839 43,084 41,511 36,580 41,033
countries Imports 356,643 358,848 378,700 269,448 33,007 35,101 36,139 31,488 34,119
Balance + 77,432 + 82,244 + 92,513 + 60,099 + 7,832 + 7,983 + 5,372 + 5,093 + 6,914
of which:
Austria Exports 58,217 59,778 62,656 42,936 5,183 5,537 5,402 5,137 5,506
Imports 37,250 38,543 40,686 28,606 3,465 3,682 3,728 3,403 3,651Balance + 20,967 + 21,235 + 21,970 + 14,330 + 1,718 + 1,855 + 1,674 + 1,734 + 1,854
Belgium and Exports 46,196 46,931 50,071 34,061 4,276 4,416 4,156 3,838 4,082
Luxembourg Imports 40,116 40,960 43,689 33,246 3,837 4,000 4,660 4,092 4,377
Balance + 6,079 + 5,971 + 6,381 + 815 + 439 + 416 − 504 − 255 − 295
France Exports 102,762 101,106 105,687 70,398 8,327 9,417 9,004 7,224 8,949
Imports 66,819 65,651 64,329 43,080 5,125 5,652 5,890 4,690 5,219Balance + 35,943 + 35,454 + 41,359 + 27,318 + 3,202 + 3,765 + 3,114 + 2,534 + 3,730
Italy Exports 57,987 61,265 65,422 46,417 6,005 6,190 6,070 4,438 5,736
Imports 49,038 51,737 55,342 40,434 5,192 5,654 5,521 4,459 5,172Balance + 8,949 + 9,528 + 10,080 + 5,983 + 813 + 537 + 548 − 21 + 565
Netherlands Exports 79,191 78,433 84,661 61,088 7,607 7,536 7,412 7,206 7,376
Imports 87,889 83,142 90,597 65,015 7,978 7,982 8,310 7,910 8,225Balance − 8,697 − 4,709 − 5,935 − 3,927 − 372 − 447 − 898 − 704 − 849
Spain Exports 38,715 40,497 43,067 29,767 3,838 3,906 3,847 3,025 3,517
Imports 26,442 27,870 31,396 21,809 2,750 2,959 2,636 2,207 2,591Balance + 12,273 + 12,627 + 11,671 + 7,958 + 1,088 + 947 + 1,211 + 818 + 926
Other EU Member Exports 258,417 264,456 278,638 190,983 24,854 24,602 23,041 22,870 ...
States Imports 186,691 192,496 207,371 144,126 18,896 18,818 17,616 16,999 ...
Balance + 71,727 + 71,960 + 71,267 + 46,857 + 5,958 + 5,784 + 5,426 + 5,871 ...
of which:
United Exports 89,018 85,939 85,440 55,156 6,896 6,970 6,677 6,326 6,530Kingdom Imports 38,414 35,654 36,820 24,512 4,053 3,060 2,797 2,609 2,898
Balance + 50,604 + 50,285 + 48,620 + 30,644 + 2,843 + 3,909 + 3,880 + 3,717 + 3,632
Exports 110,932 113,096 122,576 82,586 10,207 11,183 10,178 9,862 ... 2. Other European
Imports 110,448 106,409 113,607 82,192 9,698 10,744 10,695 10,236 ... countries
Balance + 484 + 6,687 + 8,969 + 394 + 509 + 439 − 517 − 374 ...
of which:
Switzerland Exports 49,070 50,161 53,913 36,073 4,384 4,794 4,389 4,475 ...
Imports 42,089 43,896 45,689 30,359 3,558 3,934 4,214 3,643 ...Balance + 6,981 + 6,265 + 8,224 + 5,714 + 826 + 860 + 175 + 831 ...
II. Exports 387,398 382,486 403,490 273,602 32,827 36,385 35,955 35,675 ...Non-European
Imports 295,461 297,164 328,606 226,500 27,301 28,980 29,907 29,394 ... countries
Balance + 91,936 + 85,322 + 74,884 + 47,102 + 5,526 + 7,405 + 6,048 + 6,281 ...
Exports 23,897 24,434 25,431 15,061 1,879 2,021 2,042 1,964 ... 1. Africa
Imports 18,307 16,675 20,428 14,546 1,579 2,110 1,889 2,015 ...Balance + 5,590 + 7,759 + 5,003 + 515 + 300 − 89 + 153 − 51 ...
Exports 156,982 147,542 154,644 106,150 12,255 14,121 14,052 13,857 ... 2. America
Imports 85,582 83,499 89,927 61,550 7,971 7,828 8,009 7,385 ...Balance + 71,400 + 64,043 + 64,717 + 44,600 + 4,285 + 6,292 + 6,044 + 6,472 ...
of which:
Exports 113,733 106,822 111,805 75,620 8,499 10,112 10,115 9,445 9,276 United States
Imports 60,217 57,968 61,902 42,336 5,468 5,208 5,403 5,295 5,473Balance + 53,516 + 48,855 + 49,903 + 33,283 + 3,031 + 4,904 + 4,712 + 4,150 + 3,803
Exports 196,297 200,158 212,070 144,074 17,728 19,122 18,839 18,812 ... 3. Asia
Imports 188,621 193,979 214,393 147,949 17,375 18,742 19,710 19,654 ...Balance + 7,676 + 6,179 − 2,323 − 3,876 + 353 + 380 − 871 − 841 ...
of which:
Middle East Exports 39,518 36,659 33,104 18,370 2,134 2,563 2,349 2,305 ...
Imports 7,330 6,581 6,963 5,507 691 690 901 813 ...Balance + 32,188 + 30,079 + 26,141 + 12,863 + 1,443 + 1,873 + 1,448 + 1,492 ...
Japan Exports 16,968 18,307 19,546 13,451 1,578 1,673 2,003 1,784 1,888
Imports 20,180 21,922 22,955 15,985 1,920 2,040 2,025 2,007 1,954Balance − 3,213 − 3,615 − 3,410 − 2,534 − 342 − 368 − 22 − 224 − .66
Exports 71,284 76,046 86,141 61,177 7,547 8,254 7,977 7,857 7,961 People‘s Republic
Imports 91,930 94,172 101,837 68,559 7,744 8,408 9,275 9,354 8,800 of China  
2 
Balance − 20,646 − 18,126 − 15,695 − 7,382 − 197 − 155 − 1,298 − 1,497 − 839
Exports 51,510 51,921 53,425 37,130 4,834 4,788 4,574 4,805 ... New industrial countries
Imports 42,478 42,966 50,873 34,933 4,345 4,752 4,520 4,433 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 9,032 + 8,955 + 2,552 + 2,197 + 489 + 36 + 54 + 372 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 10,221 10,352 11,344 8,318 965 1,121 1,022 1,042 ... 4. Oceania and
Imports 2,951 3,011 3,857 2,455 377 299 300 340 ... polar regions
Balance + 7,271 + 7,341 + 7,487 + 5,863 + 588 + 822 + 722 + 702 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of K orea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
November 2018
XII. External sector
 
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
  
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  
2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2013 − 41,376 − 9,881 − 37,713 + 8,056 + 3,656 − 870 − 5,518 + 3,073 + 541 + 60,681 + 1,223
2014 − 24,485 − 6,902 − 37,653 + 7,007 + 3,549 + 2,666 − 700 + 2,971 + 1,184 + 54,473 + 8912015 − 16,910 − 5,258 − 36,595 + 9,587 + 4,830 + 4,064 − 2,488 + 3,160 + 1,521 + 66,048 − 3472016 − 19,948 − 6,185 − 38,247 + 9,856 + 6,203 + 3,224 − 3,004 + 3,094 + 750 + 60,943 − 1,0542017 − 20,874 − 4,047 − 43,588 + 10,683 + 6,494 + 3,252 − 1,683 + 2,092 − 36 + 68,622 − 1,229
2017         Q1 − 2,921 − 1,257 − 6,332 + 2,207 + 1,029 + 377 − 855 + 551 + 589 + 21,868 − 1,162
         Q2 − 4,785 − 407 − 10,675 + 2,655 + 1,538 + 893 − 608 + 625 − 203 + 5,303 − 2,042         Q3 − 11,794 − 1,134 − 17,166 + 2,746 + 1,433 + 512 + 53 + 545 − 620 + 19,690 − 1,148         Q4 − 1,374 − 1,249 − 9,415 + 3,076 + 2,494 + 1,470 − 274 + 370 + 197 + 21,761 + 3,123
2018         Q1 − 630 − 787 − 6,238 + 2,684 + 1,059 + 867 − 314 + 655 + 559 + 21,896 − 835
         Q2 − 3,608 − 46 − 10,459 + 2,219 + 1,657 + 1,515 − 703 + 738 − 248 + 6,112 − 2,092         Q3  
p − 11,597 − 626 − 17,100 + 1,866 + 1,664 + 715 − 252 + 560 − 688 + 20,585 − 843
2017         Nov. − 508 − 400 − 2,372 + 1,353 + 586 + 162 − 369 + 174 + 57 + 7,151 − 340
         Dec. + 2,980 − 396 − 1,253 + 948 + 668 + 1,312 + 362 − 35 + 88 + 7,632 + 3,968
2018         Jan. − 550 − 301 − 1,649 + 842 + 161 − 365 − 49 + 191 + 188 + 7,806 − 393
         Feb. + 710 − 249 − 1,577 + 693 + 762 + 675 − 162 + 218 + 208 + 5,446 − 235         Mar. − 791 − 237 − 3,012 + 1,149 + 136 + 557 − 103 + 246 + 162 + 8,645 − 207
         Apr. − 576 − 46 − 2,230 + 796 + 456 + 194 − 515 + 247 − 79 + 4,532 − 439
         May − 1,003 + 46 − 3,775 + 709 + 780 + 474 − 152 + 243 − 80 − 5,905 − 1,307         June − 2,029 − 46 − 4,455 + 713 + 421 + 847 − 35 + 248 − 89 + 7,485 − 345
         July − 4,297 − 80 − 5,541 + 773 + 174 + 62 − 587 + 231 − 252 + 6,213 − 348
         Aug. − 5,508 − 214 − 6,763 + 350 + 986 − 38 − 471 + 161 − 225 + 7,133 − 313         Sep.  
p − 1,792 − 332 − 4,797 + 743 + 504 + 691 + 806 + 167 − 211 + 7,240 − 182
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001 the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which: of which:
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which: resident and Non-produced
international non-resident Workers’ Capital income, wealth, non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2013 − 43,639 − 28,923 − 4,733 + 6,174 − 14,715 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 563 + 1,105 − 1,668
2014 − 41,283 − 28,146 − 6,419 + 8,105 − 13,137 − 3,477 − 3,451 + 2,936 + 2,841 + 952015 − 40,044 − 23,965 − 6,805 + 10,638 − 16,079 − 3,540 − 3,523 + 534 + 2,366 − 1,8322016 − 39,879 − 24,870 − 11,523 + 10,994 − 15,009 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 3,468 + 3,372 + 962017 − 54,120 − 23,688 − 11,496 + 10,584 − 30,432 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 254 + 3,021 − 3,275
2017         Q1 − 16,781 − 7,604 − 2,995 + 1,796 − 9,176 − 1,158 − 1,153 + 616 + 734 − 118
         Q2 − 11,841 − 1,706 − 1,500 + 6,239 − 10,135 − 1,159 − 1,153 − 727 + 384 − 1,111         Q3 − 11,035 − 5,432 − 1,557 + 1,755 − 5,603 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 904 + 1,531 − 627         Q4 − 14,463 − 8,946 − 5,444 + 794 − 5,517 − 1,159 − 1,153 − 1,047 + 372 − 1,419
2018         Q1 − 14,483 − 9,356 − 2,233 + 1,655 − 5,127 − 1,291 − 1,286 + 214 − 431 + 645
         Q2 − 5,373 − 529 − 1,260 + 6,154 − 4,844 − 1,287 − 1,286 + 85 + 99 − 14         Q3  
p − 12,029 − 7,476 − 1,941 + 1,131 − 4,552 − 1,288 − 1,286 − 993 − 255 − 738
2017         Nov. − 5,260 − 2,807 − 1,685 + 70 − 2,453 − 386 − 384 − 536 + 78 − 614
         Dec. − 4,979 − 3,201 − 2,723 + 615 − 1,778 − 386 − 384 − 305 + 300 − 605
2018         Jan. − 5,052 − 3,518 − 1,332 + 230 − 1,534 − 430 − 429 + 489 + 118 + 371
         Feb. − 5,390 − 3,679 − 558 + 814 − 1,712 − 429 − 429 + 19 − 269 + 288         Mar. − 4,041 − 2,160 − 343 + 612 − 1,881 − 432 − 429 − 294 − 281 − 14
         Apr. − 2,636 − 994 − 314 + 1,479 − 1,643 − 429 − 429 + 357 + 505 − 148
         May + 102 + 1,640 − 281 + 3,635 − 1,538 − 429 − 429 + 50 − 108 + 158         June − 2,839 − 1,176 − 665 + 1,040 − 1,663 − 429 − 429 − 321 − 297 − 24
         July − 4,664 − 2,833 − 857 + 150 − 1,831 − 430 − 429 − 203 + 101 − 304
         Aug. − 3,731 − 2,525 − 543 + 251 − 1,206 − 429 − 429 + 90 + 237 − 147         Sep.  
p − 3,633 − 2,118 − 540 + 730 − 1,516 − 429 − 429 − 880 − 593 − 287
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
November 2018
XII. External sector
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3  p July Aug. Sep.  p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 270,235 + 397,043 + 363,024 + 156,350 + 117,731 + 58,644 − 17,352 + 7,043 + 68,953
1. Direct investment + 116,141 + 82,985 + 111,797 + 42,552 + 55,587 + 21,991 + 10,865 + 2,566 + 8,559
Equity + 75,292 + 70,623 + 71,205 + 35,042 + 58,113 + 21,249 + 14,492 + 8,849 − 2,091
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 16,804 + 10,867 + 23,779 + 12,044 + 5,656 + 7,860 + 1,214 + 5,258 + 1,387
Debt instruments + 40,849 + 12,362 + 40,592 + 7,510 − 2,526 + 741 − 3,627 − 6,282 + 10,650
2. Portfolio investment + 124,062 + 98,236 + 105,157 + 42,396 + 6,146 + 28,360 + 11,120 + 8,966 + 8,273
Shares  2 + 19,692 + 17,254 + 14,042 + 8,182 − 1,361 + 3,872 + 2,616 + 3,709 − 2,453
Investment fund shares  3 + 35,750 + 36,142 + 47,747 + 8,585 + 4,412 + 4,217 + 2,164 + 168 + 1,885
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 74,342 + 51,037 + 47,101 + 25,157 + 4,358 + 21,011 + 4,405 + 4,947 + 11,659
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 5,723 − 6,196 − 3,733 + 473 − 1,262 − 741 + 1,935 + 144 − 2,819
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 26,026 + 32,535 + 8,937 + 1,154 + 9,583 + 10,099 + 1,417 + 4,694 + 3,989
4. Other investment  7 + 6,219 + 181,602 + 138,402 + 69,548 + 46,788 − 1,313 − 41,020 − 8,543 + 48,251
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 90,288 + 18,627 − 21,008 + 41,060 + 6,134 + 1,171 + 10,408 − 2,486 − 6,750
Long-term − 2,804 + 44,980 + 19,619 − 1,407 − 494 + 3,336 + 6,453 + 828 − 3,944Short-term − 87,484 − 26,353 − 40,627 + 42,467 + 6,628 − 2,165 + 3,955 − 3,314 − 2,806
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 14,618 − 6,248 + 7,927 + 13,383 − 7,625 + 19,454 + 12,813 − 5,019 + 11,661
Long-term + 19,127 + 1,725 − 3,372 + 1,660 + 4,573 + 3,044 + 1,342 − 751 + 2,453Short-term − 33,744 − 7,974 + 11,298 + 11,723 − 12,198 + 16,411 + 11,471 − 4,268 + 9,208
General government − 12,239 − 1,268 − 5,154 + 1,523 − 4,915 − 4,733 − 1,164 − 343 − 3,225
Long-term − 7,591 − 7,595 − 3,730 − 310 − 832 − 10 + 29 − 49 + 11Short-term − 4,648 + 6,327 − 1,424 + 1,833 − 4,083 − 4,723 − 1,193 − 294 − 3,236
Bundesbank + 123,364 + 170,491 + 156,637 + 13,583 + 53,195 − 17,206 − 63,077 − 695 + 46,566
5. Reserve assets − 2,213 + 1,686 − 1,269 + 699 − 374 − 493 + 266 − 640 − 119
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(increase: +) + 30,817 + 139,350 + 83,057 + 87,001 + 47,279 + 27,909 − 24,914 − 8,962 + 61,785
1. Direct investment + 48,606 + 51,816 + 69,548 + 20,537 + 23,454 + 20,621 + 3,560 + 2,007 + 15,054
Equity + 10,567 + 11,894 + 24,077 + 2,089 + 541 + 7,701 + 1,166 + 2,321 + 4,215
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 − 1,524 + 3,935 + 9,216 + 2,671 + 941 + 1,950 − 4 + 960 + 993
Debt instruments + 38,039 + 39,921 + 45,471 + 18,449 + 22,914 + 12,920 + 2,394 − 314 + 10,840
2. Portfolio investment − 68,808 − 108,471 − 95,045 + 7,592 − 17,519 − 8,768 − 15,497 + 6,272 + 457
Shares  2 + 10,605 + 342 − 1,126 + 4,306 + 3,548 − 1,560 − 73 − 1,748 + 262
Investment fund shares  3 + 7,357 − 6,919 − 3,441 − 1,792 − 3,038 − 353 + 323 − 52 − 624
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 96,048 − 97,281 − 70,559 + 16,555 − 18,710 − 8,551 − 17,785 + 8,410 + 824
Short-termdebt securities  
5 + 9,278 − 4,613 − 19,919 − 11,476 + 682 + 1,696 + 2,039 − 338 − 5
3. Other investment  7 + 51,019 + 196,006 + 108,554 + 58,872 + 41,344 + 16,057 − 12,976 − 17,241 + 46,273
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 41,165 + 86,742 + 17,476 + 45,097 + 19,374 + 8,519 + 11,858 + 5,528 − 8,868
Long-term − 19,535 + 5,774 + 7,541 − 7,418 + 3,309 − 3,878 + 2,310 − 3,707 − 2,481Short-term − 21,630 + 80,968 + 9,935 + 52,515 + 16,065 + 12,396 + 9,548 + 9,235 − 6,387
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 18,920 + 3,716 + 17,557 + 4,463 + 3,658 + 13,561 + 6,940 − 4,832 + 11,453
Long-term + 23,006 + 8,579 + 3,339 + 1,879 + 10,204 − 1,429 + 1,372 − 2,919 + 118Short-term − 4,085 − 4,863 + 14,218 + 2,584 − 6,546 + 14,990 + 5,568 − 1,914 + 11,335
General government − 11,105 − 5,309 − 6,313 + 1,660 − 592 + 4,071 + 1,275 + 2,323 + 474
Long-term − 3,941 − 4,682 − 3,290 − 1 + 153 + 104 − 27 − 0 + 132Short-term − 7,164 − 626 − 3,023 + 1,662 − 746 + 3,968 + 1,302 + 2,323 + 342
Bundesbank + 84,369 + 110,857 + 79,834 + 7,652 + 18,904 − 10,094 − 33,049 − 20,260 + 43,214
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 239,418 + 257,693 + 279,967 + 69,348 + 70,452 + 30,735 + 7,561 + 16,005 + 7,168
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
November 2018
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
  
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts positiondrawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col. 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col. 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan.  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,6702003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,9212016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,7192017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 671,359 471,486
2016         Feb. 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 489,464 349,871
         Mar. 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 492,119 345,256
         Apr. 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 495,580 360,687
         May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 501,620 383,267         June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 518,491 403,741
         July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 518,946 385,099
         Aug. 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 525,347 393,345         Sep. 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 549,909 407,951
         Oct. 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 543,001 404,717
         Nov. 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 552,565 438,543         Dec. 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,719
2017         Jan. 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 577,969 456,835
         Feb. 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,255 451,639         Mar. 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,579 451,460
         Apr. 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 601,538 487,606
         May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 601,130 497,749         June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 623,941 474,939
         July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 614,300 478,469
         Aug. 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 623,104 466,780         Sep. 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 622,729 492,470
         Oct. 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 604,141 481,775
         Nov. 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 579,766 512,066         Dec. 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 671,359 471,486
2018         Jan. 1,114,634 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,525 882,043 53,165 618,843 495,792
         Feb. 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 637,646 510,333         Mar. 1,157,102 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 937,348 923,466 53,924 678,869 478,233
         Apr. 1,137,942 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 916,858 902,364 54,115 632,732 505,210
         May 1,196,227 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 970,555 956,150 54,203 654,573 541,654         June 1,212,477 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 990,543 976,266 54,857 698,155 514,323
         July 1,145,236 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 927,466 913,270 54,463 672,992 472,244
         Aug. 1,142,982 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 926,771 912,448 53,864 644,807 498,174         Sep. 1,189,133 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,337 956,487 54,717 688,053 501,080
         Oct. 1,165,423 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 942,063 927,555 55,089 668,621 496,802
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to respective country designation), since November 2000 also bal ances with non-euro
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad. 4See
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5Euro opening
valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
November 2018
XII. External sector
 
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2014 835,476 280,176 555,301 365,738 189,562 174,764 14,798 963,495 154,960 808,534 639,186 169,348 102,535 66,8132015 875,758 264,291 611,467 415,697 195,770 181,271 14,499 1,018,333 152,109 866,224 681,923 184,301 112,677 71,6252016 870,375 243,728 626,646 416,534 210,112 195,934 14,179 1,045,869 131,535 914,333 717,688 196,646 124,059 72,5872017 879,462 216,300 663,162 438,824 224,338 210,673 13,666 1,073,004 136,001 937,003 738,896 198,107 129,693 68,413
2018         Apr. 902,159 226,492 675,668 447,451 228,217 214,343 13,874 1,086,714 126,092 960,622 763,887 196,735 125,846 70,889
         May 893,057 217,728 675,329 450,281 225,048 211,060 13,988 1,095,399 129,565 965,833 769,452 196,381 124,483 71,898         June 897,781 215,723 682,058 447,376 234,682 220,361 14,321 1,130,077 137,373 992,705 784,491 208,214 136,433 71,780
         July 909,598 227,451 682,147 451,542 230,605 215,987 14,618 1,138,487 142,643 995,844 792,830 203,014 130,806 72,208
         Aug. 897,840 225,010 672,830 451,202 221,628 207,157 14,471 1,136,688 139,575 997,113 804,749 192,365 119,515 72,849         Sep. 921,696 230,920 690,776 457,847 232,929 218,534 14,395 1,160,790 150,012 1,010,778 803,574 207,204 135,290 71,915
Industrial countries 1
 
2014 735,152 275,277 459,876 330,740 129,136 116,037 13,099 872,950 153,807 719,142 598,249 120,894 85,432 35,4612015 767,018 260,389 506,629 373,705 132,924 119,877 13,047 918,524 147,252 771,272 644,228 127,044 91,130 35,9142016 754,210 239,866 514,344 374,776 139,568 126,889 12,679 943,314 127,540 815,774 682,238 133,536 96,378 37,1582017 761,078 212,247 548,830 396,409 152,422 140,229 12,193 969,214 129,153 840,060 701,848 138,212 104,583 33,629
2018         Apr. 780,643 222,207 558,436 402,345 156,091 143,940 12,151 979,674 116,887 862,788 725,030 137,758 103,229 34,529
         May 769,576 213,548 556,028 402,958 153,069 140,739 12,331 990,518 122,145 868,373 731,502 136,871 101,979 34,893         June 773,499 211,375 562,123 401,514 160,610 148,005 12,605 1,024,871 131,379 893,491 747,453 146,038 111,441 34,597
         July 785,200 222,842 562,359 406,930 155,428 142,614 12,815 1,027,476 130,424 897,052 755,931 141,121 106,413 34,708
         Aug. 776,673 220,355 556,318 407,029 149,289 136,649 12,640 1,026,266 126,827 899,439 767,269 132,170 97,033 35,137         Sep. 798,811 226,389 572,422 414,658 157,764 145,121 12,643 1,042,308 131,552 910,756 765,588 145,168 110,047 35,121
EU Member States 1
 
2014 618,804 260,133 358,671 266,920 91,752 81,141 10,611 727,491 139,209 588,282 504,292 83,989 56,842 27,1472015 630,450 242,362 388,088 293,629 94,459 83,964 10,495 751,636 136,375 615,261 530,824 84,437 58,686 25,7512016 611,322 221,947 389,375 292,074 97,300 87,283 10,017 767,040 117,466 649,573 561,444 88,129 61,234 26,8952017 605,152 192,336 412,815 305,890 106,925 97,037 9,889 796,346 112,898 683,448 587,325 96,123 71,906 24,217
2018         Apr. 618,946 200,386 418,559 307,098 111,461 101,490 9,972 807,184 103,217 703,967 606,598 97,369 72,470 24,899
         May 611,952 191,698 420,254 310,430 109,824 99,699 10,124 815,990 106,300 709,690 611,977 97,713 72,672 25,041         June 610,761 189,449 421,312 306,100 115,212 105,032 10,180 843,179 114,037 729,141 627,124 102,018 77,311 24,707
         July 622,069 202,008 420,061 310,625 109,436 99,078 10,358 843,038 111,823 731,215 632,670 98,545 73,888 24,658
         Aug. 615,469 198,865 416,603 312,490 104,113 93,943 10,170 839,872 111,671 728,201 637,077 91,123 66,310 24,813         Sep. 633,229 205,107 428,122 316,886 111,236 101,129 10,107 855,579 116,486 739,094 637,531 101,562 76,743 24,820
of which: Euro area 2
 
2014 457,077 204,589 252,488 194,201 58,288 52,067 6,221 607,716 107,561 500,155 445,643 54,513 37,580 16,9332015 468,303 195,218 273,085 211,614 61,471 54,892 6,579 605,579 94,369 511,210 458,386 52,824 38,178 14,6462016 449,741 169,681 280,060 215,560 64,500 57,774 6,726 614,469 77,067 537,402 481,462 55,940 41,076 14,8642017 451,112 148,460 302,652 230,442 72,211 64,753 7,458 634,898 74,496 560,402 495,566 64,836 50,038 14,798
2018         Apr. 449,522 149,615 299,907 226,350 73,557 65,988 7,569 644,732 66,118 578,614 513,494 65,120 49,435 15,685
         May 449,216 147,339 301,877 229,527 72,350 64,751 7,599 658,336 68,170 590,167 524,101 66,066 50,194 15,872         June 449,044 146,537 302,507 226,220 76,287 68,610 7,678 683,244 71,357 611,887 542,305 69,582 53,730 15,852
         July 453,625 155,487 298,138 224,694 73,444 65,620 7,824 681,024 68,957 612,067 544,369 67,698 51,689 16,009
         Aug. 451,171 153,236 297,935 228,492 69,442 61,803 7,639 678,295 66,930 611,365 549,161 62,205 46,058 16,146         Sep. 462,020 156,070 305,950 232,248 73,702 66,077 7,625 690,031 69,668 620,363 551,731 68,632 52,547 16,086
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2014 100,274 4,849 95,425 34,998 60,427 58,728 1,699 90,545 1,153 89,392 40,937 48,455 17,103 31,3522015 107,753 3,094 104,659 41,992 62,667 61,215 1,452 95,639 886 94,752 37,495 57,257 21,547 35,7112016 114,754 2,616 112,138 41,742 70,396 68,896 1,500 99,412 1,069 98,342 35,250 63,093 27,681 35,4122017 116,755 2,619 114,136 42,373 71,764 70,291 1,472 97,759 1,110 96,650 36,848 59,802 25,110 34,692
2018         Apr. 119,650 2,700 116,950 44,978 71,972 70,249 1,723 98,867 1,334 97,533 38,657 58,876 22,582 36,294
         May 121,574 2,562 119,012 47,194 71,818 70,160 1,658 98,536 1,378 97,157 37,751 59,407 22,467 36,940         June 122,355 2,729 119,626 45,734 73,892 72,176 1,716 100,262 1,354 98,908 36,837 62,071 24,954 37,117
         July 122,313 2,869 119,443 44,484 74,959 73,156 1,803 99,821 1,324 98,498 36,699 61,799 24,355 37,443
         Aug. 119,064 2,864 116,200 44,044 72,156 70,325 1,831 98,699 1,315 97,384 37,280 60,104 22,443 37,662         Sep. 120,791 2,749 118,042 43,060 74,982 73,230 1,751 101,032 1,310 99,722 37,786 61,936 25,204 36,732
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
November 2018
XII. External sector
 
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
  
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.10692017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2017         July 1.4772 1.4641 7.7965 7.4366 129.48 9.3988 9.5892 1.1059 0.88617 1.1511
         Aug. 1.4919 1.4889 7.8760 7.4379 129.70 9.3201 9.5485 1.1398 0.91121 1.1807         Sep. 1.4946 1.4639 7.8257 7.4401 131.92 9.3275 9.5334 1.1470 0.89470 1.1915
         Oct. 1.5099 1.4801 7.7890 7.4429 132.76 9.3976 9.6138 1.1546 0.89071 1.1756
         Nov. 1.5395 1.4978 7.7723 7.4420 132.39 9.6082 9.8479 1.1640 0.88795 1.1738         Dec. 1.5486 1.5108 7.8073 7.4433 133.64 9.8412 9.9370 1.1689 0.88265 1.1836
2018         Jan. 1.5340 1.5167 7.8398 7.4455 135.25 9.6464 9.8200 1.1723 0.88331 1.2200
         Feb. 1.5684 1.5526 7.8068 7.4457 133.29 9.6712 9.9384 1.1542 0.88396 1.2348         Mar. 1.5889 1.5943 7.7982 7.4490 130.86 9.5848 10.1608 1.1685 0.88287 1.2336
         Apr. 1.5972 1.5622 7.7347 7.4479 132.16 9.6202 10.3717 1.1890 0.87212 1.2276
         May 1.5695 1.5197 7.5291 7.4482 129.57 9.5642 10.3419 1.1780 0.87726 1.1812         June 1.5579 1.5327 7.5512 7.4493 128.53 9.4746 10.2788 1.1562 0.87886 1.1678
         July 1.5792 1.5356 7.8504 7.4523 130.23 9.4975 10.3076 1.1622 0.88726 1.1686
         Aug. 1.5762 1.5063 7.9092 7.4558 128.20 9.6161 10.4668 1.1413 0.89687 1.1549         Sep. 1.6189 1.5211 7.9930 7.4583 130.54 9.6205 10.4426 1.1286 0.89281 1.1659
         Oct. 1.6158 1.4935 7.9481 7.4597 129.62 9.4793 10.3839 1.1413 0.88272 1.1484
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 − Exchange rate statistics.    
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.12602011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.64662014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.7028042015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
November 2018
XII.  External sector
 
12.  Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
1999Q1=100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  4 
In real terms In real terms
of which: based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selectedconsumer domestic national consumer Euro
 area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 56 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.1 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.0 85.2 88.0 85.8 91.7 97.3 85.1 90.8 93.0 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.5 86.0 90.6 86.9 91.6 96.4 85.9 90.1 93.0 91.4 90.82002 90.1 90.2 89.5 89.4 95.2 90.5 92.2 95.5 88.4 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.72003 100.7 101.2 100.4 100.5 107.1 101.4 95.6 94.5 97.5 94.7 97.0 96.5 96.72004 104.6 104.9 103.2 103.8 111.7 105.0 95.8 93.3 99.8 94.9 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.4 101.0 101.8 109.6 102.4 94.6 91.9 98.8 92.8 98.4 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.3 100.2 100.5 109.6 101.7 93.3 90.3 98.1 91.0 98.5 96.4 95.82007 106.1 106.0 102.0 102.7 113.0 103.6 94.2 89.5 101.9 91.2 100.7 97.8 96.92008 109.3 108.1 103.3 105.9 117.1 105.5 94.4 88.1 105.1 90.3 102.1 97.7 97.02009 110.7 108.8 104.2 110.8 120.2 106.5 94.6 88.8 104.4 90.9 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.1 96.0 102.6 111.6 97.6 92.1 88.5 98.1 87.1 98.7 93.6 91.9
2011 103.3 100.1 93.8 101.2 112.3 97.0 91.8 88.4 97.4 86.2 98.1 92.7 91.32012 97.7 94.8 88.3 95.0 107.2 92.2 89.9 88.3 92.3 83.6 95.8 89.7 88.22013 101.0 97.7 91.0 97.7 111.8 95.0 92.2 88.8 97.6 85.5 98.1 91.4 90.12014 101.4 97.2 91.0 98.6 114.1 95.4 92.8 89.6 97.8 86.2 98.1 91.6 90.7
2015 91.7 87.6 82.9 88.4 105.7 87.0 90.0 90.5 89.2 82.5 94.1 86.4 85.8
2016 94.4 89.5 85.0
p 89.3 109.7 p 88.9 90.9 91.0 90.6 84.0 94.7 87.5 p 87.0
2017 96.6 91.4 85.9 p 90.0 112.0 p 90.0 92.1 91.2 93.6 84.9 96.0 88.6 p 87.8
2015         Nov. 90.5 86.3 83.2 88.1 105.0 86.0 90.2 90.7 89.3 82.8 93.5 85.8 85.3
         Dec. 91.9 87.5 107.1 87.5 93.7 86.2 85.9
2016         Jan. 93.0 88.4 108.9 p 88.6 93.9 86.8 p 86.7
         Feb. 94.2 89.3 84.8 p 89.2 110.3 p 89.5 90.9 91.2 90.3 83.9 94.5 87.3 p 87.2
         Mar. 93.6 88.8 109.0 p 88.5 94.5 87.0 p 86.7
         Apr. 94.4 89.5 109.8 p 89.0 94.9 87.5 p 87.1
         May 94.6 89.8 85.1 p 89.6 110.2 p 89.4 90.9 91.1 90.6 84.1 94.7 87.6 p 87.3
         June 94.4 89.6 109.8 p 89.1 94.5 87.6 p 87.1
         July 94.6 89.8 109.5 p 88.7 94.8 87.6 p 86.9
         Aug. 94.9 90.0 85.3 p 89.5 110.0 p 89.0 91.0 90.9 91.0 84.1 95.0 87.6 p 87.0
         Sep. 95.1 90.1 110.2 p 89.2 95.1 87.8 p 87.2
         Oct. 95.1 90.3 110.0 p 89.0 95.4 87.9 p 87.1
         Nov. 94.6 89.6 84.7 p 89.1 109.6 p 88.6 90.8 90.9 90.7 83.8 94.8 87.5 p 86.8
         Dec. 93.7 88.9 108.6 p 87.8 94.7 87.3 p 86.5
2017         Jan. 93.9 89.1 109.0 p 88.0 94.5 87.2 p 86.4
         Feb. 93.4 88.9 83.4 p 88.0 108.1 p 87.4 90.6 90.9 90.1 83.4 94.5 87.1 p 86.2
         Mar. 94.0 89.2 108.5 p 87.5 94.7 87.2 p 86.2
         Apr. 93.7 89.0 108.2 p 87.2 94.5 87.1 p 86.0
         May 95.6 90.5 84.8 p 88.9 110.5 p 88.8 91.5 91.3 91.9 84.4 95.3 87.9 p 87.0
         June 96.3 91.2 111.4 p 89.5 95.9 88.5 p 87.6
         July 97.6 92.4 113.3 p 91.0 96.6 89.2 p 88.5
         Aug. 99.0 93.6 87.7 p 91.6 115.0 p 92.3 93.1 91.3 95.9 85.9 97.2 89.8 p 89.2
         Sep. 99.0 93.6 115.0 p 92.3 97.3 89.9 p 89.3
         Oct. 98.6 93.1 114.8 p 91.9 97.1 89.5 p 89.0
         Nov. 98.5 93.0 87.5 p 91.4 115.0 p 92.0 93.3 91.2 96.5 85.8 97.2 89.5 p 89.0
         Dec. 98.8 93.3 115.3 p 92.2 97.5 89.8 p 89.3
2018         Jan. 99.4 93.9 116.1 p 92.8 97.6 89.8 p 89.4
         Feb. 99.6 93.9 p 88.1 p 91.9 117.3 p 93.6 93.9 91.3 98.0 86.2 97.7 89.9 p 89.5
         Mar. 99.7 94.2 117.7 p 93.9 97.8 90.0 p 89.7
         Apr. 99.5 p 93.9 117.9 p 94.0 97.9 p 90.0 p 89.8
         May 98.1 p 92.8 p 87.2 p 91.0 116.6 p 93.1 93.4 91.3 96.8 85.7 p 97.3 p 89.3 p 89.3
         June 97.9 p 92.6 116.7 p 93.0 p 97.2 p 89.4 p 89.4
         July 99.2 p 93.8 118.2 p 94.2 p 97.1 p 89.8 p 89.9
         Aug. 99.0 p 93.4 ... ... 119.0 p 94.6 ... ... ... ... p 96.9 p 89.6 p 90.0
         Sep. 99.5 p 93.9 120.4 p 95.5 p 97.4 p 90.2 p 90.9
         Oct. 98.9 p 93.4 119.0 p 94.3 p 97.1 p 89.9 p 90.3
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the group EER-19 (see footnote 1) and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Bra zil, Chile,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zeala nd,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailan d, Turkey and
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Venezuela. Due to the redenomination of the Venezuelan bolívar on2001, pp.  50-53, May 2007, pp.  31-35 and August 2017, pp.  41-43). For more 20  August  2018, the spot rate from 17  August  2018 is used since t hen. 3Annual
detailed information on methodology, see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from
(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, fr om 2015
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Austra- including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norw ay, Sweden,
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro area countries
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-1 9.6Euro area
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai- countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the gro up EER-38 (see
lable, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2017 see the index attached 
to the January 2018 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
January 2018
– The impact of the internationalisation of 
German firms on domestic investment
– The importance of bank profitability and 
bank capital for monetary policy
– Developments in corporate financing in the 
euro area since the financial and economic 
crisis
– Finalising Basel III
February 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2018
– German balance of payments in 2017– The demand for euro banknotes at the Bun -
desbank
– Contingent convertible bonds: design, regu -
lation, usefulness
April 2018
– Wage growth in Germany: assessment and 
determinants of recent developments
– Germany’s external position: new statistical 
approaches and results since the financial 
crisis 
– Current regulatory developments in the field 
of payments and in the settlement of secur -
ities and derivatives
– Maastricht debt: methodological principles, 
compilation and development  in Germany
May 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2018
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2018 and 2019 and 
an outlook for 2020
– Lower bound, inflation target and the an -
choring of inflation expectations
July 2018
– The market for Federal securities: holder 
structure and the main drivers of yield move -
mentsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
85•

– The realignment of the Chinese economy 
and its global  implications
– Trends in the financing structures of   German 
non- financial  corporations as reflected in the 
corporate financial  statements  statistics
August 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2018
– Models for short- term economic forecasts: 
an update
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2017
October 2018
– State government finances: comparison of 
developments, debt brakes and fiscal surveil -
lance
– The macroeconomic impact of uncertainty
– Activities of multinational enterprise groups 
and national economic statistics
– The growing importance of exchange- traded 
funds in the financial markets
November 2018
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20133
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
86•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20182, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification ,  
January 20182
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2011 to 
2016, May 20172
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2015, 
December 20162
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2014 bis 2015 , 
May 20182, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 20132
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20181, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
34/2018  
What are the real effects of financial market 
liquidity?  Evidence on bank lending from the 
euro area
35/2018  
Mitigating counterparty risk
36/2018  
Short-term forecasting economic activity in Ger -
many: a supply and demand side system of 
bridge equations
37/ 2018  
Equilibrium asset pricing in directed networks
38/ 2018  
Oil price shocks and stock return volatility: New 
evidence based on volatility impulse response 
analysis
39/ 2018  
Coordination failures, bank runs and asset prices
40/ 2018  
Large mixed- frequency VARs with a parsimoni -
ous time- varying parameter structure
41/ 2018  
Seasonal adjustment of daily time series
42/2018  
The pricing of FX forward contracts: micro evi -
dence from banks’ dollar hedging
43/2018  
Implications of bank regulation for loan supply 
and bank stability: A dynamic perspective
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since 
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
87•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2018  
88•

