Monthly Report
February 2018
Vol 70
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
2
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Annual and weekly publishing schedules for
Postal address selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes-
Postfach 10 06 02 bank can be downloaded from our website.
60006 Frankfurt am Main The statistical data are also published on the
Germany website.
Tel +49 69 9566 0 The Monthly Report is published by the
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main,
Fax +49 69 9566 3077 by virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank
Act. It is available to interested parties free of
http://www.bundesbank.de charge.
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita-
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition) tive text.
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 11 am on 16 February 2018.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
3
Contents
The current economic situation in Germany ................................................ 5
Overview ........................................................................................................................ 6
Global and European setting .................................................................................. 10
The potential macroeconomic impact of US tax reform ...................................................... 14
Monetary policy and banking business .............................................................. 21
Money market management and liquidity needs ................................................................ 22
Financial markets ........................................................................................................ 35
Economic conditions in Germany ......................................................................... 45
Housing prices in Germany in 2017 .................................................................................... 51
Public finances ............................................................................................................. 57
The structural development of German public finances –
results of the disaggregated framework for 2017 ............................................................... 58

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
4
Statistical Section.................................................................................................... 1•
Key economic data for the euro area .................................................................................. 5•
Overall monetary survey in the euro area ............................................................................ 8•
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem ............................................................ 16•
Banks .................................................................................................................................. 20•
Minimum reserves ............................................................................................................... 42•
Interest rates ....................................................................................................................... 43•
Insurance corporations and pension funds .......................................................................... 48•
Capital market .................................................................................................................... 50•
Financial accounts ............................................................................................................... 54•
Public finances in Germany ................................................................................................. 58•
Economic conditions in Germany ........................................................................................ 65•
External sector .................................................................................................................... 74•
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank .......................... 83•
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
5
The current economic situation
in Germany

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
6
Overview
German economy booming German Bunds rose significantly. On the inter-
national stock markets, the positive economic
Continuing The global economy remained buoyant towards outlook and the US tax reform were reflected
global economic
the end of 2017. Following its rapid pace in the in higher profit expectations and a greater
upturn
second and third quarters, economic growth in appe tite for risk amongst investors, causing
industrial countries slowed only slightly in the stock prices to rise – in some cases, consider-
final quarter of the year. In the United States, ably – and new interim highs to be reached in
growth of real gross domestic product (GDP) both Germany and the United States. At the
was dampened by a very sharp increase in im- be ginning of February, however, rising yields
ports and a weaker build- up of inventories. prompted a noticeable stock market correc-
Domestic final demand, on the other hand, tion, forcing the European markets to surren-
saw its strongest growth in three years. Eco- der their gains and end the period with net
nomic performance in the euro area also rose losses. On the foreign exchange markets, there
considerably again in the fourth quarter. Steady were perceptible shifts in exchange rates to the
growth in the emerging market economies as a detriment of the US dollar and to the benefit of
group – especially China – rounds out the pic- the euro as of the fourth quarter of 2017.
ture of a largely synchronised upswing in the
global economy. Overall, it is likely that global At the current end, indicators suggest that Global
economic
activity and international trade expanded much global economic activity has maintained its
outlook remains
more strongly in 2017 than in the previous year, momen tum. Sentiment amongst enterprises favourable
recording the largest gains since 2011. and consumers remained upbeat at the end of
the year. The latest drops in prices on the stock
Financial Favourable economic conditions, US fiscal pol- markets are unlikely to fundamentally change
markets
icy and monetary policy on both sides of the this picture; they instead represent a correction
influenced by
good economic Atlantic shaped events on international finan- to the, in some cases very high, valuation levels
outlook
cial markets in the fourth quarter of 2017 and that had been achieved previously. Not only the
at the beginning of the new year. Yields on economy’s built- in dynamics but also the con-
sovereign bonds were initially mixed. One rea- tinually supportive stance of macro policy are
son for this was the differing monetary policy indicative that the global economic upswing
stances in the euro area and the United States. will carry on. Monetary policy indeed still
Consequently, the interest rate spread between remains expansionary in many major econ-
ten- year US Treasuries and German Federal omies and, in some countries, fiscal policy is
bonds (Bunds) with the same maturity widened being relaxed. In the United States in particular,
perceptibly. Yields then rose sharply worldwide the implemented tax cuts and announced
as of mid- December. In this regard, stimulus spending hikes may have temporarily stimu-
was provided by the tax reform in the United lated the economy.
States (Tax Cuts and Jobs Act), which was
passed before the end of the year. Additionally, The Governing Council of the European Central ECB Governing
Council leaves
it was clear that the upswing was maintaining Bank (ECB) kept policy rates unchanged in the
policy rates
its great momentum not only in the euro area reporting period. Since January 2018, pur- unchanged
and the United States, but around the world. chases under the expanded asset purchase pro-
Not least in the light of market expectations of gramme (EAPP) have proceeded at a reduced
less expansionary monetary policy in the two monthly volume of €30 billion, as was decided
major currency areas and higher term pre- in October 2017. The monthly net purchases
miums, the yields on ten-y ear US Treasuries and are scheduled to take place until at least the

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
7
end of September 2018 and in any case until On the demand side, economic growth was Demand- side
growth driven
the ECB Governing Council sees a sustained driven mainly by exports and investment in ma-
mainly by
correction in the path of inflation consistent chinery and equipment in the last quarter of exports and
machinery and
with its inflation target. the year. Flourishing global trade ensured
equipment
strong growth in sales among German export-
Ongoing The positive underlying dynamics in the monet- ers. Commercial investment in machinery and
monetary
ary indicators persisted in the fourth quarter of equipment, which had already risen briskly in
growth in the
euro area 2017. The broad monetary aggregate M3 again the first three quarters of 2017, was expanded
expanded considerably against the backdrop of much further in light of the high utilisation
the very low interest rate level and the strong, of production capacity. Following a lull in the
broadly based economic growth in the euro summer, private consumption, which had been
area. Once again, the mainstay of monetary a mainstay of the upswing up until the first half
growth was lending. Loans to non- financial of 2017, also only provided limited additional
corporations in the euro area saw a resurgence economic stimulus at the end of year. In the
in the fourth quarter, while loans to house- fourth quarter, investment in construction like-
holds continued to grow stably and securities- wise remained lacklustre and lingered near the
based lending in the MFI sector to domestic exceptionally high level that had been reached
non- banks, which was again mainly driven by previously. Increasing capacity shortages could
Eurosystem asset purchases, likewise made a have been decisive in stifling further growth in
highly positive contribution. construction activity.
German Germany’s economy is booming. After aggre- In line with the strong underlying pace of Marked
economy expansion in
gate economic activity had surpassed potential growth in the German economy, banks in Ger-
booming loans to the
output by a considerable margin in the first many again markedly increased their lending to domestic private
sector in
three quarters of 2017, economic performance the domestic private sector in the fourth quar-
Germany
also saw large gains in the last quarter, although ter of 2017. The largest net expansion was re-
with slightly less momentum than before. corded by loans to households in Germany,
Accord ing to the Federal Statistical Office’s which continued to be driven by their brisk de-
flash estimate, real GDP increased by 0.6% mand for housing loans. The rate of growth in
from the third quarter after adjustment for sea- consumer credit also accelerated noticeably
sonal and calendar variations. Aggregate cap- over the course of 2017. On balance, banks’
acity utilisation has since significantly exceeded lending business with domestic non- financial
its long- term average. Sentiment is extraordin- corporations expanded further; the growth
arily good amongst enterprises and households rate in this loan segment ultimately exceeded
alike, and the situation on the labour market growth in loans to households by a significant
has improved even further. margin.
Industry remains In the final quarter of 2017, industry continued Germany’s labour market was again in excel- Situation and
key driving force outlook on
to play its role as the main driving force of the lent shape in the fourth quarter of 2017. As in
labour market
upswing. In its wake, business- related service the preceding quarters, employment rose extremely
favourable
sectors are also likely to have maintained their sharply, especially in the case of jobs subject to
dynamic upwards movement. On the other social security contributions and among both
hand, the construction sector, which has been German nationals and migrants. By contrast,
facing considerable capacity shortages for exclusively low-p aid part- time employment and
some time, was unable to increase production self- employment followed a downward trend.
any further. Unemployment declined further from its already
low level. The number of job vacancies also
continued to grow during the reporting quar-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
8
ter. Other leading indicators promise a similarly period in 2016, the rate stayed more or less
positive outlook for the next few months. constant at 1.6%; excluding energy and food,
Nonetheless, it may become more difficult to however, it fell from 1.5% to 1.2%.
fill vacant positions given the currently high
demand for labour. The burgeoning order books of industrial firms, Strong economic
growth
along with the persistently positive sentiment
continues
First major wage In this year’s pay round, the majority of the in the economy as a whole, suggest that the
agreement in
wage demands by the trade unions covering rapid pace of expansion achieved in the course
the 2018 pay
round important sectors such as the metal- working of 2017 will continue into the new year. Given
and electrical engineering industries, the main the recent massive influx of new orders, the
construction sector, the central and local gov- industrial sector probably remains the driving
ernment public sector, and the chemical indus- force behind the upturn. The continuing very
try amounted to 6%, and were thus up slightly high level of utilisation of tangible assets in
from the previous year’s level. The macroeco- manufacturing that this entails is likely to mean
nomic framework conditions, which include that enterprises’ willingness to invest in new
strong economic growth and increasing staff machinery and equipment will increase further.
shortages in the labour market, suggest that In addition, the framework conditions for pri-
wage growth will accelerate to a more notice- vate consumption, which experienced a lull in
able degree overall compared with previous the second half of 2017 after strong growth in
years. This is supported by the most recent pay the first half of the year, remain favourable.
agreement in the metalworking and electrical These include the glowing outlook for employ-
engineering industries, which features a sus- ment and a perceptible rise in earnings. How-
tained increase of 4.3% in scheduled rates of ever, there are mounting signs that the German
pay from April 2018 as well as further signifi- economy is increasingly facing shortages of
cant improvements in remuneration in 2019. skilled workers, which could stand in the way
Other distinctive features of the agreement in of significantly stronger growth.
this key sector of Germany industry are the, in
some cases, innovative models put in place to German public finances remained in very good Germany’s
public finances
allow more flexible working hours arrange- shape last year. Given the strong economic
continue to
ments. expan sion and diminishing interest expend- benefit from
favourable
iture, the general government surplus increased
underlying
Another marked Consumer prices as measured by the Harmon- further to over 1% of GDP. Growth in tax and conditions
rise in consumer
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose con- social contribution receipts was again dynamic.
prices in Q4;
core inflation siderably again at the end of 2017, recording a At the same time, expenditure on items such
rate distinctly
seasonally adjusted quarter- on- quarter increase as social benefits or one- off nuclear fuel tax
dampened by
one- off effects of 0.4%. This was driven mainly by higher prices repay ments went up – in some cases signifi-
for energy, which were caused by the steep rise cantly. As things stand, the underlying condi-
in crude oil prices, and for food. Excluding both tions look set to remain extremely favourable
these components, inflation was noticeably over the next few years, with increasingly posi-
weaker. Substantial reductions in the price of tive cyclical factors and further diminishing
travel services and car insurance policies had a interest expenditure easing the burden on gov-
dampening effect on services, which had previ- ernment budgets. Given the moderately expan-
ously become considerably more expensive. sionary fiscal stance of the financial plans up
Although price pressures for non- energy indus- until now, after a surplus of around 1½% of
trial goods also eased, they remained positive GDP this year, a further slight increase in the
despite a decrease in the corresponding import balance could be on the cards. However, when
prices since the appreciation of the euro in the it is formed, the new Federal Government
second quarter. Compared with the same – includ ing the social security funds – along

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
9
with state and local governments, is expected moderate structural surpluses in the financial
to use this favourable outlook in order to hike plan.
spending further and to cut taxes. As a result,
the general government surplus is likely to be In the context of the budgetary rules, but also Bear future
demographic
distinctly smaller, and fiscal policy considerably in terms of achieving modest structural budget
burdens in mind
expansionary, going forward. The debt ratio surpluses, some financial leeway will be avail- when using
financial leeway
declined to 65% by the end of the third quar- able over the next few years. The coalition
ter. Even though fiscal policy is expected to be agreement proposes a certain reduction in the
more expan sionary, it is likely to fall below the tax burden, largely through the reduction in
60% mark again by 2019 at the latest. the solidarity surcharge announced for the
year 2021. On the expenditure side, additional
Avoid short- term The fact that the recently unveiled coalition resources are to be used in areas such as edu-
policy oriented
agreement between the CDU, the CSU and the cation, pensions and digitalisation. Some pro-
to cash balance
SPD has retained the fundamental objective of jects will require coordination between central,
a balanced budget and will thus continue to state and local governments. Here, it will be
prioritise sound public finances is a welcome necessary to prevent the lines of responsibility
development. However, the aim of avoiding from becoming too blurred as a result of
new net borrowing could also create problems. greater financial interconnectedness. When it
It allows the temporary funding of budget- comes to additional budgetary burdens, a long-
consuming measures through cyclical surpluses term outlook should be taken, given that Ger-
and reserves. This can result in a procyclical and many’s public finances are facing major chal-
– once the reserves have been depleted – erratic lenges due to demographic developments. This
fiscal policy, for instance. In addition, it must is especially true for the statutory pension in-
be ensured that the general government surance scheme. The statutory retirement age
budget ceiling under the European budget should be raised further in line with increasing
rules is not breached. This ceiling is linked to life expectancy, and, looking ahead, a lower
the structural deficit rather than net borrowing. pension level should also be considered in
With regard to the coalition agreement, it is order to limit the significant increase which is
noticeable that new burdens for the central already expected in the burdens generated
government budget will increase considerably by social security contributions and taxes. It
in the final year, by which time the refugee re- appears appropriate to combat demographic
serve is expected to be used up. All in all, to developments with measures to counteract the
achieve a steady medium to long- term fiscal shortage of potential labour supply.
policy, it would remain advisable to aim for

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
10
Global and European setting
World economic activity completes the picture of a largely synchronised
upswing in the global economy. According to
Clear and The global economy remained buoyant at the the figures provided by the Dutch Centraal
broad- based
end of 2017. Having surged in the second and Planbureau (CPB), global industrial production
global economic
growth third quarters, economic growth in industrial grew almost just as briskly on average in the
countries eased only slightly in the final quarter October- November 2017 period compared
of last year. In the United States, the rise in real with the previous three months, as it had in the
gross domestic product (GDP) was dampened third quarter. The steep expansion of global
by a very sharp increase in imports and a trade in the summer gained a little more trac-
weaker build- up of inventories. Domestic final tion in the first months of the fourth quarter.
demand, on the other hand, saw its strongest Overall, global GDP and international trade are
growth in a little more than three years. The likely to have accelerated at a far quicker pace
euro area likewise registered another strong in 2017 than in the previous year, recording
upturn in GDP in the fourth quarter, while the their largest gains since 2011.
United Kingdom’s lacklustre activity in the first
half of the year strengthened again slightly. The Current indicators suggest that global eco- Current
indicators
Japanese economy was able to marginally out- nomic activity also made a buoyant start to
remain
strip its earlier, strongly increased level of activ- 2018, with sentiment among businesses and favourable
ity. Steady growth in the emerging market consumers remaining upbeat at the turn of the
economies as a group – especially China – year. This is consistent with the fact that the
Bundesbank leading indicator for the global
economy improved well into January, signalling
Selected short-term indicators of
international economic activity continued consolidated growth in global indus-
trial production.1 Recent price declines in finan-
Monthly, standardised 1
cial markets, though, highlight the potential
Bundesbank leading indicator 2
+1.2 Business confidence 3 risk of a sharp correction in asset prices, which
Composite leading indicator 3
could hamper global economic growth.
+0.9
The persistently favourable global activity Global growth
+0.6 outlook brighter
prompted the International Monetary Fund
still
(IMF) staff in January to raise their growth pro-
+0.3
0 1 The Bundesbank leading indicator was designed to pre-
dict cyclical turning points in global industrial production
(according to the CPB). It is based on a principal compon-
–0.3 ent analysis with six indicator inputs: the Global Manufac-
turing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) produced by
JP Morgan and IHS Markit, the PMI sub- index for new ex-
–0.6 port orders, the corresponding global PMI for the services
sector, the sentix economic index on the current situation,
the sentix economic index on the expectations for the next
–0.9
six months, and the S&P Global 1200 equity index. The
data from IHS Markit and sentix GmbH, and those from
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18 Standard and Poor’s (which are provided by IHS Markit),
are used as sources. A rising indicator above the long- term
Sources: OECD, Haver Analytics and Bundesbank calculations
based on data from IHS Markit, sentix GmbH, and Standard mean signals a cyclical period of expansion. The Bundes-
and Poor's; these data are provided by IHS Markit. 1 Based on bank leading indicator’s time series is available at: https://
the mean value and the standard deviation since January 2003. www.bundesbank.de/ Navigation/ EN/ Statistics/ Time_
2 For the global economy. 3 OECD indicators (amplitude ad-
series_databases/ Euro_area_and_euro_area_countries/
justed) for the OECD area and six other major economies.
euro_area_aggregates_list_node.html?https=1&listId=
Deutsche Bundesbank
www_s3wa_imac_bbli

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
11
jections for the world economy again in 2018
World market prices for crude oil,
and 2019. Prospects not least for the euro area,
industrial commodities and food
especially Germany, and for Japan were now and beverages
seen in a distinctly more favourable light than
Monthly averages, log scale
as recently as last autumn. Projections for
120
global trade growth were even increased con-
110
siderably. The improved global growth outlook 100
also mirrors the IMF staff’s expectation that the 90
Crude oil (Brent)
tax reform recently passed in the United States in US$ per barrel 80
will provide significant, albeit temporary, stimu- 70
lus above all for the economies in North Amer-
60
ica.
50
Temporary Bundesbank calculations using NiGEM, the
stimulus for 40
global economic model of the National Insti-
US economy
110 35
tute of Economic and Social Research, likewise
100
suggest that the tax cuts will deliver consider- 30
90
able growth stimulus in the United States in
80
2018 and 2019, but will probably act as a drag
70
in later years (see the box on pages 14 to 16). US dollar basis,
2012 = 100
60 60
These calculations furthermore point to a con- Industrial commodities
siderably stronger rate of inflation in the me- 50
dium term. While the ripple effects on real GDP Food and beverages
110
or consumer prices beyond America’s direct
100
neighbours, which have close foreign trade ties 90
to the US economy, would be small, the simu- 80
lations suggest that the fiscal costs in the United
70
States would be high. What is more, both the 65
deficit in the US current account and the Ger- 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18
man surplus would be pushed up distinctly. Sources: Bloomberg Finance LP and HWWI. • Latest figures:
average of 1 to 9 February 2018, or 1 to 15 February 2018 for
crude oil.
Risks to the It would be misguided to see such a widening Deutsche Bundesbank
global economy
of global imbalances as evidence of a lack of
“fairness” in the architecture of international Hamburg Institute of International Economics
trade, or to consequently even call for greater (HWWI), rose significantly during the period
restrictions to be placed on international trade. under review, while the price of crude oil
Protectionist measures would particularly do posted further robust gains. According to fig-
harm to the country that applies them – and ures from Bloomberg, the spot price for a bar-
the repercussions for current account balances rel of Brent came to just under US$70 in Janu-
would be unclear.2 A push in this direction ary 2018; this is a little more than US$11 higher
ranks alongside sharp corrections in financial than three months before and the highest level
markets and an escalation of geopolitical con- since November 2014. The simultaneous
flicts as one of the major risks to what is gener- marked rise in discounts for forward deliveries
ally an upbeat global growth outlook. might indicate that supply is tightening, prob-
Crude oil price With economic activity vibrant, the prices of in-
at three- year dustrial raw materials, measured on a US dollar 2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The danger posed to the
high global economy by protectionist tendencies, Monthly
basis using a suitable index produced by the Report, July 2017, pp 77-91.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
12
ably as a result of a number of temporary pro- sumption activity was very robust, with survey
duction outages. What is more, major oil- data indicating that household sentiment
producing countries agreed to extend their stayed extremely upbeat up until this report
output cuts through to the end of 2018. Be- went to press. One likely factor is that con-
sides the ongoing conflicts in the Middle East, sumer price inflation remained rather lacklustre
the political situation in Venezuela is also in- again in the final quarter of 2017, coming in at
creasingly a cause of concern; oil production a rate of 1.8%.
there contracted significantly in recent months.
That said, the oil price did fall back consider- In India, two sweeping reforms in the first half Firmer activity
in India
ably at the beginning of February following sur- of 2017 – the exchange of much of the cash in
prisingly strong growth in US output. As this circulation, and the introduction of a single
report went to press, the spot price for a barrel Goods & Services Tax (GST) across the coun-
of Brent was US$64. try – put a considerable damper on economic
activity. The headwinds these measures caused
Consumer prices After adjustment for seasonal factors, con- appear to have eased in the second half of the
sharply higher
sumer prices in industrial countries surged in year. In any case, GDP growth increased in the
on the quarter
the final quarter of 2017 compared to the pre- summer to 6.3% on the year. This recovery is
vious quarter, not least owing to higher energy likely to have continued into the fourth quarter,
prices. The last time prices increased at a faster for which an official GDP estimate is not yet
pace than this was back in winter 2011. Annual available. Consumer price inflation picked up
price inflation barely changed because of the sharply of late, the consumer price index (CPI)
similarly robust increase registered one year rate coming in at an average of 4.6% in the
earlier. Headline inflation in December 2017 final quarter. The Reserve Bank of India, which
came to 1.9%, as it had done in September. is aiming for an inflation rate of 4% over the
Core inflation, which is based on the basket of medium term, left its policy rate at 6.0%, where
consumer goods excluding energy and food it has been since August 2017 following a ser-
products, was still somewhat lower at 1.5%. ies of reductions.
Selected emerging market Brazil’s economic recovery stumbled at times in Dip in the
Brazilian
the second half of 2017. Seasonally adjusted
economies economy’s
third quarter GDP hovered close to the level of rebound
China maintains According to the official estimate, China’s eco- the previous period. Though private final do-
pace of growth
nomic output in the last quarter rose by 6.8% mestic demand registered another strong rise,
in fourth quarter
on the year, which matched the pace of growth a sharp increase in imports and inventory dy-
recorded one quarter earlier. Average annual namics depressed aggregate growth in arith-
real GDP growth in 2017 even slightly outpaced metical terms. In the fourth quarter, it is likely
the 2016 figure, coming in at 6.9%, which that real GDP returned to a growth path ac-
means that the aggregate slowdown observed cording to the indicators available. Industrial
since 2011 has come to a halt. The pick-u p in production, for example, grew by 2% com-
Chinese goods exports in response to firmer pared to the third quarter. To keep the aggre-
global activity was instrumental in this regard. gate economy firmly on track for recovery,
Their value climbed by 8% in US dollar terms however, policymakers will need to put the ne-
compared to 2016, when it had receded by al-
most the same magnitude. Growth in invest-
ment activity last year appears to have weak- 3 China’s National Bureau of Statistics does not report any
real growth figures for the individual expenditure- side com-
ened again significantly, however.3 The cooling ponents of GDP, though it does publish a breakdown of
economic growth into expenditure- side contributions,
of the residential property market is likely to
which can be used to derive the rates of change in each
have played a key role here. By contrast, con- component.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
13
cessary framework in place. Consumer price in- pace with this, crimping the saving ratio in De-
flation is still rather feeble by Brazilian stand- cember still further to its lowest level in over
ards, with the annual growth rate standing at 12 years. Now that the tax cuts have come into
2.8% on average in the fourth quarter. This force, consumers should have greater scope for
prompted the Central Bank of Brazil to lower its expenditure in the new year. Moreover, the
policy rate on multiple occasions in recent perceptible increase in employment continued
months. into January 2018, while the unemployment
rate remained at its cyclical low of 4.1%. CPI-
Recovery in Last year saw the Russian economy recoup based inflation clocked in at 2.1% in the same
Russia probably
some of the output it had lost in the 2015-16 month. In light of the progress already made
slowed recently
recession. According to the preliminary esti- and the likely road ahead towards its monetary
mate by the Russian Federal State Statistics Of- policy objectives, the US Federal Reserve main-
fice, real GDP climbed by an annual average of tained its stance of gradually normalising mon-
1.5%. Imports of goods and services rose by as etary policy and raised its policy rate last De-
much as 17%, though these had contracted cember by 25 basis points.
particularly severely during the economic crisis.
Separate national accounts data are not yet Japan
available for the fourth quarter. There are signs
that economic growth has slowed down con- Growth in the Japanese economy in the fourth Private
consumption
siderably. For example, industrial production quarter of 2017 fell short of the strong rate of
recovers
shrank by an unexpected 1.8% on the year in expansion observed in earlier quarters. Prelim-
the fourth quarter. Yet higher oil prices, which inary estimates by the country’s cabinet office
ought to benefit Russia as an exporting econ- indicate that seasonally adjusted real GDP was
omy, suggest that the economic recovery suf- just marginally up on the third quarter. Private
fered no more than a short-l ived lull. Consumer consumption bounced back distinctly from its
price inflation dwindled to 2.6% on average in lull in the previous period. However, private
the final quarter, prompting the Russian central gross fixed capital formation registered no
bank to maintain its accommodative monetary more than minimal gains, while public sector
policy stance. demand was crimped again slightly. Both ex-
ports and imports of goods and services experi-
United States enced firm growth. The unemployment rate
touched a new cyclical low in November, but
Strong growth in According to an initial estimate, fourth quarter domestic price increases nonetheless remained
final domestic
real GDP in the United States was up by a sea- sluggish – the annual core rate of CPI inflation
demand
sonally adjusted 0.6% on the third quarter, in (excluding energy and food prices) coming in at
which it had risen by 0.8%. On the one hand, 0.1% in December, which was only marginally
a turnaround in inventory dynamics in arith- higher than the figure three months earlier.
metical terms and a sharp increase in imports Livelier energy and fresh food price inflation,
created headwinds for growth. On the other, however, was instrumental in pushing the De-
final domestic demand expanded at a very cember headline rate to 1.0%, the highest rate
brisk pace, the like of which was last seen in observed since March 2015. The Bank of Japan
the third quarter of 2014. In addition to gross
fixed capital formation, which has been follow-
4 The pick- up in residential construction may be partly a
ing a rather steep upward trajectory since back response to the trail of devastation left by hurricanes in
in early 2017, residential construction invest- August and September on the US Gulf Coast. This hypoth-
esis is supported by the fact that similar natural disasters in
ment and private consumption also posted the past have also prompted an increase in activity in the
construction sector. See Deutsche Bundesbank, The impact
considerable gains in the final quarter.4 Dispos-
of hurricanes on economic activity in the United States,
able household income was unable to keep Monthly Report, November 2017, pp 14-15.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
14
The potential macroeconomic impact of US tax reform
As 2017 was drawing to a close, the lying the simulations, real government de-
US Congress passed the Tax Cuts and Jobs mand does not deviate from the baseline.
Act, which ushered in a sweeping reform of The considerable spending hikes adopted
tax legislation. As from 2018, tax rates will by the US Congress in February for the cur-
be lower and the tax code will be simplifi ed; rent and next fi scal years are not taken into
this will benefi t primarily fi rms but also account.
households. In addition, the USA will move
to a territorial system of taxing global earn- Consistent with the time paths of the tax
ings, subjecting deferred offshore income rates, the calculations suggest that the
to a one-t ime tax at reduced rates.1 Accord- reform could, in the short run, considerably
ing to estimates by the non- partisan Con-
gressional Joint Committee on Taxation
1 This would be augmented by, amongst other things,
(JCT), the direct government revenue short-
measures designed to prevent abuse and restrictions
falls caused by the reform over a ten- year on the deductibility of interest rates, more favourable
rules for intangible assets and immediate depreciation
period could amount to a net fi gure of
options.
nearly US$1.5 trillion.2 Although the extent 2 See Joint Committee on Taxation, Estimated budget
effects of the conference agreement for H.R. 1, the
of the relief would fall short of earlier pro-
“Tax Cuts and Jobs Act”, JCX-67-17, 18 December
posals,3 the short-t erm fi scal stimulus would 2017.
3 Proposals being put forward by US government offi -
still be considerable, at roughly 1¼% of
cials as late as April 2017 entailed estimated cumula-
gross domestic product (GDP) per year for tive revenue losses of US$5.5 trillion over a decade.
See Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget
the years 2018 to 2020. The stimulus would
(2017), Fiscal FactCheck: How much will Trump’s tax
subsequently be scaled back gradually, re- plan cost?, Blog post, 26 April 2017.
4 This projection is based mainly on the fact that major
sulting even in a slightly positive impact on
amendments to income tax legislation will expire in
the budget as from the 2027 fi scal year.4 2025 and that corporate deductions are likewise only
temporary.
5 NiGEM is the macroeconometric model developed
The NiGEM global economic model will be by the UK- based National Institute of Economic and
Social Research (NIESR). It individually models the bulk
used below to study the macroeconomic
of OECD countries as well as major emerging market
implications of the reform for the United economies and their economic interconnectedness via
foreign trade and the interest- exchange rate nexus.
States and its trading partners.5 The changes The model has New Keynesian features and, in particu-
in tax legislation are approximated by ad- lar, forward- looking elements on fi nancial and labour
markets. For further information, see https:// nimodel.
justing the effective tax rates for fi rms and niesr.ac.uk
households.6 The calibrations are based on 6 For a model- based gauging of the macroeconomic
impact of earlier blueprints for reform, see Deutsche
the JCT’s cost estimates, factoring out the Bundesbank, The macroeconomic impact of tax re-
new tax treatment of international earn- form plans in the United States, Monthly Report, May
2017, pp 12-13.
ings.7 Initially, the effective corporate tax 7 The added revenue expected by the JCT for the com-
rate in NiGEM is reduced by 10 percentage ing years in connection with the international aspects
of the reform largely refl ects the one- time tax on de-
points and that of natural persons by 1 per- ferred overseas earnings. The cost of capital, which is
centage point. Over the long term, the the decisive factor when considering future investment
decisions, is not expected to be affected by this retro-
assumed effective corporate tax rate will active measure. Some analysts even assume that, in
this context, funds from abroad will accrue to house-
remain only 2 percentage points below the
holds and fi rms in the United States. Netting the in-
baseline, whereas the percentage tax bur- creased fi scal revenue from this measure against the
revenue shortfall from tax cuts, however, would re-
den on households will even rise some-
duce the fi scal stimulus to the US economy and there-
what. According to the assumptions under- fore does not seem appropriate.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
15
boost US GDP. This is due primarily to a
Fiscal costs of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
strong rebound in investment activity
As a percentage of GDP,1 data relate to fiscal years
which, in NiGEM, is an immediate response
Reform of taxes on...
to the reduction in the after- tax user cost of ... households
... corporations
capital. For households, an increase in dis- +2.0 ... overseas income
posable income is refl ected in a more rapid
+1.5 Total costs
rise in consumer spending. The growth-
+1.0
enhancing effects on domestic demand,
+0.5
however, are short- lived, and will fall into
0
negative territory as early as from the year
2020. After ten years, GDP will not be sig- –0.5
2018 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
nifi cantly different from where it would
Sources: Joint Committee on Taxation, Congressional Budget
have been in the absence of any tax reform. Office (CBO) and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to the
CBO’s baseline projection; the macroeconomic impact of the
tax reforms is not taken into account.
Price developments show a similar pattern, Deutsche Bundesbank
albeit with a time lag. Consumer price infl a-
tion in the United States would only be defi cit to rise considerably according to
temporarily dampened by an appreciating the simulation results. Conversely, most
US dollar, but would later be spurred con- other economies would see their current
siderably by higher domestic demand. In account balances increase, including Ger-
NiGEM, the US central bank responds to many, which is already running a surplus.
the infl ation surge, which peaks after three The growing US fi scal defi cit would thus
years, by perceptibly lifting its policy rate; clash with the aim of improving the US ex-
this move, in concert with an economic ternal trade position and reducing global
downturn, puts the brakes on infl ation.8
Higher interest rates impact on fi nancial
8 It is not only revenue shortfalls but also higher inter-
markets immediately. In the model, the US est rates which weigh on the US government budget.
According to the results of the simulation, the govern-
stock market takes a considerable hit even
ment debt ratio could rise by just over 9 percentage
though after- tax corporate profi ts rise. points compared to the baseline in the space of a dec-
ade.
9 Moreover, the reform could also affect the rest of
Despite the considerable swings in US eco- the world through feedback effects of the various
changes to tax legislation, such as the treatment of
nomic activity indicators, the simulations in-
intangible assets or the closing of loopholes. These are
dicate that the ripple effect to other regions not modelled here.
10 According to the simulation output, accelerated
will be limited,9 with the rest of the world economic growth in the United States will be associ-
as a whole only seeing a slight, temporary ated with an increase in imports by a total of 4% up to
2019. This even disregards the fact that the salient
rise in GDP. The model even yields slightly feature of investment demand, which rises strongly, is
negative effects on output for the euro a relatively high import content. In modifi ed versions
of the model which take this fact into account, the
area, although the region will benefi t from additional increase in imports over the same period
an initial considerable spike in US demand will be larger than one percentage point. This is re-
fl ected in slightly more favourable spillover effects to
for imports.10 Higher infl ation and interest the real economy of other countries.
rates, however, will have a dampening 11 These factors and their countervailing impacts on
euro area economic activity also show up in the Euro-
effect on GDP, since US infl ationary trends pean Commission’s QUEST model. See M Buti (2018),
will spill over to other economic areas.11 Cross- Atlantic implications of the new United States
policy mix, remarks delivered at the AEA Annual Meet-
ing, New York, 26 January 2018; and European Com-
mission, US macroeconomic policies and spillovers to
The aspects of the tax reform modelled
the euro area, Spring 2017 European Economic Fore-
here would cause the US current account cast, Institutional Paper 053, pp 45-48.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
16
partisan Tax Policy Center suggest a similar
Macroeconomic impact of the Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act according to NiGEM time path.16 Because the recently adopted
simulations*
government spending hikes are disre-
Deviation from the baseline expressed in percentage points garded, the actual fi scal stimulus is even
USA Euro area underestimated by all studies. In the current
+1.0 Real GDP growth situation, however, the question to ask is to
+0.8
what extent conventional models ad-
+0.6
equately refl ect the effectiveness of stimu-
+0.4
lus in times of rather high macroeconomic
+0.2
capacity utilisation. Infl ation, in particular,
0
could turn out to be higher than calculated
–0.2
–0.4 using conventional simulations.
Consumer price inflation rate +0.8
+0.6
+0.4
+0.2
0
–0.2
–0.4
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
Source: Bundesbank calculations using NiGEM (Version 4.17)
based on cost estimates by the Joint Committee on Taxation.
* Assuming permanent tax changes and rules-based monetary
policy responses.
Deutsche Bundesbank
imbalances.12 From this perspective, and
also looking towards the long- term sustain-
ability of public fi nances, fi scal consolida-
tion in the United States, rather than fi scal
stimulus, would appear to be more appro-
12 Consequently, the possibility of calls for protection-
priate.13 ist measures increasingly fi nding sway with US govern-
ment offi cials cannot be ruled out. However, such pol-
icies would not only jeopardise the global upswing but
Given uncertainty about the suitability of would especially also impair economic growth in the
United States itself. See Deutsche Bundesbank, The
the model framework and the scope for
danger posed to the global economy by protectionist
imple menting individual policy measures, tendencies, Monthly Report, July 2017, pp 77-91.
13 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Possibilities for adjust-
macroeconomic simulations of complex ing the US current account defi cit, Monthly Report,
reform packages should always be inter- July 2017, pp 83-85.
14 The distributional impact of the reform, for in-
preted with caution. The incentives associ- stance, cannot be taken into account in NiGEM.
ated with the US tax reform are multi- 15 According to IMF estimations, the dampening
effects on economic growth are likely to gain the
layered and modelled in a highly simplifying upper hand from 2022. In the two preceding years,
form.14 Studies by other institutions, how- however, GDP could be 1.2% higher than in a scenario
without tax reform. The effects would thus also be
ever, yield results similar to those presented quantitatively similar to those contained in the simula-
here. For instance, in its latest growth pro- tion calculations presented here. See IWF, Brighter pro-
spects, optimistic markets, challenges ahead, World
jections from January, the staff of the Inter- Economic Outlook Update, January 2018, pp 3-4.
national Monetary Fund (IMF) assumes that 16 See JCT, Macroeconomic analysis of the conference
agreement for H.R. 1, the “Tax Cuts and Jobs Act”,
tax reform will initially perceptibly boost JCX-69-17, study published on 22 December 2017, or
also B R Page, J Rosenberg, J R Nunns, J Rohaly and
GDP growth but then dampen it in later
D Berger, Macroeconomic analysis of the tax cuts and
years.15 Analyses by the JCT and the non- jobs act, Tax Policy Center letter, 20 December 2017.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
17
kept its monetary policy stance exceptionally pace of economic growth for much longer.
accommodative. HICP inflation was sharply higher in the fourth
quarter of the year, touching 2.0% for the first
United Kingdom time since early 2013. Inflation rates among
EU-6 countries ranged from 1.5% in Croatia to
Economy firms Activity in the United Kingdom continued to 1.8% in Poland, and to 2.5% in the Czech Re-
up again slightly
gradually pick up pace. After adjustment for public. But this pick- up in inflation was driven
the usual seasonal variations, real GDP in the primarily by energy and food prices – adjusting
fourth quarter of 2017 was 0.5% up on the the headline rate for these components leaves
previous quarter according to the first official a core rate of inflation that is unchanged at
estimate, having expanded at rates of just 0.9%.
0.3% in the first two quarters. One factor driv-
ing the faster pace of expansion was the dis-
tinct upturn in the UK’s important services sec- Macroeconomic trends
tor; the other was another solid upturn in in the euro area
manufacturing output. Overall value added in
the production sector, however, increased at a Activity in the euro area, too, continued to Strong
underlying pace
more subdued pace, largely on account of a move at a lively pace as the year drew to a
of economic
temporary cutback in oil and gas production. close. Eurostat’s flash estimate indicates that growth
Furthermore, aggregate growth was damp- real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2017 rose by
ened by what remains a steep downward cor- a seasonally adjusted 0.6% on the quarter and
rection in construction activity from its high by 2.7% on the year.6 Economic growth was
level at the beginning of the year. With GDP again broadly based, both across member
growth averaging 1.8% in 2017, the UK econ- states and in terms of components of origin
omy remained in robust shape in spite of the and use of GDP. On average, real GDP growth
stronger rate of inflation. After peaking at 3.1% in 2017 is likely to have come to 2.5%, which is
in November last year, inflation as measured by a significant improvement on the already rather
the rate of change in the Harmonised Index of strong expansion rate of 1.8% recorded in
Consumer Prices (HICP) eased only marginally 2016. This brisker pace of activity was mainly
up until January. Unemployment as an average down to the improved external environment,
for the September to November 2017 period and the noticeable upturn in exports. Domestic
remained at its lowest level since spring 1975. activity was again a key source of impetus –
The Bank of England left its monetary policy private consumption remained on an upward
unchanged during the period under review. trajectory, while the acceleration in investment
New EU member states
5 This group comprises the non- euro area countries that
Upswing still Activity in the new EU member states (EU-6)5 have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech
robust in central remained vibrant in the fourth quarter of 2017. Republic , Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.
and eastern 6 This flash estimate contains no figures for Ireland as yet.
Europe Domestic demand is projected to have in- Growth rates for the third quarter of 2017 and the fourth
creased again substantially – private consump- quarter of 2016 were each revised from 0.6% to 0.7% fol-
lowing publication of Ireland’s GDP numbers. This is be-
tion especially. Many of these countries saw cause real GDP in Ireland rose by 4.2% in the third quarter
industrial capacity utilisation increase from their of 2017, according to an initial estimate by the country’s
Central Statistics Office, and increased at a revised rate
already high levels. At the same time, the un- of 6.8% (previously 5.8%) in the fourth quarter of 2016.
employment rate fell to fresh lows in the Czech Ireland’s GDP growth rates have been very high and sus-
ceptible to revision for some time now, mainly on account
Republic, Poland, Hungary and Romania. This of the activities of multinational enterprises. See also
Deutsche Bundesbank, The revision of the euro- area na-
raises the question of whether this group of
tional accounts for 2015, Monthly Report, November 2016,
countries will be able to maintain the brisk pp 16-17.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
18
the fourth quarter is anything to go by. Con-
Aggregate output in the euro area
struction investment, on the other hand, prob-
2010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
ably did not improve by much, seeing as con-
110 struction activity only moved sideways in the
last three months of the year.
108
106 Log scale
GDP1 The fourth quarter of 2017 saw another signifi- Lively foreign
104 cant increase in foreign business. Revenue from trade
102 goods exports to non- euro area countries far
outpaced export prices, producing a significant
100
volume effect. Price- adjusted imports likewise
98 increased again in the fourth quarter, having al-
ready picked up strongly previous to that. Intra-
Lin scale
%
Quarter-on-quarter change euro area trade was similarly upbeat.
+1
0 Industrial activity in the euro area remained Industrial
production
buoyant, with industrial production in the last
–1 buoyant
three months of 2017 expanding by a season-
–2 ally adjusted 1.5% on the quarter and by 4.3%
on the year. Output growth was evident across
–3
a broad range of sectors.
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 2017
Source: Eurostat. 1 Affected by a level shift in Irish GDP from
2015 Q1 onwards. Economic conditions improved for the majority Upturn in GDP
Deutsche Bundesbank of euro area member states. In France, real widespread
across all
fourth quarter GDP was a seasonally adjusted regions
activity was palpable.7 With business and con- 0.6% up on the quarter, following on from a
sumer sentiment persistently upbeat, the 0.5% rise in the summer. Domestic growth was
broadly based economic upswing in the euro mainly spurred by investment activity, while pri-
area looks set to continue. vate consumption posted just modest gains.
France also saw a sharp rise in exports. Com-
Private Private consumption is likely to have risen bined with a moderate upturn in imports, this
consumption
slightly in the fourth quarter. Price and season- depleted the country’s inventory levels signifi-
heading higher
ally adjusted retail sales saw just marginal cantly. Italy’s recovery continued, albeit at no
growth, unlike new motor vehicle registrations, more than a meagre pace, as the country’s real
which were sharply higher. Private consump- GDP rose by 0.3%. Growth is likely to have
tion was propelled by another uptick in con- been bolstered by exports – at least the foreign
sumer confidence, largely on the back of in- trade figures for the October- December period
creased optimism about the economy. The suggest that export activity was buoyant. On a
steady improvement in the labour market will
also have shored up households’ propensity to 7 While it is true that the official Eurostat data point to a
purchase, though the stronger inflation is likely slowdown in euro area capital formation, this is solely the
result of recording certain activities by multinationals in Ire-
to have had a dampening effect. land’s GDP. For instance, Ireland saw substantial investment
in intangible assets during the course of 2016, and this was
reflected by steep increases in gross fixed capital formation
Investment Investment activity probably continued to ac- and imports in the national accounts data on the expend-
up again celerate in the fourth quarter of the year. In- iture side. These developments continued into last year,
albeit to a lesser degree, which is why Irish investment and
vestment in machinery and equipment is likely imports contracted significantly in some instances and in
turn impacted perceptibly on the euro area aggregates.
to have registered respectable gains if the
Invest ment would have risen strongly if Ireland were
strong rise in capital goods output observed in exclude d.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
19
wider scale, however, the Italian economy
Sentiment indicators for the euro area
probably lacked stamina, as the quite consider-
Percentage balances, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
able pace of investment growth registered earl-
ier is likely to have run out of steam and private +20
Business confidence
consumption likewise put in a very lacklustre +15
showing at best. Spain’s rather brisk upswing +10 Services sector
continued at a slightly gentler pace, boosting + 5
GDP in the last three months of the year by 0
0.7% on the quarter. Growth will probably – 5
Manufacturing
have been shored up by both domestic and ex- –10 industry
–15
ternal factors. Broad underlying demand bene-
–20
fited industry, which boosted output levels sig- Construction
–25
nificantly. Aggregate economic developments
–30
remained on an upward path in the other
–35 + 5
member states of the euro area as well, with
Consumer confidence 0
Lithuania, Finland and Cyprus registering very
– 5
strong GDP growth.
–10
–15
Labour market Labour market conditions continued to
continues to –20
brighten up in the fourth quarter as seasonally
improve –25
adjusted unemployment contracted by almost
360,000 on the third quarter and by 1.5 million 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
on the year. The standardised unemployment
Source: European Commission.
rate in December was down at 8.7%, after Deutsche Bundesbank
8.9% in September and 9.7% one year earlier.
Employment data showed that job numbers Germany and the cut in tuition fees in Italy),
rose sharply in the third quarter, climbing by which can be expected to fade over time. An-
2.7 million, or 1.7%, on the year. Wage growth nual headline consumer price inflation was
remained lacklustre, however. The rise in gross static at 1.4%, while the core rate (net of en-
hourly earnings eased slightly to a year-o n- year ergy and food prices) dropped quite substan-
rate of 1.6% in the third quarter, while there tially to 0.9% on the back of flatter growth in
was a simultaneous increase in the average services prices at year-e nd 2017.
number of hours worked per employee. Hourly
employee compensation rose by 1.5% over the Average annual HICP inflation in the euro area 2017 inflation
rate strongly
same period. registered a steep increase last year, climbing
higher at 1.5%
from 0.2% to 1.5% mainly on account of the
Autumn HICP Fourth quarter HICP consumer prices in the sharp rise in energy and food prices. Adjusting
inflation
euro area were a substantial 0.4% up on the this headline rate for these components leaves
unchanged at
1.4%, while quarter, after adjustment for seasonal factors. a core rate of inflation of 1.0%, marginally up
one- off factors,
Noteworthy gains were registered above all by on the previous level of 0.9%. This came mainly
mainly, depress
core rate to energy and food prices, but the prices of non- as a result of brisker services inflation, which
0.9%
energy industrial goods, which are still not re- picked up from 1.1% to 1.4% on average on
sponding to any notable degree to the stronger the year. Prices of (non- energy) industrial
euro, also rose moderately. Services prices, goods, meanwhile, grew at the previous year’s
meanwhile, remained unchanged at the previ- rate of 0.4%, with growth being increasingly
ous quarter’s level due to the dampening im- dispersed across the countries of the euro area.
pact of multiple one-o ff factors (including the In this particular segment, Germany was the
cut in motor vehicle insurance premiums in euro area country which experienced the

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
20
the same pace over the past years in Germany
Consumer prices* in the euro area
as it did in the rest of the euro area.
and in Germany
Year-on-year percentage change
Eurostat’s flash estimate indicates that euro One- off effects
Euro area excluding Germany partly explain
area inflation in January 2018 increased quite
Germany slightly lower
2.1 steeply on the month, rising by a seasonally ad- January rate
HICP excluding energy and food
1.8 justed 0.3%. As in the fourth quarter, this was
1.5 mainly due to energy and food prices, though
1.2 prices of non- energy industrial goods also grew
0.9 markedly at the beginning of the year, while
0.6 services prices rose only marginally. As energy
0.3 and food price inflation had been slightly
stronger still at the beginning of 2017, the an-
0
nual HICP inflation rate eased slightly to 1.3%.
Non-energy industrial goods +1.5
HICP inflation adjusted for energy and food
+1.2
prices, on the other hand, bounced back
+0.9
slightly to 1.0%.
+0.6
+0.3
Leading indicators point to a persistently strong Signs of solid
0 economic
rate of economic growth at the beginning of
–0.3 growth in the
2018, with the Composite Purchasing Man- first quarter
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
agers’ Index rising further in January, the Euro-
Sources: Federal Statistical Office, Eurostat and Bundesbank
calculations. * Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. pean Commission’s indicator of business and
Deutsche Bundesbank consumer sentiment holding out at a high
level, and sentiment indicators in both industry
strongest rate of increase. This pattern has and the services sector running well above their
been in evidence since 2014 across a broad long- term averages, and some even eclipsing
spectrum of durable and non- durable goods. earlier peaks. Factors underpinning the eco-
Accordingly, core inflation in Germany, at 1.3% nomic upswing include the continued favour-
of late, far exceeded the average of the other able funding conditions for businesses and
euro area countries for the fourth year running, households, the steadily improving labour mar-
in a reflection of the different points of the ket situation, high levels of industrial capacity
economic cycle which each country occupies. utilisation, and robust global activity.
Services inflation, meanwhile, ran at roughly

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
21
Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money monetary policy accommodation remains neces-
market developments sary to ensure a sustained return of inflation
rates towards a level of below, but close to,
ECB Governing Based on its economic and monetary analysis, 2%.
Council leaves
the ECB Governing Council decided to keep key
policy rates
unchanged interest rates unchanged in the reporting On 9 February 2018, the Eurosystem held Purchase
volumes still
period. The main refinancing rate thus remains assets in the amount of €1,919.1 billion under
in line with
at 0%, while the marginal lending rate stands the public sector purchase programme (PSPP). announced
target
at 0.25% and the deposit facility rate at The average residual maturity of the PSPP port-
-0.40%. The Governing Council continues to folio fell yet again slightly to 7.7 years from pre-
expect the key interest rates to remain at their viously 7.9 years. The outstanding amounts
present levels for an extended period of time, acquired to date under the third covered bond
and well past the horizon of its net asset pur- purchase programme (CBPP3) and the asset-
chases. Furthermore, as agreed in October backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP)
2017, the Governing Council confirmed that came to €246.1 billion and €25.3 billion re-
purchases under the expanded asset purchase spectively. As for the corporate sector purchase
programme (APP) will be made at the reduced programme (CSPP), asset purchases totalled
monthly pace of €30 billion net until the end of €139.1 billion by 9 February.
September 2018, or beyond, if necessary, and
in any case until the Governing Council sees a
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
consistent with its inflation aim. Redemption
Money market interest rates
amounts will be reinvested alongside the net in the euro area
purchases. The Eurosystem will reinvest the
principal payments from maturing securities for
%
Marginal lending rate
an extended period of time after ending net +0.6
Main refinancing rate
asset purchases, and in any case for as long as Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1
necessary. +0.4 Deposit rate
+0.2
Pace of In the view of the Governing Council, informa-
economic
tion which became available in the reporting
expansion 0
higher than period confirmed that the economy was ex-
expected
panding at a robust pace that had increased
–0.2
more strongly in the second half of 2017 than
expected. The strong cyclical momentum, the –0.4
ongoing reduction of economic slack and in-
Money market risk premium: Basis
creasing capacity utilisation further strength- Euribor-OIS spread 1, 2 points
ened the Governing Council’s confidence that
inflation will converge towards its inflation aim 10
of below, but close to, 2%. However, domestic
0
price pressures remain subdued and the Gov-
erning Council has not yet identified any con- 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
vincing signs of a permanent, self- sustaining Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month Euribor less three-month Eonia swap rate. • Average
upward trend. Overall, the Governing Council 1 to 14 February 2018.
Deutsche Bundesbank
therefore concluded that a high degree of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
22
Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be- was possible only under unattractive condi-
tween 1 November 2017 and 30 January 2018 tions. This category of deposits was also up at
saw another overall increase in euro area the end of 2016, albeit to a lesser degree. Fur-
liquidity needs stemming from autonomous thermore, the seasonal increase in banknotes
factors (see the table below). They averaged in circulation during the observation period,
€1,197.6 billion in the December 2017-January to the tune of €15.4 billion net, contributed to
2018 reserve period, which was €87.6 billion higher liquidity needs. The previous year’s two
more than the average for the September- corresponding reserve maintenance periods
October 2017 reserve period, ie the last one saw the volume of banknotes in circulation
prior to the period under review. At the end of rise by an average of €24.4 billion. By con-
2017, the sum of the autonomous factors trast, the decline in government deposits with
reached a new all- time high of €1,268.7 bil- the Eurosystem provided more liquidity. Com-
lion. A crucial factor behind the higher liquid- pared with the average for the September-
ity needs was the aggregate decline in net October 2017 reserve period, these decreased
foreign assets and other factors, which are by €30.2 billion to €188.1 billion in the
considered together because of liquidity- Decem ber 2017-January 2018 period. The
neutral valuation effects. Combined, they minimum reserve requirement rose across the
fell by €102.4 billion. This very considerable two reserve maintenance periods by a total of
decrease was attributable, in particular, to €1.5 billion, thus additionally increasing the
non-e uro area residents’ higher deposits with calculated liquidity needs.
the Eurosystem. One reason for this could be
the fact that, towards the close of the year, The total outstanding tender volume fell
investing funds in the market was diffi cult or slightly in the period under review. In the
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
2017/2018
1 November 20 December
to to
Item 19 December 30 January
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of c entral bank balances due to changes
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation (increase: –) – 3.8 – 11.6
2 Government deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 29.8 + 0.4
3 Net foreign assets1 – 0.5 + 1.2
4 Other factors1 – 23.7 – 79.4
Total + 1.8 – 89.4
II Monetary policy o perations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refi nancing operations – 3.7 – 0.1
(b) Longer-term refi nancing o perations – 1.6 – 3.1
(c) Other operations + 94.3 + 64.7
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility + 0.0 + 0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 34.4 – 6.7
Total + 54.6 + 54.8
III Change in credit i nstitutions’ c urrent accounts (I + II) + 56.4 – 34.5
IV Change in the m inimum reserve requirement (i ncrease: –) – 0.6 – 0.9
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14• and 15• of the Statistical Section of this Monthly
Report . 1 Including end-of-q uarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
23
Decem ber 2017-January 2018 reserve period,
Central bank interest rates, money
it averaged €764 billion, which was just over
market rates and excess liquidity
€8 billion less than in the September- October
Daily data
2017 reserve period (see the chart on page 25).
Both the main refi nancing operations and the 0% Main refinancing rate
longer- term refi nancing operations contrib- –0.1
Eonia
uted to the slight drop. The volume of main
–0.2 Deposit facility rate
refi nancing operations fell by €3.8 billion in
–0.3
the same period, to an average of just €2.9
–0.4
billion. The increase in demand seen in the
–0.5
fi nal main refi nancing operation of 2017 –0.6 STOXX GC Pooling
Overnight
– which, by way of exception, lasted two
–0.7 ECB basket
weeks and thus coincided with both the ECB EXTended basket
–0.8
Christmas public holidays and the end of the
–0.9
year – was relatively modest at €1.5 billion. Excess Mean value for the reserve € bn
liquidity1 maintenance period 2 2,000
Demand rose to €3.4 billion. The decline in
1,800
the volume of longer- term refi nancing oper-
1,600
ations resulted primarily from early voluntary
1,400
repayments of funds borrowed under the fi rst
0
series of targeted longer- term refi nancing op-
Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb
erations (TLTRO I), with a total of €2.7 billion 2017 2018
being repaid in December 2017 for the second, Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
fourth and sixth TLTRO I operations. This r pe lun st a thc eco du en pt h so itld fi an cg ils ym in 2u Ts t eh e m sti n pi em riu om dre iss pe lr av ye r de q isu i sr te ilm oe nn -t
o it . h la d e l
brought the TLTRO I volume down to just over going.
Deutsche Bundesbank
€13 billion, placing it still further behind the
TLTRO II in terms of magnitude, with the
Eurosystem purchase programmes
latter’s outstanding volume still standing at
around €740 billion (see the chart on page 24). € billion
In the December 2017- January 2018 reserve Change Balance sheet
period, the already low volume of the three- across the holdings as
two reserve at 9 February
month tenders fell slightly against the average Programme periods 2018
for the September- October 2017 reserve period, Active programmes
PSPP + 111.6 1,919.1
dropping by €0.5 billion to €7.8 billion. CBPP3 + 8.1 246.1
CSPP + 15.4 139.1
ABSPP + 0.7 25.3
The Eurosystem continued to provide the bulk
Completed programmes
of central bank liquidity through the monetary SMP 1 + 0.2 85.0
CBPP1 – 0.1 6.0
policy asset purchase programmes (see the CBPP2 – 0.0 4.6
adjacent table). At an average of €2,398
1 Increase due to use of amortised cost accounting at end
billion in the December 2017-January 2018 of quarter.
reserve period, the APP balance sheet hold- Deutsche Bundesbank
ings were up on the average for the
September- October 2017 reserve period by continued to climb in the period under review
approximately €159 billion. Pursuant to the overall, averaging €1,841 billion in the Decem-
decision taken by the ECB Governing Council ber 2017-January 2018 reserve period. How-
in October 2017, January 2018 saw the pace ever, comparing each reserve period average
of net asset purchases under the APP scaled with its respective previous period reveals
back from €60 billion to €30 billion per that excess liquidity increased only in the
month. November- December 2017 reserve period (up
€90 billion), while the December 2017-January
Against the backdrop of asset purchases 2018 reserve period saw a decrease of €29
for monetary policy purposes, excess liquidity billion. This decline was caused by the signifi -

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
24
Liquidity provision and use
+3,500
Purchase
+3,000 programmes 1
Main refinancing
+2,500 operations 3
+2,000 T teh nr dee e- rm 3onth
s
+1,500 First series of
targeted longer-
term refinan-
+1,000 cing operations
(TLTRO I) 3
+ 500
Second series of
targeted longer-
0 term refinan-
cing operations
(TLTRO II)
– 500
Deposit facility 4
–1,000
Current account
holdings in excess
–1,500
of the reserve
requirement
–2,000
July August September October November December January February
2017 2018
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Securities markets programme (SMP), covered bond purchase programmes (CBPP1,
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor purchase programme (CSPP). 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the deposit facility.
3 Volume so small it is hardly visible. 4 The marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank
cantly higher liquidity needs stemming from under review, the reported volumes of un-
autonomous factors, which exceeded the in- secured overnight money continued on a
jection of liquidity from the purchases under downward trend. On the GC Pooling plat-
the APP. form, secured overnight money traded in the
ECB basket at an average of -0.45% in the
With the exception of the year-e nd fi gure and December 2017-January 2018 reserve period,
against the backdrop of high excess liquidity, ie 1 basis point lower than in the previous
overnight rates in the period under review period. Overnight money in the ECB EXTended
continued to move in line with the deposit basket (which contains a larger set of eligible
facility rate (see the chart on page 23). Not- securities) traded at an average of -0.42%,
withstanding a temporary rise, the unsecured which was 2 basis points lower than the de-
overnight rate in the money market (Eonia) posit facility rate. Totalling €5.2 billion and
averaged -0.35% in the November- December €5.8 billion respectively, the associated over-
2017 reserve period, ie 1 basis point higher night turnovers in the ECB and ECB EXTended
than in the subsequent December 2017- January baskets in both reserve maintenance periods
2018 reserve period, when it averaged -0.36%. under review had again risen compared with
At the end of November, Eonia was signifi - the previous observation period, despite low
cantly higher at -0.24% and remained at ele- turnovers at year- end. As in previous years,
vated levels over the following days, too. In the end of the year saw a fall in Eonia turn-
the absence of a general increase in overnight overs, although this time the reference rate
rates, for instance in the secured market, the hardly changed. Also with low turnovers, the
increase in Eonia should be considered in the turn of the year saw considerable declines in
light of the limited number of panel banks the case of secured overnight money, to
and the low turnovers reported. With an aver- -0.76% in the ECB basket and -0.88% in the
age daily turnover of €5.3 billion in the period ECB EXTended basket.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
25
Outstanding liquidity broken down by open market operations in the euro area
€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
3,300
Main refinancing operations
3,000 Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
2,700 Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
2,400 Purchase programmes
2,100
1,800
1,500
1,200
900
600
300
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Upward trend in The upward trend in excess liquidity flattened of between -0.35% and -0.37%. The secured
excess liquidity
slightly in the period under review as a result of overnight rate (STOXX GC Pooling) remained
slows down
the lower purchase volumes under the APP slightly below the deposit facility rate in the
since January 2018. Overall, excess liquidity report ing period. Due to end- of- year effects,
grew by €40 billion to €1,890 billion. This in- the secured overnight rate temporarily saw a
crease continued to be propelled mainly by the substantial drop to -0.76%. By contrast, three-
continued asset purchases, while volumes in month Euribor was largely unchanged through-
the standard tender operations deflated again out the reporting period, standing at -0.33% at
slightly. Bearing in mind the planned purchases last report. Despite the intermediate one- off
under the APP up until September 2018, a fur- effects, money market rates on the whole
ther rise in the level of excess liquidity can be remain at essentially the same level observed
expected. for several months now.
Money market The unsecured overnight rate in the money Forward rates recorded considerable increases Market
rates largely participants
market (Eonia) moved within a range of be- in the reporting period. These were, for the
unchanged on expect first
the whole tween -0.24% and -0.37% in the reporting most part, related to the positive economic policy rate
increases
period, ie above the deposit facility rate of data which became available in December. To
in 2019
-0.40%. At the end of November, Eonia in- some extent, the summary of the monetary
creased perceptibly for a number of days. Given policy meeting of the ECB Governing Council in
that total turnover was very low, this increase December, which was published at the begin-
was probably caused by individual transactions ning of January, contributed to this rise as well.
reported in the Eonia panel. As a consequence, Thus, the markets are currently pricing in an ini-
Eonia a few days later returned to a lower level tial interest rate hike in the first quarter of 2019.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
26
Monetary developments
Monetary aggregates and counterparts
in the euro area in the euro area
Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted In the fourth quarter of 2017, the perceptible Credit growth
M3 and components expansion in the broad monetary aggregate reflected in
monetary
Contribution of components in percentage points
+8 M3 continued on balance, with a 4.6% annual dynamics
M3 – M2
M2 – M1 growth rate at the end of the quarter, ie only
+6 M1 slightly below the level observed since April
Percentage growth
in M3 2015. The sustained expansion of the money
+4
stock continued to be shaped by the money-
holding sector’s strong preference for over-
+2
night deposits against the backdrop of low op-
portunity costs. Of the counterparts, MFI lend-
0
ing to non- banks in the euro area – including
–2 by the Eurosystem – was once again the main
M3 and counterparts driver of monetary growth. On the one hand,
C ino pn etr ri cb eu nt tio agn o pf oc io nu tsnterparts +12
e monetary growth was supported by the Euro-
Remaining counterparts system’s continued purchases of bonds issued
Securities-based lending to +10
general government by general government and private non- banks.
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
On the other hand, in the context of the still
Net external assets + 8
Credit to the private sector 2 very low interest rate setting and the econo-
Percentage growth in M3 + 6 my’s broad- based growth path, bank loans to
private non- banks, in particular, continued their
+ 4 upward trajectory; the picture for the year
shows that their contribution to the M3 growth
+ 2
rate in the reporting quarter exceeded that of
loans to general government for the first time
0
since 2011. The positive development in lend-
ing is also reflected in the assessments of the
– 2
banks surveyed as part of the Bank Lending
– 4 Survey (BLS). Thus, against the backdrop of vir-
tually unchanged or only slightly changed
+8 of which
credit standards, the growth of loans to enter-
Loans to selected sectors
prises and households was primarily fuelled by
Contribution of sectors in percentage points
+6
Financial corporations 3 a lively demand for credit.
Non-financial corporations
+4 Households 4
Given the persistently low yield spread between Overnight
+2 P toe r tc he en pta rg ive a tc eh a sen cg te o ri n 2 loans long- term government bonds and monetary d de op mo insi ats n s t t fi oll rce
components, money holdings remained at- behind M3
0 tractive in the period under review, especially growth
for risk- averse investors. In this setting, monet-
–2
ary growth in the reporting quarter was again
characterised by strong inflows in overnight
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
deposits , received, in particular, from house-
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se,
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se- holds but also from financial and non- financial
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial corporations. The shifts within the monetary
corporations. 4 Including non-profit institutions serving house-
holds. aggregate M3 from short- term time deposits to
Deutsche Bundesbank
short- term savings and, in particular, to over-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
27
Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Assets 2017 Q4 2017 Q3 Liabilities 2017 Q4 2017 Q3
Credit to private non-MFIs Holdings against central government2 – 9.5 64.9
in the euro area 82.5 77.3
Loans 64.6 78.9 Monetary aggregate M3 91.5 163.9
Loans, adjusted1 81.6 86.7 of which Components
Securities 17.9 – 1.7 Currency in circulation and
overnight deposits (M1) 114.4 166.9
Credit to general government Other short-term deposits
in the euro area 88.9 88.7 (M2-M1) – 11.2 – 21.7
Loans – 16.3 – 10.8 Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 11.8 18.6
Securities 105.1 99.6
Longer-term fi nancial liabilities – 32.9 – 20.0
of which
Net external assets – 73.1 24.1 Capital and reserves 0.2 34.7
Other longer-term fi nancial
Other counterparts of M3 – 49.1 18.7 liabilities – 33.1 – 54.8
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
night deposits continued. Given the low level solid economic growth is broad- based across
of interest rate spreads between these types of member states and sectors, lending rates in the
deposit, the incentives for building up time de- euro area as a whole remain close to historical
posits are currently low. lows and the business of lending to corporate
customers is highly competitive.
Lending to Monetary growth in the fourth quarter was
private non-
again mainly supported by MFI lending to non- This is consistent with the fact that the banks According to
banks again
BLS, demand
key driver of banks in the euro area. A key driver of this de- surveyed in the BLS perceived a considerable
for credit
monetary
velopment were once again the loans to pri- rise in the demand for credit by non- financial increasingly
growth
fuelled by
vate non- banks adjusted for securitisation and corporations in the fourth quarter of 2017,
funding needs
other one- off effects; in the reporting quarter, which meant that credit demand was even for fixed
investment
the annual growth rate of these loans recorded somewhat more dynamic than in the preceding
a further slight increase to 2.8%. Consequently, quarters. The credit institutions attributed these
the gap narrowed further between monetary gains, above all, to greater funding needs for
growth and loan growth in the euro area, hav- fixed invest ment. However, demand- boosting
ing widened in 2011 and 2012 as a result of impulses also stemmed from the low general
weak loan dynamics in parts of the currency interest rate level and the financing needs for
union. inventories and working capital as well as for
mergers, acquisitions and corporate restructur-
Significant rise The largest contribution to loan growth came ing. By contrast, enterprises’ scope for internal
in lending to
from lending to non- financial corporations in financing, per se, had a stifling effect on de-
non- financial
corporations the euro area regaining momentum in the mand. No headwinds were caused by lending
fourth quarter. Medium and long- term loans policies in the reporting quarter. The surveyed
again recorded the most significant gains. Ad- institutions left their credit standards for lend-
justed for securitisation and other one- off ing to enterprises unchanged on balance and
effects , the annual growth rate of loans to continued to ease their credit terms and condi-
non- financial corporations climbed from 2.4% tions, as previously reported in the preceding
at the end of September to 2.9% at the end of months.
December. The ongoing expansion in loans to
enterprises reflects the continued favourable More so than in the preceding quarters, the
underlying conditions in the euro area; the growth of loans to non- financial corporations

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
28
Spain. The slower pace of internal financing
Selected components of the external
could explain why the growth of loans to non-
financing of non-financial corporations
in the four large euro area countries financial corporations in Germany recently re-
bounded.
€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Net sales of debt securities
Loans granted by domestic MFIs1 In addition, since the announcement of the Higher net
+40 Germany sales of debt
CSPP in March 2016, net issuance of debt
securities of
+20
secur ities by non- financial corporations has late, especially
0 picked up in the euro area as a whole. This is in Italy and
CSPP Spain
–20 announcement 2 especially true of France, the Netherlands and,
France to a lesser extent, of Italy and Spain (see the
+60
adjacent chart). In France, however, net issu-
+40
ance by enterprises which were previously
+20
highly active in the capital market weakened
0
noticeably at the end of the reporting period.
Italy
+20 By contrast, net issuance of debt securities by
0 non- financial corporations in Italy and Spain
accelerated in recent quarters, which meant
–20
that their volumes even exceeded net inflows
–40
in corresponding loans. Conversely, growth in
–60
net issuance in Germany was perceptibly lower
Spain +20 than the net increase in loans to enterprises.
0 Projections drawn up ex post regarding the
–20 CSPP period provide no indication of any mark-
–40 edly dampening effects on German loan
growth stemming from the purchase pro-
–60
gramme.
–80
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Loans to households continued on their steady Loans to
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Adjusted for loan households
sales and securitisation. 2 The vertical line depicts the ECB Gov- growth path and were thus the second major
– especially
erning Council’s announcement of the corporate sector pur-
chase programme (CSPP) on 10 March 2016. mainstay of credit to the euro area private sec- for house
Deutsche Bundesbank tor in the fourth quarter. The largest contribu- purchase –
providing further
tions came from banks in Germany and France, support to
lending growth
Internal in the euro area in the reporting quarter was followed by Italy. Drivers of growth in the euro
financing
driven by positive impetus not only from France area as a whole were once again loans for
particularly
relevant in Spain and Germany, but also from Italy and a number house purchase, the annual growth rate of
and Germany
of smaller core euro area countries; muted which stood at 3.3% at the end of the year;
positive contributions emanated from Spain. this was roughly the same level as in the two
Country- specific differences in the demand for preceding quarters. According to the banks
loans to enterprises can, in part, be explained surveyed in the BLS, household demand for
by the varying degrees of relevance of alterna- loans for house purchase rose again in the
tive sources of funding.1 In Germany and Spain, fourth quarter. At the same time, the pace of
for instance, internal financing of non-fi nancial growth continued to slow compared with the
enterprises has risen considerably as a result of previous quarters. Viewed in isolation, the posi-
the favourable development in gross value
added since the financial and economic crisis;
but whereas internal financing declined in Ger- 1 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Developments in corpor-
ate financing in the euro area since the financial and eco-
many of late, it remained at a high level in nomic crisis, Monthly Report, January 2018, pp 53-71.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
29
tive outlook on the housing market and antici-
Securities-based lending* to private
pated price changes supported demand just as
non-banks in the euro area
much as robust consumer confidence and the
€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
low general interest rate level. Demand- curbing
Extended by the MFI sector as a whole
effects mainly resulted from households’ use of +250 of which
Eurosystem
their own savings to help fund house pur-
MFIs excluding the Eurosystem: debt securities
chases. On balance, credit standards in this +200 MFIs excluding the Eurosystem: equities1
segment were eased slightly.
+150
Continued Consumer credit showed further substantial +100
steep growth in
growth in the reporting period, probably re-
consumer credit
flecting the ongoing expansionary underlying + 50
trend in private consumption. This is consistent
0
with the fact that households’ need for con-
sumer credit recorded another marked increase
– 50
in the fourth quarter of 2017, according to the
CSPP
results of the BLS. Respondents put the higher –100 announcement 2
demand down to stable consumer confidence,
the low general level of interest rates and the –150
high propensity to purchase. On balance, credit 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
standards in this segment remained virtually Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Eurosystem: debt
securities only; other MFIs: debt securities and equities.
unchanged. 1 Shares and other equities. 2 The vertical line depicts the ECB
Governing Council’s announcement of the corporate sector
purchase programme (CSPP) on 10 March 2016.
Securities- based MFIs noticeably expanded their securities- Deutsche Bundesbank
lending to
based lending to the private sector from Octo-
private sector
records net ber to December, thus also making a positive longer- term time deposits and savings deposits
inflows
contribution to monetary growth. This expan- as well as longer- term bank debt securities. It is
sion was supported, in particular, by the on- likely that this was largely encouraged by the
going Eurosystem purchases of debt securities interest rate levels and the persistently high
issued by private non- banks under the APP. In inflows of funds to short- term deposits.
net terms, other MFIs continued to buy shares
issued by private enterprises in the reporting The previously observed upward trend in the Net external
asset position
quarter while at the same time reducing their net external asset position of the MFI sector did
dampening M3
net holdings of debt securities issued by the not continue in the reporting period. Instead, growth
private sector (see the adjacent chart). the fourth quarter saw further substantial out-
Securities- based lending to general govern- flows of funds to non- euro area countries,
ment was also strongly influenced in the last which curbed monetary growth per se. The
quarter of 2017 by the Eurosystem purchases balance of payments data available so far for
under the APP and contributed significantly to October and November 2017 suggest that this
monetary growth. Other MFIs, by contrast, fur- can be attributed to euro area investors’ exten-
ther reduced their holdings on balance. sive net purchases of foreign securities, espe-
cially longer- term bonds issued by the non-M FI
Further net The supportive impact of longer-t erm financial private sector. This development was aided by
outflows from
liabilities vis- à- vis other euro area residents on the persistently negative yield spread for the
longer- term
financial the money supply, which has been observed euro area relative to most other economic
liabilities due to
since the end of 2011, also continued in the areas. On balance, the resulting outflows from
interest rate
levels quarter under review. The money- holding sec- portfolio transactions outweighed the con-
tor again significantly reduced its stock of tinued marked interest of non-r esident invest-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
30
net outflows. From a sectoral perspective,
Interest rates on bank deposits
in Germany* households once again made the greatest con-
tribution to the sustained build-u p of overnight
% pa, monthly data
deposits, although this growth again slowed
Time deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
... up to 2 years slightly on the quarter. Overall, the investment
... over 2 years
behaviour of households – despite signs of a
5 Overall volume1
small increase in yield awareness – was still
Savings deposits redeemable
4 at notice of ... characterised by a preference for highly liquid
... up to 3 months
... over 3 months and less risky investment forms, however.
3
At the same time, non- financial corporations Further build- up
2 of non- financial
markedly stocked up their holdings of over-
corporations’
1 night deposits, despite the fact that interest bank deposits
rates had fallen further. In addition, the enter-
Overnight deposits
0 prises included in this sector showed greater
New business2 interest in long- term time deposits in the re-
4
porting quarter, as they had also done in the
preceding months. This development is likely to
3
be attributable to the now negative average
2 interest rates on short-t erm bank deposits and
other safe forms of investment, amongst other
1
things. The sustained increase in this sector’s
bank deposits was also assisted by the fact that
0
non- financial corporations in Germany were
2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 2017 still generating high surpluses.
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for Furthermore, for the first time in around four Investment
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new behaviour within
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac- years, a positive contribution from financial
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume- the financial
weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike corporations characterised domestic banks’ de- corporate sector
the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the ba- remains very
lance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi- posit business in the reporting quarter. How-
heterogeneous
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-
ever, the investment behaviour of the individual
plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank financial market players remained heteroge-
neous in the fourth quarter: whilst insurers and
ors in euro area equities and investment fund pension funds continued to reduce both their
shares and the high current account surpluses. long- term and – to a lesser extent – their short-
term deposits, other financial corporations built
up their bank deposits further.
German banks’ deposit
and lending business with German banks’ lending to the domestic non- Further
expansion in
bank sector rose markedly again in the fourth
domestic customers lending to
quarter of 2017. As in the preceding eight quar- domestic
non- banks
Build- up of German banks’ deposit business with domestic ters, loans to general government were the
households’
customers recorded another distinct increase in sole exception here. In view of the very favour-
overnight
deposits still the final quarter of 2017. Given the low interest able budgetary situation overall, this is likely to
dominating
rates and the flat yield curve (see the chart reflect, not least, the public sector’s low finan-
deposit growth
above), the ongoing build- up of overnight de- cing needs. By contrast, loans to the domestic
posits, which began in autumn 2008, con- private sector saw distinct growth again. In
tinued whilst all other deposit types recorded addition, banks in Germany markedly increased

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
31
their holdings of securities issued by the private
Lending and deposits of monetary
sector once more, acquiring mainly shares and
fi nancial institutions in Germany*
other variable-y ield securities.
Loans to Loans to households again recorded the largest
households
net inflows in loans to the private sector, closely
still driven by
housing followed by non- financial corporations. Once
loans, …
more, loans for house purchase were a decisive
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl ows, end-of-quarter data,
driver of households’ ongoing brisk demand seasonally adjusted
for bank loans, growing at a similarly strong 2017
rate in the reporting quarter as in the preceding Item Q3 Q4
quarters. On balance, the year-o n- year growth Deposits of domestic non-MFIs1
rate of this credit segment remained un- Overnight 23.2 30.7
With an agreed maturity of
changed again at 3.9%. It was thus the fourth up to 2 years – 5.0 – 7.8
consecutive quarter that this rate moved side- over 2 years – 2.2 – 1.7
Redeemable at notice of
ways.
up to 3 months 0.4 – 0.1
over 3 months – 2.1 – 2.5
… aided by low In addition to the extremely favourable income Lending
borrowing costs to domestic general government
and asset situation of households in Germany,
and by favour- Loans – 7.5 – 1.4
able income and the continued high demand for housing loans Securities – 5.1 – 6.9
asset situation to domestic enterprises and
in the quarter under review was also spurred
households
on by the still exceptionally supportive finan- Loans2 26.1 22.6
of which to households3 12.3 12.6
cing conditions. According to the MFI interest
to non-fi nancial
rate statistics, the interest rate on long- term corporations4 11.0 9.6
loans for house purchase was 1.9% at the end Securities 2.1 5.4
of the fourth quarter, thus remaining close to * As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but
the trough it reached in September 2016. excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi nancial institutions
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
The results of the latest BLS provide evidence of prises, households and general government excluding central
government. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
further factors influencing these developments.
cluding non-profi t institutions serving households. 4 Non-
For instance, in addition to the low general fi nancial corporations and quasi-c orporations.
level of interest rates, the respondent banks in- Deutsche Bundesbank
dicated that good prospects for the housing
market and robust consumer confidence per se slightly in net terms. After the expansionary ad-
were also having an expansionary effect on de- justments to the standards in the first and third
mand. This impact was neutralised on balance, quarters, this was the third time credit stand-
however, by influences stifling demand, such as ards were loosened in the past year. However,
households’ increased use of their own sav- neither the scale of these adjustments nor the
ings, banks having lost market share to com- proportion of banks in the sample easing their
petitors, lower funding needs for refinancing, standards suggests that the standards were
restructuring and renegotiation purposes, and reduced across the board. For the first quarter
more restrictive legal and tax conditions in the of 2018, the surveyed banks do not expect any
housing market. further changes to credit standards.
No restrictive According to the BLS, banks’ lending policies Unlike for housing loans, growth in consumer Fresh inflows for
stimulus from consumer credit
provided no restrictive stimulus during the re- credit accelerated markedly over the course of
lending policies
porting period. In fact, credit standards for 2017, although the banks surveyed in the BLS
loans to households for house purchase eased reported more subdued loan demand growth

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
32
Loans* by German banks to the domestic upturn in the German economy, domestic enter- Another distinct
increase in
prises once again showed great interest in bank
private non-financial sector lending to
loans during the quarter under review. With an non- financial
Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data,
seasonally adjusted annual growth rate of 4.3% at the end of the corporations
with unchanged
+5 Non-financial corporations1 quarter, the growth momentum in this credit credit
standards …
Maturity contributions in percentage points segment is now distinctly higher than in the
+4 Up to 1 year
More than 1 year and case of loans to households, which grew by
up to 5 years
+3 More than 5 years 3.2% last year.
Total percentage
+2 growth rate In terms of maturities, non- financial corpor- … and greater
preference for
+1 ations continued to show a preference for
longer- term
long- term loans in the reporting quarter. Be- loans
0
sides the exceptionally low interest rates, Ger-
man enterprises’ interest in long- term loan
–1
contracts can probably also be explained by the
–2
strong sentiment and enterprises’ upbeat busi-
ness expectations. The latest BLS results under-
–3
pin this assessment: according to the surveyed
Households2
+5
bank managers, the high level of funds needed
Loan contributions in percentage points
Other lending +4 for fixed investment was decisive for the in-
Consumer credit
crease in demand for bank loans while, when
Loans for house purchase
+3 viewed in isolation, enterprises’ use of internal
Total percentage
growth rate
financing was the main factor dampening de-
+2
mand.
+1
Banks’ lending policies also supported enter-
0
prises’ demand for bank loans in the reporting
–1 quarter. Whereas credit standards remained
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 broadly unchanged, on balance, according to
* Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 1 Non-financial the responses provided by the banks surveyed
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
in the BLS, banks eased the credit terms and
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank conditions agreed in the loan contracts mark-
edly on the whole, although the easing only
in this segment. Compared with the dynamic related to the margins on average-r isk loans.
developments of the three preceding quarters,
for example, the respondent banks reported The BLS conducted in January contained add- German banks
increase
marginal growth in demand for the fourth itional questions on banks’ funding conditions
risk- weighted
quarter of 2017. As in the past, the banks and on the impact on banks’ lending policies of assets and
strengthen their
mainly attributed the rise in demand to house- the new regulatory and supervisory activities
capital position
holds’ stable propensity to purchase, robust relating to requirements for capital adequacy,
consumer confidence and the low general leverage ceilings, liquidity and loss provision-
interest rate level. On balance, credit standards ing. The German banks reported that, given
in this segment remained unchanged in the the situation in the financial markets, their
report ing quarter. funding situation showed little change overall
compared with the preceding quarter. With re-
Growth in German banks’ lending business was gard to the new regulatory and supervisory ac-
largely supported by loans to non-fi nancial cor- tivities, the respondents reported – for the first
porations. In line with the persistently strong time since the ad hoc question was introduced

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
33
Banking conditions in Germany
Credit to non-financial corporations Credit to households1
% Bank interest rates for loans to enterprises2... Bank interest rates for consumer credit2... %
pa pa
... with an initial rate fixation of 9.5
up to one year ...
4.5 ... with an initial rate fixation of 9.0
... up to €1 million over five years
4.0 8.5
3.5 8.0
3.0 7.5
2.5 7.0
2.0 6.5
... with an initial rate fixation of
1.5 over one year and up to five years 6.0
1.0 5.5
0.5 5.0
... with an initial rate fixation of 4.5
over five years ...
4.0
... over €1 million
5.0 3.5
4.5 3.0
Bank interest rates
4.0 2.5
on loans for house
purchase2
3.5 2.0
with an initial rate
fixation of over ten years
3.0 1.5
... up to
2.5 €1 million Change in credit standards3 for ... %
... consumer credit +30
2.0
0
1.5
4
–30
1.0
%
Change in credit standards3 ... loans for house purchase +30
for loans to enterprises
% 0
4
+30 Change in margins3 for ... –30
0 ... consumer credit %
4
–30 Riskier loans +30
Change in margins3
% for loans to enterprises 0
+60 –30
Riskier loans Average loans
+30 ... loans for house purchase %
0 Riskier loans +30
–30 0
Average loans
–60 Average loans –30
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2018
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until
May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June
2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is
calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 3 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the
number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins:
difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of re-
spondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 4 Expectations for
2018 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
34
in 2011 – having increased their risk- weighted ticularly as a result of the rise in average- risk
assets slightly on balance in the wake of the loans. In addition, credit institutions strength-
new regulatory and supervisory activi ties, par- ened their capital position again.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
35
Financial markets
Financial market setting rising yields prompted a noticeable stock mar-
ket correction, forcing the European markets to
Economic Favourable economic conditions, US fiscal pol- surrender all their gains and end the period
conditions and
icy and monetary policy on both sides of the with net losses. On the foreign exchange mar-
monetary policy
stance the main Atlantic shaped events on international finan- kets, there were perceptible shifts in exchange
drivers on
cial markets in the fourth quarter of 2017 and rates to the detriment of the US dollar and to
the financial
markets at the beginning of the new year. Yields on the benefit of the euro as of the fourth quarter
sovereign bonds were initially mixed. One rea- of 2017.
son for this was the differing monetary policy
stances in the euro area and the United States.
For example, yields in the euro area initially Exchange rates
came under pressure as the expectation on the
market increasingly took hold that the ECB Gov- The foreign exchange markets were character- US dollar weak
on the foreign
erning Council would, at its meeting at the end ised, particularly in the new year, by a broad-
exchange
of October 2017, decide to continue the asset based weakness of the US dollar and increased, markets
purchase programme beyond 2017. At the but still comparatively low, implied exchange
same time, the US Federal Open Market Com- rate volatility. As of the end of October, the US
mittee (FOMC) continued its gradual tightening dollar continued the downward slide it had
of monetary policy and raised its key interest begun in January 2017, albeit with intermittent
rate at its December meeting, in line with ex- interruptions. As a result, it lost 9.3% in value
pectations. Consequently, the yield spread be- on a weighted average against 56 trading part-
tween ten- year US Treasuries and German Fed- ners compared to the beginning of 2017. It re-
eral bonds (Bunds) with the same maturity corded significant losses against European cur-
widened perceptibly. Yields then rose sharply rencies, in particular, falling against the euro
worldwide as of mid- December, with stimulus (-15.6%) and against the pound sterling
being provided, amongst other things, by the (-12.6%), for instance, but also against the yen
tax reform in the United States (Tax Cuts and (-9.0%). By contrast, the euro appreciated on a
Jobs Act), which was passed before the end of weighted average over the reporting period as
the year. Furthermore, it became clear that the of September – driven mainly by gains against
economic upswing was maintaining its great the US dollar – but was also up on its level at
momentum not only in the euro area and the the beginning of 2017. This happened against
United States, but around the world. Not least the backdrop of surprisingly buoyant economic
in light of market expectations of a less expan- activity in the euro area.
sionary monetary policy stance in the two
major currency areas and higher term pre- The euro appreciated perceptibly against the Euro up
markedly
miums, the yields on ten-y ear US Treasuries and US dollar during November following the pub-
against the
German Bunds rose significantly to 2.9% and lication of a series of surprisingly strong domes- US dollar
0.7% respectively. On the international stock tic economic data. Economic growth and con-
markets, the aforementioned factors were re- sumer confidence in Germany, for example, as
flected in higher profit expectations and a well as a purchasing managers’ index for the
greater appetite for risk amongst investors, euro area, were all unexpectedly favourable. In
causing stock prices to rise – in some cases, addition, the Ifo business climate index of the
considerably – and new interim highs to be German economy rose unexpectedly to a new
reached in both Germany and the United all- time high. At the end of the month, how-
States. At the beginning of February, however, ever, the euro surrendered some of its gains

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
36
against the US dollar, after the index for con-
Exchange rate of the euro
sumer sentiment in the US rose surprisingly
Daily data, log scale
strongly to reach its highest level in 17 years.
against the ... US $
The Senate’s consent to the tax reform in the
... US dollar 1.25 United States and the associated expectations
Launch exchange rate: 1.20 of a fiscal stimulus subsequently gave the US
US $ 1.1789 1 dollar an additional boost.
1.15
1.10
However, following the mid-D ecember monet-
1.05 ary policy meeting of the Federal Reserve, the
¥
mood reversed again in favour of the single
140 ... yen
currency after the Fed, in line with expect-
135 Launch exchange rate:
ations, decided to increase key interest rates
¥ 133.73 1
130
and signalled that it would stick to the path of
125 moderately raising interest rates. In light of the
120 favourable growth prospects for the euro area,
the euro subsequently started to appreciate
115
once again. Its appreciation intensified in mid-
110 £
January, after the account of the most recent
0.95 meeting of the ECB Governing Council indi-
... pound sterling
cated that the latter might deliberate on an ad-
0.90
justment to monetary policy communication
0.85 early this year. In addition, in the subsequent
period, a looming budget freeze in the United
0.80 States contributed to the depreciation of the
US dollar. Furthermore, at times there was an
0.75 impression on the markets that the US Admin-
Launch exchange rate: £0.7111 1 istration supported the weakness of the US
0.70 dollar. As this report went to press, the euro
Nominal effective exchange rate ... stood at US$1.25, which was up 5.8% on its
1999 Q1 = 100 level at the end of September 2017 and its
105
Launch exchange rate: 103.12 1 highest level since December 2014.
100
... of the euro 2
95 Supported by the above-m entioned favourable By contrast,
substantial gains
economic outlook for the euro area, on the
against the yen
90 one hand, and the prospect of a continued ex- only temporary
Memo item pansionary monetary policy of the Bank of
... of the US dollar 3 95
Japan, on the other, the euro also appreciated
against the yen as of the third week of Novem-
90
ber 2017. After the announcement of Japan’s
85 central bank that it had purchased fewer par-
ticularly long- dated government bonds, the
80
euro temporarily lost some of the ground it had
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M
previously gained against the yen. However, at
2016 2017 2018
the start of February it reached its highest level
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur- since August 2015, trading at ¥137. In the wake
rencies of 19 countries. 3 As calculated by the Bundesbank
against the currencies of 19 countries. of the marked correction on the global equity
Deutsche Bundesbank
markets in the first week of February and the

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
37
ensuing rise in uncertainty on the financial mar-
Yields* in the euro area and
kets, the yen appreciated on a broad basis. As
selected countries
this report went to press, the euro was trading
% pa, weekly averages
at ¥133, which was 0.2% above its value at the
+3.0
start of the reporting period.
+2.7 United States
Slight Despite notable variability, the euro traded
+2.4
appreciation
against the pound sterling during the reporting
against the
pound sterling period without any clearly discernible trend. +2.1
Fluctuations of the euro- pound sterling rate
+1.8
were influenced primarily by the developments
United
surrounding the planned withdrawal of the +1.5 Kingdom
United Kingdom from the European Union +1.2
(EU). After London and Brussels agreed, in prin-
+0.9
ciple, at the end of November on the financial Euro area
consequences of a withdrawal, the euro came +0.6 Germany
under downward pressure against the pound
+0.3
sterling. Subsequently, however, the uncer-
tainty over the outcome of the EU exit negoti- 0
Japan
ations increased once more and the euro made
–0.3
good on a large part of the previous losses. In
2016 2017 2018
mid- January, the pound sterling appreciated
Source: Thomson Reuters. * Government bonds with a residual
significantly on a broad basis after the publica-
maturity of ten years.
tion of unexpectedly favourable data on the Deutsche Bundesbank
British labour market and mounting signs that
economic growth in the UK had been higher
than expected in the fourth quarter of 2017. As Securities markets and
this report went to press, the euro stood at portfolio transactions
£0.89, up 0.5% on its level at the end of Sep-
tember. Yields on government bonds have risen sharply Economic
activity and
around the world on balance since the end of
monetary policy
Euro Measured against the currencies of 19 major September 2017. This is mainly due to the fact push yields
appreciated in higher
trading partners, the euro appreciated by 1.3% that the recovery has become more broadly
effective terms globally …
compared to the end of September. The based around the globe. The cyclical improve-
marked gains, particularly against the US dollar, ment contributed to the expectation among
contrasted with losses against some central market participants that key central banks
European currencies, for example, such as the would raise rates earlier than previously antici-
Polish zloty (-3.5%) and the Czech koruna pated. Furthermore, term premiums, which
(-2.4%). The price competitiveness of euro area compensate for the willingness to accept se-
suppliers deteriorated somewhat as a result of curities for a longer period, have also increased
the euro’s appreciation, but in the context of sharply since mid- December.
the long- term average their competitive pos-
ition can currently continue to be regarded as However, yields in the euro area fell initially and … and also in
the euro area
neutral. continued to do so well into December. This
was partly due to the decision of the ECB Gov-
erning Council in October to continue the asset
purchase programme and to purchase €30 bil-
lion worth of securities per month as of January

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
38
cators exceeded expectations – the focus
Yield curve on the German bond market*
shifted back to the positive economic trend.
%
The account of the ECB Governing Council’s
+0.8
monetary policy meeting in December, which
+0.6
15 February 2018 was published on 11 January 2018, partly con-
+0.4
tributed to this. Some market participants saw
+0.2
this as a surprisingly positive economic assess-
0
ment by the ECB Governing Council. As a re-
–0.2 29 September 2017
sult, they assumed that the Eurosystem could
–0.4
potentially normalise monetary policy some-
–0.6
what faster than previously expected. On bal-
–0.8
ance, the GDP-w eighted yield on ten-y ear gov-
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Residual maturity in years ernment bonds in the euro area rose to 1.2%,
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds (Svensson up 15 basis points since the end of September.
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank Yields on Federal bonds (Bunds) rose even Continuing
rise in Bund
more sharply, up 35 basis points to 0.7%. This
Spreads of ten-year government bonds
yields …
over German Federal bonds is the highest level reached since 2015, when,
during the so- called “Bund tantrum”, interest
Basis points, daily data
rates rose in several stages to nearly 1.0% for a
1,200 Greece
while. However, unlike then, this time the rise
1,100 in interest rates was attributable to the funda-
mentally improved economic outlook.
1,000
900
As a result of the aforementioned factors, the … causing the
800 yield curve derived from yields on Federal se- entire yield
curve to steepen
curities shifted upwards and steepened slightly.
700
The spread between ten- year and two- year
600 Portugal
bonds stood at 135 basis points as this report
Italy
500 Spain went to press and was thus 16 basis points
Ireland
France higher than at the end of September. Yields
400
with a residual maturity of five years are in
300
positive territory again for the first time since
200 September 2015. The scarcity premiums on
Federal securities, as measured, for example, by
100
the yield spread between EONIA swaps and
0
bonds of an equivalent maturity, declined over
2016 2017 2018 the reporting period, particularly in the short-
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. term segment.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Yield spreads between ten- year Bunds and Decline in risk
premiums for
2018 until at least the end of September 2018. government bonds of the other euro area
euro area
Although the decision itself did not have any countries fell during the reporting period by 21 government
bonds
discernible impact on the markets, prior to the basis points to 65 basis points (in the GDP-
meeting the clear signals from the ECB that it weighted average). They therefore reached
would further loosen monetary policy did tem- their lowest level since the beginning of 2010.
porarily place yields under pressure. At the end Yields on the bonds of individual euro area
of the year, however – after a number of indi- countries put in a mixed performance. While

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
39
yields on government bonds of the highest
Repo rate and yield on short-dated
credit quality, in particular, rose considerably,
Federal securities
yields fell in some countries with weaker credit
% pa, daily data
ratings. This was partly due to the generally
0
good economic situation, which reduced the
risk of default on the whole. Furthermore, –1
country- specific factors also played a role. For
Repo rate 1
–2
example, Portuguese and Spanish government Two-year
yield 2
bonds benefited from rating upgrades by one –3 Memo item
Deposit
rating agency. facility rate
–4
Year- end effects Year- end effects were once again observed on –5
on repo market
the market for overnight credit secured by 2016 2017 2018
short- lived
European government bonds (repo market). 1 Money market rate for overnight credit secured by German
government bonds. Source: repofundsrate.com. 2 Yield on a
On and around the balance sheet date, the
two-year zero-coupon bond from the German yield curve.
(negative) money market rate (repo rate) and Deutsche Bundesbank
the volume of secured overnight credit de-
creased significantly. Some providers of collat- based measures of inflation expectations were
eral clearly refrained from extending such loans converging again as a result of rising term pre-
beyond the end of the year. Regulatory reasons miums. The probability of deflation over the
are likely to be one of the main motivations for next five years based on options data declined
this, as scaling back repo transactions leads to further, sinking to a new multi- year low of
a smaller balance sheet on the part of the pro- below 5% for a while.
vider of the collateral. These year- end effects
were, however, of a very temporary nature and European enterprises’ financing conditions re- European
corporate bond
did not have a lasting impact on the repo mar- main favourable. Yields on BBB- rated European
yields virtually
ket itself or on the government bond markets. corporate bonds with a maturity of seven to unchanged
Ultimately, the Eurosystem’s securities lending ten years rose by 10 basis points on balance
facilities are likely to also have contributed to compared to the end of September. Whereas
this. the yields on bonds issued by financial corpor-
ations remained virtually unchanged, bonds is-
Recovery of Market- based inflation expectations for the sued by non- financial corporations recorded an
market- based
next few years in the euro area continued the increase of 13 basis points, delivering a yield of
inflation
expectations in moderate upward trend begun in the second 1.6% as this report went to press. Given the
the euro area
quarter of 2017 across all horizons. The five- increase in government bond yields, yield
continues
year forward inflation rates in five years derived spreads in the corporate sector over safe Fed-
from inflation swaps rose to 1.8%, which was eral bonds fell by 31 and 19 basis points re-
12 basis points higher than at the end of Sep- spectively for financial and non- financial cor-
tember 2017. The average inflation expect- porations. The yield spreads in both corporate
ations for the euro area six to ten years ahead, sectors were therefore at levels not seen since
as computed by Consensus Economics on the before the onset of the financial crisis in July
basis of surveys, remained stable at 1.9%. 2007. This development is probably partially at-
When interpreting this discrepancy, it is neces- tributable to the continued highly accommoda-
sary to bear in mind the possible liquidity and tive monetary policy for the euro area, of which
inflation risk premiums that influence market- the corporate sector purchase programme is a
based measures and reduce their informative part. Furthermore, the positive economic situ-
value in economic terms. However, as this re- ation is contributing to a reduction in default
port went to press, market-b ased and survey- risk.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
40
On balance, the interest rate differential be-
Forward inflation rates and expectations
tween the United States and the euro area
in the euro area
widened further. The yield spread between ten-
year US Treasuries and German Bunds with the
% Consensus inflation expectations
in six to ten years same maturity stood at 217 basis points as this
2.0
report went to press, placing it in the upper 2%
1.8 quantile of a long-t erm comparison since 1999.
1.6
1.4 As a result of the interest rate linkage between Yields in Japan
and the United
the major currency areas, interest rates in the
1.2 Five-year forward inflation rate Kingdom
in five years based on swaps 1 United Kingdom also increased substantially. As
2016 2017 2018 this report went to press, ten- year gilts yielded
Sources: Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics and Bundes- 1.7%, up 28 basis points compared to the end
bank calculations. 1 Derived from the fixed cash flow arising
from inflation swaps which is swapped for the actual annual of September. In Japan, by contrast, the bond
inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco) realised over the next
market remains virtually sealed off from inter-
five or ten years. Weekly averages.
Deutsche Bundesbank national developments. Here, the Bank of J apan’s
yield curve control ensured that yields on ten-
Yield spread between US and German
government bonds* year government bonds remained within a nar-
row corridor of between two and eight basis
Percentage points, monthly data
points.
+2.5
+2.0
Gross issuance on the German bond market in Net redemptions
+1.5 the fourth quarter of 2017 was down slightly of domestic
debt securities
+1.0 on the previous quarter. Overall, German bor-
rowers issued paper worth €240½ billion,
+0.5
compared with €257½ billion in the previous
0
three months. Net of redemptions and changes
–0.5 in issuers’ own holdings, domestic issuers
scaled back their capital market borrowing by
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
€7 billion. The outstanding volume of foreign
1 Source: Thomson Reuters. * US Treasury yields less Bunds,
each with a residual maturity of ten years. debt securities in the German market rose by
Deutsche Bundesbank
€3 billion in the fourth quarter. On balance, the
total outstanding volume of bonds in Germany
Strong rise in Among the global benchmark bonds, yields on thus shrank by €4 billion in the quarter under
yields in the
ten- year US Treasuries rose the sharpest over review.
United States
the reporting period (up 58 basis points). This
was due primarily to strong domestic activity in From October to December, domestic credit in- Fall in credit
institutions’
the United States, which was reflected in con- stitutions reduced their capital market debt
capital market
tinued positive US labour market figures, and compared to the previous quarter by €14½ bil- debt
to the higher than expected path of inflation. lion. Net redemptions centred on debt secur-
In addition, the US tax reform, which Congress ities issued by specialised credit institutions and
adopted before the turn of the year and which other bank debt securities which can be struc-
is likely to put supply- side pressure on the US tured flexibly (€10 billion and €6 billion respect-
bond market, further boosted yields. While the ively). By contrast, the outstanding volume of
Fed’s 25-basis- point increase in the policy rate mortgage Pfandbriefe and public Pfandbriefe
in December had been largely anticipated, the rose slightly (€½ billion in each case).
expected path for short- term interest rates in
the United States has become steeper overall.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
41
Net public The public sector issued debt instruments total-
Investment activity
sector issuance
ling €5 billion net in the quarter under review.
in the German securities markets
Central government (and the resolution agency
classified as part of central government) was
€ billion
the main issuer of ten- year and 30-year bonds,
2016 2017
which were issued in the amount of €12 billion
Item Q4 Q3 Q4
and €2½ billion respectively. This contrasted
Debt securities
with net redemptions of five- year Federal notes Residents 17.9 18.8 38.7
Credit institutions – 19.6 – 23.6 – 13.5
(Bobls) totalling €10 billion and Federal Treas- of which
Foreign debt securities – 5.2 – 5.5 – 0.3
ury discount paper (Bubills) worth €1½ billion.
Deutsche Bundesbank 49.5 34.3 35.6
State and local governments issued debt secur- Other sectors – 12.1 8.0 16.6
of which
ities with a net value of €1½ billion.
Domestic debt securities – 1.5 – 15.1 11.7
Non-residents – 57.6 – 26.4 – 42.7
Net issuance of In the fourth quarter of 2017, domestic enter- Shares
corporate bonds Residents 2.3 12.8 19.3
prises issued bonds worth €2½ billion net. On
Credit institutions 1.8 – 3.0 4.8
balance, this was exclusively long- term paper. of which
Domestic shares 1.6 – 0.8 2.9
Non-banks 0.5 15.8 14.5
of which
Purchases of The Bundesbank was by far the largest net pur-
Domestic shares – 6.4 5.2 – 1.7
debt securities
chaser of debt securities in the fourth quarter Non-residents 6.6 – 2.3 0.0
of 2017. Mainly under the Eurosystem’s asset
Mutual fund shares
purchase programmes, it acquired debt secur- Investment in specialised funds 33.8 10.5 24.1
Investment in open-end funds 6.0 8.9 5.2
ities worth €35½ billion net, principally in the of which
Equity funds 3.4 3.6 0.8
form of German government bonds. Domestic
non- banks bought bonds worth €16½ billion Deutsche Bundesbank
net, the bulk of which were domestic secur-
ities. By contrast, foreign investors and domes- last year, and for a time attained a new all- time
tic credit institutions disposed of fixed- income high. This was due not only to the good state
securities worth €42½ billion and €13½ billion of the US economy, but also to the US tax re-
respectively. form adopted in December, which includes a
significant reduction in enterprises’ tax burden.
In addition, analysts upped their projection of
Equity market earnings per share 12 months ahead as well as
their assessments of medium- term earnings
Strong gains Buoyed by the positive economic environment, growth. The December interest rate hike and
seen for a while
the international equity markets initially re- the expectation among market participants
fully eroded in
some cases by corded significant gains in the reporting period, that the Fed would continue to tighten monet-
end of reporting
which was reflected in a high valuation level. ary policy this year only started to exert a
period
There were marked corrections at the begin- dampening impact on equity prices in the
ning of February as a result of perceptions United States at the beginning of February.
among some market participants that the Fed
would, owing to the good economic data, Bank equities in the United States climbed by US bank equities
up significantly
raise interest rates faster than had previously 16.2%, significantly outperforming the US mar-
been anticipated. Rising risk- free interest rates ket as a whole. This increase was accompanied
reduce the discount factor, which is used to by a strikingly sharp rise in earnings expect-
value future profits, and thus lower the present ations for the next 12 months, which were up
value of public limited companies. Neverthe- by 18.4%. Medium- term earnings expectations
less, on balance, the US S&P 500 rose by a total rose, too. Like enterprises in the real economy,
of 8.4% compared to the end of September banks will also benefit in the medium term

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
42
from the lower US taxes on earnings. That said,
Equity market
individual institutions recorded significant
Daily data
extraordinary expenses for 2016 as a result of
Euro area (Euro Stoxx)
the tax reform. Overall, therefore, despite the
United States (S&P 500)
Japan (Nikkei 225) strong rise in equity prices, the price- earnings
140
130 Beginning of 2016 = 100, log scale ratio of US banks remained virtually unchanged.
Overall market indices
120
110 The interim price gains in the European equity European
100 markets were significantly weaker than those in equities lower at
end of reporting
90 the US market, probably mainly due to the period
80 strong appreciation of the euro against the US
dollar. Following the global correction, the
Lin scale
%
Implied volatilities1 broad Euro Stoxx index ended the period under
review 3.0% lower than it was at the start. The
VStoxx 40
VIX CDAX also recorded net losses (-2.3%), having
30 previously climbed – like the S&P 500 – to a
new all- time high. However, during the report-
20 ing period, the European automobile sector, in
particular, significantly outperformed the mar-
10
ket as a whole (6.8%). Here again, the US tax
2016 2017 2018 reform is likely to have been one of the reasons
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cal- for this development, causing (future) tax bur-
culated using the prices of index options. For euro area, calcu-
dens recognised in the balance sheet to fall sig-
lated from options on Euro Stoxx 50.
Deutsche Bundesbank nificantly in some cases for European car manu-
facturers that produce in the United States. By
Stock market valuations
contrast, bank shares in the euro area recorded
Data since January 2004
declines of 3.9% and were thus largely in line
14 Maximum
with the overall index. Prices were supported,
75% quantile
Current level amongst other things, by the Basel III reform
Median level
package adopted in December 2017, which
12 25% quantile
aims to strengthen financial stability and con-
Minimum
tribute to harmonised regulation for the bank-
10 ing sector.
Given the good economic outlook and a mon- Japanese stock
8
market sees rise
etary policy stance that remains highly accom-
modative, the Japanese equity market also ini-
6 tially continued the upward trend it had em-
barked upon in September 2017. The Nikkei
225 climbed to its highest level since 1991 –
4
and even following the recent significant falls
was still 5.4% higher, at last count, than at the
2 end of September 2017. Despite the continuing
Euro Stoxx S&P 500
uncertainty regarding the future links to the EU,
EY CE RP EY CE RP
the British equity market proved to be com-
Sources: Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S, Bundesbank calculations.
Earnings yields (EY) as an inverted price/earnings ratio; implied paratively robust. The broad FTSE All- Share
cost of equity (CE) and equity risk premium (RP) derived from
the dividend discount model. Index lost somewhat less than the Euro Stoxx
Deutsche Bundesbank
on balance (-1.8%).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
43
Significantly Market participants’ uncertainty about future
Major items of the balance of payments
higher price
stock price developments – as measured by the
uncertainty in
the stock market implied volatility of equity indices calculated on
the basis of options – increased significantly of
late in light of the correction on the equity € billion
markets at the beginning of February. It was
2016 2017
above its five- year average for both the Euro Item Q4 Q3 Q4p
Stoxx and for the US equity market. I Current account + 68.2 + 62.6 + 73.9
1 Goods1 + 60.8 + 68.0 + 64.6
2 Services2 – 2.2 – 11.1 + 0.4
Stock market On balance, funding on the German stock mar- 3 Primary income + 21.1 + 16.6 + 23.5
4 Secondary income – 11.6 – 11.0 – 14.5
funding at low
ket totalled €1 billion in the reporting quarter.
level II Capital account + 0.1 + 0.9 – 1.3
The volume of foreign shares on the German
III Financial account
market rose by €18 billion in the same period.
(increase: +) + 82.5 + 54.0 + 74.1
Equities were purchased predominantly by do- 1 Direct investment + 28.9 + 0.5 + 14.5
Domestic investment
mestic non-b anks and credit institutions (to the abroad + 21.4 + 21.5 + 27.8
Foreign investment in the
tune of €14½ billion and €5 billion respect- reporting country – 7.5 + 21.0 + 13.3
2 Portfolio investment + 51.0 + 58.9 + 69.9
ively). While credit institutions acquired more
Domestic investment in
domestic paper, non- banks focused their inter- foreign securities – 0.6 + 30.8 + 23.5
Shares3 + 3.4 + 5.1 + 5.8
est on foreign shares. On balance, non- resident Investment fund shares4 + 9.9 + 10.6 + 14.7
of which
investors reduced their portfolio of German Money market fund
shares + 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.8
shares only marginally. Long-term debt
securities5 – 9.7 + 16.5 + 7.7
of which
Significant rise In the final quarter of 2017, domestic invest- Denominated in euro6 – 7.7 + 6.9 + 4.3
Short-term debt
in sales and ment companies recorded a net inflow of securities7 – 4.2 – 1.4 – 4.7
purchases of Foreign investment in
mutual fund €29½ billion, compared with €19½ billion in domestic securities – 51.6 – 28.0 – 46.4
shares Shares3 + 6.4 – 2.3 – 0.8
the previous quarter. On balance, the vast ma- Investment fund shares – 0.4 + 0.6 – 2.9
Long-term debt
jority of the fresh funds were channelled to
securities5 – 29.3 – 21.0 – 40.3
specialised funds reserved for institutional in- of which
Issued by the public
vestors (€24 billion). Of the various asset sector8 – 43.1 – 18.8 – 22.5
Short-term debt
classes, mixed securities funds, in particular, securities7 – 28.3 – 5.4 – 2.4
3 Financial derivatives9 + 13.5 + 1.4 + 4.0
registered significant net inflows of capital
4 Other investment10 – 10.9 – 6.9 – 12.9
(€10½ billion), as did, albeit to a lesser extent, Monetary fi nancial
institutions11 + 22.3 – 12.5 + 16.8
open- end real estate funds (€6 billion), equity Enterprises and
households12 – 27.4 – 3.7 – 17.8
funds (€5½ billion) and funds of funds (€5 bil- General government – 1.8 – 8.5 + 11.4
Bundesbank – 4.0 + 17.7 – 23.3
lion). The outstanding volume of foreign mu-
5 Reserve assets 0.0 + 0.2 – 1.4
tual fund shares in Germany rose by €14½ bil-
IV Errors and omissions13 + 14.3 – 9.5 + 1.5
lion in the period under review. On balance,
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
investment fund shares were bought exclu- cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including
participation certifi cates. 4 Including reinvested earnings. 5 Long-
sively by domestic non- banks, which added
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.
paper worth €47 billion to their portfolios in 6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term:
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the
net terms. Most of this paper was issued by former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi ce and the
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from
domestic mutual funds. This contrasted with options and fi nancial futures contracts as well as employee
stock options. 10 Includes in particular fi nancial and trade
net sales by non- resident investors and domes- credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun-
desbank. 12 Includes the following sectors: fi nancial corpor-
tic credit institutions to the tune of €3 billion
ations (excluding monetary fi nancial institutions) as well as
and €½ billion respectively. non- fi nancial corporations, households and non- profi t institu-
tions serving households. 13 Statistical errors and omissions,
resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi nan-
cial account and the balances on the current account and the
capital account.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
44
Direct investment flows of funds took place, amongst other
things, as a result of a corporate restructuring,
Net capital As with cross- border portfolio investment, which was also partly the reason for the afore-
exports in direct
which saw net outflows to the tune of €70 bil- mentioned capital exports to Luxembourg.
investment
lion in the fourth quarter of 2017, net capital
exports were likewise recorded in the field of Foreign investors also increased their direct in- … and foreign
enterprises
direct investment; these amounted to €14½ vestment in Germany from October to Decem-
carried out
billion. ber 2017 by €13½ billion. On the one hand, foreign direct
investment in
they provided additional equity capital to
Germany
Domestic enter- Direct investment abroad by German enter- branches in Germany (€10½ billion). On the
prises invested
prises came to €28 billion net in the final quar- other hand, they increased their lending to af-
abroad …
ter of 2017. Domestic investors boosted their filiated enterprises in Germany (€2½ billion),
equity capital by €23 billion, thus also reinvest- particularly though trade credits. In regional
ing profits abroad (€4 billion). In addition, they terms, investors from the EU, especially from
issued intra- group loans in the amount of €4½ Sweden (€5 billion), France (€4½ billion) and
billion. €7½ billion was accounted for by the Denmark (€4 billion), played the largest role. By
granting of additional trade credits, while fi- contrast, there were significant outflows to
nancial loans were curtailed (€2½ billion). Luxembourg (€8½ billion) and the United King-
Countries receiving substantial direct invest- dom (€3½ billion) – in both cases primarily in
ments from Germany included Luxembourg the form of intra- group credit transactions,
(€19½ billion) and France (€6½ billion) within and, in the case of Luxembourg, predominantly
the euro area, and China (€3½ billion) outside through the repayment of loans that had previ-
it. By contrast, domestic enterprises disinvested ously been granted by foreign branches to their
in Belgium to the tune of €9 billion. The out- parent companies in Germany (reverse flows).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
45
Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation briskly in the first three quarters of 2017, was
expanded further in light of the high capacity
German Germany’s economy is booming. With aggre- utilisation levels. Private consumption, which
economy
gate economic activity already having sur- had been a mainstay of the upswing up until
booming
passed potential output by a considerable mar- the first half of 2017, fell into a lull in the sum-
gin in the first three quarters of 2017, economic mer and provided only limited additional stimu-
output also saw a sharp increase in the final lus towards the end of the year, too.
quarter, albeit with somewhat less momentum
than before. According to the Federal Statistical German exports rose sharply at the end of Strong export
growth at end
Office’s flash estimate, real gross domestic 2017. According to the statistical data which
of year
product (GDP) was 0.6% higher than in the are available up to November, the products of
third quarter in seasonally and calendar- domestic enterprises benefited from buoyant
adjusted terms. This was up 2.9% on the year demand both within and outside the euro area,
after adjustment for calendar effects. Aggre- with exports to non-e uro area countries grow-
gate capacity utilisation is now significantly ex- ing much more sharply, however. Business with
ceeding its long- term average. Business and China remained on a clearly upward trajectory
household sentiment is exceptionally good, following quite substantial increases in the pre-
and the situation on the labour market has vious quarter. Exports of goods to the south
shown a further improvement. The excellent and east Asian emerging market economies
orders situation for industrial firms suggests also expanded strongly. This was likewise the
that the rapid pace of expansion achieved in
the course of 2017 is continuing into the new
Overall output
year. However, there are mounting signs that
2010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
the German economy is increasingly being con-
116
fronted with capacity constraints, which could
stand in the way of significantly stronger 114
growth.
112
Industry remains In the final quarter of 2017, industry maintained 110 Log scale
key driving force GDP
its role as the major driving force behind the 108
upswing. In its wake, business- related services
106
sectors are also likely to have continued their
dynamic upward movement. On the other 104
hand, the construction sector, which has been
102 Lin scale %
facing considerable capacity shortages for Year-on-year change 1
+6
some time, was unable to boost its output any
further. +4
+2
Demand- side On the demand side, economic growth in the
growth driven final quarter of last year was driven chiefly by 0
mainly by
exports and exports and investment in machinery and –2
investment in
equipment. Flourishing global trade ensured
machinery and 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
equipment strong sales growth among German exporters.
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only
Commercial investment in machinery and calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank
equipment, which had already been rising

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
46
goods industry. The mechanical engineering
Foreign trade
sector along with manufacturers of computers,
Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
electronic and optical products as well as elec-
2010 = 100, log scale
trical equipment were able to achieve a signifi-
130 Exports of goods
price-adjusted1 cant boost to their domestic sales. The high
120 demand for investment also benefited foreign
Total
firms, as is indicated by the significant increase
110
Oct- in imports of capital goods up to November. As
Nov
100 140 was the case in the summer months, however,
to non-euro area
countries enterprises were still holding back on expand-
130
ing their motor vehicle fleets in the final quarter
120
of the year.
110
120 Construction investment remained lacklustre in Construction
to euro area countries the fourth quarter of 2017 and remained at investment
Oct- showing side-
110 Nov
more or less the extremely high level achieved ways movement
earlier. Increasingly restricting capacity short-
100
ages may have been the main reason why
130
there was no further growth in construction
Imports of goods 120 activity. The turnover figures for the main con-
price-adjusted 1
struction sector available up to November
110
nevertheless indicate a considerable rise in pri-
€ bn 100 vate housing construction investment during
80 Lin scale the reporting period (see the box on pages 51
Foreign trade balance
60 to 53 for details of housing price developments
40 in 2017). By contrast, investment in commercial
construction probably fell perceptibly.
20
0
According to Federal Statistical Office data, Private
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 consumption
households are likely to have largely kept their
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Ad- subdued
consumption expenditure at a high level to-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank wards the end of 2017, as they had done in the
third quarter. Although households purchased
case for exports of goods to the United States considerably more passenger cars during the
and the United Kingdom following their weak reporting period, this dynamic activity in the
performance in the second and third quarters. automotive sector is likely to have been due to
In addition, there was considerable growth in discounts and premiums for trade- ins of diesel
sales of goods to central and east European vehicles in connection with the emissions scan-
countries. By contrast, the value of exports to dal. Real retail sales (excluding motor vehicles)
the newly industrialised economies in Asia, as continued to rise owing to the thriving business
well as to Japan and the OPEC countries fell activity in online and mail order trade. By con-
short of their third-q uarter level. trast, sales of ICT equipment saw a sharp decline
at the end of the year. In addition, consumers
Investment in In view of the further increase in capacity util- cut back their expenditure on hotel and res-
machinery and
isation in the manufacturing sector and the fa- taurant services and on foreign travel.
equipment still
on upward vourable economic outlook, industrial firms’
trajectory
propensity to invest remained high. This bene- Imports rose steeply in the final quarter of 2017
fited major branches of the German capital in quarter- on- quarter terms. According to the

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
47
More goods figures available up to November, export de-
Output in industry and
imports,
mand for intermediate and consumer goods
in construction
especially from
the euro area was particularly strong, and capital goods im-
2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
ports also rose significantly. In regional terms,
significantly more goods were imported, par- 120
ticularly from euro area countries, whereas im- 115
ports from non- euro area countries, after ad- Industry
110
justment for price effects, were probably barely
up on their third-q uarter level. 105
140
135
130
Sectoral trends
125
Industrial boom Industrial output remained on an upward path Main
120
continues construction
in the final quarter of 2017 and was up signifi-
115
cantly (+1%) on its third- quarter level in season-
ally adjusted terms. The strongest growth in
110
output was in intermediate goods. Strong in-
105
creases were posted, in particular, by manufac-
Construction1
turers of chemical products. By contrast, the
100
increase in production in the capital goods sec-
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
tor was much more subdued. This was due
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main
mainly to the automotive sector, which, follow-
construction sector and finishing trades.
ing quite considerable growth during the sum- Deutsche Bundesbank
mer months, fell slightly short of matching the
high level of the previous quarter. Consumer in succession following the exceptionally strong
goods production remained at the prior-q uarter first half of 2017. There is a high and increasing
level. percentage of construction firms, which, ac-
cording to the Ifo Institute, have reported pro-
Further rise According to the Ifo Institute, utilisation of tan- duction hold- ups owing to the lack of skilled
in industrial
gible fixed assets in manufacturing rose sub- workers. This combined with the very high level
capacity
utilisation stantially on the back of the ongoing boom in of equipment utilisation and the fact that the
industrial activity. It reached its highest level in reach of orders in this sector is far above aver-
a decade and was only marginally below its age, indicates that the decline is due not so
record high since German reunification. much to falling demand but rather to signifi-
cant capacity shortages. This is consistent with
Further decline Construction output declined significantly in the marked increase in construction prices.
in construction
seasonally adjusted terms in the final quarter of
activity amid
ongoing high 2017 (-1%). The main reason for this was a Business activity in the services sector probably Continued
capacity strong growth
sharp decline in construction activity in the showed further marked growth in the final
utilisation in the services
main construction sector, especially in Decem- quarter of 2017. In the wake of brisk industrial sector
ber. The fact that employees used up their re- activity, price- adjusted wholesale sales ex-
maining holiday entitlement at the end of the panded substantially after posting fairly muted
year may have played a part in this. The finish- growth in the third quarter. The motor vehicle
ing trades, which expanded considerably in the trade was also flourishing thanks to the high
reporting quarter, provided some impetus, level of household demand for passenger cars.
however. As a result, overall construction activ- Price- adjusted retail sales (excluding motor
ity was already contracting for the second time vehicles ) were also up. Overall, the broadly

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
48
based and very upbeat sentiment indicates that
Labour market
the other services sectors also posted a signifi-
Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
cant increase in sales.
Million
44.5
Employed
44.0
Labour market
43.5 Total
43.0 Germany’s labour market was again in excel- Situation and
outlook on
lent shape in the fourth quarter of 2017. As in
42.5 labour market
the preceding quarters, employment rose extremely
42.0
favourable
sharply, especially in the case of jobs subject to
41.5 Thousand social security contributions, among both Ger-
Year-on-year change1 1,000 man nationals and migrants. Unemployment
500 declined further from its already low level. The
number of job vacancies also continued to
0
grow during the reporting quarter. Other lead-
Million ing indicators promise a similarly positive out-
32.5 Jobs subject to social security look for the next few months. Nonetheless, it
contributions
32.0 Oct- may be becoming more difficult to fill vacant
Nov
positions given the current high demand for
31.5
labour .
31.0
30.5 Occupied positions In the final quarter of 2017, seasonally adjusted Equally strong
employment
30.0 domestic employment increased by 150,000
growth
persons, or 0.3%. As a result, total employ-
29.5
ment rose steadily at a strong pace for the third
29.0
quarter in succession. This increase was due
28.5 Thousand solely to the expansion in employment subject
Scale enlarged 800 to social security contributions, which, accord-
Unsubsidised vacancies 2
Jan 600 ing to initial estimates of the Federal Employ-
ment Agency (BA) for October and November,
400
grew by 0.5% compared with the average of
Million the third quarter. This contrasted with the de-
Unemployed
3.2 clining trend in exclusively low- paid part- time
3.0 employment and in self-e mployment.
2.8
Registrered unemployed
The number of jobs subject to social security Almost all
2.6 Jan
sectors creating
contributions increased across virtually all sec-
new jobs
2.4
tors. Particularly strong growth was recorded in
Thousand
Year-on-year change1 +200 business- related services, logistics and the in-
formation and communications sector. Follow-
0
ing two weaker quarters, the number of em-
–200
Jan ployees subject to social security contributions
–400
in temporary agency employment was increas-
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 201718 ing more strongly again at the end of the
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed- period under review. The health and welfare
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad. sector as well as manufacturing and construc-
Deutsche Bundesbank
tion also made a significant contribution to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
49
growth in regular jobs subject to social security
Employees subject to social security
contributions. Although the increase in the
contributions broken down by
manufacturing sector intensified somewhat nationality
compared with the second and third quarters,
Thousand persons, year-on-year increase
growth was below average. In the finance and
German
insurance sectors, employment also continued Rest of the world
West Balkan countries
to decline towards the end of the period under
Eight most significant countries of origin
of asylum seekers
review. 800
Central and east European EU 11 countries
700
Shift in compos- For a number of years now, there has been a
ition of migrants
persistently high demand for jobs subject to
in employment 600
growth social security contributions. Despite inactive or
unemployed persons being brought into the 500
job market, satisfying this demand with mem-
400
bers of the domestic labour force has been
only partly successful. In November 2017, al- 300
most half of the 756,000 additional persons in
200
employment subject to social security contribu-
tions (compared with 12 months earlier) were
100
non- German nationals. Despite the diminishing
relative importance in terms of employment 0
creation, approximately every fifth additional 2014 2015 2016 2017
person employed at the end of the period
Quelle: Federal Employment Agency.
under review was a national of a central or east Deutsche Bundesbank
European EU member state. The integration of
refugees into the labour market made further with the unemployment rate standing at just
progress and – in addition to recruitment into 5.4% at the end of the period under review.
work placements or mini- jobs – now also The decrease was due mainly to the reduced
accounted for a significant share of just over numbers of long- term job seekers on welfare
one- tenth of the overall increase in employ- benefits. Although the chance of the long- term
ment subject to social security contributions.1 unemployed being able to take up employ-
In addition, the possibility of labour migration ment again increased only slightly, there were
for persons from the West Balkan countries relatively few unemployed persons – excluding
that was introduced at the end of 2015 – a refugees – transferring from the short-t erm in-
response to the very high level of migration of surance scheme to the longer- term welfare
asylum seekers from this region in the winter of benefits scheme. The risk of becoming un-
2014-15 – was also reflected in the fact that employed fell sharply, and most of the short-
one in every 20 additional positions was filled term unemployed are able to find a new job
by such a person. relatively quickly in the current situation.
Further Registered unemployment fell significantly in Enterprises wish to go on expanding their em- Labour market
decline in outlook remains
the fourth quarter of 2017 in seasonally ad- ployment levels. According to the Ifo employ-
unemployment very positive
justed terms. Taking the average of the report- ment barometer, the intentions of enterprises
ing period, the decline, at 56,000 persons, was in trade and industry for the next three months
stronger than in the previous quarter. The un-
employment rate was 0.2 percentage point 1 Measured in terms of persons with a nationality of one of
the eight main countries of origin of asylum seekers (Syria,
down on the average of the third quarter. This
Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan and Pakistan as well as the African
positive development also continued in January countries of Eritrea, Nigeria and Somalia).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
50
market utilisation, continued to rise modestly. Negotiated pay
Rates of pay and wage drift
rates continued
At 2.1%, the annual rate of growth in negoti-
Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis to rise only
ated rates of basic pay was just as moderate as moderately in
% Actual earnings in the third quarter. Overall, negotiated rates of Q4 2017
Negotiated rates of pay
+3.5 pay (ie including ancillary agreements) were up
+3.0 on their level one year earlier owing to base
effects stemming from one- off payments in the
+2.5
previous year and annual bonus payments
+2.0
being lowered by just 1.8% in the reporting
+1.5
year. The already noticeably stronger increase
+1.0 in actual earnings in the preceding quarters is
+0.5 likely to have continued.
0
In 2017 as a whole, negotiated rates of pay (in- Only moderate
Wage drift % points wage increase
cluding ancillary agreements) – as in 2016 –
overall in 2017,
+1.5 also showed only a moderate rise on the year too …
+1.0 at 2.1%. To a certain extent, this was due to
low pay increases from the second stage of
+0.5
earlier pay rounds that had been concluded
0
under the impact of very low inflation in 2015
–0.5
and 2016. Wage dynamics, however, were
2010 20112012 20132014 20152016 2017
shaped to a greater extent by the moderate
Sources: Federal Statistical Office (actual earnings) and
new agreements of the 2017 pay round. Be-
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay).
Deutsche Bundesbank sides weak productivity in some sectors, non-
wage components, which are not reflected dir-
are extremely expansionary. This is also con- ectly in the remuneration tables, are increas-
firmed by the IAB labour market barometer and ingly likely to have played a greater role in
the Federal Employment Agency’s BA- X job dampening the final pay agreements.
index. As in the past, more vacancies were
reported , above all, in the case of business- According to initial preliminary annual figures, … but signifi-
cantly positive
related service providers and in the production the rise in actual earnings last year, at 2.6%,
wage drift
sector. The fact that firms are experiencing dif- was significantly stronger than the increase in
ficulties in finding suitable staff is also likely to negotiated rates of pay, chiefly because of very
play a part here. The vacancy periods for open positive economic activity and the shortages on
positions registered with the Federal Employ- the labour market. Added to this were wage-
ment Agency were increasing significantly boosting stimuli from the raising of the general
again towards the end of the period under statutory minimum wage at the beginning of
review . The unemployment subcomponent of the year and the gradual phasing- out of sector-
the IAB labour market barometer stabilised at a specific exemptions to the minimum wage.
relatively high level recently and points to a
continuation of the declining trend in un- This year’s pay round covers major sectors such 2018 pay round
in favourable
employment for the coming months. as the metal- working and electrical engineer-
economic
ing industry, construction, central and local climate
government and the chemicals industry and
Wages and prices will affect around 9½ million employees. The
trade unions’ published wage demands so far
In the fourth quarter of 2017, negotiated pay amount mostly to 6% and are therefore of a
rates, measured by the high level of labour slightly higher magnitude than in the previous

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
51
Housing prices in Germany in 2017
Last year saw a continuation of the broadly ing to fi gures based on bulwiengesa AG
based upward pressure on housing prices in data, residential property prices in urban
Germany. Even so, there was no increase in areas in Germany continued to increase
the rate of infl ation, which has been quite sharply by around 9%, and hence at a
high for some time. While the prices of somewhat faster pace than in the three
housing in urban areas were going up at a preceding years, when the increase aver-
more or less undiminished pace, the rate of aged 7½%.2 In Germany’s seven biggest
price increase in Germany as a whole de- cities, where housing prices are already
clined somewhat. Unlike in previous years, higher than average, housing infl ation
interest rates did not decline further last slowed down by 1¾ percentage points to
year, which meant that they did not con- 9¼%, but the rate was still above the aver-
tribute to a further surge in demand. Fur- age fi gure for the three preceding years.3 As
thermore, there is likely to have been a sig- in 2016, the rate of infl ation for rental
nifi cant expansion in the housing supply in apartment buildings in the towns and cities
2017. In urban areas, the prices of housing as well as in Germany as a whole was mark-
continue to be well above the level that edly higher than for owner- occupied hous-
would appear justifi ed in terms of the ing. The results for the towns and cities in-
longer- term economic and demographic dicate that the demand for urban housing
determinants.1 – not least in view of the extremely high
price levels in the big cities – has continued
The price index of the Association of Ger- to focus on locations outside the major cit-
man Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deutscher ies that have been in high demand up to
Pfandbriefbanken, vdp) for owner- occupied now. Given the somewhat more moderate
housing in Germany went up by 5¾% last price dynamics in Germany overall, urban
year, compared with an increase of 6% in centres appear to have gained in popularity
2016. Other housing price indicators, too, compared with rural areas.
show that the rate of increase in residential
property prices in Germany was somewhat The continuing sharp price rises for housing
slower in the reporting year. For the fi rst in urban centres were accompanied by a
three quarters of 2017, the latest period for signifi cant increase of 7¼% in rents in new
which data are available, the house price contracts, which are chiefl y the outcome of
index of the Federal Statistical Offi ce shows rent adjustments in the case of repeat occu-
house price growth of 4% compared with pancies. In the big cities, rents for new let-
the same period of 2016. In 2016, the in- tings of existing dwellings were raised by
crease was 6%. Hypoport AG’s Europace
house price index (EPX) indicates that hous-
1 These comments relate to how price developments
ing prices in Germany went up by 6¼% in in the housing market are to be seen in the context of
2017, which was 1¾ percentage points less the real economy. To assess them from a fi nancial sta-
bility perspective, it is also necessary to take into ac-
than in the year before. count aspects connected with mortgage fi nancing.
2 Price data for housing in the 127 towns and cities in
2016 has been adjusted upwards by ¾ percentage
In German towns and cities overall, how- point in the latest data release.
ever, there was no easing of the upward 3 The seven biggest cities are Berlin, Cologne, Düssel-
dorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
pressure on the prices of housing. Accord- gart.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
52
9¼%. Thus, rent infl ation in the reporting
Price indices for housing
year was at its highest since the start of the
2010 = 100, annual data, log scale
current boom in the housing market.
180
170 The positive outlook for households’ in-
160 comes as well as the extremely favourable
150 Deutsche Bundesbank 1 labour market conditions played a part in
140 Total the strong demand for housing as it did in
127 towns and cities
of which the year before. Interest rates for mortgage
130 7 major cities
loans, however, were no longer generating
120
any additional relief for households when
110 purchasing residential property. The aver-
age mortgage rate, which had already hit
100 an all- time low in the preceding year, set-
tled at 1.7%, which was slightly above its
90
2016 level. In the reporting year, the aggre-
140
gate housing price- to- income ratio went up
130 from its heightened level by a little less than
vdp price index for it did in the previous year.4 Moreover, in
120
owner-occupied housing
2017, too, urban areas are unlikely to have
110
become a less attractive residential option
for domestic households or households
100
Quarterly data which have newly arrived from abroad.5
90
It is estimated that, in 2017, the additional
150
supply of housing was again markedly
140
larger than in the previous year, in which
130
some 278,000 units were completed. A
Hypoport AG composite index
120 large part of this is likely to consist of apart-
ment block construction as well as a marked
110
expansion in the available housing in the
100 category of residential homes, which in-
cludes accommodation for refugees. The
90 number of planned housing units, on the
140 other hand, declined last year for the fi rst
time since the start of the housing market
130
boom. At an estimated number of around
Destatis house price index 120
345,000 units, roughly 7.5% fewer permits
110
4 See the Deutsche Bundesbank’s system of indicators
100 for the German residential property market, available
at http:// www.bundesbank.de/ Navigation/ EN/ Statistics/
Enterprises_and_households/ System_of_indicators/
90
system_of_indicators.html
2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 2017 5 According to data from the regional database of the
Federal Statistical Offi ce, in the period from 2011 to
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on 2015 the percentage of the population living in towns
price data provided by bulwiengesa AG.
and cities went up by 4.1%; in the big cities, the in-
Deutsche Bundesbank
crease was 5.5%.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
53
were granted than in 2016, when special therefore at its highest since the early
factors contributed an extremely sharp in- 1990s.
crease of more than 20%.6 Given the very
high level of capacity utilisation as well as
the accumulated stock of orders for the
construction of buildings, the increase in
prices for construction work on new resi-
dential buildings in 2017, at 3%, was again
stronger than in the previous year, which
had already seen a perceptible rise. Even so,
the high cost of expanding available land
still represented the main constraint on an
expansion of housing. According to Federal
Statistical Offi ce data, the prices of building
plots went up by around 12% in the fi rst
half of 2017. This followed a marked in-
crease in 2016 compared with the annual
average dynamics of the period from 2010
to 2015.
In sum, the heightened price dynamics of
residential real estate may have continued
in the past year to exceed the rate that
would have been appropriate in terms of
the demographic and economic fundamen-
tals. According to current estimates, price
exaggerations in urban areas overall in 2017
amounted to between 15% and 30%.7 In
the big cities, where considerable overvalu-
ations had already been measured earlier,
6 Some of this may have been due to anticipatory
the price deviations are likely to have in- effects regarding construction permits in connection
with the more stringent energy standards for new resi-
creased further to 35%. Other standard in-
dential buildings after the end of 2015/ start of 2016.
dicators for assessing price developments in 7 These fi gures are based inter alia on a regionally dif-
ferentiated estimation model. They refer to an esti-
residential real estate likewise suggest that, mated fundamental residential property price, which is
especially in the towns and cities, prices conceptually based on the sustainable components of
economic and sociodemographic factors. See F Kajuth,
have continued to go up relative to their T Knetsch and N Pinkwart, 2016, Assessing house
fundamental determinants. For example, prices in Germany: evidence from a regional dataset,
Journal of European Real Estate Research 9 (3),
the price- rent ratio for apartments in urban pp 286-307. As usual, price data for the year 2017 are
areas, which had already shown a marked currently available only for the subcategory of towns
and cities. The estimates on which the current fi gures
rise earlier in the wake of the housing mar- for overvaluations are based refer to the estimation
ket boom, was around 15% higher last year period until 2016, up to which year the district-s pecifi c
price information for Germany as a whole is available.
than its long- term average since German 8 In this fi gure, the contribution of the exceptional
reunifi cation. In the seven big cities, resi- decline in interest rates in the period from 2010 to
2016, which, taken in isolation, increased the actual
dential property overvaluation at the end of price- rent ratio, also fl ows into the reference measure.
In a hypothetical scenario without a decline in interest
the period under review was 25%.8 The
rates since 2010, the reference value would be signifi -
price-r ent ratio in these areas last year was cantly lower and the price deviations would be larger.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
54
allow more flexible working hours arrange-
Import, export, producer and
ments.
consumer prices
2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
At a seasonally adjusted figure of 0.4%, con- Another marked
Log scale rise in consumer
sumer prices as measured by the Harmonised
110 prices in Q4;
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) showed a core inflation
105 rate significantly
IEminpfuohrtr pprreicisees clear quarter- on- quarter increase again at the
dampened by
100 end of 2017. This was due mainly to higher en- special factors
ergy prices, which were caused by the sharp
95
acceleration in crude oil prices, and to the cost
110 of food. If these two components are excluded,
Export prices
inflation was noticeably weaker. Substantial re-
105
ductions in the prices of travel services and car
100
insurance policies had a dampening impact on
110 Producer prices1 services, which had become considerably more
expensive earlier. Although there was also an
105
easing of price pressure on non- energy indus-
100
trial goods, it remained positive despite the
Jan 105 downward trend in import prices for non-
Consumer prices 2
energy goods since the euro’s appreciation in
2015 = 100 100
the second quarter. The overall year- on- year
95 rate stayed more or less constant at 1.6%; ex-
Lin scale
% cluding energy and food, however, it fell from
Year-on-year change 3
+3 1.5% to 1.2%.2
+2 Jan
+1 HICP inflation surged from 0.4% to 1.7% on an Core inflation
for 2017 as a
annual average of 2017, mainly because of the
0 whole in line
rebound in energy prices, but also as a result of with growing
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18
aggregate
more rapidly rising food prices.3 Core inflation
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Pro- overutilisation
ducer price index for industrial products in domestic sales. (excluding energy and food) went up to 1.3%,
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
after remaining at 1.1% for three years. This
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank increase was a reflection, above all, of a higher
rate of inflation for non- energy industrial
year. The underlying macroeconomic condi- goods. Since the launch of European monetary
tions with strong economic growth and grow- union, it was only in 2012, when the euro de-
ing shortages in the labour market suggest that preciated strongly, and in 2007, when there
wage increases will be perceptibly larger overall was a significant hike in value added tax, that
than in previous years. This impression is re- the rate was so high. In the case of services,
inforced by the most recent pay agreement in the increase in the rate of inflation was osten-
the metalworking and electrical engineering in- sibly more moderate; what should also be
dustry, which features a permanent increase of taken into consideration, however, is that the
4.3% in scheduled rates of pay from April 2018 reform of long- term care at the beginning of
as well as further significant improvements to 2017 had a dampening impact on the figure.
remuneration in 2019. Furthermore, one not- Overall, the accelerating core rate corresponds
able feature of the agreement in this key sector
of Germany industry are the, in some cases, in-
novative models that have been created to
2 Annual headline CPI inflation held steady +1.7%.
3 The CPI figure was +1.8% compared with +0.5%.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
55
quite well with increasing aggregate overutili-
Demand for industrial goods and
sation.
construction work
Volume, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Volatile Seasonally adjusted consumer prices were un-
components Log scale 130
changed on the month overall at the beginning
dampen Total industrial orders
consumer price of 2018, however. Annual headline HICP infla-
120
inflation in
tion went down from 1.6% to 1.4% and the
January
index, excluding energy and food, fell slightly.4
110
This was mainly due to a marked decline in the
prices of travel services and clothing, both of
100
which are very volatile.5 With regard to cloth- % Lin scale
+20 Year-on-year change 1
ing prices, another factor may have been that
sales of winter goods probably suffered as a
+10
result of the comparatively mild weather. How-
ever, leaving aside these two components, core
0
inflation rose to 1.4% once the negative contri-
bution of the long-t erm care reform had disap-
peared. This was because prices of other ser- –10 140
vices and industrial goods (excluding energy)
130
continued to go up. By contrast, prices of en-
Log scale
ergy and food changed only slightly. 120 120
Foreign
110
Orders received and outlook
100 120
Robust The first quarter of the new year is likely to Domestic
economic have seen the German economy maintaining 110
growth
continues the high average pace of expansion achieved in
2017. Given the very large inflow of new orders 100
during the period under review, the industrial
140 Oct-
Nov
sector will probably remain the key driver be- Main construction orders
hind the upturn. The associated ongoing very 130
high level of utilisation of tangible assets in
120
manufacturing is likely to give a further boost
to enterprises’ willingness to invest in new
110
machinery and equipment. Nevertheless, ac-
cording to the Ifo Institute, the percentage %
100
of manufacturing firms reporting production +20
Lin scale
hold- ups due to the lack of skilled workers is on Year-on-year change 1
the rise, and this might gradually place limits +10
on an expansion of output.
0
Oct-
Nov
–10
4 Annual headline CPI inflation was +1.6% compared with 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
+1.7%.
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The volatility of the trad-
calendar-adjusted.
itional core inflation rate in Germany, Monthly Report, No-
Deutsche Bundesbank
vember 2017, pp 49-51.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
56
Unchanged Sentiment in the German economy is still char- for other transport equipment, which often ori-
positive
acterised by a great deal of optimism. The Ifo ginates from primary demand in non- euro area
sentiment in
German Institute’s business climate index for trade and countries. The inflow of orders in the second
economy
industry continued to be at a very high level at half of the year was so strong that the reserves
the start of the new year. A slight deterioration of orders showed a sharp increase despite a
in business expectations contrasted with a marked expansion in production. According to
marked improvement in the assessment of the the Ifo Institute, the stocks of orders that have
business situation. This was especially true of still not been processed hit a new all-t ime high.
manufacturing. There was barely any change The range of orders also exceeded its previous
either in the extremely positive sentiment in peak.
other sectors – main construction and whole-
sale and retail trade. According to the Ifo Insti- October and November – statistics are available Construction
sector probably
tute, confidence was also unbroken in the rest up to then – saw a sharp increase in new orders
at full capacity
of the services sector (excluding wholesale and received by the main construction sector com-
retail trade). This picture of exceptionally posi- pared with the third quarter. More orders were
tive sentiment is consistent with the results of received mainly in housing construction and, to
the survey conducted by the German Cham- a lesser extent, in civil engineering. However,
bers of Commerce and Industry (DIHK) at the notwithstanding the high level of demand and
beginning of the year, which is based on re- the well- filled order books – and apart from the
sponses from a large number of firms and one- off effects possibly triggered by the mild
where, in some cases, expectations refer to a weather in January – construction output is
longer time horizon of up to one year. Com- likely to have shown no more than a moderate
pared with the autumn survey, the assessment increase in the first quarter of 2018. According
of the business situation as well as enterprises’ to Ifo Institute surveys, this sector is facing sig-
business and export expectations showed a nificant capacity shortages in terms of both the
marked improvement. Firms’ investment and very high level of equipment utilisation and the
employment plans were likewise clearly point- considerable shortage of skilled labour.
ing upwards.
The underlying conditions for private consump- Still favourable
underlying
Outstanding There was a further very steep rise in industrial tion, which probably underwent a lull in the
conditions for
orders situation
orders towards the end of 2017. This is striking second half of 2017 following strong growth in private
in industry
consumption
given that they had already increased consider- the first half of the year, remain favourable.
ably during the summer months. It is true that This includes the extremely positive outlook for
the inflow of new orders in the fourth quarter employment and a substantial rise in earnings.
was due primarily to large- scale orders which In line with this, consumer sentiment is still at a
have an impact on output only after a time lag, very high level according to the consumer cli-
but there was strong growth even if these mate index compiled by the market research
orders are not taken into account. Broken institution Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung
down by sector, the surge in orders was broadly (GfK). According to the survey findings, con-
based. In regional terms, impulses from abroad sumers’ expectations about the economy, in
were predominant. Demand from the euro particular, were clearly brighter towards the
area was particularly strong, although there end of the period under review and reached
was an exceptionally high share of major orders their highest level in seven years.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
57
Public finances*
General government budget As things stand, conditions for public finances Conditions set
to remain
look set to remain extremely favourable over
extremely
Continued highly German public finances remained in very good the next few years. Increasingly positive cyclical favourable
favourable
shape last year. According to preliminary data, effects and declining interest expenditure will
developments in
2017: surplus the general government surplus rose to 1.2% bring relief to government budgets. Further-
up, debt down
of gross domestic product (GDP). On balance, more, there will be a year- on- year improve-
improvements related to the strong economic ment in the balance owing to the fact that
upswing and further diminishing interest ex- nuclear fuel tax repayments have come to an
penditure. Overall, nuclear fuel tax repayments end. However, it has to be assumed that the
were more than made up for elsewhere. Re- exceptional growth in profit- related taxes will
newed dynamic growth in tax and social con- normalise, with growth in structural primary
tribution receipts was accompanied by consid- expenditure2 remaining comparatively high.3
erable spending increases in areas such as
social benefits, personnel and investment (see General government fiscal ratios *
also pages 58 to 60). The debt ratio shrank
As a percentage of GDP
rapidly . That said, at 65.1% at the end of the
45.5
third quarter, it was still well above the 60%
threshold. The lion’s share of the decline by
45.0 Expenditure
3 percentage points compared with the end of
2016 was attributable to nominal GDP growth
44.5
in the ratio’s denominator. However, as a result
of the surpluses in the central, state and local 44.0
government budgets and the portfolio reduc-
43.5 Revenue
tion at government- owned bad banks,1 gross
debt also fell significantly.
41
Taxes and social contributions 1
40
* The section entitled “General government budget” re-
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas-
39
tricht debt ratio. The subsequent more detailed reporting
on the budgets of central, state and local government and
of the social security funds pursuant to available data is 38
based on the figures as defined in the government finance
statistics (which are generally in line with the budget
+1.5 Fiscal balance
accounts ).
1 The portfolio reduction and scaling-b ack of correspond-
ing liabilities are rather volatile. For example, occasionally +1.0
pronounced fluctuations in cash collateral in connection
with derivatives transactions are reflected in the debt level.
Deleveraging at FMS Wertmanagement (recorded in the +0.5
government sector) could be delayed if it repurchases add-
itional liabilities belonging to the DEPFA Group (not classi-
0
fied as part of the government sector) under the DEPFA
resolution process.
2 Variables are defined as structural if cyclical factors and –0.5
significant temporary effects are deducted. Primary ex-
penditure (primary balance) refers to expenditure (fiscal
balance) excluding interest expenditure. –1.0
3 A return to higher payments to the EU is one factor that 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
will probably contribute to this. These were relatively low
last year but are expected to pick up over the course of the * As defined in the national accounts. 1 Taxes and social con-
tributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the
current financial planning period, before increasing mark-
European-level Single Resolution Fund.
edly after the United Kingdom’s exit from the EU is final-
Deutsche Bundesbank
ised.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
58
The structural development of German public fi nances –
results of the disaggregated framework for 2017
Germany’s general government budget had its usual slightly positive effect. The lat-
posted another surplus in 2017. According ter was offset on balance by cuts in taxes
to preliminary data from the Federal Statis- and social contributions. However, a small
tical Offi ce, the surplus amounted to 1.2% reduction in income tax and the gradual
of gross domestic product (GDP) and was changeover to deferred taxation of pen-
once again distinctly higher than in the pre- sions, in particular, caused revenue short-
vious year (0.8% of GDP).1 The role played falls which could not be fully offset by the
by cyclical infl uences and specifi c temporary higher contribution rate to the long- term
effects is estimated using the “disaggre- care insurance scheme.
gated framework” for analysing public
fi nances .2 The framework also shows the The expenditure ratio decreased slightly
major determinants of any other changes in both unadjusted and structural terms
– which are classifi ed as structural – in the (-0.1 and -0.2 percentage point respect-
expenditure and revenue ratio. The main ively). Favourable economic developments
results of this analysis for 2017 are pre- pushed down the unadjusted ratio – mainly
sented below.3 due to strong nominal GDP growth in the
ratio’s denominator. However, this was
While favourable cyclical developments largely offset by the above- mentioned tem-
continued to ease the strain on government porary effects. The interest expenditure
budgets in year- on- year terms, this was ratio fell again somewhat on the back of
more or less cancelled out by temporary the benefi cial funding terms and the reduc-
one-o ff effects (in particular, the repayment
of nuclear fuel tax owing to a ruling by the
Federal Constitutional Court, but also sup-
port provided to HSH Nordbank).4 Thus,
1 As defi ned in the national accounts.
both the unadjusted and the structural
2 For more information on the methodology used, see
(adjusted for cyclical infl uences and tem- Deutsche Bundesbank, A disaggregated framework for
analysing public fi nances: Germany’s fi scal track record
porary effects) surplus ratio increased by
between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March
0.4 percentage point. 2006, pp 61-76.
3 These results are subject to amendments arising
from subsequent revisions to the national accounts
The unadjusted revenue ratio climbed by fi gures or to the macroeconomic outlook.
4 Due to the Federal Constitutional Court’s June 2017
0.2 percentage point and the structural ruling that nuclear fuel tax is void, central government
ratio rose by only a little more (+0.3 per- had to make payments in the amount of 0.2% of GDP.
These are recorded in the national accounts as capital
centage point). The main reason for the rise transfers payable. By comparison, the temporary bur-
in the tax and social contributions ratio was dens recorded thus far for calls on state government
guarantees issued for HSH Nordbank have been signifi -
continued high growth in profi t- related cantly lower.
taxes, which cannot be entirely accounted 5 Marked residuals have also been observed in the
past. They are related, in particular, to the fact that the
for by the increase in entrepreneurial and macroeconomic reference variables available and the
investment income and the impact of legis- structures modelled for time lags can only roughly
approxi mate changes in tax payments.
lative changes (residual: +0.3 percentage 6 In this context, the term “fi scal drag” encompasses
point).5 In addition, GDP contained more the overall revenue effect of bracket creep in income
taxation and the impact of the fact that specifi c excise
“revenue-r ich” components and fi scal drag6 duties are largely independent of prices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
59
Structural development*
Year-on-year change in the ratio to nominal trend GDP in percentage points
Total
2008 to
Item 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2017
Unadjusted fi scal balance1 – 0.4 – 3.1 – 1.0 3.3 0.9 – 0.1 0.5 0.3 0.2 0.4 1.0
Cyclical component1 0.4 – 1.7 0.2 0.8 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 0.4
Temporary effects1 – 0.3 0.2 – 1.0 1.1 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3
Fiscal balance – 0.4 – 1.4 – 0.3 1.3 1.0 0.3 0.8 0.0 0.1 0.4 1.7
Interest payable 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 1.5
Owing to change in
average interest rate – 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.7
Owing to change in debt
level 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.2
Primary balance – 0.4 – 1.7 – 0.4 1.4 0.8 – 0.0 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.2 0.2
Revenue 0.2 – 0.9 – 0.2 1.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 0.1 0.5 0.3 1.3
Taxes and social
contributions 0.2 – 1.0 – 0.4 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.2 0.5 0.4 1.1
Fiscal drag2 0.0 0.1 – 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.8
Decoupling of macro-
economic reference
variables from GDP 0.2 – 0.3 0.2 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3
Legislative changes – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.6 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.8
Residual 0.5 – 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.3 1.9
of which profi t-
related taxes3 0.5 – 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.1 – 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.3 1.5
Non-tax revenue4 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.2
Primary expenditure 0.7 0.8 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.8 0.2 – 0.4 0.2 0.6 0.0 1.2
Social payments5 0.2 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 0.7
Subsidies – 0.0 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.2
Compensation of
employees 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0
Intermediate consumption 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.0 0.8
Gross fi xed capital
formation 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2
Other expenditure6 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.1 – 0.2 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.4
Memo item
Pension expenditure7 – 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 – 0.5
Healthcare expenditure8 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.0 – 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.9
Labour market expenditure9 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.9
Long-term care
expenditure 10 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.4
* The structural fi gures are derived by adjusting for cyclical infl uences and specifi c temporary effects. 1 Year- on- year change in
the ratio to nominal GDP. 2 In this context, the term “fi scal drag” encompasses the overall revenue effect of bracket creep in
income taxation and the impact of the fact that specifi c excise duties are largely independent of prices. 3 Assessed income tax,
corporation tax, local business tax, investment income tax. 4 Other current transfers receivable, sales and total capital revenue.
5 Including other current transfers to households. 6 Other current transfers payable to corporations and the rest of the world,
other net acquisitions of non-fi nancial assets and capital transfers payable. 7 Spending by the statutory pension insurance
scheme, spending on recipients of civil servant pensions as well as payments by the Post Offi ce Pension Fund and the Federal
Railways Fund. 8 Spending by the statutory health insurance scheme and assistance towards civil servants’ healthcare costs.
9 Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the reintegration payment paid to central government (from 2008
to 2013)) and central government expenditure on unemployment benefi t II and on labour market reintegration measures.
10 Spending by the public long-term care insurance scheme.
Deutsche Bundesbank
tion in the debt ratio.7 The other structural Overall, public fi nances benefi ted in 2017,
expenditure (primary expenditure) ratio re- too, from very favourable conditions.
mained unchanged. For instance, on the Dynamic growth in profi t- related taxes,
one hand, the structural social expenditure favour able cyclical developments and a
ratio rose (above all for expenditure on further decline in interest expenditure more
long- term care). On the other hand, how- than offset temporary burdens (caused, in
ever, transfers to the EU budget as well as
capital transfers (adjusted for temporary
effects ) declined. 7 The breakdown of the change in the interest ex-
penditure ratio for 2017 is not shown as the debt ratio
for the year’s end is not yet available.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
60
particular, by nuclear fuel tax being de- (positive residuals) has been concealing a
clared void). moderately expansionary fi scal stance.
In comparison with 2007, ie prior to the
fi nanc ial and economic crisis, the structural
fi scal balance saw an improvement of just
over 1½ percentage points of GDP. On
balance, this was entirely attributable to
favour able funding conditions. The interest
expenditure ratio therefore fell by 1½ per-
centage points during this period solely due
to the drop in the average interest rate on
government debt. At 2½% as this report
went to press, the structural primary surplus
ratio (after adjustment for this develop-
ment) thus roughly matched its 2007 level.
After a period of clear deterioration up to
2010 followed by a period of improvement
up to 2014, the ratio has remained virtually
unchanged for the past three years. Extra-
ordinary growth in profi t- related taxes
Under the financial plans published up to now, the substantial surpluses do provide fiscal
an overall surplus of around 1½% of GDP space, the focus on a budget without net bor-
would be expected for 2018,4 potentially fol- rowing creates problems. It would therefore
lowed by another slight increase. The fiscal pol- be reasonable, first, to allow positive cyclical
icy stance would be moderately expansionary effects to pass through to the budgets so as to
and the structural surplus would still be in the avoid procyclical or erratic fiscal policy should
order of 1% of GDP. However, when the new the situation take a turn for the worse. This is
Federal Government is formed, central, state why the fiscal rules prescribe structural budget
and local governments (with central govern- limits, which enable the automatic stabilisers to
ment setting the budgets of the social security work (ie to run surpluses in upswings and def-
funds as well) are expected to use this favour- icits in downturns). Second, compliance with
able outlook for additional spending as well as the deficit ceiling set out in the European Fiscal
tax and social contribution cuts. As a result, the Compact must be ensured if reserves are used
general government surplus is likely to be dis- to cover new budgetary burdens.6 Further-
tinctly smaller going forward. Nonetheless, the more, there needs to be a guarantee in such an
debt ratio will probably fall below the 60% instance that medium and longer- term burdens
mark again by 2019 at the latest.
Avoid short- term The fact that the recently unveiled coalition 4 Risks remain in connection with state government guar-
policy oriented agreement between the CDU, CSU and SPD5 antees issued for HSH Nordbank.
to cash 5 Reference is made, both here and in the rest of the art-
balance … retains the fundamental objective of a bal- icle, to the agreement of 7 February 2018, which, as this
report went to press, had not yet been approved.
anced budget and will thus continue to priori-
6 For information on the central government refugee re-
tise sound public finances is welcome. While serve, see also p 64.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
61
can be sustainably financed once the reserves fall if it receives higher payments from central
have been exhausted, if not before. government for persons claiming unemploy-
ment benefit II and if the additional costs for
… by planning Generally speaking, to achieve a steady, me- benefit increases are limited. In addition, it was
for moderate
dium to long- term fiscal policy, it is advisable to agreed that the solidarity surcharge (which is
structural
surpluses and … aim for moderate structural surpluses in finan- paid to central government only) would be par-
cial plans at the central, state and local govern- tially abolished. Surpluses at the state and local
ment level. With such budgetary buffers in government level could, as a whole, lead to in-
place, even the blow of distinctly adverse de- dividual governments cutting real estate acqui-
velopments can be cushioned rather than sition tax rates or local business and real estate
needing to be offset as early as in the next tax multipliers, which have been raised in mul-
budget. Owing to the rapid decrease in the tiple cases in the past. On the expenditure side,
debt ratio associated with structural surpluses, additional funding has been earmarked under
this would also make it easier to cover soaring, the coalition agreement for areas such as child-
demographically driven expenditure (while rev- care, education, internal security and digitalisa-
enue grows more slowly) in the foreseeable tion. Some projects will require coordination
future . For example, central government will be between central, state and local governments.
affected by increasing central government What would be detrimental here would be for
grants to the pension insurance scheme, while the lines of responsibility to become too blurred
state governments will be confronted with ris- as a result of greater financial interconnected-
ing pension costs. ness.
… ensuring Demographic challenges lie ahead for the pen- On the expenditure side, there is a focus on Prospect of
transparent tax a more
sion insurance, public long- term care and expanding social security in old age. The afore-
financing of fundamental
non- insurance- health insurance schemes. Looking ahead, their mentioned separation of non- insurance- related pension reform
related benefits
reserves will shrink and contribution rates will benefits that are, in principle, to be financed
rise considerably – all without additional bene- out of general taxation, on the one hand, and
fit increases. In order for public finances to be what are essentially contribution- equivalent
open and transparent, it would be expedient to benefits, on the other, appears particularly im-
report the social security funds’ non-i nsurance- portant in this context. The issue of how to ad-
related benefits and base tax grant levels on dress the demographic challenges facing the
the size of these benefits. General social bene- statutory pension insurance scheme is to first
fits would then be easier to identify and would be referred to a commission. Of key import-
be financed by society as a whole via progres- ance here are consistent projections with a
sive taxation. In addition, it would avoid creat- long horizon, which should – as is usual for
ing the impression of shuffling funds between current sustainability analyses – span at least as
the central government budget and the social far as 2060. In order to limit the significant in-
security funds. crease in the contribution and tax rates (to
finance additional central government grants)
Financial leeway There will be some financial leeway available at that is expected in any case, two points should
utilised under
all levels of government over the next few be considered here: first, raising the statutory
coalition deal
years, even with aims to achieve modest struc- retirement age further in line with increasing
tural budget surpluses. With respect to the life expectancy and, second, looking ahead,
social security funds, this applies to the Federal lowering pension levels. It would appear appro-
Employment Agency, for which a contribution priate to combat demographic developments
rate reduction has been agreed in the coalition with measures to counteract the shortage of
deal. In the case of the statutory health insur- potential labour supply.
ance scheme, the contribution rate could also

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
62
income tax thresholds). Turnover tax revenue
Tax revenue*
rose considerably in line with the macroeco-
Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
nomic reference variables, and revenue from
+7 the excise duties on energy and tobacco was
+6 also up significantly.
+5
+4 According to the official estimate of November Underlying
+3 2017, an increase in tax revenue of around 4% dynamic
remains
+2 (including local government taxes) is expected favourable
+1 for 2018. The revenue shortfalls stemming from in 2018 and
medium term
0 legislative changes will more or less offset fiscal
–1 drag on balance.9 Revenue will increase on
2015 2016 2017 account of the overall burden of tax refunds in
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in connection with court rulings decreasing sig-
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
nificantly in net terms. Growth is estimated at
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank around 4% per annum between 2019 and
2022. This is primarily the result of macroeco-
nomic assumptions and fiscal drag.
Budgetary development
of central, state and local Growth could be dampened by the tax policy Only limited tax
cuts envisaged
measures of a new Federal Government. Over-
government for current
all, only limited tax cuts have been outlined in legislative period
Tax revenue the coalition agreement between the CDU,
CSU and SPD – in particular, the scaling- back of
Significant Despite the burden arising from the repayment the solidarity surcharge, which is to begin in
increase in tax
of nuclear fuel tax to owners of nuclear power 2021, the last year of the legislative period. This
revenue despite
nuclear fuel tax plants,7 tax revenue8 rose significantly by 4% in is to be generally regarded as a positive move.
repayment in
2017 (see the above chart and the table on However, the plan to only abolish the solidarity
2017
page 63). The annual result was therefore surcharge up to an exemption limit could give
broadly in line with the official estimate of No- rise to very high marginal tax rates in some
vember 2017. While wage tax and turnover tax areas, plus it is envisaged that the surcharge on
receipts were somewhat lower than projected, corporation tax will be maintained. Given that
income from profit- related taxes grew more special- purpose grants to the federal states in
strongly. Overall, growth was broad-b ased in eastern Germany are to be phased out by
year-o n- year terms. Revenue from profit-r elated 2020, the original justification for the add- on
taxes rose sharply once again – starting from to income taxes appears increasingly dubious.
an already high level in the previous year. In this regard, it would make sense to either
Assessed income tax remained on a strong
growth path, while the increase in corporation
7 Following a ruling by the Federal Constitutional Court
tax was down compared with the major boost published on 7 June 2017 (2 BvL 6/1 3), central government
recorded in 2016. The likewise dynamic rise in was required to repay all nuclear fuel tax payments (includ-
ing interest of €7½ billion, or 1% of total tax revenue).
wage tax receipts primarily reflects the favour- 8 Including transfers to the EU budget – which are de-
able developments in gross wages and salaries. ducted from German tax revenue – but excluding receipts
from local government taxes, which are not yet known for
The additional revenue generated by fiscal drag the quarter under review.
in income taxation was largely offset by 9 The Working Party on Tax Revenue Forecasting issues
projections on the basis of current tax legislation. In this
revenue shortfalls resulting from legislative context, the term “fiscal drag” encompasses the overall
(positive) revenue effect of bracket creep in income tax-
changes (in particular, slightly higher income
ation and the (negative) impact of the fact that specific
tax allowances and a rightward shift in other excise duties are largely independent of prices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
63
Tax revenue
Year as a whole Estimate Q4
for 2017
as a
2016 2017 whole1,2,3 2016 2017
Year- on-
year
Year-on-year change change Year-on-year change
Type of tax € billion € billion % % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total2 648.3 674.6 + 26.3 + 4.1 + 4.0 175.8 182.3 + 6.5 + 3.7
of which
Wage tax 184.8 195.5 + 10.7 + 5.8 + 5.9 52.3 54.7 + 2.4 + 4.7
Profi t-related taxes4 106.7 116.9 + 10.3 + 9.6 + 8.6 25.8 27.4 + 1.6 + 6.1
Assessed income tax 53.8 59.4 + 5.6 + 10.4 + 10.2 14.4 14.9 + 0.5 + 3.1
Corporation tax 27.4 29.3 + 1.8 + 6.6 + 3.9 6.1 6.8 + 0.7 + 11.6
Investment income
tax5 25.4 28.3 + 2.9 + 11.3 + 10.5 5.2 5.7 + 0.4 + 7.8
Turnover taxes6 217.1 226.4 + 9.3 + 4.3 + 4.4 56.1 58.1 + 2.1 + 3.7
Other consumption-
related taxes7 90.1 92.2 + 2.1 + 2.3 + 2.5 27.4 27.6 + 0.2 + 0.6
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi cial tax estimate of November 2017. 2 Including EU
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Tax revenue including (still estimated) local govern-
ment taxes was €10½ billion above the Novem ber 2016 estimate, which formed the basis for the 2017 central government plan drawn
up at the end of 2016. According to government assessments, tax revenue would have been revised upwards by €22½ billion if the
effects of legislation passed and court rulings published (or applied by the tax authorities) since the estimate are removed. 4 Employee
refunds deducted from revenue. 5 Withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 6 Turnover tax
and import turnover tax. 7 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, spirits, air traffi c, coffee, sparkling wine, inter-
mediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery , beer, fi re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
abolish it completely or integrate it into the in- to restrict scope for design at the interface be-
come tax scale in future. tween debt and equity capital and between
interest income and capital gains may prove
Harmonisation For a potentially more fundamental reform of difficult in practice.
of corporate
corporate taxation, the coalition agreement
taxation in EU
still envisaged points to aims for a harmonised European cor- Real estate tax is to be secured as a local gov- Various
measures
porate tax setting. With respect to investment ernment financing source. Non- trivial adjust-
focused on
conditions in Germany, it appears crucial, inter ments may need to be made swiftly to make housing
alia, to keep an eye on international trends this happen, not least on account of a ruling by
– such as tax cuts in the United States – and, the Federal Constitutional Court that is ex-
where necessary, make adjustments in Ger- pected to be made in summer. Generally speak-
many, too. However, at the local government ing, the entire resident population is affected
level, it was possible to create scope in many by this tax. Given its comparatively low distor-
places to lower local business tax multipliers – tionary impact and the reliable, steady revenue
not least thanks to the agreement reached to it generates, it is very well suited as a source of
Abolition of extend central government grants. The aboli- funds for local government. Subject to a consti-
withholding tax
tion of withholding tax on interest income was tutional review, there are also plans to provide
on interest
income not also announced. It should be noted that inter- local governments with an additional tool by
without its
est income offsets increasing prices to a certain introducing a “real estate tax C” – which will
problems
degree and, to this extent, does not increase
one’s ability to pay tax. If this is not taken into
account, the real tax burden of interest income 10 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Return on private finan-
cial assets taking into account inflation and taxes, Monthly
can be very high.10 Furthermore, the intention Report, July 2017, pp 69-75.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
64
due to favourable macroeconomic develop-
Central government fiscal balance *
ments. The repayment of nuclear fuel tax
€ billion
ordered by the Federal Constitutional Court
Quarterly figures
was offset by a sharp decline in transfers to the
+15
EU budget.12 A decrease of €7½ billion was re-
2015
+10
2016 corded for non- tax revenue, the bulk of which
+ 5 2017 was attributable to the Bundesbank’s lower
profit distribution and the one- off reclamation
0
of €1½ billion from the flood relief fund in
– 5 2016. Expenditure grew at only a slightly higher
rate than revenue. Especially noteworthy here
–10
is a clear rise in transfers, particularly to the
Cumulated from start of year +15
social security funds (+€5 billion). Having fallen
2016 +10 considerably in previous years, interest expend-
iture stagnated owing to the fact that persist-
2017 + 5
ent refinancing advantages were offset by
0 lower premiums and additional payments to
the precautionary fund for final payments of
2015 – 5
inflation- indexed Federal securities.
–10
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
The fiscal balance was therefore up by €12 bil- Result more
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed- favourable than
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget lion on the budget plan approved in autumn
planned; further
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects. 2016. As in the previous year, the planned top- up of
Deutsche Bundesbank withdrawal from the refugee reserve (€6½ bil- refugee reserve
questionable
lion) was not required. Instead, aiming for a
probably target the taxation of undeveloped “black zero” budget – a budget without net
residential land. This measure appears to be a borrowing or debt repayment – resulted in the
suitable way of increasing the supply of hous- reserve expanding by a further €5½ billion to
ing in sought- after regions in a targeted man- €24 billion. For three consecutive years now,
ner.11 The planned home buyers’ child benefit marked surpluses have been recorded despite
for first- time buyers could, in particular, further the expenses incurred by central government in
hike the prices of building plots and existing connection with refugees. In view of this, there
properties – especially in the current climate. If is no longer a discernible need for such a spe-
this happens, the measure would not have the cial reserve. The Federal Court of Auditors ex-
desired effect of making it easier for families to pressed concern at this, not least with respect
become property owners. As this measure will to preserving the budgetary principle of annu-
put a significant strain on the central govern- ality.13 A timely dissolution of the reserve to
ment budget in the medium term, it appears repay debt in the budget would therefore be
questionable on the whole. appropriate. Furthermore, this would be in line
with European budget rules, under which re-
Central government budget
Slightly lower According to preliminary data, the central gov- 11 The extent to which the housing supply can be effi-
ciently expanded depends not least on the quantitative im-
surplus in 2017
ernment budget recorded a surplus of €5 bil- portance of vacant building plots in urban areas.
as a whole
lion last year. This equates to a year- on- year 12 A large proportion of this is attributable to the one-o ff
effect of retroactively applying the EU own funds ruling of
decline of €1 billion. Revenue expanded by 4% autumn 2016 to the budget.
overall. Going up by 6½% (€21 billion), tax rev- 13 See Bemerkungen 2017 des Bundesrechnungshofes zur
Haushalts- und Wirtschaftsführung des Bundes, Bundes-
enue grew even more steeply. This is largely tags- Drucksache 19/ 179, p 144.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
65
Key central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
2016 2017 2018
2017
Provisional summer
Item Actual Budget actual draft1
1 Fiscal balance 6.2 – 7.0 5.0 – 8.4
2 Coin seigniorage 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
3 Transfer to (–)/withdrawal from (+) reserves – 6.5 6.7 – 5.3 8.2
4 Net borrowing (1+2+3) – – – –
5 Balance of fi nancial transactions 0.6 – 0.7 – 0.8 0.6
6 Cyclical component in the budget procedure – 0.4 – 1.9 2 2.4 – 0.4
7 Balance of incorporated off-budget entities 1.0 – 3.2 – 1.4 – 2.5
Energy and climate fund – 0.0 – 1.5 – 0.2 – 0.8
Flood assistance fund – 2.3 – 1.0 – 0.7 – 0.3
Fund to promote municipal investment 3.4 – 0.8 – 0.5 – 1.4
8 Structural net borrowing (4–5–6+7)
(repayment: +; borrowing: –) 0.8 – 0.6 – 3.0 – 2.7
9 Structural balance (8–2–3) 7.0 – 7.6 2.0 – 11.2
10 Structural balance adjusted for updated estimate of potential output 7.0 – 12.0 2.0 – 17.5
11 Debt brake ceiling (from 2016: –0.35% of GDP3) – 10.2 – 10.6 – 10.6 – 11.0
* For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public fi nances, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp 68-69. 1 To be presented once
revised by the new Federal Government. 2 Simplifi ed procedure applied: adjusted to the national accounts fi gures (unchanged from
January) published in mid-F ebruary 2018. 3 GDP: gross domestic product. Here, this refers to GDP in the year before the budget is pre-
pared.
Deutsche Bundesbank
serve withdrawals provide no relief for the fis- cerning transfers (€3 billion in total), €1½ bil-
cal balance. lion was due to the basic allowance for the
elderly. Federal states’ settlements may be
Relief provided In 2017, revenue (excluding reserve withdraw- delayed here.17 These would then be counted
by higher tax
als) exceeded its target by €8½ billion. This was against the 2018 budget, meaning to this ex-
revenue and
lower driven by tax receipts.14 Turning to other rev- tent that no relief would be provided overall.
expenditure
enue, shortfalls of €2 billion owing to the Bun-
desbank’s lower- than- expected profit distribu- According to data from the Federal Ministry of Structural out-
turn according
tion were slightly more than offset overall.15 Finance, the structural outturn for 2017 in the
to debt brake
Going beyond the €3 billion global cut in ex- context of the debt brake amounted to -0.1% slightly negative,
but considerable
penditure to be achieved in the course of im- of GDP. The surplus in the core budget was
credit entry in
plementing the budget, expenditure remained neutralised by another reserve top- up (no net control account
€3½ billion below its overall target. The inter-
est burden accounted for €1 billion of this.
However, excluding the (unplanned) premium16 14 The unplanned burden stemming from the nuclear fuel
of €4 billion generated when issuing Federal tax repayment was offset by lower- than- expected transfers
to the EU budget.
securities – which pushed down interest ex- 15 This was due, not least, to higher grants from the EU.
penditure – the interest estimates would have 16 This accounting method harbours the risk of volatile
budgetary developments; it would be advisable to change
been clearly exceeded. Savings on investment this. See Deutsche Bundesbank, Distortive accounting of
expenditure of €2 billion compared with the premiums and discounts in the Federal budget, Monthly
Report, July 2017, pp 43-44. Last year’s premium marked a
budget entitlements were linked, not least, to year- on- year increase in expenditure of €2 billion.
lower outflows for broadband network expan- 17 The 2016 budget outturn, which was deferred until
March 2017 in connection with the supplementary budget,
sion and from guarantees. Of the relief con- factored in delayed settlements of this kind instead.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
66
borrowing).18 A deficit from financial transac- dens of €46 billion in the proposed financial
tions was more than offset by cyclical relief.19 In framework are clearly concentrated on the lat-
addition, the off- budget entities included under ter end of the legislative period. The earmarked
the debt brake recorded a moderate deficit. funds appear to be based on the room for
The structural outturn was thus significantly manoeuvre reported in last summer’s financial
better than the debt brake ceiling of -0.35% of plan (€15 billion), and also take into account
GDP. At the start of March, central govern- the upward revision of the November 2017 tax
ment’s control account will once again contain estimate and the better- than- expected budget
a considerable credit entry (€7½ billion). outturn. The latter will push up the refugee
reserve . These funds are intended to finance
Starting position A revised draft central government budget for new burdens, although it would seem logical
for 2018 budget
2018 will only become the subject of parlia- to use them to pay down debt in the budget
more favourable
mentary deliberations once a new Federal Gov- here, as outlined above. The assumed room for
ernment is in place. In view of this, a particu- manoeuvre covers, in particular, a reduction in
larly long period of interim budget manage- the solidarity surcharge from 2021 onwards,
ment is expected this year, during which new additional expenditure in the areas of educa-
(not previously agreed on or legally regulated) tion and social welfare, and an extension of
spending is tightly restricted. The budgetary temporary central government grants for state
situation is likely to continue to improve as a and local governments beyond 2018, chiefly
result. The outgoing Federal Government’s those aimed at the integration of refugees.
draft budget of June 2017 envisaged a reserve However, the announced additional EU fund-
withdrawal of €8 billion to maintain a budget ing payments and significantly higher contribu-
without additional debt incurrence. Compared tions to the statutory health insurance scheme
with the draft budget, additional revenue of for persons receiving unemployment benefit II,
€7 billion was already foreseeable when the in particular, were not taken into account as
Novem ber 2017 tax estimate was published. As they still seem to be conditional on sufficient
GDP growth is now forecast to be even stronger funding. Should favourable macroeconomic
than estimated in the Federal Government’s developments continue, however, it will prob-
projection last autumn, tax revenue could even ably be possible to fund some further measures
be revised upwards again. In addition, the without additional debt incurrence. Yet, it should
global revenue shortfall of €2 billion could, in be borne in mind that continuing even just a
the absence of budget- burdening measures so part of the solidarity surcharge probably has to
far, represent a further buffer. On the expend- be justified by a particular Federal Government
iture side, many of the expenditure savings need, which is hard to detect.
made at budget outturn vis- à- vis the budget
plans are likely to be maintained, meaning that
there should be no trouble achieving the then
envisaged global spending cut of €4 billion, to- 18 The way in which changes in reserves are accounted for
gether with making additional cost savings in differs from the European budget rules, compliance with
which was intended to be ensured by means of the debt
connection with interim budget management. brake. Excluding the reserve top- up, the amount credited
It should therefore be quite possible to once to the control account would have been correspondingly
higher. However, the use of control account funds is con-
again close the fiscal year without incurring siderably more limited.
additional debt or drawing on the reserve. 19 In the case of the debt brake, the cyclical component
determined at budget outturn compared with the figure
projected in the budget (2017: -€2 billion) is adjusted using
Burdens result- The measures agreed in the coalition agree- a simplified procedure based on the revision of nominal
GDP growth (for more details, see Deutsche Bundesbank,
ing from new
ment between the CDU, CSU and SPD will Federal states’ cyclical adjustment in the context of the
Federal Govern-
debt brake, Monthly Report, March 2017, p 53). The clos-
ment’s measures affect the outlook for 2018 only slightly. The
ing entry in September of the following year is based on
cumulated central government budgetary bur- the then current GDP data.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
67
Central According to figures from the Federal Ministry overall, by €5½ billion on the year,24 making
government’s
of Finance, central government’s off- budget this the highest result since the country’s reuni-
off- budget
entities record entities (excluding bad banks and other entities fication. This was primarily due to the increase
distinct surplus
that use commercial double- entry bookkeep- in tax revenue (+4%, or just over €10 billion).
in 2017 …
ing) recorded a surplus of €3 billion in 2017,20 Considerably increased transfers from public
having posted a surplus of €½ billion the year administrations (+8½%, or just over €5½ bil-
before (amidst continued central government lion) also played a role, although these were, in
prepayments to the fund to promote municipal part, central government funds to be for-
investment). Off-b udget entities for civil servant warded to local government. Overall revenue
pension obligations posted distinct surpluses growth totalled just over 4%. By comparison,
once again (€3 billion). The precautionary fund expenditure growth was more modest at just
for final payments of inflation- indexed Federal over 2½%. In particular, personnel expenditure
securities recorded a surplus of €1½ billion (-€2 (+4%, or just under €5 billion) and payments
billion in 2016). Relevant debt instruments had to administrations (+3½%, or €3½ billion)
not expired here, and there was a notable price – mainly to local government – increased dis-
increase to be offset by central government tinctly. However, declines had a dampening
transfers.21 By contrast, off- budget entities in- effect , especially those in interest expenditure
cluded in the debt brake (the flood relief fund, (-6½%, or €1 billion) and other operating ex-
the energy and climate fund and the fund to penditure (-1%, following the refugee- related
promote municipal investment) all saw deficits exceptionally sharp increase in 2016), as did
of up to just over €½ billion. the weak development of investment expend-
iture.
… and outlook Central government’s off- budget entities are
for 2018 is only
expected to record an overall surplus this year, A high surplus can be expected for 2018, too. Favourable
slightly less
outlook for 2018
favourable too. However, there is the forthcoming repay- Payroll employment is likely to continue to
and the medium
ment of an inflation- indexed Federal note grow, other operating expenditure to increase term
(Bobl) to consider, which will burden the rele- again, and, not least, investment expenditure
vant off- budget entity when inflation compen- to rise substantially. At the same time, how-
sation payments are due. In addition, outflows ever, ongoing favourable developments in tax
from the fund to promote municipal invest-
ment are likely to increase considerably once
20 The foundation for funding nuclear waste disposal,
the rules of the new task area to increase in-
which received a one- off payment of €24 billion from
vestment in schools have come into force and power plant operators in 2017, is not included. As an ad-
vance payment, this cash receipt retained a neutral balance
the federal states have identified their eligible
effect in the national accounts.
municipalities (with weak financial capacity). 21 The balance of this fund is not taken into consideration
in the national accounts. The current transfers received are
Overall, the aggregated figure considered here only recorded as central government’s interest expenditure,
for central government’s off- budget entities is and the redemption premiums financed by this fund do not
affect the fiscal balance in the national accounts.
likely to decline somewhat in comparison with 22 The development of local government finances in the
2017. third quarter of 2017 was analysed in the short articles in
the Bundesbank Monthly Report of January 2018. Only
data on the core budgets were available at the time. How-
ever, the fiscal balances do not differ substantially from the
State government budgets22
data now available that include off- budget entities. The
data on state government budgets in this quarterly report
Historically high According to the latest cash data, state govern- are based on the monthly cash statistics on the core
budgets.
surplus for 2017:
ment’s core budgets concluded 2017 with an 23 Without consolidation assistance, Saarland would also
dynamic tax
revenue amid exceptionally high surplus of €14 billion. With have registered a deficit.
24 The prior- year figure is based on monthly cash statistics.
muted spending
the exception of North Rhine- Westphalia and The quarterly results for 2017 are not yet available. In 2016,
increase
these included negative closing entries (from special trans-
Bremen, all of the federal states recorded a sur-
fers to off- budget entities), with the result that the surplus
plus.23 Their finances improved significantly subsequently stood at €6 billion.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
68
State government fiscal balance* planning regular net redemptions. In December Stability
Council extends
2017, by contrast, the Stability Council felt it
€ billion budgetary
necessary to extend budgetary recovery pro- recovery proced-
+8 Quarterly figures ures for Bremen
cedures, which have been running since 2012,
and Saarland
+6 until 2020 in the case of the two highly in- and urges
further
+4 debted state governments of Bremen and Saar-
consolidation
+2 land. Additional measures were required for
Bremen in particular to enable it to adhere to
0
2017 its deficit reduction path. There is still reason to
–2 2016
2015 fear that the consolidation efforts of these two
16
Cumulated from state governments will ultimately be insuffi-
start of year 14 cient, and that a structurally balanced budget
12 will only be achieved with the help of the high
10 central government budgetary recovery assis-
tance to the tune of €400 million for each
8
state, which is to be paid out on an annual
2017 6
basis from 2020 onwards. Overall, it is import-
4
2016 ant for the individual state governments to en-
2 sure that their budgetary outcomes – including
2015
0 off- budget entities – per capita of the popula-
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 tion do not remain too far below the federal
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from state average. Otherwise, future budget-
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets
burdening nationwide measures, which seem
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche Bundesbank likely given the overall very good economic
conditions and will probably be based on the
revenue are expected, and a further decline in room for manoeuvre of the majority of the
interest payments is to have an alleviating state governments under the debt brake, will
effect . The Federal Ministry of Finance’s De- require immediate significant additional con-
cember 2017 forecast for the Stability Council solidation measures.
anticipates further rising surpluses in the next
few years, starting from a somewhat lower The coalition agreement between the CDU, Coalition
agreement
closing level last year. This is also partly attribut- CSU and SPD also contains measures which
could potentially
able to the increase in central government could affect the budgets of the state govern- have extensive
impact on state
funds in the context of the reformed financial ments and their local authorities to a significant
government
equalisation system as of 2020. The favourable but, in some cases, not precisely specified ex- budgets
conditions should be used by state govern- tent, in future. In addition to the ongoing cen-
ments not least to contribute to the elimination tral government transfers intended to relieve
of remaining local governments’ budgetary im- the burden of refugee costs, further transfers
balances. Further state government funds are planned for the expansion of day care facil-
could be counted on here to support any ex- ities for children in primary education,25 im-
tensive consolidation of local government fi- proved quality of childcare and reduced paren-
nances. tal financial contributions, as well as for general
In the light of the overall exceptionally good
fiscal situation, the majority of the state gov-
25 In this regard, it has been announced that a legal
ernments are expected to comply with the entitle ment will be implemented into the Eighth Book of
the Social Security Code (SGB VIII) by 2025. Linking this to
debt brake, which comes into force in 2020,
assistance for children and young people would push edu-
without difficulties. Many states are already cation policy issues into the background.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
69
investment in education (particularly the digi- of 4½% as a result of the ongoing favourable
talisation of schools).26 In addition, education employment and wage developments, but also
policy coordination is to involve central govern- due to the phasing-o ut of a temporary reduc-
ment and become more strongly institutional- tion of the central government grant. By con-
ised. It is not yet clear how these measures are trast, expenditure rose at a somewhat slower
to be implemented and financed in concrete pace (+3½%). Pensions saw an annual average
terms. For example, a legal entitlement to all- increase of 3½% on the previous year. How-
day childcare for children of primary school age ever, the growth in the number of pensions
would entail considerable investment and per- was somewhat more subdued.
sonnel costs on the part of the local govern-
ments, which are primarily responsible for this. At the start of the year, the contribution rate Stable result
possible for
Central government’s planned share (€2 billion was lowered by 0.1 percentage point to 18.6%.
2018 in spite of
for the entire legislative period) only appears to However, revenue will be bolstered by positive contribution rate
reduction
cover these costs to a limited extent, possibly labour market developments and marked wage
because they are mostly to be accrued after the increases. Expenditure growth and the ex-
end of this legislative period. Not least the con- pected mid- year pension adjustment are likely
sent of the federal states depends on the con- to be lower overall than in 2017. As things
crete implementation of the stated measures. stand, a virtually unchanged result appears
The planned national educational council will likely on the whole, whereby the upper limit for
play only an advisory role. It remains to be seen the reserves is expected to be distinctly ex-
whether better nationwide coordination will ceeded once again.
succeed in this way and whether the state gov-
ernments will agree to increased central gov- However, the finances of the statutory pension Statutory
pension
ernment involvement in the area of education, insurance scheme are currently only experien-
insurance
in view of their autonomy in cultural and edu- cing an interim peak. In the medium term, as scheme only
experiencing
cational matters. Although the desired object- more people enter retirement and employment
interim peak,
ives certainly appear worthy of support, an in- loses momentum, partly due to the fact that however
creased blurring of the lines of responsibility for birth rates have been declining for decades, the
financing and various tasks between central reserves are set to be depleted. Central govern-
and state government would be problematic as ment’s current pension insurance report states
it would entail the risk of inefficiencies, as past that contribution rate increases can be ex-
experience has shown. pected from 2023 onwards. Owing to demo-
graphic developments, the statutory pension
insurance scheme as a whole will be put under
Social security funds27 considerable financial pressure up to 2035 and
will still feel perceptible strain thereafter. It is
Statutory pension insurance
therefore particularly important to take the
scheme
long- term prospects into account when mak-
ing decisions about benefit expansions. If the
2017 result According to preliminary figures, the statutory contribution rate, the statutory retirement age,
significantly
pension insurance scheme posted a small sur-
better than that
of previous year plus in 2017. The result was thus significantly
better than in the previous year (+€2½ billion) 26 Financial assistance in accordance with Article 104c of
the German Basic Law, which was introduced in 2017 for
and better than estimated in central govern- financially weak local governments, is to be extended to all
ment’s pension insurance report of autumn local governments.
27 The financial development of the public long- term care
2016 (+€2 billion). The reserve was above the and statutory health insurance schemes in the third quarter
of 2017 was analysed in the short articles of the December
statutory upper limit once again, at 1.6 times
2017 Monthly Report. These are the most recent data avail-
monthly expenditure. Revenue rose by a total able.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
70
periods for families with three or more children
Finances of the German statutory
born before 1992 extended by a third year.
pension insurance scheme
Pension income is also to be raised for persons
with low pension entitlements insured on a
Year-on-year percentage change
Revenue Expenditure long- term basis, according to their needs. In
6 6
cases of reduced earning capacity, pension pro-
5 5
visions are to be improved by means of longer
4 4
non- contributory supplementary periods.28
3 3
2 2 Here, adequate provisions are, in principle, a
1 1 key component of the statutory pension insur-
0 0 ance scheme. However, an expansion of bene-
2015 2016 2017 2015 2016 2017 fits would distinctly boost incentives for early
retirement, which would make it even more
€ billion
Fiscal balance, quarterly figures important to prevent the system from being
+4
abused. A further increase in “mothers’ pen-
+3
+2 2015 sions” ups the spending pressure on the pen-
2016
+1 2017 sion insurance scheme; however, additional ex-
0 penditure is constrained by linking this to the
–1
number of children. A threshold of 35 years,
–2
made up of contribution periods, child-r aising
–3
periods and care- giving periods, has been
–4
€ billion
agreed for basic pensions, with contribution
Cumulated from start of year 0
2017
periods including periods of claiming un-
–1
2015 employment benefit I, for example. In view of
–2
the rising retirement age, 35 years seems rather
2016 –3
low, but the planned means-t esting would limit
–4
–5 additional expenditure. However, the intended
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 further- reaching exemption of owner-o ccupied
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche housing29 would entail additional discrimin-
Rentenversicherung Bund). Preliminary quarterly figures. The fi-
nal annual figures generally differ from the total of the repor- ation and distortions.
ted preliminary quarterly figures as the latter are not revised
subsequently.
Deutsche Bundesbank There are no separate pension contributions to Define
non- insurance-
finance the increase in mothers’ pensions and
related benefits
the pension level and the central government basic pensions. Funding these from contribu- and fund them
using tax
grant all paint a consistent picture here, this tion receipts would therefore infringe the prin-
revenue
could not only strengthen confidence in the ciple of equivalence, and could possibly result
statutory pension insurance scheme but also in undesirable distributional effects up to the
reduce uncertainty as regards financial security maximum level of earnings subject to contribu-
in old age. Long- term projections could also re- tions on account of the proportional tax re-
veal intergenerational distribution effects and
provide a sounder basis for pension policy
decision- making.
28 The non- contributory supplementary periods to be
More compre- Various benefit increases have been outlined in heeded when calculating pensions are to be extended to
hensive old- age the coalition agreement between the CDU, the statutory retirement age (currently 65 years and seven
provision months) in the short term, and then to 67 years when this
proposed in CSU and SPD. For instance, pensions for per- change comes into effect.
coalition sons with reduced earning capacity are to be 29 It appears that this is intended to apply even in cases
agreement where unemployment benefit II or social assistance are
increased and the recognised child- raising received .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
71
gime.30 In order to increase the transparency of A pensions commission is to develop proposals Maintaining
pension level
the pension insurance scheme and to avoid for limits for the long-t erm contribution rate and
and upper
shuffling funds to and from the central govern- pension level in particular, for the period after limit for contri-
bution rate
ment budget depending on the cash balance, it 2025. Were the pension level to remain un-
long- term …
would make sense, in principle, to define the changed beyond 2025, this would result in high
benefits not covered by contributions and to and increasing additional expenditure over time.
direct central government grants towards If the rise in the contribution rate were to be re-
them. This would also make the pursued ob- stricted simultaneously, this would have to trans-
jectives, as well as their costs and funding, late into changes to the statutory retirement age,
more comprehensible. to level-i ndependent benefits (such as surviving
dependents’ pensions) and/o r to the central gov-
Compulsory Insurance under the statutory pension insur- ernment grant. Against a backdrop of increasing
insurance for
ance scheme is to become compulsory for self- life expectancy, arguments in favour of increasing
self- employed
persons could employed persons, with an option to “opt- out” the retirement age include, inter alia, the possi-
dampen
if they have made sufficient old- age provisions bility of stabilising the relationship between the
contribution
rate rise over elsewhere. Including self- employed persons in contribution period and the pension- drawing
a longer
the statutory pension insurance scheme would period, and increasing employment potential.31
transitional
period directly result in additional revenue, but the re-
sulting additional expenditure would only rise Additional central government funds for pen- … would
require marked
after some time. On account of the given legal sion expenditure would further augment the
tax increases
regulations, the contribution rate rise would be increase in central government grants. Trans- even if pension
age increases
dampened for a transitional period. However, fers to the statutory pension insurance scheme
the statutory pension insurance scheme’s already account for almost three tenths of ex-
demographic problem cannot be permanently penditure in the central government budget,
resolved by expanding the pool of insured per- and steep growth is already anticipated here
sons. without expansions. Measured in terms of GDP
(which essen tially constitutes the tax base),
Stabilisation of In addition to the above measures favouring central government grants are set to increase
pension level
subgroups of pensioners, it is envisaged to disproportionately because they follow per
until 2025
both stabilise the pension level measured capita earnings for the most part (which, unlike
against the standard pension (assuming an GDP, are not dampened by the demographic
average income over 45 contribution years) at challenges posed by employment).32 Not least
the current value of around 48%, and to re- to at least mitigate an increased tax burden,
strict the contribution rate to 20% (present further increasing the statutory retirement age
rate: 18.6%) until 2025. On account of the very for age groups that are currently close to retire-
favourable labour market developments, it has
been possible to keep additional expenditure
30 For more on the adequacy of funding retirement bene-
related to the stabilisation of the pension level fits for child- raising periods with tax revenue, see Gut-
to a limit, according to central government’s achten des Sozialbeirats zum Rentenversicherungsbericht
2013 (Bundestags- Drucksache 18/ 95). Increasing benefits
latest pension insurance report. With no new for people claiming pensions for reduced earning capacity
measures that have a detrimental impact, the represents an expansion of insurance cover, meaning that
raised contribution rates certainly seem to be an appropri-
contribution rate would be expected to exceed ate means of financing.
the 20% mark in around 2025, as things stand. 31 In principle, it would make sense to adjust the calcula-
tion of the standard pension to factor in the claims arising
However, the contribution rate could now rise from extended employment periods. For more information,
sooner and more steeply on account of the en- see Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: longer- term pension
developments, Monthly Report, August 2016, pp 68-77.
visaged benefit increases, and additional tax 32 They also rise much more sharply than contribution re-
ceipts. Against a backdrop of rising pension contribution
revenue may ultimately be necessary to ensure
rates, contribution receipts and large parts of the central
adherence to the upper limit. government funds increase to the same extent.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
72
ous year. The budget estimate (surplus of €1½
Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency * billion) was substantially exceeded once again.
The free reserves for operational activities in-
creased at the end of 2017 to €17 billion.35
Year-on-year percentage change
+12 +12
Revenue Expenditure
+ 9 + 9 Amid robust growth in contributions, revenue Further
decline in
rose by a total of 4%. At 3%, the increase in
+ 6 + 6 unemployment
+ 3 + 3 expenditure lagged distinctly behind. Excluding benefit spending
the aforementioned special effects, spending
0 0
would actually have fallen slightly. In particular,
– 3 – 3
payments for unemployment benefit continued
– 6 – 6
to decline and spending on active labour mar-
– 9 – 9
ket policy measures was at around the same
2015 2016 2017 2015 2016 2017 level as the previous year.
€ billion Fiscal balance, quarterly data
+3 The budget plan envisages a marked decline in High surplus
2015 likely for 2018,
the surplus to €2½ billion in 2018. Sharp
+2 2016 too
2017 growth of almost a quarter, or €1½ billion, on
+1
the year is expected once again for active la-
0
€ billion bour market policy measures. From the current
–1 2017 +6
perspective, unemployment benefit spending
Cumulated from start of year 2016 +5 also looks set to rise due to an increase in the
+4
number of recipients and the per capita rates.
2015
+3 However, in the light of the anticipated favour-
+2 able labour market developments, which are
+1 also projected by the Federal Government in
0 the current Annual Economic Report, these
–1 esti mates seem significantly overstated. A sub-
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 stantial share of the deterioration (€1½ billion)
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Federal Employment in the budget position is due to an additional
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’
ad hoc special allocation to the civil servants’
pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank pension fund,36 without which the surplus
could have been expected to rise once more,
ment, even after 2030, should not be categor- as things stand.
ically ruled out. As is the case in current law, a
certain reduction in the pension level which 33 Excluding the pension fund, ie the transfers reduce the
can be offset by private provisions still appears fiscal balance.
34 In 2016, the supplementary pension scheme of central
equally sensible. and state government (Versorgungsanstalt des Bundes und
der Länder, or VBL) had reimbursed the additional pay-
ments charged in previous years. This resulted first and
Federal Employment Agency foremost in subdued administrative expenditure by the
Federal Employment Agency. See Deutsche Bundesbank,
Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2016, p 68 and p 73.
High surplus The Federal Employment Agency’s core budget33 35 Further reserves include the insolvency benefit and win-
for 2017 was €6 billion in surplus in 2017, thus slightly ter compensation reserve (totalling just over €2 billion) and
a reserve of €6½ billion in the pension fund.
exceeding the already high level of the previous 36 As a result of the special allocation, transfers are to end
year. The result was, in fact, reduced by a special in 2028 rather than in 2048, as originally planned. In add-
ition, from 2018, the rate of regular annual transfers was
allocation to the pension fund totalling just over raised from 80% to 96.6% of civil servants’ pensionable
pay (which, apart from the basic salary, may include family
€½ billion, whereas it had been increased by a
allowances as well as benefits and other remuneration
positive one-o ff effect (€½ billion)34 in the previ- deemed pensionable).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
73
Marked In the light of the forecast positive labour rate are logical. If the surpluses are cyclical,
contribution rate
market development at present, the Federal however, they should not be available for use.
reduction
appropriate Employment Agency’s financial situation is set Yet even if this is taken into account, the reduc-
to remain very positive for the next few years. tion announced in the coalition agreement
Surpluses are expected to increase and reserves (0.3 percentage points) seems rather moder-
to grow strongly as a consequence. Against ate.
this backdrop, plans to reduce the contribution

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
74

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
1•
Statistical
Section

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
2•
Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest rates ................................................................... 5•
2 External transactions and positions ............................................................................... 5•
3 General economic indicators ........................................................................................ 6•
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts .......................................................................... 8•
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) ............................ 10•
3 Banking system’s liquidity position ................................................................................ 14•
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1 Assets ........................................................................................................................... 16•
2 Liabilities ...................................................................................................................... 18•
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)
in Germany .................................................................................................................. 20•
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks ........... 24•
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents ............................... 26•
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents ........................ 28•
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) ...................... 30•
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing
loans, sectors of economic activity ............................................................................... 32•
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany ...................... 34•
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in
Germany ...................................................................................................................... 36•
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ......... 36•
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to
non-banks (non-MFIs) ................................................................................................... 38•
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany ....... 38•
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany ......................................................... 39•
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of
German banks (MFIs) .................................................................................................... 40•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
3•
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area .......................................................................... 42•
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany ................................................................................. 42•
VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates ......................................................................................................... 43•
2 Base rates ..................................................................................................................... 43•
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders ................................. 43•
4 Money market rates, by month .................................................................................... 43•
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of
German banks (MFIs) .................................................................................................... 44•
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
1 Assets ........................................................................................................................... 48•
2 Liabilities ...................................................................................................................... 49•
VIII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany ...................................... 50•
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents ................................................................... 51•
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .......................................... 52•
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents ........................................................................ 52•
5 Yields and indices on German securities ....................................................................... 53•
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany ................................................ 53•
IX Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations ...... 54•
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations .......................................... 55•
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households ............................. 56•
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households ................................................................. 57•
X Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty.... 58•
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the
national accounts ......................................................................................................... 58•
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics) 59•
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development ...................................... 59•
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue ......................................................... 60•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
4•
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type .................... 60•
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes .................................................... 61•
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets ....................... 61•
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development .................................................. 62•
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development......................................... 62•
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development ........................... 63•
12 Central government: borrowing in the market .............................................................. 63•
13 General government: debt by creditor .......................................................................... 63•
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category ................................................. 64•
XI Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income ............................ 65•
2 Output in the production sector ................................................................................... 66•
3 Orders received by industry .......................................................................................... 67•
4 Orders received by construction ................................................................................... 68•
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles ................................................................ 68•
6 Labour market .............................................................................................................. 69•
7 Prices ........................................................................................................................... 70•
8 Households’ income ..................................................................................................... 71•
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy) ........................................................................ 71•
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups ............................................ 72•
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups ..................................... 73•
XII External sector
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area ............................................ 74•
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany ............... 75•
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and
group of countries ........................................................................................................ 76•
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany ................................. 77•
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany ................................................ 77•
6 Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ..................................................... 77•
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany .................................................. 78•
8 External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................. 79•
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis
non-residents ............................................................................................................... 80•
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies .............................. 81•
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union ................................................................ 81•
12 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price
competitiveness ............................................................................................................ 82•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
5
I Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
M 3 3
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
moving average MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation 4 Eonia 5,7 Euribor 6,7 outstanding 8
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2 0 1 6 Apr 9.7 5.3 4.8 5.0 3.5 1.3 − 2.6 − 0.34 − 0.25 0.9
May 9.1 5.1 4.9 4.9 3.7 1.4 − 2.2 − 0.34 − 0.26 0.8
June 8.7 5.1 5.1 5.1 4.0 1.5 − 2.1 − 0.33 − 0.27 0.7
July 8.7 5.1 5.2 5.1 3.9 1.3 − 2.4 − 0.33 − 0.29 0.6
Aug 8.6 5.0 5.0 5.1 3.9 1.6 − 2.3 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.5
Sep 8.3 5.0 5.0 4.8 4.0 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.6
Oct 8.0 4.6 4.5 4.7 4.3 2.2 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.31 0.7
Nov 8.5 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.4 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.35 − 0.31 1.0
Dec 8.8 4.8 5.0 4.8 4.7 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.32 1.0
2 0 1 7 Jan 8.4 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.5 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.1
Feb 8.3 4.7 4.6 4.8 4.3 2.2 − 1.0 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2
Mar 8.9 5.0 5.1 4.8 4.8 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2
Apr 9.1 5.0 4.8 4.9 4.5 2.6 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
May 9.2 5.1 4.9 4.8 4.3 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
June 9.5 5.2 4.8 4.8 4.1 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
July 9.2 5.0 4.5 4.8 3.9 2.6 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2
Aug 9.5 5.4 5.0 4.9 3.8 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
Sep 9.8 5.4 5.2 5.1 3.9 2.5 − 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
Oct 9.4 5.4 5.0 5.0 3.8 2.6 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
Nov 9.1 5.3 4.9 4.8 3.9 2.9 − 1.2 − 0.35 − 0.33 0.9
Dec 8.6 5.1 4.6 ... 3.6 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.34 − 0.33 0.9
2 0 1 8 Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
/
1 Source:ECB.2 Seasonallyadjusted.3 Excludingmoneymarketfundsharesunits, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
moneymarketpaperanddebtsecuritieswithamaturityofuptotwoyearsheldby Table VI.4, p 43 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include:DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK.
2 External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments r Euro exchange rates 1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment derivatives 2 investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real
Period € million 1 EUR = ... USDQ1 1999 = 100
2 0 1 6 Apr + 34,678 + 35,828 + 32,995 − 13,812 + 132,693 − 22,205 − 62,204 − 1,476 1.1339 94.4 89.5
May + 18,451 + 32,635 + 20,637 + 22,024 + 692 − 14,460 + 9,269 + 3,113 1.1311 94.6 89.9
June + 38,432 + 39,130 + 21,352 + 441 + 399 − 10,507 + 30,394 + 625 1.1229 94.4 89.7
July + 34,064 + 33,814 + 20,275 + 16,364 + 44,592 + 12,999 − 52,738 − 942 1.1069 94.6 89.8
Aug + 24,225 + 25,247 + 36,314 + 36,165 + 54,943 + 6,248 − 63,016 + 1,974 1.1212 94.9 90.0
Sep + 36,416 + 33,600 + 61,444 + 75,335 + 21,913 + 4,333 − 46,882 + 6,746 1.1212 95.1 90.1
Oct + 34,178 + 28,338 + 16,836 + 21,989 + 44,325 + 6,346 − 51,876 − 3,949 1.1026 95.1 90.3
Nov + 37,311 + 34,182 + 6,029 − 251 − 27,345 + 2,918 + 28,161 + 2,545 1.0799 94.6 89.6
Dec + 45,185 + 33,239 + 76,341 + 56,256 + 18,499 + 6,620 − 11,081 + 6,046 1.0543 93.7 88.9
2 0 1 7 Jan − 361 + 7,175 + 5,685 + 6,488 − 4,530 + 6,954 + 1,817 − 5,043 1.0614 93.9 89.1
Feb + 25,041 + 25,573 + 24,978 + 29,164 + 54,508 + 7,418 − 68,156 + 2,044 1.0643 93.4 88.8
Mar + 45,751 + 37,850 + 38,773 − 37,535 + 49,269 + 8,802 + 17,518 + 719 1.0685 94.0 89.2
Apr + 20,037 + 24,870 + 15,786 + 31,152 + 18,172 + 2,433 − 31,829 − 4,142 1.0723 93.7 89.0
May + 16,196 + 29,774 + 6,689 + 20,958 − 21,586 + 3,792 + 2,394 + 1,132 1.1058 95.6 90.5
June + 34,535 + 34,630 + 39,912 − 43,315 + 29,400 − 8,570 + 60,959 + 1,438 1.1229 96.3 91.2
July + 43,265 + 32,684 + 56,698 + 5,454 + 28,625 − 2,651 + 30,464 − 5,194 1.1511 97.6 92.4
Aug + 39,200 + 26,276 + 37,502 − 7,563 + 89,942 − 5,073 − 39,123 − 682 1.1807 99.0 93.6
Sep + 46,578 + 36,338 + 68,037 + 18,013 + 29,812 − 2,930 + 16,722 + 6,421 1.1915 99.0 93.6
Oct + 35,386 + 27,408 + 39,101 + 26,793 + 50,100 − 232 − 34,908 − 2,653 1.1756 98.6 p 93.1
Nov + 37,828 + 35,108 + 35,086 − 17,950 + 33,246 + 353 + 13,255 + 6,181 1.1738 98.5 p 93.0
Dec ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1836 98.8 p 93.3
2 0 1 8 Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2200 99.4 p 93.8
* Source:ECB,accordingtotheinternationalstandardsoftheBalanceofPayments XII.10 and 12, pp 81−82 2 Including employee stock options. 3 Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1 See also Tables currencies of The-EER-19 group.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
6
I Key economic data for the euro area
3 General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1,2
2015 2.1 1.4 1.7 1.7 0.1 1.1 − 0.3 25.6 1.0 2.8
2016 1.8 1.5 1.9 2.1 2.1 1.2 − 0.2 5.1 0.9 2.1
2017 ... ... 2.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2 0 1 6 Q3 1.7 1.6 1.7 2.0 2.2 0.7 1.1 2.7 0.7 0.5
Q4 1.9 1.5 1.3 3.1 2.0 0.9 − 1.3 9.9 0.5 2.8
2 0 1 7 Q1 2.1 1.8 3.4 4.6 3.8 1.6 0.7 5.1 2.0 4.0
Q2 2.4 1.5 1.0 5.7 3.0 1.2 1.5 6.3 1.2 4.0
Q3 2.8 1.6 2.2 4.2 2.8 2.0 1.3 10.5 1.4 5.8
Q4 2.7 ... 2.3 ... ... 2.3 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 1,3
2015 2.1 − 0.0 0.8 0.1 − 1.2 1.8 1.0 36.9 1.1 3.4
2016 1.5 4.3 1.0 1.9 2.3 0.3 2.6 0.7 1.7 4.9
2017 e 3.0 ... p 3.4 7.7 ... ... ... p − 2.2 ... 8.5
2 0 1 6 Q3 1.0 4.9 0.6 3.0 2.6 − 0.6 2.0 − 0.8 1.6 1.4
Q4 2.3 4.5 1.4 7.6 3.2 0.5 4.0 3.2 3.6 9.8
2 0 1 7 Q1 1.3 1.6 1.0 10.4 2.5 0.8 9.7 − 6.0 1.6 8.6
Q2 2.7 3.5 3.1 11.1 4.3 1.6 3.2 − 1.1 2.9 9.3
Q3 3.7 4.6 4.3 4.5 4.0 2.9 3.9 − 3.4 4.0 11.4
Q4 e 4.2 ... p 5.0 5.2 ... ... ... p 1.6 ... 4.9
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
2015 81.3 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.5
2016 81.8 80.0 85.0 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 − 76.3 72.6
2017 83.0 81.8 86.5 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 − 76.8 74.5
2 0 1 6 Q4 82.3 80.9 85.7 75.0 80.6 83.6 69.3 − 75.7 73.1
2 0 1 7 Q1 82.5 80.7 85.9 74.4 81.0 84.6 68.6 − 76.5 74.5
Q2 82.6 81.4 86.0 76.4 82.1 84.3 68.1 − 76.0 74.8
Q3 83.2 82.0 86.7 73.9 82.6 84.7 72.0 − 77.0 74.5
Q4 83.8 82.9 87.2 74.8 83.6 85.2 71.2 − 77.6 74.2
2 0 1 8 Q1 84.4 82.1 88.0 75.5 83.1 86.2 70.4 − 78.3 75.8
Standardised unemployment rate 5
2015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 9.9 11.9 9.9
2016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 8.4 11.7 9.6
2017 9.1 7.2 3.8 ... 8.6 9.5 ... 6.7 ... 8.7
2 0 1 7 July 9.0 7.2 3.7 6.0 8.7 9.7 21.0 6.7 11.3 8.9
Aug 9.0 7.1 3.8 5.4 8.6 9.7 20.8 6.7 11.1 8.7
Sep 8.9 7.0 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.5 20.9 6.7 11.1 8.4
Oct 8.8 6.8 3.8 5.2 8.6 9.4 20.9 6.5 11.0 8.2
Nov 8.7 6.7 3.6 5.4 8.7 9.3 20.9 6.4 10.9 8.1
Dec 8.7 6.6 3.7 ... 8.7 9.2 ... 6.2 10.8 8.1
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
2015 6 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
2017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2 0 1 7 Aug 1.5 2.0 1.8 4.2 0.8 1.0 0.6 0.4 1.4 3.2
Sep 1.5 2.0 1.8 3.9 0.8 1.1 1.0 0.2 1.3 3.0
Oct 1.4 1.8 1.5 4.0 0.5 1.2 0.5 0.5 1.1 2.7
Nov 1.5 2.1 1.8 4.5 0.9 1.2 1.1 0.5 1.1 2.7
Dec 1.4 2.1 1.6 3.8 0.5 1.2 1.0 0.5 1.0 2.2
2 0 1 8 Jan e 1.3 ... 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... e 1.1 ...
General government financial balance 7
2015 − 2.1 − 2.5 0.6 0.1 − 2.7 − 3.6 − 5.7 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 1.2
2016 − 1.5 − 2.5 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.4 0.5 − 0.7 − 2.5 0.0
2017 ... ... 1.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
General government debt 7
2014 91.8 106.8 74.6 10.7 60.2 95.0 179.0 104.5 131.8 40.9
2015 89.9 106.0 70.9 10.0 63.6 95.8 176.8 76.9 131.5 36.9
2016 88.9 105.7 68.1 9.4 63.1 96.5 180.8 72.8 132.0 40.6
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4 Manufacturing,in%;seasonallyadjusted;dataarecollectedinJanuary,April,July
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1 Annual and October. 5 As a percentage of the civilian labour force;
percentage change. 2 GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted seasonally adjusted. Standardised unemployment rate of Germany:
data. 3 Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. BundesbankcalculationbasedonunadjusteddatafromtheFederalStatisticalOffice.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
7
I Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1,2
2.0 2.9 7.2 2.3 1.1 1.8 3.9 2.3 3.4 2.0 2015
2.3 3.1 5.5 2.2 1.4 1.5 3.3 3.1 3.3 3.0 2016
... ... ... 3.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... 2017
1.8 5.0 4.9 2.4 1.0 1.7 2.7 3.4 3.3 3.0 2 0 1 6 Q3
3.6 4.3 5.7 2.4 1.1 1.9 3.2 3.5 2.5 3.7 Q4
4.2 3.8 6.5 3.2 3.1 3.2 3.0 5.1 2.8 3.8 2 0 1 7 Q1
4.1 2.0 7.9 3.3 2.6 2.7 3.7 4.6 3.2 4.0 Q2
3.2 3.2 7.2 3.0 3.1 2.5 3.4 4.5 2.9 3.8 Q3
3.9 ... ... 2.9 2.8 ... ... ... ... ... Q4
Industrial production 1,3
4.6 1.1 6.3 − 3.4 2.2 2.1 7.3 5.1 3.4 3.4 2015
2.8 0.2 − 3.8 2.2 2.7 2.4 4.8 7.8 1.8 8.0 2016
7.1 p − 0.9 p 3.9 ... ... 3.6 ... ... 3.0 ... 2017
3.0 − 0.7 − 3.3 3.4 1.4 1.6 3.0 7.9 0.9 6.1 2 0 1 6 Q3
3.1 − 1.6 − 2.0 5.6 4.3 1.6 4.2 9.3 1.8 7.1 Q4
5.9 − 3.8 7.3 2.2 2.0 3.4 7.7 6.4 1.9 9.0 2 0 1 7 Q1
6.7 − 0.2 4.0 1.5 3.6 2.4 1.8 7.6 2.2 5.3 Q2
8.8 2.0 4.5 1.8 6.0 5.7 3.3 8.2 2.8 7.6 Q3
6.8 p − 1.3 p − 0.1 ... ... 2.9 ... ... 5.2 ... Q4
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
74.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 80.4 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 2015
75.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 2016
77.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 2017
76.0 81.3 79.9 82.1 85.1 80.3 85.4 84.1 79.1 59.6 2 0 1 6 Q4
76.5 82.6 79.3 81.4 85.1 79.8 87.1 84.5 78.8 58.1 2 0 1 7 Q1
77.4 82.1 79.1 82.5 86.6 79.1 86.5 85.4 78.1 57.6 Q2
77.6 80.1 80.0 83.1 86.9 80.9 84.4 85.1 78.7 61.5 Q3
77.4 81.1 82.8 83.1 88.0 81.7 83.0 85.2 79.1 59.1 Q4
77.8 83.1 77.5 83.9 88.8 81.6 83.7 85.0 79.7 60.4 2 0 1 8 Q1
Standardised unemployment rate 5
9.1 6.5 5.4 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 2015
7.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.0 19.6 13.0 2016
7.2 5.7 4.0 4.9 5.5 9.0 8.1 6.8 17.2 11.3 2017
6.8 5.8 4.0 4.8 5.4 8.9 8.1 6.7 16.9 10.6 2 0 1 7 July
6.8 5.7 4.0 4.7 5.5 8.7 8.0 6.7 16.8 10.5 Aug
7.0 5.7 3.9 4.7 5.4 8.5 7.8 6.7 16.7 10.4 Sep
7.1 5.6 3.6 4.5 5.4 8.4 7.7 6.5 16.7 10.4 Oct
7.0 5.5 3.6 4.4 5.4 8.1 7.5 6.4 16.6 10.9 Nov
7.1 5.6 3.6 4.4 5.3 7.8 7.4 6.2 16.4 11.1 Dec
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 2016
3.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 2017
4.6 2.3 1.2 1.5 2.1 1.3 1.6 1.4 2.0 0.5 2 0 1 7 Aug
4.6 2.0 1.2 1.4 2.5 1.6 1.8 1.4 1.8 0.1 Sep
4.2 2.0 1.5 1.3 2.4 1.9 1.8 1.3 1.7 0.4 Oct
4.2 2.0 1.5 1.5 2.4 1.8 2.1 1.4 1.8 0.2 Nov
3.8 1.6 1.3 1.2 2.3 1.6 2.0 1.9 1.2 − 0.4 Dec
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 0 1 8 Jan
General government financial balance 7
− 0.2 1.4 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 5.3 − 1.2 2015
0.3 1.6 1.1 0.4 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.5 2016
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2017
General government debt 7
40.5 22.7 63.8 68.0 83.8 130.6 53.5 80.3 100.4 107.5 2014
42.6 22.0 60.3 64.6 84.3 128.8 52.3 82.6 99.4 107.5 2015
40.1 20.8 57.6 61.8 83.6 130.1 51.8 78.5 99.0 107.1 2016
6 IncludingLithuaniafrom2015onwards.7 AsapercentageofGDP(Maastricht procedure (Eurostat). Germany: current data according to the Federal Statistical
Treaty definition). Euro area: European Central Bank, regularly updated. Member Office and Bundesbank calculations.
states excluding Germany: latest data publication under the excessive deficit

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
8
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Securities Total Securities Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net) 2 reserves 3
2 0 1 6 May 70.8 20.7 12.9 50.2 56.4 − 0.9 62.0 62.9 3.4 − 5.0 − 0.5 0.4 8.5
June 55.6 5.1 − 7.0 50.5 62.1 31.2 − 23.2 − 54.4 − 10.3 − 20.8 − 0.8 − 10.3 21.6
July 54.5 29.5 14.7 25.0 24.1 − 84.9 56.9 141.8 − 25.4 − 7.1 − 0.5 − 23.8 6.0
Aug 17.3 16.9 27.1 0.4 9.0 − 39.7 7.8 47.5 2.0 − 4.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 7.9
Sep 41.8 26.6 − 7.3 15.2 19.4 − 16.9 − 69.0 − 52.0 − 22.9 − 12.2 − 0.5 − 19.6 9.4
Oct 84.9 37.3 5.6 47.6 45.1 − 45.5 153.8 199.3 4.7 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 2.6 13.5
Nov 105.9 55.8 16.0 50.1 62.1 7.2 − 21.6 − 28.7 0.3 − 7.9 − 0.8 − 1.1 10.1
Dec − 58.4 − 51.0 − 8.3 − 7.5 − 0.7 36.4 − 154.2 − 190.6 − 8.7 0.1 − 1.0 − 13.8 6.0
2 0 1 7 Jan 131.2 43.6 31.3 87.6 69.7 − 12.8 233.5 246.4 − 18.3 − 9.9 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 4.6
Feb 45.8 30.6 4.0 15.2 35.3 − 45.6 53.4 99.0 13.4 − 6.1 − 0.5 − 3.4 23.3
Mar 151.6 92.8 25.3 58.8 62.6 − 8.8 − 51.7 − 43.0 − 13.6 1.8 − 0.5 − 22.1 7.2
Apr 54.9 24.7 20.2 30.1 27.6 − 39.4 77.6 117.0 − 22.2 − 12.2 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 9.0
May 50.7 26.1 16.3 24.6 35.1 − 0.3 − 4.2 − 3.8 18.4 − 5.4 − 2.4 16.9 9.4
June 23.6 28.9 0.4 − 5.3 − 5.3 58.2 − 108.4 − 166.6 − 3.9 − 12.9 − 0.1 − 6.7 15.9
July 7.2 0.1 15.3 7.0 9.4 6.2 105.0 98.9 − 5.6 − 7.8 − 0.9 − 1.5 4.6
Aug 11.9 − 20.5 − 15.0 32.4 38.4 − 28.0 − 2.6 25.4 6.4 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 2.8 15.8
Sep 58.5 46.8 − 13.8 11.7 17.1 7.5 − 34.3 − 41.8 − 20.3 − 8.6 − 0.9 − 30.6 19.7
Oct 63.8 52.3 − 9.5 11.5 11.3 − 68.7 87.6 156.3 − 31.6 − 27.4 − 0.7 − 7.9 4.3
Nov 125.1 96.9 21.5 28.2 34.6 20.0 − 0.3 − 20.3 2.7 4.4 − 0.8 − 3.3 2.4
Dec − 110.2 − 91.7 − 2.6 − 18.5 − 8.9 15.9 − 156.3 − 172.1 − 1.1 10.6 − 0.8 − 5.6 − 5.2
(b) German contribution
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Securities Total Securities Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net) 2 reserves 3
2 0 1 6 May 24.8 16.2 4.9 8.6 11.9 1.5 1.1 − 0.4 7.5 0.8 − 1.0 4.7 3.0
June 4.7 1.7 0.5 2.9 8.6 − 2.9 23.9 26.8 − 3.5 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 7.5 6.2
July 30.2 13.3 1.6 16.9 13.8 − 18.4 7.1 25.5 − 6.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 5.4 1.1
Aug 11.1 8.9 1.5 2.2 4.0 − 16.5 2.5 19.0 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.8 3.9 0.6
Sep 24.6 13.2 3.4 11.4 12.6 − 37.2 − 11.1 26.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 6.2 0.9
Oct 21.5 11.8 2.6 9.6 6.5 − 3.2 42.4 45.7 7.1 2.2 − 0.8 5.8 − 0.2
Nov 28.1 18.4 4.4 9.7 14.4 − 22.4 − 25.7 − 3.3 9.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 9.6 0.8
Dec − 10.1 − 8.1 0.4 − 2.1 8.4 19.6 − 9.5 − 29.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.9 2.7
2 0 1 7 Jan 23.6 15.0 2.3 8.6 8.5 − 24.4 31.8 56.2 9.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 15.9 − 2.3
Feb 17.3 12.5 3.9 4.9 5.5 − 30.2 7.5 37.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.8
Mar 18.2 12.7 1.8 5.5 9.5 − 3.6 6.3 9.9 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 5.5
Apr 14.9 7.8 − 1.5 7.1 5.4 − 19.0 − 7.3 11.6 9.3 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.3 11.9
May 13.8 13.3 3.5 0.6 7.9 7.1 − 13.0 − 20.1 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 1.8 1.4
June 11.8 11.5 6.2 0.4 2.6 22.7 16.2 − 6.4 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.4 2.8 5.6
July 18.1 12.8 1.8 5.3 3.5 − 10.3 − 23.0 − 12.7 − 4.0 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.5
Aug 13.6 10.2 − 0.6 3.4 8.3 14.7 − 13.8 − 28.5 4.5 0.1 − 0.8 3.5 1.7
Sep 17.8 14.1 − 1.8 3.7 8.0 − 22.3 9.2 31.5 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.3 2.3
Oct 15.9 8.6 0.4 7.3 6.5 6.1 − 11.4 − 17.5 − 11.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 9.5 − 0.1
Nov 27.2 16.7 6.4 10.5 11.2 23.1 − 2.6 − 25.7 2.6 3.3 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.1
Dec − 5.3 − 3.6 4.3 − 1.7 1.1 − 50.9 − 9.5 41.4 2.3 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 1.9 5.2
*Thedatainthistablearebasedontheconsolidatedbalancesheetofmonetary MFIs’portfolios.3Afterdeductionofinter-MFIparticipations.4Includingthecounter-
financialinstitutions(MFIs)(TableII.2);statisticalbreakshavebeeneliminatedfrom parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5 Including the monetary
theflowfigures(seealsothe“Notesonthefigures“inthe“Explanatorynotes“inthe liabilitiesofcentralgovernments(PostOffice,Treasury).6InGermany,onlysavings
StatisticalSupplementtotheMonthlyReport1,p30 ).1Source:ECB.2Excluding deposits. 7 Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
9
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
(a) Euro area
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market
central gov- banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 months 5,6 tions (net) 2,7,8 (net) 2,7 Period
20.1 12.9 − 33.6 35.0 47.4 2.3 45.1 − 20.2 7.9 − 9.5 − 0.1 − 2.0 2 0 1 6 May
60.5 17.6 − 19.0 31.4 34.7 8.4 26.3 − 1.9 − 1.4 2.5 − 9.6 5.9 June
− 29.0 − 72.4 − 96.5 73.5 66.9 10.1 56.9 6.1 0.5 − 22.7 15.6 5.0 July
− 54.7 41.2 − − 10.9 − 8.9 − 5.1 − 3.5 − 1.6 − 4.5 0.7 2.4 0.6 − 2.5 Aug
2.7 42.6 − 2.4 18.3 23.7 2.2 21.5 1.4 − 6.7 − 4.8 − 1.8 − 5.9 Sep
− 3.0 7.0 − 30.7 14.4 50.2 3.2 47.0 − 29.6 − 6.2 − 16.9 18.0 2.1 Oct
5.1 20.3 − 87.4 82.7 95.0 1.2 93.7 − 10.3 − 1.9 − 2.2 7.0 1.2 Nov
− 48.3 − 16.7 − 51.6 72.1 90.1 16.1 74.0 − 24.4 6.4 4.4 − 6.0 − 7.4 Dec
62.7 46.1 − 27.9 6.3 − 6.6 −11.9 5.3 3.0 9.9 − 17.4 11.6 − 0.9 2 0 1 7 Jan
− 17.4 − 25.5 − 29.7 30.8 30.8 3.0 27.8 − 2.1 2.1 − 8.6 − 4.2 6.5 Feb
24.2 25.4 − 106.8 92.4 92.7 4.3 88.5 − 5.6 5.3 14.8 12.0 − 0.6 Mar
− 5.4 − 9.9 − 53.0 72.4 101.1 6.8 94.3 − 31.2 2.5 − 5.9 − 4.3 − 16.9 Apr
13.4 − 13.5 − 32.0 30.1 41.9 0.5 41.5 − 21.0 9.2 − 11.7 − 4.7 5.2 May
20.4 21.6 − 43.7 72.8 80.8 9.5 71.3 − 10.5 2.6 − 16.6 − 20.6 − 0.2 June
− 7.7 − 17.4 − 44.1 31.7 35.4 5.7 29.8 − 6.2 2.4 − 24.1 13.6 − 3.1 July
− 18.3 − 59.9 − 55.8 45.9 31.8 − 2.0 33.8 8.1 6.0 2.6 9.1 − 5.5 Aug
41.2 24.6 − 20.5 23.3 47.7 0.6 47.1 − 21.3 − 3.1 7.0 − 3.9 10.3 Sep
− 43.5 53.8 − 16.4 13.2 23.3 2.9 20.4 − 7.6 − 2.5 19.8 7.8 − 6.7 Oct
− 8.8 71.9 − 79.3 72.4 81.3 0.9 80.4 − 7.9 − 1.0 17.1 − 2.5 1.4 Nov
− 21.7 − 95.4 − 23.9 61.4 63.6 16.5 47.1 − 6.4 4.2 − 31.6 − 22.0 − 7.6 Dec
(b) German contribution
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V) 10
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money
central gov- banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months 6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7 Period
18.7 − 19.8 2.9 − 0.5 19.9 21.5 0.3 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.7 2 0 1 6 May
13.0 − 7.9 4.2 1.5 0.2 2.0 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.0 0.4 June
− 31.8 25.0 3.7 2.1 24.5 12.3 4.0 − 0.1 0.9 − 0.2 7.6 July
8.8 − 22.3 2.3 − 0.8 6.2 11.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4 Aug
8.6 − 21.2 4.7 − 0.6 7.2 3.0 5.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5 Sep
− 8.8 18.6 3.2 − 0.5 1.4 12.0 − 10.2 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 Oct
6.9 − 48.2 1.9 0.3 37.8 36.2 3.3 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 1.7 Nov
− 13.6 30.4 3.3 2.4 − 4.8 − 4.9 − 1.5 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 Dec
− 12.6 − 27.2 1.1 − 2.7 29.2 16.9 8.9 0.7 2.6 − 0.1 0.2 2 0 1 7 Jan
− 4.2 − 18.9 1.7 1.2 11.6 13.6 − 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 0.0 Feb
14.2 − 2.7 1.8 1.1 0.5 2.4 3.5 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.0 Mar
− 6.7 − 8.9 3.3 1.6 2.3 10.3 − 7.1 − 0.0 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.8 Apr
7.7 − 8.7 2.9 − 0.7 19.2 18.3 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 0.8 May
7.1 0.7 4.7 0.9 20.7 20.6 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.1 0.6 June
2.5 14.8 2.1 2.1 − 5.6 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.4 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 July
7.4 5.1 3.7 − 1.3 11.2 14.7 − 2.9 − 0.3 0.1 0.2 − 0.5 Aug
9.6 − 14.2 3.5 − 0.3 5.9 5.6 0.8 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 0.3 Sep
− 14.2 43.1 2.1 0.8 4.5 14.3 − 9.3 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 Oct
6.2 8.7 1.2 − 0.0 32.7 33.8 − 1.7 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.2 Nov
10.0 − 59.4 3.8 2.0 − 9.1 − 10.2 0.3 2.6 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.2 Dec
8 Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9 Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11 The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10 The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordancewiththeaccountingregimechosenbytheEurosystem(seealsofootnote
monetaryaggregatesandarethereforenotcomparablewiththeerstwhileGerman 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
10
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities 2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2 0 1 5 Nov 26,653.5 16,691.8 12,803.5 10,716.5 1,295.5 791.5 3,888.3 1,117.1 2,771.2 5,314.1 4,647.6
Dec 25,850.7 16,541.4 12,703.0 10,627.4 1,296.3 779.3 3,838.4 1,110.2 2,728.2 5,034.5 4,274.8
2 0 1 6 Jan 26,414.5 16,689.5 12,731.3 10,656.8 1,307.0 767.5 3,958.2 1,127.1 2,831.2 5,149.6 4,575.4
Feb 26,749.2 16,774.6 12,771.6 10,700.6 1,313.1 757.8 4,003.0 1,118.6 2,884.4 5,228.2 4,746.4
Mar 26,406.9 16,825.5 12,776.4 10,709.9 1,312.1 754.4 4,049.1 1,117.9 2,931.3 5,030.7 4,550.7
Apr 26,557.7 16,909.0 12,815.8 10,721.4 1,325.7 768.7 4,093.2 1,127.9 2,965.3 5,173.9 4,474.7
May 26,807.0 16,993.9 12,842.6 10,733.4 1,341.4 767.8 4,151.4 1,121.7 3,029.6 5,270.0 4,543.1
June 27,072.9 17,041.4 12,829.3 10,732.4 1,344.2 752.7 4,212.1 1,110.6 3,101.4 5,278.2 4,753.4
July 27,135.0 17,093.7 12,852.6 10,737.6 1,359.7 755.3 4,241.1 1,111.6 3,129.5 5,326.7 4,714.7
Aug 27,037.8 17,105.7 12,866.5 10,723.2 1,365.1 778.2 4,239.1 1,102.9 3,136.2 5,321.4 4,610.7
Sep 26,973.2 17,147.5 12,892.5 10,756.7 1,359.3 776.5 4,255.0 1,098.8 3,156.2 5,266.4 4,559.3
Oct 27,050.9 17,202.6 12,923.2 10,785.2 1,363.1 775.0 4,279.4 1,101.0 3,178.4 5,422.4 4,425.8
Nov 27,160.6 17,295.2 12,983.4 10,830.1 1,383.3 770.0 4,311.8 1,088.9 3,222.9 5,451.6 4,413.9
Dec 26,678.3 17,234.9 12,925.7 10,772.3 1,372.2 781.2 4,309.2 1,079.4 3,229.7 5,208.1 4,235.3
2 0 1 7 Jan 26,758.5 17,317.9 12,957.0 10,777.1 1,393.4 786.4 4,360.9 1,097.4 3,263.6 5,377.4 4,063.3
Feb 27,020.5 17,378.7 12,994.7 10,807.3 1,398.4 789.0 4,384.0 1,076.2 3,307.8 5,497.8 4,144.0
Mar 26,971.6 17,511.2 13,077.2 10,863.6 1,423.7 789.9 4,434.0 1,072.8 3,361.2 5,418.0 4,042.4
Apr 27,060.7 17,556.3 13,092.0 10,859.1 1,429.8 803.0 4,464.3 1,075.4 3,388.9 5,450.3 4,054.1
May 26,978.9 17,596.1 13,109.0 10,859.5 1,451.1 798.3 4,487.1 1,062.4 3,424.7 5,360.7 4,022.2
June 26,659.1 17,574.1 13,095.9 10,858.2 1,441.3 796.3 4,478.3 1,063.0 3,415.2 5,195.9 3,889.0
July 26,613.3 17,568.3 13,082.9 10,830.2 1,460.1 792.6 4,485.3 1,060.3 3,425.1 5,228.0 3,817.1
Aug 26,646.4 17,574.5 13,051.4 10,817.3 1,444.2 789.9 4,523.2 1,054.5 3,468.6 5,198.8 3,873.0
Sep 26,528.9 17,622.7 13,097.6 10,873.2 1,433.2 791.2 4,525.1 1,045.9 3,479.2 5,171.9 3,734.4
Oct 26,726.5 17,699.9 13,156.4 10,935.4 1,422.7 798.3 4,543.5 1,046.1 3,497.4 5,292.7 3,733.9
Nov 26,756.9 17,810.8 13,236.9 11,003.1 1,430.3 803.6 4,573.9 1,038.1 3,535.7 5,248.2 3,697.9
Dec 26,329.9 17,703.3 13,162.5 10,938.9 1,424.8 798.9 4,540.8 1,028.6 3,512.2 5,063.1 3,563.5
German contribution (€ billion)
2 0 1 5 Nov 6,104.8 3,865.0 3,019.5 2,594.8 153.5 271.2 845.5 363.9 481.6 1,236.6 1,003.2
Dec 5,925.1 3,840.1 3,003.6 2,586.5 155.7 261.3 836.5 358.3 478.2 1,166.4 918.6
2 0 1 6 Jan 6,057.8 3,858.2 3,004.8 2,592.8 154.8 257.3 853.4 362.0 491.4 1,191.2 1,008.3
Feb 6,155.3 3,874.9 3,014.0 2,607.0 151.1 255.9 860.9 362.0 498.9 1,209.7 1,070.8
Mar 6,060.6 3,885.5 3,015.6 2,607.8 151.8 256.0 869.9 361.6 508.3 1,163.7 1,011.4
Apr 6,050.2 3,908.3 3,026.3 2,617.8 152.2 256.3 882.1 366.1 515.9 1,181.7 960.2
May 6,091.2 3,934.7 3,043.0 2,629.7 153.3 260.0 891.7 362.8 528.9 1,187.1 969.4
June 6,221.2 3,939.7 3,042.5 2,629.1 152.9 260.5 897.2 357.3 540.0 1,221.3 1,060.1
July 6,245.6 3,968.5 3,054.3 2,639.3 155.3 259.7 914.2 360.3 553.8 1,228.3 1,048.8
Aug 6,218.9 3,977.8 3,062.7 2,646.2 155.3 261.2 915.1 358.5 556.6 1,226.9 1,014.2
Sep 6,202.1 4,001.8 3,075.1 2,655.3 157.6 262.1 926.8 357.2 569.5 1,215.0 985.4
Oct 6,208.1 4,019.0 3,087.3 2,664.9 161.9 260.5 931.7 360.3 571.4 1,260.2 928.9
Nov 6,186.1 4,046.1 3,107.1 2,680.4 165.0 261.7 939.0 355.5 583.5 1,243.2 896.8
Dec 6,131.1 4,037.0 3,099.2 2,671.7 164.0 263.6 937.8 345.2 592.6 1,234.7 859.4
2 0 1 7 Jan 6,131.6 4,054.1 3,112.0 2,682.7 165.0 264.3 942.1 345.2 596.8 1,260.2 817.4
Feb 6,196.5 4,075.7 3,124.9 2,691.3 168.1 265.5 950.8 344.6 606.2 1,281.9 839.0
Mar 6,176.3 4,089.6 3,136.8 2,701.2 169.6 266.0 952.8 340.6 612.3 1,281.0 805.7
Apr 6,174.4 4,103.1 3,143.3 2,709.1 170.4 263.9 959.8 342.3 617.5 1,264.2 807.1
May 6,160.2 4,114.5 3,157.3 2,719.6 172.6 265.0 957.2 332.2 624.9 1,234.6 811.2
June 6,106.3 4,120.6 3,165.9 2,722.5 173.2 270.2 954.7 330.8 623.9 1,238.6 747.1
July 6,069.0 4,135.9 3,176.7 2,731.5 175.2 269.9 959.2 332.6 626.7 1,201.4 731.7
Aug 6,084.5 4,152.3 3,186.3 2,741.6 174.3 270.3 966.1 327.8 638.3 1,185.1 747.2
Sep 6,076.7 4,167.7 3,200.9 2,757.6 174.3 269.1 966.8 323.2 643.6 1,194.6 714.3
Oct 6,082.0 4,185.9 3,210.4 2,766.1 174.6 269.8 975.4 324.0 651.4 1,188.5 707.7
Nov 6,088.7 4,211.0 3,227.4 2,777.0 178.7 271.6 983.6 321.5 662.1 1,177.2 700.5
Dec 6,049.9 4,202.2 3,222.8 2,768.6 180.4 273.9 979.4 318.5 660.8 1,162.2 685.5
*Monetaryfinancialinstitutions(MFIs)comprisebanks(includingbuildingandloan enterprises. 3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national generalgovernment.4Eurocurrencyincirculation(seealsofootnote8onp12 )
centralbanks(theEurosystem).1Source:ECB.2Includingmoneymarketpaperof ExcludingMFIs‘cashinhand(ineuro).TheGermancontributionincludesthevolume

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
11
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over End of
circulation 4 Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,034.5 11,524.3 10,774.3 10,870.1 5,288.7 970.8 343.9 2,081.4 2,109.6 75.7 2 0 1 5 Nov
1,048.9 11,486.9 10,813.9 10,922.8 5,326.1 981.5 343.8 2,083.3 2,112.9 75.2 Dec
1,037.7 11,611.8 10,852.4 10,953.3 5,365.2 973.3 344.1 2,074.6 2,121.8 74.3 2 0 1 6 Jan
1,038.9 11,621.1 10,871.9 10,976.1 5,385.2 967.8 340.6 2,085.3 2,124.1 73.1 Feb
1,042.5 11,686.5 10,916.7 11,007.2 5,418.9 973.3 339.8 2,076.3 2,126.7 72.3 Mar
1,047.1 11,715.7 10,978.1 11,072.9 5,504.4 963.0 337.5 2,071.0 2,126.5 70.5 Apr
1,049.3 11,766.9 11,005.9 11,092.6 5,545.2 945.2 331.9 2,066.3 2,134.0 70.0 May
1,057.7 11,829.3 11,001.4 11,089.4 5,565.3 944.9 330.2 2,046.5 2,133.1 69.3 June
1,067.8 11,849.6 11,053.7 11,133.7 5,615.1 952.1 325.6 2,039.3 2,132.9 68.8 July
1,064.3 11,783.5 11,037.8 11,120.8 5,611.4 952.6 320.7 2,034.0 2,134.1 68.1 Aug
1,066.5 11,788.9 11,032.4 11,130.6 5,637.1 960.1 315.0 2,021.8 2,129.2 67.4 Sep
1,069.7 11,797.5 11,047.9 11,134.7 5,680.7 936.8 307.6 2,018.8 2,123.8 67.2 Oct
1,071.0 11,882.2 11,107.7 11,212.3 5,780.1 926.7 303.3 2,013.9 2,121.8 66.4 Nov
1,087.1 11,891.0 11,172.9 11,282.8 5,870.1 910.5 294.0 2,014.1 2,128.5 65.6 Dec
1,075.1 11,946.4 11,152.9 11,267.7 5,867.2 913.0 286.6 1,997.7 2,138.2 65.0 2 0 1 7 Jan
1,078.1 11,955.2 11,171.7 11,291.3 5,891.9 918.0 284.5 1,992.1 2,140.2 64.6 Feb
1,082.4 12,064.9 11,241.2 11,383.9 5,987.6 909.4 285.3 1,992.4 2,145.1 64.1 Mar
1,089.2 12,102.7 11,284.7 11,417.9 6,064.0 885.3 278.6 1,978.6 2,147.6 63.7 Apr
1,089.7 12,115.3 11,302.5 11,407.7 6,086.1 859.4 272.9 1,970.5 2,156.7 62.0 May
1,099.1 12,176.7 11,346.6 11,446.2 6,153.5 852.6 265.6 1,953.2 2,159.5 61.9 June
1,104.7 12,174.0 11,357.2 11,440.7 6,164.7 847.2 262.7 1,942.9 2,164.7 58.4 July
1,102.7 12,191.1 11,387.0 11,469.4 6,188.3 856.1 260.6 1,936.0 2,170.7 57.7 Aug
1,103.3 12,239.3 11,399.9 11,487.3 6,238.5 841.5 256.2 1,926.3 2,168.0 56.8 Sep
1,106.2 12,184.5 11,387.6 11,474.8 6,258.6 844.7 250.8 1,898.9 2,165.5 56.2 Oct
1,107.1 12,215.9 11,438.1 11,511.3 6,332.4 830.4 246.2 1,882.0 2,164.8 55.5 Nov
1,123.6 12,280.5 11,538.2 11,612.6 6,389.0 832.9 242.4 1,924.3 2,169.4 54.6 Dec
German contribution (€ billion)
241.9 3,386.8 3,309.9 3,182.3 1,732.8 168.6 33.2 653.8 531.1 62.8 2 0 1 5 Nov
244.2 3,379.0 3,293.1 3,168.8 1,711.8 176.9 34.4 649.6 534.1 61.9 Dec
242.2 3,398.2 3,312.7 3,191.1 1,739.2 172.6 35.6 647.9 535.1 60.7 2 0 1 6 Jan
242.7 3,412.8 3,319.7 3,197.4 1,747.9 172.1 35.8 645.5 536.7 59.4 Feb
243.3 3,428.4 3,315.7 3,188.8 1,735.7 176.5 37.5 644.9 535.9 58.3 Mar
244.2 3,429.1 3,334.3 3,208.5 1,759.1 178.5 38.3 640.3 535.1 57.2 Apr
243.7 3,469.8 3,356.2 3,222.9 1,779.2 175.2 37.3 640.6 534.4 56.2 May
245.2 3,481.5 3,352.9 3,218.7 1,779.1 173.1 38.3 638.8 533.9 55.4 June
247.4 3,464.1 3,368.1 3,233.1 1,793.5 174.7 38.2 638.3 533.8 54.6 July
246.5 3,480.0 3,376.0 3,238.3 1,803.0 173.4 38.2 636.2 533.8 53.8 Aug
245.9 3,494.5 3,380.7 3,247.0 1,807.9 179.4 38.3 635.0 533.3 53.1 Sep
245.4 3,489.6 3,386.4 3,254.0 1,821.1 172.1 37.8 637.3 533.5 52.3 Oct
245.7 3,536.5 3,424.0 3,288.1 1,857.7 171.0 37.4 636.6 533.7 51.7 Nov
248.1 3,517.1 3,419.8 3,284.1 1,851.0 171.5 38.4 635.6 536.3 51.3 Dec
245.4 3,526.3 3,439.3 3,306.3 1,873.8 174.0 38.7 632.1 537.1 50.6 2 0 1 7 Jan
246.6 3,532.6 3,448.3 3,313.4 1,881.5 175.3 38.8 630.0 537.9 50.0 Feb
247.7 3,549.3 3,449.2 3,318.1 1,886.4 177.4 39.9 628.4 536.5 49.5 Mar
249.3 3,540.9 3,447.5 3,317.0 1,895.9 170.7 40.0 624.7 536.6 49.0 Apr
248.6 3,566.1 3,465.8 3,327.4 1,910.5 167.5 40.2 624.1 536.4 48.7 May
249.5 3,590.5 3,482.0 3,339.9 1,928.7 165.5 40.3 621.4 535.7 48.3 June
251.6 3,583.1 3,472.8 3,333.0 1,927.8 162.6 40.3 619.5 537.9 44.9 July
250.4 3,600.7 3,483.1 3,338.6 1,938.3 159.0 40.3 619.3 537.5 44.1 Aug
250.1 3,616.3 3,486.8 3,345.9 1,945.0 162.3 39.6 617.9 537.5 43.5 Sep
250.9 3,606.4 3,490.8 3,352.9 1,958.5 158.8 38.6 616.2 538.0 42.7 Oct
250.9 3,646.8 3,521.5 3,383.7 1,990.6 157.1 37.4 618.2 538.3 42.1 Nov
252.9 3,647.9 3,515.8 3,378.8 1,976.2 162.1 37.6 620.7 540.9 41.3 Dec
ofeurobanknotesputintocirculationbytheBundesbankinaccordancewiththe Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5 Excluding
circulationinTableIII.2).Thevolumeofcurrencyactuallyputintocirculationbythe central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
12
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net) 3 Total in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2 0 1 5 Nov 298.5 355.7 168.0 108.4 13.0 39.7 21.9 4.7 301.4 296.2 497.1 2,367.3 1,646.3
Dec 227.4 336.6 154.4 104.6 13.7 39.7 19.5 4.7 272.8 270.9 475.1 2,319.4 1,634.3
2 0 1 6 Jan 315.1 343.4 160.9 102.3 14.3 39.7 21.0 5.2 294.5 292.9 485.5 2,301.4 1,615.0
Feb 301.0 344.0 162.6 98.1 14.4 39.9 24.0 5.1 339.1 335.1 484.2 2,288.0 1,597.6
Mar 333.3 345.9 159.5 102.0 15.1 40.8 23.6 5.0 332.3 329.1 471.7 2,271.4 1,590.3
Apr 297.6 345.2 161.9 97.2 15.4 42.2 23.5 4.9 327.9 323.1 489.1 2,275.8 1,586.3
May 317.7 356.6 167.0 102.1 15.5 43.1 24.0 4.9 318.7 312.8 489.2 2,284.5 1,575.9
June 378.3 361.6 171.3 102.4 15.9 43.7 23.5 4.8 321.3 318.0 479.7 2,281.8 1,569.3
July 349.2 366.7 174.1 101.6 18.2 43.8 24.2 4.8 298.6 297.4 494.8 2,258.2 1,543.7
Aug 294.6 368.1 175.7 100.8 18.7 44.3 23.8 4.9 301.0 299.9 495.5 2,253.2 1,534.5
Sep 297.4 361.0 170.5 99.5 19.4 44.4 22.3 5.0 286.5 285.7 493.7 2,227.1 1,517.1
Oct 295.3 367.4 182.2 94.3 19.9 44.5 21.3 5.3 266.4 265.7 511.8 2,226.0 1,503.3
Nov 300.4 369.6 178.7 98.8 21.1 44.2 21.6 5.2 264.5 263.8 518.8 2,244.1 1,506.1
Dec 253.0 355.1 169.8 93.9 21.5 43.3 21.4 5.1 268.9 268.2 512.8 2,230.4 1,502.6
2 0 1 7 Jan 316.7 362.0 170.7 99.5 21.3 43.4 21.7 5.5 250.1 249.5 524.3 2,209.7 1,487.5
Feb 299.9 364.1 176.2 96.2 20.2 44.1 21.9 5.4 241.7 241.0 520.1 2,221.0 1,493.4
Mar 324.0 357.0 166.6 96.5 21.5 44.6 22.3 5.4 256.5 255.8 532.1 2,194.0 1,480.5
Apr 318.6 366.2 177.7 92.4 23.7 44.7 22.2 5.5 250.4 249.7 527.8 2,164.8 1,466.1
May 332.1 375.5 182.9 94.5 25.3 45.2 22.9 4.7 238.4 237.7 523.0 2,171.8 1,490.1
June 352.5 378.0 182.5 95.7 26.6 45.8 22.7 4.7 221.7 221.0 502.2 2,154.7 1,478.3
July 345.0 388.3 192.2 95.2 26.7 46.2 23.1 4.8 197.4 196.8 516.0 2,134.2 1,471.5
Aug 326.7 395.0 198.4 94.8 27.8 46.2 23.2 4.7 199.6 198.9 525.0 2,119.1 1,465.2
Sep 362.5 389.5 194.4 91.9 28.1 47.5 22.8 4.7 206.6 205.9 521.1 2,098.6 1,448.2
Oct 318.9 390.9 199.1 87.6 28.3 48.3 22.9 4.7 226.5 225.8 528.9 2,090.1 1,431.5
Nov 310.2 394.4 198.8 89.5 29.8 49.0 22.6 4.6 243.5 242.9 526.6 2,102.8 1,444.7
Dec 288.6 379.3 192.4 81.5 31.9 46.6 22.3 4.6 211.8 211.3 504.5 2,084.1 1,437.4
German contribution (€ billion)
2 0 1 5 Nov 12.3 192.2 55.6 90.2 9.5 33.2 3.1 0.6 6.1 4.5 3.8 562.5 270.9
Dec 22.6 187.6 54.3 86.0 10.2 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.5 2.0 3.4 533.4 254.9
2 0 1 6 Jan 21.8 185.2 54.5 83.2 10.5 33.4 3.1 0.5 2.8 2.7 3.7 534.8 257.0
Feb 28.9 186.5 59.1 79.7 10.5 33.7 3.1 0.5 4.2 3.7 3.6 527.9 250.2
Mar 49.3 190.2 57.4 84.1 10.8 34.3 3.1 0.5 3.2 2.0 3.4 518.7 250.5
Apr 31.9 188.7 58.2 80.3 10.9 35.6 3.2 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.0 521.8 249.1
May 50.6 196.3 60.4 84.9 11.1 36.2 3.3 0.5 3.5 2.4 2.5 530.9 244.9
June 63.6 199.2 62.2 85.0 11.5 36.6 3.3 0.5 2.5 2.3 2.6 523.0 241.2
July 31.9 199.1 59.9 85.2 13.3 36.8 3.3 0.5 3.4 3.2 2.4 524.2 241.2
Aug 40.6 201.0 61.7 84.6 13.6 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 524.4 241.5
Sep 49.3 198.3 59.7 83.5 14.0 37.2 3.4 0.5 2.9 2.9 2.4 516.7 240.8
Oct 40.5 195.1 58.8 80.4 14.9 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 526.0 242.2
Nov 47.4 201.0 59.5 84.2 16.1 37.3 3.3 0.6 3.0 3.0 2.3 542.1 251.4
Dec 33.8 199.1 61.6 80.5 16.6 36.6 3.3 0.6 2.2 2.2 2.3 541.3 250.6
2 0 1 7 Jan 21.2 198.8 55.1 86.6 16.4 36.9 3.2 0.6 4.8 4.8 2.2 553.4 261.4
Feb 17.5 201.8 61.5 83.2 15.7 37.7 3.1 0.6 4.5 4.5 2.2 556.7 262.6
Mar 31.6 199.5 58.7 82.5 16.5 38.2 3.1 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.1 551.8 263.6
Apr 25.0 198.9 59.0 79.4 18.8 38.2 3.0 0.6 3.5 3.5 2.1 546.7 264.9
May 32.7 206.1 61.6 81.6 20.6 38.7 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 542.6 263.2
June 39.8 210.9 63.4 82.6 22.0 39.3 3.0 0.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 542.7 266.0
July 42.3 207.8 60.3 81.5 22.6 39.8 3.0 0.7 3.3 3.3 2.1 534.5 264.9
Aug 49.7 212.4 64.0 81.0 23.6 40.1 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.4 2.3 534.4 267.8
Sep 59.5 210.9 63.2 78.5 24.3 41.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.3 529.1 264.0
Oct 45.3 208.2 64.4 73.5 24.7 41.9 3.0 0.7 2.3 2.3 2.0 521.8 252.3
Nov 51.7 211.4 65.5 73.0 26.2 43.1 2.9 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 518.3 251.1
Dec 61.7 207.4 69.3 66.3 27.8 40.3 2.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.7 512.3 256.3
*Monetaryfinancialinstitutions(MFIs)comprisebanks(includingbuildingandloan paper. 5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6 After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFIparticipations.7TheGermancontributionstotheEurosystem’smonetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1 Source: ECB. 2 In Germany, only savings aggregatesshouldonnoaccountbeinterpretedasnationalmonetaryaggregates
deposits. 3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding andarethereforenotcomparablewiththeerstwhileGermanmoneystocksM1,M2
GermanMFIs’portfoliosofsecuritiesissuedbyMFIsintheeuroarea.4InGermany, or M3. 8 including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bankdebtsecuritieswithmaturitiesofuptooneyearareclassedasmoneymarket p 10 ) 9 For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
13
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Memo item
Other liability items Monetary aggregates 7
(From 2002, German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of central
liability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments
1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of
1 year 4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 Treasury) 14 year/month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
31.1 49.2 2,286.9 3,905.8 2,565.3 − 77.1 4,534.8 − 6,592.5 10,180.7 10,841.5 7,053.7 121.9 2 0 1 5 Nov
22.9 47.8 2,248.7 3,652.6 2,549.2 − 50.1 4,095.9 − 6,631.8 10,228.4 10,840.9 7,000.7 123.0 Dec
28.9 50.6 2,221.8 3,800.3 2,573.0 − 77.2 4,387.6 − 6,666.0 10,264.2 10,908.5 6,988.6 123.6 2 0 1 6 Jan
33.4 54.2 2,200.4 3,912.2 2,609.9 − 98.7 4,554.5 − 6,688.4 10,278.4 10,942.5 7,013.7 122.8 Feb
37.2 51.9 2,182.3 3,724.8 2,592.4 − 94.6 4,379.8 − 6,721.6 10,322.7 10,968.4 6,969.1 121.3 Mar
41.7 50.0 2,184.2 3,912.4 2,604.3 − 99.6 4,285.0 − 6,815.4 10,399.2 11,070.5 6,977.2 122.7 Apr
39.9 49.2 2,195.4 4,018.4 2,600.8 − 84.1 4,363.2 − 6,867.6 10,440.8 11,110.7 6,980.5 126.6 May
49.8 47.2 2,184.8 3,941.0 2,664.9 − 62.9 4,560.1 − 6,901.6 10,472.1 11,131.7 7,014.0 127.7 June
54.6 47.8 2,155.8 4,071.9 2,678.7 − 105.5 4,521.0 − 6,967.7 10,543.0 11,225.5 6,991.1 131.5 July
53.9 46.2 2,153.1 4,113.9 2,676.2 − 85.2 4,435.5 − 6,962.0 10,533.4 11,214.3 6,980.4 131.4 Aug
48.7 46.1 2,132.3 4,069.0 2,698.3 − 45.3 4,388.4 − 6,984.6 10,550.9 11,216.3 6,969.1 131.3 Sep
53.5 43.6 2,129.0 4,278.6 2,683.3 − 28.9 4,246.4 − 7,043.6 10,568.0 11,250.0 6,948.0 131.8 Oct
54.7 42.8 2,146.6 4,317.8 2,662.6 − 55.6 4,255.2 − 7,145.6 10,659.4 11,345.5 6,939.0 136.4 Nov
48.1 42.0 2,140.3 4,039.0 2,658.6 − 42.5 4,033.0 − 7,238.4 10,732.4 11,397.9 6,926.9 135.4 Dec
44.2 45.8 2,119.7 4,244.7 2,646.4 − 14.7 3,876.5 − 7,227.7 10,732.4 11,420.1 6,877.7 139.1 2 0 1 7 Jan
49.4 47.2 2,124.4 4,375.4 2,696.5 − 20.4 3,952.6 − 7,262.0 10,767.4 11,454.3 6,927.2 140.1 Feb
48.5 47.2 2,098.3 4,315.5 2,677.0 − 4.4 3,853.7 − 7,352.5 10,856.8 11,557.8 6,881.8 140.0 Mar
35.1 43.8 2,085.9 4,399.0 2,663.1 0.0 3,863.7 − 7,449.0 10,923.0 11,604.5 6,841.5 142.1 Apr
42.2 42.8 2,086.9 4,332.9 2,659.6 2.0 3,846.1 − 7,479.8 10,935.4 11,619.3 6,829.0 145.0 May
42.5 42.1 2,070.2 4,134.0 2,631.4 8.9 3,730.3 − 7,556.7 11,003.2 11,657.4 6,767.1 145.5 June
39.6 40.5 2,054.1 4,179.3 2,616.3 8.4 3,683.0 − 7,585.8 11,029.4 11,694.6 6,722.8 148.0 July
35.2 40.2 2,043.8 4,177.3 2,647.6 − 1.8 3,685.8 − 7,614.1 11,070.9 11,746.4 6,735.9 148.5 Aug
43.6 39.9 2,015.0 4,154.6 2,651.3 16.7 3,537.6 − 7,662.7 11,095.2 11,765.7 6,701.6 150.4 Sep
39.1 37.9 2,013.2 4,336.4 2,665.8 11.5 3,576.5 − 7,689.0 11,112.5 11,786.5 6,687.1 148.7 Oct
44.1 38.2 2,020.5 4,284.7 2,657.8 44.4 3,574.1 − 7,766.5 11,173.0 11,857.9 6,669.4 151.3 Nov
38.8 36.1 2,009.3 4,089.6 2,636.5 26.4 3,372.9 − 7,827.4 11,230.6 11,878.0 6,675.9 145.2 Dec
German contribution (€ billion)
26.4 9.6 526.5 724.9 553.7 − 754.5 1,621.4 295.2 1,788.4 2,624.1 2,670.0 1,830.6 − 2 0 1 5 Nov
26.3 9.3 497.8 659.6 552.5 − 742.7 1,537.4 297.8 1,766.1 2,610.8 2,652.3 1,795.8 − Dec
25.2 11.2 498.4 702.8 560.8 − 766.0 1,620.7 297.1 1,793.6 2,633.8 2,676.6 1,801.7 − 2 0 1 6 Jan
25.5 11.8 490.7 739.6 574.8 − 790.7 1,683.0 297.7 1,807.0 2,644.8 2,689.9 1,804.6 − Feb
24.0 10.9 483.8 699.0 569.9 − 784.5 1,622.4 299.8 1,793.1 2,641.1 2,682.7 1,791.6 − Mar
23.9 11.7 486.1 753.1 575.6 − 803.0 1,566.8 300.9 1,817.3 2,663.6 2,705.9 1,795.3 − Apr
22.8 12.3 495.8 758.5 571.4 − 823.1 1,577.5 303.9 1,839.6 2,685.7 2,726.9 1,800.7 − May
23.8 11.8 487.5 783.3 592.6 − 834.3 1,670.0 308.0 1,841.3 2,686.4 2,727.1 1,811.5 − June
30.5 12.6 481.1 807.8 595.1 − 824.9 1,673.4 311.7 1,853.4 2,702.0 2,750.9 1,806.5 − July
27.4 12.5 484.5 826.1 589.2 − 846.9 1,640.6 314.1 1,864.6 2,711.7 2,757.1 1,801.3 − Aug
26.4 12.9 477.4 851.2 594.2 − 876.5 1,616.7 318.8 1,867.6 2,719.5 2,764.2 1,797.3 − Sep
25.3 13.4 487.3 899.9 585.7 − 863.2 1,564.6 322.0 1,879.9 2,721.9 2,766.1 1,800.2 − Oct
22.7 14.6 504.7 905.9 578.4 − 918.6 1,536.5 323.9 1,917.2 2,762.9 2,805.6 1,809.3 − Nov
23.1 14.2 504.0 878.8 580.3 − 897.1 1,506.3 327.3 1,912.6 2,759.2 2,801.0 1,808.4 − Dec
22.8 14.4 516.2 930.2 575.5 − 926.5 1,465.7 328.3 1,928.9 2,784.9 2,829.2 1,811.9 − 2 0 1 7 Jan
22.2 15.2 519.2 972.2 587.9 − 944.3 1,484.8 330.1 1,943.0 2,797.0 2,841.1 1,825.3 − Feb
19.5 15.9 516.4 979.6 586.5 − 957.7 1,462.2 331.9 1,945.1 2,801.0 2,841.1 1,819.5 − Mar
17.7 16.9 512.1 985.8 597.9 − 965.5 1,463.1 335.2 1,954.8 2,803.4 2,843.5 1,822.6 − Apr
18.4 16.8 507.4 957.7 595.0 − 967.6 1,461.9 338.1 1,972.1 2,821.5 2,861.2 1,814.4 − May
19.3 16.4 507.0 946.6 591.5 − 981.1 1,412.1 342.8 1,992.1 2,841.2 2,880.9 1,808.1 − June
18.8 16.2 499.5 926.1 589.1 − 975.5 1,406.4 345.0 1,988.1 2,835.9 2,876.2 1,793.6 − July
18.5 15.8 500.0 894.5 597.2 − 970.2 1,422.2 348.6 2,002.3 2,846.8 2,886.8 1,801.4 − Aug
19.3 15.4 494.4 927.7 594.2 − 982.9 1,387.5 352.1 2,008.2 2,853.5 2,893.0 1,792.0 − Sep
18.6 15.7 487.5 913.6 596.3 − 946.7 1,386.3 354.2 2,023.0 2,859.6 2,898.2 1,785.4 − Oct
18.5 15.8 484.0 883.4 593.7 − 940.3 1,382.0 355.5 2,056.1 2,890.9 2,929.9 1,781.9 − Nov
17.4 14.7 480.2 921.8 596.5 −1,000.9 1,367.3 359.3 2,045.5 2,883.1 2,920.2 1,779.8 − Dec
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central governments’
accordancewiththeaccountingregimechosenbytheEurosystem(seealsofootnote deposits)and(fortheeuroarea)centralgovernments’monetaryliabilitieswithsuch
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10 Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities.12M2plusrepotransactions,moneymarketfundshares,moneymarket
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paperanddebtsecuritiesupto2years.13Depositswithagreedmaturitiesofover2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the yearsandatagreednoticeofover3months,debtsecuritieswithmaturitiesofover2
consolidatedbalancesheet.11M1plusdepositswithagreedmaturitiesofupto2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
14
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3 Banking system’s liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility operations 3 facility operations 4 circulation 5 deposits (net) 6 reserves) 7 money 8
ending in 1
Eurosystem 2
2 0 1 5 July 642.9 82.4 443.2 0.3 471.8 103.1 0.0 1 042.7 96.3 17.2 381.4 1 527.2
Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep 627.4 72.4 462.2 0.6 550.8 148.0 0.0 1 055.3 63.4 18.1 428.4 1 631.8
Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec 612.2 66.1 459.3 0.0 730.7 173.1 0.0 1 056.5 93.5 51.5 493.8 1 723.4
2 0 1 6 Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1 072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1 826.5
Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar 607.8 62.9 461.7 0.1 907.6 230.5 0.0 1 063.4 115.6 73.9 556.5 1 850.4
Apr 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1 000.1 262.0 0.0 1 069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1 901.3
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1 105.3 309.0 0.0 1 076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2 009.4
July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1 227.1 323.1 0.0 1 087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2 067.7
Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1 339.7 355.1 0.0 1 096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2 200.2
Oct 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1 447.0 387.3 0.0 1 094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2 259.4
Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1 570.2 439.4 0.0 1 103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2 366.3
2 0 1 7 Jan 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1 670.8 434.4 0.0 1 119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2 472.6
Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1 787.5 479.2 0.0 1 110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2 550.9
Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 678.6 18.5 707.4 0.3 1 905.3 550.0 0.0 1 118.4 182.0 378.8 1 081.1 2 749.4
June 683.1 13.7 767.4 0.2 1 995.0 593.7 0.0 1 126.0 163.6 397.4 1 178.7 2 898.5
July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2 076.1 595.3 0.0 1 136.3 229.8 379.4 1 169.2 2 900.8
Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep 639.0 5.5 768.6 0.3 2 150.2 611.4 0.0 1 142.5 181.8 385.1 1 242.7 2 996.7
Oct 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2 239.2 648.1 0.0 1 142.8 218.3 383.9 1 253.3 3 044.2
Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec 634.5 3.0 763.7 0.2 2 333.5 682.5 0.0 1 146.6 188.5 407.6 1 309.7 3 138.8
2 0 1 8 Jan 635.7 2.9 760.6 0.2 2 398.2 689.2 0.0 1 158.2 188.1 487.0 1 275.2 3 122.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 0 1 5 July 155.4 2.1 36.4 0.0 102.5 25.5 0.0 246.2 3.4 − 101.4 122.8 394.4
Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep 151.2 1.8 40.0 0.0 119.1 42.4 0.0 249.5 2.9 − 118.3 135.9 427.7
Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec 146.1 3.2 43.3 0.0 156.3 56.1 0.0 249.1 9.3 − 116.3 150.7 455.9
2 0 1 6 Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar 143.7 1.9 46.3 0.0 193.9 59.8 0.0 250.4 26.1 − 113.3 162.9 473.1
Apr 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
May . . . . . . . . . . . .
June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
Oct 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2 0 1 7 Jan 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 164.4 1.0 86.0 0.1 412.4 181.4 0.0 264.1 29.7 − 185.3 374.0 819.5
June 165.8 0.3 95.0 0.0 431.8 181.2 0.0 266.2 32.4 − 204.9 418.0 865.4
July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep 155.2 0.3 94.9 0.0 463.2 165.5 0.0 269.9 52.4 − 192.6 418.5 853.9
Oct 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec 154.2 0.5 94.8 0.0 501.4 187.5 0.0 270.3 56.0 − 218.6 455.8 913.6
2 0 1 8 Jan 155.5 0.9 93.3 0.0 514.7 204.4 0.0 272.8 54.9 − 192.2 424.5 901.7
Discrepanciesmayarisefromrounding.*Thebankingsystem’sliquiditypositionis figuresareavailableinsuchcases.2Source:ECB.3Includesliquidityprovidedunder
definedasthecurrentaccountholdingsineuroofeuro-areacreditinstitutionswith the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes. 4 From Aug. 2009, includes
theEurosystem.Amountsarederivedfromtheconsolidatedfinancialstatementof liquidityabsorbedasaresultoftheEurosystem’sforeignexchangeswapoperations.
theEurosystemandthefinancialstatementoftheBundesbank.1Figuresaredailyav- 5From2002,eurobanknotesandotherbanknoteswhichhavebeenissuedbythena-
eragesforthereservemaintenanceperiodendinginthemonthindicated.Following tional central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation. In ac-
thechangeoverinthefrequencyofGoverningCouncilmonetarypolicymeetingstoa cordancewiththeaccountingprocedurechosenbytheEurosystemfortheissueof
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation are

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
15
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility operations 3 facility operations 4 circulation 5 deposits (net) 6 reserves) 7 money 8 period
ending in 1
Eurosystem 2
− 12.8 − 13.5 + 36.6 + 0.2 + 88.7 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 15.3 + 19.8 − 17.3 + 78.0 + 96.7 2 0 1 5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug
− 15.5 − 10.0 + 19.0 + 0.3 + 79.0 + 44.9 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 32.9 + 0.9 + 47.0 + 104.6 Sep
− 8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7 Oct
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov
− 6.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 87.5 + 20.3 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 1.7 + 22.6 + 28.5 + 52.9 Dec
− 0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2 0 1 6 Jan
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb
− 3.8 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 95.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 − 9.4 + 33.1 + 20.7 − 0.6 + 23.9 Mar
+ 19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9 Apr
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1 June
+ 25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5 Sep
+ 2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2 Oct
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9 Dec
− 12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2 0 1 7 Jan
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3 Mar
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr
+ 16.2 − 10.5 + 153.1 + 0.0 + 117.8 + 70.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 21.7 + 56.6 + 120.2 + 198.5 May
+ 4.5 − 4.8 + 60.0 − 0.1 + 89.7 + 43.7 + 0.0 + 7.6 − 18.4 + 18.6 + 97.6 + 149.1 June
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug
− 17.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 74.1 + 16.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 48.0 + 5.7 + 73.5 + 95.9 Sep
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5 Oct
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov
− 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 94.3 + 34.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 29.8 + 23.7 + 56.4 + 94.6 Dec
+ 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 64.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 11.6 − 0.4 + 79.4 − 34.5 − 16.3 2 0 1 8 Jan
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 3.8 − 1.5 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 18.6 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 3.7 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 19.9 + 20.5 2 0 1 5 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug
− 4.1 − 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 16.6 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 17.0 + 13.1 + 33.2 Sep
− 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2 Oct
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov
− 2.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 18.1 + 15.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 15.0 Dec
− 1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2 0 1 6 Jan
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb
− 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 9.8 + 0.0 − 2.1 + 8.1 + 10.7 − 11.5 − 3.8 Mar
+ 8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0 Apr
. . . . . . . . . . . . May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3 June
+ 6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0 Sep
+ 0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5 Oct
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6 Dec
− 4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2 0 1 7 Jan
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1 Mar
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr
+ 4.9 + 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.0 + 25.9 + 27.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 6.6 − 15.6 + 33.0 + 62.5 May
+ 1.5 − 0.7 + 9.0 − 0.1 + 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.6 − 19.6 + 44.0 + 45.9 June
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug
− 4.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 15.4 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 9.0 + 5.8 + 2.1 Sep
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2 Oct
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 16.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 9.9 − 21.0 + 33.1 + 50.4 Dec
+ 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 13.3 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.1 + 26.4 − 31.3 − 11.9 2 0 1 8 Jan
allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6 Remaining items in the
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro consolidatedfinancialstatementoftheEurosystemandthefinancialstatementof
banknotesincirculationisallocated,likewiseonamonthlybasis,totheNCBs,with theBundesbank.7Equaltothedifferencebetweenthesumofliquidity-providing
eachNCBshowinginitsbalancesheetthepercentageoftheeurobanknotesin factorsandthesumofliquidity-absorbingfactors.8Calculatedasthesumofthe
circulationthatcorrespondstoitspaid-upshareintheECB’scapital.Thedifference “depositfacility”,“banknotesincirculation”and“creditinstitutions’currentaccount
betweenthevalueoftheeurobanknotesallocatedtoanNCBandthevalueofthe holdings”.
euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
16
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1 Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated Claims on non-euro area
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
banks, security Claims on
On investments, euro area Balances Claims
reporting external loans residents with banks, arising from
date/ Gold and other denominated security the credit
End of Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
month 1 assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
Eurosystem 2
20 1 7 J u n e 2 4,204.5 404.1 321.2 77.4 243.8 30.2 16.3 16.3 −
9 4,218.1 404.1 321.5 77.4 244.1 29.9 16.7 16.7 −
16 4,232.9 404.1 322.9 77.6 245.3 28.7 18.3 18.3 −
23 4,246.2 404.1 321.6 77.6 244.0 30.7 18.5 18.5 −
30 4,209.5 379.1 304.8 74.4 230.4 31.2 18.0 18.0 −
J u l y 7 4,214.7 379.1 303.5 74.6 228.9 30.5 17.2 17.2 −
14 4,229.3 379.1 302.9 74.2 228.7 31.6 17.2 17.2 −
21 4,235.8 379.1 300.7 74.3 226.4 33.4 15.9 15.9 −
28 4,248.3 379.1 302.0 74.3 227.7 33.9 16.7 16.7 −
A u g 4 4,246.5 379.1 299.2 74.4 224.8 36.9 16.4 16.4 −
11 4,256.0 379.1 301.2 74.5 226.8 35.3 15.9 15.9 −
18 4,265.7 379.1 300.1 74.5 225.6 35.2 16.5 16.5 −
25 4,278.9 379.1 299.2 74.5 224.7 35.6 16.2 16.2 −
S e p 1 4,283.7 379.1 298.8 74.5 224.3 34.2 16.4 16.4 −
8 4,299.8 379.1 302.0 74.5 227.4 33.7 15.1 15.1 −
15 4,308.9 379.1 302.9 74.5 228.4 31.0 16.6 16.6 −
22 4,328.2 379.1 302.5 74.5 228.0 33.4 16.8 16.8 −
29 4,318.6 379.0 296.9 73.0 223.8 30.8 17.7 17.7 −
O c t 6 4,337.7 379.0 295.9 73.0 222.8 33.4 16.9 16.9 −
13 4,371.6 379.0 297.2 73.0 224.2 32.1 16.7 16.7 −
20 4,363.4 379.0 297.4 73.0 224.4 32.8 17.3 17.3 −
27 4,371.2 379.0 295.5 72.9 222.5 34.6 15.5 15.5 −
20 1 7 N o v 3 4,373.2 379.0 296.4 72.9 223.5 33.9 15.0 15.0 −
10 4,387.7 379.0 297.4 72.7 224.6 32.4 14.8 14.8 −
17 4,411.9 379.0 297.6 72.2 225.3 34.6 15.7 15.7 −
24 4,427.5 379.0 298.3 72.2 226.1 33.0 15.8 15.8 −
D e c 1 4,440.8 379.0 299.9 72.3 227.5 32.9 16.0 16.0 −
8 4,456.6 379.0 300.5 72.3 228.2 33.1 16.2 16.2 −
15 4,471.9 379.0 299.9 72.1 227.8 31.8 17.7 17.7 −
22 4,487.3 379.0 300.6 70.7 230.0 39.4 16.5 16.5 −
29 4,471.7 376.5 296.2 70.2 226.0 38.1 19.4 19.4 −
20 1 8 J a n 5 4,466.0 376.3 294.6 70.2 224.4 38.6 16.1 16.1 −
12 4,472.7 376.3 295.5 70.2 225.3 28.9 14.5 14.5 −
19 4,484.0 376.3 297.6 70.2 227.4 29.9 15.8 15.8 −
26 4,493.1 376.3 296.4 70.1 226.3 29.1 15.7 15.7 −
F e b 2 4,491.2 376.3 295.9 70.0 225.9 32.7 16.1 16.1 −
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 0 1 6 Mar 1 077.6 117.8 53.4 21.5 32.0 0.0 − − −
Apr 1 112.7 117.8 54.1 21.5 32.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 −
May 1 159.5 117.8 54.9 21.5 33.4 0.0 − − −
June 1 214.0 129.0 55.7 21.5 34.1 0.7 − − −
July 1 209.4 129.0 56.0 21.5 34.5 0.2 − − −
Aug 1 239.2 129.0 56.1 21.4 34.7 0.3 − − −
Sep 1 305.3 128.8 55.0 21.3 33.7 2.3 0.4 0.4 −
Oct 1 312.2 128.8 54.9 21.3 33.6 − 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
Nov 1 376.5 128.8 55.0 21.1 33.9 0.1 0.4 0.4 −
Dec 1 392.7 119.3 56.5 21.5 35.0 1.8 0.4 0.4 −
2 0 1 7 Jan 1 449.7 119.3 56.4 21.5 34.9 0.1 1.8 1.8 −
Feb 1 484.8 119.3 56.2 21.2 35.0 0.1 1.5 1.5 −
Mar 1 558.0 126.2 55.7 21.1 34.7 2.7 1.7 1.7 −
Apr 1 582.8 126.1 55.7 21.0 34.7 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
May 1 608.2 126.1 55.7 21.0 34.7 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
June 1 616.4 118.2 53.1 20.0 33.0 1.3 2.1 2.1 −
July 1 621.0 118.2 53.5 20.0 33.6 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
Aug 1 625.1 118.2 52.6 19.9 32.7 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
Sep 1 663.9 118.2 51.7 19.6 32.2 1.4 3.1 3.1 −
Oct 1 644.4 118.2 52.9 19.5 33.4 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
Nov 1 665.0 118.2 52.6 19.3 33.4 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
Dec 1 727.7 117.3 49.5 18.3 31.2 7.2 4.4 4.4 −
2 0 1 8 Jan 1 699.8 117.3 49.4 18.2 31.2 0.1 2.1 2.1 −
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial nationalcentralbanks of the euro area memberstates (NCBs).The balance sheet
statementoftheEuropeanCentralBank(ECB)andthefinancialstatementsofthe itemsforforeigncurrency,securities,goldandfinancialinstrumentsarevaluedatthe

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
17
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
Other
claims on
euro area
Longer- Fine- credit Securities General On
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government reporting
financing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno- date/
opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other End of
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets month 1
Eurosystem 2
780.1 12.1 767.8 − − 0.3 − 74.5 2 311.0 2 015.2 295.8 26.4 240.7 20 1 7 J u n e 2
780.0 12.1 767.8 − − 0.1 − 73.7 2 325.6 2 029.8 295.9 26.4 240.3 9
779.1 11.0 767.8 − − 0.3 − 75.5 2 338.7 2 045.0 293.7 26.4 239.2 16
779.6 11.5 767.8 − − 0.3 − 73.1 2 352.1 2 058.4 293.7 26.4 240.1 23
779.3 11.6 767.3 − − 0.3 − 70.9 2 358.6 2 064.4 294.2 25.8 241.9 30
775.7 8.3 767.3 − − 0.1 − 69.5 2 374.4 2 081.3 293.1 25.7 239.0 J u l y 7
774.6 7.1 767.3 − − 0.2 − 69.0 2 390.4 2 097.5 292.9 25.7 238.8 14
774.3 6.8 767.3 − − 0.2 − 67.7 2 400.0 2 108.3 291.7 25.7 239.0 21
776.3 7.4 768.7 − − 0.2 − 63.3 2 411.3 2 119.2 292.1 25.7 240.0 28
773.1 4.3 768.7 − − 0.2 − 63.6 2 414.8 2 128.2 286.6 25.7 237.5 A u g 4
773.5 4.6 768.7 − − 0.2 − 61.4 2 426.0 2 139.7 286.3 25.7 237.8 11
773.7 4.8 768.7 − − 0.2 − 62.2 2 435.4 2 149.3 286.1 25.7 237.7 18
776.3 7.3 768.7 − − 0.3 − 60.4 2 446.2 2 160.1 286.1 25.7 240.2 25
774.7 5.9 768.6 − − 0.2 − 59.2 2 456.1 2 170.4 285.8 25.7 239.4 S e p 1
772.8 4.3 768.4 − − 0.1 − 61.0 2 471.7 2 185.9 285.8 25.7 238.6 8
772.5 4.0 768.4 − − 0.1 − 61.5 2 484.1 2 200.0 284.2 25.7 235.3 15
773.6 5.1 768.4 − − 0.1 − 59.4 2 498.5 2 214.1 284.3 25.7 239.1 22
768.5 4.2 764.1 − − 0.2 − 53.3 2 504.4 2 221.3 283.1 25.7 242.3 29
767.5 3.2 764.1 − − 0.2 − 54.9 2 521.9 2 238.9 283.0 25.7 242.5 O c t 6
785.5 21.3 764.1 − − 0.1 − 55.0 2 537.6 2 254.4 283.2 25.7 242.7 13
768.2 3.8 764.1 − − 0.3 − 56.7 2 547.4 2 265.1 282.3 25.7 238.9 20
769.4 5.3 763.7 − − 0.3 − 55.4 2 560.0 2 278.4 281.6 25.7 236.2 27
766.9 3.0 763.7 − − 0.2 − 52.6 2 568.1 2 287.7 280.4 25.7 235.7 20 1 7 N o v 3
766.5 2.7 763.7 − − 0.1 − 52.7 2 583.9 2 303.2 280.7 25.1 235.9 10
766.8 2.8 763.7 − − 0.2 − 56.7 2 599.0 2 318.3 280.7 25.1 237.4 17
767.1 3.0 763.7 − − 0.4 − 55.6 2 614.0 2 333.4 280.6 25.1 239.6 24
768.9 5.0 763.7 − − 0.2 − 50.7 2 627.3 2 347.3 279.9 25.1 241.1 D e c 1
766.1 2.3 763.7 − − 0.1 − 52.2 2 643.1 2 364.8 278.3 25.1 241.3 8
765.7 1.9 763.7 − − 0.1 − 54.9 2 655.8 2 380.3 275.5 25.1 241.9 15
764.3 3.4 760.6 − − 0.3 − 43.1 2 668.3 2 393.3 275.0 25.1 250.9 22
764.3 3.4 760.6 − − 0.3 − 37.6 2 660.7 2 386.0 274.7 25.0 254.0 29
763.6 2.9 760.6 − − 0.1 − 35.2 2 662.4 2 388.9 273.5 25.0 254.2 20 1 8 J a n 5
763.7 3.0 760.6 − − 0.1 − 46.2 2 672.9 2 399.0 273.9 25.0 249.7 12
763.3 2.4 760.6 − − 0.2 − 47.7 2 679.3 2 406.6 272.7 25.0 249.1 19
762.8 2.2 760.6 − − 0.1 − 49.5 2 688.7 2 415.3 273.4 25.0 249.5 26
762.6 1.9 760.7 − − 0.0 − 51.5 2 685.3 2 416.1 269.1 25.0 245.7 F e b 2
Deutsche Bundesbank
49.7 3.7 46.0 − − 0.0 − 3.4 210.4 210.4 − 4.4 638.4 2 0 1 6 Mar
49.7 4.2 45.5 − − 0.0 − 4.3 227.3 227.3 − 4.4 655.0 Apr
48.8 3.8 45.0 − − 0.0 − 4.3 244.8 244.8 − 4.4 684.4 May
47.3 2.8 44.5 − − 0.0 − 5.2 261.8 261.8 − 4.4 710.0 June
46.4 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 279.9 279.9 − 4.4 688.0 July
46.3 2.3 44.1 − − 0.0 − 5.5 292.6 292.6 − 4.4 705.0 Aug
55.3 1.3 54.0 − − − − 5.7 309.3 309.3 − 4.4 744.1 Sep
55.5 0.9 53.9 − − 0.7 − 5.4 326.7 326.7 − 4.4 736.2 Oct
55.2 1.0 53.9 − − 0.3 − 4.8 345.4 345.4 − 4.4 782.3 Nov
65.5 1.8 63.5 − − 0.1 − 3.0 357.7 357.7 − 4.4 784.1 Dec
64.0 0.6 63.4 − − 0.0 − 4.1 375.7 375.7 − 4.4 823.9 2 0 1 7 Jan
63.9 0.7 63.2 − − 0.0 − 4.5 392.6 392.6 − 4.4 842.4 Feb
95.6 0.4 95.0 − − 0.2 − 3.9 408.8 408.8 − 4.4 859.0 Mar
95.7 0.6 95.0 − − 0.1 − 4.2 421.4 421.4 − 4.4 872.8 Apr
95.3 0.3 95.0 − − 0.0 − 4.0 434.3 434.3 − 4.4 886.4 May
96.4 1.2 95.0 − − 0.1 − 3.9 445.8 445.8 − 4.4 891.3 June
95.5 0.5 94.9 − − 0.1 − 4.4 457.2 457.2 − 4.4 884.8 July
95.2 0.2 94.9 − − 0.1 − 4.4 467.1 467.1 − 4.4 880.4 Aug
95.1 0.2 94.8 − − 0.0 − 3.7 478.3 478.3 − 4.4 908.1 Sep
95.2 0.3 94.8 − − 0.0 − 3.8 490.5 490.5 − 4.4 877.5 Oct
96.3 1.4 94.8 − − 0.0 − 2.8 503.6 503.6 − 4.4 885.0 Nov
94.3 1.0 93.3 − − − − 0.5 512.1 512.1 − 4.4 937.9 Dec
93.9 0.6 93.3 − − 0.0 − 3.1 518.2 518.2 − 4.4 911.3 2 0 1 8 Jan
endofthequarter.1FortheEurosystem:financialstatementsforspecificweekly
dates; for the Bundesbank: end of month financial statement. 2 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
18
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2 Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
On (covering Fine- area credit
reporting the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
date/ Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse related to deno- certifi- General
End of Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
month 1 liabilities lation 2 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
Eurosystem 4
20 1 7 J u n e 2 4,204.5 1,131.3 1,796.2 1,194.2 602.0 − − 0.0 11.3 − 299.9 157.7 142.2
9 4,218.1 1,130.5 1,800.6 1,199.2 601.3 − − 0.1 9.1 − 310.2 172.5 137.7
16 4,232.9 1,131.7 1,776.2 1,168.4 607.8 − − 0.0 7.4 − 351.7 209.7 142.1
23 4,246.2 1,131.3 1,735.3 1,158.1 577.2 − − 0.0 7.7 − 400.8 259.1 141.7
30 4,209.5 1,136.9 1,723.1 1,106.1 617.0 − − 0.1 9.2 − 347.6 210.1 137.5
J u l y 7 4,214.7 1,140.0 1,787.3 1,166.6 620.7 − − 0.0 9.8 − 340.1 209.1 131.0
14 4,229.3 1,141.2 1,792.1 1,197.8 594.2 − − 0.1 9.8 − 360.2 230.7 129.6
21 4,235.8 1,140.4 1,764.1 1,186.9 577.2 − − 0.0 9.2 − 380.8 254.1 126.7
28 4,248.3 1,142.3 1,784.2 1,200.7 583.5 − − 0.1 9.6 − 369.8 239.3 130.5
A u g 4 4,246.5 1,144.7 1,867.3 1,245.9 621.3 − − 0.0 10.4 − 273.7 147.1 126.6
11 4,256.0 1,145.9 1,870.4 1,240.9 629.4 − − 0.0 9.7 − 285.5 158.3 127.2
18 4,265.7 1,144.1 1,836.3 1,238.6 597.7 − − 0.0 9.0 − 321.6 194.8 126.8
25 4,278.9 1,139.9 1,824.0 1,230.8 593.2 − − 0.0 8.0 − 352.3 225.4 126.9
S e p 1 4,283.7 1,142.1 1,891.7 1,263.4 628.3 − − 0.0 8.4 − 286.7 158.8 128.0
8 4,299.8 1,142.7 1,900.0 1,264.2 635.8 − − 0.0 14.5 − 292.4 162.5 129.9
15 4,308.9 1,142.0 1,888.0 1,238.9 649.0 − − 0.0 6.7 − 324.3 198.1 126.2
22 4,328.2 1,140.2 1,865.2 1,217.6 647.6 − − 0.0 10.7 − 362.3 236.2 126.1
29 4,318.6 1,143.5 1,824.3 1,175.2 649.0 − − 0.1 9.7 − 351.9 229.6 122.3
O c t 6 4,337.7 1,144.9 1,920.2 1,257.3 662.9 − − 0.0 9.2 − 321.4 200.2 121.2
13 4,371.6 1,145.2 1,942.5 1,283.7 658.8 − − 0.0 8.1 − 333.7 210.4 123.3
20 4,363.4 1,143.0 1,913.7 1,261.7 652.0 − − 0.0 6.8 − 357.1 233.5 123.6
27 4,371.2 1,145.3 1,950.4 1,312.1 638.3 − − 0.0 8.3 − 327.6 205.1 122.5
20 1 7 N o v 3 4,373.2 1,147.3 1,982.6 1,312.0 670.6 − − 0.0 6.4 − 279.8 158.6 121.2
10 4,387.7 1,143.2 1,982.6 1,303.4 679.0 − − 0.2 8.6 − 296.3 174.6 121.7
17 4,411.9 1,141.3 1,972.6 1,274.8 697.8 − − 0.0 7.5 − 337.3 208.6 128.7
24 4,427.5 1,140.0 1,972.9 1,270.4 702.4 − − 0.0 6.5 − 360.2 232.0 128.1
D e c 1 4,440.8 1,146.7 2,034.8 1,340.0 694.9 − − 0.0 6.5 − 292.9 170.3 122.5
8 4,456.6 1,153.6 2,029.1 1,334.8 694.3 − − 0.0 11.8 − 287.0 165.3 121.8
15 4,471.9 1,157.0 1,984.9 1,319.6 665.2 − − 0.0 12.9 − 321.3 197.1 124.2
22 4,487.3 1,168.2 1,942.8 1,266.5 676.2 − − 0.0 19.5 − 295.8 177.5 118.3
29 4,471.7 1,170.7 1,881.6 1,185.8 695.8 − − 0.0 21.0 − 287.6 168.5 119.2
20 1 8 J a n 5 4,466.0 1,162.6 1,962.0 1,262.5 699.4 − − 0.0 11.8 − 280.1 163.7 116.4
12 4,472.7 1,154.9 1,995.2 1,291.5 703.5 − − 0.2 8.6 − 298.9 183.1 115.8
19 4,484.0 1,149.5 1,987.8 1,294.8 692.9 − − 0.1 11.7 − 317.0 198.7 118.3
26 4,493.1 1,146.4 1,998.1 1,316.7 681.2 − − 0.2 11.1 − 349.8 230.6 119.2
F e b 2 4,491.2 1,148.9 2,021.1 1,330.9 690.2 − − 0.0 12.0 − 296.1 173.1 123.0
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 0 1 6 Mar 1 077.6 251.9 227.3 167.8 59.6 − − − − − 108.8 39.9 69.0
Apr 1 112.7 252.5 272.4 180.8 91.6 − − − − − 96.3 24.2 72.1
May 1 159.5 253.4 293.2 200.0 93.2 − − − − − 121.2 41.8 79.4
June 1 214.0 255.6 299.7 214.4 85.3 − − 0.0 − − 130.6 56.5 74.1
July 1 209.4 258.0 320.7 235.4 85.4 − − 0.0 − − 101.4 25.3 76.1
Aug 1 239.2 257.1 334.5 242.3 92.2 − − 0.0 0.0 − 110.4 33.5 76.9
Sep 1 305.3 257.9 362.6 244.7 117.9 − − − 0.1 − 122.4 43.9 78.6
Oct 1 312.2 259.2 380.0 260.5 119.5 − − − 0.3 − 110.8 35.6 75.3
Nov 1 376.5 259.5 428.0 293.1 134.9 − − − 0.3 − 116.6 40.0 76.6
Dec 1 392.7 264.9 411.4 284.9 126.4 − − − 0.5 − 105.8 32.5 73.4
2 0 1 7 Jan 1 449.7 260.9 499.0 348.3 150.7 − − − 2.2 − 92.9 17.1 75.8
Feb 1 484.8 261.3 507.1 347.0 160.1 − − − 1.7 − 97.3 12.4 84.9
Mar 1 558.0 262.1 543.2 353.8 189.3 − − − 1.7 − 115.4 26.8 88.6
Apr 1 582.8 264.7 591.2 402.7 188.5 − − − 4.1 − 88.9 20.0 68.9
May 1 608.2 264.9 607.1 433.6 173.5 − − − 2.5 − 102.9 27.8 75.1
June 1 616.4 267.4 586.1 418.6 167.5 − − − 3.4 − 112.9 40.0 72.9
July 1 621.0 268.8 597.0 422.3 174.7 − − 0.0 3.8 − 112.2 40.8 71.4
Aug 1 625.1 268.4 585.6 422.9 162.7 − − 0.0 4.1 − 114.7 47.0 67.7
Sep 1 663.9 269.0 613.2 411.1 202.1 − − 0.0 3.8 − 121.5 59.3 62.2
Oct 1 644.4 269.8 624.6 478.1 146.5 − − 0.0 3.6 − 100.7 45.1 55.6
Nov 1 665.0 269.3 665.2 458.0 207.2 − − 0.0 2.8 − 103.9 48.5 55.4
Dec 1 727.7 275.4 609.8 392.8 217.0 − − 0.0 2.7 − 118.8 67.0 51.8
2 0 1 8 Jan 1 699.8 269.8 665.2 449.5 215.7 − − 0.0 5.0 − 92.7 38.5 54.2
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial specific weekly dates; for the Bundesbank: end-of-month financial statements.
statementoftheEuropeanCentralBank(ECB)andthefinancialstatementsofthe 2AccordingtotheaccountingregimechosenbytheEurosystemontheissueofeuro
nationalcentralbanksoftheeuroareamemberstates(NCBs).Thebalancesheet banknotes,ashareof8%ofthetotalvalueoftheeurobanknotesincirculationis
itemsforforeigncurrency,securities,goldandfinancialinstrumentsarevaluedat allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is
marketratesattheendofthequarter.1ForEurosystem:financialstatementsfor disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
19
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-
Eurosystem
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability On
to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to reporting
area residents residents balances from the drawing euro Capital date/
denominated in foreign and other credit facility rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and End of
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF liabilities 3 issue 2 accounts reserves month 1
Eurosystem 4
150.7 2.8 10.7 10.7 − 59.0 228.3 − 412.0 102.3 20 1 7 J u n e 2
152.7 2.8 10.8 10.8 − 59.0 228.1 − 412.0 102.3 9
149.0 3.0 11.0 11.0 − 59.0 229.5 − 412.0 102.3 16
152.1 3.0 12.5 12.5 − 59.0 230.1 − 412.0 102.3 23
222.5 4.1 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 224.4 − 371.9 102.3 30
168.8 5.0 10.3 10.3 − 56.7 222.5 − 371.9 102.3 J u l y 7
156.4 5.0 11.2 11.2 − 56.7 222.5 − 371.9 102.3 14
170.7 5.5 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 223.5 − 371.9 102.3 21
169.3 6.2 12.7 12.7 − 56.7 223.2 − 371.9 102.3 28
175.8 8.9 10.5 10.5 − 56.7 224.2 − 371.9 102.3 A u g 4
171.3 8.7 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 222.7 − 371.9 102.3 11
182.2 7.5 10.9 10.9 − 56.7 223.3 − 371.9 102.3 18
181.3 7.4 10.9 10.9 − 56.7 224.2 − 371.9 102.3 25
182.1 6.8 10.1 10.1 − 56.7 224.8 − 371.9 102.3 S e p 1
175.2 8.5 11.0 11.0 − 56.7 224.7 − 371.9 102.3 8
175.5 7.7 9.8 9.8 − 56.7 224.1 − 371.9 102.3 15
173.6 8.7 10.8 10.8 − 56.7 225.9 − 371.9 102.3 22
231.1 5.9 10.4 10.4 − 55.6 218.9 − 364.9 102.3 29
177.8 9.0 10.8 10.8 − 55.6 221.5 − 364.9 102.3 O c t 6
176.5 8.6 11.4 11.4 − 55.6 222.7 − 364.9 102.3 13
175.1 8.9 12.4 12.4 − 55.6 223.5 − 364.9 102.3 20
171.6 9.5 11.3 11.3 − 55.6 224.3 − 364.9 102.3 27
186.8 9.8 10.9 10.9 − 55.6 226.5 − 364.9 102.3 20 1 7 N o v 3
186.4 8.2 11.8 11.8 − 55.6 227.7 − 364.9 102.3 10
174.4 10.1 11.6 11.6 − 55.6 234.3 − 364.9 102.3 17
170.2 8.7 11.2 11.2 − 55.6 235.0 − 364.9 102.3 24
185.5 9.2 11.4 11.4 − 55.6 230.9 − 364.9 102.3 D e c 1
198.2 8.5 12.8 12.8 − 55.6 232.7 − 364.9 102.3 8
219.5 7.5 12.0 12.0 − 55.6 233.9 − 364.9 102.3 15
286.1 6.5 11.9 11.9 − 55.6 233.6 − 364.9 102.3 22
354.6 3.8 11.3 11.3 − 55.2 225.5 − 358.0 102.3 29
291.1 3.9 11.4 11.4 − 55.2 227.7 − 357.9 102.3 20 1 8 J a n 5
253.3 5.3 11.2 11.2 − 55.2 230.2 − 357.9 102.1 12
252.1 7.0 12.1 12.1 − 55.2 231.6 − 357.9 102.2 19
220.8 5.4 11.5 11.5 − 55.2 234.6 − 357.9 102.2 26
239.1 8.4 11.9 11.9 − 55.2 237.9 − 357.9 102.7 F e b 2
Deutsche Bundesbank
30.5 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 22.8 299.8 116.2 5.0 2 0 1 6 Mar
30.7 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.9 22.9 300.9 116.2 5.0 Apr
27.2 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.9 23.1 303.9 116.2 5.0 May
47.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.2 23.4 308.0 128.5 5.0 June
43.8 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 15.2 23.6 311.7 128.5 5.0 July
48.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 15.2 23.7 314.1 128.5 5.0 Aug
70.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 15.1 24.0 318.8 128.0 5.0 Sep
66.5 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.3 322.0 128.0 5.0 Oct
74.7 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 15.1 24.4 323.9 128.0 5.0 Nov
117.0 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 15.4 24.7 327.3 119.7 5.0 Dec
100.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.4 25.2 328.3 119.7 5.0 2 0 1 7 Jan
121.3 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.4 24.5 330.1 119.7 5.6 Feb
131.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 15.3 25.1 331.9 126.0 5.6 Mar
125.9 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.3 25.3 335.2 126.0 5.6 Apr
119.4 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.3 25.8 338.1 126.0 5.6 May
140.4 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.7 26.2 342.8 115.8 5.6 June
130.0 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 14.7 26.4 345.0 115.8 5.6 July
139.9 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.7 26.6 348.6 115.8 5.6 Aug
140.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 − 14.4 27.1 352.1 114.6 5.6 Sep
127.4 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 14.4 27.3 354.2 114.6 5.6 Oct
103.8 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 14.4 27.7 355.5 114.6 5.6 Nov
199.8 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.3 27.9 359.3 113.1 5.6 Dec
145.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.3 28.1 359.3 113.1 5.6 2 0 1 8 Jan
remaining92%ofthevalueoftheeurobanknoteincirculationisalsoallocatedto according to the aforementioned accounting regime and the value of euro bank-
theNCBsonamonthlybasis,andeachNCBshowsinitsbalancesheettheshareof notes put into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/ liability
the euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s relatedtobanknoteissue“.3FortheDeutscheBundesbank:includingDMbanknotes
capital.ThedifferencebetweenthevalueoftheeurobanknotesallocatedtotheNCB still in circulation. 4 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
20
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,709.7 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.6 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2 0 1 6 Mar 7,783.4 17.5 2,039.2 1,547.2 1,243.5 303.7 492.0 347.9 144.1 3,736.0 3,316.8 2,742.1 2,458.5
Apr 7,806.5 17.2 2,089.1 1,594.3 1,291.0 303.3 494.8 352.8 142.0 3,747.3 3,329.8 2,753.3 2,467.1
May 7,817.2 18.7 2,070.3 1,587.2 1,284.7 302.4 483.1 342.8 140.4 3,759.2 3,334.1 2,762.8 2,476.2
June 7,920.6 19.3 2,072.8 1,592.2 1,292.9 299.3 480.6 338.2 142.4 3,745.9 3,321.4 2,759.7 2,473.7
July 7,942.1 19.7 2,086.0 1,604.7 1,308.1 296.6 481.2 341.4 139.8 3,758.8 3,333.6 2,766.6 2,479.7
Aug 7,908.5 19.7 2,086.1 1,611.7 1,317.0 294.7 474.4 336.0 138.5 3,758.4 3,335.4 2,774.3 2,486.3
Sep 7,863.9 21.0 2,074.5 1,636.4 1,343.9 292.5 438.2 300.7 137.5 3,766.0 3,343.0 2,785.6 2,497.3
Oct 7,868.7 22.8 2,079.5 1,641.2 1,349.4 291.8 438.3 301.6 136.7 3,773.0 3,349.9 2,793.6 2,502.5
Nov 7,911.6 22.9 2,154.7 1,712.1 1,421.7 290.5 442.6 306.3 136.2 3,785.7 3,361.6 2,810.0 2,518.4
Dec 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2 0 1 7 Jan 7,889.3 24.6 2,210.1 1,777.0 1,490.7 286.3 433.1 299.8 133.3 3,769.9 3,347.6 2,813.5 2,519.3
Feb 7,944.8 23.9 2,225.4 1,783.3 1,497.9 285.4 442.1 307.6 134.5 3,774.5 3,347.6 2,819.5 2,525.6
Mar 7,926.1 23.6 2,237.5 1,797.8 1,513.2 284.6 439.7 306.9 132.7 3,776.8 3,351.3 2,828.1 2,533.8
Apr 7,954.6 24.7 2,276.6 1,847.6 1,563.1 284.6 428.9 298.2 130.8 3,780.1 3,357.1 2,836.6 2,541.1
May 7,947.0 25.6 2,286.5 1,864.4 1,579.4 285.0 422.1 290.1 132.0 3,782.1 3,360.7 2,847.3 2,552.6
June 7,849.7 27.3 2,245.7 1,830.9 1,548.9 282.1 414.8 284.2 130.6 3,780.7 3,364.7 2,859.4 2,559.7
July 7,818.7 26.6 2,258.5 1,840.3 1,560.2 280.0 418.2 289.0 129.2 3,787.1 3,370.5 2,867.1 2,567.3
Aug 7,807.7 27.5 2,243.1 1,828.2 1,553.7 274.5 415.0 286.9 128.0 3,792.2 3,377.0 2,876.6 2,576.3
Sep 7,811.3 28.4 2,262.7 1,847.3 1,578.3 269.0 415.4 288.4 127.0 3,799.4 3,385.3 2,890.2 2,589.5
Oct 7,825.7 28.4 2,285.3 1,873.3 1,604.0 269.2 412.1 285.1 127.0 3,804.7 3,393.5 2,899.1 2,598.2
Nov 7,849.9 28.0 2,312.8 1,901.5 1,633.0 268.5 411.3 285.5 125.8 3,818.1 3,411.2 2,919.0 2,612.6
Dec 7,709.7 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.6 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
Changes 3
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 0.7 6.1 134.9 164.5 182.2 − 17.7 − 29.6 − 20.1 − 9.5 50.7 63.2 114.5 100.8
2 0 1 6 Apr 31.0 − 0.3 49.9 47.2 47.6 − 0.4 2.7 4.8 − 2.1 13.0 14.4 12.6 9.9
May 35.2 1.5 8.4 20.2 21.4 − 1.2 − 11.7 − 10.1 − 1.6 11.4 5.3 10.6 10.0
June 108.2 0.7 3.7 5.6 8.2 − 2.6 − 1.9 − 4.2 2.3 − 10.4 − 11.4 − 1.7 − 1.2
July 23.5 0.4 13.1 12.4 15.2 − 2.8 0.7 3.4 − 2.7 14.5 13.4 8.2 7.3
Aug − 31.5 − 0.0 0.4 7.1 9.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 − 5.3 − 1.4 0.2 2.1 8.0 6.8
Sep − 42.7 1.3 − 11.3 24.9 26.9 − 2.0 − 36.3 − 35.2 − 1.1 8.3 8.3 11.7 11.4
Oct − 0.5 1.8 4.8 5.2 5.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.9 6.5 7.1 7.9 5.2
Nov 25.9 0.1 72.2 69.4 71.4 − 2.0 2.8 3.4 − 0.5 11.6 11.3 15.8 15.2
Dec − 121.7 3.1 − 53.6 − 41.3 − 37.8 − 3.5 − 12.3 − 11.7 − 0.6 − 23.1 − 17.0 − 4.4 − 6.1
2 0 1 7 Jan 108.8 − 1.4 110.7 107.1 107.1 0.0 3.5 5.7 − 2.2 9.4 4.6 9.3 8.5
Feb 47.4 − 0.7 14.0 5.6 6.8 − 1.2 8.4 7.1 1.2 4.3 0.3 6.3 6.5
Mar − 13.0 − 0.3 13.1 14.9 15.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 3.2 4.3 9.0 8.9
Apr 40.0 1.1 41.0 50.7 50.5 0.2 − 9.7 − 7.8 − 1.9 4.7 6.8 9.4 8.2
May 8.8 0.9 12.6 18.0 17.1 0.9 − 5.4 − 6.8 1.4 4.0 4.6 9.0 9.9
June − 85.4 1.7 − 38.0 − 31.5 − 29.2 − 2.3 − 6.5 − 5.2 − 1.4 0.5 5.3 13.2 8.0
July − 14.3 − 0.7 14.5 10.5 12.2 − 1.7 4.0 5.2 − 1.2 8.6 7.1 8.9 8.6
Aug − 4.7 0.9 − 14.3 − 11.6 − 6.3 − 5.3 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.2 5.6 6.8 9.9 9.3
Sep 4.8 0.9 21.8 21.5 26.0 − 4.5 0.3 1.2 − 0.9 6.9 7.1 12.0 13.5
Oct 8.6 0.1 21.9 25.5 25.4 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.7 0.1 4.6 8.0 8.6 8.6
Nov 33.4 − 0.4 28.9 28.8 29.4 − 0.6 0.0 1.2 − 1.1 14.8 18.7 19.0 13.5
Dec − 133.6 4.1 − 91.1 − 75.2 − 72.3 − 2.8 − 15.9 − 15.4 − 0.5 − 15.8 − 10.4 − 0.2 − 2.7
*Thistableservestosupplementthe“Overallmonetarysurvey“insectionII.Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
theothertablesinsectionIV,thistableincludes−inadditiontothefiguresreported funds.1Seefootnote1inTableIV.2.2Includingdebtsecuritiesarisingfromthe

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
21
IV Banks
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
General Enterprises and General
government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities 2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets 1 Period
End of year or month
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 400.9 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 990.6 744.0 669.0 2017
283.6 574.7 327.8 246.9 419.2 273.3 149.1 145.9 29.3 116.6 992.1 727.7 998.5 2 0 1 6 Mar
286.2 576.5 331.6 244.8 417.6 272.8 150.4 144.8 30.0 114.8 1,005.6 741.1 947.2 Apr
286.6 571.3 329.5 241.9 425.1 280.0 153.3 145.1 28.9 116.2 1,012.9 750.5 956.2 May
286.0 561.8 323.9 237.9 424.4 281.2 155.2 143.2 28.9 114.3 1,036.4 774.7 1,046.2 June
286.8 567.0 327.0 240.0 425.2 284.2 159.3 141.0 28.9 112.1 1,041.7 785.1 1,036.0 July
288.0 561.0 324.9 236.1 423.1 283.3 159.7 139.8 29.1 110.7 1,042.6 786.2 1,001.7 Aug
288.3 557.5 323.0 234.5 422.9 282.2 157.8 140.7 29.8 110.9 1,030.5 774.4 971.9 Sep
291.0 556.4 326.3 230.0 423.0 284.6 162.1 138.5 29.5 108.9 1,077.9 823.1 915.5 Oct
291.6 551.6 321.9 229.7 424.1 285.9 161.9 138.3 29.2 109.1 1,065.1 811.1 883.2 Nov
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 Dec
294.2 534.1 312.2 221.9 422.4 284.6 163.1 137.7 28.6 109.2 1,080.8 826.0 803.9 2 0 1 7 Jan
294.0 528.0 311.6 216.5 427.0 289.4 165.6 137.6 28.6 109.0 1,095.4 843.6 825.5 Feb
294.3 523.2 307.1 216.1 425.5 290.8 167.2 134.7 29.0 105.7 1,097.1 847.5 791.1 Mar
295.5 520.5 307.9 212.6 423.0 287.1 167.8 135.8 29.9 105.9 1,080.7 832.2 792.5 Apr
294.6 513.4 298.9 214.6 421.4 288.5 166.8 132.9 28.9 103.9 1,056.3 808.0 796.5 May
299.7 505.4 296.4 208.9 416.0 283.4 162.6 132.6 29.9 102.6 1,064.9 817.0 731.1 June
299.8 503.4 298.3 205.1 416.6 285.0 164.1 131.7 29.9 101.8 1,028.5 780.9 717.9 July
300.4 500.4 293.4 207.0 415.2 283.8 165.2 131.4 30.0 101.4 1,011.0 765.3 733.9 Aug
300.7 495.1 289.0 206.1 414.1 283.0 167.9 131.1 29.8 101.3 1,021.2 776.3 699.6 Sep
301.0 494.4 289.2 205.3 411.2 281.6 167.7 129.6 30.4 99.2 1,014.2 768.9 693.0 Oct
306.4 492.2 287.3 205.0 406.8 276.8 164.2 130.0 29.8 100.2 1,005.3 759.4 685.6 Nov
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 400.9 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 990.6 744.0 669.0 Dec
Changes 3
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010
− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011
− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.4 − 3.8 3.7 − 8.6 0.1 − 8.8 − 18.1 − 12.2 − 173.0 2017
2.7 1.8 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.3 1.7 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 12.9 13.1 − 44.4 2 0 1 6 Apr
0.6 − 5.2 − 2.3 − 2.9 6.1 5.7 1.4 0.4 − 1.0 1.4 0.9 3.7 13.0 May
− 0.5 − 9.7 − 5.7 − 4.0 1.0 2.0 2.4 − 1.0 0.0 − 1.0 24.7 25.5 89.5 June
0.8 5.3 3.1 2.2 1.0 3.2 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 6.7 11.9 − 11.1 July
1.2 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.9 − 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 2.3 2.4 − 34.3 Aug
0.3 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.8 0.6 0.1 − 10.8 − 10.5 − 30.3 Sep
2.8 − 0.9 3.5 − 4.3 − 0.6 1.9 4.0 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 42.7 44.1 − 56.4 Oct
0.6 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 0.4 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 − 25.7 − 24.1 − 32.3 Nov
1.7 − 12.6 − 9.7 − 2.9 − 6.0 − 4.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 9.4 − 11.4 − 38.8 Dec
0.8 − 4.7 0.0 − 4.8 4.9 3.7 4.2 1.2 0.1 1.1 30.4 31.0 − 40.2 2 0 1 7 Jan
− 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.6 − 5.4 4.0 4.2 2.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.2 8.2 11.7 21.6 Feb
0.2 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 1.2 1.7 2.1 − 2.9 0.4 − 3.3 5.5 7.5 − 34.5 Mar
1.2 − 2.6 0.8 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 3.3 1.1 1.2 0.9 0.3 − 8.2 − 7.4 1.4 Apr
− 0.8 − 4.4 − 6.4 2.0 − 0.6 2.3 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 12.7 − 13.1 4.0 May
5.2 − 7.9 − 2.3 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 3.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.3 15.6 15.3 − 65.2 June
0.3 − 1.7 2.0 − 3.7 1.4 2.4 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 24.4 − 24.9 − 12.3 July
0.6 − 3.0 − 4.9 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.9 − 11.3 16.0 Aug
− 1.5 − 4.9 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 8.3 9.0 − 33.1 Sep
0.1 − 0.7 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.2 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 6.6 Oct
5.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 4.3 − 3.1 0.4 − 0.6 1.0 − 2.5 − 3.6 − 7.3 Nov
2.5 − 10.1 − 2.9 − 7.3 − 5.4 − 4.7 − 5.7 − 0.7 0.0 − 0.8 − 14.1 − 15.0 − 16.8 Dec
exchange of equalisation claims. 3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
22
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
End of year or month
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,709.7 1,232.3 1,047.3 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.5 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.2 108.6 42.5
2 0 1 6 Mar 7,783.4 1,252.3 1,058.8 193.5 3,319.6 3,221.8 1,682.6 944.7 290.4 594.4 536.2 86.8 40.1
Apr 7,806.5 1,258.6 1,060.8 197.8 3,332.8 3,240.8 1,704.9 943.2 291.0 592.7 535.6 82.4 38.4
May 7,817.2 1,230.3 1,027.5 202.8 3,348.6 3,253.7 1,717.2 945.3 292.6 591.1 535.0 84.9 41.7
June 7,920.6 1,241.7 1,039.1 202.6 3,350.9 3,250.2 1,718.1 942.1 290.9 590.0 534.5 89.4 44.9
July 7,942.1 1,226.7 1,023.7 203.0 3,362.7 3,267.1 1,733.1 945.0 295.2 589.1 534.5 85.5 40.7
Aug 7,908.5 1,211.5 1,016.5 195.0 3,369.5 3,274.0 1,744.5 941.2 292.8 588.4 534.6 85.5 40.4
Sep 7,863.9 1,194.8 1,029.1 165.7 3,372.1 3,274.9 1,743.8 944.0 297.4 587.1 534.0 88.0 41.4
Oct 7,868.7 1,186.8 1,025.4 161.3 3,378.8 3,286.5 1,763.9 936.0 288.5 586.6 534.3 83.7 37.1
Nov 7,911.6 1,205.6 1,042.2 163.4 3,420.0 3,320.5 1,795.0 939.3 292.8 586.1 534.4 89.8 43.4
Dec 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2 0 1 7 Jan 7,889.3 1,237.0 1,053.4 183.6 3,433.4 3,337.5 1,807.5 941.6 300.1 588.4 537.7 88.4 42.2
Feb 7,944.8 1,245.6 1,055.3 190.3 3,435.3 3,336.9 1,812.7 935.8 295.0 588.5 538.3 89.6 41.7
Mar 7,926.1 1,259.8 1,077.3 182.5 3,433.9 3,334.5 1,813.5 934.4 296.4 586.6 537.0 91.2 39.6
Apr 7,954.6 1,254.1 1,075.4 178.8 3,452.0 3,352.3 1,840.8 925.4 290.7 586.2 536.9 91.2 41.7
May 7,947.0 1,259.3 1,079.9 179.4 3,463.2 3,360.6 1,848.6 926.4 292.7 585.7 536.8 93.5 44.2
June 7,849.7 1,235.2 1,054.2 181.0 3,477.7 3,362.0 1,865.6 911.8 290.3 584.6 536.2 107.1 44.8
July 7,818.7 1,239.8 1,062.3 177.5 3,470.9 3,353.4 1,862.3 907.6 287.9 583.4 538.2 107.5 45.8
Aug 7,807.7 1,243.3 1,065.8 177.4 3,486.1 3,368.4 1,880.5 905.5 285.7 582.4 537.9 108.3 47.5
Sep 7,811.3 1,256.2 1,071.9 184.3 3,494.8 3,371.4 1,886.8 902.8 284.3 581.8 537.9 114.7 50.7
Oct 7,825.7 1,272.0 1,081.9 190.1 3,505.8 3,388.0 1,912.7 893.9 277.3 581.5 538.4 109.2 46.3
Nov 7,849.9 1,275.5 1,081.0 194.5 3,542.9 3,417.4 1,939.9 896.5 276.9 581.0 538.6 113.6 52.1
Dec 7,709.7 1,232.3 1,047.3 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.5 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.2 108.6 42.5
Changes 4
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 0.7 28.7 13.2 15.5 123.5 107.2 145.4 − 32.6 − 15.5 − 5.6 1.7 16.3 5.7
2 0 1 6 Apr 31.0 6.3 2.0 4.3 13.1 18.9 22.2 − 1.5 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 4.5 − 1.6
May 35.2 − 1.4 − 5.7 4.2 14.8 12.0 11.7 1.8 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.6 2.4 3.2
June 108.2 13.0 12.4 0.6 2.2 − 3.0 1.0 − 2.9 − 1.5 − 1.1 − 0.4 3.9 3.2
July 23.5 − 14.9 − 15.4 0.5 11.9 17.1 15.1 2.9 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 4.2
Aug − 31.5 − 15.0 − 7.1 − 7.9 7.0 7.0 11.5 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 0.7 0.1 0.1 − 0.3
Sep − 42.7 − 16.5 12.7 − 29.2 2.7 1.0 − 0.6 2.9 4.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 2.5 1.1
Oct − 0.5 − 8.4 − 3.7 − 4.7 6.2 11.2 19.8 − 8.1 − 8.9 − 0.6 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4
Nov 25.9 17.3 15.9 1.4 39.7 32.7 30.1 3.0 4.0 − 0.4 0.1 5.8 6.1
Dec − 121.7 − 0.9 − 9.3 8.4 − 9.0 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 1.3 2.3 2.7 − 5.7 − 6.2
2 0 1 7 Jan 108.8 32.8 20.7 12.1 23.0 19.7 13.3 6.4 9.1 − 0.0 0.7 4.4 5.1
Feb 47.4 7.6 1.6 6.1 1.2 − 0.7 4.7 − 5.5 − 4.8 0.1 0.7 1.1 − 0.5
Mar − 13.0 14.8 22.2 − 7.4 − 1.0 − 2.1 1.1 − 1.3 1.5 − 1.9 − 1.4 1.6 − 2.1
Apr 40.0 − 4.4 − 1.3 − 3.1 19.1 18.7 27.8 − 8.7 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.2 2.2
May 8.8 6.7 5.3 1.5 12.7 9.5 8.7 1.3 2.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.5 2.6
June − 85.4 − 22.2 − 24.3 2.1 15.3 11.1 17.5 − 5.4 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 0.7 4.7 0.7
July − 14.3 5.3 8.9 − 3.5 − 5.3 − 7.4 − 2.4 − 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.4 0.7 1.1
Aug − 4.7 4.1 3.8 0.3 15.8 15.5 18.5 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 1.7
Sep 4.8 3.0 − 3.8 6.7 8.4 2.9 6.1 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.6 0.0 6.4 3.2
Oct 8.6 15.2 9.8 5.5 10.3 16.0 25.5 − 9.1 − 7.1 − 0.3 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.4
Nov 33.4 4.6 − 0.3 4.9 37.9 30.2 27.9 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 0.2 4.6 5.9
Dec − 133.6 − 38.8 − 29.3 − 9.5 − 13.8 − 6.3 − 3.4 − 4.8 − 2.8 1.9 2.6 − 5.0 − 9.7
*Thistableservestosupplementthe“Overallmonetarysurvey“insectionII.Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
theothertablesinsectionIV,thistableincludes−inadditiontothefiguresreported funds. 1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2 Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
23
IV Banks
Debt securities
issued 3
in other member states 2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic repos with market with to non-
of which of which central non-banks fund maturities euro- Capital
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued 3 Total 2 years 3 residents reserves Liabilities 1 Period
End of year or month
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.1 37.3 603.4 614.3 731.0 2017
43.5 18.6 3.3 2.7 11.0 8.3 3.2 3.5 1,014.7 49.0 557.1 576.3 1,056.7 2 0 1 6 Mar
40.7 17.0 3.2 2.7 9.6 7.9 3.7 3.1 1,019.3 50.3 606.6 583.6 998.9 Apr
40.0 15.9 3.2 2.7 10.0 8.1 3.5 2.7 1,029.8 49.8 611.6 583.9 1,007.0 May
41.3 17.1 3.2 2.7 11.3 8.8 2.5 2.7 1,023.9 50.0 618.1 587.3 1,093.4 June
41.6 16.2 3.2 2.7 10.1 8.1 3.4 2.5 1,021.8 56.6 656.1 578.1 1,090.9 July
42.0 17.0 3.2 2.7 10.0 7.9 3.2 2.4 1,020.1 52.7 663.4 581.9 1,056.4 Aug
43.4 17.9 3.1 2.7 9.2 8.1 2.9 2.5 1,011.1 51.9 655.7 596.9 1,028.0 Sep
43.6 16.6 3.1 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.2 2.4 1,019.6 50.7 710.2 594.9 972.9 Oct
43.4 16.0 3.1 2.6 9.7 8.2 3.0 2.4 1,035.2 48.4 711.7 591.2 942.6 Nov
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 Dec
43.2 15.6 3.0 2.6 7.5 6.9 4.8 2.3 1,043.2 47.5 716.8 585.0 866.9 2 0 1 7 Jan
44.8 18.0 3.0 2.6 8.8 7.7 4.5 2.3 1,050.8 48.0 734.1 588.5 883.7 Feb
48.6 19.9 3.0 2.6 8.3 7.9 2.6 2.2 1,045.7 45.9 730.2 594.1 857.6 Mar
46.6 18.3 3.0 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.5 2.2 1,042.1 43.9 749.0 598.3 853.4 Apr
46.4 17.2 3.0 2.6 9.1 7.8 2.4 2.1 1,042.5 44.6 724.9 603.2 849.4 May
59.3 20.1 3.0 2.6 8.6 7.9 1.8 2.2 1,039.2 44.8 689.8 610.2 793.5 June
58.8 19.1 3.0 2.6 10.0 7.9 3.3 2.2 1,029.2 43.9 684.2 606.2 782.9 July
57.8 18.3 3.0 2.6 9.4 7.9 3.4 2.4 1,024.7 42.6 643.1 608.1 796.7 Aug
61.0 20.5 2.9 2.6 8.7 8.0 2.6 2.4 1,015.2 42.2 669.5 612.4 758.2 Sep
59.9 18.3 2.9 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.3 2.2 1,008.9 40.7 667.9 612.7 753.9 Oct
58.6 16.7 2.9 2.6 11.8 8.3 2.6 2.2 1,004.7 40.1 664.4 609.8 747.9 Nov
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.1 37.3 603.4 614.3 731.0 Dec
Changes 4
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011
− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012
− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013
− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.7 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 7.6 − 9.9 − 17.9 34.4 − 161.3 2017
− 2.8 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.5 0.5 − 0.4 3.9 1.2 49.3 7.2 − 48.8 2 0 1 6 Apr
− 0.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.4 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.4 4.8 − 0.7 1.0 4.3 12.3 May
0.7 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.3 0.7 − 1.0 0.0 − 5.0 0.3 8.4 3.9 86.7 June
0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.2 6.6 38.6 − 8.9 − 2.7 July
0.4 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.8 7.9 6.6 − 36.6 Aug
1.5 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 7.0 12.0 − 25.5 Sep
0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 5.3 − 1.3 52.6 − 2.9 − 53.5 Oct
− 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.6 − 0.2 0.1 7.3 − 2.6 − 5.1 − 6.2 − 27.0 Nov
0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 6.8 − 1.3 − 69.7 − 0.2 − 34.3 Dec
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.9 0.5 76.7 − 5.1 − 38.9 2 0 1 7 Jan
1.6 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 3.4 0.3 14.4 2.4 18.7 Feb
3.7 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.2 6.2 − 26.1 Mar
− 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.0 1.4 − 1.8 22.7 5.6 − 5.3 Apr
− 0.1 − 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 7.8 0.9 − 18.5 7.0 − 5.7 May
4.0 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 0.1 1.0 0.3 − 31.9 8.9 − 56.0 June
− 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 10.6 July
− 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 39.0 2.7 13.0 Aug
3.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.7 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.5 25.3 4.7 − 25.6 Sep
− 1.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.6 Oct
− 1.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 0.3 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 7.1 Nov
4.6 2.9 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 11.6 − 3.8 − 60.9 5.9 − 15.1 Dec
governments.3InGermany,debtsecuritieswithmaturitiesofuptooneyearare publishedtogetherwithmoneymarketfundshares.4Statisticalbreakshavebeen
classedasmoneymarketpaper;uptotheJanuary2002MonthlyReporttheywere eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
24
IV Banks
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which of which
Loans
Cash in
hand and
credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances Securities up to and for Securities Partici-
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets 1
All categories of banks
2 0 1 7 July 1,673 7,865.5 464.7 2,416.5 1,927.6 485.1 4,053.9 350.4 2,972.5 0.6 723.4 113.2 817.2
Aug 1,668 7,854.3 470.1 2,384.7 1,903.7 477.3 4,052.8 345.5 2,977.9 0.5 722.1 113.6 833.0
Sep 1,651 7,857.6 462.5 2,423.1 1,948.3 471.5 4,060.9 352.9 2,982.9 0.6 717.2 113.1 798.0
Oct 1,639 7,871.8 526.4 2,375.2 1,900.0 472.3 4,066.0 351.5 2,993.2 0.5 713.6 113.0 791.2
Nov 1,634 7,895.7 508.7 2,410.5 1,936.0 472.2 4,080.2 351.9 3,002.4 0.5 717.8 113.0 783.3
Dec 1,631 7,754.0 447.7 2,370.0 1,900.3 468.4 4,056.5 333.6 3,002.4 0.6 715.0 112.6 767.1
Commercial banks 6
2 0 1 7 Nov 264 3,178.8 339.5 1,012.5 937.1 75.2 1,217.0 197.4 798.4 0.4 217.2 51.2 558.6
Dec 263 3,128.4 291.3 998.3 921.8 76.2 1,236.8 185.0 822.6 0.5 227.8 50.9 551.0
Big banks 7
2 0 1 7 Nov 4 1,751.0 178.3 509.3 479.1 30.2 497.3 107.9 291.1 0.1 95.4 45.0 521.1
Dec 4 1,692.7 154.0 496.4 466.9 29.4 484.3 97.5 290.8 0.2 95.7 45.1 512.9
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2 0 1 7 Nov 153 1,012.2 93.2 248.8 206.8 41.9 636.3 63.9 460.2 0.2 111.3 5.0 28.9
Dec 153 1,030.0 70.4 260.8 216.8 43.8 664.0 62.7 479.4 0.2 121.2 5.1 29.8
Branches of foreign banks
2 0 1 7 Nov 107 415.7 67.9 254.4 251.3 3.1 83.4 25.5 47.1 0.1 10.5 1.2 8.7
Dec 106 405.6 67.0 241.2 238.1 3.0 88.5 24.7 52.5 0.1 10.9 0.7 8.3
Landesbanken
2 0 1 7 Nov 8 898.1 57.2 267.4 200.8 65.7 470.7 50.2 346.2 0.1 72.8 9.9 92.8
Dec 8 861.3 45.1 258.1 191.9 65.6 459.8 47.1 342.4 0.1 69.1 9.9 88.4
Savings banks
2 0 1 7 Nov 391 1,195.2 37.8 175.9 62.4 113.5 950.0 47.3 745.3 0.0 157.2 14.2 17.3
Dec 391 1,199.5 41.3 176.0 63.2 112.6 951.1 46.5 747.1 0.0 157.4 14.1 17.0
Credit cooperatives
2 0 1 7 Nov 917 886.6 17.1 169.6 63.0 106.1 664.5 31.9 524.4 0.0 108.1 16.6 18.8
Dec 917 890.1 19.1 168.4 62.7 105.2 666.9 31.9 525.7 0.0 109.2 16.8 18.9
Mortgage banks
2 0 1 7 Nov 14 254.9 4.3 39.3 28.1 11.1 204.0 3.1 169.5 − 31.4 0.1 7.3
Dec 13 228.7 4.6 32.0 21.4 10.6 185.5 3.2 157.6 − 24.8 0.1 6.3
Building and loan associations
2 0 1 7 Nov 20 229.1 1.8 56.6 40.5 16.1 165.8 1.2 139.6 . 24.9 0.3 4.6
Dec 20 229.2 1.0 56.6 40.8 15.8 166.7 1.1 140.4 . 25.1 0.3 4.6
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2 0 1 7 Nov 20 1,253.1 51.0 689.2 604.2 84.5 408.2 20.8 279.0 − 106.2 20.7 83.9
Dec 19 1,216.9 45.2 680.7 598.3 82.4 389.6 18.9 266.6 − 101.5 20.5 80.9
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2 0 1 7 Nov 143 1,138.3 124.0 433.4 394.9 38.4 487.4 73.5 307.8 0.3 103.9 4.5 89.0
Dec 141 1,107.0 110.6 425.8 388.1 37.5 481.9 68.3 308.1 0.4 103.3 4.0 84.6
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2 0 1 7 Nov 36 722.6 56.0 179.0 143.6 35.3 403.9 48.0 260.7 0.2 93.4 3.3 80.3
Dec 35 701.3 43.7 184.7 150.0 34.5 393.4 43.5 255.6 0.3 92.4 3.3 76.3
*Assetsandliabilitiesofmonetaryfinancialinstitutions(MFIs)inGermany.Theassets meaningofsection340e(3)sentence1oftheGermanCommercialCode(Handels-
andliabilitiesofforeignbranches,ofmoneymarketfunds(whicharealsoclassified gesetzbuch)readinconjunctionwithsection35(1)No1aoftheCreditInstitution
asMFIs)andoftheBundesbankarenotincluded.Forthedefinitionsoftherespective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kreditinstitute)
items,seethefootnotestoTableIV.3.1OwingtotheActModernisingAccounting areclassifiedunder"Otherassetsandliabilities"asoftheDecember2010reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date.TradingportfolioderivativesarelistedseparatelyintheStatisticalSupplement
financialinstrumentsinthetradingportfolio(tradingportfolioderivatives)withinthe totheMonthlyReport1,Bankingstatistics,inTablesI.1toI.3.2Forbuildingand

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
25
IV Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
including
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for Liabilities of which debt funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank securities general Other
Sight Time Sight including than from months’ savings out- banking liabi- End of
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds standing 5 risks lities 1 month
All categories of banks
1,754.1 566.0 1,188.0 3,644.0 2,003.7 300.8 694.0 79.8 591.2 545.0 54.3 1,124.7 510.5 832.4 2 0 1 7 July
1,713.2 510.4 1,202.8 3,662.5 2,017.4 305.8 695.7 83.6 590.0 544.6 53.6 1,120.5 512.0 846.1 Aug
1,763.0 550.7 1,212.3 3,659.8 2,025.2 296.3 695.5 71.5 589.4 544.6 53.5 1,116.1 511.3 807.4 Sep
1,768.6 556.3 1,212.2 3,679.3 2,049.1 294.0 694.0 78.4 589.0 545.1 53.1 1,110.1 511.2 802.6 Oct
1,774.0 554.7 1,219.3 3,711.1 2,084.5 287.5 698.0 74.5 588.5 545.2 52.6 1,103.1 511.2 796.4 Nov
1,705.9 499.1 1,206.8 3,662.1 2,050.4 269.1 700.3 46.0 590.3 547.5 52.0 1,097.0 511.1 777.9 Dec
Commercial banks 6
865.5 395.4 470.0 1,478.0 931.2 165.9 255.9 55.2 101.0 92.9 23.9 150.6 177.6 507.2 2 0 1 7 Nov
843.1 377.9 465.1 1,454.0 894.9 156.4 277.8 37.5 101.4 93.5 23.6 158.4 180.0 492.8 Dec
Big banks 7
418.3 167.4 250.9 646.1 385.1 104.4 89.1 55.2 61.3 60.0 6.3 119.4 103.9 463.2 2 0 1 7 Nov
406.5 157.7 248.8 612.7 359.3 94.5 91.3 37.4 61.6 60.4 6.0 120.3 103.8 449.3 Dec
Regional banks and other commercial banks
212.2 62.1 150.1 670.1 434.9 39.9 140.2 − 39.2 32.5 16.0 30.9 65.2 33.7 2 0 1 7 Nov
203.0 57.7 145.4 687.4 429.9 40.2 162.0 0.1 39.5 32.9 15.9 37.9 67.7 34.0 Dec
Branches of foreign banks
235.0 166.0 69.0 161.7 111.2 21.7 26.6 − 0.6 0.3 1.7 0.2 8.4 10.3 2 0 1 7 Nov
233.5 162.5 71.0 153.9 105.7 21.8 24.6 − 0.2 0.2 1.7 0.2 8.5 9.5 Dec
Landesbanken
259.5 67.8 191.7 298.9 128.6 59.5 97.5 16.1 12.4 12.0 0.7 196.0 50.9 92.8 2 0 1 7 Nov
238.8 35.9 202.9 284.8 128.2 50.2 93.2 7.5 12.5 12.0 0.7 196.2 50.9 90.6 Dec
Savings banks
128.8 5.0 123.8 901.0 561.5 14.3 14.9 − 289.8 265.2 20.5 14.6 108.3 42.5 2 0 1 7 Nov
128.6 5.0 123.5 905.5 565.5 14.5 15.0 − 290.3 265.9 20.3 14.5 108.2 42.8 Dec
Credit cooperatives
113.4 1.8 111.6 659.0 421.9 32.2 14.3 − 184.8 174.6 5.8 8.4 74.3 31.5 2 0 1 7 Nov
112.5 1.5 111.0 662.7 424.5 32.3 14.4 − 185.8 175.8 5.7 8.7 74.4 31.8 Dec
Mortgage banks
51.4 4.0 47.4 94.3 3.6 4.7 86.1 0.1 − − . 90.9 9.6 8.7 2 0 1 7 Nov
44.5 2.8 41.7 80.6 3.2 3.9 73.5 − − − . 87.1 8.9 7.6 Dec
Building and loan associations
26.6 4.1 22.6 175.8 3.4 1.4 170.5 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 3.0 11.0 12.7 2 0 1 7 Nov
25.6 3.6 22.1 178.1 3.4 1.3 172.8 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 3.0 11.0 11.5 Dec
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
328.9 76.6 252.3 104.2 34.4 9.5 58.7 3.1 − − . 639.6 79.5 100.9 2 0 1 7 Nov
312.9 72.4 240.5 96.3 30.6 10.5 53.7 1.0 − − . 629.2 77.7 100.8 Dec
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
415.0 238.2 176.7 557.2 392.3 52.0 83.0 9.4 20.8 20.3 9.1 22.8 50.1 93.2 2 0 1 7 Nov
395.6 228.3 167.3 549.9 381.8 53.7 84.2 8.9 21.1 20.6 9.0 22.7 49.8 89.0 Dec
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
180.0 72.3 107.7 395.4 281.1 30.3 56.4 9.4 20.3 20.0 7.3 22.6 41.6 83.0 2 0 1 7 Nov
162.1 65.8 96.3 395.9 276.2 31.9 59.7 8.9 20.9 20.4 7.3 22.5 41.4 79.4 Dec
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov.2009),CommerzbankAG,UniCreditBankAG(formerlyBayerischeHypo-und
IV.12). 3 Included in time deposits. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan VereinsbankAG)andDeutschePostbankAG.8Sumofthebanksmajority-ownedby
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5 Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreignbanksandincludedinothercategoriesofbanksandthecategory”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6 Commercial banks (withdependentlegalstatus)offoreignbanks”.9Separatepresentationofthebanks
comprisethesub-groups”Bigbanks”,”Regionalbanksandothercommercialbanks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories.
and”Branchesofforeignbanks”.7DeutscheBankAG,DresdnerBankAG(upto

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
26
IV Banks
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
(euro-area balances market Memo money mar- Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper Securities item ket paper issued
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks 1
End of year or month *
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2 0 1 6 July 19.4 233.0 1,349.1 1,074.3 0.0 1.3 273.4 1.7 3,264.5 2,806.4 0.3 1.7 456.1
Aug 19.4 240.9 1,348.1 1,075.2 0.0 1.2 271.7 1.7 3,265.9 2,810.9 0.3 1.3 453.5
Sep 20.7 246.0 1,368.1 1,097.3 0.0 1.2 269.5 1.7 3,274.2 2,819.9 0.3 1.6 452.4
Oct 22.6 258.7 1,360.3 1,090.2 0.0 1.4 268.7 1.7 3,281.0 2,828.6 0.2 1.6 450.6
Nov 22.6 291.7 1,397.6 1,128.8 0.0 1.1 267.6 1.7 3,293.1 2,840.0 0.2 1.3 451.6
Dec 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2 0 1 7 Jan 24.3 346.9 1,407.0 1,142.5 0.0 1.0 263.5 1.7 3,277.7 2,831.2 0.3 0.8 445.4
Feb 23.6 346.6 1,413.8 1,150.2 0.0 1.1 262.5 1.8 3,279.0 2,836.8 0.3 0.8 441.1
Mar 23.4 352.1 1,423.3 1,160.4 0.0 1.3 261.6 1.7 3,283.0 2,840.6 0.3 1.0 441.1
Apr 24.4 400.2 1,424.8 1,161.7 0.0 1.1 262.0 1.7 3,288.9 2,848.6 0.3 1.1 438.9
May 25.4 426.0 1,415.5 1,152.3 0.0 1.1 262.1 1.7 3,292.9 2,851.3 0.2 1.8 439.6
June 27.0 417.8 1,391.1 1,130.4 0.0 1.2 259.4 1.7 3,296.8 2,855.9 0.2 1.1 439.6
July 26.4 420.0 1,398.0 1,139.4 0.0 1.4 257.2 1.7 3,302.5 2,865.2 0.3 1.0 436.0
Aug 27.3 421.3 1,384.2 1,131.4 0.0 1.4 251.3 1.7 3,308.9 2,869.4 0.2 0.8 438.5
Sep 28.1 409.2 1,416.1 1,168.3 0.0 1.3 246.5 1.7 3,317.6 2,878.2 0.3 0.7 438.4
Oct 28.1 472.7 1,378.5 1,130.6 0.0 0.9 247.0 1.7 3,326.1 2,887.0 0.3 0.8 438.0
Nov 27.7 457.1 1,422.2 1,175.1 0.0 0.8 246.3 1.8 3,343.7 2,899.6 0.2 1.2 442.6
Dec 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
Changes *
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2 0 1 6 July + 0.4 + 19.4 − 7.6 − 4.5 − − 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.1 + 13.3 + 10.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2
Aug − 0.0 + 7.9 − 1.0 + 0.9 − − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 2.6
Sep + 1.3 + 5.1 + 20.0 + 22.1 − + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 9.1 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 1.1
Oct + 1.8 + 12.7 − 7.3 − 6.6 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.7
Nov + 0.1 + 33.0 + 37.3 + 38.7 − − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 12.1 + 11.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0
Dec + 3.1 − 7.7 − 32.7 − 29.0 − − 0.3 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 19.0 − 16.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.8
2 0 1 7 Jan − 1.4 + 62.9 + 42.1 + 42.6 − + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 3.3 + 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.4
Feb − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.8 + 7.7 − + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2
Mar − 0.3 + 5.5 + 9.5 + 10.2 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
Apr + 1.1 + 48.1 + 1.7 + 1.3 − − + 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.3
May + 0.9 + 25.8 − 9.4 − 9.5 − − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7
June + 1.7 − 8.2 − 23.5 − 20.9 − + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0
July − 0.7 + 2.2 + 6.9 + 9.0 − + 0.2 − 2.2 − + 5.6 + 9.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
Aug + 0.9 + 1.3 − 13.8 − 8.0 − + 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.6
Sep + 0.8 − 12.1 + 34.1 + 38.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.5
Oct + 0.1 + 63.5 − 37.6 − 37.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
Nov − 0.4 − 15.6 + 43.7 + 44.4 − − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 17.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.6
Dec + 4.1 − 64.6 − 10.3 − 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.1
*SeeTableIV.2,footnote*;statisticalbreakshavebeeneliminatedfromthechanges. (see also footnote 2). 2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional.Subsequent equalisation claims. 3 Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registeredmoneymarketpaperandnon-negotiablebearerdebtsecurities;including
marked.1Excludingdebtsecuritiesarisingfromtheexchangeofequalisationclaims subordinatedliabilities.4Includingliabilitiesarisingfrommonetarypolicyoperations

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
27
IV Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs) 3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims 2 loans enterprises Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans Period
End of year or month *
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011
− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
− 19.5 90.1 1,022.8 140.0 882.7 0.0 5.9 3,275.7 1,737.1 896.8 589.1 52.7 28.6 2 0 1 6 July
− 19.4 90.3 1,015.7 137.3 878.3 0.0 5.9 3,282.1 1,748.5 893.1 588.4 52.2 28.7 Aug
− 19.3 89.8 1,028.7 132.1 896.6 0.0 5.8 3,283.7 1,748.1 896.6 587.2 51.8 28.6 Sep
− 19.1 89.7 1,025.1 137.1 887.9 0.0 5.7 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 586.6 51.3 28.6 Oct
− 19.1 89.3 1,041.1 145.9 895.1 0.0 5.6 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 586.2 50.9 28.6 Nov
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 Dec
− 20.3 90.8 1,052.6 136.9 915.6 0.1 5.5 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 588.5 49.5 30.6 2 0 1 7 Jan
− 20.3 89.4 1,054.6 141.4 913.1 0.0 5.6 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 588.5 49.0 30.5 Feb
− 20.1 89.1 1,077.0 137.4 939.6 0.0 5.5 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 586.7 48.2 30.4 Mar
− 20.1 88.8 1,074.8 140.7 934.2 0.0 5.5 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 586.2 47.8 30.3 Apr
− 20.0 88.7 1,079.5 142.0 937.5 − 5.5 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 585.7 47.0 30.4 May
− 19.7 88.4 1,053.9 125.6 928.3 0.0 5.5 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 584.7 46.6 29.8 June
− 19.6 88.5 1,061.7 125.0 936.6 0.0 5.4 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 583.5 46.0 29.9 July
− 19.6 88.9 1,065.1 121.2 943.9 0.0 5.4 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 582.4 45.4 30.0 Aug
− 19.5 88.1 1,071.5 120.2 951.3 0.0 5.3 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 581.8 45.3 30.0 Sep
− 19.4 87.9 1,081.0 122.8 958.2 0.0 5.3 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 581.5 44.8 29.9 Oct
− 19.4 88.1 1,079.8 125.9 953.9 0.0 5.3 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 581.0 44.3 30.1 Nov
− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 Dec
Changes *
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011
− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012
− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013
− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016
− − 0.0 − 1.5 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 15.8 − 12.5 − 3.3 − − 0.1 + 15.8 + 14.5 + 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.0 2 0 1 6 July
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 7.1 − 2.7 − 4.4 − − 0.0 + 6.4 + 11.4 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 Aug
− − 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.0 − 5.3 + 18.3 − − 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.4 + 3.6 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 Sep
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 3.2 + 1.5 − 4.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 Oct
− − 0.0 − 0.4 + 16.0 + 8.8 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 − Nov
− + 0.0 + 1.6 − 8.2 − 16.4 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 Dec
− + 1.2 − 0.2 + 19.7 + 7.4 + 12.3 − − 0.1 + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 2 0 1 7 Jan
− − 0.1 − 1.4 + 2.0 + 4.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 Feb
− − 0.1 − 0.3 + 22.4 − 4.1 + 26.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 Mar
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 Apr
− − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.6 + 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 May
− − 0.4 + 0.0 − 24.6 − 16.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 June
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.8 − 0.5 + 8.3 − − 0.0 − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 July
− − 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 − 3.9 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 Aug
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.3 − − 0.1 + 4.3 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 Sep
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 − + 0.0 + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 Oct
− − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 3.1 − 4.2 − + 0.0 + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 Nov
− − 0.3 + 0.6 − 27.3 − 15.0 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1 Dec
withtheBundesbank.5Ownacceptancesandpromissorynotesoutstanding.6Since savingsandloancontracts(seealsofootnote8).8Includingliabilitiesarisingfrom
theinclusionofbuildingandloanassociationsinJanuary1999,includingdeposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7 Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
28
IV Banks
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable Loans and bills negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper Securities item and paper Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 962.6 736.9 439.7 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2 0 1 6 July 0.3 1,089.1 854.6 586.5 268.0 2.7 231.9 1.0 766.0 448.5 100.1 348.4 4.1 313.4
Aug 0.3 1,081.5 848.6 577.9 270.7 2.5 230.4 1.0 765.4 450.3 99.9 350.4 5.1 310.0
Sep 0.3 1,046.8 806.0 535.5 270.5 2.5 238.4 1.0 751.0 444.0 93.6 350.4 4.7 302.3
Oct 0.3 1,089.3 850.4 571.3 279.0 2.1 236.8 1.0 758.1 454.5 102.9 351.6 4.2 299.3
Nov 0.3 1,074.3 837.9 541.7 296.2 1.7 234.7 1.0 765.2 459.4 103.6 355.9 5.5 300.3
Dec 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2 0 1 7 Jan 0.3 1,069.4 836.4 537.3 299.0 0.8 232.2 1.7 772.9 468.4 109.0 359.4 5.3 299.1
Feb 0.3 1,088.4 854.7 552.1 302.6 1.3 232.5 1.7 782.0 474.4 110.6 363.8 6.2 301.3
Mar 0.3 1,086.7 854.7 548.7 306.0 1.9 230.0 1.7 777.5 475.7 110.9 364.9 4.1 297.7
Apr 0.3 1,063.7 833.7 529.7 304.0 1.9 228.0 1.7 774.4 477.4 114.5 362.9 4.8 292.2
May 0.3 1,037.5 804.3 506.9 297.4 2.2 231.0 1.9 771.7 475.9 112.3 363.6 5.1 290.8
June 0.3 1,043.5 812.2 515.4 296.8 2.3 229.0 1.9 756.2 461.8 102.5 359.3 6.3 288.1
July 0.3 1,018.5 788.2 493.2 295.0 2.3 227.9 2.1 751.5 458.0 102.6 355.4 6.1 287.4
Aug 0.2 1,000.5 772.3 478.4 293.9 2.2 226.0 2.1 743.9 454.3 104.0 350.3 6.0 283.6
Sep 0.3 1,007.0 780.1 484.7 295.4 1.9 225.1 2.1 743.3 457.8 107.9 349.9 6.7 278.8
Oct 0.3 996.7 769.4 473.5 295.9 1.9 225.3 2.1 739.9 457.9 104.8 353.1 6.5 275.6
Nov 0.3 988.3 761.0 467.6 293.4 1.4 225.9 2.2 736.5 454.9 105.5 349.3 6.4 275.2
Dec 0.3 962.6 736.9 439.7 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
Changes *
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2017 + 0.0 − 58.5 − 50.0 − 62.7 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2 0 1 6 July − 0.0 − 1.0 + 4.4 + 6.2 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 8.0 + 13.6 + 10.9 + 2.7 − 2.3 − 3.3
Aug + 0.0 − 6.7 − 5.0 − 8.1 + 3.0 − 0.2 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 2.3 + 1.0 − 3.3
Sep − 0.0 − 44.3 − 42.2 − 42.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 5.3 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 2.5
Oct − 0.0 + 38.4 + 40.6 + 34.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 9.0 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.1
Nov + 0.0 − 25.6 − 22.6 − 35.0 + 12.3 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1
Dec + 0.0 − 20.7 − 19.9 − 23.1 + 3.2 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 10.7 − 9.1 − 13.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 1.2
2 0 1 7 Jan + 0.0 + 18.9 + 21.1 + 19.8 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 19.9 + 19.5 + 19.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1
Feb − 0.0 + 14.0 + 13.5 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.8
Mar − 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 4.7
Apr + 0.0 − 16.1 − 14.2 − 15.4 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 4.9
May − 0.0 − 17.3 − 20.9 − 18.6 − 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.6
June − 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.7 + 10.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 9.3 − 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.2
July − 0.0 − 16.8 − 16.1 − 18.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1
Aug − 0.0 − 19.5 − 17.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 3.5
Sep + 0.1 + 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 3.5
Oct + 0.0 − 13.4 − 13.6 − 12.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.4 + 2.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
Nov − 0.0 − 3.2 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.1
Dec − 0.0 − 22.4 − 20.9 − 26.4 + 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 11.1 − 11.9 + 0.8 − 2.2 + 2.5
*SeeTableIV.2,footnote*;statisticalbreakshavebeeneliminatedfromthechanges.
Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional.Subsequent
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
29
IV Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)
in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciary
loans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans Period
End of year or month *
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 2008
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 2011
32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 657.7 388.3 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
13.1 29.4 706.1 408.3 297.8 217.9 80.0 0.0 244.0 129.1 114.9 68.2 46.6 0.7 2 0 1 6 July
13.1 29.4 701.3 398.5 302.8 220.1 82.7 0.0 248.3 127.3 121.0 74.9 46.1 0.7 Aug
13.1 29.4 679.5 366.0 313.5 231.3 82.2 0.0 233.3 124.6 108.7 62.0 46.7 0.7 Sep
13.2 28.8 692.7 398.6 294.1 211.9 82.2 0.0 266.3 146.2 120.1 72.0 48.1 0.7 Oct
13.2 28.9 703.9 416.7 287.2 203.2 84.0 0.0 266.2 138.3 128.0 79.1 48.9 0.7 Nov
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 Dec
13.0 28.4 746.1 452.6 293.5 206.4 87.1 0.0 246.7 125.6 121.1 71.1 50.0 0.7 2 0 1 7 Jan
13.0 24.8 765.2 480.7 284.5 197.4 87.1 0.0 254.0 129.5 124.5 74.8 49.7 0.7 Feb
12.9 24.7 768.8 488.1 280.7 192.1 88.6 0.0 237.6 113.7 124.0 72.2 51.8 0.7 Mar
12.9 24.8 751.4 429.4 322.0 234.2 87.7 0.0 271.9 132.3 139.7 89.0 50.6 0.7 Apr
12.8 24.6 732.4 464.0 268.4 181.8 86.5 0.0 269.4 134.1 135.3 85.0 50.3 0.6 May
12.5 24.4 720.3 463.2 257.1 170.1 87.0 0.0 259.9 123.7 136.1 75.7 60.4 0.6 June
12.5 24.4 692.4 441.0 251.4 165.5 85.9 0.0 282.5 137.7 144.8 84.4 60.5 0.6 July
12.4 24.4 648.0 389.2 258.9 174.0 84.9 0.0 286.0 133.1 152.9 92.5 60.4 0.5 Aug
12.4 24.8 691.5 430.5 261.0 176.6 84.3 0.0 279.1 133.5 145.7 84.3 61.4 0.5 Sep
12.3 24.8 687.6 433.6 254.0 169.4 84.7 0.0 282.8 132.3 150.5 87.9 62.6 0.4 Oct
12.4 24.7 694.2 428.8 265.4 179.7 85.7 0.0 284.4 140.6 143.8 81.7 62.1 0.4 Nov
12.1 24.3 657.7 388.3 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 Dec
Changes *
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011
− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012
− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013
+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016
− 1.0 − 4.1 − 16.8 + 24.0 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
+ 0.0 + 0.4 + 27.8 + 11.0 + 16.8 + 14.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 + 8.5 − 3.8 + 12.3 + 11.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 2 0 1 6 July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 4.3 − 9.5 + 5.2 + 2.4 + 2.8 − + 4.5 − 1.7 + 6.2 + 6.7 − 0.5 − 0.1 Aug
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 32.3 + 11.1 + 11.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 14.8 − 2.7 − 12.1 − 12.7 + 0.7 − 0.0 Sep
+ 0.1 − 0.6 + 11.1 + 31.7 − 20.5 − 20.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 32.5 + 21.4 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 Oct
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 15.8 − 10.9 − 12.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 6.9 + 6.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 Nov
− 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.2 − 42.7 + 33.5 + 30.2 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 60.5 − 38.2 − 22.3 − 24.1 + 1.8 + 0.0 Dec
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 52.9 + 79.0 − 26.1 − 26.2 + 0.1 − + 41.2 + 25.6 + 15.6 + 16.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2 0 1 7 Jan
− 0.1 − 3.6 + 15.9 + 26.6 − 10.7 − 10.3 − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 Feb
− 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 8.3 − 2.8 − 4.5 + 1.7 − − 15.9 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 2.2 − 0.0 Mar
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 12.8 − 56.2 + 43.4 + 43.7 − 0.4 − + 34.4 + 18.2 + 16.2 + 17.1 − 0.9 − Apr
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 13.8 + 36.5 − 50.3 − 49.8 − 0.5 − − 0.9 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 May
− 0.3 − 0.2 − 9.0 + 0.6 − 9.6 − 10.5 + 0.9 − − 17.8 − 10.0 − 7.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 − 0.0 June
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.9 − 19.7 − 4.2 − 3.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 24.0 + 14.4 + 9.6 + 9.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 July
− 0.1 + 0.0 − 42.9 − 51.2 + 8.3 + 9.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.6 − 4.0 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 Aug
− 0.0 + 0.4 + 42.4 + 41.0 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.7 − − 7.2 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 8.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 Sep
− 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 2.4 − 8.3 − 8.3 + 0.0 − + 3.0 − 1.4 + 4.4 + 3.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 Oct
+ 0.1 − 0.0 + 9.4 − 3.6 + 13.0 + 11.6 + 1.4 − + 2.3 + 8.6 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 Nov
− 0.3 − 0.4 − 34.6 − 39.6 + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.5 − − 42.5 − 31.0 − 11.6 − 13.4 + 1.8 − 0.1 Dec

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
30
IV Banks
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2 0 1 6 July 3,264.5 2,806.6 268.8 213.8 212.9 1.0 55.0 54.2 0.7 2,995.6 2,483.9
Aug 3,265.9 2,811.2 262.2 208.1 207.5 0.6 54.1 53.4 0.7 3,003.8 2,497.1
Sep 3,274.2 2,820.2 268.7 214.2 213.7 0.5 54.5 53.4 1.1 3,005.4 2,502.7
Oct 3,281.0 2,828.8 269.7 212.6 212.0 0.6 57.1 56.1 1.0 3,011.3 2,512.3
Nov 3,293.1 2,840.2 268.0 216.3 215.8 0.5 51.7 51.0 0.8 3,025.0 2,525.5
Dec 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2 0 1 7 Jan 3,277.7 2,831.5 252.1 208.6 208.0 0.6 43.5 43.3 0.2 3,025.6 2,535.3
Feb 3,279.0 2,837.1 252.8 209.7 209.1 0.7 43.1 42.9 0.1 3,026.2 2,541.5
Mar 3,283.0 2,840.9 252.7 212.6 211.8 0.8 40.0 39.8 0.2 3,030.4 2,547.5
Apr 3,288.9 2,849.0 253.7 210.6 209.8 0.8 43.1 42.8 0.3 3,035.2 2,558.1
May 3,292.9 2,851.5 249.3 211.0 210.0 0.9 38.4 37.5 0.8 3,043.5 2,568.8
June 3,296.8 2,856.1 251.1 214.1 213.5 0.6 37.0 36.5 0.5 3,045.7 2,577.7
July 3,302.5 2,865.5 249.4 210.2 209.5 0.7 39.2 38.8 0.3 3,053.1 2,589.2
Aug 3,308.9 2,869.6 242.8 207.6 207.0 0.6 35.2 35.0 0.2 3,066.1 2,601.2
Sep 3,317.6 2,878.5 246.2 214.1 213.5 0.6 32.2 32.0 0.2 3,071.3 2,608.7
Oct 3,326.1 2,887.3 248.0 215.3 214.7 0.6 32.7 32.6 0.2 3,078.1 2,616.7
Nov 3,343.7 2,899.8 248.0 215.4 214.9 0.5 32.6 31.9 0.7 3,095.6 2,636.3
Dec 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
Changes *
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2 0 1 6 July + 13.3 + 10.2 + 0.1 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 4.0 + 3.9 + 0.1 + 13.3 + 12.0
Aug + 1.5 + 4.6 − 6.7 − 5.8 − 5.4 − 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.2 + 13.2
Sep + 8.2 + 9.0 + 6.6 + 6.2 + 6.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 5.5
Oct + 7.0 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 9.4
Nov + 12.1 + 11.4 − 1.7 + 3.7 + 3.8 − 0.1 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 + 13.7 + 13.0
Dec − 19.0 − 16.2 − 19.0 − 10.1 − 9.9 − 0.2 − 8.9 − 8.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.8
2 0 1 7 Jan + 3.3 + 7.3 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 5.3
Feb + 1.4 + 5.6 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 6.2
Mar + 3.9 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 5.9
Apr + 5.9 + 8.1 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 10.6
May + 3.9 + 2.5 − 4.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 5.2 + 0.5 + 8.0 + 7.8
June + 4.0 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 3.3 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 8.8
July + 5.6 + 9.4 − 1.8 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 11.4
Aug + 6.4 + 4.1 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 13.0 + 12.0
Sep + 7.3 + 8.9 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 6.5 − 0.0 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.8
Oct + 8.6 + 8.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 8.0
Nov + 17.7 + 12.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 17.6 + 17.8
Dec − 11.1 − 5.5 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 4.7 + 3.6
*SeeTableIV.2,footnote*;statisticalbreakshavebeeneliminatedfromthechanges. marked.1Excludingdebtsecuritiesarisingfromtheexchangeofequalisationclaims
Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional.Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
31
IV Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term Securities loans Total Total term term ities 1 claims 2 loans Period
End of year or month *
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 2008
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 2017
2,266.8 258.5 2,008.2 217.1 17.7 511.7 272.7 25.9 246.8 239.0 − 1.8 2 0 1 6 July
2,278.8 260.6 2,018.1 218.4 17.6 506.6 271.5 25.9 245.6 235.1 − 1.8 Aug
2,283.5 261.0 2,022.5 219.3 17.5 502.7 269.6 25.4 244.2 233.1 − 1.8 Sep
2,290.5 261.5 2,029.0 221.8 17.3 498.9 270.2 24.4 245.7 228.8 − 1.8 Oct
2,302.5 264.0 2,038.5 223.0 17.3 499.5 270.9 24.3 246.6 228.6 − 1.8 Nov
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 Dec
2,311.3 264.5 2,046.8 224.0 18.6 490.3 268.9 24.2 244.7 221.4 − 1.7 2 0 1 7 Jan
2,316.5 263.2 2,053.3 225.1 18.5 484.7 268.6 25.0 243.7 216.1 − 1.7 Feb
2,322.0 264.4 2,057.6 225.5 18.4 482.9 267.3 24.6 242.7 215.6 − 1.7 Mar
2,331.2 265.4 2,065.9 226.8 18.4 477.2 265.1 23.6 241.5 212.0 − 1.7 Apr
2,342.6 266.2 2,076.4 226.2 18.3 474.8 261.3 23.4 238.0 213.4 − 1.7 May
2,346.1 267.4 2,078.7 231.6 18.0 468.0 260.0 23.0 237.0 208.1 − 1.6 June
2,357.7 268.3 2,089.4 231.5 18.0 463.9 259.4 23.1 236.3 204.5 − 1.6 July
2,369.2 269.4 2,099.8 232.0 18.0 464.9 258.4 22.9 235.5 206.5 − 1.6 Aug
2,376.0 269.6 2,106.3 232.7 17.9 462.7 257.0 22.4 234.6 205.7 − 1.6 Sep
2,383.4 270.9 2,112.5 233.2 17.8 461.4 256.6 22.7 234.0 204.8 − 1.6 Oct
2,397.7 274.4 2,123.3 238.6 17.8 459.3 255.4 22.8 232.6 204.0 − 1.6 Nov
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 Dec
Changes *
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 40.0 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017
+ 10.8 + 0.8 + 10.1 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 2.1 − − 0.0 2 0 1 6 July
+ 12.0 + 2.1 + 9.9 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − − 0.0 Aug
+ 4.6 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 2.0 − − 0.0 Sep
+ 6.8 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.7 − 4.3 − − 0.0 Oct
+ 11.9 + 2.4 + 9.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 Nov
+ 3.4 − 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 2.3 − − 0.0 Dec
+ 4.8 + 0.3 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 5.0 − − 0.0 2 0 1 7 Jan
+ 5.1 − 1.3 + 6.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 5.3 − − 0.0 Feb
+ 5.5 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − − 0.0 Mar
+ 9.3 + 1.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 2.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 3.6 − − 0.0 Apr
+ 8.5 + 0.8 + 7.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.4 − − 0.0 May
+ 3.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 5.4 − 0.3 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 5.4 − − 0.1 June
+ 11.4 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − + 0.0 July
+ 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 2.0 − − 0.0 Aug
+ 6.6 + 0.2 + 6.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − − 0.0 Sep
+ 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.9 − − 0.0 Oct
+ 12.4 + 3.5 + 9.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.8 − − Nov
+ 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 8.3 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 − + 0.1 Dec

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
32
IV Banks
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1
of which
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
Electricity, sale and
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
2015 2,440.0 1,253.3 1,230.2 1,010.4 219.8 1,314.2 339.6 127.4 100.9 60.5 125.2 50.0 65.3 130.5
2 0 1 6 Dec 2,512.0 1,259.7 1,276.6 1,016.5 260.1 1,347.5 354.1 125.1 104.7 62.2 128.2 50.6 57.0 139.7
2 0 1 7 Mar 2,533.8 1,267.0 1,283.2 1,022.4 260.8 1,364.4 356.6 129.4 105.2 66.9 131.5 50.5 55.9 141.0
June 2,559.7 1,280.1 1,297.8 1,033.7 264.1 1,377.8 360.9 131.5 108.3 65.7 130.8 51.0 54.7 141.5
Sep 2,589.5 1,296.7 1,315.7 1,046.9 268.8 1,392.7 366.5 131.8 109.7 67.1 133.3 50.9 53.0 146.0
Dec 2,610.1 1,304.3 1,326.6 1,053.0 273.6 1,403.1 368.5 131.3 112.6 67.3 133.3 50.2 51.5 147.9
Short-term lending
2015 207.6 − 8.5 − 8.5 173.8 4.3 33.7 4.7 11.5 42.0 3.9 5.3 24.1
2 0 1 6 Dec 205.5 − 6.9 − 6.9 174.3 3.7 29.7 4.4 11.8 43.2 3.6 4.4 29.3
2 0 1 7 Mar 211.8 − 6.9 − 6.9 181.3 3.7 33.6 4.5 13.6 44.8 3.8 4.2 28.6
June 213.6 − 6.7 − 6.7 183.3 3.5 34.7 4.7 13.7 43.3 4.0 4.6 28.1
Sep 213.5 − 6.5 − 6.5 183.5 3.6 33.8 4.0 14.0 45.2 3.9 4.3 28.1
Dec 210.6 − 6.5 − 6.5 180.8 3.6 32.3 4.0 13.6 45.2 3.4 4.0 27.4
Medium-term lending
2015 256.0 − 35.2 − 35.2 181.3 13.3 23.8 5.1 10.4 16.4 4.4 11.7 41.1
2 0 1 6 Dec 264.1 − 34.5 − 34.5 186.4 13.5 23.6 5.5 10.5 17.2 4.5 11.2 41.8
2 0 1 7 Mar 264.4 − 34.0 − 34.0 186.8 13.4 23.3 4.9 11.4 17.9 4.4 10.8 43.0
June 267.4 − 33.8 − 33.8 188.7 13.3 23.3 5.0 10.9 18.2 4.4 10.7 44.3
Sep 269.6 − 33.9 − 33.9 190.2 13.6 23.1 5.1 11.2 18.2 4.4 10.4 45.6
Dec 273.6 − 34.0 − 34.0 193.1 14.0 23.6 5.1 11.3 18.2 4.3 10.3 46.8
Long-term lending
2015 1,976.3 1,253.3 1,186.4 1,010.4 176.0 959.1 322.0 70.0 91.2 38.5 66.9 41.7 48.3 65.3
2 0 1 6 Dec 2,042.4 1,259.7 1,235.1 1,016.5 218.6 986.8 336.9 71.8 94.8 39.9 67.7 42.5 41.4 68.6
2 0 1 7 Mar 2,057.6 1,267.0 1,242.4 1,022.4 220.0 996.2 339.6 72.5 95.8 41.9 68.7 42.3 40.9 69.4
June 2,078.7 1,280.1 1,257.3 1,033.7 223.6 1,005.8 344.0 73.5 98.6 41.1 69.3 42.6 39.4 69.2
Sep 2,106.3 1,296.7 1,275.3 1,046.9 228.3 1,018.9 349.3 74.9 100.5 41.9 69.9 42.6 38.3 72.2
Dec 2,125.9 1,304.3 1,286.1 1,053.0 233.1 1,029.2 351.0 75.4 103.4 42.4 70.0 42.4 37.2 73.8
Lending, total Change during quarter *
2 0 1 6 Q4 + 14.4 + 9.1 + 12.4 + 8.4 + 4.0 + 6.0 + 3.8 − 5.2 + 1.4 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 3.2
2 0 1 7 Q1 + 21.7 + 7.3 + 6.6 + 5.8 + 0.7 + 16.8 + 2.6 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 3.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.2
Q2 + 23.3 + 12.7 + 13.8 + 11.2 + 2.6 + 11.1 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.4
Q3 + 29.5 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 14.5 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.0
Q4 + 18.7 + 7.2 + 10.5 + 5.6 + 4.9 + 8.9 + 1.9 − 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.5 + 1.5
Short-term lending
2 0 1 6 Q4 − 7.6 − − 0.7 − − 0.7 − 6.6 − 0.5 − 4.6 − 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9
2 0 1 7 Q1 + 6.3 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.7
Q2 + 2.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4
Q3 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0
Q4 − 2.8 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.8
Medium-term lending
2 0 1 6 Q4 + 2.4 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.7
2 0 1 7 Q1 + 0.2 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.1
Q2 + 3.0 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.3
Q3 + 2.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3
Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.1
Long-term lending
2 0 1 6 Q4 + 19.6 + 9.1 + 13.3 + 8.4 + 4.9 + 10.4 + 4.3 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.6
2 0 1 7 Q1 + 15.1 + 7.3 + 7.2 + 5.8 + 1.4 + 9.4 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.8
Q2 + 18.2 + 12.7 + 14.0 + 11.2 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.5
Q3 + 27.2 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 12.8 + 5.4 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.7
Q4 + 17.6 + 7.2 + 10.4 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 8.7 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.1
*Excludinglendingbyforeignbranches.Breakdownoflendingbybuildingandloan fromthechanges.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedaspro-
associationsbyareasandsectorsestimated.Statisticalalterationshavebeeneliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
33
IV Banks
Lending to
Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items Other lending
of which of which
Debit
balances
on wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing Instalment pension Housing
Total enterprises companies activities persons 2 enterprises Total loans Total loans 3 accounts Total loans Period
End of year or quarter * Lending, total
654.3 193.4 32.4 176.5 395.6 46.8 1,111.6 887.1 224.6 154.4 10.1 14.2 3.5 2015
680.0 204.7 36.3 181.6 401.3 46.0 1,150.1 919.0 231.2 163.3 9.2 14.4 3.6 2 0 1 6 Dec
684.0 206.2 38.8 179.7 403.8 46.3 1,154.8 922.9 231.9 165.5 9.2 14.6 3.7 2 0 1 7 Mar
694.3 209.8 39.6 183.6 408.2 48.5 1,167.3 933.2 234.2 168.0 8.9 14.5 3.8 June
700.9 211.2 41.1 185.7 410.4 48.3 1,182.2 945.4 236.7 170.4 8.9 14.6 3.7 Sep
709.0 214.9 42.3 186.4 411.2 47.7 1,192.3 954.3 237.9 171.6 8.6 14.8 3.7 Dec
Short-term lending
48.7 8.7 4.9 10.7 25.4 5.6 33.2 4.2 29.0 1.7 10.1 0.5 0.0 2015
47.9 8.4 5.7 10.2 23.9 5.1 30.6 3.2 27.4 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 2 0 1 6 Dec
48.2 8.4 6.6 9.1 24.5 5.7 29.8 3.2 26.7 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 2 0 1 7 Mar
50.1 9.0 6.5 9.7 24.5 5.7 29.7 3.1 26.6 1.8 8.9 0.5 0.0 June
50.2 9.6 6.7 10.0 23.7 5.5 29.4 2.9 26.5 1.7 8.9 0.5 0.0 Sep
50.9 10.1 6.8 10.3 23.3 5.0 29.3 2.9 26.4 1.6 8.6 0.5 0.0 Dec
Medium-term lending
68.4 10.1 7.3 19.3 32.4 3.5 74.2 21.9 52.3 47.4 − 0.6 0.0 2015
72.1 11.1 8.2 19.3 32.9 3.6 77.3 21.1 56.2 51.0 − 0.5 0.0 2 0 1 6 Dec
71.1 11.3 8.6 17.8 32.7 3.6 77.1 20.6 56.5 51.7 − 0.5 0.0 2 0 1 7 Mar
72.1 11.5 8.8 18.6 32.8 3.6 78.1 20.5 57.7 52.9 − 0.5 0.0 June
72.2 11.9 9.1 18.3 32.9 3.6 78.9 20.2 58.6 54.0 − 0.5 0.0 Sep
73.5 12.1 9.3 18.3 32.7 3.6 79.9 20.0 59.9 55.2 − 0.6 0.0 Dec
Long-term lending
537.3 174.6 20.2 146.5 337.8 37.7 1,004.2 861.0 143.3 105.3 − 13.0 3.5 2015
560.0 185.2 22.4 152.2 344.5 37.3 1,042.3 894.7 147.6 110.5 − 13.3 3.5 2 0 1 6 Dec
564.7 186.5 23.6 152.7 346.5 37.1 1,047.9 899.2 148.8 112.1 − 13.4 3.7 2 0 1 7 Mar
572.2 189.2 24.3 155.3 350.8 39.2 1,059.4 909.6 149.9 113.3 − 13.5 3.7 June
578.5 189.8 25.3 157.4 353.8 39.3 1,073.8 922.3 151.6 114.8 − 13.6 3.7 Sep
584.6 192.7 26.2 157.8 355.3 39.2 1,083.0 931.4 151.6 114.8 − 13.7 3.7 Dec
Change during quarter * Lending, total
+ 7.1 + 3.3 + 1.5 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 8.2 + 8.5 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 2 0 1 6 Q4
+ 6.8 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 4.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2 0 1 7 Q1
+ 10.5 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 12.2 + 9.7 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 Q2
+ 8.9 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 14.9 + 12.1 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 Q3
+ 8.5 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 9.8 + 8.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 Q4
Short-term lending
− 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 2 0 1 6 Q4
+ 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2 0 1 7 Q1
+ 2.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.8 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 Q3
+ 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2 0 1 6 Q4
− 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2 0 1 7 Q1
+ 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
+ 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0 Q4
Long-term lending
+ 6.8 + 3.1 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.0 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2 0 1 6 Q4
+ 6.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2 0 1 7 Q1
+ 7.4 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 9.8 + 1.4 + 1.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
+ 8.6 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.6 − + 0.2 − 0.0 Q3
+ 6.5 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 Q4
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
34
IV Banks
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2 Memo item
for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years deposits 3 bonds 4 loans securities) from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
2015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
2016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.7 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2 0 1 7 Jan 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 241.0 654.9 46.8 608.0 588.5 49.5 30.6 18.1 2.5
Feb 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 237.3 654.1 46.5 607.6 588.5 49.0 30.5 17.6 1.5
Mar 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 237.8 653.1 47.8 605.3 586.7 48.2 30.4 17.2 0.9
Apr 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 229.2 652.6 50.3 602.3 586.2 47.8 30.3 17.3 0.8
May 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 229.3 654.1 52.3 601.8 585.7 47.0 30.4 17.1 0.4
June 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 226.4 643.4 53.5 589.9 584.7 46.6 29.8 16.9 0.9
July 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 223.2 642.8 54.1 588.6 583.5 46.0 29.9 16.7 0.7
Aug 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 220.0 644.4 55.2 589.2 582.4 45.4 30.0 16.7 0.7
Sep 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 218.7 643.2 55.3 587.9 581.8 45.3 30.0 15.8 1.8
Oct 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 212.7 640.7 54.5 586.2 581.5 44.8 29.9 15.7 1.1
Nov 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 212.4 645.0 55.3 589.7 581.0 44.3 30.1 15.1 1.6
Dec 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.7 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
Changes*
2016 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 8.9 + 2.0 + 10.2 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.3
2017 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 24.7 − 2.8 + 10.1 − 12.8 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.8
2 0 1 7 Jan + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 + 8.6 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.7
Feb − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1
Mar − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 1.0 + 1.3 − 2.3 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.6
Apr + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 8.5 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
May + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
June + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 2.9 − 1.7 + 1.2 − 2.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4
July − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1
Aug + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
Sep + 4.3 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.1
Oct + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6
Nov + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.4
Dec − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 − 4.8 + 0.5 + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0
Domestic government End of year or month*
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2017 201.4 58.9 134.5 65.7 68.7 27.4 41.3 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2 0 1 7 Jan 202.2 55.1 138.7 84.7 54.1 16.4 37.7 3.8 4.5 26.7 2.5 −
Feb 205.7 61.4 136.0 81.8 54.2 15.8 38.4 3.7 4.6 26.8 2.5 −
Mar 204.0 58.9 136.8 81.4 55.4 16.5 38.9 3.7 4.7 26.7 2.5 −
Apr 203.1 59.1 135.6 77.9 57.7 18.7 39.0 3.6 4.7 26.7 2.5 −
May 209.7 61.1 140.3 80.4 59.9 20.4 39.5 3.7 4.6 26.4 2.5 −
June 209.9 58.1 143.5 81.8 61.8 21.8 40.0 3.7 4.7 25.8 2.4 −
July 207.2 55.6 143.2 80.4 62.8 22.4 40.4 3.7 4.7 25.8 2.4 −
Aug 213.6 61.2 144.2 79.9 64.3 23.4 40.8 3.7 4.5 25.9 2.5 −
Sep 210.5 58.8 143.4 77.5 66.0 24.1 41.9 3.7 4.5 25.9 2.3 −
Oct 207.6 60.0 139.5 72.6 67.0 24.4 42.6 3.7 4.4 25.8 2.3 0.0
Nov 211.1 61.1 142.2 72.3 69.9 25.8 44.1 3.6 4.2 25.8 2.3 0.0
Dec 201.4 58.9 134.5 65.7 68.7 27.4 41.3 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
Changes*
2016 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.7 + 8.7 + 6.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.5
2017 − 1.1 + 1.6 − 2.4 − 14.1 + 11.7 + 10.7 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0
2 0 1 7 Jan + 2.4 − 2.7 + 5.2 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 −
Feb + 3.5 + 6.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
Mar − 1.7 − 2.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
Apr − 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 3.5 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
May + 6.7 + 1.9 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
June − 0.1 − 3.0 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 −
July − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
Aug + 6.4 + 5.6 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
Sep − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.5 − 2.7 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −
Oct − 3.5 + 1.1 − 4.5 − 5.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
Nov + 4.1 + 1.6 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
Dec − 11.2 − 2.1 − 9.3 − 6.6 − 2.7 + 1.6 − 4.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional. registereddebtsecurities.2Includingdepositsundersavingsandloancontracts(see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
35
IV Banks
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2 Memo item
for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years deposits 3 bonds 4 loans securities) from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
2015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −
2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
2017 3,219.5 1,882.1 718.8 141.9 576.9 29.9 547.0 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.6
2 0 1 7 Jan 3,144.2 1,757.4 757.1 156.3 600.8 30.4 570.3 584.7 45.0 3.8 15.6 2.5
Feb 3,139.8 1,755.2 755.4 155.5 599.9 30.6 569.2 584.8 44.4 3.7 15.1 1.5
Mar 3,138.8 1,758.1 754.1 156.3 597.8 31.3 566.4 583.0 43.6 3.7 14.8 0.9
Apr 3,157.2 1,785.2 746.3 151.4 594.9 31.6 563.3 582.6 43.1 3.7 14.8 0.8
May 3,158.7 1,791.1 743.1 148.9 594.2 31.9 562.4 582.0 42.4 4.0 14.6 0.4
June 3,160.3 1,811.1 726.2 144.6 581.6 31.7 549.9 581.0 41.9 3.9 14.5 0.9
July 3,154.3 1,810.5 722.7 142.8 580.0 31.8 548.2 579.8 41.3 4.1 14.3 0.7
Aug 3,162.8 1,823.0 720.2 140.1 580.1 31.8 548.3 578.7 40.9 4.1 14.2 0.7
Sep 3,170.2 1,832.9 718.5 141.2 577.2 31.2 546.1 578.1 40.8 4.1 13.5 1.8
Oct 3,188.8 1,856.9 713.8 140.1 573.7 30.1 543.5 577.8 40.3 4.1 13.4 1.1
Nov 3,215.7 1,882.9 715.3 140.1 575.2 29.5 545.6 577.5 40.1 4.3 12.8 1.6
Dec 3,219.5 1,882.1 718.8 141.9 576.9 29.9 547.0 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.6
Changes*
2016 + 101.7 + 124.2 − 8.9 − 2.2 − 6.7 + 3.8 − 10.5 − 8.0 − 5.7 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.9
2017 + 104.1 + 141.3 − 25.0 − 10.6 − 14.4 − 0.7 − 13.8 − 5.3 − 6.7 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.8
2 0 1 7 Jan + 17.2 + 17.1 + 1.0 + 3.5 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 1.7
Feb − 4.3 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1
Mar − 1.0 + 2.9 − 1.3 + 0.8 − 2.1 + 0.7 − 2.8 − 1.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6
Apr + 18.4 + 27.0 − 7.8 − 5.0 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
May + 1.4 + 5.9 − 3.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4
June + 11.0 + 19.9 − 7.5 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
July − 5.9 − 0.7 − 3.4 − 1.9 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1
Aug + 8.6 + 12.6 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
Sep + 8.1 + 9.9 − 1.0 + 1.4 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1
Oct + 19.2 + 23.9 − 4.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7
Nov + 26.2 + 25.6 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.4
Dec + 5.3 − 0.9 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.8 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
2017 1,039.8 558.9 461.3 92.9 368.4 17.2 351.2 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.6
2 0 1 7 Jan 1,048.4 532.9 495.6 102.1 393.6 17.6 376.0 6.9 13.0 2.9 12.8 2.5
Feb 1,033.8 520.4 493.6 100.5 393.1 18.0 375.1 6.8 13.0 2.8 12.4 1.5
Mar 1,034.5 522.7 492.1 101.3 390.8 18.4 372.4 6.8 12.9 2.8 12.1 0.9
Apr 1,035.4 530.1 485.4 97.5 387.9 18.6 369.2 6.9 13.0 2.8 12.1 0.8
May 1,033.4 531.1 482.6 95.8 386.8 18.8 368.1 6.8 12.9 2.9 12.0 0.4
June 1,032.3 545.0 467.6 92.9 374.7 18.8 355.9 6.8 12.9 2.8 11.9 0.9
July 1,022.6 537.7 465.4 91.5 373.9 19.1 354.8 6.8 12.8 2.8 11.8 0.7
Aug 1,026.6 543.9 463.2 89.1 374.1 19.2 354.8 6.8 12.7 2.8 11.7 0.7
Sep 1,028.0 546.3 462.0 90.9 371.1 18.7 352.4 6.9 12.9 2.8 11.0 1.8
Oct 1,038.4 561.0 457.7 90.0 367.7 17.8 349.8 6.9 12.9 2.8 10.9 1.1
Nov 1,047.0 567.1 459.8 90.6 369.3 17.3 352.0 6.9 13.1 2.9 10.4 1.6
Dec 1,039.8 558.9 461.3 92.9 368.4 17.2 351.2 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.6
Changes*
2016 + 4.6 + 15.9 − 11.2 − 1.2 − 10.1 + 3.2 − 13.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.9
2017 + 19.5 + 40.2 − 20.0 − 4.7 − 15.4 − 0.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.8
2 0 1 7 Jan + 16.0 + 14.6 + 1.6 + 3.8 − 2.2 + 0.2 − 2.4 − − 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.7
Feb − 14.2 − 12.6 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.1
Mar + 0.7 + 2.4 − 1.5 + 0.8 − 2.3 + 0.4 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6
Apr + 0.9 + 7.3 − 6.6 − 3.8 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1
May − 2.0 + 1.0 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.4
June + 8.3 + 14.0 − 5.7 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
July − 9.7 − 7.4 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1
Aug + 4.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 2.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
Sep + 2.1 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1
Oct + 11.0 + 14.7 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.7
Nov + 7.9 + 5.7 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4
Dec − 5.7 − 8.2 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.1
TableIV.12).3Excludingdepositsundersavingsandloancontracts(seealsofoot-
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
36
IV Banks
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
institutions, employed Other institu- employed Other
Period total Total Total persons Employees individuals tions Total Total persons Employees individuals
End of year or month*
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.6
2016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2 0 1 7 July 2,131.7 1,272.8 1,237.7 216.2 868.7 152.8 35.1 257.4 242.8 23.5 179.5 39.7
Aug 2,136.3 1,279.2 1,243.6 219.1 871.3 153.3 35.5 257.0 242.2 23.8 181.5 36.9
Sep 2,142.2 1,286.6 1,250.8 216.0 880.5 154.3 35.8 256.5 241.8 23.7 181.4 36.7
Oct 2,150.4 1,295.9 1,260.1 221.4 884.8 153.9 35.7 256.1 241.6 23.6 181.4 36.6
Nov 2,168.7 1,315.8 1,280.3 222.9 902.2 155.2 35.5 255.4 241.4 23.4 181.4 36.7
Dec 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
Changes*
2016 + 97.1 + 108.4 + 105.3 + 17.5 + 78.7 + 9.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.3
2017 + 84.7 + 101.1 + 99.8 + 17.5 + 77.8 + 4.5 + 1.3 − 5.0 − 5.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 1.3
2 0 1 7 July + 3.7 + 6.7 + 7.6 + 5.1 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.2
Aug + 4.4 + 6.4 + 5.9 + 2.9 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.1
Sep + 6.0 + 7.5 + 7.2 − 3.0 + 9.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3
Oct + 8.3 + 9.2 + 9.4 + 5.4 + 4.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
Nov + 18.3 + 19.9 + 20.2 + 1.5 + 17.4 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1
Dec + 10.9 + 7.4 + 6.3 + 0.5 + 5.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 2.1 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.5
*SeeTableIV.2,footnote*;statisticalbreakshavebeeneliminatedfromthechanges. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially
Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional.Subsequent marked.1Includingsubordinatedliabilitiesandliabilitiesarisingfromregistereddebt
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds 1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.5
2016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2017 201.4 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2 0 1 7 July 207.2 7.9 3.8 1.6 2.4 0.1 13.2 49.9 11.3 19.6 17.8 1.2 12.6
Aug 213.6 7.9 3.9 1.4 2.6 0.1 13.2 49.9 11.1 19.8 17.9 1.2 12.7
Sep 210.5 8.0 4.1 1.3 2.6 0.1 13.2 49.8 11.7 19.2 17.7 1.2 12.7
Oct 207.6 7.9 4.0 1.3 2.4 0.1 13.2 46.9 11.8 16.1 17.7 1.2 12.6
Nov 211.1 8.3 4.2 1.3 2.7 0.1 13.2 44.8 12.0 13.9 17.7 1.3 12.6
Dec 201.4 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
Changes*
2016 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3
2017 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 − 0.5
2 0 1 7 July − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0
Aug + 6.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1
Sep − 3.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0
Oct − 3.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
Nov + 4.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0
Dec − 11.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its TelekomAG,andofpubliclyownedenterprises,whichareincludedin”Enterprises”.
successororganisations,oftheFederalRailways,eastGermanRailwaysandFederal Statisticalbreakshavebeeneliminatedfromthechanges.Thefiguresforthelatest
PostOffice,and,from1995,ofDeutscheBahnAG,DeutschePostAGandDeutsche datearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional.Subsequentrevisions,whichappearin

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
37
IV Banks
Savings deposits 3 Memo item
by maturity
more than 1 year 2
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
non-profit up to and up to and non-profit Bank negotiable Liabilities
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total households tions bonds 4 loans securities) 5 from repos Period
End of year or month*
13.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 2015
13.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 2016
14.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 2017
14.6 51.3 206.1 12.7 193.4 573.1 565.0 8.1 28.5 1.3 2.5 − 2 0 1 7 July
14.8 51.0 206.0 12.5 193.5 571.8 563.8 8.0 28.2 1.3 2.5 − Aug
14.7 50.3 206.2 12.5 193.7 571.2 563.1 8.0 27.9 1.3 2.5 − Sep
14.6 50.1 206.0 12.3 193.7 571.0 563.0 8.0 27.5 1.3 2.5 − Oct
14.0 49.5 205.9 12.2 193.6 570.5 562.8 7.8 27.0 1.4 2.4 − Nov
14.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − Dec
Changes*
+ 0.6 − 1.0 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 7.9 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 2016
+ 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 2017
+ 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.2 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 2 0 1 7 July
+ 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − Aug
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − Sep
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − Oct
− 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 − Nov
− 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − Dec
securities. 2 Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Period
End of year or month*
52.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 2015
56.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 2016
61.3 33.2 8.8 13.8 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 2017
51.4 26.0 8.1 11.6 5.7 0.0 97.9 14.5 51.1 31.0 1.3 − 2 0 1 7 July
57.7 31.2 8.8 11.9 5.8 0.0 98.2 15.1 50.0 31.9 1.2 − Aug
55.5 28.0 9.0 12.7 5.8 0.0 97.1 15.0 48.0 33.0 1.2 − Sep
54.1 27.0 8.7 12.8 5.7 0.0 98.8 17.2 46.4 34.1 1.1 − Oct
57.0 30.0 9.1 12.5 5.4 0.0 101.0 14.9 47.9 37.0 1.0 − Nov
61.3 33.2 8.8 13.8 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − Dec
Changes*
+ 3.7 + 2.4 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.2 − 2016
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 11.8 +11.6 − 0.4 − 2017
− 2.9 − 2.9 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 2 0 1 7 July
+ 6.3 + 5.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 − + 0.3 + 0.5 − 1.1 + 1.0 − 0.2 − Aug
− 2.5 − 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − − 1.2 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 1.0 + 0.0 − Sep
− 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.1 + 2.2 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − Oct
+ 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 2.1 − 2.2 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 0.1 − Nov
+ 3.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.2 − 5.4 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 − Dec
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1 Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3 Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).
GermanUnityFund,EqualisationofBurdensFund.2Includingliabilitiesarisingfrom

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
38
IV Banks
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds 3 , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings months’ savings non-banks, than foreign
Period Total Total Total facilities 2 Total facilities 2 Total notice deposits total Total 2 years non-banks
End of year or month*
2015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.7
2016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2 0 1 7 Aug 590.0 582.4 538.0 352.6 44.4 33.2 7.6 6.7 0.1 53.6 45.4 32.5 8.2
Sep 589.4 581.8 538.0 350.7 43.9 32.6 7.6 6.6 0.1 53.5 45.3 32.5 8.2
Oct 589.0 581.5 538.5 349.7 43.0 31.9 7.5 6.6 0.1 53.1 44.8 32.2 8.3
Nov 588.5 581.0 538.6 349.8 42.4 31.2 7.5 6.5 0.2 52.6 44.3 31.9 8.3
Dec 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 1.2 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
Changes*
2016 − 8.8 − 7.9 + 2.5 − 18.4 − 10.4 − 10.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 . − 5.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 0.0
2017 − 6.2 − 5.6 + 1.5 − 13.1 − 7.1 − 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 . − 7.2 − 6.7 − 4.4 − 0.5
2 0 1 7 Aug − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.1
Sep − 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
Oct − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.1
Nov − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0
Dec + 1.8 + 1.9 + 2.4 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1
*SeeTableIV.2,footnote*;statisticalbreakshavebeeneliminatedfromthechanges. as time deposits. 2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional.Subsequent minimumorbasicrateofinterest.3Includingliabilitiesarisingfromnon-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities.
marked.1Excludingdepositsundersavingsandloancontracts,whichareclassified
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which
with
Certifi- of which of which maturities non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 deposit Total guarantee 5 Total guarantee 5 2 years Total 2 years securities securities
Period
End of year or month*
2015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.5
2016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2 0 1 7 Aug 1,088.4 166.5 27.8 375.5 79.0 100.5 5.1 37.9 6.5 950.0 0.4 0.2 32.2 0.5
Sep 1,084.0 161.5 28.2 378.8 84.4 106.0 5.0 37.0 6.5 941.0 0.3 0.2 32.1 0.5
Oct 1,079.1 149.6 28.0 383.2 86.6 106.4 5.1 35.5 6.5 937.1 0.3 0.2 31.1 0.5
Nov 1,072.3 148.0 25.9 377.3 84.9 103.4 5.0 35.1 6.7 933.8 0.3 0.2 30.7 0.5
Dec 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
Changes*
2016 + 22.1 − 12.0 − 2.1 + 23.0 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 8.8 + 0.1 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0
2017 − 30.8 − 29.7 − 2.1 − 36.7 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 − 22.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0
2 0 1 7 Aug − 4.1 − 2.8 + 1.7 − 2.9 − 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
Sep − 3.6 − 5.0 + 0.4 + 3.3 + 5.5 + 5.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 8.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 −
Oct − 4.9 − 11.9 − 0.1 + 4.4 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.0 −
Nov − 6.7 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 5.9 − 1.2 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 −
Dec − 5.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 6.9 + 5.0 + 4.0 − 0.9 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 7.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4 Bonds denominated in
changes.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5 Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6 Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearerdebtsecuritiesareclassifiedamongbanksavingsbonds(seealsoTableIV.10,
currencies. 2 Issue value when floated. 3 Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
39
IV Banks
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- ities (in- item
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tracts
ber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- entered
of Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of associ- sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or
year/month ations total 13 loans) 1 loans 2 ities 3 tracts loans loans paper) 4 tracts deposits tracts posits 6 ing serves) 7 month 8
All building and loan associations
2016 20 218.8 43.6 0.0 16.6 13.8 98.6 18.1 23.4 2.5 21.4 163.8 5.5 2.0 10.2 89.2
2017 20 229.2 41.8 0.0 15.8 12.3 104.4 24.8 25.1 2.6 23.0 168.6 9.5 3.0 11.0 83.6
2 0 1 7 Oct 20 230.6 43.2 0.0 16.9 12.6 103.2 24.9 24.8 2.5 26.0 166.1 9.6 2.8 11.0 6.8
Nov 20 229.1 42.3 0.0 16.1 12.5 103.5 24.8 24.9 2.6 24.0 166.3 9.5 3.0 11.0 7.2
Dec 20 229.2 41.8 0.0 15.8 12.3 104.4 24.8 25.1 2.6 23.0 168.6 9.5 3.0 11.0 8.1
Private building and Ioan associations
2 0 1 7 Oct 12 161.9 27.7 − 7.6 9.5 79.9 22.0 11.3 1.7 23.5 108.3 9.3 2.8 7.4 4.3
Nov 12 160.7 26.7 − 7.2 9.4 80.2 21.9 11.4 1.7 22.0 108.5 9.2 3.0 7.4 4.5
Dec 12 160.5 26.1 − 6.9 9.3 81.0 21.9 11.6 1.7 21.1 110.0 9.2 3.0 7.4 5.1
Public building and Ioan associations
2 0 1 7 Oct 8 68.7 15.6 0.0 9.3 3.1 23.2 2.9 13.5 0.9 2.5 57.8 0.3 − 3.6 2.4
Nov 8 68.4 15.5 0.0 8.9 3.1 23.3 3.0 13.6 0.9 2.1 57.8 0.3 − 3.6 2.7
Dec 8 68.7 15.8 0.0 8.8 3.1 23.4 2.9 13.5 0.9 1.9 58.7 0.3 − 3.6 3.0
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits of which of which interim
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging which of Memo
paid into under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period counts 9 tracts tracts Total tions 11 Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter ceived 12
All building and loan associations
2016 27.5 2.2 7.6 46.8 27.4 40.9 17.2 4.4 4.9 3.7 18.8 16.3 8.0 8.0 7.2 0.2
2017 26.7 2.3 7.6 45.3 26.0 39.6 16.4 4.1 4.5 3.4 18.7 16.4 7.4 7.1 ... 0.2
2 0 1 7 Oct 2.0 0.0 0.6 3.5 2.1 3.2 1.2 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.6 16.9 7.8 0.6 0.0
Nov 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.4 1.9 3.3 1.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.6 16.7 7.6 0.5 0.0
Dec 2.2 1.9 0.6 3.3 1.9 3.1 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.5 16.4 7.4 0.6 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2 0 1 7 Oct 1.3 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.4 2.5 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.2 12.2 4.6 0.5 0.0
Nov 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.6 1.3 2.5 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.3 12.1 4.5 0.4 0.0
Dec 1.5 1.2 0.3 2.3 1.3 2.4 0.9 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.2 11.9 4.4 0.4 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2 0 1 7 Oct 0.7 0.0 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.2 0.1 0.0
Nov 0.8 0.0 0.4 0.8 0.6 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.3 4.5 3.1 0.1 0.0
Dec 0.8 0.7 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.4 3.0 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excludingassetsandliabilitiesand/ortransactionsofforeignbranches.Thefigures 8 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
forthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional.Subsequentrevisions, whichthecontractfeehasbeenfullypaid.Increasesinthesumcontractedcountas
whichappearinthefollowingMonthlyReport,arenotspeciallymarked.1Including new contracts. 9 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arisingfromtheallocationofcontractssee“Capitaldisbursed“.10Includinghousing
securitiesandcentralbankcreditbalances.2Loansundersavingsandloancontracts bonuses credited. 11 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
andinterimandbridgingloans.3Includingmoneymarketpaperandsmallamounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12 The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4 Including equalisation claims. 5 Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6 Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits.7Includingparticipationrightscapitalandfundforgeneralbankingrisks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
40
IV Banks
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets 7
Credit balances and loans Loans
German
banks
(MFIs)
with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches branches 1 Money Money financial
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks ities 2,3 Total Total banks banks ities 2 Total portfolio
Foreign branches End of year or month *
2014 56 205 1,926.2 548.8 532.2 201.2 331.0 16.5 593.5 473.1 14.0 459.1 120.5 783.8 551.9
2015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.0
2016 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2 0 1 7 Feb 51 193 1,920.0 617.9 604.9 227.3 377.5 13.1 600.4 505.3 13.8 491.4 95.1 701.7 467.6
Mar 51 193 1,918.1 616.1 602.7 228.2 374.5 13.4 609.0 513.0 14.1 499.0 95.9 693.0 452.2
Apr 51 192 1,931.5 631.8 618.6 224.4 394.2 13.3 597.8 503.9 13.7 490.3 93.9 701.8 460.3
May 51 192 1,894.2 629.7 616.8 215.1 401.8 12.8 565.5 478.3 13.2 465.1 87.2 699.0 459.0
June 51 192 1,828.5 589.4 576.9 212.5 364.4 12.5 565.1 475.9 13.3 462.5 89.2 674.1 434.1
July 51 192 1,787.7 564.8 552.6 199.5 353.1 12.1 546.9 463.7 13.3 450.4 83.1 676.1 438.4
Aug 51 191 1,752.1 537.7 526.1 171.1 355.0 11.6 545.3 461.7 13.2 448.5 83.7 669.1 432.2
Sep 51 190 1,746.8 549.5 537.6 176.8 360.8 11.9 568.1 481.8 13.5 468.3 86.3 629.2 408.3
Oct 51 187 1,788.9 579.0 567.0 185.8 381.1 12.1 558.7 477.1 13.5 463.6 81.5 651.2 418.3
Nov 51 187 1,712.1 516.9 505.0 187.2 317.9 11.9 562.5 481.7 13.6 468.1 80.9 632.7 416.0
Changes *
2015 − 5 − 7 − 145.0 − 56.3 − 56.0 − 40.0 − 16.0 − 0.3 + 4.5 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 2.6 − 109.0 − 58.2
2016 + 0 − 7 + 29.1 + 49.3 + 52.9 + 43.7 + 9.2 − 3.5 − 56.4 − 24.6 + 0.5 − 25.1 − 31.8 + 24.9 − 14.8
2 0 1 7 Mar − − − 1.2 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.4 + 11.7 + 10.6 + 0.3 + 10.3 + 1.2 − 7.9 − 13.7
Apr − − 1 + 14.9 + 22.0 + 22.0 − 3.8 + 25.8 + 0.1 − 4.5 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 2.6 − 1.4 + 10.3 + 11.7
May − − − 35.2 + 6.6 + 6.8 − 9.3 + 16.1 − 0.2 − 22.3 − 16.9 − 0.5 − 16.4 − 5.4 − 0.8 + 4.0
June − − − 64.4 − 34.7 − 34.4 − 2.5 − 31.9 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 2.6 − 23.6 − 21.9
July − − − 39.1 − 16.8 − 16.7 − 13.0 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 9.6 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 4.5 − 5.1 + 3.7 + 8.9
Aug − − 1 − 34.9 − 24.2 − 23.7 − 28.4 + 4.7 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.2 − 6.3 − 4.3
Sep − − 1 − 5.5 + 10.6 + 10.3 + 5.6 + 4.6 + 0.3 + 20.5 + 18.6 + 0.3 + 18.3 + 1.9 − 40.0 − 25.1
Oct − − 3 + 41.1 + 25.6 + 25.5 + 9.1 + 16.5 + 0.1 − 13.6 − 8.4 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 + 21.0 + 7.9
Nov − − − 75.5 − 56.8 − 56.7 + 1.3 − 58.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.3 + 0.1 + 9.2 − 0.2 − 17.3 + 0.3
Foreign subsidiaries End of year or month *
2014 28 63 389.4 154.5 137.9 83.4 54.5 16.7 172.7 141.2 21.6 119.5 31.5 62.2 −
2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −
2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2 0 1 7 Feb 20 53 315.4 80.7 71.2 30.9 40.4 9.5 162.0 130.8 23.1 107.7 31.2 72.7 −
Mar 20 53 309.8 79.8 70.7 31.1 39.7 9.1 162.7 131.5 23.0 108.5 31.2 67.2 −
Apr 20 53 303.2 73.1 64.1 24.8 39.3 9.0 160.8 130.9 22.8 108.0 29.9 69.3 −
May 20 53 295.9 72.1 64.6 26.7 38.0 7.5 157.0 128.3 23.0 105.3 28.7 66.8 −
June 20 51 285.2 72.4 65.2 27.0 38.2 7.2 155.5 126.6 22.9 103.7 28.9 57.2 −
July 20 53 280.7 79.2 72.5 26.6 45.9 6.8 147.0 119.2 22.7 96.5 27.8 54.5 −
Aug 20 52 279.0 74.8 67.8 28.8 39.0 6.9 153.1 125.7 23.0 102.7 27.5 51.1 −
Sep 20 52 284.6 77.0 70.2 30.2 39.9 6.8 155.2 127.1 23.0 104.1 28.1 52.4 −
Oct 20 50 276.9 73.1 66.7 27.8 38.9 6.4 145.5 118.2 22.9 95.3 27.3 58.3 −
Nov 20 50 277.3 74.1 67.5 27.8 39.7 6.6 145.5 117.9 22.6 95.3 27.6 57.7 −
Changes *
2015 − 4 − 5 − 23.9 − 33.3 − 28.7 − 33.3 + 4.6 − 4.6 + 6.5 + 6.2 + 0.6 + 5.6 + 0.3 + 2.9 −
2016 − 4 − 5 − 56.8 − 45.9 − 42.6 − 28.7 − 13.9 − 3.3 − 22.7 − 22.1 + 0.4 − 22.4 − 0.6 + 11.8 −
2 0 1 7 Mar − − − 4.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 5.5 −
Apr − − − 4.9 − 5.7 − 5.7 − 6.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 2.1 −
May − − − 4.9 + 0.5 + 1.7 + 1.9 − 0.1 − 1.3 − 2.9 − 1.7 + 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.2 − 2.5 −
June − − 2 − 9.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 9.6 −
July − + 2 − 2.0 + 8.3 + 8.5 − 0.4 + 8.9 − 0.2 − 7.6 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 6.3 − 1.1 − 2.7 −
Aug − − 1 − 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.2 + 2.3 − 6.4 + 0.2 + 6.4 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 3.4 −
Sep − − + 5.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.4 −
Oct − − 2 − 8.4 − 4.3 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 10.0 − 9.2 − 0.1 − 9.1 − 0.8 + 5.9 −
Nov − − + 1.5 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 −
*Inthistable“foreign“alsoincludesthecountryofdomicileoftheforeignbranches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
andforeignsubsidiaries.Statisticalrevisionshavebeeneliminatedfromthechanges. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaksowingtochangesinthereportingpopulationhavenotbeeneliminatedfrom followingMonthlyReport,arenotspeciallymarked.1Severalbranchesinagiven

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
41
IV Banks
Deposits Other liabilities 6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4
Money
market of which
paper Derivative
and debt financial
Medium securities Working instruments
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks banks Total Total term term non-banks ing 5 funds Total portfolio Period
End of year or month * Foreign branches
1,046.7 739.9 416.2 323.7 306.8 20.6 16.1 4.4 286.2 128.4 45.2 705.8 557.5 2014
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 2015
1,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 2016
1,190.7 816.8 423.2 393.6 373.9 16.5 13.2 3.4 357.4 114.0 51.2 564.0 462.0 2 0 1 7 Feb
1,197.9 825.3 436.0 389.3 372.6 15.2 11.8 3.4 357.4 106.9 51.6 561.7 448.3 Mar
1,210.4 846.5 422.0 424.5 363.9 15.3 12.0 3.3 348.7 104.7 51.3 565.0 455.4 Apr
1,178.6 830.8 406.4 424.4 347.8 15.5 12.3 3.2 332.2 100.5 50.7 564.3 458.6 May
1,151.2 801.4 424.5 377.0 349.7 14.9 11.6 3.3 334.9 93.4 50.3 533.6 429.5 June
1,105.0 780.2 399.6 380.6 324.7 14.4 11.6 2.8 310.4 97.0 49.8 536.0 434.9 July
1,075.3 739.6 372.0 367.5 335.7 13.8 11.1 2.8 321.8 98.3 49.7 528.9 431.3 Aug
1,094.2 760.6 385.6 375.0 333.6 14.3 11.4 2.9 319.3 95.6 49.2 507.7 401.6 Sep
1,127.3 768.4 379.7 388.7 358.9 14.1 11.4 2.7 344.8 98.4 49.8 513.3 412.8 Oct
1,051.4 695.8 352.4 343.4 355.6 16.0 13.1 2.8 339.6 95.1 49.4 516.2 412.2 Nov
Changes *
− 30.8 − 53.8 − 57.0 + 3.2 + 23.0 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 22.5 − 2.1 + 4.7 − 124.1 − 65.8 2015
+ 66.8 + 76.8 + 65.6 + 11.2 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 29.6 + 1.2 − 18.1 − 17.3 2016
+ 9.9 + 11.1 + 12.8 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 6.4 + 0.4 − 2.4 − 11.9 2 0 1 7 Mar
+ 19.0 + 27.4 − 14.1 + 41.5 − 8.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 8.6 − 0.7 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 11.1 Apr
− 22.7 − 6.8 − 15.5 + 8.7 − 15.9 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 16.2 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 8.7 May
− 21.7 − 23.8 + 18.1 − 41.8 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 2.8 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 30.6 − 25.8 June
− 38.5 − 13.8 − 24.8 + 11.1 − 24.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 24.3 + 5.3 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 10.2 July
− 26.8 − 37.9 − 27.6 − 10.2 + 11.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 11.6 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 − 1.7 Aug
+ 18.1 + 20.2 + 13.6 + 6.6 − 2.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 21.2 − 30.7 Sep
+ 29.1 + 3.9 − 6.0 + 9.8 + 25.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 25.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 5.6 + 9.0 Oct
− 70.5 − 67.4 − 27.3 − 40.1 − 3.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.2 − 0.3 + 2.9 + 2.2 Nov
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
297.1 173.6 101.1 72.5 123.5 20.3 14.5 5.8 103.2 18.4 25.9 48.0 − 2014
292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015
247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016
239.3 129.5 70.4 59.1 109.8 13.0 7.6 5.4 96.8 13.9 24.1 38.2 − 2 0 1 7 Feb
237.1 126.8 68.1 58.6 110.3 13.8 8.4 5.4 96.5 13.8 23.7 35.2 − Mar
229.6 116.9 57.7 59.1 112.7 12.9 7.2 5.7 99.8 13.8 23.6 36.2 − Apr
224.9 114.1 55.8 58.3 110.8 13.4 7.7 5.7 97.4 13.7 23.5 33.7 − May
216.3 105.1 53.8 51.3 111.2 13.4 7.6 5.8 97.8 13.1 23.0 32.8 − June
213.2 104.2 55.0 49.2 109.0 13.9 8.0 5.9 95.1 13.0 23.0 31.5 − July
211.8 103.9 56.6 47.3 108.0 13.4 7.7 5.7 94.6 13.0 23.1 31.1 − Aug
217.0 105.9 58.1 47.9 111.1 12.6 7.1 5.6 98.5 12.9 23.2 31.5 − Sep
208.6 99.9 53.3 46.7 108.7 11.7 5.9 5.8 97.0 12.9 23.1 32.3 − Oct
207.8 98.1 53.3 44.8 109.7 11.9 6.1 5.8 97.8 12.9 23.1 33.6 − Nov
Changes *
− 12.3 − 11.2 − 1.5 − 9.7 − 1.1 − 7.2 − 4.0 − 3.2 + 6.1 − 4.0 + 0.4 − 7.9 − 2015
− 46.2 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 12.7 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 2.9 − 11.9 − 0.8 − 2.5 − 7.3 − 2016
− 1.7 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 2 0 1 7 Mar
− 6.3 − 9.1 − 10.4 + 1.3 + 2.8 − 0.9 − 1.2 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.5 − Apr
− 3.0 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.8 − May
− 7.7 − 8.4 − 2.0 − 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.6 − June
− 1.7 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − July
− 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − Aug
+ 4.9 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 3.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − Sep
− 9.0 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 − Oct
− 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.6 − Nov
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2 Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5 Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discountpaperandothermoneymarketpaper,debtsecurities.3Includingowndebt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.
securities. 4 Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
42
V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
beginning in 1 Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7
2010 10,559.5 211.2 210.7 212.4 1.7 0.0
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2 0 1 7 Nov 12,326.7 123.3 122.9 1,309.7 1,186.8 0.0
Dec p 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 ...
2 0 1 8 Jan p ... ... 123.9 ... ... ...
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period euro-area reserve base before deduction of after deduction of
beginning in 1 Reserve base 2 in per cent lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7
2010 2,530,997 24.0 50,620 50,435 51,336 901 0
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2 0 1 7 Nov 3,457,522 28.0 34,575 34,417 455,804 421,387 0
Dec 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2 0 1 8 Jan p 3,488,989 ... 34,890 34,732 ... ... ...
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
beginning in 1 Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks
2010 10,633 7,949 1,845 18,128 9,153 556 2,170
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,324
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2 0 1 7 Nov 6,227 5,666 3,352 11,088 6,210 138 1,737
Dec 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2 0 1 8 Jan 6,461 5,717 3,164 11,261 6,314 127 1,688
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
Liabilities (excluding savings deposits with building and loan rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but associations) with agreed Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period agreed maturities of up to 2 not subject to minimum reserve maturities of up to 2 years to periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting
beginning in 1 years requirements banks in non-euro-area countries to 2 years institution
2010 1,484,334 2,376 344,440 594,119 105,728
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2 0 1 7 Nov 2,324,352 1,102 428,683 581,651 121,741
Dec 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2 0 1 8 Jan 2,371,175 681 418,244 580,982 117,899
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2%between1January1999and17January2012.Since18January2012,itwas
refinancingoperationimmediatelyfollowingthemeetingoftheGoverningCouncilof stoodat1%.4Article5(2)oftheRegulationoftheEuropeanCentralBankonthe
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. applicationofminimumreserves.5Averagecreditbalancesofcreditinstitutionsat
2Article3oftheRegulationoftheEuropeanCentralBankontheapplicationof national central banks. 6 Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deductionofthelump-sumallowance.7Requiredreservesafterdeductionofthe
pursuanttoArticle4(1)).3Amountafterapplyingthereserveratiotothereserve lump-sum allowance.
base.Thereserveratioforliabilitieswithagreedmaturitiesofuptotwoyearswas

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
43
VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
Minimum ginal Minimum ginal as per as per
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code 1 from Code 1
20 0 5 D e c 6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 20 1 1 A p r 13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 20 0 2 J a n 1 2.57 20 0 9 J a n 1 1.62
J u l y 13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 J u l y 1 2.47 J u l y 1 0.12
20 0 6 M a r 8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50 N o v 9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
J u n e 15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 D e z 14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 20 0 3 J a n 1 1.97 20 1 1 J u l y 1 0.37
A u g 9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00 J u l y 1 1.22
O c t 11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 20 1 2 J u l y 11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 20 1 2 J a n 1 0.12
D e c 13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 20 0 4 J a n 1 1.14
20 1 3 M a y 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00 J u l y 1 1.13 20 1 3 J a n 1 −0.13
20 0 7 M a r 14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 N o v 13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75 J u l y 1 −0.38
J u n e 13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 20 0 5 J a n 1 1.21
20 1 4 J u n e 11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40 J u l y 1 1.17 20 1 4 J a n 1 −0.63
20 0 8 J u l y 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 S e p 10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30 J u l y 1 −0.73
O c t 8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 20 0 6 J a n 1 1.37
O c t 9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 20 1 5 D e c 9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30 J u l y 1 1.95 20 1 5 J a n 1 −0.83
N o v 12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
D e c 10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 20 1 6 M a r 16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 20 0 7 J a n 1 2.70 20 1 6 J u l y 1 −0.88
J u l y 1 3.19
20 0 9 J a n 21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00
M a r 11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 20 0 8 J a n 1 3.32
A p r 8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25 J u l y 1 3.19
M a y 13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate 1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
20 1 8 J a n 3 2,910 2,910 0.00 − − − 7
J a n 10 3,007 3,007 0.00 − − − 7
J a n 17 2,418 2,418 0.00 − − − 7
J a n 24 2,159 2,159 0.00 − − − 7
J a n 31 1,906 1,906 0.00 − − − 7
F e b 7 1,553 1,553 0.00 − − − 7
F e b 14 1,322 1,322 0.00 − − − 7
Long-term refinancing operations
20 1 7 N o v 30 2,883 2,883 2 ... − − − 91
D e c 21 2,367 2,367 2 ... − − − 98
20 1 8 F e b 1 2,518 2,518 2 ... − − − 84
* Source: ECB. 1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or averageminimumbidrateofthemainrefinancingoperationsoverthelifeofthis
collected. 2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation.
4 Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR 2
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2 0 1 7 July −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.33 −0.27 −0.21 −0.15
Aug −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.33 −0.27 −0.21 −0.16
Sep −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.33 −0.27 −0.22 −0.17
Oct −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.33 −0.27 −0.22 −0.18
Nov −0.35 −0.38 −0.37 −0.33 −0.27 −0.22 −0.19
Dec −0.34 −0.38 −0.37 −0.33 −0.27 −0.22 −0.19
2 0 1 8 Jan −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.33 −0.27 −0.22 −0.19
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4January1999onthebasisofrealturnoveraccordingtotheact/360methodand
anyoneelsecanbeheldliableforanyirregularityorinaccuracyoftheEONIArate published via Reuters. 2 Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
andtheEURIBORrate.1EuroOverNightIndexAverage:weightedaverageovernight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method.
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
44
VI Interest rates
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2 0 1 6 Dec 0.38 74,227 1.48 220,035 0.10 81,192 1.54 19,097
2 0 1 7 Jan 0.37 73,435 1.46 219,585 0.10 82,672 1.53 19,293
Feb 0.35 73,708 1.45 219,045 0.10 83,514 1.52 19,144
Mar 0.34 73,460 1.44 218,575 0.09 84,520 1.49 19,649
Apr 0.33 72,221 1.42 218,122 0.09 82,082 1.44 20,074
May 0.33 71,503 1.41 217,847 0.08 82,646 1.41 20,471
June 0.33 69,952 1.40 217,154 0.08 80,018 1.35 20,770
July 0.32 69,365 1.39 216,115 0.08 78,396 1.31 21,529
Aug 0.31 69,014 1.37 215,909 0.09 78,517 1.30 22,146
Sep 0.31 67,904 1.36 215,817 0.08 77,405 1.25 22,356
Oct 0.30 67,393 1.35 215,503 0.08 76,092 1.18 23,093
Nov 0.30 66,679 1.34 215,034 0.08 77,669 1.12 24,421
Dec 0.29 66,554 1.34 216,872 0.06 78,429 1.06 25,136
Housing loans to households 3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households 4, 5
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2 0 1 6 Dec 2.42 4,380 2.11 26,777 2.99 1,090,316 7.18 51,459 4.07 83,809 4.16 310,013
2 0 1 7 Jan 2.43 4,463 2.10 26,399 2.96 1,090,663 7.21 51,134 4.04 83,791 4.13 310,789
Feb 2.41 4,314 2.09 26,272 2.94 1,093,062 7.24 50,975 4.02 83,726 4.11 311,206
Mar 2.47 4,342 2.07 26,205 2.91 1,097,148 7.32 51,515 4.01 84,063 4.09 311,220
Apr 2.45 4,296 2.05 26,173 2.88 1,102,315 7.10 50,383 3.99 84,268 4.08 310,696
May 2.44 4,356 2.04 26,187 2.85 1,106,601 7.13 50,320 3.96 84,963 4.06 312,176
June 2.44 4,253 2.03 26,205 2.83 1,113,177 7.17 51,412 3.95 85,256 4.04 311,592
July 2.46 4,128 2.01 26,016 2.80 1,118,677 7.15 50,266 3.93 85,648 4.03 312,427
Aug 2.45 4,083 2.00 25,936 2.77 1,123,854 7.17 49,529 3.92 86,101 4.01 313,807
Sep 2.42 3,979 2.00 25,995 2.75 1,129,577 7.12 50,538 3.91 86,330 4.00 313,232
Oct 2.38 4,257 1.99 25,924 2.73 1,133,364 7.14 49,847 3.89 86,778 3.98 313,554
Nov 2.44 3,948 1.98 25,924 2.71 1,137,903 7.00 49,267 3.87 87,491 3.96 313,715
Dec 2.44 3,900 1.97 25,849 2.68 1,141,614 6.98 49,785 3.87 87,351 3.95 312,487
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Effective interest rate 1 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Volume 2
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2 0 1 6 Dec 2.57 124,451 2.01 132,491 2.45 629,290
2 0 1 7 Jan 2.52 129,099 2.00 133,125 2.42 633,662
Feb 2.55 130,095 1.99 132,565 2.41 637,765
Mar 2.54 130,479 1.98 133,300 2.39 638,362
Apr 2.51 130,949 1.98 133,720 2.37 642,920
May 2.45 131,174 1.97 134,474 2.35 649,087
June 2.51 132,255 1.95 134,974 2.33 645,396
July 2.45 131,691 1.95 135,710 2.31 650,498
Aug 2.44 130,333 1.94 136,527 2.30 654,312
Sep 2.45 135,493 1.93 135,872 2.28 654,806
Oct 2.39 136,523 1.92 136,647 2.26 657,911
Nov 2.42 137,523 1.91 138,041 2.25 664,018
Dec 2.47 133,094 1.90 137,697 2.22 664,399
*Theinterestratestatisticsgatheredonaharmonisedbasisintheeuroareafrom calculatedeitherasannualisedagreedinterestratesorasnarrowlydefinedeffective
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate rates.Bothcalculationmethodscoverallinterestpaymentsondepositsandloansbut
statisticsarebasedontheinterestratesappliedbyMFIsandtherelatedvolumesof not any other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administration,
euro-denominateddepositsandloanstohouseholdsandnonfinancialcorporations preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2 Data based on
domiciledintheeuroarea.Thehouseholdsectorcomprisesindividuals(includingsole monthlybalancesheetstatistics.3Securedandunsecuredloansforhomepurchase,
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial includingbuildingandhomeimprovements;includingloansgrantedbybuildingand
corporationsincludeallenterprisesotherthaninsurancecompanies,banksandother loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the
financialinstitutions.Themostrecentfiguresareinallcasestoberegardedasprovi- reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. 4 Loans for
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not consumptionaredefinedasloansgrantedforthepurposeofpersonaluseinthe
speciallymarked.FurtherinformationontheMFIinterestratestatisticscanbefound consumptionofgoodsandservices.5Forthepurposeofthesestatistics,otherloans
ontheBundesbank’swebsite(Statistics/Moneyandcapitalmarkets/Interestrates areloansgrantedforotherpurposessuchasbusiness,debtconsolidation,education
and yields / Interest rates on deposits and loans). o The statistics on outstanding etc. 6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 p 47 ).
amountsarecollectedattheendofthemonth.1Theeffectiveinterestratesare

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
45
VI Interest rates
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont’d)
(b) New business +
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of 8
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2 0 1 6 Dec 0.07 1,220,413 0.23 5,583 0.51 621 0.68 967 0.24 536,031 0.32 51,299
2 0 1 7 Jan 0.07 1,222,852 0.28 6,002 0.59 715 0.61 999 0.23 536,834 0.31 50,563
Feb 0.06 1,233,193 0.31 4,688 0.47 617 0.70 773 0.22 537,566 0.31 49,971
Mar 0.05 1,233,631 0.26 4,918 0.51 676 0.69 820 0.21 536,136 0.31 49,493
Apr 0.05 1,253,497 0.19 4,926 0.37 729 0.63 741 0.21 536,260 0.31 49,013
May 0.05 1,258,521 0.20 4,724 0.43 719 0.87 726 0.21 536,046 0.30 48,646
June 0.04 1,264,791 0.22 4,078 0.27 947 0.73 633 0.21 535,416 0.30 48,253
July 0.04 1,271,823 0.17 5,276 0.31 653 0.70 617 0.20 537,553 0.31 44,902
Aug 0.03 1,278,289 0.14 5,198 0.41 492 0.65 716 0.19 537,173 0.30 44,119
Sep 0.03 1,285,601 0.15 3,992 0.31 598 0.65 636 0.19 537,108 0.30 43,509
Oct 0.03 1,294,797 0.18 3,750 0.28 800 0.65 696 0.19 537,700 0.28 42,721
Nov 0.03 1,314,663 0.17 4,022 0.39 696 0.72 747 0.18 537,935 0.27 42,074
Dec 0.03 1,322,090 0.13 4,043 0.35 880 0.59 627 0.18 540,537 0.28 41,270
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2 0 1 6 Dec − 0.00 401,493 − 0.12 15,159 0.22 1,205 0.36 538
2 0 1 7 Jan − 0.00 400,475 − 0.05 11,356 0.22 754 0.40 314
Feb − 0.00 397,363 − 0.07 10,802 0.13 631 0.54 336
Mar − 0.01 395,640 − 0.09 12,614 0.19 450 0.79 309
Apr − 0.01 397,203 − 0.07 9,275 0.08 899 0.33 1,039
May − 0.01 401,652 − 0.05 10,212 0.13 912 0.30 837
June − 0.02 415,078 − 0.14 14,661 0.07 525 0.24 586
July − 0.01 402,113 − 0.09 11,516 0.19 859 0.26 1,382
Aug − 0.02 409,698 − 0.04 9,710 0.21 185 0.52 666
Sep − 0.02 414,461 − 0.08 10,040 0.09 351 0.37 704
Oct − 0.02 425,806 − 0.10 9,134 0.04 412 0.26 1,456
Nov − 0.02 428,784 − 0.08 9,337 0.09 897 0.22 1,237
Dec − 0.02 425,492 − 0.07 13,102 0.09 351 0.28 1,477
Loans to households
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of 4
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
including charges) Total renegotiated loans 9 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual percentage Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting rate of charge 10 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2 0 1 6 Dec 5.69 5.67 6,552 7.06 1,399 6.09 320 4.40 3,026 6.83 3,206
2 0 1 7 Jan 6.06 6.04 8,603 7.16 1,886 6.15 330 4.59 3,242 6.97 5,031
Feb 5.82 5.80 8,187 6.92 1,619 6.15 273 4.37 3,094 6.69 4,820
Mar 5.62 5.60 9,849 6.88 1,761 6.12 341 4.15 4,041 6.64 5,467
Apr 5.66 5.65 8,222 6.91 1,544 6.17 287 4.32 3,415 6.61 4,520
May 5.89 5.87 9,372 7.22 1,814 6.41 337 4.49 3,846 6.87 5,189
June 5.90 5.88 8,683 7.24 1,685 6.28 308 4.49 3,574 6.89 4,801
July 5.99 5.97 8,940 7.32 1,872 6.22 299 4.57 3,561 6.95 5,080
Aug 5.88 5.86 8,827 7.20 1,724 6.51 312 4.54 3,703 6.84 4,812
Sep 5.67 5.65 8,212 7.11 1,465 6.09 305 4.31 3,579 6.72 4,328
Oct 5.67 5.65 8,338 7.07 1,495 6.06 302 4.30 3,758 6.81 4,278
Nov 5.63 5.61 8,216 7.10 1,410 6.09 306 4.31 3,827 6.80 4,083
Dec 5.39 5.37 6,703 6.82 1,005 5.78 299 4.15 3,315 6.63 3,089
Forfootnotes*and1to6,seep44 .+Inthecaseofdepositswithanagreed businessattheendofthemonthhastobeincorporatedinthecalculationofaverage
maturityandallloansexcludingrevolvingloansandoverdrafts,creditcarddebt,new ratesofinterest.7Estimated.Thevolumeofnewbusinessisextrapolatedtoform
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- theunderlyingtotalusingagrossing-upprocedure.8Includingnon-financialcorpor-
ationsandthebank.Theinterestratesarecalculatedasvolume-weightedaverage ations’deposits;includingfidelityandgrowthpremia.9Excludingoverdrafts.10An-
ratesofallnewagreementsconcludedduringthereportingmonth.Inthecaseof nual percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, occurforenquiries,administration,preparationofthedocuments,guaranteesand
creditcarddebt,newbusinessiscollectedinthesamewayasoutstandingamounts credit insurance.
for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
46
VI Interest rates
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont’d)
(b) New business +
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of 5
of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total renegotiated loans 9 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Loans to households
2 0 1 6 Dec 1.93 7,774 1.89 2,343 1.86 3,262 2.61 1,085 1.79 3,427
2 0 1 7 Jan 1.94 6,698 1.84 2,651 1.78 3,024 2.52 915 1.92 2,759
Feb 1.94 5,484 1.86 1,916 1.69 2,540 2.56 803 1.99 2,141
Mar 2.01 7,097 1.88 2,130 1.80 3,237 2.72 1,032 1.99 2,828
Apr 2.00 6,030 1.86 2,229 1.75 2,826 2.67 853 2.05 2,351
May 2.02 5,890 1.81 1,930 1.83 2,535 2.61 941 1.99 2,414
June 2.06 5,933 1.89 1,852 1.95 2,722 2.73 859 1.93 2,352
July 1.96 6,388 1.75 2,282 1.76 2,873 2.48 964 1.99 2,551
Aug 1.99 5,667 1.74 1,625 1.81 2,171 2.66 814 1.92 2,682
Sep 1.99 5,275 1.80 1,455 1.79 2,341 2.60 804 1.99 2,130
Oct 2.08 5,682 1.91 1,915 1.91 2,646 2.64 854 2.07 2,182
Nov 1.98 5,587 1.84 1,569 1.76 2,471 2.63 873 1.96 2,243
Dec 2.00 6,191 1.80 1,623 1.80 2,703 2.76 958 1.92 2,530
of which: loans to sole proprietors
2 0 1 6 Dec 2.01 5,393 . . 1.98 2,257 2.71 881 1.76 2,255
2 0 1 7 Jan 1.99 4,694 . . 1.92 2,084 2.61 712 1.83 1,898
Feb 2.07 3,613 . . 1.95 1,579 2.75 568 1.93 1,466
Mar 2.11 4,783 . . 2.01 2,120 2.84 767 1.93 1,896
Apr 2.09 4,280 . . 1.95 1,931 2.77 670 1.97 1,679
May 2.12 4,033 . . 2.04 1,667 2.84 689 1.92 1,677
June 2.15 4,197 . . 2.13 1,964 2.84 681 1.88 1,552
July 2.06 4,142 . . 1.89 1,917 2.82 688 1.94 1,537
Aug 2.08 3,640 . . 1.95 1,445 2.79 629 1.92 1,566
Sep 2.04 3,411 . . 1.84 1,436 2.81 598 1.90 1,377
Oct 2.13 3,707 . . 1.98 1,694 2.82 628 2.00 1,385
Nov 2.07 3,725 . . 1.94 1,592 2.80 662 1.88 1,471
Dec 2.09 4,265 . . 2.00 1,821 2.83 753 1.85 1,691
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of 3
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
(including charges) Total renegotiated loans 9 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual percentage Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting rate of charge 10 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2 0 1 6 Dec 1.72 1.66 21,400 1.80 4,757 1.98 2,347 1.67 1,800 1.49 8,054 1.73 9,199
2 0 1 7 Jan 1.82 1.77 19,804 1.84 5,711 2.08 2,283 1.66 1,780 1.59 7,454 1.86 8,287
Feb 1.87 1.81 17,838 1.89 4,291 2.17 1,784 1.65 1,567 1.64 6,556 1.90 7,931
Mar 1.87 1.82 22,196 1.86 4,945 2.08 2,428 1.69 1,932 1.67 7,609 1.89 10,227
Apr 1.91 1.85 18,087 1.89 4,620 2.10 2,001 1.73 1,672 1.71 6,456 1.92 7,958
May 1.88 1.83 20,484 1.92 4,136 2.17 2,288 1.77 1,731 1.66 7,308 1.88 9,157
June 1.87 1.82 19,294 1.92 3,767 2.02 2,265 1.70 1,541 1.68 6,573 1.89 8,915
July 1.88 1.82 20,405 1.88 4,612 2.04 2,389 1.68 1,726 1.66 7,420 1.92 8,870
Aug 1.94 1.87 20,228 2.00 3,743 2.05 2,340 1.89 1,888 1.67 7,199 1.98 8,801
Sep 1.92 1.86 17,363 1.91 3,289 2.04 2,025 1.71 1,571 1.71 5,950 1.96 7,817
Oct 1.90 1.85 18,128 1.90 3,955 2.08 2,134 1.70 1,634 1.68 6,611 1.96 7,749
Nov 1.90 1.84 18,793 1.89 3,525 2.04 2,170 1.72 1,640 1.68 6,550 1.94 8,433
Dec 1.86 1.79 17,473 1.87 3,242 2.04 2,150 1.69 1,553 1.65 6,084 1.86 7,686
of which: collateralised loans 11
2 0 1 6 Dec . 1.57 9,705 . . 1.85 863 1.55 878 1.41 3,968 1.66 3,996
2 0 1 7 Jan . 1.67 8,932 . . 1.90 835 1.50 925 1.52 3,632 1.81 3,540
Feb . 1.71 7,964 . . 2.06 643 1.50 796 1.57 3,181 1.82 3,344
Mar . 1.72 9,905 . . 1.96 855 1.53 939 1.59 3,565 1.82 4,546
Apr . 1.75 8,413 . . 1.98 795 1.53 838 1.60 3,204 1.89 3,576
May . 1.73 9,110 . . 2.09 843 1.59 900 1.58 3,370 1.81 3,997
June . 1.72 8,374 . . 1.87 865 1.53 726 1.61 3,030 1.82 3,753
July . 1.72 9,062 . . 1.84 896 1.53 891 1.60 3,529 1.84 3,746
Aug . 1.79 8,461 . . 1.96 821 1.87 996 1.59 3,204 1.92 3,440
Sep . 1.78 7,701 . . 1.97 711 1.53 797 1.63 2,707 1.92 3,486
Oct . 1.77 8,217 . . 1.97 780 1.53 782 1.62 3,095 1.92 3,560
Nov . 1.76 8,464 . . 1.93 771 1.53 796 1.60 3,031 1.90 3,866
Dec . 1.69 7,644 . . 1.97 685 1.51 740 1.57 2,733 1.77 3,486
Forfootnotes*and1to6,seep44 .Forfootnotes+,7to10,seep45 .For
footnote 11, see p 47 .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
47
VI Interest rates
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont’d)
(b) New business +
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans 12 Revolving loans 12
and overdrafts 13 Revolving loans 12 Extended and overdrafts 13 Revolving loans 12
credit card debt 14 and overdrafts 13 credit card debt credit card debt 14 and overdrafts 13
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2 0 1 6 Dec 8.50 40,103 8.54 32,351 15.06 4,286 3.69 61,612 3.71 61,357
2 0 1 7 Jan 8.55 39,784 8.54 32,190 15.12 4,309 3.61 64,182 3.63 63,925
Feb 8.65 39,345 8.62 31,953 15.14 4,291 3.68 65,697 3.70 65,431
Mar 8.66 40,215 8.61 32,949 15.13 4,273 3.67 65,990 3.68 65,698
Apr 8.50 38,972 8.49 31,353 15.13 4,295 3.64 65,154 3.66 64,865
May 8.46 39,394 8.50 31,647 15.13 4,259 3.53 65,353 3.54 65,067
June 8.44 40,606 8.47 32,739 15.13 4,328 3.59 67,282 3.61 66,992
July 8.45 39,300 8.46 31,374 15.11 4,423 3.52 65,979 3.54 65,695
Aug 8.48 38,663 8.47 30,914 15.12 4,364 3.48 66,012 3.49 65,718
Sep 8.44 39,630 8.48 31,635 15.09 4,393 3.52 67,886 3.54 67,559
Oct 8.47 39,133 8.48 31,101 15.10 4,493 3.41 67,481 3.42 67,162
Nov 8.30 38,672 8.35 30,489 15.11 4,386 3.45 67,793 3.46 67,457
Dec 8.21 39,538 8.35 31,187 14.94 4,303 3.47 65,936 3.49 65,625
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of 15 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of 15
renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans 9 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Total loans
2 0 1 6 Dec 1.53 78,985 1.63 22,509 2.50 8,638 2.57 1,829 1.77 1,881 1.27 48,315 1.64 3,444 1.62 14,878
2 0 1 7 Jan 1.33 64,819 1.54 18,857 2.42 8,119 2.60 1,328 1.86 1,423 1.01 43,339 1.40 2,830 1.57 7,780
Feb 1.33 56,958 1.55 13,746 2.55 7,309 2.58 1,326 1.83 1,209 0.99 37,140 1.29 2,001 1.54 7,973
Mar 1.50 71,530 1.60 22,647 2.51 9,245 2.59 1,733 1.85 1,665 1.20 45,163 1.41 2,977 1.67 10,747
Apr 1.43 57,323 1.46 19,903 2.44 7,699 2.54 1,493 1.81 1,371 1.14 38,649 1.41 2,188 1.67 5,923
May 1.35 65,177 1.53 18,706 2.54 8,000 2.58 1,661 1.82 1,423 0.99 41,638 1.55 3,072 1.58 9,383
June 1.41 71,950 1.50 21,083 2.51 8,904 2.57 1,681 1.84 1,442 1.13 46,903 1.08 3,655 1.61 9,365
July 1.39 67,430 1.48 20,770 2.42 8,497 2.57 1,583 1.87 1,403 1.08 43,495 1.28 3,021 1.61 9,431
Aug 1.38 59,046 1.52 13,769 2.39 7,401 2.58 1,441 1.82 1,335 1.08 37,547 1.38 2,627 1.57 8,695
Sep 1.38 66,182 1.52 19,843 2.50 8,124 2.60 1,446 1.86 1,236 1.08 43,731 1.24 2,419 1.63 9,226
Oct 1.35 66,679 1.47 19,173 2.48 8,209 2.59 1,490 1.81 1,214 1.05 45,005 1.25 2,354 1.59 8,407
Nov 1.40 63,110 1.49 16,676 2.50 8,257 2.57 1,582 1.87 1,423 1.09 41,581 1.32 2,565 1.58 7,702
Dec 1.43 78,501 1.52 21,693 2.45 8,207 2.55 1,862 1.82 1,628 1.15 49,208 1.51 5,166 1.63 12,430
of which: collateralised loans 11
2 0 1 6 Dec 1.55 16,083 . . 1.91 662 2.46 176 1.57 569 1.39 8,076 1.96 1,310 1.62 5,290
2 0 1 7 Jan 1.57 8,742 . . 1.80 692 2.24 141 1.81 505 1.41 4,626 2.05 518 1.60 2,260
Feb 1.46 8,259 . . 2.07 464 2.44 158 1.78 399 1.33 4,051 1.73 512 1.40 2,675
Mar 1.48 11,857 . . 1.87 643 2.52 166 1.72 493 1.37 7,040 1.30 519 1.60 2,996
Apr 1.42 8,360 . . 1.81 570 2.23 164 1.69 413 1.29 5,640 1.59 299 1.62 1,274
May 1.61 8,671 . . 2.06 545 2.54 191 1.70 401 1.45 4,558 2.04 646 1.63 2,330
June 1.55 11,011 . . 1.85 632 2.60 150 1.75 444 1.44 6,484 1.64 625 1.66 2,676
July 1.52 9,023 . . 1.78 661 2.46 155 1.77 415 1.34 5,050 1.74 464 1.68 2,278
Aug 1.47 9,188 . . 1.99 480 2.39 153 1.69 431 1.30 4,961 1.94 560 1.50 2,603
Sep 1.52 9,811 . . 1.83 535 2.50 132 1.77 351 1.41 5,743 1.64 370 1.62 2,680
Oct 1.46 9,398 . . 1.90 557 2.61 131 1.77 349 1.25 5,480 2.19 304 1.64 2,577
Nov 1.60 8,531 . . 1.95 545 2.41 147 1.74 414 1.40 5,212 2.68 423 1.74 1,790
Dec 1.59 13,235 . . 1.92 627 2.65 167 1.75 426 1.44 7,644 2.33 1,098 1.56 3,273
Forfootnotes*and1to6,seep44 .Forfootnotes+and7to10,seep45 .11For (d)thereisnoobligationofregularrepaymentoffunds.13Overdraftsaredefinedas
the purposes of the interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if debitbalancesoncurrentaccounts.Theyincludeallbankoverdraftsregardlessof
collateral(amongothersfinancialcollateral,realestatecollateral,debtsecurities)in whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
at leat the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or bank.14Includingconvenienceandextendedcreditcarddebt.Conveniencecreditis
assigned.12Includingrevolvingloanswhichhaveallthefollowingfeatures:(a)the defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without paymenttransactionseffectuatedwiththecardduringonebillingcycleandthedate
givingpriornoticetothelender;(b)theamountofavailablecreditcanincreaseand at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become due. 15 The
decreaseasfundsareborrowedandrepaid;(c)theloanmaybeusedrepeatedly; amount category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
48
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
1 Assets
€ billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and funds Financial technical Non-financial Remaining
year/quarter Total deposits 2 securities Loans 3 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
2012 1,694.4 405.1 240.1 251.7 211.4 425.1 6.1 59.0 43.3 52.7
2013 1,742.1 386.3 262.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 6.0 59.8 46.4 51.0
2014 1,892.0 371.6 321.0 271.4 215.9 542.3 6.4 63.9 49.3 50.2
2015 1,954.1 344.4 344.7 278.9 228.7 578.3 4.5 71.9 51.8 50.8
2 0 1 6 Q1 2,007.8 343.6 374.1 280.2 230.0 596.3 5.2 73.7 53.1 51.7
Q2 2,034.6 336.1 395.8 281.9 229.6 607.7 4.8 73.5 53.2 52.0
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 2,219.7 383.4 396.9 389.6 280.7 604.9 5.3 47.3 31.8 79.7
Q4 2,186.1 361.5 370.9 374.6 308.6 620.1 3.3 44.1 32.4 70.6
2 0 1 7 Q1 2,189.3 347.1 391.8 364.9 298.6 631.6 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
Q2 2,177.9 335.5 392.3 362.3 302.3 641.2 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6
Q3 2,190.5 322.2 398.9 367.8 308.2 649.9 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.3
Life insurance
2012 927.6 261.4 120.0 148.0 31.7 299.2 3.0 18.0 26.1 20.1
2013 956.9 247.8 131.4 148.7 31.5 329.1 3.0 17.7 28.3 19.5
2014 1,044.1 237.2 161.2 153.4 32.3 390.3 3.2 17.8 29.7 19.1
2015 1,063.7 219.7 169.8 158.0 34.9 414.6 2.2 16.3 30.7 17.4
2 0 1 6 Q1 1,095.7 219.1 187.0 159.2 35.3 428.0 2.5 15.6 31.9 17.2
Q2 1,116.7 214.5 201.7 160.7 35.6 438.0 2.4 14.9 32.0 16.9
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 1,246.9 246.5 204.2 243.1 47.5 437.2 4.1 11.3 19.1 33.8
Q4 1,194.2 231.3 182.7 223.0 50.7 453.8 2.1 9.6 19.1 21.9
2 0 1 7 Q1 1,170.4 217.6 196.1 215.1 38.6 458.6 1.8 8.2 19.1 15.3
Q2 1,172.7 209.4 199.6 215.3 39.3 464.7 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3
Q3 1,178.6 201.0 203.3 218.0 40.5 471.0 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0
Non-life insurance
2012 427.3 130.4 59.9 48.9 40.3 97.7 1.5 24.8 12.3 11.4
2013 448.1 126.0 70.9 51.1 42.8 105.9 1.6 25.1 12.7 12.0
2014 486.4 122.8 89.4 53.9 44.3 122.5 1.8 26.5 13.7 11.5
2015 511.0 113.9 97.6 55.6 48.5 134.8 1.3 32.9 14.5 11.9
2 0 1 6 Q1 527.6 113.2 108.2 55.5 49.6 140.6 1.5 32.8 14.5 11.8
Q2 532.8 109.4 113.6 55.8 49.3 144.5 1.4 32.8 14.4 11.7
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 592.2 125.0 101.7 94.0 50.9 153.9 0.5 28.7 8.7 29.0
Q4 583.3 118.9 98.5 91.8 56.8 152.0 0.5 26.8 9.0 29.0
2 0 1 7 Q1 606.5 118.0 105.8 91.4 56.9 156.8 0.3 34.0 9.1 34.2
Q2 603.4 114.5 107.1 90.6 58.5 159.9 0.4 33.2 9.1 30.1
Q3 603.8 109.5 109.3 92.3 59.6 162.7 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4
Reinsurance 4
2012 339.5 13.2 60.2 54.7 139.4 28.2 1.6 16.2 4.8 21.2
2013 337.1 13.3 59.0 57.4 136.8 27.2 1.4 17.1 5.4 19.5
2014 361.4 12.4 69.7 64.1 139.2 29.5 1.4 19.6 5.9 19.6
2015 379.4 10.8 77.3 65.3 145.4 28.9 1.1 22.7 6.5 21.4
2 0 1 6 Q1 376.0 11.2 78.5 64.0 145.1 27.3 1.1 20.4 6.4 21.9
Q2 373.7 11.9 79.8 62.8 144.8 25.8 1.0 18.8 6.4 22.4
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 380.6 12.0 91.0 52.5 182.3 13.8 0.8 7.3 4.0 16.9
Q4 408.6 11.3 89.7 59.7 201.0 14.3 0.7 7.7 4.3 19.7
2 0 1 7 Q1 412.5 11.5 89.9 58.4 203.0 16.2 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
Q2 401.9 11.6 85.6 56.4 204.4 16.6 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2
Q3 408.1 11.7 86.3 57.4 208.1 16.2 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9
Pension funds 5
2012 468.4 155.1 40.9 26.2 12.4 194.4 − 4.1 23.8 11.5
2013 494.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 − 4.4 25.1 11.7
2014 552.5 151.7 57.1 29.1 16.7 247.8 − 4.9 27.8 17.4
2015 579.5 145.5 60.2 28.8 19.1 268.5 − 5.4 31.5 20.4
2 0 1 6 Q1 588.8 143.1 66.0 29.0 19.4 273.4 − 5.5 31.9 20.5
Q2 601.7 142.7 69.1 29.2 20.0 281.9 − 5.5 32.5 20.7
Q3 611.6 144.4 69.2 29.3 20.1 289.0 − 5.6 33.2 20.9
Q4 613.5 144.7 67.8 29.8 20.6 288.9 − 5.7 34.5 21.4
2 0 1 7 Q1 619.9 146.2 66.1 30.3 21.2 293.9 − 5.8 34.9 21.6
Q2 623.7 143.7 69.0 30.7 21.4 295.3 − 6.8 35.3 21.5
Q3 631.6 142.9 71.0 30.8 21.8 301.1 − 6.9 35.5 21.7
1Dataasof2016Q3arebasedonSolvency IIsupervisorydata,valuationoflistedse- edonassumedreinsuranceaswellasregisteredbonds,borrowers’noteloansand
curitiesatthecorrespondingconsistentpricefromtheESCB’ssecuritiesdatabase.Up registeredPfandbriefe.4Notincludingthereinsurancebusinessconductedbypri-
toandincluding2016Q2dataarebasedonSolvency IsupervisorydatafromtheFed- maryinsurers,whichisincludedthere.5Theterm“pensionfunds“referstotheinsti-
eralFinancialSupervisoryAuthority(BaFin),supplementedbyestimatesandowncalcu- tutionalsector“pensionfunds“oftheEuropeanSystemofAccounts.Pensionfunds
lations.2Accountsreceivabletomonetaryfinancialinstitutions,includingregistered thuscomprisecompanypensionschemesandoccupationalpensionschemesforthe
bonds,borrowers’noteloansandregisteredPfandbriefe.3Includingdepositsretain- self-employed. Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
49
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
2 Liabilities
€ billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life /
Debt Claims on
End of securities Shares and pension funds Financial Remaining
year/quarter Total issued Loans 2 other equity Total reserves 3 Non-life 4 derivatives liabilities Net worth 7
Insurance corporations
2012 1,694.4 22.4 73.1 152.0 1,280.0 1,009.2 270.8 0.0 69.5 97.4
2013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 0.0 68.8 49.2
2014 1,892.0 17.3 84.3 193.0 1,411.6 1,113.8 297.8 0.0 70.5 115.3
2015 1,954.1 18.3 91.7 214.8 1,474.7 1,160.6 314.1 0.0 70.2 84.4
2 0 1 6 Q1 2,007.8 17.7 92.9 220.4 1,501.0 1,179.8 321.2 0.0 71.5 104.3
Q2 2,034.6 17.6 93.0 191.1 1,508.4 1,188.4 320.1 0.0 71.6 152.9
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 2,219.7 30.7 73.7 383.0 1,579.3 1,396.7 182.5 1.5 151.4 −
Q4 2,186.1 30.7 70.3 441.0 1,494.4 1,313.3 181.1 2.3 147.5 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 2,189.3 30.5 57.2 448.5 1,511.7 1,309.5 202.3 1.8 139.5 −
Q2 2,177.9 28.6 57.0 450.7 1,505.2 1,308.3 196.9 2.1 134.3 −
Q3 2,190.5 28.5 58.4 455.4 1,512.8 1,317.0 195.7 2.3 133.2 −
Life insurance
2012 927.6 0.0 23.1 16.3 814.9 801.2 13.7 0.0 34.9 38.5
2013 956.9 0.0 23.8 20.2 853.2 839.4 13.8 0.0 34.1 25.6
2014 1,044.1 0.0 24.7 21.6 891.8 877.4 14.4 0.0 32.8 73.3
2015 1,063.7 0.0 24.5 24.6 926.0 911.0 15.0 0.0 30.9 57.7
2 0 1 6 Q1 1,095.7 0.0 26.0 23.6 938.7 923.4 15.2 0.0 30.7 76.8
Q2 1,116.7 0.0 27.8 22.3 943.1 927.8 15.3 0.0 30.2 93.3
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 1,246.9 3.8 25.9 96.0 1,066.1 1,066.1 − 0.7 54.4 −
Q4 1,194.2 4.1 25.0 116.3 993.7 993.7 − 1.2 53.9 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 1,170.4 4.1 12.5 116.3 991.7 991.7 − 0.9 44.8 −
Q2 1,172.7 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.5 989.5 − 1.0 46.2 −
Q3 1,178.6 4.1 12.3 121.5 993.9 993.9 − 1.1 45.8 −
Non-life insurance
2012 427.3 0.0 11.5 44.4 329.9 208.0 122.0 0.0 14.9 26.6
2013 448.1 0.0 9.2 55.9 351.6 222.0 129.6 0.0 15.3 16.1
2014 486.4 0.0 10.5 58.2 369.8 236.5 133.4 0.0 15.6 32.3
2015 511.0 0.0 14.2 63.7 390.5 249.6 140.9 0.0 17.1 25.5
2 0 1 6 Q1 527.6 0.0 14.6 62.0 399.6 253.8 145.9 0.0 17.5 33.9
Q2 532.8 0.0 14.5 57.7 401.6 256.8 144.9 0.0 17.2 41.9
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 592.2 0.9 6.6 120.0 407.4 310.1 97.3 0.0 57.3 −
Q4 583.3 1.1 6.3 130.4 390.1 300.4 89.7 0.2 55.3 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 606.5 1.1 7.3 134.0 408.9 300.7 108.2 0.1 55.0 −
Q2 603.4 1.1 6.8 135.6 406.7 302.4 104.3 0.1 53.0 −
Q3 603.8 1.1 6.9 137.3 406.6 305.7 100.9 0.1 51.9 −
Reinsurance 5
2012 339.5 22.4 38.5 91.3 135.1 − 135.1 0.0 19.8 32.4
2013 337.1 16.9 44.7 112.7 135.9 − 135.9 0.0 19.4 7.5
2014 361.4 17.3 49.1 113.3 150.0 − 150.0 0.0 22.1 9.6
2015 379.4 18.3 53.0 124.8 158.2 − 158.2 0.0 22.2 2.8
2 0 1 6 Q1 376.0 17.7 52.5 118.3 157.3 − 157.3 0.0 22.5 7.7
Q2 373.7 17.6 51.7 111.2 156.6 − 156.6 0.0 22.9 13.6
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 380.6 26.0 41.3 167.0 105.8 20.5 85.3 0.8 39.8 −
Q4 408.6 25.5 39.0 194.3 110.5 19.1 91.4 0.9 38.3 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −
Q3 408.1 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.8 1.1 35.6 −
Pension funds 6
2012 468.4 − 4.1 6.9 428.3 427.9 0.4 − 1.8 27.3
2013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 − 2.9 25.3
2014 552.5 − 4.7 9.7 492.1 491.6 0.5 − 1.8 44.2
2015 579.5 − 4.9 11.3 518.3 517.9 0.4 − 6.1 38.9
2 0 1 6 Q1 588.8 − 5.0 11.4 522.7 522.2 0.5 − 5.8 44.1
Q2 601.7 − 5.0 10.0 529.6 529.1 0.5 − 5.8 51.3
Q3 611.6 − 5.1 10.3 535.2 535.2 − − 5.8 55.3
Q4 613.5 − 5.2 11.3 544.7 544.7 − − 6.0 46.4
2 0 1 7 Q1 619.9 − 5.2 11.9 552.4 552.4 − − 6.0 44.3
Q2 623.7 − 6.1 11.6 554.3 554.3 − − 6.2 45.5
Q3 631.6 − 6.1 12.0 559.9 559.9 − − 6.2 47.4
1Dataasof2016Q3arebasedonSolvency IIsupervisorydata.Uptoandincluding ESA1995.4Asof2016Q3insurancetechnicalreserves“non-life“pursuanttoSolven-
2016Q2dataarebasedonSolvency IsupervisorydatafromtheFederalFinancialSu- cy II.Uptoandincluding2016Q2unearnedpremiumsandreservesforoutstanding
pervisoryAuthority(BaFin),supplementedbyestimatesandowncalculations.2Includ- claimspursuanttoESA1995.5Notincludingthereinsurancebusinessconductedby
ingdepositsretainedoncededbusinessaswellasregisteredbonds,borrowers’note primaryinsurers,whichisincludedthere.6Theterm“pensionfunds“referstothein-
loansandregisteredPfandbriefe.3Asof2016Q3insurancetechnicalreserves“life“ stitutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pension
pursuanttoSolvency IItakingaccountoftransitionalmeasures.Uptoandincluding fundsthuscomprisecompanypensionschemesandoccupationalpensionschemes
2016Q2:Long-termnetequityofhouseholdsinlifeinsurance(includingageingprovi- for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 7 Own funds corre-
sions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance spond to the sum of net worth and the liability item „Shares and other equity“.
schemeswithguaranteedpremiumrefund)andpensionfundreservespursuantto

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
50
VIII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities (non-MFIs) 2 ities 3 ities 4 Total 5 associations 6 Bundesbank sectors 7 residents 8
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,526
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,580
2013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,646 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,380
2014 64,027 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 95,988 53,068 − 12,124 − 11,951 77,143 10,961
2015 31,809 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 67,819 123,820 − 66,330 121,164 68,986 − 92,012
2016 69,798 27,069 19,177 17,905 − 10,012 42,728 173,193 − 58,012 187,500 43,705 − 103,395
2017 56,684 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 45,122 149,178 − 71,454 161,012 59,620 − 92,494
2 0 1 7 Feb 4,188 − 2,177 12,413 1,756 − 16,346 6,365 21,814 − 5,044 16,715 10,143 − 17,626
Mar 9,225 8,713 1,179 − 131 7,665 512 17,676 − 8,293 17,769 8,200 − 8,451
Apr − 12,590 − 15,170 − 5,909 − 276 − 8,985 2,580 3,520 − 5,737 12,817 − 3,560 − 16,110
May 39,706 28,463 10,800 1,096 16,567 11,243 17,325 3,906 12,751 668 22,381
June 3,582 − 1,090 2,876 − 5,769 1,802 4,672 10,890 − 11,745 12,871 9,764 − 7,309
July − 7,719 − 17,251 − 7,196 8,174 − 18,228 9,532 9,807 − 6,471 11,565 4,713 − 17,526
Aug 13,913 12,771 − 1,814 − 1,581 16,166 1,143 7,547 − 8,730 9,902 6,375 6,366
Sep − 13,841 − 18,254 − 8,577 − 3,456 − 6,221 4,413 1,397 − 8,357 12,865 − 3,111 − 15,238
Oct − 12,039 − 10,152 − 9,775 − 2,760 2,383 − 1,887 9,522 − 4,841 12,199 2,164 − 21,561
Nov 28,537 22,066 893 6,338 14,835 6,471 25,664 3,359 13,355 8,950 2,873
Dec − 20,490 − 18,944 − 5,802 − 952 − 12,190 − 1,546 3,495 − 12,058 10,057 5,496 − 23,985
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 9 shares 10 Total 11 tutions 6 Other sectors 12 residents 13
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 39,903 18,778 21,125 34,148 17,203 16,945 5,755
2015 40,293 7,668 32,625 26,058 − 5,421 31,479 14,235
2016 33,504 4,409 29,095 32,324 − 5,143 37,467 1,180
2017 44,727 15,570 29,157 46,529 7,031 39,498 − 1,802
2 0 1 7 Feb 2,436 852 1,584 2,985 1,866 1,119 − 549
Mar 13,985 10,136 3,849 11,531 506 11,025 2,454
Apr − 1,261 95 − 1,356 − 3,599 − 2,589 − 1,010 2,338
May 3,434 107 3,327 2,137 475 1,662 1,297
June − 5,794 920 − 6,714 64 5,220 − 5,156 − 5,858
July 2,728 509 2,219 3,894 − 690 4,584 − 1,166
Aug 2,241 155 2,086 4,758 − 603 5,361 − 2,517
Sep 5,522 1,482 4,040 4,101 − 1,738 5,839 1,421
Oct 2,355 572 1,783 − 428 735 − 1,163 2,783
Nov 3,310 110 3,200 4,121 1,198 2,923 − 811
Dec 13,617 484 13,133 15,596 2,898 12,698 − 1,979
1Netsalesatmarketvaluesplus/minuschangesinissuers’portfoliosoftheirown values.9Excludingsharesofpubliclimitedinvestmentcompanies;atissueprices.
debtsecurities.2Includingcross-borderfinancingwithingroupsfromJanuary2011. 10Netpurchasesornetsales(−)offoreignshares(includingdirectinvestment) by
3IncludingFederalRailwaysFund,FederalPostOfficeandTreuhandagency.4Net residents; transaction values.11Domesticandforeignshares.12Residual;also
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
values.5Domesticandforeigndebtsecurities.6Bookvalues;statisticallyadjusted. 13Netpurchasesornetsales(−)ofdomesticshares(includingdirectinvestment)by
7Residual;alsoincludingpurchasesofdomesticandforeignsecuritiesbydomestic non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 8 Net pur- provisional; revisions are not specially marked.
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
51
VIII Capital market
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities 1
Debt securities
issued by special Corporate
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) 2 debt securities 3
Gross sales 4
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,872
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,376
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,529
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,891
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700
2016 5 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,370 416,110
2017 5 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,289 362,333
2 0 1 7 May 88,568 55,536 1,700 238 41,685 11,913 5,015 28,016
June 73,438 42,842 5,005 364 25,324 12,148 4,284 26,312
July 81,160 47,165 292 562 38,013 8,298 11,105 22,889
Aug 83,236 47,675 2,476 20 36,804 8,374 1,462 34,100
Sep 80,958 48,059 1,940 76 34,328 11,716 3,712 29,186
Oct 91,104 50,410 2,420 1,150 34,514 12,326 5,299 35,396
Nov 84,080 37,055 1,823 340 22,871 12,021 11,681 35,345
Dec 5 59,026 33,899 1,727 1,727 17,999 12,446 6,113 19,014
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 6
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 5 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017 5 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2 0 1 7 May 29,215 12,669 1,165 136 6,045 5,322 3,142 13,404
June 24,255 10,611 3,011 54 3,390 4,156 1,784 11,860
July 31,503 12,687 111 62 9,523 2,991 7,388 11,428
Aug 24,629 10,217 2,245 20 5,283 2,670 521 13,890
Sep 26,426 13,324 1,395 24 8,649 3,256 2,765 10,337
Oct 31,980 14,680 2,129 1,145 7,480 3,926 2,837 14,463
Nov 35,497 12,555 1,528 320 6,294 4,413 8,990 13,952
Dec 5 18,711 8,098 420 1,607 2,704 3,368 4,821 5,791
Net sales 7
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302
2009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289
2012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298
2013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479
2014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 5 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017 5 2,669 5,954 6,389 − 4,697 18,788 − 14,525 6,828 − 10,114
2 0 1 7 May 26,524 10,344 − 1,329 − 1,105 13,027 − 250 − 226 16,406
June − 6,370 1,035 2,036 − 245 4,667 − 5,423 − 2,704 − 4,701
July − 12,190 − 6,664 − 2,176 209 − 1,958 − 2,738 8,539 − 14,065
Aug 13,424 − 1,646 975 − 94 2,334 − 4,861 − 934 16,004
Sep − 11,050 − 6,065 − 749 − 1,959 779 − 4,137 − 1,796 − 3,189
Oct − 1,501 179 1,342 229 − 1,165 − 227 − 1,952 272
Nov 22,681 − 24 444 123 − 1,471 880 6,842 15,863
Dec 5 − 28,202 − 16,824 − 1,367 − 329 − 7,519 − 7,609 − 469 − 10,909
*Fordefinitions,seetheexplanatorynotesintheStatisticalSupplement2Capital initial sales of newly issued securities. 5 Sectoral reclassification of debt
marketstatisticsonp21ff.1Excludingregisteredbankdebtsecurities.2Including securities.e.6Maximummaturityaccordingtothetermsofissue.7Grosssalesless
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3 Including Federal redemptions.
RailwaysFund,FederalPostOfficeandTreuhandagency.4Grosssalesmeansonly

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
52
VIII Capital market
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017 1 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 302,543 1,617,244
2 0 1 7 June 3,087,618 1,201,963 142,804 59,824 661,820 337,515 272,387 1,613,268
July 3,075,428 1,195,300 140,628 60,033 659,861 334,777 280,925 1,599,203
Aug 3,088,852 1,193,654 141,603 59,939 662,196 329,917 279,992 1,615,207
Sep 3,097,730 1,187,589 140,854 57,980 662,975 325,780 2 298,123 1,612,018
Oct 3,096,229 1,187,768 142,196 58,210 661,809 325,553 296,171 1,612,290
Nov 3,118,910 1,187,744 142,640 58,333 660,338 326,433 303,012 1,628,153
Dec 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 1 651,211 1 320,432 302,543 1,617,244
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-December 2017
less than 2 999,383 447,324 39,968 23,696 271,863 111,798 56,793 495,266
2 to less than 4 662,052 275,672 36,254 12,535 158,090 68,793 52,932 333,449
4 to less than 6 442,002 168,380 27,433 8,541 85,886 46,520 40,118 233,504
6 to less than 8 313,952 114,378 18,740 6,030 62,951 26,658 32,168 167,407
8 to less than 10 242,865 78,744 15,272 4,283 36,206 22,984 14,839 149,282
10 to less than 15 127,106 35,165 2,670 1,329 17,341 13,825 21,302 70,639
15 to less than 20 83,206 17,822 213 1,141 12,562 3,906 9,118 56,267
20 and more 220,141 33,435 723 450 6,313 25,949 75,276 111,430
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1 Sectoral securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount
reclassificationofdebtsecurities. 2Increaseduetochangeinissuers’countryof outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
residence. 3 Calculated from month under review until final maturity for debt
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments (market capita-
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims of shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review 2
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 − − 457 − 661 − 1,615 1,933,733
2 0 1 7 June 178,620 294 64 202 218 − 0 − 6 − 184 1,811,817
July 179,467 847 493 485 8 − 3 − 18 − 125 1,800,324
Aug 179,207 − 260 155 2 6 − − 167 − 173 − 83 1,787,670
Sep 179,448 241 165 18 119 − − 13 − 7 − 41 1,888,218
Oct 179,294 − 154 230 0 121 − − 1 − 1 − 504 1,957,699
Nov 179,426 132 109 − − − 0 58 − 35 1,947,204
Dec 178,828 − 598 128 − 1 − − 140 − 363 − 224 1,933,733
*Excludingsharesofpubliclimitedinvestmentcompanies.1Includingsharesissued ondataoftheHerausgebergemeinschaftWertpapier-MitteilungenandtheDeutsche
outofcompanyprofits.2Allmarketplaces.Source:Bundesbankcalculationsbased Börse AG.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
53
VIII Capital market
5 Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents 1 Price indices 2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index € Germany share price index
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate =100 =100 =1000
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2 0 1 7 Aug 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.9 1.6 141.85 110.01 551.25 12,055.84
Sep 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.9 1.7 141.21 109.06 585.63 12,828.86
Oct 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.9 1.6 141.63 109.70 603.37 13,229.57
Nov 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.8 1.6 141.23 109.62 597.74 13,023.98
Dec 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.8 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2 0 1 8 Jan 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.9 1.8 139.19 107.24 608.72 13,189.48
1Bearerdebtsecuritieswithmaximummaturitiesaccordingtothetermsofissueof dingofthedebtsecuritiesincludedinthecalculation.Monthlyfiguresarecalculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt onthebasisoftheyieldsonallthebusinessdaysinamonth.Theannualfiguresare
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, theunweightedmeansofthemonthlyfigures.2Endofyearormonth.3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yieldsforthevariouscategoriesofsecuritiesareweightedbytheamountsoutstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
and loan associations 2 Other sectors 3
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutual
pur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds 4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5
2007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,469
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,036
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,438
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,709
2014 139,768 97,711 3,998 −473 862 1,000 93,713 42,057 143,560 819 − 1,745 142,741 43,802 − 3,790
2015 180,762 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 34,626 173,417 7,362 494 166,055 34,131 7,345
2016 155,955 119,369 21,301 −342 11,131 7,384 98,068 36,586 162,883 2,877 − 3,172 160,006 39,757 − 6,928
2017 141,467 94,921 29,560 −235 21,970 4,406 65,361 46,546 144,924 4,946 1,058 139,978 45,488 − 3,455
2 0 1 7 June 4,858 4,745 1,831 66 874 488 2,915 113 5,512 556 662 4,956 − 549 − 654
July 14,039 9,699 4,537 − 35 4,033 353 5,162 4,340 13,152 545 230 12,607 4,110 887
Aug 9,664 6,458 408 238 1,450 − 1,493 6,050 3,206 9,686 517 − 47 9,169 3,253 − 22
Sep 6,275 3,246 3,996 31 2,849 709 −750 3,029 6,499 102 − 224 6,397 3,253 − 224
Oct 18,167 10,973 906 −285 501 322 10,068 7,194 17,151 414 − 176 16,737 7,370 1,016
Nov 10,535 8,591 2,614 11 2,316 256 5,978 1,944 15,290 − 43 − 285 15,333 2,229 − 4,755
Dec 15,285 9,757 1,665 − 7 585 774 8,092 5,528 14,441 − 648 63 15,089 5,465 844
1Includingpubliclimitedinvestmentcompanies.2Bookvalues.3Residual.4Net transactionvalues.—Thefiguresforthemostrecentdateareprovisional;revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked.
5 Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
54
IX Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2016 2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits − 1.62 30.58 40.13 8.80 23.65 − 1.11 6.81 19.49 2.89
Debt securities − 5.38 − 0.93 − 3.22 − 3.32 0.17 − 0.94 − 0.89 − 0.76 − 1.08
short-term debt securities 1.62 − 0.77 − 0.57 − 0.70 − 0.02 − 0.82 0.23 − 1.89 − 0.26
long-term debt securities − 7.00 − 0.15 − 2.65 − 2.62 0.19 − 0.11 − 1.13 1.13 − 0.81
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 1.88 0.73 − 2.60 − 2.54 − 0.04 − 0.52 − 0.52 − 0.06 − 1.08
Non-financial corporations − 0.05 − 0.79 0.69 − 0.12 0.01 0.15 0.85 − 0.71 − 0.59
Financial corporations − 1.26 1.93 − 2.49 − 1.80 − 0.53 − 0.47 − 0.34 0.64 − 0.11
General government − 0.57 − 0.41 − 0.81 − 0.62 0.47 − 0.20 − 1.03 0.01 − 0.37
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.50 − 1.66 − 0.62 − 0.78 0.21 − 0.41 − 0.38 − 0.71 − 0.00
Loans 18.48 27.12 12.62 − 6.83 0.18 13.86 28.72 4.64 2.13
short-term loans 33.19 25.81 8.63 − 1.52 − 3.94 13.62 17.82 − 0.63 − 0.49
long-term loans − 14.71 1.31 3.99 − 5.31 4.11 0.24 10.90 5.27 2.62
Memo item
to domestic sectors 14.11 8.90 − 1.44 − 5.36 − 2.10 1.40 10.74 − 1.20 − 2.48
Non-financial corporations − 0.42 0.84 − 6.06 − 11.07 − 1.74 0.57 2.75 2.51 − 0.52
Financial corporations 14.46 7.88 4.47 5.67 − 0.40 0.78 7.99 − 3.71 − 1.96
General government 0.08 0.18 0.15 0.04 0.04 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.00
to the rest of the world 4.37 18.22 14.06 − 1.47 2.28 12.47 17.98 5.84 4.61
Equity and investment fund shares − 1.85 44.57 60.08 3.70 12.11 34.87 16.26 − 2.42 19.00
Equity 8.53 28.23 54.26 4.45 8.03 32.83 17.51 − 0.24 16.70
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 1.62 − 10.41 20.66 − 0.77 6.72 20.70 − 5.54 − 2.10 1.85
Non-financial corporations − 5.39 − 8.04 20.34 − 0.94 6.83 20.62 − 5.45 − 2.26 1.89
Financial corporations 3.78 − 2.37 0.31 0.17 − 0.11 0.08 − 0.09 0.16 − 0.04
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 4.85 12.45 10.13 − 0.59 1.37 8.69 3.23 11.72 − 6.00
Other equity 1 14.99 26.19 23.47 5.81 − 0.07 3.44 19.83 − 9.86 20.85
Investment fund shares − 10.38 16.35 5.82 − 0.75 4.08 2.04 − 1.25 − 2.18 2.29
Money market fund shares 0.23 0.21 0.36 − 0.10 − 0.03 0.79 − 0.28 0.00 − 1.07
Non-MMF investment fund shares − 10.61 16.13 5.46 − 0.65 4.11 1.25 − 0.97 − 2.18 3.37
Insurance technical reserves − 0.06 2.97 1.09 0.35 0.29 0.29 0.06 0.52 0.45
Financial derivatives − 1.23 0.56 4.93 0.84 − 1.08 7.25 0.08 2.35 3.30
Other accounts receivable − 78.98 28.63 − 1.44 − 4.03 − 3.39 − 3.56 79.72 − 22.21 23.80
Total − 70.63 133.50 114.18 − 0.50 31.92 50.67 130.75 1.61 50.49
External financing
Debt securities 1.26 7.78 23.71 4.60 2.88 5.82 7.57 − 0.52 0.96
short-term securities − 11.63 1.96 − 0.15 0.18 − 0.57 − 1.79 5.47 − 0.42 − 2.62
long-term securities 12.89 5.82 23.85 4.43 3.45 7.61 2.11 − 0.10 3.58
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 4.27 1.77 10.93 1.27 1.59 3.10 3.35 1.28 0.57
Non-financial corporations − 0.05 − 0.79 0.69 − 0.12 0.01 0.15 0.85 − 0.71 − 0.59
Financial corporations 4.12 2.08 10.11 1.96 1.56 3.00 3.19 2.10 1.43
General government 0.00 0.02 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 − 0.01 0.02 0.00
Households 0.20 0.46 0.12 − 0.57 0.01 − 0.05 − 0.69 − 0.13 − 0.28
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.01 6.02 12.78 3.33 1.29 2.73 4.23 − 1.80 0.39
Loans − 7.50 46.98 43.32 7.74 17.29 − 12.09 46.99 13.76 18.39
short-term loans 0.60 29.81 14.68 − 1.69 3.27 − 2.34 7.72 2.93 7.89
long-term loans − 8.10 17.17 28.65 9.43 14.02 − 9.75 39.27 10.83 10.50
Memo item
from domestic sectors 10.66 20.12 19.91 − 6.44 11.38 − 11.24 28.01 8.98 9.25
Non-financial corporations − 0.42 0.84 − 6.06 − 11.07 − 1.74 0.57 2.75 2.51 − 0.52
Financial corporations 22.22 26.12 25.58 3.78 15.41 − 5.54 18.81 5.15 12.26
General government − 11.15 − 6.83 0.39 0.85 − 2.29 − 6.28 6.46 1.32 − 2.48
from the rest of the world − 18.16 26.86 23.41 14.18 5.91 − 0.85 18.98 4.78 9.13
Equity 31.11 16.63 8.95 2.05 2.18 1.12 2.83 3.52 5.11
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 0.34 7.36 21.96 3.30 4.33 17.00 − 6.70 2.68 3.73
Non-financial corporations − 5.39 − 8.04 20.34 − 0.94 6.83 20.62 − 5.45 − 2.26 1.89
Financial corporations 2.22 11.75 − 2.31 3.22 − 2.25 − 2.13 − 0.88 6.21 0.63
General government 0.03 0.11 0.07 0.05 0.01 − 0.02 0.07 0.13 0.16
Households 2.80 3.55 3.85 0.98 − 0.26 − 1.47 − 0.44 − 1.40 1.04
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 9.09 − 1.34 − 20.44 − 2.89 − 4.10 − 16.16 7.03 − 1.28 − 1.77
Other equity 1 22.37 10.61 7.43 1.64 1.95 0.29 2.51 2.12 3.16
Insurance technical reserves 6.41 5.60 3.60 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 0.21 − 10.81 − 0.13 − 5.71 8.05 − 7.81 2.60 2.23 3.14
Other accounts payable − 1.73 15.92 28.53 0.20 − 1.61 23.79 28.73 − 24.82 − 8.08
Total 29.33 82.09 107.97 9.77 29.69 11.73 89.62 − 4.94 20.41
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
55
IX Financial accounts
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2016 2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Financial assets
Currency and deposits 407.0 464.5 516.2 467.8 504.3 516.2 517.9 526.5 534.9
Debt securities 49.6 47.8 44.8 45.7 46.0 44.8 43.9 42.8 41.9
short-term debt securities 6.8 6.0 5.5 6.3 6.3 5.5 5.8 3.9 3.6
long-term debt securities 42.9 41.7 39.3 39.3 39.6 39.3 38.1 39.0 38.3
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 22.9 23.3 20.8 21.4 21.4 20.8 20.3 20.2 19.3
Non-financial corporations 4.6 3.6 4.4 4.2 4.3 4.4 5.3 4.6 4.1
Financial corporations 12.7 14.5 12.0 13.0 12.5 12.0 11.6 12.3 12.3
General government 5.7 5.2 4.4 4.2 4.6 4.4 3.4 3.3 3.0
Debt securities of the rest of the world 26.7 24.4 24.0 24.3 24.5 24.0 23.6 22.7 22.6
Loans 455.3 485.3 496.8 481.8 480.9 496.8 526.2 527.4 530.4
short-term loans 356.2 383.7 392.4 381.9 377.6 392.4 410.8 408.4 406.9
long-term loans 99.1 101.5 104.4 99.9 103.3 104.4 115.3 119.0 123.5
Memo item
to domestic sectors 303.6 312.5 311.1 311.8 309.7 311.1 321.8 320.6 318.2
Non-financial corporations 212.4 213.3 207.2 208.4 206.7 207.2 210.0 212.5 212.0
Financial corporations 84.9 92.8 97.2 96.8 96.4 97.2 105.2 101.5 99.5
General government 6.3 6.5 6.6 6.6 6.6 6.6 6.6 6.6 6.6
to the rest of the world 151.7 172.7 185.7 170.0 171.2 185.7 204.3 206.8 212.2
Equity and investment fund shares 1,698.6 1,872.9 1,914.9 1,746.9 1,804.2 1,914.9 1,995.7 1,982.0 2,012.9
Equity 1,563.1 1,720.9 1,755.0 1,595.2 1,646.0 1,755.0 1,834.9 1,823.8 1,851.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors 262.2 273.0 292.3 239.4 265.1 292.3 304.1 304.1 322.7
Non-financial corporations 252.2 266.6 286.2 233.7 259.3 286.2 298.6 297.9 315.9
Financial corporations 10.0 6.3 6.1 5.7 5.8 6.1 5.5 6.2 6.9
Listed shares of the rest of the world 50.0 62.5 73.9 62.1 64.5 73.9 79.7 89.3 80.1
Other equity 1 1,250.8 1,385.4 1,388.8 1,293.6 1,316.3 1,388.8 1,451.2 1,430.4 1,448.7
Investment fund shares 135.5 151.9 159.9 151.7 158.2 159.9 160.8 158.2 161.4
Money market fund shares 1.2 1.4 1.9 1.1 1.0 1.9 1.7 1.7 0.6
Non-MMF investment fund shares 134.4 150.6 158.0 150.6 157.2 158.0 159.1 156.4 160.7
Insurance technical reserves 46.1 48.8 50.2 49.4 49.7 50.2 50.5 50.8 51.1
Financial derivatives 22.8 24.1 27.3 25.3 22.0 27.3 23.6 22.7 22.8
Other accounts receivable 883.4 913.5 946.1 910.5 913.8 946.1 1,031.3 980.5 1,029.6
Total 3,562.8 3,856.8 3,996.4 3,727.3 3,820.8 3,996.4 4,189.0 4,132.6 4,223.5
Liabilities
Debt securities 150.9 156.8 183.8 179.0 183.0 183.8 189.7 188.1 210.2
short-term securities 1.8 3.0 2.9 5.3 4.7 2.9 8.3 7.9 5.3
long-term securities 149.1 153.7 180.9 173.7 178.3 180.9 181.4 180.2 205.0
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 60.2 58.7 72.2 68.2 71.3 72.2 74.8 75.4 80.0
Non-financial corporations 4.6 3.6 4.4 4.2 4.3 4.4 5.3 4.6 4.1
Financial corporations 39.8 40.0 51.9 49.1 50.9 51.9 54.4 55.9 61.0
General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households 15.8 15.0 15.7 14.9 15.9 15.7 15.0 14.8 14.8
Debt securities of the rest of the world 90.7 98.1 111.7 110.8 111.8 111.7 114.9 112.7 130.2
Loans 1,390.6 1,438.8 1,476.6 1,467.8 1,486.1 1,476.6 1,523.0 1,532.3 1,546.4
short-term loans 486.5 515.5 528.7 527.5 531.9 528.7 536.5 536.3 542.8
long-term loans 904.2 923.3 947.9 940.3 954.2 947.9 986.5 996.0 1,003.6
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,093.9 1,110.7 1,124.3 1,123.2 1,134.7 1,124.3 1,151.6 1,159.4 1,166.6
Non-financial corporations 212.4 213.3 207.2 208.4 206.7 207.2 210.0 212.5 212.0
Financial corporations 822.2 845.7 863.9 856.3 870.5 863.9 882.7 886.1 895.6
General government 59.2 51.7 53.2 58.6 57.5 53.2 58.8 60.8 59.0
from the rest of the world 296.7 328.0 352.4 344.6 351.4 352.4 371.4 372.8 379.8
Equity 2,543.6 2,673.9 2,749.3 2,490.5 2,665.4 2,749.3 2,870.5 2,889.4 2,973.8
Listed shares of domestic sectors 570.8 626.4 664.0 569.6 616.9 664.0 696.5 697.8 737.6
Non-financial corporations 252.2 266.6 286.2 233.7 259.3 286.2 298.6 297.9 315.9
Financial corporations 134.7 150.1 154.7 139.2 147.8 154.7 161.3 166.4 173.4
General government 35.2 43.4 44.4 40.4 40.8 44.4 47.0 46.7 51.0
Households 148.7 166.2 178.7 156.3 168.9 178.7 189.7 186.8 197.4
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 719.1 756.3 803.7 684.7 782.2 803.7 865.4 879.1 906.1
Other equity 1 1,253.7 1,291.2 1,281.6 1,236.2 1,266.4 1,281.6 1,308.5 1,312.4 1,330.1
Insurance technical reserves 250.3 255.9 259.5 257.7 258.6 259.5 260.4 261.3 262.2
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 51.8 42.0 38.2 46.5 50.4 38.2 35.4 32.7 31.3
Other accounts payable 981.3 1,004.1 1,035.2 988.2 995.2 1,035.2 1,060.7 1,009.6 1,044.8
Total 5,368.5 5,571.4 5,742.6 5,429.7 5,638.7 5,742.6 5,939.7 5,913.3 6,068.7
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
56
IX Financial accounts
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2016 2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 85.82 96.67 114.98 29.09 24.75 52.40 12.35 30.16 18.03
Currency 15.64 25.51 21.30 4.83 7.11 6.32 3.63 5.57 2.46
Deposits 70.18 71.16 93.68 24.26 17.63 46.09 8.72 24.59 15.57
Transferable deposits 73.84 100.96 105.26 28.09 23.41 46.52 13.26 29.95 20.65
Time deposits 8.74 − 9.22 1.28 2.16 − 1.73 0.02 − 1.59 − 2.32 − 2.47
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 12.41 − 20.58 − 12.87 − 5.99 − 4.05 − 0.45 − 2.96 − 3.04 − 2.61
Debt securities − 18.00 − 17.40 − 12.20 − 4.10 − 3.16 − 3.18 − 1.19 − 1.57 − 2.42
short-term debt securities − 0.67 0.75 − 0.10 − 0.62 0.10 0.33 0.38 0.20 − 0.33
long-term debt securities − 17.33 − 18.16 − 12.10 − 3.48 − 3.26 − 3.50 − 1.57 − 1.77 − 2.09
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 15.08 − 9.34 − 3.81 − 1.57 − 1.74 − 1.58 0.11 − 0.72 − 1.92
Non-financial corporations 0.02 0.39 0.02 − 0.59 0.03 − 0.09 − 0.65 − 0.20 − 0.25
Financial corporations − 12.52 − 6.80 − 2.22 − 0.36 − 1.29 − 1.31 1.08 − 0.23 − 1.49
General government − 2.58 − 2.93 − 1.61 − 0.63 − 0.48 − 0.18 − 0.33 − 0.28 − 0.18
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 2.93 − 8.06 − 8.39 − 2.53 − 1.42 − 1.60 − 1.30 − 0.86 − 0.50
Equity and investment fund shares 36.87 46.39 42.23 11.57 10.20 4.79 10.62 12.07 14.56
Equity 12.17 15.03 18.16 5.22 3.35 − 0.67 1.86 1.96 5.53
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 4.61 4.06 6.49 2.69 0.25 − 3.03 − 0.70 − 0.67 1.54
Non-financial corporations 2.69 3.77 3.22 0.69 − 0.30 − 1.69 − 0.36 − 1.43 1.00
Financial corporations 1.93 0.28 3.28 2.00 0.55 − 1.33 − 0.33 0.76 0.54
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 3.70 6.75 6.83 1.21 2.08 1.88 1.78 1.96 2.65
Other equity 1 3.86 4.22 4.83 1.32 1.02 0.47 0.77 0.66 1.34
Investment fund shares 24.70 31.36 24.07 6.35 6.86 5.46 8.76 10.12 9.03
Money market fund shares − 0.34 − 0.57 − 0.52 − 0.15 0.10 − 0.17 − 0.22 0.04 − 0.16
Non-MMF investment fund shares 25.04 31.93 24.60 6.50 6.76 5.63 8.98 10.08 9.19
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 22.85 20.09 19.58 3.65 3.79 8.01 2.85 2.87 2.82
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 31.89 31.36 24.63 5.26 5.60 5.60 13.44 10.82 5.37
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 36.84 30.85 20.63 5.14 5.40 1.63 7.64 4.32 6.73
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 2 − 34.45 − 16.59 − 9.32 − 1.20 − 3.26 − 22.50 16.16 − 6.24 1.94
Total 161.81 191.36 200.53 49.42 43.31 46.75 61.87 52.43 47.04
External financing
Loans 20.59 38.20 47.23 15.82 15.98 9.44 7.86 16.60 18.52
short-term loans − 1.98 − 3.17 − 4.31 − 0.91 − 0.93 − 2.05 − 0.35 − 0.34 − 1.09
long-term loans 22.57 41.36 51.53 16.73 16.92 11.49 8.22 16.94 19.62
Memo item
Mortage loans 24.87 35.63 41.69 12.13 14.30 11.00 6.08 13.28 15.80
Consumer loans 1.21 5.44 9.78 3.93 2.86 0.88 2.41 3.25 3.40
Entrepreneurial loans − 5.49 − 2.88 − 4.24 − 0.24 − 1.17 − 2.44 − 0.62 0.07 − 0.68
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 18.87 39.35 42.87 13.81 15.74 8.08 7.10 15.54 16.93
Loans from other financial institutions 1.72 − 1.16 4.36 2.01 0.25 1.37 0.77 1.06 1.59
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 0.78 − 1.14 − 0.72 − 0.13 − 0.13 − 0.44 0.11 0.07 0.02
Total 21.37 37.06 46.51 15.69 15.85 9.01 7.97 16.67 18.54
1Includingunlistedshares.2Includingaccumulatedinterest-bearingsurplusshares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
57
IX Financial accounts
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2016 2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Financial assets
Currency and deposits 1,998.1 2,094.8 2,208.9 2,132.7 2,157.6 2,208.9 2,221.9 2,252.1 2,270.1
Currency 127.7 153.2 174.5 161.1 168.2 174.5 178.1 183.7 186.2
Deposits 1,870.4 1,941.6 2,034.4 1,971.6 1,989.5 2,034.4 2,043.8 2,068.4 2,084.0
Transferable deposits 981.4 1,082.4 1,188.0 1,117.9 1,141.5 1,188.0 1,201.2 1,231.2 1,251.8
Time deposits 256.4 246.8 248.7 250.4 248.7 248.7 247.9 245.6 243.1
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 632.7 612.4 597.7 603.4 599.3 597.7 594.7 591.7 589.1
Debt securities 162.2 139.8 127.4 133.5 130.6 127.4 126.7 125.4 123.6
short-term debt securities 2.1 2.9 2.7 2.3 2.4 2.7 3.1 3.2 2.9
long-term debt securities 160.1 136.9 124.7 131.2 128.3 124.7 123.6 122.2 120.7
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 102.4 89.4 85.6 87.8 87.1 85.6 86.1 86.2 85.1
Non-financial corporations 14.1 13.4 13.9 13.1 14.1 13.9 13.3 13.0 12.9
Financial corporations 78.7 69.5 66.7 69.0 67.8 66.7 68.2 68.9 68.1
General government 9.6 6.5 5.0 5.7 5.2 5.0 4.6 4.3 4.1
Debt securities of the rest of the world 59.8 50.3 41.8 45.7 43.5 41.8 40.6 39.3 38.5
Equity and investment fund shares 951.4 1,040.7 1,107.7 1,028.6 1,068.8 1,107.7 1,155.5 1,158.1 1,192.9
Equity 508.9 555.9 589.9 540.8 563.7 589.9 614.6 610.9 632.2
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 169.7 188.9 200.8 174.6 187.9 200.8 213.0 211.1 223.7
Non-financial corporations 142.1 158.7 169.8 148.6 160.6 169.8 180.4 177.5 188.4
Financial corporations 27.6 30.3 31.0 26.0 27.3 31.0 32.6 33.6 35.4
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 64.0 74.8 86.8 76.8 80.7 86.8 93.1 92.7 96.5
Other equity 1 275.3 292.2 302.4 289.4 295.1 302.4 308.5 307.1 311.9
Investment fund shares 442.5 484.8 517.8 487.8 505.1 517.8 540.9 547.2 560.7
Money market fund shares 4.0 3.4 2.8 3.0 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.6
Non-MMF investment fund shares 438.5 481.4 515.0 484.7 502.1 515.0 538.2 544.4 558.1
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 307.2 324.3 339.9 329.9 332.8 339.9 342.7 345.6 348.4
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 885.6 919.5 947.8 935.0 941.4 947.8 961.3 972.1 977.5
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 752.1 786.6 811.3 795.3 800.4 811.3 818.9 823.2 830.0
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 2 35.8 37.1 35.6 36.6 36.2 35.6 35.8 36.2 36.2
Total 5,092.5 5,342.8 5,578.5 5,391.5 5,467.9 5,578.5 5,662.8 5,712.6 5,778.6
Liabilities
Loans 1,570.5 1,606.6 1,654.5 1,628.8 1,645.0 1,654.5 1,662.3 1,680.2 1,698.7
short-term loans 64.6 60.9 56.6 59.6 58.6 56.6 56.3 55.9 54.8
long-term loans 1,505.9 1,545.8 1,597.8 1,569.2 1,586.3 1,597.8 1,606.1 1,624.3 1,643.9
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,118.0 1,153.8 1,195.6 1,170.3 1,184.6 1,195.6 1,201.7 1,218.0 1,234.4
Consumer loans 188.9 191.9 201.8 197.8 200.9 201.8 204.2 207.4 210.6
Entrepreneurial loans 263.6 260.9 257.0 260.7 259.5 257.0 256.4 254.8 253.8
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,477.6 1,514.9 1,558.3 1,534.3 1,550.2 1,558.3 1,565.4 1,582.3 1,599.2
Loans from other financial institutions 92.9 91.8 96.1 94.5 94.8 96.1 96.9 98.0 99.6
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 16.5 15.1 14.9 15.8 16.0 14.9 16.0 15.6 15.9
Total 1,587.0 1,621.7 1,669.4 1,644.6 1,661.0 1,669.4 1,678.3 1,695.8 1,714.6
1Includingunlistedshares.2Includingaccumulatedinterest-bearingsurplusshares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
58
X Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 − 4.0 − 7.4 − 2.5 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2014 p + 9.5 + 8.7 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
2015 p + 19.4 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 25.7 + 7.4 + 4.9 + 5.2 + 8.2 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 pe + 38.4 + 3.1 + 15.6 + 9.9 + 9.8 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3
2 0 1 5 H1 p + 12.5 + 1.5 + 3.5 + 4.6 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.2
H2 p + 6.9 + 8.2 + 0.4 − 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
2 0 1 6 H1 p + 17.5 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 6.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4
H2 p + 8.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1
2 0 1 7 H1 pe + 21.2 − 1.5 + 9.3 + 6.4 + 7.0 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2011 2,125.0 1,344.1 653.8 143.5 1.3 78.6 49.7 24.2 5.3 0.0
2012 2,202.2 1,387.9 683.5 147.5 1.2 79.8 50.3 24.8 5.3 0.0
2013 2,186.6 1,390.4 661.7 150.6 1.3 77.4 49.2 23.4 5.3 0.0
2014 p 2,187.0 1,396.5 655.0 152.0 1.4 74.6 47.6 22.3 5.2 0.0
2015 p 2,156.6 1,372.6 651.3 152.2 1.4 70.9 45.1 21.4 5.0 0.0
2016 p 2,140.0 1,366.8 634.0 153.4 1.1 68.1 43.5 20.2 4.9 0.0
2 0 1 6 Q1 p 2,164.8 1,382.5 644.2 154.4 1.2 70.6 45.1 21.0 5.0 0.0
Q2 p 2,168.1 1,391.1 640.6 154.0 1.1 69.9 44.8 20.7 5.0 0.0
Q3 p 2,161.3 1,381.1 640.8 154.8 1.0 69.2 44.2 20.5 5.0 0.0
Q4 p 2,140.0 1,366.8 634.0 153.4 1.1 68.1 43.5 20.2 4.9 0.0
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 2,113.2 1,350.9 624.0 152.1 1.2 66.5 42.5 19.6 4.8 0.0
Q2 p 2,108.0 1,353.5 617.8 151.5 0.9 65.9 42.3 19.3 4.7 0.0
Q3 p 2,102.1 1,352.8 616.7 149.8 0.8 65.1 41.9 19.1 4.6 0.0
Sources:FederalStatisticalOfficeandBundesbankcalculations.1Thedeficit/surplus thefirsthalfoftheyear.Therefore,the2017half-yearfiguresarenotdirectlycompar-
inaccordancewithESA2010correspondstotheMaastrichtdefinition.Inconnection ablewiththeannualfigures.2QuarterlyGDPratiosarebasedonthenationaloutput
withthepublicationofthe2017annualfigures,norevisedfigureswerereleasedfor of the four preceding quarters.
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees consumption formation Interest Other surplus burden 1
€ billion
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 124.1 61.4 67.5 113.1 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 1,259.0 651.0 465.0 143.0 1,263.0 666.4 217.8 133.0 60.1 55.5 130.2 − 4.0 1,120.3
2014 p 1,308.3 674.1 482.0 152.3 1,298.8 691.0 224.0 137.4 60.0 51.2 135.2 + 9.5 1,160.7
2015 p 1,354.3 704.3 500.8 149.2 1,334.9 722.3 229.2 142.2 64.2 46.4 130.6 + 19.4 1,212.2
2016 p 1,414.2 739.0 523.8 151.5 1,388.6 754.9 236.5 150.0 66.8 41.6 138.8 + 25.7 1,269.6
2017 pe 1,474.1 773.3 548.0 152.8 1,435.7 783.9 246.6 154.4 70.2 38.9 141.8 + 38.4 1,328.2
as a percentage of GDP
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.3 2.5 4.2 − 1.0 38.7
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.3
2013 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.1 39.6
2014 p 44.6 23.0 16.4 5.2 44.3 23.6 7.6 4.7 2.0 1.7 4.6 + 0.3 39.6
2015 p 44.5 23.1 16.5 4.9 43.9 23.7 7.5 4.7 2.1 1.5 4.3 + 0.6 39.8
2016 p 45.0 23.5 16.7 4.8 44.2 24.0 7.5 4.8 2.1 1.3 4.4 + 0.8 40.4
2017 pe 45.2 23.7 16.8 4.7 44.0 24.0 7.6 4.7 2.2 1.2 4.3 + 1.2 40.7
Percentage growth rates
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.1 + 3.3 + 5.7 − 19.2 . + 6.0
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.6
2013 + 3.1 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 3.2 + 2.6 + 5.1 − 2.2 − 12.0 + 15.4 . + 3.4
2014 p + 3.9 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 6.4 + 2.8 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.3 − 0.3 − 7.7 + 3.9 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.5 + 4.5 + 3.9 − 2.0 + 2.8 + 4.5 + 2.3 + 3.5 + 7.0 − 9.3 − 3.4 . + 4.4
2016 p + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 3.2 + 5.5 + 4.1 − 10.4 + 6.2 . + 4.7
2017 pe + 4.2 + 4.6 + 4.6 + 0.9 + 3.4 + 3.8 + 4.3 + 2.9 + 5.1 − 6.5 + 2.2 . + 4.6
Source:FederalStatisticalOffice.*FiguresinaccordancewithESA2010.1Taxesand lution Fund established at the European level.
socialcontributionspluscustomsdutiesandleviesfrombankstotheSingleReso-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
59
X Public finances in Germany
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government 1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cial
transac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total 4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.2 +15.1 1,104.2 1,111.1 − 6.9
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 +17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.3 1,236.7 + 8.6
2015 p 829.5 673.3 10.4 804.1 244.1 302.6 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,300.8 1,273.4 + 27.4
2016 p 862.1 705.8 9.0 843.3 251.3 320.5 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 18.8 601.5 594.6 + 6.9 1,354.7 1,329.0 + 25.7
2 0 1 5 Q1 p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
Q2 p 208.4 167.7 1.5 185.2 59.5 72.8 7.2 9.1 3.0 + 23.1 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 325.0 301.8 + 23.2
Q3 p 202.8 166.5 3.8 198.0 62.3 71.3 16.6 11.6 3.4 + 4.7 141.2 143.4 − 2.1 318.1 315.5 + 2.6
Q4 p 221.5 178.2 2.6 219.3 63.4 77.4 7.3 17.3 3.5 + 2.2 152.7 145.3 + 7.4 348.4 338.8 + 9.6
2 0 1 6 Q1 p 205.7 169.9 1.4 206.5 60.2 81.5 17.7 8.4 2.2 − 0.8 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 321.8 326.2 − 4.5
Q2 p 216.7 176.6 2.4 194.1 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 338.5 314.2 + 24.3
Q3 p 207.1 169.3 2.9 210.9 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 328.2 333.4 − 5.2
Q4 p 233.1 189.2 2.1 232.3 68.0 82.3 7.7 17.2 4.8 + 0.9 160.1 152.2 + 7.8 365.8 357.1 + 8.7
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 215.6 180.4 0.9 200.9 63.1 80.9 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 14.6 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 337.5 327.7 + 9.8
Q2 p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.7 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.8 + 13.4
Q3 p 292.6 180.4 3.5 221.0 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 71.6 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 419.1 348.4 + 70.6
Source:BundesbankcalculationsbasedonFederalStatisticalOfficedata.1Annualfig- latterareallprovisional.Thequarterlyfiguresforsomeinsurancesectorsareesti-
uresbasedonthecalculationsoftheFederalStatisticalOffice.Bundesbanksupple- mated.3Thedevelopmentofthetypesofexpenditurerecordedhereisinfluencedin
mentaryestimationsforthereportingyearsafter2011thatarenotyetavailable.The partbystatisticalchangeovers.4Includingdiscrepanciesinclearingtransactionsbe-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tweencentral,stateandlocalgovernment.5Ontherevenueside,thiscontainspro-
generalgovernmentsectorasdefinedinthenationalaccountsbutarenotyetin- ceedsbookedasdisposalsofequityinterestsandasloanrepayments.Ontheexpend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012, also including the bad bank itureside,thiscontainstheacquisitionofequityinterestsandloansgranted.6In-
FMSW.2Theannualfiguresdonottallywiththesumofthequarterlyfigures,asthe cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government 2,3 Local government 3
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2 0 1 5 Q1 p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
Q2 p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 58.1 53.4 + 4.7
Q3 p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 57.5 56.3 + 1.2
Q4 p 91.5 83.4 + 8.1 94.1 96.8 − 2.8 69.0 65.9 + 3.0
2 0 1 6 Q1 p 81.1 83.6 − 2.5 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
Q2 p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
Q3 p 85.2 88.6 − 3.5 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
Q4 p 90.9 92.5 − 1.6 104.3 104.4 − 0.0 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 88.2 84.6 + 3.5 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
Q2 p 81.5 80.1 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
Q3 p 88.6 93.6 − 5.0 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 136.4 66.6 +69.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1 Any assignedtothegeneralgovernmentsector.Annualfiguresuptoandincluding2011:
amountsoftheBundesbank’sprofitdistributionexceedingthereferencevaluethat excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special purpose
wereusedtorepaypartsofthedebtofcentralgovernment’sspecialfundsarenotin- associationsbasedonthecalculationsoftheFederalStatisticalOffice.Forthefollow-
cludedhere.2Includingthelocalauthoritylevelofthecity-statesBerlin,Bremenand ing years, Bundesbank supplementary estimations.
Hamburg. 3 Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
60
X Public finances in Germany
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,791 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,679 + 148 27,836
2017 ... 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 ... ... 27,390
2 0 1 6 Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
Q2 176,879 152,042 82,184 64,684 5,175 25,205 − 368 6,512
Q3 169,374 145,700 76,638 61,573 7,489 23,839 − 165 7,584
Q4 189,180 164,382 83,919 72,608 7,855 32,513 − 7,715 7,253
2 0 1 7 Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
Q2 177,090 149,915 76,391 66,605 6,918 27,631 − 456 6,825
Q3 180,407 155,250 82,576 66,718 5,957 25,517 − 361 7,467
Q4 ... 170,139 92,507 71,019 6,613 ... ... 6,493
2 0 1 6 Dec . 81,084 40,392 38,055 2,637 . . 2,945
2 0 1 7 Dec . 84,116 47,025 34,852 2,239 . . 2,179
Sources:FederalMinistryofFinance,FederalStatisticalOfficeandBundesbankcalcu- governmenttaxrevenue.3Includinglocalgovernmenttaxesinthecity-statesBerlin,
lations. 1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, BremenandHamburg.Includingrevenuefromoffshorewindfarms.4Differencebe-
regionalisationfunds(localpublictransport),compensationforthetransferofmotor tweenlocalgovernment’sshareinthejointtaxesreceivedbythestategovernment
vehicletaxtocentralgovernmentandconsolidationassistance,whichcentralgovern- cashofficesintheperiodinquestion(seeTableX.6)andtheamountspassedonto
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these localgovernmentinthesameperiod.5Volumeofthepositionsmentionedunder
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2 Custom footnote 1.
dutiesandsharesinVATandgrossnationalincomeaccruingtotheEUfromcentral
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2 0 1 6 Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
Q2 162,096 74,489 45,311 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,054
Q3 155,524 68,137 44,656 11,898 5,546 6,037 53,906 40,877 13,029 2,046 24,857 5,263 1,316 9,824
Q4 175,797 78,076 52,275 14,422 6,134 5,245 56,071 42,593 13,478 3,656 31,247 5,454 1,293 11,415
2 0 1 7 Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121
Q3 165,923 75,218 47,253 12,720 6,034 9,211 56,481 42,571 13,911 2,214 25,114 5,580 1,315 10,673
Q4 182,288 82,077 54,707 14,873 6,843 5,654 58,128 43,846 14,282 3,868 31,587 5,384 1,243 12,149
2 0 1 6 Dec 87,376 49,346 23,923 14,815 7,482 3,126 18,481 13,896 4,585 1,746 15,365 2,004 434 6,292
2 0 1 7 Dec 90,693 51,866 24,744 15,455 8,623 3,044 19,159 14,174 4,986 1,852 15,569 1,825 422 6,577
Source:FederalMinistryofFinanceandBundesbankcalculations.1Thistotal,unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
thatinTableX.5,doesnotincludethereceiptsfromtheequalisationofburdens plans. 4 Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies,localbusinesstax(lesslocalbusinesstaxtransferstocentralandstategovern- taxesonearnings.5Theallocationofrevenuetocentral,stateandlocalgovern-
ment),realpropertytaxesandotherlocalgovernmenttaxes,orthebalanceofun- ment,whichisadjustedatmoreregularintervals,isregulatedinsection1oftheRev-
transferred tax shares. 2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local enueAdjustmentAct.Respectivepercentageshareofcentral,stateandlocalgovern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2017: 50.7:46.6:2.7. The EU share is deducted from central
ationtaxandnon-assessedtaxesonearnings50:50:-,finalwithholdingtaxoninter- government’sshare.6Respectivepercentageshareofcentralandstategovernment
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3 After for 2017: 22.6:77.4. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
61
X Public finances in Germany
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Spirits land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax 2 taxes
2011 40,036 12,781 14,414 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 6,366 4,246 1,420 1,064 52,984 40,424 11,674
2012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,017
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,377
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,313 50,097 13,654
2017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 −4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 ... ... ...
2 0 1 6 Q1 4,620 3,979 2,722 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 3,217 1,668 451 336 15,639 12,090 3,121
Q2 9,860 4,470 4,139 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 2,952 2,283 451 267 16,740 12,635 3,715
Q3 10,149 3,938 3,010 2,510 2,198 1,641 499 911 3,050 1,501 446 266 15,896 11,699 3,794
Q4 15,461 4,468 4,315 2,038 1,899 1,728 532 806 3,189 1,554 460 251 17,039 13,673 3,024
2 0 1 7 Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 −5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 18,113 13,881 3,832
Q3 10,497 4,144 3,867 2,669 2,132 1,628 502 −324 3,394 1,497 417 273 16,698 12,443 3,824
Q4 15,622 4,677 4,261 2,070 1,906 1,786 538 727 3,257 1,438 456 233 ... ... ...
2 0 1 6 Dec 8,385 2,736 1,922 609 600 623 199 292 1,171 590 151 92 . . .
2 0 1 7 Dec 8,514 2,851 1,874 659 565 655 192 260 1,080 502 149 93 . . .
Sources:FederalMinistryofFinance,FederalStatisticalOfficeandBundesbankcalcu-
lations.1Forthesumtotal,seeTableX.6.2Includingrevenuefromoffshorewind
farms.
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,4
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits 5 Securities loans 6 estate assets
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,379
2012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,315
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,250
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,147
2017 p 299,134 211,411 86,875 298,927 255,601 18,022 + 207 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2 0 1 5 Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254
Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259
Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2 0 1 6 Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220
Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213
Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2 0 1 7 Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136
Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115
Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
Sources:FederalMinistryofLabourandSocialAffairsandGermanpensioninsurance sequently.2Includingfinancialcompensationpayments.Excludinginvestmentspend-
scheme.*ExcludingtheGermanpensioninsuranceschemeforthemining,railway ingandproceeds.3Includingcontributionsforrecipientsofgovernmentcashbene-
andmaritimeindustries.1Thefinalannualfiguresgenerallydifferfromthetotalof fits.4Largelycorrespondstothesustainabilityreserves.Endofyearorquarter.5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
62
X Public finances in Germany
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2 0 1 5 Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −
Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −
Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
2 0 1 6 Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −
Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −
Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −
Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −
Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
Source:FederalEmploymentAgency.*Includingtransferstothecivilservants’pen- encouragejobtake-up,rehabilitation,compensationtop-uppaymentsandpromo-
sion fund. 1 Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2 Un- tion of business start-ups. 5 Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3 Including seasonal short-time amount.6Includingcollectionchargestootherstatutorysocialsecurityfunds,ex-
workingbenefitsandrestructuringshort-timeworkingbenefits,restructuringmea- cludingadministrativeexpenditurewithintheframeworkofthebasicallowancefor
suresandrefundsofsocialsecuritycontributions.4Vocationaltraining,measuresto job seekers.
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment 4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2 0 1 5 Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501
Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996
Q4 55,872 52,085 2,875 54,124 16,553 8,773 8,998 3,449 3,618 2,834 3,102 + 1,747
2 0 1 6 Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615
Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517
Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
2 0 1 7 Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298
Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415
Source:FederalMinistryofHealth.1Thefinalannualfiguresgenerallydifferfrom ment.3Federalgrantandliquidityassistance.4Includingdentures.5Net,ieafter
thetotalofthereportedprovisionalquarterlyfiguresasthelatterarenotrevisedsub- deductingreimbursementsforexpensesforlevyingcontributionsincurredbyother
sequently.Excludingrevenueandexpenditureaspartoftheriskstructurecompen- social insurance funds.
sationscheme.2Includingcontributionsfromsubsidisedlow-paidpart-timeemploy-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
63
X Public finances in Germany
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,235
2 0 1 5 Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472
Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236
Q4 8,198 8,180 7,571 966 2,722 1,682 240 295 + 626
2 0 1 6 Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259
Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147
Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
2 0 1 7 Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400
Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999
Source:FederalMinistryofHealth.*Includingtransferstothelong-termcareprovi- includingspecialcontributionsforchildlesspersons(0.25%ofincomesubjecttoinsur-
dentfund.1Thefinalannualfiguresgenerallydifferfromthetotalofthereported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers.
provisionalquarterlyfiguresasthelatterarenotrevisedsubsequently.2Since2005
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing 1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Other
market market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross 2 Net loans deposits 3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs pe porations pe creditors 1 creditors pe
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,125,032 4,440 613,186 206,631 53,974 1,246,801
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,202,242 4,440 637,133 199,132 60,140 1,301,397
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,186,643 4,440 644,067 190,555 43,969 1,303,612
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,186,954 4,440 613,794 190,130 44,915 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,156,645 77,220 601,629 186,661 44,977 1,246,158
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 p 2,140,009 196,320 578,865 179,755 41,352 1,143,717
2017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897
2 0 1 5 Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2 0 1 5 Q1 2,192,594 12,335 622,160 189,048 44,414 1,324,637
Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930 Q2 2,158,420 34,310 602,743 187,280 44,792 1,289,295
Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091 Q3 2,160,212 54,990 607,882 188,165 44,785 1,264,390
Q4 + 32,541 − 5,929 + 2,344 − 142 Q4 2,156,645 77,220 601,629 186,661 44,977 1,246,158
2 0 1 6 Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2 0 1 6 Q1 p 2,164,801 100,051 616,144 183,160 41,334 1,224,112
Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084 Q2 p 2,168,052 133,297 604,796 181,372 39,529 1,209,058
Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864 Q3 p 2,161,325 163,636 591,243 179,359 38,827 1,188,260
Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333 Q4 p 2,140,009 196,320 578,865 179,755 41,352 1,143,717
2 0 1 7 Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2 0 1 7 Q1 p 2,113,167 230,505 564,829 178,219 39,361 1,100,254
Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289 Q2 p 2,107,983 255,879 551,469 176,810 38,670 1,085,155
Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941 Q3 p 2,102,149 280,953 540,154 176,646 38,965 1,065,431
Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95
Source: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical
1 Including the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund, the In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual.
vestment and Repayment Fund and the Restructuring Fund
for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 3 Ex-
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes-
bank.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
64
X Public finances in Germany
14 Central, state and local government: debt by category*
€ million
Loans from non-banks Old debt
Direct
Treasury Five-year lending
Period discount Federal Federal Federal by credit Social Equal-
(End of year paper Treasury notes savings bonds institu- security isation
or quarter) Total (Bubills) 1 notes 2,3 (Bobls) 2 notes (Bunds) 2 Day-bond tions 4 funds Other 4 claims 5 Other 5,6
Central, state and local government
2011 1,751,730 60,272 414,250 214,211 8,208 644,894 2,154 289,426 102 113,773 4,440 2
2012 1,791,656 57,172 417,470 234,355 6,818 667,198 1,725 288,133 70 114,272 4,440 2
2013 1,815,991 50,129 423,442 245,372 4,488 684,951 1,397 289,725 41 112,005 4,440 2
2014 1,817,244 27,951 429,633 259,186 2,375 703,812 1,187 275,582 42 113,035 4,440 2
2 0 1 5 Q1 1,821,383 28,317 425,257 250,432 2,271 707,905 1,155 289,247 42 112,315 4,440 2
Q2 1,806,631 29,575 421,582 243,299 2,031 722,562 1,133 269,992 42 111,974 4,440 2
Q3 1,810,827 26,213 424,534 256,613 1,677 715,763 1,106 268,390 42 112,046 4,440 2
Q4 1,804,522 19,431 429,818 246,940 1,305 725,285 1,070 261,189 59 114,983 4,440 2
2 0 1 6 Q1 1,813,655 21,804 427,090 240,281 1,205 730,533 1,051 275,378 100 111,771 4,440 2
Q2 1,812,131 29,543 427,813 235,389 1,108 727,922 1,033 275,038 40 109,804 4,440 2
Q3 1,804,296 31,237 433,493 245,945 922 717,358 1,021 260,003 39 109,835 4,440 2
Q4 1,786,609 24,509 430,701 236,136 737 724,528 1,010 254,273 21 110,251 4,440 2
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 1,771,555 16,098 424,930 227,906 619 730,531 995 257,179 25 108,830 4,440 2
Q2 p 1,771,333 15,759 422,682 219,668 487 745,792 986 252,719 32 108,766 4,440 2
Q3 p 1,771,735 13,206 420,721 229,519 398 743,727 977 249,827 27 108,892 4,440 2
Central government7,8
2011 1,081,304 58,297 130,648 214,211 8,208 644,513 2,154 9,382 − 9,450 4,440 2
2012 1,113,032 56,222 117,719 234,355 6,818 666,775 1,725 16,193 − 8,784 4,440 2
2013 1,132,505 50,004 110,029 245,372 4,488 684,305 1,397 23,817 − 8,652 4,440 2
2014 1,130,128 27,951 103,445 259,186 2,375 702,515 1,187 20,509 − 8,518 4,440 2
2 0 1 5 Q1 1,127,042 26,495 102,203 250,432 2,271 706,308 1,155 25,289 − 8,448 4,440 2
Q2 1,121,637 27,535 101,090 243,299 2,031 720,715 1,133 13,021 − 8,373 4,440 2
Q3 1,119,670 24,157 98,087 256,613 1,677 713,766 1,106 11,776 − 8,046 4,440 2
Q4 1,113,741 18,536 96,389 246,940 1,305 723,238 1,070 13,825 − 7,996 4,440 2
2 0 1 6 Q1 1,124,391 20,526 98,232 240,281 1,205 728,457 1,051 22,533 − 7,664 4,440 2
Q2 1,128,595 28,369 99,417 235,389 1,108 725,469 1,033 26,236 − 7,133 4,440 2
Q3 1,114,708 30,626 102,053 245,945 922 714,903 1,021 7,794 − 7,002 4,440 2
Q4 1,102,410 23,609 95,727 236,136 737 722,124 1,010 11,761 − 6,866 4,440 2
2 0 1 7 Q1 1,096,711 14,910 95,148 227,906 619 727,887 995 17,829 − 6,976 4,440 2
Q2 1,101,991 14,431 93,795 219,668 487 743,120 986 18,076 − 6,986 4,440 2
Q3 1,105,486 11,851 91,893 229,519 398 741,039 977 18,420 − 6,949 4,440 2
Q4 1,106,941 10,037 91,013 218,389 289 752,052 966 22,988 − 6,767 4,440 2
State government
2011 536,696 1,975 283,601 . . . . 150,631 62 100,426 . 1
2012 541,237 950 299,751 . . . . 137,068 51 103,416 . 1
2013 545,788 125 313,412 . . . . 131,302 30 100,918 . 1
2014 544,612 0 326,188 . . . . 117,451 5 100,967 . 1
2 0 1 5 Q1 546,975 1,821 323,055 . . . . 121,130 5 100,964 . 1
Q2 537,947 2,040 320,492 . . . . 114,816 5 100,593 . 1
Q3 543,477 2,056 326,447 . . . . 114,081 5 100,887 . 1
Q4 543,003 895 333,429 . . . . 106,720 5 101,953 . 1
2 0 1 6 Q1 541,653 1,278 328,858 . . . . 113,286 5 98,225 . 1
Q2 536,101 1,173 328,397 . . . . 109,680 6 96,845 . 1
Q3 541,288 611 331,441 . . . . 112,558 6 96,672 . 1
Q4 537,009 900 334,975 . . . . 103,071 6 98,056 . 1
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 529,520 1,188 329,782 . . . . 101,940 3 96,607 . 1
Q2 p 524,502 1,327 328,887 . . . . 97,768 3 96,516 . 1
Q3 p 523,024 1,355 328,828 . . . . 96,031 3 96,806 . 1
Local government9
2011 133,730 . − . . 381 . 129,412 40 3,897 . .
2012 137,386 . − . . 423 . 134,872 18 2,073 . .
2013 137,698 . − . . 646 . 134,606 11 2,435 . .
2014 142,505 . − . . 1,297 . 137,622 37 3,549 . .
2 0 1 5 Q1 147,366 . − . . 1,597 . 142,829 37 2,903 . .
Q2 147,047 . − . . 1,847 . 142,155 37 3,008 . .
Q3 147,680 . − . . 1,997 . 142,534 37 3,112 . .
Q4 147,778 . − . . 2,047 . 140,644 54 5,033 . .
2 0 1 6 Q1 147,611 . − . . 2,076 . 139,559 94 5,882 . .
Q2 147,435 . − . . 2,453 . 139,122 34 5,826 . .
Q3 148,300 . − . . 2,455 . 139,651 33 6,161 . .
Q4 147,190 . − . . 2,404 . 139,441 15 5,330 . .
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 145,325 . − . . 2,645 . 137,410 23 5,247 . .
Q2 p 144,840 . − . . 2,672 . 136,875 29 5,265 . .
Q3 p 143,225 . − . . 2,687 . 135,376 24 5,138 . .
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical itiesarisingfromhousingconstructionbytheformerGDR’sarmedforcesandfrom
Office.*Excludingdirectintergovernmentalborrowing.1IncludingTreasuryfinan- housingconstructioninconnectionwiththereturnofthetroopsoftheformerUSSR
cingpaper.2Excludingissuers’holdingsoftheirownsecurities.3Treasurynotes stationedineasternGermanytotheirhomecountry;excludingdebtsecuritiesinown
issued by state government include long-term notes. 4 Mainly loans against bor- portfolios.7Incontrasttothecapitalmarketstatistics,thedebtincurredthroughthe
rowers’notesandcashadvances.Includingloansraisedabroad.Otherloansfrom jointissuanceofFederalsecuritiesisrecordedhereundercentralgovernmentandits
non-banks,includingloansfrompublicsupplementarypensionfundsandliabilities specialfundsinaccordancewiththeagreedallocationratios.8IncludingtheFinan-
arisingfromtheinvestmentassistancelevy.5Excludingoffsetsagainstoutstanding cial Market Stabilisation Fund, the Investment and Repayment Fund and the Re-
claims.6Olddebtmainlydenominatedinforeigncurrency,inaccordancewiththe structuringFundforCreditInstitutions.9Includingdebtofmunicipalspecialpurpose
LondonDebtsAgreement,oldliabilitiesarisingfromhousingconstructionandliabil- associations. Data other than year-end figures have been estimated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
65
XI Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2016 2017
2015 2016 2017 2015 2016 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 112.8 114.9 117.7 2.2 1.9 2.5 1.1 4.5 1.2 0.6 4.5 − 0.4 2.8
Construction 102.9 104.9 107.2 0.0 1.9 2.2 1.4 5.3 1.7 − 0.4 6.4 0.6 2.7
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and restaurant
services 108.5 111.1 114.2 0.7 2.4 2.9 1.1 4.2 1.6 2.5 4.3 1.6 3.1
Information and communication 128.5 132.0 137.2 2.6 2.7 3.9 3.1 2.7 3.5 1.6 4.5 3.8 3.6
Financial and insurance
activities 104.3 107.4 107.5 − 0.7 3.0 0.0 2.1 3.7 4.1 2.3 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.6
Real estate activities 103.3 103.9 105.3 0.2 0.6 1.4 0.5 0.9 0.4 0.5 1.7 0.8 1.8
Business services 1 108.1 110.0 112.8 1.9 1.8 2.5 1.0 3.1 1.7 1.5 3.9 0.9 2.7
Public services, education and
health 105.3 107.7 109.9 2.2 2.2 2.1 1.7 2.6 2.3 2.4 2.5 1.8 2.1
Other services 99.3 100.2 101.4 0.7 0.9 1.2 − 0.4 1.9 1.2 1.0 2.5 0.0 1.1
Gross value added 108.3 110.4 112.9 1.5 1.9 2.2 1.2 3.3 1.7 1.4 3.5 0.8 2.5
Gross domestic product 2 108.6 110.7 113.1 1.7 1.9 2.2 1.5 3.3 1.7 1.3 3.4 1.0 2.3
II Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 106.1 108.3 110.5 1.7 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.9 1.7 1.7 2.3 2.2 2.1
Government consumption 108.0 111.9 113.5 2.9 3.7 1.4 4.1 4.3 3.4 3.0 1.7 1.1 0.9
Machinery and equipment 111.1 113.4 117.4 3.9 2.2 3.5 4.7 6.4 1.4 − 2.6 3.5 1.5 4.6
Premises 108.3 111.3 114.2 − 1.4 2.7 2.6 3.1 5.4 2.1 0.4 6.4 2.0 3.2
Other investment 4 117.3 123.8 128.0 5.5 5.5 3.5 6.8 6.8 6.1 2.6 3.9 3.4 3.2
Changes in inventories 5, 6 . . . − 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 0.2 0.4 − 0.2 0.3 0.2
Domestic demand 106.1 108.7 111.1 1.6 2.4 2.2 2.2 3.2 2.4 1.9 2.5 2.3 2.4
Net exports 6 . . . 0.2 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.5 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 1.1 − 1.1 0.1
Exports 124.7 128.0 134.0 5.2 2.6 4.7 1.7 4.9 1.3 2.6 7.0 1.4 4.8
Imports 120.5 125.2 131.7 5.6 3.9 5.2 3.4 5.1 2.8 4.3 5.4 4.5 5.5
Gross domestic product 2 108.6 110.7 113.1 1.7 1.9 2.2 1.5 3.3 1.7 1.3 3.4 1.0 2.3
At current prices (€ billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,630.5 1,674.4 1,737.7 2.3 2.7 3.8 2.6 3.2 2.2 2.8 4.2 3.8 3.9
Government consumption 587.1 615.4 638.1 4.1 4.8 3.7 5.5 5.4 4.5 4.1 3.6 3.3 3.4
Machinery and equipment 200.8 205.8 213.4 4.7 2.5 3.7 5.2 6.7 1.7 − 2.3 3.7 1.8 4.8
Premises 291.0 304.5 322.0 0.4 4.6 5.8 4.6 7.3 4.1 2.5 9.2 5.1 6.6
Other investment 4 112.5 119.7 125.4 7.0 6.4 4.8 7.8 7.4 6.9 3.7 4.9 4.8 4.7
Changes in inventories 5 − 21.5 − 26.4 − 21.4 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,800.3 2,893.4 3,015.2 2.6 3.3 4.2 3.0 3.9 3.2 3.2 4.3 4.4 4.4
Net exports 243.3 250.6 248.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,426.7 1,450.0 1,542.6 6.4 1.6 6.4 1.2 3.1 − 0.0 2.3 8.7 3.5 6.4
Imports 1,183.4 1,199.4 1,294.5 4.1 1.4 7.9 0.4 1.0 0.2 3.9 9.6 8.0 7.2
Gross domestic product 2 3,043.7 3,144.1 3,263.4 3.8 3.3 3.8 3.1 4.7 2.9 2.5 4.3 2.6 4.3
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 106.2 106.9 108.7 0.6 0.6 1.7 0.6 0.3 0.5 1.1 1.8 1.6 1.7
Gross domestic product 108.7 110.1 111.8 2.0 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.3 1.2 1.2 0.9 1.6 1.9
Terms of trade 102.1 103.7 102.7 2.7 1.5 − 1.0 2.5 2.2 1.3 0.2 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.0
VDistribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,542.3 1,600.3 1,668.5 3.9 3.8 4.3 4.2 3.4 3.7 3.9 4.3 4.4 4.4
Entrepreneurial and property
income 722.6 737.7 766.4 3.8 2.1 3.9 0.8 9.5 − 0.2 − 1.2 4.0 − 1.0 6.3
National income 2,264.9 2,338.0 2,434.8 3.8 3.2 4.1 3.0 5.2 2.3 2.5 4.2 2.7 5.1
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,099.8 3,197.2 3,324.1 3.7 3.1 4.0 3.1 4.7 2.4 2.5 4.1 2.9 4.6
Source:FederalStatisticalOffice;figurescomputedinNovember2017.Initialannual inghouseholds.4Intellectualpropertyrights(interalia,computersoftwareandenter-
resultsfor2017:figurescomputedinJanuary2018.1Professional,scientific,techni- tainment,literaryorartisticoriginals)andcultivatedassets.5Includingnetincrease
cal,administrationandsupportserviceactivities.2Grossvalueaddedplustaxeson in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP.
products(nettedwithsubsidiesonproducts).3Includingnon-profitinstitutionsserv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
66
XI Economic conditions in Germany
2 Output in the production sector*
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
basic metals electronic Motor
and and optical vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and electrical and and semi-
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2010=100
% of total 1 100.00 11.24 10.14 78.62 31.02 33.31 2.49 11.80 10.41 10.37 12.17 11.62
Period
2014 108.1 109.5 92.7 109.8 106.2 116.6 100.5 102.2 111.3 108.7 115.1 119.5
2015 108.6 107.0 97.5 110.3 106.1 117.6 102.8 101.9 111.4 109.4 114.8 119.3
2016 109.8 109.6 96.2 111.7 107.3 119.3 105.9 103.0 113.0 111.4 114.8 121.6
2017 x,p 113.7 114.4 96.1 115.8 111.9 123.6 110.8 105.3 118.3 118.3 119.1 125.9
2 0 1 6 Q4 112.9 120.5 101.6 113.3 104.8 124.1 109.6 106.1 111.7 114.1 124.1 117.8
2 0 1 7 Q1 108.4 90.8 101.8 111.7 109.3 117.7 110.0 101.8 115.3 112.9 110.6 125.4
Q2 113.0 118.0 91.4 115.0 112.4 122.4 109.4 102.4 119.2 116.5 117.0 126.2
Q3 114.8 123.0 90.2 116.8 114.1 123.4 109.8 107.1 119.8 121.3 118.3 126.2
Q4 x,p 118.4 125.9 101.0 119.6 111.8 130.8 114.0 109.9 119.0 122.6 130.6 126.0
2 0 1 6 Dec 104.3 115.5 103.1 102.9 90.6 116.7 98.4 97.2 94.6 105.3 130.9 90.1
2 0 1 7 Jan 99.8 68.9 108.2 103.1 104.3 103.8 102.7 98.2 108.3 106.0 94.9 112.6
Feb 106.1 90.7 97.2 109.5 106.1 116.8 108.8 98.0 112.4 109.5 110.1 126.0
Mar 119.2 112.8 100.0 122.6 117.5 132.4 118.5 109.3 125.1 123.1 126.7 137.5
Apr 111.7 116.4 93.3 113.4 112.1 119.2 109.3 101.1 117.9 115.0 112.0 127.0
May 111.8 116.5 92.2 113.6 111.3 120.3 107.0 102.4 118.5 113.4 114.2 125.1
June 115.5 121.2 88.8 118.1 113.8 127.7 111.9 103.8 121.1 121.1 124.7 126.5
July 2 115.0 125.7 89.2 116.7 115.3 122.9 104.9 105.6 121.0 120.8 117.1 125.0
Aug 2 109.4 118.3 90.5 110.6 110.0 113.9 101.8 104.8 113.6 115.6 109.3 115.0
Sep 120.1 124.9 90.9 123.2 117.0 133.3 122.7 110.9 124.7 127.6 128.6 138.7
Oct x 118.9 127.5 102.5 119.8 117.0 125.7 117.6 111.3 125.2 120.8 118.5 130.0
Nov x 125.2 129.5 98.8 128.0 119.4 141.0 121.8 115.5 128.4 129.8 133.5 147.3
Dec x,p 111.1 120.7 101.8 110.9 98.9 125.6 102.6 102.8 103.3 117.2 139.9 100.6
Annual percentage change
2014 + 1.6 + 2.9 − 3.8 + 1.9 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.2
2015 + 0.5 − 2.3 + 5.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.1 + 2.4 − 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 3.0 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 1.9
2017 x,p + 3.6 + 4.4 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 4.3 + 3.6 + 4.6 + 2.2 + 4.7 + 6.2 + 3.7 + 3.5
2 0 1 6 Q4 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 4.0 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 1.1
2 0 1 7 Q1 + 1.1 + 2.1 − 0.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 0.9 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 1.3 + 0.2
Q2 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.8 + 2.9 + 5.0 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 6.6 + 3.6 + 1.7
Q3 + 4.3 + 4.3 − 1.7 + 4.9 + 5.4 + 4.9 + 6.6 + 3.0 + 6.3 + 6.9 + 4.6 + 5.8
Q4 x,p + 4.9 + 4.5 − 0.6 + 5.5 + 6.7 + 5.4 + 4.0 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 7.4 + 5.2 + 7.0
2 0 1 6 Dec + 0.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 5.4 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.2
2 0 1 7 Jan − 0.4 − 5.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 1.3 − 1.1 + 3.3 − 1.1 + 1.0 + 4.3 − 0.3 − 2.2
Feb + 1.4 + 4.3 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 2.0 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 0.6
Mar + 2.1 + 5.2 − 2.3 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 2.0 + 3.0 + 2.5 + 3.0 + 4.1 + 0.6 + 1.9
Apr + 2.9 + 7.3 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 4.4 + 1.2 + 3.3 + 7.4 + 1.9 − 1.0
May + 5.0 + 6.6 + 2.6 + 4.9 + 4.0 + 6.6 + 10.1 + 1.3 + 5.5 + 7.5 + 6.5 + 8.1
June + 2.8 + 5.6 + 3.3 + 2.3 + 3.6 + 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 3.3 + 5.1 + 2.6 − 1.5
July 2 + 4.2 + 4.1 − 2.7 + 4.8 + 5.6 + 4.6 + 5.6 + 2.8 + 6.5 + 8.0 + 5.4 + 2.6
Aug 2 + 4.7 + 4.1 − 0.1 + 5.2 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 8.2 + 2.3 + 6.2 + 6.8 + 3.3 + 9.9
Sep + 4.1 + 4.5 − 2.4 + 4.7 + 4.9 + 4.5 + 6.1 + 3.7 + 6.3 + 6.1 + 4.9 + 5.3
Oct x + 2.8 + 4.2 + 3.0 + 2.6 + 4.6 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 5.6 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 1.7
Nov x + 5.5 + 4.8 − 3.3 + 6.5 + 6.8 + 7.1 + 5.1 + 3.8 + 5.4 + 7.8 + 4.9 + 12.4
Dec x,p + 6.5 + 4.5 − 1.3 + 7.8 + 9.2 + 7.6 + 4.3 + 5.8 + 9.2 + 11.3 + 6.9 + 11.7
Sourceoftheunadjustedfigures:FederalStatisticalOffice.*Forexplanatorynotes, achangeinholidaydates.xProvisional;estimatedandadjustedinadvancebythe
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to FederalStatisticalOfficetotheresultsoftheQuarterlyProductionSurveyandthe
II.12.oUsingtheCensusX-12-ARIMAmethod,version0.2.8.1Shareofgrossvalue Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively.
addedatfactorcostoftheproductionsectorinthebaseyear2010.2Influencedby

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
67
XI Economic conditions in Germany
3 Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
Total
2013 109.4 + 2.3 103.2 − 1.0 114.3 + 4.7 105.9 + 2.0 101.8 + 2.3 107.4 + 2.0
2014 112.4 + 2.7 103.9 + 0.7 118.6 + 3.8 110.8 + 4.6 102.4 + 0.6 113.7 + 5.9
2015 114.8 + 2.1 103.0 − 0.9 123.2 + 3.9 114.3 + 3.2 106.7 + 4.2 116.9 + 2.8
2016 115.7 + 0.8 102.1 − 0.9 125.3 + 1.7 115.3 + 0.9 112.6 + 5.5 116.2 − 0.6
2017 p 123.8 + 7.0 112.7 + 10.4 132.0 + 5.3 121.6 + 5.5 125.2 + 11.2 120.3 + 3.5
2 0 1 6 Dec 121.1 + 9.5 93.6 + 3.7 143.0 + 13.9 104.1 − 2.1 103.5 + 5.0 104.3 − 4.3
2 0 1 7 Jan 115.1 + 1.1 107.0 + 2.6 120.7 + 1.1 116.9 − 4.1 115.5 − 0.9 117.4 − 5.2
Feb 119.0 + 6.0 111.8 + 10.4 123.8 + 3.7 121.7 + 4.1 116.7 + 12.0 123.4 + 1.7
Mar 133.6 + 4.3 119.5 + 10.0 143.8 + 0.8 131.2 + 8.3 134.8 + 14.5 129.9 + 6.0
Apr 119.4 + 5.5 111.0 + 5.9 125.3 + 4.9 118.7 + 7.8 121.2 + 2.6 117.9 + 9.9
May 118.3 + 5.7 109.2 + 7.6 125.1 + 4.9 116.3 + 4.3 119.2 + 18.4 115.4 + 0.1
June 126.7 + 6.7 114.2 + 10.9 136.4 + 4.6 120.9 + 6.0 129.7 + 16.8 117.8 + 2.3
July 121.5 + 6.5 112.3 + 10.0 127.8 + 4.7 123.6 + 5.4 116.9 + 6.1 126.0 + 5.1
Aug 113.4 + 9.9 108.7 + 17.0 115.2 + 5.7 124.3 + 8.5 121.2 + 19.1 125.4 + 5.4
Sep 126.6 + 11.2 112.4 + 11.8 137.1 + 11.2 123.1 + 6.7 134.4 + 12.8 119.1 + 4.4
Oct 129.3 + 8.9 117.3 + 11.7 138.4 + 7.8 125.9 + 6.8 136.5 + 5.3 122.2 + 7.4
Nov 131.4 + 10.4 121.2 + 12.7 139.1 + 9.4 128.0 + 8.2 140.6 + 18.1 123.6 + 4.7
Dec p 131.3 + 8.4 107.4 + 14.7 151.5 + 5.9 108.5 + 4.2 115.5 + 11.6 106.0 + 1.6
From the domestic market
2013 104.4 + 0.5 101.9 − 1.4 107.6 + 2.1 100.4 + 1.3 102.8 + 0.9 99.5 + 1.3
2014 105.6 + 1.1 100.8 − 1.1 110.9 + 3.1 102.4 + 2.0 102.8 + 0.0 102.2 + 2.7
2015 107.4 + 1.7 99.0 − 1.8 116.3 + 4.9 105.2 + 2.7 102.1 − 0.7 106.3 + 4.0
2016 107.4 + 0.0 96.8 − 2.2 118.7 + 2.1 103.4 − 1.7 105.6 + 3.4 102.6 − 3.5
2017 p 113.9 + 6.1 106.2 + 9.7 122.7 + 3.4 107.7 + 4.2 111.3 + 5.4 106.4 + 3.7
2 0 1 6 Dec 107.3 + 9.6 86.4 + 2.7 131.0 + 16.1 91.0 + 0.2 88.9 + 6.3 91.7 − 1.8
2 0 1 7 Jan 106.2 + 0.5 100.8 + 2.1 112.0 − 1.0 103.6 + 0.2 104.6 + 1.6 103.2 − 0.3
Feb 113.5 + 7.5 108.4 + 13.9 119.3 + 3.2 109.9 + 1.9 104.3 + 3.8 111.9 + 1.4
Mar 122.5 + 4.9 111.5 + 9.2 135.3 + 1.9 111.3 + 2.1 117.6 + 1.0 109.1 + 2.5
Apr 111.8 + 3.2 104.8 + 2.7 120.7 + 4.0 99.9 + 0.6 106.3 + 0.1 97.6 + 0.8
May 107.8 + 2.7 102.7 + 7.2 114.0 − 0.5 101.7 − 0.7 102.9 + 8.2 101.3 − 3.5
June 116.4 + 7.4 104.4 + 7.6 130.3 + 7.6 104.7 + 4.0 106.4 + 4.9 104.1 + 3.7
July 115.2 + 9.1 107.2 + 9.8 123.9 + 9.1 110.7 + 5.3 106.1 + 3.1 112.3 + 6.0
Aug 109.0 + 9.3 106.5 + 17.0 110.7 + 2.7 114.0 + 10.7 112.4 + 11.0 114.5 + 10.5
Sep 115.7 + 10.8 105.2 + 13.4 126.8 + 9.3 111.6 + 7.3 123.5 + 6.6 107.4 + 7.5
Oct 119.2 + 7.4 111.6 + 11.0 127.5 + 4.3 115.0 + 7.5 131.5 + 9.0 109.2 + 6.8
Nov 121.3 + 9.0 112.9 + 10.3 130.1 + 7.6 118.9 + 10.6 130.6 + 14.0 114.8 + 9.3
Dec p 108.6 + 1.2 98.0 + 13.4 122.2 − 6.7 91.1 + 0.1 89.3 + 0.4 91.7 + 0.0
From abroad
2013 113.5 + 3.9 104.8 − 0.4 118.4 + 6.1 110.7 + 2.7 100.8 + 3.5 114.1 + 2.5
2014 117.9 + 3.9 107.4 + 2.5 123.4 + 4.2 118.0 + 6.6 102.0 + 1.2 123.5 + 8.2
2015 120.7 + 2.4 107.7 + 0.3 127.4 + 3.2 122.1 + 3.5 110.7 + 8.5 126.0 + 2.0
2016 122.4 + 1.4 108.3 + 0.6 129.4 + 1.6 125.5 + 2.8 118.8 + 7.3 127.8 + 1.4
2017 p 131.9 + 7.8 120.3 + 11.1 137.7 + 6.4 133.5 + 6.4 137.3 + 15.6 132.2 + 3.4
2 0 1 6 Dec 132.4 + 9.4 102.0 + 4.5 150.4 + 12.7 115.3 − 3.6 116.2 + 4.0 115.0 − 6.0
2 0 1 7 Jan 122.4 + 1.7 114.3 + 3.2 126.0 + 2.2 128.3 − 6.8 125.0 − 2.5 129.4 − 8.2
Feb 123.5 + 4.9 115.9 + 6.8 126.6 + 4.0 131.7 + 5.6 127.5 + 18.7 133.2 + 2.0
Mar 142.6 + 3.9 129.0 + 10.9 149.1 + 0.2 148.2 + 12.6 149.8 + 26.1 147.6 + 8.4
Apr 125.5 + 7.2 118.2 + 9.4 128.2 + 5.4 134.8 + 13.0 134.1 + 4.4 135.1 + 16.3
May 126.9 + 8.0 116.9 + 8.0 131.9 + 8.0 128.8 + 8.1 133.4 + 26.4 127.3 + 2.7
June 135.1 + 6.3 125.8 + 14.3 140.1 + 2.9 134.7 + 7.3 150.0 + 25.7 129.4 + 1.3
July 126.7 + 4.7 118.2 + 10.1 130.2 + 2.2 134.7 + 5.4 126.3 + 8.4 137.7 + 4.5
Aug 117.0 + 10.3 111.2 + 16.9 118.0 + 7.5 133.2 + 7.0 128.8 + 25.9 134.7 + 2.0
Sep 135.5 + 11.3 120.9 + 10.4 143.4 + 12.2 132.9 + 6.2 143.9 + 18.0 129.1 + 2.3
Oct 137.6 + 10.2 123.9 + 12.3 145.1 + 9.7 135.3 + 6.4 140.8 + 2.4 133.3 + 7.8
Nov 139.6 + 11.5 131.0 + 15.3 144.6 + 10.5 135.7 + 6.3 149.3 + 21.4 131.0 + 1.5
Dec p 149.8 + 13.1 118.4 + 16.1 169.5 + 12.7 123.3 + 6.9 138.3 + 19.0 118.2 + 2.8
Sourceoftheunadjustedfigures:FederalStatisticalOffice.*Atcurrentprices;forex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8.
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
68
XI Economic conditions in Germany
4 Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client 1
Building
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector 2
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change
2013 119.2 + 3.9 126.4 + 4.1 140.6 + 6.3 128.0 + 3.1 93.9 + 2.3 111.9 + 3.7 121.9 + 2.6 107.7 + 4.1
2014 118.5 − 0.6 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.8 − 0.9 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.8 − 0.1 104.0 − 3.4
2015 124.2 + 4.8 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.3 − 2.0 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.2 + 5.0
2016 142.2 + 14.5 153.7 + 15.0 193.4 + 16.9 143.0 + 15.0 107.5 + 9.1 130.7 + 13.9 137.1 + 11.8 126.9 + 16.2
2 0 1 6 Nov 127.1 + 7.0 139.7 + 1.9 189.4 + 24.4 121.8 − 15.8 95.1 + 12.0 114.5 + 13.9 124.4 − 11.5 104.8 + 26.0
Dec 131.1 + 6.2 149.9 + 10.9 171.8 + 2.8 153.8 + 22.6 95.4 − 5.7 112.2 + 0.4 141.0 + 22.8 104.5 − 8.8
2 0 1 7 Jan 113.5 + 4.7 125.0 + 6.2 154.5 + 4.7 122.5 + 15.0 74.4 − 19.1 102.1 + 2.9 124.5 + 11.8 85.9 − 4.1
Feb 130.3 + 8.0 144.3 + 14.6 176.0 + 11.6 139.1 + 20.5 97.4 + 2.9 116.2 + 0.7 127.4 + 16.3 114.8 − 2.0
Mar 179.0 + 8.7 190.4 + 13.1 243.7 + 7.2 172.2 + 17.5 139.7 + 19.4 167.7 + 4.2 165.1 + 10.1 167.3 + 8.3
Apr 165.2 + 9.4 170.4 + 9.7 204.4 + 4.4 166.7 + 17.1 114.7 + 0.6 160.0 + 9.0 154.0 + 9.7 160.9 + 11.8
May 155.5 − 1.2 162.5 − 7.7 202.3 − 3.5 143.0 − 17.7 142.1 + 20.8 148.5 + 7.1 138.5 − 11.2 154.1 + 11.7
June 173.2 + 4.8 188.1 + 3.9 238.5 + 6.9 164.4 − 5.9 159.2 + 36.3 158.4 + 6.1 156.1 − 3.3 164.6 + 13.0
July 164.0 + 7.5 167.7 + 2.5 203.9 + 4.6 159.6 + 0.7 120.4 + 2.6 160.4 + 13.2 155.1 + 7.6 157.1 + 8.8
Aug 145.3 + 4.6 152.9 + 2.9 184.9 + 0.4 142.3 + 0.5 121.5 + 22.0 137.7 + 6.6 138.9 + 4.9 135.9 + 6.7
Sep 151.8 + 5.1 163.7 + 1.3 200.0 − 11.3 148.2 + 11.3 138.2 + 14.9 140.0 + 9.9 144.9 + 11.7 139.5 + 9.8
Oct 141.2 − 2.8 152.7 − 2.7 203.3 + 4.6 131.0 − 11.5 117.8 + 6.8 129.7 − 2.9 132.5 − 8.5 125.3 − 0.6
Nov 140.7 + 10.7 158.1 + 13.2 188.6 − 0.4 157.1 + 29.0 101.3 + 6.5 123.3 + 7.7 152.9 + 22.9 108.9 + 3.9
Sourceoftheunadjustedfigures:FederalStatisticalOffice.*Atcurrentprices;values method, version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 2 Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction.
Seasonallyadjustedbusinessstatistics,TableII.21.oUsingtheCensusX-12-ARIMA
5 Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which
in stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order houses
clothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco 1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale 2
At current At prices in
prices year 2010 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change
2014 108.0 + 1.5 102.6 + 1.2 111.5 + 2.1 104.8 + 1.7 94.6 − 0.8 101.9 − 0.4 110.7 + 7.1 125.9 + 1.8
2015 3 112.1 + 3.8 3 106.6 + 3.9 114.7 + 2.9 105.2 + 0.4 95.5 + 1.0 104.6 + 2.6 116.6 + 5.3 3 151.2 + 20.1
2016 114.8 + 2.4 108.7 + 2.0 116.8 + 1.8 104.8 − 0.4 95.3 − 0.2 106.0 + 1.3 121.4 + 4.1 166.3 + 10.0
2017 4 120.6 + 5.1 112.2 + 3.2 122.2 + 4.6 112.2 + 7.1 101.3 + 6.3 107.4 + 1.3 125.8 + 3.6 182.4 + 9.7
2 0 1 6 Dec 138.4 + 3.9 130.5 + 2.3 136.8 + 3.2 128.7 + 3.5 151.1 + 1.9 116.0 + 2.3 137.3 + 5.0 216.6 + 8.3
2 0 1 7 Jan 107.7 + 2.9 101.6 + 0.9 108.8 + 1.3 91.3 + 1.9 107.1 + 10.0 91.1 − 1.5 119.0 + 3.0 173.3 + 10.7
Feb 105.8 + 4.8 99.0 + 2.4 109.2 + 3.9 83.5 + 6.5 88.2 + 3.8 93.0 − 0.6 116.1 + 2.7 162.4 + 6.5
Mar 122.5 + 6.8 113.8 + 4.6 122.3 + 4.9 113.4 + 17.9 98.5 + 8.7 117.4 + 4.4 127.8 + 3.2 180.6 + 5.9
Apr 120.3 + 5.6 111.4 + 3.8 124.4 + 6.6 113.2 + 2.7 89.1 + 8.5 112.9 + 1.0 123.7 + 4.0 173.4 + 16.5
May 120.1 + 5.1 111.3 + 3.4 123.4 + 4.5 109.6 + 2.8 84.8 + 6.9 110.8 + 0.8 124.5 + 5.2 173.1 + 10.7
June 118.6 + 6.4 110.5 + 4.7 122.1 + 5.3 109.3 + 8.4 90.6 + 6.3 106.5 + 3.1 123.9 + 5.9 169.1 + 11.2
July 120.3 + 4.4 112.7 + 2.9 123.8 + 4.2 109.2 + 2.7 97.4 + 10.3 108.4 + 2.2 127.5 + 2.7 170.2 + 13.4
Aug 116.0 + 4.4 108.5 + 2.6 120.3 + 4.1 102.9 + 6.6 93.1 + 9.8 101.8 + 0.4 122.1 + 3.7 167.6 + 9.3
Sep 119.2 + 7.5 110.4 + 5.5 119.0 + 5.7 129.9 + 27.9 97.1 + 10.1 103.4 + 2.7 123.3 + 3.0 176.4 + 11.8
Oct 124.3 + 3.2 114.8 + 1.3 123.3 + 3.9 126.4 − 3.9 105.7 + 4.0 113.9 + 1.2 126.8 + 1.9 184.4 + 2.4
Nov 128.8 + 6.2 119.2 + 4.5 125.6 + 5.8 122.2 + 10.0 115.6 + 5.6 114.7 + 2.2 131.9 + 3.9 226.1 + 12.5
Dec 144.1 + 4.1 133.6 + 2.4 143.8 + 5.1 135.9 + 5.6 148.5 − 1.7 114.7 − 1.1 143.5 + 4.5 231.9 + 7.1
Sourceoftheunadjustedfigures:FederalStatisticalOffice.*Excludingvalue-added integrationofalargeronlineretailsalesbasedenterprisethatfoundedabusiness
tax; Forexplanatorynotes,seeStatisticalSupplementSeasonallyadjustedbusiness establishmentinGermanyinMay2015.4AsofJanuary2017,figuresareprovision-
statistics, Table II.24. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. al,insomecasesrevised,andparticularlyuncertaininrecentmonthsduetoesti-
1Includingstallsandmarkets.2Notinstores,stallsormarkets.3AsofMay2015, mates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
69
XI Economic conditions in Germany
6 Labour mark et *
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions 2,3 Short time workers 4 Unemployment 5
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary Temporary social unem- Unem-
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies, 5,7
Thou- percentage Thou- percentage rate 5,6 thou-
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2013 42,319 +0.6 29,713 +1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 191 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 42,672 +0.8 30,197 +1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,069 +0.9 30,823 +2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,638 +1.3 31,508 +2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 8 44,291 8 +1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,533 9 855 5.7 731
2 0 1 4 Q4 42,965 +0.8 30,614 +1.6 8,956 20,625 796 5,018 110 46 2,738 846 6.3 510
2 0 1 5 Q1 42,517 +0.7 30,360 +1.8 8,833 20,551 756 4,863 310 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
Q2 42,998 +0.8 30,671 +2.0 8,895 20,740 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822 6.3 560
Q3 43,286 +1.0 30,928 +2.1 8,974 20,865 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595
Q4 43,476 +1.2 31,333 +2.3 9,049 21,204 837 4,829 101 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2 0 1 6 Q1 43,096 +1.4 31,077 +2.4 8,929 21,131 793 4,785 312 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
Q2 43,557 +1.3 31,350 +2.2 8,988 21,298 820 4,823 59 47 2,674 782 6.1 653
Q3 43,832 +1.3 31,593 +2.1 9,056 21,431 858 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682
Q4 44,066 +1.4 32,014 +2.2 9,137 21,770 866 4,781 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2 0 1 7 Q1 r 43,740 r +1.5 31,790 +2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734 9 987 6.2 671
Q2 r 44,207 r +1.5 32,064 +2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 10 5.6 717
Q3 r 44,507 r +1.5 11 32,329 11 +2.3 11 9,173 11 22,015 11 892 11 4,766 ... 11 18 2,504 833 5.6 763
Q4 8 44,708 8 +1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,381 780 5.3 771
2 0 1 4 Sep 42,976 +0.8 30,663 +1.7 8,992 20,608 813 5,013 51 39 2,808 885 6.5 518
Oct 43,065 +0.8 30,676 +1.6 8,980 20,645 808 5,021 61 49 2,733 836 6.3 517
Nov 43,017 +0.7 30,636 +1.6 8,960 20,645 798 5,020 63 52 2,717 834 6.3 515
Dec 42,813 +0.8 30,398 +1.7 8,864 20,565 753 5,012 204 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2 0 1 5 Jan 42,444 +0.7 30,276 +1.8 8,815 20,498 747 4,846 327 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
Feb 42,470 +0.7 30,342 +1.9 8,818 20,546 756 4,821 352 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519
Mar 42,638 +0.8 30,528 +2.0 8,865 20,651 777 4,829 251 50 2,932 955 6.8 542
Apr 42,832 +0.8 30,645 +1.9 8,895 20,723 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552
May 43,013 +0.8 30,718 +2.0 8,901 20,776 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815 6.3 557
June 43,150 +0.9 30,771 +2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572
July 43,190 +0.9 30,744 +2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589
Aug 43,245 +1.0 30,988 +2.2 8,993 20,901 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597
Sep 43,422 +1.0 31,333 +2.2 9,076 21,153 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600
Oct 43,508 +1.0 31,368 +2.3 9,068 21,206 846 4,814 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612
Nov 43,545 +1.2 31,389 +2.5 9,060 21,247 842 4,846 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610
Dec 43,374 +1.3 31,150 +2.5 8,964 21,167 798 4,843 177 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2 0 1 6 Jan 43,005 +1.3 30,983 +2.3 8,906 21,073 784 4,774 343 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
Feb 43,059 +1.4 31,069 +2.4 8,923 21,127 793 4,769 343 50 2,911 947 6.6 614
Mar 43,224 +1.4 31,209 +2.2 8,954 21,217 804 4,782 252 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
Apr 43,388 +1.3 31,314 +2.2 8,983 21,279 809 4,806 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640
May 43,577 +1.3 31,410 +2.3 9,000 21,337 826 4,838 57 45 2,664 774 6.0 655
June 43,707 +1.3 31,443 +2.2 9,010 21,339 846 4,865 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665
July 43,689 +1.2 31,378 +2.1 9,007 21,273 853 4,863 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674
Aug 43,807 +1.3 31,675 +2.2 9,076 21,486 865 4,802 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685
Sep 43,999 +1.3 32,007 +2.2 9,157 21,729 869 4,768 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687
Oct 44,086 +1.3 32,045 +2.2 9,154 21,773 871 4,767 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691
Nov 44,131 +1.3 32,069 +2.2 9,147 21,807 876 4,794 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681
Dec 43,982 +1.4 31,848 +2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2 0 1 7 Jan r 43,656 r +1.5 31,707 +2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777 9 1,010 6.3 647
Feb r 43,704 r +1.5 31,774 +2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
Mar r 43,861 r +1.5 31,930 +2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
Apr r 44,035 r +1.5 32,013 +2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
May r 44,216 r +1.5 32,131 +2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 10 5.6 714
June r 44,369 r +1.5 32,165 +2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
July r 44,388 r +1.6 32,128 +2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
Aug r 44,477 r +1.5 11 32,408 11 +2.3 11 9,192 11 22,072 11 896 11 4,742 ... 11 18 2,545 855 5.7 765
Sep r 44,657 r +1.5 11 32,737 11 +2.3 11 9,274 11 22,309 11 901 11 4,704 ... 11 18 2,449 800 5.5 773
Oct r 44,730 r +1.5 11 32,780 11 +2.3 11 9,276 11 22,357 11 901 11 4,704 ... 11 15 2,389 772 5.4 780
Nov r 44,770 r +1.4 11 32,825 11 +2.4 11 9,280 11 22,391 11 914 11 4,727 ... 11 19 2,368 772 5.3 772
Dec 8 44,623 8 +1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,385 796 5.3 761
2 0 1 8 Jan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,570 941 5.8 736
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. * Annual and 2017, persons receiving additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and
quarterlyfigures:averages;calculatedbytheBundesbank;deviationsfromtheoffi- unemploymentbenefitIIatthesametime)shallbeassignedtothelegalcategoryof
cialfiguresareduetorounding.1Workplaceconcept;averages.2Monthlyfigures: theThirdBookoftheSocialSecurityCode(SGBIII).10FromMay2017calculated
end of month. 3 From January 2012, excluding all persons taking up federal onthebasisofnewlabourforcefigures.11Unadjustedfiguresestimatedbythe
voluntaryserviceorayearofsocialorecologicalwork.4Numberwithinagiven FederalEmploymentAgency.In2015and2016,theestimatedvaluesforGermany
month.5Mid-monthlevel.6Relativetothetotalcivilianlabourforce.7Excluding deviatedfromthefinaldatabyamaximumof1.1%foremployeessubjecttosocial
government-assistedformsofemploymentandseasonaljobs,includingjobslocated contributions,byamaximumof0.5%forpersonssolelyinjobsexemptfromsocial
abroad.8InitialpreliminaryestimatebytheFederalStatisticalOffice.9FromJanuary contributions, and by a maximum of 33.9 % for cyclically induced short-time work.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
70
XI Economic conditions in Germany
7 Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which 1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 6
prices of
of which industrial
Memo item: products Index of
Non- Consumer Con- sold on producer-
energy price index struction the prices
industrial Housing (national price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food 2 goods Energy 3 Services rents 4 concept) index market 5 products 5 Exports Imports Energy 7 materials 8
Period 2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level
2013 99.1 97.4 98.7 109.8 97.4 97.3 105.7 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 160.2 117.6
2014 99.9 98.8 99.2 107.5 98.8 98.8 106.6 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 142.8 108.3
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 111.3 103.9 106.9 104.9 100.9 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.2 101.2 107.4 113.4 102.1 106.7 104.0 97.8 83.2 98.4
2017 102.1 104.0 102.3 97.5 102.5 102.9 109.3 117.0 104.8 9 115.5 105.9 101.5 99.6 107.1
2 0 1 6 Mar 100.3 101.2 101.0 92.7 101.5 100.8 107.3 101.2 106.6 103.6 96.5 72.3 93.6
Apr 99.8 101.6 101.5 93.6 99.7 100.9 106.9 101.3 105.9 103.5 96.4 75.1 95.5
May 100.2 101.3 101.4 95.0 100.5 101.0 107.2 113.1 101.7 106.0 103.7 97.3 82.6 97.2
June 100.3 101.0 100.7 96.2 100.9 101.1 107.3 102.1 106.4 103.9 97.8 87.9 98.9
July 100.7 101.3 100.0 95.1 102.2 101.2 107.6 102.3 110.0 104.1 97.9 84.4 100.2
Aug 100.6 100.9 100.3 94.3 102.3 101.4 107.6 113.7 102.2 106.7 104.0 97.7 83.9 98.6
Sep 100.6 101.2 101.5 94.9 101.4 101.5 107.7 102.0 104.8 104.0 97.8 83.9 97.0
Oct 100.8 101.2 102.0 96.2 101.2 101.7 107.9 102.7 108.9 104.3 98.7 96.2 99.8
Nov 100.8 102.0 102.0 95.2 101.1 101.8 108.0 114.1 103.0 111.4 104.8 99.4 95.4 108.5
Dec 101.8 102.6 101.6 97.3 102.8 102.0 108.8 103.4 113.2 105.2 101.3 106.6 114.0
2 0 1 7 Jan 101.0 103.2 100.7 98.2 101.0 102.2 108.1 104.1 9 114.9 105.8 102.2 108.9 115.9
Feb 101.7 104.6 101.0 98.4 101.9 102.3 108.8 115.5 104.3 116.3 106.0 102.9 110.2 118.9
Mar 101.8 103.4 102.6 97.5 102.0 102.4 109.0 104.3 117.7 106.0 102.4 99.7 116.4
Apr 101.8 103.4 102.7 98.3 101.5 102.6 109.0 104.7 120.0 106.2 102.3 100.4 110.1
May 101.6 103.5 102.7 96.9 101.5 102.8 108.8 116.6 104.5 121.0 106.0 101.3 93.1 104.2
June 101.8 103.6 102.0 96.1 102.5 102.9 109.0 104.5 121.4 105.8 100.2 85.7 100.4
July 102.2 103.8 101.4 95.9 103.8 103.0 109.4 104.7 120.3 105.7 99.8 86.5 102.9
Aug 102.4 103.8 101.8 96.3 103.8 103.1 109.5 117.5 104.9 121.3 105.6 99.8 90.1 103.3
Sep 102.4 104.1 102.9 97.5 102.8 103.2 109.6 105.2 116.2 105.8 100.7 96.3 102.8
Oct 102.3 104.8 103.2 97.4 102.2 103.3 109.6 105.5 114.6 105.9 101.3 101.6 102.7
Nov 102.6 104.8 103.2 98.7 102.6 103.5 109.9 118.4 105.6 115.0 106.1 102.1 110.3 103.8
Dec 103.4 105.5 102.8 98.5 104.2 103.6 110.6 105.8 114.6 106.2 102.4 113.7 103.6
2 0 1 8 Jan 102.4 106.2 101.8 98.9 102.4 103.9 109.8 ... ... ... ... 115.9 105.4
Annual percentage change
2013 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 8.6
2014 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.8 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 16.8 − 1.6
2017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.2 + 2.6 9 + 8.2 + 1.8 + 3.8 + 19.7 + 8.8
2 0 1 6 Mar + 0.1 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 8.9 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 1.4 − 1.6 − 5.9 − 33.7 − 12.6
Apr − 0.3 + 1.2 + 1.1 − 8.5 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 6.6 − 35.0 − 9.6
May + 0.0 + 0.9 + 1.2 − 8.0 + 1.1 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.8 − 2.7 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 5.5 − 29.3 − 7.2
June + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.2 + 0.9 − 1.3 − 4.6 − 22.4 − 4.4
July + 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.9 − 7.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 5.3 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 20.4 − 1.4
Aug + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 4.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 8.3 + 2.7
Sep + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 7.6 + 3.1
Oct + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.0 + 6.9
Nov + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 17.0
Dec + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 5.5 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 37.5 + 27.5
2 0 1 7 Jan + 1.9 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.4 9 + 7.6 + 1.8 + 6.0 + 68.8 + 31.4
Feb + 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 7.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 9.7 + 2.5 + 7.4 + 72.2 + 34.2
Mar + 1.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 3.1 +10.4 + 2.3 + 6.1 + 37.9 + 24.4
Apr + 2.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 3.4 +13.3 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 33.7 + 15.3
May + 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.8 +14.2 + 2.2 + 4.1 + 12.7 + 7.2
June + 1.5 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.4 +14.1 + 1.8 + 2.5 − 2.5 + 1.5
July + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 9.4 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.7
Aug + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.3 + 2.6 +13.7 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 7.4 + 4.8
Sep + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.1 +10.9 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 14.8 + 6.0
Oct + 1.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 5.2 + 1.5 + 2.6 + 5.6 + 2.9
Nov + 1.8 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.7 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.8 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 15.6 − 4.3
Dec + 1.6 + 2.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 6.7 − 9.1
2 0 1 8 Jan + 1.4 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 ... ... ... ... + 6.4 − 9.1
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on transportfuelsandlubricants.4Netrents.5Excludingvalue-addedtax.6Forthe
datafromtheFederalStatisticalOffice;fortheIndexofWorldMarketPricesofRaw euroarea,ineuro.7Coal,crudeoil(Brent)andnaturalgas.8Food,beveragesandto-
Materials:HWWI.1Differencesfromtheofficialfiguresareduetorounding.2Inclu- baccoaswellasindustrialrawmaterials.9FromJanuary2017onwards,provisionalfi-
dingalcoholicbeveragesandtobacco.3Electricity,gasandotherfuelsaswellas gures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
71
XI Economic conditions in Germany
8 Households’ income *
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 benefits received 3 Mass income 4 Disposable income 5 Saving 6 ratio 7
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- As
age age age age age age percent-
Period € billion change € billion change € billion change € billion change € billion change € billion change age
2009 1,009.5 0.1 672.6 0.3 380.7 6.9 1,053.3 2.6 1,569.2 − 0.8 156.2 − 5.9 10.0
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.3
2013 1,167.4 3.0 778.3 2.8 388.1 0.1 1,166.4 1.9 1,717.2 1.3 153.7 − 2.5 8.9
2014 1,212.7 3.9 806.9 3.7 398.4 2.6 1,205.2 3.3 1,759.8 2.5 166.6 8.4 9.5
2015 1,260.8 4.0 836.6 3.7 417.0 4.7 1,253.7 4.0 1,804.0 2.5 173.5 4.2 9.6
2016 1,311.5 4.0 869.1 3.9 430.1 3.1 1,299.2 3.6 1,854.1 2.8 179.7 3.5 9.7
2 0 1 6 Q2 319.5 3.6 207.6 3.7 106.0 3.1 313.6 3.5 462.9 3.4 43.6 5.3 9.4
Q3 323.3 3.9 218.6 3.6 108.8 4.2 327.4 3.8 461.8 2.2 37.7 2.0 8.2
Q4 363.1 4.1 240.4 3.8 106.9 3.0 347.4 3.6 472.4 2.9 39.9 4.4 8.5
2 0 1 7 Q1 319.3 4.5 211.7 4.6 112.9 4.2 324.6 4.4 477.7 4.5 62.5 6.9 13.1
Q2 333.9 4.5 216.0 4.0 109.9 3.7 325.9 3.9 480.2 3.7 44.8 2.8 9.3
Q3 338.2 4.6 228.4 4.4 111.7 2.6 340.0 3.8 480.7 4.1 40.1 6.5 8.3
Source:FederalStatisticalOffice;figurescomputedinNovember2017.*Households salariesplusmonetarysocialbenefitsreceived.5Massincomeplusoperatingsurplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1 Residence concept. 2 After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and
contributionstothesocialsecurityfunds.3Socialsecuritybenefitsincashfromthe consumption-relatedtaxes)andothercurrenttransferspaid.Includingtheincreasein
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claimsoncompanypensionfunds.6Includingtheincreaseinclaimsoncompanypen-
pensionpayments(net),privatefundedsocialbenefits,lesssocialcontributionson sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income.
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4 Net wages and
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages 1
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates 2 per employee 3
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.4
2012 104.4 2.7 104.4 2.6 104.7 2.8 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.7
2013 107.0 2.5 107.0 2.4 107.3 2.5 107.2 2.4 108.4 2.1
2014 110.1 2.9 109.9 2.8 110.1 2.7 110.1 2.7 111.4 2.8
2015 112.6 2.3 112.4 2.2 112.6 2.3 112.7 2.3 114.5 2.8
2016 114.9 2.1 114.7 2.1 115.0 2.1 115.2 2.2 117.3 2.4
2017 117.4 2.1 117.1 2.1 117.5 2.1 117.8 2.3 . .
2 0 1 6 Q3 117.6 2.1 117.3 2.1 117.7 2.2 115.8 2.2 115.4 2.4
Q4 128.1 2.2 127.8 2.2 128.2 2.2 116.1 2.3 128.4 2.5
2 0 1 7 Q1 109.1 2.6 108.8 2.5 109.1 2.5 116.8 2.5 113.7 2.8
Q2 110.1 2.1 109.9 2.1 110.2 2.4 117.6 2.4 117.8 2.7
Q3 120.0 2.1 119.7 2.0 120.1 2.0 118.3 2.1 118.6 2.8
Q4 130.5 1.9 130.1 1.8 130.6 1.8 118.6 2.1 . .
2 0 1 7 June 109.9 1.7 109.7 1.7 110.0 2.3 117.8 2.3 . .
July 139.1 2.0 138.8 1.9 139.2 1.9 118.0 2.0 . .
Aug 110.4 2.1 110.1 2.1 110.5 2.1 118.3 2.1 . .
Sep 110.5 2.1 110.2 2.1 110.6 2.1 118.4 2.1 . .
Oct 111.0 2.1 110.7 2.0 111.1 2.0 118.5 2.1 . .
Nov 167.9 1.6 167.5 1.6 168.1 1.6 118.7 2.1 . .
Dec 112.5 2.0 112.2 1.9 112.5 2.1 118.6 2.1 . .
1Currentdataarenormallyrevisedonaccountofadditionalreports.2Excluding andretirementprovisions).3Source:FederalStatisticalOffice;figurescomputedin
one-offpaymentsandcovenants(capitalformationbenefits,specialpayments,such November 2017.
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
72
XI Economic conditions in Germany
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End-of-year/end-of-half data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2013 1,902.2 1,171.1 385.0 485.2 232.4 731.1 187.5 175.8 136.5 569.6 1,332.6 706.0 379.8 626.6 191.0 163.1
2014 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 207.2 175.8
2015 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 222.7 180.3
2016 2,371.4 1,479.8 493.0 595.4 289.7 891.6 227.0 218.1 152.1 676.0 1,695.5 889.0 482.0 806.5 249.0 192.9
2 0 1 5 H2 2,226.6 1,394.6 470.7 565.2 273.1 832.0 215.6 190.6 136.2 633.8 1,592.8 860.8 465.4 732.0 222.7 180.3
2 0 1 6 H1 2,256.6 1,381.0 462.4 549.8 272.0 875.6 226.7 195.2 140.5 607.4 1,649.2 895.4 464.6 753.8 243.9 174.9
H2 2,371.4 1,479.8 493.0 595.4 289.7 891.6 227.0 218.1 152.1 676.0 1,695.5 889.0 482.0 806.5 249.0 192.9
2 0 1 7 H1 p 2,387.4 1,472.0 501.7 582.8 289.4 915.4 238.2 220.7 151.8 705.0 1,682.4 886.8 497.2 795.6 246.2 194.9
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 61.6 20.2 25.5 12.2 38.4 9.9 9.2 7.2 29.9 70.1 37.1 20.0 32.9 10.0 8.6
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.0 8.5
2015 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.1
2016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.5 71.5 37.5 20.3 34.0 10.5 8.1
2 0 1 5 H2 100.0 62.6 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.1
2 0 1 6 H1 100.0 61.2 20.5 24.4 12.1 38.8 10.1 8.7 6.2 26.9 73.1 39.7 20.6 33.4 10.8 7.8
H2 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.5 71.5 37.5 20.3 34.0 10.5 8.1
2 0 1 7 H1 p 100.0 61.7 21.0 24.4 12.1 38.3 10.0 9.2 6.4 29.5 70.5 37.2 20.8 33.3 10.3 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2013 1,523.6 908.2 257.2 384.6 215.6 615.4 171.2 136.1 104.1 450.9 1,072.6 560.4 282.8 512.2 170.2 114.9
2014 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 185.6 122.4
2015 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 198.3 127.6
2016 1,909.6 1,146.4 322.1 473.4 270.8 763.3 209.8 170.1 115.6 514.5 1,395.1 715.3 369.4 679.8 223.1 141.0
2 0 1 5 H2 1,782.1 1,077.3 304.0 446.9 259.0 704.8 198.9 147.1 104.5 485.5 1,296.6 689.8 353.1 606.8 198.3 127.6
2 0 1 6 H1 1,818.4 1,059.3 296.6 432.5 254.2 759.1 210.1 150.0 112.3 466.0 1,352.3 717.9 351.0 634.4 219.2 130.0
H2 1,909.6 1,146.4 322.1 473.4 270.8 763.3 209.8 170.1 115.6 514.5 1,395.1 715.3 369.4 679.8 223.1 141.0
2 0 1 7 H1 p 1,921.2 1,136.9 324.7 463.5 273.1 784.3 224.2 171.9 125.3 550.0 1,371.2 708.2 378.1 663.0 224.3 153.1
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 59.6 16.9 25.2 14.2 40.4 11.2 8.9 6.8 29.6 70.4 36.8 18.6 33.6 11.2 7.5
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.2 7.4
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.1 7.2
2016 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.3 35.6 11.7 7.4
2 0 1 5 H2 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.1 7.2
2 0 1 6 H1 100.0 58.3 16.3 23.8 14.0 41.8 11.6 8.3 6.2 25.6 74.4 39.5 19.3 34.9 12.1 7.2
H2 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.3 35.6 11.7 7.4
2 0 1 7 H1 p 100.0 59.2 16.9 24.1 14.2 40.8 11.7 9.0 6.5 28.6 71.4 36.9 19.7 34.5 11.7 8.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)
2013 378.6 262.9 127.8 100.6 16.8 115.7 16.3 39.7 32.3 118.6 260.0 145.6 97.0 114.4 20.8 48.2
2014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.4
2015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2016 461.8 333.5 170.9 122.0 18.9 128.3 17.1 48.1 36.5 161.4 300.4 173.7 112.6 126.6 26.0 51.9
2 0 1 5 H2 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2 0 1 6 H1 438.3 321.7 165.8 117.3 17.8 116.6 16.6 45.3 28.2 141.4 296.9 177.4 113.6 119.4 24.7 45.0
H2 461.8 333.5 170.9 122.0 18.9 128.3 17.1 48.1 36.5 161.4 300.4 173.7 112.6 126.6 26.0 51.9
2 0 1 7 H1 p 466.2 335.1 177.0 119.3 16.3 131.1 14.0 48.8 26.6 155.1 311.1 178.6 119.2 132.6 21.9 41.8
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 69.5 33.8 26.6 4.5 30.6 4.3 10.5 8.5 31.3 68.7 38.5 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016 100.0 72.2 37.0 26.4 4.1 27.8 3.7 10.4 7.9 35.0 65.0 37.6 24.4 27.4 5.6 11.2
2 0 1 5 H2 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2 0 1 6 H1 100.0 73.4 37.8 26.8 4.1 26.6 3.8 10.3 6.4 32.3 67.7 40.5 25.9 27.3 5.6 10.3
H2 100.0 72.2 37.0 26.4 4.1 27.8 3.7 10.4 7.9 35.0 65.0 37.6 24.4 27.4 5.6 11.2
2 0 1 7 H1 p 100.0 71.9 38.0 25.6 3.5 28.1 3.0 10.5 5.7 33.3 66.7 38.3 25.6 28.4 4.7 9.0
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excludinggroupsengagedinrealestateactivities.1Includingcashequivalents.2In-
StockExchangewhichpublishIFRSconsolidatedfinancialstatementsonaquarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry.
orhalf-yearlybasisandmakeanoteworthycontributiontovalueaddedinGermany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
73
XI Economic conditions in Germany
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA 1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2
before depreciation
and amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 1 ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period € billion 3 in % 4 € billion 3 in % 4 % points 4 % % % € billion 3 in % 4 % points 4 % % %
Total
2009 1,158.6 −10.7 135.6 −16.9 11.7 −0.9 3.9 9.4 15.7 55.9 −29.2 4.8 −1.3 −0.1 4.9 9.3
2010 1,321.0 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.5 98.3 66.6 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.8 12.1
2011 1,414.4 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 −1.0 5.4 10.9 17.4 93.9 −4.1 6.6 −0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,533.0 6.6 189.3 3.1 12.4 −0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 −7.7 6.2 −0.9 1.9 6.0 11.0
2013 1,541.1 −0.6 187.1 −2.8 12.1 −0.3 5.1 10.3 18.3 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.8 10.9
2014 1,565.6 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.7 10.3 17.2 109.3 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,636.2 6.9 196.4 −1.0 12.0 −1.0 6.1 10.6 17.6 91.6 −16.3 5.6 −1.5 1.7 6.5 11.3
2016 1,626.1 −0.4 214.9 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.6 11.4 17.9 112.0 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.3 6.6 12.0
2 0 1 2 H2 782.2 5.2 95.9 2.6 12.3 −0.3 4.7 11.0 17.9 39.9 −19.2 5.1 −1.4 1.4 6.8 11.7
2 0 1 3 H1 762.8 −0.2 93.4 −3.5 12.2 −0.4 3.4 9.3 16.5 53.8 −7.6 7.1 −0.6 0.6 4.9 10.7
H2 780.0 −1.1 93.8 −2.0 12.0 −0.1 5.4 10.7 19.2 45.7 25.5 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.1 12.1
2 0 1 4 H1 757.2 −0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.7 9.5 16.0 57.8 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
H2 808.7 2.9 101.5 5.2 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2 0 1 5 H1 815.7 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 −0.4 4.8 10.1 17.6 59.1 1.4 7.3 −0.5 1.1 5.9 10.9
H2 831.7 5.2 93.8 −7.5 11.3 −1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.7 −36.7 3.9 −2.6 2.3 7.1 11.7
2 0 1 6 H1 782.3 −2.0 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 6.1 10.5 17.6 65.6 2.7 8.4 0.4 1.5 6.4 11.3
H2 843.8 1.1 103.1 9.9 12.2 1.0 6.7 11.9 19.0 46.4 21.1 5.5 0.8 2.9 7.5 12.5
2 0 1 7 H1 p 844.9 7.2 126.0 14.4 14.9 0.9 5.7 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.3 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2009 837.7 −11.8 94.9 −20.6 11.3 −1.3 2.5 9.0 14.0 40.0 −32.6 4.8 −1.5 −1.4 4.3 8.8
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.4 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.0
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 −1.7 12.1 −1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 −4.9 6.9 −1.1 2.1 6.8 11.5
2012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 −0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 −0.4 1.8 6.1 9.8
2013 1,179.0 −0.8 138.7 −2.6 11.8 −0.2 4.4 10.3 15.5 74.5 −5.8 6.3 −0.3 1.3 5.7 10.0
2014 1,197.3 1.0 147.9 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.1 9.6 15.3 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,283.3 7.0 144.0 −2.7 11.2 −1.1 6.1 10.4 15.5 65.2 −20.2 5.1 −1.8 1.8 6.5 10.0
2016 1,267.1 −1.1 156.5 6.0 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.6 15.9 80.5 4.3 6.4 0.3 2.5 6.2 10.4
2 0 1 2 H2 593.9 6.1 67.5 5.3 11.4 −0.1 4.4 10.5 15.9 34.9 0.2 5.9 −0.3 0.6 6.2 10.2
2 0 1 3 H1 588.8 −0.1 71.7 −4.8 12.2 −0.6 3.1 9.3 15.0 43.1 −10.9 7.3 −0.9 0.6 5.3 9.7
H2 591.7 −1.4 67.1 −0.3 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.4 15.8 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 10.9
2 0 1 4 H1 584.4 −1.1 74.2 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.0 46.2 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.4 9.6
H2 613.1 3.0 73.7 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 15.8 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.7
2 0 1 5 H1 636.8 8.8 80.1 7.9 12.6 −0.1 5.1 10.0 15.4 48.8 4.9 7.7 −0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
H2 647.1 5.3 63.9 −13.3 9.9 −2.1 5.3 10.9 15.5 16.4 −52.5 2.5 −3.3 1.7 6.8 10.3
2 0 1 6 H1 610.8 −2.7 83.9 1.2 13.7 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.6 50.6 −6.7 8.3 −0.3 1.7 6.4 9.9
H2 656.4 0.5 72.6 11.9 11.1 1.1 6.2 11.3 16.4 29.9 35.0 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.4
2 0 1 7 H1 p 678.6 7.5 98.4 18.4 14.5 1.3 5.9 9.9 16.0 63.9 37.0 9.4 2.0 2.2 5.8 10.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2009 321.0 −7.4 40.7 −4.9 12.7 0.3 4.7 10.7 20.3 16.0 −16.3 5.0 −0.5 1.7 5.7 12.7
2010 340.4 5.8 45.1 8.9 13.3 0.4 5.6 10.8 19.6 22.6 46.8 6.7 1.7 3.3 5.9 12.4
2011 335.5 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 5.4 10.1 20.7 19.7 −0.7 5.9 −0.1 3.2 6.1 13.8
2012 359.2 2.8 48.5 −3.4 13.5 −0.9 5.1 10.0 22.7 14.0 −47.2 3.9 −3.0 2.1 5.7 14.0
2013 362.2 −0.1 48.4 −3.3 13.4 −0.4 5.1 9.9 21.1 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.5 5.9 12.2
2014 368.3 1.0 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.2 6.0 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.4 4.8 14.9 −0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 −1.6 7.5 −0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.4 58.3 14.6 16.3 1.8 6.8 13.5 25.1 31.5 24.7 8.8 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2 0 1 2 H2 188.3 2.3 28.5 −4.0 15.1 −1.0 5.2 11.2 23.7 5.1 −73.2 2.7 −5.2 2.7 7.4 15.3
2 0 1 3 H1 174.0 −0.5 21.7 1.4 12.5 0.2 3.9 8.0 19.2 10.7 12.8 6.2 0.7 0.9 4.6 12.8
H2 188.3 0.3 26.7 −6.7 14.2 −1.1 5.6 11.3 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.3 13.4
2 0 1 4 H1 172.9 −0.5 23.0 7.6 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.6 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
H2 195.6 2.4 27.8 −2.2 14.2 −0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.4 8.1 −0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2 0 1 5 H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 −2.2 12.7 −1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 −15.7 5.8 −1.6 −0.5 4.5 14.2
H2 184.7 4.6 29.9 10.8 16.2 0.9 7.3 12.2 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2 0 1 6 H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
H2 187.5 3.6 30.5 4.6 16.3 0.2 7.4 13.5 24.3 16.5 2.7 8.8 −0.1 4.0 8.9 17.1
2 0 1 7 H1 p 166.3 5.8 27.6 0.3 16.6 −0.8 5.4 11.0 21.3 14.7 −0.1 8.8 −0.5 1.4 5.8 14.7
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt returnonsales.3Annualfiguresdonotalwaysmatchthesumofthetwohalf-year
StockExchangewhichpublishIFRSconsolidatedfinancialstatementsonaquarterly figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p 3.
orhalf-yearlybasisandmakeanoteworthycontributiontovalueaddedinGermany. 4Adjustedforsubstantialchangesinthebasisofconsolidationoflargegroupsand
Excludinggroupsengagedinrealestateactivities.1Earningsbeforeinterest,taxes, in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement
depreciationandamortisation.2Quantiledataarebasedonthegroups’unweighted Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
74
XII External sector
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2017
Item 2014 2015 2016 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep Oct Nov p
A Current account + 245,761 + 335,017 + 368,856 + 70,431 + 70,768 +129,043 + 46,578 + 35,386 + 37,828
1 Goods
Exports 1,966,061 2,138,897 2,130,214 558,797 565,780 563,019 195,759 193,633 205,981
Imports 1,724,958 1,780,137 1,754,551 488,200 476,505 467,720 159,421 166,225 170,873
Balance + 241,104 + 358,760 + 375,661 + 70,598 + 89,274 + 95,298 + 36,338 + 27,408 + 35,108
2 Services
Receipts 706,388 769,235 783,880 191,218 208,178 220,249 73,425 69,783 66,312
Expenditure 628,051 707,420 745,957 179,295 188,284 188,657 60,971 63,481 63,621
Balance + 78,338 + 61,817 + 37,921 + 11,923 + 19,894 + 31,590 + 12,453 + 6,302 + 2,692
3 Primary income
Receipts 638,693 666,059 662,031 159,345 173,660 166,187 55,511 50,510 50,927
Expenditure 570,131 614,175 567,874 130,915 175,256 130,744 46,124 37,402 38,343
Balance + 68,565 + 51,882 + 94,156 + 28,430 − 1,596 + 35,442 + 9,387 + 13,108 + 12,584
4 Secondary income
Receipts 96,442 109,468 109,909 25,693 28,936 25,118 8,884 7,716 7,354
Expenditure 238,688 246,910 248,791 66,213 65,741 58,407 20,484 19,149 19,909
Balance − 142,246 − 137,442 − 138,884 − 40,520 − 36,805 − 33,287 − 11,600 − 11,433 − 12,556
B Capital account + 13,711 − 12,466 − 814 − 10,301 − 10,204 − 1,824 − 958 + 1,399 + 1,145
C Financial account (Increase: +) + 264,839 + 283,782 + 310,245 + 69,436 + 62,387 +162,237 + 68,037 + 39,101 + 35,086
1 Direct investment + 71,932 + 241,686 + 222,811 − 1,883 + 8,795 + 15,904 + 18,013 + 26,793 − 17,950
By resident units abroad + 216,544 + 976,478 + 411,941 +204,780 + 27,242 −139,883 + 13,484 + 34,420 − 4,703
By non-resident units in the euro area + 144,612 + 734,796 + 189,129 +206,664 + 18,448 −155,788 − 4,529 + 7,627 + 13,248
2 Portfolio investment + 26,370 + 96,384 + 416,553 + 99,247 + 25,986 +148,379 + 29,812 + 50,100 + 33,246
By resident units abroad + 459,905 + 392,290 + 392,236 +174,760 +171,362 +190,906 + 48,664 + 27,248 + 49,840
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 142,536 + 10,920 + 22,568 + 30,756 + 55,787 + 56,747 + 11,158 + 24,961 + 10,298
Long-term debt securities + 224,271 + 368,619 + 366,925 + 96,999 +128,250 +115,816 + 18,621 + 13,771 + 41,186
Short-term debt securities + 93,094 + 12,750 + 2,745 + 47,004 − 12,674 + 18,344 + 18,885 − 11,484 − 1,644
By non-resident units in the euro area + 433,535 + 295,905 − 24,317 + 75,513 +145,377 + 42,527 + 18,853 − 22,852 + 16,593
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 303,756 + 238,775 + 83,573 + 90,519 +164,308 +116,043 + 30,404 + 44,222 + 16,297
Long-term debt securities + 141,184 + 91,835 − 157,034 − 63,416 − 21,865 − 71,572 − 13,161 − 45,509 + 9,968
Short-term debt securities − 11,406 − 34,707 + 49,145 + 48,412 + 2,935 − 1,943 + 1,610 − 21,565 − 9,672
3 Financial derivatives and
employee stock options + 49,274 + 87,196 + 18,505 + 23,174 − 2,345 − 10,654 − 2,930 − 232 + 353
4 Other investment + 112,902 − 152,049 − 363,335 − 48,821 + 31,524 + 8,063 + 16,722 − 34,908 + 13,255
Eurosystem + 31,506 − 25,391 − 151,295 − 29,782 − 8,922 − 10,058 − 29,879 + 32,994 + 3,531
General government + 12,224 + 19,293 + 1,807 + 2,011 − 4,087 − 4,142 − 6,067 − 110 + 1,025
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 99,280 − 120,298 − 151,020 − 16,912 + 18,795 + 20,567 + 30,349 − 81,481 + 1,288
Enterprises and households − 30,106 − 25,656 − 62,827 − 4,138 + 25,736 + 1,696 + 22,320 + 13,689 + 7,411
5 Reserve assets + 4,360 + 10,565 + 15,712 − 2,280 − 1,572 + 545 + 6,421 − 2,653 + 6,181
D Net errors and omissions + 5,369 − 38,765 − 57,797 + 9,306 + 1,823 + 35,020 + 22,418 + 2,316 − 3,887
*Source:ECB,accordingtotheinternationalstandardsoftheBalanceofPayments
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
75
XII External sector
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million
Current account Financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob) 1
of which
Supple-
mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items 2 Services 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5
2003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,292
2004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,748
2005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,960
2006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,511
2007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,130
2008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,088
2009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,683
2010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,351
2011 + 165,078 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 31,574 + 68,235 − 35,010 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 44,639
2012 + 193,590 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 64,858 − 38,894 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 41,759
2013 + 189,616 + 212,662 − 3,663 − 41,376 + 61,969 − 43,639 − 563 + 225,360 + 838 + 36,307
2014 + 218,026 + 228,361 − 5,873 − 25,323 + 56,177 − 41,188 + 2,355 + 238,630 − 2,564 + 18,248
2015 + 259,963 + 261,182 − 2,668 − 18,602 + 57,370 − 39,987 − 635 + 234,603 − 2,213 − 24,725
2016 + 259,286 + 268,369 − 1,434 − 21,218 + 52,136 − 40,001 + 1,112 + 243,586 + 1,686 − 16,811
2017 p + 257,066 + 266,720 + 1,449 − 18,028 + 60,627 − 52,253 + 31 + 276,458 − 1,269 + 19,361
2 0 1 5 Q1 + 59,401 + 60,330 − 1,426 − 2,104 + 17,030 − 15,855 + 298 + 29,421 − 21 − 30,277
Q2 + 59,356 + 68,659 − 1,737 − 2,871 + 611 − 7,043 + 505 + 72,121 − 465 + 12,260
Q3 + 67,057 + 67,516 + 978 − 10,628 + 16,866 − 6,697 + 701 + 67,337 − 1,455 − 421
Q4 + 74,149 + 64,676 − 483 − 2,999 + 22,864 − 10,391 − 2,138 + 65,723 − 272 − 6,287
2 0 1 6 Q1 + 63,623 + 63,412 + 621 − 3,363 + 16,933 − 13,359 − 269 + 36,937 + 1,228 − 26,417
Q2 + 69,291 + 77,109 + 242 − 4,009 + 584 − 4,393 + 1,092 + 62,620 + 761 − 7,762
Q3 + 58,213 + 67,022 − 126 − 11,696 + 13,516 − 10,630 + 228 + 61,531 − 261 + 3,090
Q4 + 68,160 + 60,827 − 2,171 − 2,150 + 21,103 − 11,620 + 61 + 82,498 − 43 + 14,278
2 0 1 7 Q1 + 65,369 + 66,740 + 2,419 − 3,315 + 15,902 − 13,958 + 457 + 74,476 − 360 + 8,649
Q2 + 55,217 + 67,376 − 170 − 4,015 + 4,662 − 12,805 + 7 + 73,956 + 385 + 18,732
Q3 + 62,599 + 68,039 − 170 − 11,066 + 16,579 − 10,953 + 856 + 53,953 + 152 − 9,502
Q4 p + 73,881 + 64,565 − 629 + 369 + 23,484 − 14,537 − 1,290 + 74,073 − 1,446 + 1,482
2 0 1 5 July + 25,776 + 25,151 − 896 − 3,062 + 6,027 − 2,339 + 448 + 20,865 − 1,170 − 5,359
Aug + 14,760 + 16,897 + 661 − 4,616 + 5,265 − 2,785 + 44 + 21,976 − 180 + 7,171
Sep + 26,521 + 25,469 + 1,213 − 2,950 + 5,575 − 1,573 + 209 + 24,497 − 105 − 2,233
Oct + 22,205 + 23,927 + 147 − 4,630 + 6,013 − 3,105 − 85 + 20,171 + 154 − 1,949
Nov + 25,362 + 22,542 + 4 − 685 + 6,368 − 2,863 + 183 + 24,896 − 548 − 649
Dec + 26,582 + 18,207 − 634 + 2,315 + 10,483 − 4,423 − 2,236 + 20,656 + 123 − 3,689
2 0 1 6 Jan + 14,891 + 14,140 − 3 − 1,527 + 4,518 − 2,241 − 37 − 2,007 − 186 − 16,860
Feb + 19,889 + 22,040 + 724 − 226 + 5,600 − 7,525 + 520 + 18,706 + 1,478 − 1,703
Mar + 28,843 + 27,232 − 99 − 1,610 + 6,815 − 3,594 − 752 + 20,238 − 64 − 7,853
Apr + 27,951 + 27,812 − 116 − 858 + 2,726 − 1,730 + 1,287 + 25,738 + 696 − 3,500
May + 17,694 + 23,149 + 511 − 880 − 4,001 − 574 + 268 + 14,378 + 776 − 3,583
June + 23,646 + 26,147 − 153 − 2,271 + 1,859 − 2,089 − 463 + 22,504 − 711 − 679
July + 18,065 + 20,523 + 520 − 3,503 + 4,494 − 3,449 − 139 + 18,115 + 342 + 188
Aug + 16,667 + 21,044 − 367 − 4,965 + 5,092 − 4,504 − 126 + 18,180 + 93 + 1,639
Sep + 23,481 + 25,455 − 279 − 3,227 + 3,930 − 2,677 + 493 + 25,236 − 695 + 1,262
Oct + 18,411 + 20,456 + 163 − 3,551 + 5,076 − 3,570 − 182 + 30,423 − 145 + 12,194
Nov + 24,860 + 23,551 − 385 − 339 + 5,677 − 4,029 − 90 + 25,794 + 140 + 1,024
Dec + 24,889 + 16,820 − 1,949 + 1,740 + 10,349 − 4,021 + 332 + 26,281 − 38 + 1,060
2 0 1 7 Jan + 13,840 + 15,862 + 278 − 1,271 + 6,080 − 6,830 − 262 + 19,471 − 124 + 5,892
Feb + 20,556 + 22,960 + 993 − 777 + 3,008 − 4,635 + 271 + 7,355 − 216 − 13,473
Mar + 30,973 + 27,919 + 1,148 − 1,268 + 6,814 − 2,492 + 448 + 47,650 − 21 + 16,229
Apr + 14,564 + 19,380 − 43 − 769 + 4,234 − 8,281 − 311 + 21,979 − 2 + 7,725
May + 15,842 + 23,185 − 1,020 − 1,801 − 4,624 − 918 + 66 + 10,040 − 47 − 5,867
June + 24,811 + 24,811 + 893 − 1,445 + 5,052 − 3,606 + 251 + 41,937 + 434 + 16,874
July + 19,061 + 21,040 + 654 − 3,793 + 6,191 − 4,378 + 553 + 14,839 + 463 − 4,775
Aug + 17,912 + 21,521 − 788 − 4,819 + 4,646 − 3,437 + 146 + 8,723 − 912 − 9,335
Sep + 25,626 + 25,478 − 37 − 2,455 + 5,742 − 3,138 + 156 + 30,391 + 602 + 4,609
Oct + 18,842 + 20,886 + 412 − 3,402 + 5,577 − 4,220 − 206 + 10,913 + 1,176 − 7,723
Nov + 27,203 + 25,116 − 328 + 195 + 7,185 − 5,293 − 536 + 26,944 − 270 + 278
Dec p + 27,837 + 18,564 − 714 + 3,576 + 10,721 − 5,024 − 548 + 36,216 − 2,353 + 8,927
1Excludingfreightandinsurancecostsofforeigntrade.2Forexample,warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5 Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the financial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
3 Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4 Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
76
XII External sector
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries *
€ million
2017
Group of countries/country 2014 2015 2016 Jan. / Nov. Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec p
All countries 1 Exports 1,123,746 1,193,555 1,203,833 1,178,468 102,982 110,296 108,025 116,381 100,940
Imports 910,145 949,245 954,917 951,846 82,953 86,369 89,110 92,714 82,714
Balance + 213,601 + 244,310 + 248,916 + 226,622 + 20,029 + 23,927 + 18,915 + 23,667 + 18,226
I European countries Exports 761,914 803,425 818,644 805,950 68,792 75,546 74,976 79,296 ...
Imports 642,738 653,782 657,753 651,325 54,980 59,164 61,542 64,004 ...
Balance + 119,176 + 149,643 + 160,891 + 154,625 + 13,812 + 16,382 + 13,434 + 15,292 ...
1 EU member states (28) Exports 648,446 692,493 705,548 691,891 58,587 64,942 64,551 67,871 ...
Imports 527,117 543,334 551,344 543,870 46,034 49,856 51,808 53,469 ...
Balance + 121,329 + 149,159 + 154,204 + 148,022 + 12,553 + 15,086 + 12,742 + 14,401 ...
Euro area (19) Exports 413,753 434,075 441,092 434,719 35,973 40,818 40,547 43,033 ...
Imports 350,550 356,643 358,848 351,130 29,349 31,662 33,379 34,260 ...
Balance + 63,203 + 77,432 + 82,244 + 83,589 + 6,624 + 9,156 + 7,168 + 8,773 ...
of which
Austria Exports 55,807 58,217 59,778 57,940 4,945 5,555 5,490 5,806 ...
Imports 36,218 37,250 38,543 38,030 3,295 3,695 3,531 3,711 ...
Balance + 19,590 + 20,967 + 21,235 + 19,910 + 1,650 + 1,860 + 1,959 + 2,095 ...
Belgium and Exports 47,345 46,196 46,931 46,171 3,986 4,146 4,132 4,447 ...
Luxembourg Imports 42,548 40,116 40,960 40,843 3,444 3,601 3,668 3,866 ...
Balance + 4,797 + 6,079 + 5,971 + 5,328 + 543 + 545 + 464 + 581 ...
France Exports 100,580 102,762 101,106 97,273 7,800 9,092 8,944 9,639 ...
Imports 66,714 66,819 65,651 59,221 4,765 5,194 5,963 5,714 ...
Balance + 33,866 + 35,943 + 35,454 + 38,052 + 3,035 + 3,899 + 2,981 + 3,925 ...
Italy Exports 54,240 57,987 61,265 60,507 4,259 5,856 5,681 6,095 ...
Imports 48,522 49,038 51,737 51,169 4,051 4,603 4,931 4,952 ...
Balance + 5,718 + 8,949 + 9,528 + 9,338 + 208 + 1,252 + 750 + 1,143 ...
Netherlands Exports 72,736 79,191 78,433 78,506 7,034 7,178 7,498 7,621 ...
Imports 87,796 87,889 83,142 83,459 6,990 7,314 7,899 8,298 ...
Balance − 15,060 − 8,697 − 4,709 − 4,953 + 44 − 137 − 400 − 676 ...
Spain Exports 34,820 38,715 40,497 39,883 3,007 3,736 3,641 3,999 ...
Imports 24,804 26,442 27,870 29,159 2,068 2,683 2,679 2,903 ...
Balance + 10,016 + 12,273 + 12,627 + 10,724 + 939 + 1,053 + 962 + 1,096 ...
Other EU member Exports 234,693 258,417 264,456 257,173 22,614 24,125 24,004 24,838 ...
states Imports 176,567 186,691 192,496 192,740 16,685 18,194 18,430 19,209 ...
Balance + 58,126 + 71,727 + 71,960 + 64,433 + 5,929 + 5,931 + 5,574 + 5,629 ...
of which
United Exports 79,163 89,018 85,939 78,454 6,573 7,293 6,978 7,325 ...
Kingdom Imports 38,545 38,414 35,654 34,285 2,863 3,104 3,256 3,282 ...
Balance + 40,618 + 50,604 + 50,285 + 44,168 + 3,710 + 4,189 + 3,722 + 4,044 ...
2 Other European Exports 113,468 110,932 113,096 114,058 10,205 10,604 10,426 11,425 ...
countries Imports 115,621 110,448 106,409 107,455 8,946 9,308 9,734 10,535 ...
Balance − 2,153 + 484 + 6,687 + 6,603 + 1,259 + 1,296 + 692 + 891 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 46,202 49,070 50,161 50,267 4,320 4,528 4,564 4,960 ...
Imports 39,392 42,089 43,896 42,300 3,388 3,673 3,535 4,176 ...
Balance + 6,810 + 6,981 + 6,265 + 7,967 + 931 + 855 + 1,030 + 784 ...
II Non-European Exports 358,337 387,398 382,486 369,721 33,918 34,579 32,793 36,832 ...
countries Imports 267,407 295,461 297,164 300,443 27,974 27,128 27,567 28,710 ...
Balance + 90,930 + 91,936 + 85,322 + 69,278 + 5,944 + 7,451 + 5,225 + 8,123 ...
1 Africa Exports 22,505 23,897 24,434 23,776 2,027 1,931 2,178 1,890 ...
Imports 20,242 18,307 16,675 18,633 1,831 1,647 1,706 1,795 ...
Balance + 2,263 + 5,590 + 7,759 + 5,144 + 196 + 285 + 472 + 95 ...
2 America Exports 135,293 156,982 147,542 141,894 12,653 12,846 12,640 14,127 ...
Imports 74,191 85,582 83,499 82,239 7,196 7,093 7,481 7,991 ...
Balance + 61,103 + 71,400 + 64,043 + 59,655 + 5,457 + 5,753 + 5,159 + 6,136 ...
of which
United States Exports 95,928 113,733 106,822 102,571 8,996 9,199 9,171 10,359 ...
Imports 49,207 60,217 57,968 56,300 5,047 4,892 5,121 5,369 ...
Balance + 46,721 + 53,516 + 48,855 + 46,271 + 3,948 + 4,307 + 4,050 + 4,990 ...
3 Asia Exports 190,973 196,297 200,158 193,764 18,288 18,796 17,034 19,771 ...
Imports 170,050 188,621 193,979 195,943 18,707 18,088 18,130 18,651 ...
Balance + 20,923 + 7,676 + 6,179 − 2,179 − 419 + 708 − 1,096 + 1,121 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 35,462 39,518 36,659 30,394 2,768 3,258 2,525 3,188 ...
Imports 7,865 7,330 6,581 6,409 581 611 486 677 ...
Balance + 27,598 + 32,188 + 30,079 + 23,986 + 2,187 + 2,647 + 2,040 + 2,510 ...
Japan Exports 16,910 16,968 18,307 17,928 1,639 1,765 1,560 1,652 ...
Imports 19,007 20,180 21,922 21,193 1,914 1,961 1,887 1,964 ...
Balance − 2,097 − 3,213 − 3,615 − 3,265 − 275 − 197 − 327 − 313 ...
People‘s Republic Exports 74,369 71,284 76,046 78,464 7,691 7,194 7,028 8,079 ...
of China 2 Imports 79,828 91,930 94,172 92,207 8,799 8,536 8,745 9,456 ...
Balance − 5,459 − 20,646 − 18,126 − 13,744 − 1,109 − 1,342 − 1,716 − 1,377 ...
New industrial countries Exports 48,476 51,510 51,921 49,125 4,509 5,152 4,441 4,720 ...
and emerging markets Imports 38,782 42,478 42,966 46,917 4,596 4,249 4,443 3,899 ...
of Asia 3 Balance + 9,695 + 9,032 + 8,955 + 2,208 − 87 + 904 − 2 + 821 ...
4 Oceania and Exports 9,566 10,221 10,352 10,287 950 1,006 941 1,044 ...
polar regions Imports 2,924 2,951 3,011 3,629 240 300 250 273 ...
Balance + 6,641 + 7,271 + 7,341 + 6,658 + 711 + 706 + 691 + 771 ...
*Source:FederalStatisticalOffice.Exports(fob)bycountryofdestination,imports otherdatanotclassifiablebyregion.2ExcludingHongKong.3BruneiDarussalam,
(cif)bycountryoforigin.Individualcountriesandgroupsofcountriesaccordingto HongKong,Indonesia,Malaysia,Philippines,RepublicofKorea,Singapore,Taiwan
thecurrentposition.1Includingfuelandothersuppliesforshipsandaircraftand and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
77
XII External sector
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services 1 Primary income
of which
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of computer and Other Government Other
Financial intellectual information business goods and Compensation Investment primary
Period Total Transport Travel 2 services property services services services 3 of employees income income 4
2013 − 41,376 − 9,881 − 37,713 + 8,056 + 3,656 − 870 − 5,518 + 3,073 + 541 + 60,205 + 1,223
2014 − 25,323 − 7,301 − 37,653 + 7,008 + 3,639 + 2,785 − 1,418 + 3,024 + 451 + 54,849 + 877
2015 − 18,602 − 5,476 − 36,595 + 9,331 + 4,942 + 4,037 − 3,116 + 3,106 + 783 + 56,948 − 361
2016 − 21,218 − 5,962 − 38,266 + 9,189 + 6,450 + 3,312 − 3,276 + 3,119 + 652 + 53,196 − 1,712
2017 p − 18,028 − 4,338 − 38,832 + 9,667 + 7,060 + 3,242 − 2,445 + 2,724 + 763 + 60,884 − 1,019
2 0 1 6 Q2 − 4,009 − 1,080 − 8,654 + 2,174 + 1,190 + 1,238 − 687 + 831 − 107 + 3,501 − 2,810
Q3 − 11,696 − 1,414 − 15,956 + 1,892 + 1,629 + 483 − 173 + 833 − 384 + 15,089 − 1,190
Q4 − 2,150 − 1,808 − 7,371 + 3,029 + 2,416 + 1,372 − 1,597 + 604 + 386 + 17,788 + 2,928
2 0 1 7 Q1 − 3,315 − 1,260 − 5,956 + 2,016 + 1,223 + 426 − 1,464 + 723 + 740 + 16,280 − 1,118
Q2 − 4,015 − 438 − 9,179 + 2,305 + 1,600 + 908 − 948 + 785 − 91 + 6,584 − 1,832
Q3 − 11,066 − 1,224 − 16,110 + 2,389 + 1,609 + 459 + 228 + 704 − 482 + 18,171 − 1,110
Q4 p + 369 − 1,416 − 7,587 + 2,957 + 2,628 + 1,448 − 261 + 513 + 595 + 19,848 + 3,041
2 0 1 7 Feb − 777 − 298 − 1,459 + 478 + 484 + 62 − 498 + 277 + 272 + 3,072 − 335
Mar − 1,268 − 492 − 2,921 + 707 + 450 + 681 − 307 + 244 + 197 + 6,989 − 373
Apr − 769 − 109 − 1,760 + 881 + 688 − 392 − 532 + 262 − 42 + 4,720 − 444
May − 1,801 − 165 − 3,049 + 806 + 293 + 212 − 554 + 255 − 18 − 3,162 − 1,444
June − 1,445 − 164 − 4,371 + 618 + 619 + 1,088 + 138 + 268 − 31 + 5,026 + 56
July − 3,793 − 211 − 4,879 + 693 + 817 − 167 − 485 + 182 − 190 + 6,750 − 369
Aug − 4,819 − 500 − 6,429 + 1,110 + 460 + 75 − 130 + 259 − 146 + 5,167 − 374
Sep − 2,455 − 512 − 4,801 + 586 + 332 + 551 + 843 + 262 − 146 + 6,255 − 366
Oct − 3,402 − 465 − 5,365 + 734 + 1,374 − 27 − 256 + 241 + 182 + 5,942 − 546
Nov + 195 − 399 − 1,641 + 1,314 + 586 + 162 − 367 + 183 + 186 + 7,339 − 340
Dec p + 3,576 − 552 − 582 + 909 + 668 + 1,312 + 362 + 89 + 227 + 6,567 + 3,927
1Includingfreightandinsurancecostsofforeigntrade.2Since2001,thesample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4 Includes, inter alia, taxes on
resultsofahouseholdsurveyhavebeenusedontheexpenditureside.3Domestic leasing,productionandimportstransferredtotheEUaswellassubsidiesreceived
publicauthorities’receiptsfromandexpenditureonservices,notincludedelsewhere; from the EU.
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government 2
of which of which
Personal transfers
Current between
Current taxes on resident and of which Non-produced
international income, wealth nonresident Workers’ non-financial Capital
Period Total Total cooperation 1 etc. Total households 3 remittances Total assets transfers
2013 − 43,639 − 28,923 − 4,733 + 6,174 − 14,715 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 563 + 1,105 − 1,668
2014 − 41,188 − 28,106 − 5,972 + 8,101 − 13,082 − 3,476 − 3,451 + 2,355 + 2,898 − 542
2015 − 39,987 − 24,925 − 6,648 + 9,830 − 15,062 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 635 + 2,377 − 3,012
2016 − 40,001 − 26,227 − 8,376 + 9,934 − 13,774 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 1,112 + 3,324 − 2,212
2017 p − 52,253 − 25,278 − 9,457 + 9,432 − 26,975 − 4,630 − 4,613 + 31 + 3,056 − 3,026
2 0 1 6 Q2 − 4,393 − 836 − 1,567 + 5,561 − 3,556 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 1,092 + 2,219 − 1,127
Q3 − 10,630 − 6,866 − 1,702 + 1,772 − 3,763 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 228 + 887 − 659
Q4 − 11,620 − 8,437 − 2,267 + 1,294 − 3,183 − 1,055 − 1,049 + 61 + 739 − 679
2 0 1 7 Q1 − 13,958 − 7,816 − 2,668 + 1,774 − 6,141 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 457 + 643 − 186
Q2 − 12,805 − 2,861 − 1,394 + 5,170 − 9,944 − 1,158 − 1,153 + 7 + 445 − 438
Q3 − 10,953 − 5,549 − 1,779 + 1,726 − 5,405 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 856 + 1,596 − 740
Q4 p − 14,537 − 9,052 − 3,617 + 762 − 5,485 − 1,159 − 1,153 − 1,290 + 372 − 1,662
2 0 1 7 Feb − 4,635 − 2,699 − 699 + 714 − 1,936 − 385 − 384 + 271 + 8 + 263
Mar − 2,492 − 1,386 − 347 + 871 − 1,106 − 386 − 384 + 448 + 719 − 271
Apr − 8,281 − 1,856 − 398 + 811 − 6,425 − 385 − 384 − 311 − 37 − 274
May − 918 + 829 − 198 + 3,216 − 1,748 − 387 − 384 + 66 + 215 − 149
June − 3,606 − 1,835 − 798 + 1,143 − 1,771 − 386 − 384 + 251 + 267 − 16
July − 4,378 − 2,624 − 906 + 482 − 1,755 − 385 − 384 + 553 + 757 − 203
Aug − 3,437 − 1,463 − 696 + 455 − 1,974 − 386 − 384 + 146 + 341 − 194
Sep − 3,138 − 1,462 − 177 + 789 − 1,676 − 386 − 384 + 156 + 499 − 342
Oct − 4,220 − 2,955 − 994 + 99 − 1,265 − 387 − 384 − 206 − 6 − 199
Nov − 5,293 − 2,857 − 835 + 61 − 2,436 − 386 − 384 − 536 + 78 − 614
Dec p − 5,024 − 3,240 − 1,788 + 603 − 1,784 − 386 − 384 − 548 + 300 − 848
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperationandothercurrenttransfers.2Includesinsurancepremiumsandclaims households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
78
XII External sector
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
€ million
2017
Item 2015 2016 2017 p Q2 Q3 Q4 p Oct Nov Dec p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 249,102 + 380,469 + 371,643 + 45,266 + 59,457 + 31,547 − 25,346 + 33,556 + 23,337
1 Direct investment + 101,357 + 69,323 + 121,014 + 22,668 + 21,526 + 27,838 + 11,216 + 8,950 + 7,672
Equity + 67,801 + 61,655 + 72,097 + 14,149 + 17,977 + 23,137 + 5,460 + 7,310 + 10,367
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 9,711 + 13,224 + 27,494 + 7,891 + 9,172 + 4,225 + 4,678 + 3,536 − 3,989
Debt instruments + 33,556 + 7,668 + 48,917 + 8,520 + 3,549 + 4,701 + 5,757 + 1,640 − 2,695
2 Portfolio investment + 122,005 + 96,602 + 105,751 + 20,473 + 30,813 + 23,512 + 6,815 + 9,591 + 7,106
Shares 2 + 19,561 + 17,288 + 14,082 − 2,404 + 5,150 + 5,808 + 1,508 + 1,176 + 3,124
Investment fund shares 3 + 34,626 + 36,586 + 46,546 + 4,382 + 10,575 + 14,666 + 7,194 + 1,944 + 5,528
Long-term
debt securities 4 + 73,519 + 48,826 + 49,000 + 19,465 + 16,462 + 7,727 − 343 + 6,493 + 1,577
Short-term
debt securities 5 − 5,700 − 6,098 − 3,878 − 970 − 1,374 − 4,689 − 1,544 − 22 − 3,123
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 26,202 + 32,792 + 7,734 + 2,351 + 1,370 + 4,014 + 1,359 + 2,537 + 118
4. Other investment 7 + 1,750 + 180,067 + 138,412 − 612 + 5,596 − 22,371 − 45,913 + 12,749 + 10,793
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 90,287 + 18,747 − 22,354 − 26,659 − 16,026 − 51,848 − 14,804 − 5,683 − 31,361
Long-term − 2,803 + 45,099 + 19,540 + 2,596 − 1,397 + 5,445 + 715 − 1,877 + 6,607
Short-term − 87,484 − 26,353 − 41,894 − 29,255 − 14,629 − 57,293 − 15,519 − 3,806 − 37,968
Enterprises and
households 9 − 19,122 − 10,373 + 8,939 − 2,807 + 5,161 − 837 + 1,189 + 8,563 − 10,589
Long-term + 12,513 + 1,254 − 2,891 − 723 − 683 − 1,322 + 222 − 706 − 839
Short-term − 31,635 − 11,627 + 11,830 − 2,084 + 5,844 + 485 + 966 + 9,268 − 9,750
General government − 12,205 + 1,202 − 4,809 − 2,565 − 2,668 + 991 − 628 + 2,654 − 1,034
Long-term − 7,557 − 5,331 − 3,385 − 1,240 − 403 − 489 − 24 − 122 − 342
Short-term − 4,648 + 6,533 − 1,424 − 1,325 − 2,265 + 1,480 − 604 + 2,776 − 692
Bundesbank + 123,364 + 170,491 + 156,637 + 31,420 + 19,129 + 29,324 − 31,669 + 7,215 + 53,777
5. Reserve assets − 2,213 + 1,686 − 1,269 + 385 + 152 − 1,446 + 1,176 − 270 − 2,353
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country
(Increase: +) + 14,499 + 136,883 + 95,185 − 28,690 + 5,504 − 42,526 − 36,259 + 6,612 − 12,880
1 Direct investment + 47,284 + 46,695 + 68,885 + 5,896 + 21,007 + 13,295 + 2,940 + 13,093 − 2,737
Equity + 20,935 + 12,126 + 20,984 − 887 + 5,656 + 10,588 + 1,894 + 4,146 + 4,548
of which
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 4,375 + 5,905 + 12,231 + 1,533 + 4,115 + 3,018 + 1,773 + 1,353 − 107
Debt instruments + 26,349 + 34,569 + 47,900 + 6,783 + 15,351 + 2,707 + 1,046 + 8,947 − 7,285
2 Portfolio investment − 74,941 − 111,309 − 99,769 − 4,557 − 28,041 − 46,382 − 17,844 − 2,725 − 25,813
Shares 2) + 9,725 − 985 − 3,821 − 2,181 − 2,286 − 814 + 2,701 − 844 − 2,671
Investment fund shares 3 + 7,345 − 6,928 − 3,455 − 1,338 + 641 − 2,894 + 1,016 − 4,755 + 844
Long-term
debt securities 4 − 101,208 − 95,730 − 72,941 + 781 − 20,992 − 40,271 − 22,092 + 4,927 − 23,105
Short-term
debt securities 5 + 9,197 − 7,666 − 19,552 − 1,819 − 5,405 − 2,402 + 531 − 2,053 − 880
3. Other investment 7 + 42,156 + 201,497 + 126,069 − 30,029 + 12,538 − 9,440 − 21,355 − 3,755 + 15,670
Monetary financial institutions 8 − 41,166 + 86,802 + 16,103 − 18,932 − 3,551 − 68,618 − 3,384 + 11,643 − 76,877
Long-term − 19,536 + 5,834 + 7,419 + 347 − 1,325 + 5,550 + 1,092 + 1,071 + 3,387
Short-term − 21,630 + 80,968 + 8,684 − 19,279 − 2,226 − 74,168 − 4,476 + 10,572 − 80,264
Enterprises and
households 9 + 10,459 + 1,988 + 23,356 − 16,249 + 8,815 + 16,953 + 778 + 6,571 + 9,605
Long-term + 15,960 + 6,716 + 8,201 + 667 + 4,489 + 3 + 3,401 − 663 − 2,734
Short-term − 5,501 − 4,728 + 15,156 − 16,916 + 4,327 + 16,950 − 2,623 + 7,234 + 12,339
General government − 11,521 + 1,796 − 3,963 − 548 + 5,846 − 10,423 − 1,366 + 983 − 10,040
Long-term − 3,942 − 2,847 − 3,241 − 842 + 281 + 170 + 119 + 0 + 52
Short-term − 7,579 + 4,642 − 722 + 294 + 5,565 − 10,593 − 1,485 + 983 − 10,091
Bundesbank + 84,383 + 110,911 + 90,573 + 5,700 + 1,428 + 52,648 − 17,382 − 22,953 + 92,982
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 234,603 + 243,586 + 276,458 + 73,956 + 53,953 + 74,073 + 10,913 + 26,944 + 36,216
1 Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
RepublicofGermany(seeSpecialStatisticalPublication10).2Includingparticipation options.7Includesinparticularloans,tradecreditsaswellascurrencyanddeposits.
certificates. 3 Including reinvestment of earnings. 4 Up to and including 2012, 8 Excluding Bundesbank. 9 Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited.5Short-term:originalmaturityuptooneyear.6Balanceoftransactions households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
79
XII. External sector
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
End of reporting Gold and gold drawing position in deposits and within the Portfolio External- (col 1 minus
period Total Total receivables rights the IMF securities Total ESCB 1 investment 2 liabilities 3,4 col 10)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1 9 9 9 Jan 5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,475
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,719
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 675,253 467,592
2 0 1 5 May 758,500 173,842 118,141 15,124 5,744 34,833 538,619 526,191 46,039 436,631 321,869
June 756,263 168,299 113,838 15,000 5,617 33,844 543,502 531,074 44,461 439,896 316,366
July 763,247 163,071 108,872 15,172 4,919 34,107 555,013 542,585 45,162 444,698 318,549
Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 440,941 340,345
Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 462,513 311,915
Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 468,506 318,187
Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 482,764 330,555
Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2 0 1 6 Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 473,104 334,867
Feb 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 489,464 349,871
Mar 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 492,119 345,256
Apr 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 495,580 360,687
May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 501,620 383,267
June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 518,491 403,741
July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 518,946 385,099
Aug 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 525,347 393,345
Sep 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 549,909 407,951
Oct 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 543,001 404,717
Nov 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 552,565 438,543
Dec 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,719
2 0 1 7 Jan 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 577,969 456,835
Feb 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,255 451,639
Mar 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,579 451,460
Apr 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 601,538 487,606
May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 601,130 497,749
June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 623,941 474,939
July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 614,300 478,469
Aug 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 623,104 466,780
Sep 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 622,729 492,470
Oct 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 605,438 480,477
Nov 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 582,362 509,470
Dec 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 675,253 467,592
2 0 1 8 Jan 1,114,634 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,525 882,043 53,165 626,650 487,985
oAssetsandliabilitiesvis-à-visallcountrieswithinandoutsidetheeuroarea.Upto the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December2000,thelevelsattheendofeachquarterareshown,owingtorevalua- non-euroareacentralbankswithintheESCB.2Mainlylong-termdebtsecuritiesfrom
tions,atmarketprices;withineachquarter,however,thelevelsarecomputedonthe issuerswithintheeuroarea.3Includingestimatesofcurrencyincirculationabroad.
basisofcumulativetransactionvalues.FromJanuary2001,allend-of-monthlevels 4SeeDeutscheBundesbank,MonthlyReport,October2014,p22.5Euroopening
arevaluedatmarketprices.1MainlynetclaimsonTARGET2balances(accordingto balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
80
XII External sector
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total operations Total granted effected Total banks Total operations Total used received
All countries
2014 r 835,476 280,176 555,301 365,738 189,562 174,764 14,798 963,495 154,960 808,534 639,186 169,348 102,535 66,813
2015 r 875,758 264,291 611,467 415,697 195,770 181,271 14,499 1,018,333 152,109 866,224 681,923 184,301 112,677 71,625
2016 855,814 241,683 614,131 412,871 201,260 187,086 14,174 1,025,815 128,831 896,984 708,734 188,250 115,808 72,443
2017 879,462 216,300 663,162 438,824 224,338 210,673 13,666 1,073,004 136,001 937,003 738,896 198,107 129,693 68,413
2 0 1 7 July 866,338 215,822 650,516 440,689 209,826 196,355 13,471 1,051,322 116,987 934,335 745,799 188,536 115,024 73,512
Aug 859,633 213,414 646,219 440,278 205,941 192,378 13,564 1,054,736 117,557 937,179 749,860 187,319 113,159 74,160
Sep 878,076 218,625 659,451 442,168 217,283 203,538 13,746 1,052,248 122,376 929,872 733,677 196,195 123,424 72,770
Oct 886,990 219,737 667,253 450,138 217,114 203,035 14,080 1,056,403 121,812 934,591 737,990 196,602 122,549 74,053
Nov 895,596 225,367 670,229 448,628 221,601 207,354 14,247 1,071,330 127,385 943,945 746,594 197,351 124,782 72,569
Dec 879,462 216,300 663,162 438,824 224,338 210,673 13,666 1,073,004 136,001 937,003 738,896 198,107 129,693 68,413
Industrial countries 1
2014 r 735,152 275,277 459,876 330,740 129,136 116,037 13,099 872,950 153,807 719,142 598,249 120,894 85,432 35,461
2015 r 767,018 260,389 506,629 373,705 132,924 119,877 13,047 918,524 147,252 771,272 644,228 127,044 91,130 35,914
2016 748,340 237,789 510,551 371,663 138,888 126,211 12,677 931,963 124,504 807,460 674,402 133,058 95,933 37,125
2017 761,078 212,247 548,830 396,409 152,422 140,229 12,193 969,214 129,153 840,060 701,848 138,212 104,583 33,629
2 0 1 7 July 750,965 211,939 539,026 397,315 141,711 129,870 11,840 954,229 111,507 842,722 712,597 130,124 93,446 36,679
Aug 746,289 209,552 536,737 398,012 138,724 126,825 11,899 960,329 112,945 847,384 717,235 130,148 93,097 37,051
Sep 762,901 214,616 548,285 400,613 147,672 135,554 12,118 950,851 112,989 837,862 701,135 136,726 100,527 36,199
Oct 770,998 215,632 555,366 408,088 147,278 134,763 12,515 954,155 112,569 841,585 704,993 136,593 99,803 36,790
Nov 780,165 221,397 558,768 406,516 152,252 139,657 12,594 968,879 118,802 850,077 710,547 139,530 103,354 36,176
Dec 761,078 212,247 548,830 396,409 152,422 140,229 12,193 969,214 129,153 840,060 701,848 138,212 104,583 33,629
EU member states 1
2014 r 618,804 260,133 358,671 266,920 91,752 81,141 10,611 727,491 139,209 588,282 504,292 83,989 56,842 27,147
2015 r 630,450 242,362 388,088 293,629 94,459 83,964 10,495 751,636 136,375 615,261 530,824 84,437 58,686 25,751
2016 605,613 219,938 385,675 288,730 96,945 86,930 10,016 757,649 114,258 643,390 555,414 87,976 61,160 26,817
2017 605,152 192,336 412,815 305,890 106,925 97,037 9,889 796,346 112,898 683,448 587,325 96,123 71,906 24,217
2 0 1 7 July 593,228 192,791 400,437 300,403 100,034 90,467 9,567 784,598 100,389 684,209 594,647 89,562 63,447 26,115
Aug 590,108 190,337 399,771 301,487 98,283 88,730 9,554 788,546 100,783 687,763 597,936 89,827 63,581 26,246
Sep 603,874 194,645 409,229 305,203 104,026 94,222 9,804 777,661 101,038 676,623 581,892 94,731 68,693 26,039
Oct 608,934 194,952 413,982 309,636 104,346 94,188 10,158 779,905 100,699 679,205 584,535 94,670 68,382 26,288
Nov 619,085 200,916 418,169 310,296 107,873 97,628 10,245 790,066 103,019 687,047 589,805 97,242 71,016 26,226
Dec 605,152 192,336 412,815 305,890 106,925 97,037 9,889 796,346 112,898 683,448 587,325 96,123 71,906 24,217
of which: Euro-area 2
2014 r 457,077 204,589 252,488 194,201 58,288 52,067 6,221 607,716 107,561 500,155 445,643 54,513 37,580 16,933
2015 r 468,303 195,218 273,085 211,614 61,471 54,892 6,579 605,579 94,369 511,210 458,386 52,824 38,178 14,646
2016 445,368 167,575 277,794 213,498 64,295 57,575 6,721 609,399 75,639 533,760 477,891 55,869 41,068 14,801
2017 451,112 148,460 302,652 230,442 72,211 64,753 7,458 634,898 74,496 560,402 495,566 64,836 50,038 14,798
2 0 1 7 July 433,899 146,251 287,648 221,209 66,439 59,229 7,209 636,189 66,063 570,126 510,427 59,699 44,398 15,301
Aug 432,126 144,124 288,001 222,827 65,174 57,979 7,195 639,953 64,913 575,040 514,960 60,080 44,729 15,351
Sep 441,962 147,862 294,100 225,777 68,323 60,949 7,374 625,362 63,972 561,390 499,409 61,981 46,863 15,118
Oct 448,758 150,417 298,341 229,402 68,939 61,336 7,603 630,810 65,738 565,072 502,267 62,805 47,418 15,386
Nov 456,305 152,788 303,518 231,960 71,557 63,876 7,681 638,867 67,515 571,352 506,294 65,058 49,685 15,374
Dec 451,112 148,460 302,652 230,442 72,211 64,753 7,458 634,898 74,496 560,402 495,566 64,836 50,038 14,798
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
2014 r 100,274 4,849 95,425 34,998 60,427 58,728 1,699 90,545 1,153 89,392 40,937 48,455 17,103 31,352
2015 r 107,753 3,094 104,659 41,992 62,667 61,215 1,452 95,639 886 94,752 37,495 57,257 21,547 35,711
2016 106,063 2,647 103,416 41,192 62,224 60,727 1,497 90,708 1,401 89,307 34,132 55,175 19,875 35,300
2017 116,755 2,619 114,136 42,373 71,764 70,291 1,472 97,759 1,110 96,650 36,848 59,802 25,110 34,692
2 0 1 7 July 113,881 2,607 111,273 43,331 67,942 66,311 1,631 92,488 1,195 91,293 33,001 58,292 21,541 36,751
Aug 111,844 2,585 109,259 42,222 67,037 65,372 1,664 90,634 1,161 89,473 32,425 57,048 20,022 37,026
Sep 113,639 2,699 110,940 41,511 69,428 67,801 1,628 92,871 1,181 91,689 32,342 59,347 22,859 36,488
Oct 114,353 2,695 111,658 42,007 69,652 68,087 1,565 93,843 1,136 92,706 32,797 59,909 22,708 37,201
Nov 113,812 2,553 111,259 42,069 69,190 67,537 1,652 94,707 1,138 93,568 35,847 57,721 21,390 36,331
Dec 116,755 2,619 114,136 42,373 71,764 70,291 1,472 97,759 1,110 96,650 36,848 59,802 25,110 34,692
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are includingLatvia;fromJanuary2015includingLithuania.3Allcountriesthatarenot
showninTable4ofSectionIV,“Banks”.Statisticalincreasesanddecreaseshavenot regardedasindustrialcountries.UptoJune2013includingCroatia.rTherevisions
beeneliminated;tothisextent,thechangesintotalsarenotcomparablewiththefi- include late and correction reports.
guresshowninTableXI.7.1FromJuly2013includingCroatia.2FromJanuary2014

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
81
XII External sector
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States
or monthly
average AUD CAD CNY 1 DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2000 1.5889 1.3706 2 7.6168 7.4538 99.47 8.1129 8.4452 1.5579 0.60948 0.9236
2001 1.7319 1.3864 7.4131 7.4521 108.68 8.0484 9.2551 1.5105 0.62187 0.8956
2002 1.7376 1.4838 7.8265 7.4305 118.06 7.5086 9.1611 1.4670 0.62883 0.9456
2003 1.7379 1.5817 9.3626 7.4307 130.97 8.0033 9.1242 1.5212 0.69199 1.1312
2004 1.6905 1.6167 10.2967 7.4399 134.44 8.3697 9.1243 1.5438 0.67866 1.2439
2005 1.6320 1.5087 10.1955 7.4518 136.85 8.0092 9.2822 1.5483 0.68380 1.2441
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2 0 1 7 Feb 1.3886 1.3942 7.3143 7.4348 120.17 8.8603 9.4762 1.0660 0.85273 1.0643
Mar 1.4018 1.4306 7.3692 7.4356 120.68 9.0919 9.5279 1.0706 0.86560 1.0685
Apr 1.4241 1.4408 7.3892 7.4376 118.29 9.1993 9.5941 1.0727 0.84824 1.0723
May 1.4878 1.5041 7.6130 7.4400 124.09 9.4001 9.7097 1.0904 0.85554 1.1058
June 1.4861 1.4941 7.6459 7.4376 124.58 9.4992 9.7538 1.0874 0.87724 1.1229
July 1.4772 1.4641 7.7965 7.4366 129.48 9.3988 9.5892 1.1059 0.88617 1.1511
Aug 1.4919 1.4889 7.8760 7.4379 129.70 9.3201 9.5485 1.1398 0.91121 1.1807
Sep 1.4946 1.4639 7.8257 7.4401 131.92 9.3275 9.5334 1.1470 0.89470 1.1915
Oct 1.5099 1.4801 7.7890 7.4429 132.76 9.3976 9.6138 1.1546 0.89071 1.1756
Nov 1.5395 1.4978 7.7723 7.4420 132.39 9.6082 9.8479 1.1640 0.88795 1.1738
Dec 1.5486 1.5108 7.8073 7.4433 133.64 9.8412 9.9370 1.1689 0.88265 1.1836
2 0 1 8 Jan 1.5340 1.5167 7.8398 7.4455 135.25 9.6464 9.8200 1.1723 0.88331 1.2200
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange rates,seeStatisticalSupplement5,Exchangeratestatistics.1UptoMarch2005,ECB
referenceratespublishedbytheECB;foradditionaleuroforeignexchangereference indicative rates. 2 Average from 13 January to 29 December 2000.
11 Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
82
XII External sector
12 Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
1999 Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the Euro Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19 1 EER-38 2 Based on the deflators of total sales 3 Based on consumer price indices
In real terms 26 selected industrial countries 5
In real terms based on
In real based on unit In real
terms the deflators labour terms 26
based on of gross costs of based on Non- selected
consumer domestic national consumer Euro area euro area 37 industrial 37 56
Period Nominal price indices product 3 economy 3 Nominal price indices 4 Total countries countries countries 6 countries 5 countries 6 countries 7
1999 96.3 96.1 96.1 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.1 85.3 88.0 85.9 91.8 97.3 85.2 90.8 93.0 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.5 86.0 90.6 86.9 91.6 96.4 86.0 90.1 93.0 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.2 89.5 89.3 95.2 90.5 92.2 95.4 88.4 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.7 101.2 100.4 100.4 107.1 101.4 95.5 94.5 97.4 94.7 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.6 104.9 103.2 103.7 111.7 105.0 95.8 93.2 99.8 94.9 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.4 100.9 101.7 109.6 102.4 94.6 91.9 98.9 92.8 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.3 100.1 100.4 109.6 101.7 93.3 90.3 98.2 91.0 98.5 96.4 95.8
2007 106.1 106.0 101.9 102.5 113.0 103.6 94.2 89.5 102.0 91.2 100.7 97.8 96.9
2008 109.3 108.1 103.2 105.7 117.1 105.5 94.3 88.1 105.1 90.3 102.1 97.7 97.0
2009 110.7 108.8 104.1 110.6 120.2 106.5 94.6 88.8 104.3 90.8 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.1 95.8 102.5 111.6 97.6 92.1 88.5 98.0 87.0 98.7 93.6 91.9
2011 103.3 100.1 93.6 101.0 112.3 97.0 91.7 88.3 97.3 86.2 98.1 92.7 91.3
2012 97.7 94.8 88.2 94.9 107.2 92.2 89.8 88.2 92.3 83.5 95.8 89.7 88.2
2013 101.0 97.7 90.9 97.5 111.8 95.0 92.1 88.7 97.6 85.4 98.1 91.4 90.1
2014 101.4 97.2 90.9 98.4 114.1 95.4 92.8 89.6 97.9 86.2 98.2 91.6 90.7
2015 91.7 87.6 82.8 88.3 105.7 p 86.9 90.0 90.5 89.2 82.5 94.1 86.4 p 85.8
2016 94.4 89.5 84.9 p 89.5 109.7 p 89.2 90.9 91.0 90.7 83.9 94.7 87.5 p 87.0
2017 96.6 p 91.4 ... ... 112.0 p 90.5 ... ... ... ... 96.0 p 88.6 p 87.8
2 0 1 5 Mar 90.0 86.1 103.0 85.0 93.6 85.6 84.6
Apr 89.1 85.3 101.6 83.9 93.4 85.2 84.0
May 91.0 87.0 81.5 87.1 103.9 85.8 89.6 90.4 88.3 81.9 94.0 86.2 85.1
June 91.7 87.7 105.2 86.7 94.1 86.4 85.6
July 90.7 86.6 104.2 85.7 93.7 85.8 85.0
Aug 92.4 88.0 83.1 88.3 107.1 88.0 90.2 90.5 89.5 82.8 94.3 86.7 86.4
Sep 93.2 88.9 108.7 89.2 94.5 87.1 87.1
Oct 93.0 88.8 108.1 88.7 94.6 87.1 86.9
Nov 90.5 86.3 83.1 88.0 105.0 p 86.0 90.2 90.8 89.4 82.9 93.5 85.8 p 85.3
Dec 91.9 87.5 107.1 p 87.5 93.7 86.2 p 85.9
2 0 1 6 Jan 93.0 88.4 108.9 p 88.6 93.9 86.7 p 86.7
Feb 94.2 89.3 84.7 p 89.3 110.3 p 89.8 90.8 91.1 90.3 83.8 94.4 87.2 p 87.1
Mar 93.6 88.8 109.0 p 88.9 94.5 87.0 p 86.7
Apr 94.4 89.5 109.8 p 89.4 94.9 87.6 p 87.1
May 94.6 89.9 85.1 p 89.8 110.2 p 89.9 90.9 91.1 90.6 84.1 94.8 87.7 p 87.4
June 94.4 89.7 109.8 p 89.5 94.6 87.6 p 87.2
July 94.6 89.8 109.5 p 89.1 94.8 87.6 p 86.9
Aug 94.9 90.0 85.3 p 89.7 110.0 p 89.4 91.1 91.0 91.1 84.1 95.0 87.7 p 87.1
Sep 95.1 90.1 110.2 p 89.6 95.1 87.8 p 87.2
Oct 95.1 90.3 110.0 p 89.4 95.4 87.9 p 87.1
Nov 94.6 89.6 84.6 p 89.3 109.6 p 88.9 90.9 90.9 90.7 83.8 94.7 87.4 p 86.7
Dec 93.7 88.9 108.6 p 88.2 94.7 87.3 p 86.6
2 0 1 7 Jan 93.9 89.1 109.0 p 88.4 94.5 87.1 p 86.4
Feb 93.4 88.8 83.4 p 88.3 108.1 p 87.8 90.5 90.8 90.0 83.2 94.4 87.0 p 86.1
Mar 94.0 89.2 108.5 p 87.9 94.7 87.2 p 86.2
Apr 93.7 89.0 108.2 p 87.7 94.4 87.0 p 86.0
May 95.6 90.5 84.7 p 89.3 110.5 p 89.3 91.6 91.4 91.9 84.2 95.4 88.1 p 87.1
June 96.3 91.2 111.4 p 90.0 95.9 88.5 p 87.6
July 97.6 92.4 113.3 p 91.5 96.6 89.2 p 88.5
Aug 99.0 93.6 87.7 p 92.1 115.0 p 92.8 93.2 91.4 95.9 85.8 97.2 89.8 p 89.2
Sep 99.0 93.6 115.0 p 92.7 97.4 89.9 p 89.4
Oct 98.6 p 93.1 114.8 p 92.4 97.1 p 89.5 p 89.0
Nov 98.5 p 93.0 ... ... 115.0 p 92.4 ... ... ... ... 97.2 p 89.5 p 89.1
Dec 98.8 p 93.3 115.3 p 92.6 97.5 p 89.8 p 89.3
2 0 1 8 Jan 99.4 p 93.8 116.1 p 93.2 p 98.0 p 90.1 p 89.6
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and
economy’spricecompetitivenessisconsistentwiththeprocedureusedbytheECBto Venezuela.3Annualandquarterlyaverages.4DataforArgentinaarecurrentlynot
computetheeffectiveexchangeratesoftheeuro(seeMonthlyReport,November availableduetothestateofemergencyinthenationalstatisticalsystemdeclaredby
2001, pp 50-53, May 2007, pp 31-35 and August 2017, pp 41-43). For more thegovernmentofArgentinaon7January2016.Asaconsequence,Argentinaisnot
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No 134 includedinthecalculationoftheEER-38CPIdeflatedseriesfromFebruary2016.The
(www.ecb.eu).Adeclineinthefiguresimpliesanincreaseincompetitiveness.1ECB policy regarding the inclusion of Argentina will be reconsidered in the future de-
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral pending on further developments. 5 Euro area countries (from 2001 including
exchangeratesoftheeuroagainstthecurrenciesofthefollowingcountries:Austra- Greece,from2007includingSlovenia,from2008includingCyprusandMalta,from
lia,Bulgaria,Canada,China,Croatia,Czechia,Denmark,HongKong,Hungary,Japan, 2009includingSlovakia,from2011includingEstonia,from2014includingLatvia,
Norway,Poland,Romania,Singapore,SouthKorea,Sweden,Switzerland,theUnited from2015includingLithuania)aswellasCanada,Denmark,Japan,Norway,Sweden,
KingdomandtheUnitedStates.Wherecurrentpriceandwageindiceswerenotavai- Switzerland,theUnitedKingdomandtheUnitedStates.6Euroareacountries(see
lable,estimateswereused.2ECBcalculations.Includescountriesbelongingtothe footnote5)andcountriesbelongingtotheEER-19group.7Euroareacountriesand
EER-19 group (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, countries belonging to the EER-38 group (see footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
83•
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica-
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail-
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division.
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web-
site.
Annual Report June 2017
– Outlook for the German economy – macro-
economic projections for 2017 and 2018
Financial Stability Review and an outlook for 2019
– Design and implementation of the European
fiscal rules
Monthly Report
July 2017
For information on the articles published be- – The market for corporate bonds in the low-
tween 2000 and 2017 see the index attached interest- rate environment
to the January 2018 Monthly Report. – The development of government interest ex-
penditure in Germany and other euro area
countries
Monthly Report articles – Return on private financial assets taking into
account inflation and taxes
March 2017 – The danger posed to the global economy by
– German balance of payments in 2016 protectionist tendencies
– Federal states’ cyclical adjustment in the con- – Changes to the MFI interest rate statistics
text of the debt brake
August 2017
April 2017 – The current economic situation in Germany
– The role of banks, non- banks and the central
bank in the money creation process September 2017
– Demographic change, immigration and the – Monetary policy indicators at the lower
potential output of the German economy bound based on term structure models
– Distributed ledger technologies in payments
May 2017 and securities settlement: potential and risks
– The current economic situation in Germany – The performance of German credit institu-
tions in 2016
– Changes to the investment funds statistics:
scope enhancements, results and outlook

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
84•
October 2017 Statistical Supplements to the
– Global liquidity, foreign exchange reserves Monthly Report
and exchange rates of emerging market
economies 1 Banking statistics1, 2
– The natural rate of interest 2 Capital market statistics1, 2
– The supervisory review and evaluation pro- 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
cess for smaller institutions and proportion- 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
ality considerations 5 Exchange rate statistics2
– The Eurosystem’s new money market statis-
tical reporting – initial results for Germany
– The new ESCB insurance statistics – inte- Special Publications
grated reporting flow and initial results
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,
November 2017 November 1996 3
– The current economic situation in Germany
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im
December 2017 Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May
– Outlook for the German economy – macro- 19973
economic projections for 2018 and 2019
and an outlook for 2020 Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan- bis 1989, August 19993
cing in 2016
– Mark-ups of firms in selected European The market for German Federal securities,
countries May 2000
– The Eurosystem’s financial market infrastruc-
ture – origin and future set-u p Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:
MEMMOD, June 2000
January 2018
– The impact of the internationalisation of Bundesbank Act, September 2002
German firms on domestic investment
– The importance of bank profitability and Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im
bank capital for monetary policy Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March
– Developments in corporate financing in the 20133
euro area since the financial and economic
crisis Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
– Finalising Basel III bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh-
rungsunion, April 20053
February 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April
2008
For footnotes, see p 86•.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
85•
Special Statistical Publications Discussion Papers*
1 Banking statistics guidelines, 33/ 2017
July 20172, 4 Moral suasion in regional government bond
markets
2 Banking statistics customer classification,
July 20172 34/ 2017
A severity function approach to scenario selec-
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen, tion
July 20132, 3
35/ 2017
4 Financial accounts for Germany 2011 to Why do banks bear interest rate risk?
2016, May 20172
36/2017
5 Extrapolated results from financial state- Liquidity provision as a monetary policy tool:
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2015, the ECB’s non-standard measures after the
December 20162 financial crisis
6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 37/2017
deutscher Unternehmen von 2013 bis 2014, A stress test framework for the German resi-
May 20172, 3 dential mortgage market – methodology and
application
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of
payments statistics, September 20132 38/2017
Changes in education, wage inequality and
8 The balance of payments statistics of the working hours over time
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition,
February 1991o 39/2017
Appropriate monetary policy and forecast dis-
9 Securities deposits, August 2005 agreement at the FOMC
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 01/ 2018
April 20171, 2 An analysis of non- traditional activities at Ger-
man savings banks – Does the type of fee and
11 Balance of payments by region, commission income matter?
July 2013
02/ 2018
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der Mixed frequency models with MA components
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113
03/ 2018
On the cyclical properties of Hamilton‘s regres-
sion filter
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p 86•.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2018
86•
Banking legislation 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute
of the European System of Central Banks 1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con-
and of the European Central Bank, June tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
1998 3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue,
2 Banking Act, July 20142 which may be of a more recent date than the English one.

