Monthly Report
August 2018
Vol 70  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 17 August 2018.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for 
 selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank   can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank  
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Recent developments in euro area export activity  ...............................................................  16
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  21
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  22
Developments in the real portfolio returns of households in Germany  ................................  32
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  38
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  48
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  57
Excursus: the use of reserves and off- budget entities by central and state government  ...... 69Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
5

Overview
German economy back 
to stronger growth in the 
second quarter
Following a slight slowdown in growth over 
the past few quarters, global economic activity 
rebounded in the second quarter of 2018. The 
upswing stabilised in the advanced economies, 
in particular. The United States recorded its 
strongest growth in real gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) in nearly four years. After a setback 
in the first quarter, the Japanese economy 
returned  to its path of growth, while in the 
United Kingdom the pace of expansion picked 
up distinctly. Euro area economic output, 
meanwhile, continued to increase at an un -
changed moderate rate. The high level of 
growth in China also remained largely stable 
compared to its international peers.
Despite ongoing efforts to reach negotiated 
solutions, several trade policy conflicts escal -
ated. However, this was probably not the main 
reason why sentiment in the manufacturing 
sector, while still fundamentally positive, has 
clouded over since the beginning of the year. 
Recent survey results have been less favour -
able, particularly among those economies 
which had benefited from particularly buoyant 
industrial activity in 2017. In those countries 
affected  the most by trade- restrictive measures, 
the relevant purchasing managers’ indices 
barely budged. Nonetheless, an escalation of 
these disputes could weigh considerably on 
global economic growth.
In the second quarter and the early part of the 
third quarter, international financial markets re -
flected the, on the whole, robust economic 
growth, the intensity of which varied from one 
currency area to the next, however. Monetary 
policy decisions, along with expectations of the 
future economic policy stance, also showed 
evidence of these differences. The Federal Re -
serve continued to gradually hike its policy rate. Whereas at the end of March only one interest 
rate move had been expected for the second 
half of 2018, the sound outlook for the econ -
omy meant that the most likely scenario at the 
end of the reporting period was two interest 
rate moves over the rest of the year. By con -
trast, at last report the euro area was not ex -
pected to see an initial interest rate increase 
until the second half of 2019. This was due in 
large measure to the ECB Governing Council’s 
communication of mid-  June, which was per -
ceived as being accommodative. Concern 
about how the trade conflicts between the 
major economic areas would progress, uncer -
tainty about the thrust of the new Italian gov -
ernment’s policy, and the sharp depreciation of 
the Turkish lira led at times to safe haven flows. 
The (implied) volatility in the financial markets, 
however, rose only in isolated cases and re -
mained, on the whole, near its long- run aver -
age. On balance, the yields on ten- year Bunds 
dropped, whereas those on matched- maturity 
US Treasuries rose. At times, the yield spread 
was at its highest level since the late 1980s. 
The GDP- weighted yield for the euro area ex -
cluding Germany picked up as well, particularly 
owing to the increase in the interest rate on 
Italian sovereign debt. The yields on euro area 
corporate bonds likewise inched up slightly. 
Equity markets largely tracked the positive cyc -
lical movement, yet in the euro area the afore -
mentioned political uncertainty dampened the 
dynamics of equity prices. On a weighted aver -
age against the currencies of 19 major trading 
partners, the euro slipped slightly, on balance. 
Significant losses against the US dollar were 
made up for in part by gains against other cur -
rencies.
Given the considerable progress made in sus -
tainably adjusting the path of inflation to its 
medium- term target, at its meeting in June the 
ECB  Governing Council announced the time 
horizon for exiting its net purchases, which had 
begun in March 2015 as part of its extended Global activity 
regains momen -
tum in second 
quarter
As yet no 
major impact of 
further escal -
ation of trade 
policy conflicts
Differences in 
business cycle 
position and 
monetary policy 
stance impact -
ing on financial 
marketsMonetary 
policy : 
ECB Governing  
Council 
announces 
decision  
on asset 
purchases  …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
6

asset purchase programme (EAPP). Subject to 
confirmation of its current assessment of the 
medium- term outlook by newly available data, 
the ECB Governing Council anticipates that it 
will reduce its current volume of monthly asset 
purchases from €30 billion to €15 billion after 
the end of September 2018 and discontinue 
purchases entirely after the end of December 
2018. The principal payments from maturing 
securities are to be reinvested for an extended 
period of time after the end of the net asset 
purchases, and in any case for as long as neces-
sary, in order to maintain favourable liquidity 
conditions and an ample degree of monetary 
accommodation.
While leaving policy rates themselves un -
changed, the ECB  Governing Council, at its 
June meeting, strengthened its forward guid -
ance. It expects policy rates to remain at their 
present levels at least through the summer of 
2019, and in any case for as long as necessary 
to ensure the continued sustained convergence 
of inflation to levels that are below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term.
Following two significantly weaker quarters, in 
the spring months the broad monetary aggre -
gate M3 in the euro area returned closer to the 
robust growth from the previous year. This was 
mainly because lending to the private sector re -
bounded at an accelerated pace. With eco -
nomic growth continuing to be sound, loans to 
non- financial corporations and to households 
again climbed considerably. The growing de -
mand for credit was sustained by the low-  
interest- rate setting and a further easing of 
commercial banks’ credit supply conditions. By 
contrast, the reduction in monthly net asset 
purchases by the Eurosystem effective as of 
January has had a dampening yet, to date, 
limited overall impact on monetary growth.
After a moderate start to the year, aggre gate 
economic activity rebounded quite strongly in 
spring 2018. According to the flash estimate by 
the Federal Statistical Office, the growth rate of 
real GDP , after adjustment for seasonal and cal -endar effects, rose marginally from the first 
quarter of 2018 to 0.5%. Diminishing one- off 
effects such as the extremely virulent wave of 
influenza, which had dampened economic 
activ ity in the winter months, are likely to have 
had merely a limited impact. This meant that 
the economic boom in Germany was still on -
going. However, the pace of growth in the first 
half of 2018 failed to match the high rates of 
the previous year, and the current underlying 
cyclical trend is probably only marginally above 
the poten  tial rate. The already high degree of 
aggreg ate capacity utilisation is therefore only 
edging up. Private consumption – currently the 
linchpin of economic expansion – continued its 
ascent in the spring. Government consumption 
probably likewise rose significantly following a 
distinct decline in the previous quarter, the first 
in many years. Moreover, following a drop at 
the beginning of the year, exports grew moder -
ately. The same is probably the case for com -
mercial investment in machinery and equip -
ment.
In the second quarter of 2018, industrial activ -
ity remained largely listless. Although the 
manufacturing industry may well have contrib -
uted slightly to aggregate growth, it was un -
able to re- assume its previous year’s role as the 
key driver of economic activity. The upturn con -
tinued for business- related services. In spite of 
existing capacity constraints, construction out -
put increased once again.
In Germany, too, the domestic private sector’s 
demand for loans accelerated. This was con -
sistent with the German economy’s sound 
growth, the low level of interest rates and the 
continued easing of banks’ credit supply condi -
tions. For the first time since 2012, the non-  
financial corporations sector recorded the larg -
est net inflows of loans in the reporting quar -
ter; the annual rate of growth of these loans 
rose to 5.9% at end-  June, its highest mark 
since 2008. Loans to households in Germany 
picked up significantly as well, particularly 
owing to brisk demand for housing loans. … and 
strengthens  its 
forward 
guidance 
Monetary 
dynamics in 
the euro area 
increasingly 
driven by loan 
growth
German 
economy  back 
to stronger 
growth in the 
second quarterIndustry weak; 
services and 
construction, 
by contrast, 
dynamic
Accelerated, 
broadly based 
expansion of 
lending to the 
domestic private 
sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
7

Given the stable consumer climate, consumer 
loan growth likewise strengthened.
In the second quarter, the labour market in 
Germany was still in a very good state of 
health, characterised by high employment and 
low unemploy ment. However, the situation did 
not improve as much as in previous quarters: 
although  employment rose markedly, this 
growth was no longer as buoyant. Employ -
ment growth continued to be driven by jobs 
subject to social security contributions. Exclu -
sively low- paid part- time employment, as be -
fore, fell slightly, while self- employment 
dropped more significantly. In the quarter 
under review, unemployment likewise did not 
fall as sharply as in the winter, yet given the 
low level achieved, this fall was still quite con -
siderable. Over the same period, the number of 
job vacancies went up only a little from the 
excep tionally high level previously achieved. 
Other, survey- based leading indicators of 
labour  market developments either fell slightly 
or remained virtually unchanged in the last few 
months. On the whole, the outlook for the 
labour  market remains good.
Negotiated wages rose sharply in the spring 
quarter, reflecting recent wage settlements 
which, given a healthy economy and a tight 
labour  market, were higher than in the last pay 
round. The rise in negotiated rates of pay in -
cluding all additional benefits in spring 2018, at 
3.2% on the year, was significantly higher than 
just three months before. Already in the first 
quarter of 2018, actual earnings had picked up 
somewhat more strongly than in earlier periods. 
This trend could well have continued in the 
second quarter. Following a unanimous deci -
sion, at the end of June the independent Min -
imum Wage Commission submitted a recom -
mendation to the Federal Government to raise 
the general minimum wage from €8.84 per 
hour to €9.19 per hour. In a second stage as of 
January 2020, it should then go up to €9.35 
per hour. The Federal Government announced 
that it would implement this proposal.Consumer prices (measured by the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices, or HICP) continued 
to rise sharply in the second quarter. Roughly 
half of the seasonally adjusted 0.6% quarter-  
on- quarter increase was attributable to energy 
prices, reflecting the distinct rise in crude oil 
prices denominated in US dollars, the effect of 
which was amplified by the depreciation of the 
euro. Food products likewise became markedly 
more expensive. This was due also to hikes in 
the price of tobacco products, which the HICP 
counts under food. Excluding energy and food, 
prices rose similarly moderately to the previous 
quarter. Prices in several sub- sectors of the ser -
vices sector went up, including rents. The prices 
of industrial goods excluding energy barely 
inched upwards on the quarter, but began to 
accelerate over the course of the second quar -
ter. One reason for this may be that import 
prices for the relevant goods rose markedly 
owing to the euro’s depreciation against the 
US dollar. At the commercial producer level, 
too, prices continued their gradual climb. The 
headline annual HICP inflation rate rose clearly 
from 1.3% to 1.9%. It even passed the 2% 
mark in May and June owing to the sharp rise 
in energy prices. Excluding energy and food, 
annual inflation in the spring was more or less 
constant at 1.2% and, consistent with aggre -
gate overutilisation, remained above its longer- 
term average.
The German economy will probably remain on 
a sound growth path in the third quarter as 
well. The rate of growth could end up being 
somewhat slower than the average for the first 
half of the year, however. Thus, industry is not 
expected to make any meaningful contribution 
to aggregate growth. Although the stock of 
orders still being processed remains exception -
ally high and short- term output expectations in 
the manufacturing sector have stabilised at an 
elevated level, new orders received by industry 
were also down in the quarter under review. To 
exacerbate matters, problems encountered 
during the transition to a new emission test 
cycle are likely to have markedly constrained 
motor vehicle production in the summer Labour market 
situation and 
outlook very 
favourable
Negotiated 
wages up more 
strongly in 
springSharp rise in 
consumer prices 
in spring
German 
economy  set 
to stay on 
expansionary 
courseDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
8

months. Private consumption, on the other 
hand, is likely to benefit from the excellent 
labour  market situation and the current strong 
wage hikes, thus maintaining its role as a key 
driver of German economic growth.
German public finances are continuing to de -
velop favourably. The general government 
surplus   is likely to keep rising in the current 
year. The debt ratio has remained on its down -
ward trend and is expected to come close to 
the 60% limit by the end of the year. Public 
finances  are benefiting from the favourable 
economy. In addition, temporary burdens have 
declined because the effect of the nuclear fuel 
tax repayment in 2017 has expired. Revenue 
has been on the rise as well, even independent 
of the cyclical upswing. This is being supported 
by the structurally positive labour market devel -
opment, which has also been dampening ex -
penditure growth. While interest expenditure 
has been decreasing, expenditure in other 
areas has gone up significantly.
As things stand, the framework conditions for 
public finances also look set to remain positive 
in the medium term. However, the surplus 
could well decline since a significant fiscal loos -
ening is in the offing. Measures to that effect 
are enshrined in the Federal Government coali -
tion agreement and are currently being grad -
ually fleshed out. State and local governments 
will likewise probably make greater use of their 
fiscal leeway.
The current situation, which is good now and 
will probably remain so in the years to come, 
should not detract from the long- term chal -
lenges, which include demographic trends. To 
that extent, the rapid reduction in the debt 
ratio, making public finances better prepared 
for these challenges, is a welcome develop -
ment. This will also render budgets less vulner -
able to rising interest rates. However, the cur -
rent pension policy plans will increase the pres -
sure already resulting from demographic 
trends. The vast majority of the additionally 
envisaged burdens on pension insurance are to be initially funded from contributions. Only as 
from 2025 would this impose a relatively heavy 
burden on the Federal budget. A more appro -
priate idea would be to use Federal grants, ie 
via general tax revenue, to fund the new non- 
insurance- related payments. This would, more -
over, largely obviate the need for the planned 
limits to the long- term contribution rate and 
pension level up until 2025. According to the 
calculations presented, excluding the additional 
burdens, only for the pension level would these 
limits have become binding in 2025.
The outlook for pension insurance post-2025 is 
currently uncertain. Demographic trends will 
exert an increasing burden from then on, and 
fundamental pension reform has been an -
nounced. Reaching a quick agreement would 
give all parties involved considerably more 
planning certainty. In the process, long- term 
projections should be conducted in order to 
make transparent the expected trends and 
burden- sharing. The currently sound economic 
and financial situation should not entice 
decision- makers to shift the adjustment pres -
sure unilaterally to the central government 
budget. Given the tax burden going forward, 
domestic tax conditions should not be disre -
garded, either. Raising the statutory retirement 
age beyond 67 years could also contribute 
towards  stabilising pension finances. As this 
would also dampen the decline in headcount 
employment, potential growth and the tax 
base could be supported in this manner as 
well. In other countries, the statutory pension 
age is pegged, for instance, to life expectancy.
In early July, the fiscal planning for the central 
government budget as from 2019 was adopted. 
The Federal Government is sticking to its target 
of a balanced budget, which means it will con -
tinue its policy of no new net borrowing. It is 
making plans for considerable structural def -
icits, however. The only way it will be able to 
comply with the debt brake is by tapping 
reserves . Although the plans for this year and 
the next appear, on the whole, to be prudent, 
the room for manoeuvre is likely to be increas -Favourable 
development of 
public finances 
in current year
Fiscal loosening 
will cause 
surplus  to 
decline in 
coming  years
Put pension 
finances on 
sound footing 
and …… improve 
planning 
certainty 
Central 
government  
increasingly 
utilising  its fiscal 
leewayDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
9

ingly exhausted by 2022. The solidarity sur -
charge is set to be maintained in some places, 
which is legally contentious. Amongst other 
things, convergence towards international 
agreements regarding defence expenditure or 
development aid could entail an additional 
fiscal  need.
The Federal Government’s plans are difficult to 
analyse. Copious use of reserves and off-  
budget entities is making them ever more com -
plex. Relevant information on the debt brake, 
which should be one of the centrepieces of 
budget planning, is lacking as well. Thus, struc -tural net borrowing as from 2020 cannot be 
gauged because there are no budget estimates 
for off- budget entities. In addition, risks cannot 
be readily assessed because the high global 
provisions for as yet unspecified additional or 
reduced revenues or expenditures, as a poten -
tial buffer, have not been explained in detail. 
The reserve withdrawals – which are probably 
only planned as an initial measure – mask the 
underlying structural fiscal position. It would be 
desirable to heighten the transparency of plan -
ning by providing timely, comprehensive infor -
mation.Planning is not 
transparentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
Following a slight slowdown in growth over 
the past few quarters, global economic activity 
rebounded in the second quarter of 2018. The 
upswing stabilised in the advanced economies 
in particular. The United States recorded its 
strongest growth in real gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) in nearly four years. After a setback 
in the first quarter, the Japanese economy 
returned  to its path of growth, while in the 
United Kingdom the pace of expansion picked 
up distinctly. In the euro area, the aggregate 
economic upturn carried on unchanged at a 
moderate pace. The high level of growth in 
China compared to its international peers also 
remained largely stable. At the same time, the 
gradual overall economic recovery in Russia 
continued, while a temporary downturn in Bra -
zil is on the horizon, partially due to one- off 
effects.
In line with the most recent –  and overall 
favour  able – economic data, the staff of the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) confirmed 
its projections for the global economy from the 
April edition of the World Economic Outlook in 
July. Despite relatively small downward revi -
sions in the projections for some European 
economies and Japan, as well as a distinct 
downward revision for Latin America, buoyant 
growth in global GDP is to be expected this 
and next year. However, not least due to a fur -
ther intensification of trade disputes, the down -
side risks have increased considerably.
Due to infringement of intellectual property 
rights, the United States imposed tariffs on cer -
tain goods imports from China at the begin -
ning of July. These measures could be expanded 
in the coming months to cover additional cat -
egories of goods. Ongoing studies by the US 
government into whether imports of motor ve -
hicles and associated parts affect national secur ity could – as has already been the case 
with aluminium and steel – lead to additional 
trade-  restricting measures. Major trading part -
ners of the United States, including the EU and 
China, were indeed receptive to finding solu -
tions through negotiation, but responded to 
these protectionist steps taken by the United 
States with targeted countermeasures of their 
own. An escalation of these disputes could 
weigh considerably on global economic 
growth.1
Such a risk scenario, along with the measures 
already taken, raises the question as to whether 
protectionist efforts are already having an im -
pact on global economic activity. The deterior -
ation of sentiment –  which nevertheless re -
mains positive  – amongst enterprises in the 
manufacturing sector since the start of the year 
has occasionally been interpreted as an indica -
tion of negative confidence effects.2 However, 
the suggestion that this is the main reason is 
contradicted by the fact that purchasing man -
agers’ indices in the countries that were likely 
to have been most severely affected by trade-  
restrictive measures saw only little change.3 In 
the United States, Mexico, and Canada, this 
index was even higher in July than it had been 
in December of the previous year; in China, it 
was somewhat lower. A normalisation of senti -
ment amongst industry in some European 
countries, which had previously been excep -
tionally buoyant, was the key reason for the Global economy 
more buoyant 
again in second 
quarter
Trade conflicts 
pose significant 
downside 
risk for global 
growth 
outlook  …… but not 
quite enough to 
dampen senti -
ment amongst 
industry
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The danger posed to the 
global economy by protectionist tendencies, Monthly 
Report , July 2017, pp 77-91.
2 A similar argument was most recently presented by the 
staff of the IMF, amongst others, which highlighted the 
fact that more negative survey results had been observed 
particularly in countries with high degrees of openness. See 
International Monetary Fund (2018), G-20 Surveillance 
Note prepared by the staff of the International Monetary 
Fund for the G-20 finance ministers and central bank gov -
ernors meetings from 21 to 22 July 2018.
3 Alongside the United States, these are Mexico, Canada, 
and China. The order reflects their ratios of export value, 
which could be affected by newly introduced or threatened 
tariffs, to GDP .Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
11

downward movement in the global indicator. 
Industrial production also rose in the first half 
of 2018, especially in the advanced economies 
– though it was off from the high rate of the 
previous year – and global trade lost some of 
its momentum.
Against this backdrop, prices of industrial com -
modities have fallen markedly across the board 
since June. Crude oil prices recently saw an -
other slight decline, too. According to figures 
from Bloomberg, a barrel of Brent crude oil 
cost, on average, just over US$74 on the spot 
market in July 2018, after having traded for just 
under US$77 as late as May. The decision by 
OPEC and other major oil-  producing countries 
to increase production is likely to have contrib -
uted to the slight fall in prices. Furthermore, US 
production hit record highs, highlighting the 
vital role that this comparatively price- elastic 
supply has on developments on the oil market. 
By contrast, US sanctions on Iran and the con -
tinuing decline in production in Venezuela, in particular, are likely to have propped up prices. 
There were also temporary production stop -
pages in Libya and Canada. The production 
stoppage in Canada reduced the supply of 
North American oil and thereby helped to nar -
row the price spread between Brent and WTI 
crude oil, which had been very wide at times. 
As this report went to press, the spot price for 
a barrel of Brent crude oil was US$70, repre -
senting a year- on- year increase of around 40%. 
Price reductions, in particular for longer- term 
delivery dates, and declining base effects point 
to annual growth rates falling again.
As a consequence of higher crude oil prices, 
consumer prices for energy in industrial coun -
tries rose considerably over the course of the 
second quarter. At nearly 10%, the year- on- 
year increase in June was double what it had 
been in March. Accordingly, headline consumer 
price inflation grew from 2.0% to 2.3%, the 
highest rate since March 2012. However, if en -
ergy and food are excluded, inflationary pres -
sures remained moderate. As had been the 
case three months earlier, the core rate stood 
at 1.6% in June.
Selected emerging market 
economies
With a year- on- year GDP increase of 6.7%, the 
rate of growth in China in the second quarter 
of 2018 was only negligibly lower than at the 
beginning of the year. Contrary to some fears, 
there was no significant slowdown. The steep 
rise in goods imports in the first half of the year 
as well as purchasing managers’ continually 
favour  able assessment of the current situation 
are consistent with largely stable economic 
develop ments. In the second quarter, private 
consumption emerged as the main driving 
force of economic growth on the demand side. 
According to surveys, sentiment among house -
holds was very positive throughout the report -
ing period. The excellent labour market situ -
ation and only muted consumer price inflation, 
amongst other factors, are likely to have con -Upward 
movement  of 
crude oil prices 
stopped for nowSharper 
consumer  price 
inflation in 
industrial 
countries 
China’s rate of 
growth virtually 
unchangedPurchasing managers’ indices for 
manufacturing in the G20*
Sources: IHS Markit, JP Morgan, World Bank, Haver Analytics 
and Bundesbank calculations. * Excluding Argentina, Saudi Ar-
abia and South Africa owing to insufficient data and Turkey 
owing to idiosyncratic developments completely unrelated to 
trade policy. 1 Weighted with the value added of the manu-
facturing sector.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A S
2017 2018515253545556Seasonally adjusted, monthly data
Canada, China, Mexico, USA1
Total excluding Canada, China, Mexico, USA1Total1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
12

tributed to this. The rate of consumer price 
infla tion even fell slightly in the second quarter 
to 1.8% on the year.
In India, year- on- year economic growth in -
creased to 7.7% at the beginning of the year. It 
seems that this pace could not quite be sus -
tained in the second quarter, which, in any 
case, is suggested by the indicators currently 
available. Industrial production lacked momen -
tum in recent months and, according to sur -
veys, consumer confidence remained low. 
Although  food price inflation declined, head -
line inflation rose. On average for the months 
from April to June, the consumer price index 
(CPI) exceeded the previous year’s value by 
4.8%. In light of these developments, the 
Reserve  Bank of India raised its policy rate in 
June to 6.25%. This was the first time that it 
had tightened its monetary policy stance in 
more than four years.
The overall economic recovery in Brazil made 
only limited progress in the first quarter of 
2018. Compared with the previous year, real 
GDP grew by 1.2%. Official data for the second 
quarter are not yet available. However, after an 
eleven- day lorry drivers’ strike crippled major 
parts of the transport infrastructure in May, a 
temporary setback may be expected. For that 
month, the Central Bank of Brazil’s activity indi -
cator recorded a slide of 3.3% compared with 
April, the largest one- month loss since its in -
ception in 2003. Although the situation nor -
malised again in June, a considerable decline 
was recorded for the quarter as a whole. Espe -
cially strong consumer price inflation was re -
corded in June due to strike- related supply 
bottlenecks and higher food prices. In the 
second quarter, consumer prices were up by an 
average of 3.3% on the year.
According to a provisional estimate, year- on- 
year economic growth in Russia accelerated to 
1.8% in the second quarter, representing per -
sistently moderate growth. Private consump -
tion – which was boosted not least by consid -
erable growth in wages, falling unemployment, and increased lending to households – prob -
ably continued to be an essential pillar of 
growth in the second quarter. The FIFA World 
Cup perhaps also provided a degree of positive 
growth stimulus in June and July.4 At the same 
time, consumer price inflation remained sub -
dued. Annual CPI inflation averaged 2.4% over 
the April to June period.Faster GDP 
growth in India
Probable 
setback  to 
recovery in 
Brazil 
Persistently 
moderate 
growth in RussiaWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and food
and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance LP and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 10 August 2018, or 1 to 16 August 2018 for 
crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201835
30405060708090100110120Monthly averages, log scale
60708090100110
5060
65708090100US dollar basis,
2012 = 100
Industrial
commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beverages
4 The Central Bank of Russia estimates that, for 2018 as a 
whole, the FIFA World Cup resulted in growth stimulus of 
0.1 to 0.2 percentage point. The majority of this is likely to 
be recorded in the second quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
13

United States
In the United States, the economic upswing 
gained momentum in the second quarter. In 
seasonally adjusted terms, overall real eco -
nomic output rose by 1.0% compared with the 
first quarter, in which it had grown by 0.6%. As 
was the case in the preceding quarters, com -
mercial and industrial investment was ex -
panded significantly, though this must also be 
viewed in the context of the tax reform that 
came into effect at the beginning of the year.5 
Extraordinarily brisk foreign business also con -
tributed to the acceleration. In price- adjusted 
terms, exports recorded their strongest growth 
in four and a half years. However, this was par -
tially due to a sharp, and likely unsustainable, 
increase in exports of foodstuffs, feedstuffs and 
beverages.6 The strong underlying dynamic is 
likely to turn out to be more persistent in the 
case of private consumption expenditure, 
which saw substantial expansion following a 
dip in growth at the start of the year. In any 
case, the underlying framework conditions 
for  private consumption remain favourable: 
accord ing to current data, households’ rate of 
saving is – at just under 7% – far above the 
record  lows seen from 2005 to 2007.7 Employ -
ment also continued to rise in July, and the rate 
of unemployment again dropped below 4%. 
Against the background of high aggregate 
capacity utilisation, the annual CPI excluding 
energy and food reached 2.4% in the same 
month. At 2.9%, the headline rate was higher 
still. In light of the overall economic develop -
ments and price trends, the US Federal Reserve 
maintained its stance of gradually normalising 
monetary policy and raised its policy rate by 
25 basis points in June.
Japan
The Japanese economy returned to a path of 
growth in the second quarter. A provisional 
esti mate shows that real GDP grew noticeably 
by a seasonally adjusted 0.5% from the preced -
ing quarter, in which economic output had declined . This countermovement was triggered 
by a substantial increase in domestic demand; 
private consumption in particular picked up 
considerably, while business investment also 
grew more strongly than before. Expenditure in 
private residential investment was reduced 
once again, however. Imports increased in line 
with the buoyant domestic economy. By con -
trast, exports continued to increase only mod -
erately, meaning foreign trade slightly damp -
ened aggregate growth in arithmetical terms. 
Unemployment reached a new cyclical low at 
2.4% in the second quarter. Aggregate wage 
growth accelerated somewhat given the 
favour  able labour market situation, and the 
results  of the spring wage round also suggest 
that momentum has picked up slightly. Infla -
tion, however, has remained extremely muted 
so far. The CPI excluding energy and food in 
June did not exceed the previous year’s level. 
Against this backdrop, the Japanese central 
bank maintained the generally accommodative 
stance of its monetary policy and announced at 
the end of July that it would keep the interest 
rate level low for an extended period of time.
United Kingdom
The cyclical upswing in the United Kingdom 
has picked up steam again. After adjustment 
for the usual seasonal variations, real GDP in 
the second quarter was up by 0.4% from the 
previous period, in which it had risen by only 
0.2%. This stronger increase was primarily due 
to the distinct upturn in the services sector. This 
was particularly true for areas which had been Strong economic 
growth in 
second quarter
Return to 
growthEconomic 
activity  
strengthening 
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The potential macroeco -
nomic impact of US tax reform, Monthly Report, February 
2018, pp 14-16.
6 The sharp upsurge may to some extent reflect Chinese 
buyers’ advance purchases of soybeans, which have been 
subject to higher import duties since July. However, re -
gional data from the trade statistics suggest that, in the 
second quarter, agricultural products from the United 
States sold well in other parts of the world, too.
7 Prior to the most recent comprehensive revision of the 
national accounts, the data had depicted a steep down -
ward trend in the rate of saving since the beginning of 
2016. However, the figure for the first quarter of 2018 was 
revised upwards by nearly 4 percentage points.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
14

especially affected by the unusually harsh wea -
ther conditions at the start of the year accord -
ing to the British Office for National Statistics. 
This picture is supported by the fact that con -
struction output recovered from its decline in 
winter. On the other hand, manufacturing out -
put contracted noticeably. The labour market 
continued to remain resilient, with the un -
employment rate in the quarter ended falling 
to 4.0%, its lowest level since the winter of 
1975. The Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) rose in June by 2.4% on the year, 
as in the previous month. At the beginning of 
August, the Bank of England raised its policy 
rate by 25 basis points to 0.75%, also in light of 
the strengthening economy.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-6),8 the eco -
nomic upswing continued in the second quar -
ter of 2018 as well. Real GDP , after adjustment 
for seasonal variations, rose sharply compared 
to the previous quarter in most countries. Vig -
orous industrial activity contributed to this; in 
the second quarter industrial production in 
these countries exceeded the level of the first 
quarter by 1.8%. On the expenditure side, eco -
nomic growth has still been primarily borne by 
persistently robust private consumption, which 
was buoyed up by the continued improvement 
in the labour market situation. The unemploy -
ment rate decreased by 1.0 percentage point 
on the year in the second quarter, reaching a 
new low at 4.1%. Consumer price inflation rose 
in the second quarter to 2.1% on the year, due 
mainly to higher energy prices. However, the 
sustained sharp growth in wages has, to date, 
barely been reflected in the core components 
of the HICP . Excluding energy and food, con -
sumer prices were up by only 0.8% in the 
second quarter. Headline HICP rates ranged 
from 1.1% in Poland to 2.1% in the Czech 
Repub lic and 2.8% in Hungary through to 
4.5% in Romania. Against the backdrop of 
sharply rising prices, the central banks of 
Romania   and the Czech Republic raised their policy rates in May and June, respectively; the 
Czech central bank raised rates again in August .
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
The economic upturn in the euro area con -
tinued in the second quarter of 2018 at the 
same pace as in the preceding quarter. Accord -
ing to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP in the 
second quarter was up after seasonal adjust -
ment by 0.4% on the quarter, and by 2.2% on 
the year. This firmly established the picture of a 
slowdown in economic growth compared to 
the growth rates observed in the previous year. 
Economic output is no longer likely to have in -
creased much faster than capacity in the first 
half of 2018. This was mainly due to the re -
duced momentum in foreign business. In the 
mean time, there had been expectations of a 
normalisation after exports had once again 
risen exceptionally sharply in the second half of 
2017 (see box on pages 16 and 17). By con -
trast, domestic activity proved to be robust in 
the first half of 2018. Aggregate capacity util -
isation remained strong, and sentiment among 
enterprises and consumers was still confident 
despite some deterioration, suggesting that the 
forces fuelling economic activity are still intact.
Private consumption is likely to have lost some 
momentum in the second quarter. While retail 
sales went up after price and seasonal adjust -
ment, there was a decline in new motor vehicle 
registrations. The sharp increase in consumer 
prices caused largely by oil prices is likely to 
have had a negative impact on households’ 
propensity to purchase. This noticeably damp -
ened the increase in real disposable income. By 
contrast, consumption growth benefited from 
persistently favourable consumer sentiment 
and the continuing improvements in the labour 
market.Continued 
upswing with 
rising consumer 
pricesContinued 
moderate  
upturn
Private 
consumption  
somewhat less 
buoyant
8 This group comprises the non- euro area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech 
Republic , Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
15

Recent developments in euro area export activity
In the fi  rst quarter of 2018, euro area ex-
ports of goods and services as defi  ned in 
the national accounts declined markedly 
after seasonal adjustment, following a very 
strong rise particularly towards the end of 
the past year. Monthly data from the for-
eign trade statistics for goods exports to 
non- euro area countries (extra- euro area 
exports) show a similar picture. Even though 
global economic activity has remained quite 
lively, data for the second quarter do not 
yet promise any improvement. It seems to 
make sense to attribute the slump in ex-
ports at least in part to the past euro appre-
ciation. After all, the euro has experienced a 
signifi  cant trend appreciation since early 
2017.
In order to identify the determinants of ex-
port developments in the fi  rst half of 2018, 
an error correction model is estimated.1 
The econometric model assumes a stable 
long- run relationship between exports,2 
the real effective exchange rate of the euro 
and foreign demand. Deviations from the 
long- run equilibrium diminish in subse-
quent periods (“error correction”). The esti-
mation comprises the period from the fi  rst 
quarter of 2000 to the second quarter of 
2018. The euro’s real effective exchange 
rate is measured against the 38 most im-
portant trading partners and is based on 
consumer prices.3 Foreign demand is ap-
proximated using the weighted average of 
import volumes of the euro area’s trading 
partners.4 Given the lack of current data, 
this analysis uses the simplifying assump-
tion that foreign demand in the second 
quarter of 2018 grew at the same rate as at 
the beginning of the year. The estimated 
model can explain around 80% of the vari-
ation in extra- euro area exports. The esti-
mated coeffi   cients have the expected sign, and the existence of a long- run relationship 
between the variables is confi  rmed. The 
deviation of exports from their long- run 
level is reduced for the subsequent period 
by around one- fi  fth, according to the esti-
mation results.
On the basis of this estimation, dynamic 
simulations can be used to calculate the 
contributions made by the exchange rate 
and foreign demand to export develop-
ments. It turns out that, according to the 
model, the euro’s appreciation distinctly 
dampened euro area exports in the last 
few quarters. What the decomposition 
also shows, though, is that the retarding 
effects of the appreciation in the past year 
were offset by particularly strong growth 
in foreign demand. Although the latter 
subsided markedly at the beginning of 
2018, the positive stimuli generated by for-
eign demand still outweighed the damp-
1 For more on this, see also M Ca’ Zorzi and B Schnatz 
(2010), Explaining and forecasting euro area exports: 
Which competitiveness indicator performs best?, in 
P  De Grauwe (ed), Dimensions of competitiveness, 
MIT Press, pp 121-148.
2 This is based on quarterly, seasonally adjusted nom-
inal exports of goods to non- euro area countries, 
price- adjusted with the producer price index for ex-
ports of goods from the euro area to non- euro area 
countries, taken from the foreign trade statistics.
3 The results remain largely unchanged if an indicator 
based on defl  ators of total sales is used. In order to 
obtain the most up- to- date data possible for a broad 
group of countries, the results are shown here for an 
indicator based on consumer prices, even if a cross- 
country empirical study of the suitability of various 
measures of the real exchange rate (see Deutsche Bun-
desbank, The impact of alternative indicators of price 
competitiveness on real exports of goods and services, 
Monthly Report, January 2016, pp  13-29) leans to-
wards using the indicator based on defl  ators of total 
sales.
4 Such a time series is calculated as part of the prepar-
ation of macroeconomic projections for the euro area 
by the staff of the European Central Bank (ECB). For 
more detailed information concerning the method-
ology, see K Hubrich and T Karlsson (2010), Trade con-
sistency in the context of the Eurosystem projection 
exercises, ECB Occasional Paper No 108.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
16

ening effects  of the euro’s appreciation. It 
must be noted, moreover, that exports 
picked up more strongly in the second half 
of 2017 than predicted by the model. At 
the beginning of 2018, however, this de-
velopment reversed itself, with the positive 
residuals of the second half of 2017 coun-
terbalanced by a considerable negative re-
sidual in the fi  rst quarter of 2018. In the 
second quarter, too, part of the poor ex-
port performance is likely to have remained 
unexplained. Although  the earlier appreci-
ation of the euro continued to weigh on 
exports, this retarding effect has subsided. 
In addition, foreign demand is likely to 
have once again generated positive stim-
uli.
Moreover, there also arises the question as 
to how to frame the slump in exports in the 
fi  rst half of 2018 over a longer- term view. 
To that end, a hypothetical equilibrium path 
of exports is calculated from the estimated 
long- run relationship, taking into account 
actual exchange rate and foreign demand 
patterns. In the fi  nal quarter of 2017, this 
path remained well below the actual vol-
ume of extra- euro area exports. What this 
means is that, in the fi  rst quarter of 2018, 
the estimated error correction mechanism 
had a dampening effect within the model’s 
framework. The unexplained negative re-
sidual could also be a sign that export vol-
ume adjusted more quickly to the long- run 
equilibrium value than on average in the 
quarters underlying the estimation. This de-
velopment could have continued in the 
second quarter. All the same, export vol-
ume probably still surpassed the estimated 
equilibrium value.
In the framework of this model simulation, 
the decline in euro area exports at the be-
ginning of the year is not a worrying slump 
but only part of a process of normalisation 
following an exceptionally favourable devel-opment. Euro area exports can thus be ex-
pected to rebound soon provided the global 
economic environment remains robust.Estimated contributions to the change in 
extra-euro area exports
Sources:  ECB,  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 This 
analysis uses the simplifying assumption that foreign demand 
in the second quarter of 2018 grew at the same rate as at the 
beginning of the year.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18210123
––+++Quarter-on-quarter change
Residual
Foreign demand
Real effective exchange rate
Extra-euro area
exports (%)Contributions in percentage points
1
Deviation of export volumes from the 
estimated long-run equilibrium
Sources:  ECB,  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 This 
analysis uses the simplifying assumption that foreign demand 
in the second quarter of 2018 grew at the same rate as at the 
beginning of the year.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 1832101234
–––++++%
1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
17

The pace of investment activity is likely to have 
picked up in the second quarter. Following the 
drop in the previous quarter, price- adjusted 
spending on machinery and equipment is set to 
have rebounded. Positive impetus probably 
also came once again from investment in build -
ings, as the rise in construction output com -
pared to the previous period suggests.
Spring 2018 saw no more than a subdued 
countermovement in exports following a de -
cline in the first quarter. Trade between euro 
area member states rose substantially on the 
quarter, and business with non- euro area coun -
tries also improved. The distinct rise in export 
prices, however, meant that there was no in -
crease in the volume of exports to countries 
outside the euro area. Delayed dragging effects 
from the appreciation of the euro and normal -
isation after an especially vibrant second half of 
2017 were probably major factors in this. Im -
ports likely proved to be somewhat more buoy -ant than exports, in keeping with the robust 
domestic economy.
Following a weak preceding quarter, industrial 
production moved onto a sideways trajectory, 
remaining at virtually the same level in the 
second quarter as in the first after seasonal ad -
justment. While energy production fell sharply, 
a distinctly higher volume of consumer goods 
were manufactured. By contrast, the produc -
tion of intermediate goods and capital goods 
remained largely unchanged.
The picture in most member states has been 
shaped by the moderately upward- moving 
underlying cyclical trend, although GDP growth 
continued to be strong in some, generally 
smaller, countries. In France, real GDP rose by 
just 0.2% on the quarter after seasonal adjust -
ment, as it had at the start of the year. Private 
consumption was down slightly after having 
increased  only marginally in the first quarter. In 
addition to higher consumer prices, the tax 
measures that took effect at the beginning of 
the year were probably also a factor in the 
weak consumption dynamics. Investment in -
creased visibly, and there was a noticeable 
build- up of inventories. This is likely to be re -
lated to the fact that imports rose much more 
sharply than exports. Aggregate output in Italy 
also experienced only muted growth. In the 
second quarter, seasonally adjusted real GDP 
was up by 0.2% following 0.3% in the preced -
ing quarter. Despite the rather sharp increase in 
employment, private consumption rose only 
moderately. This is at least what is suggested 
by the weak growth in retail and new motor 
vehicle registrations. There was probably a 
small increase in investment in machinery and 
equipment, while construction investment is 
likely to have once again been trending side -
ways. Foreign business is unlikely to have pro -
vided much of a growth stimulus. Italy’s ex -
ports of goods were up only slightly in the 
second quarter after adjustment for seasonal 
and price variations. Spain experienced the 
strongest growth among the major member 
states, although quarterly GDP growth fell from Increased 
investment 
Muted growth 
in exportsIndustrial pro -
duction virtually 
unchanged
Moderate 
economic  
growth in most 
countriesAggregate output in the euro area *
98100102104106108110112
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2018
Source: Eurostat. * Affected by a level shift in Irish GDP from 
2015 Q1 onwards.
Deutsche Bundesbank–3–2–10+1Lin scale
Quarter-on-quarter change%Log scale
GDP2010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted, quarterly dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
18

0.7% to 0.6% in the second quarter. Economic 
growth was driven primarily by the sharp ex -
pansion of investment, while private consump -
tion lost momentum, and exports even de -
clined markedly. GDP also increased strongly 
in the Netherlands, and economic growth in 
Austria, Finland and Portugal was also quite 
considerable. Belgium reported only moderate 
growth.
Labour market conditions continued to im -
prove in the second quarter. The number of un -
employed people in the second quarter fell by 
345,000 compared to the first quarter of 2018, 
after seasonal adjustment, and by around 1.2 
million on the year. The standardised un -
employment rate in June fell to 8.3%, after 
8.5% in March and 9.0% in June one year earl -
ier. Employment figures for the first quarter 
show a persistently strong increase in employ -
ment, even if that growth is somewhat lower 
than in the final quarter of 2017. The number 
of employed persons was up on the year by 2.2 
million, or 1.4%, while wage growth acceler -
ated perceptibly. Given an unchanged number 
of average hours worked, the year- on- year rise 
in gross hourly earnings accelerated by 0.4 per -
centage point to 2.0% in the first quarter com -
pared to the final quarter of 2017. Growth in 
hourly employee compensation rose to 1.9% 
over the same period.
Consumer prices were up by a seasonally ad -
justed 0.6% in the spring of 2018, indicating 
another considerable increase. As in the final 
quarter of 2017 and in the first quarter of 2018, 
energy prices were raised significantly on the 
back of higher crude oil prices. In addition, 
food prices went up distinctly, as did prices for 
services. By contrast, the prices for non- energy 
industrial goods continued to rise moderately. 
Annual headline HICP inflation increased mark -
edly from 1.3% to 1.7%. The absence of base 
effects, particularly in unprocessed food, the 
price of which had been especially high at the 
start of 2017 on account of the weather, was 
also a factor.Ongoing 
improvement 
in the labour 
market
Consumer prices 
up distinctly 
again in springEuro area trade in goods
Sources:  Eurostat  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Extra-euro 
area exports price adjusted using the producer price index for 
extra-euro area exports. 2 Extra-euro area imports price adjus-
ted using the price index for extra-euro area imports. 3 Intra-
euro area exports price adjusted using the producer price index 
for intra-euro area exports.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1885901001101201301402010 = 100, quarterly data,
price and seasonally adjusted, log scale
8590100110 110120130140
130
90100110120Imports 2
Intra-trade 3Exports1
Contributions to the euro area inflation 
rate (HICP)
Sources: Eurostat and the ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 181.51.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.0
–––++++++++Percentage points, quarterly averages
Headline HICP inflation
Year-on-year 
percentage changeEnergy
Food
Industrial products excluding energy
ServicesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
19

Excluding energy and food, consumer prices 
increased  by 0.9% on the year in the second 
quarter, which is much the same as in the pre -
vious two quarters. Services once again ac -
counted for the largest contribution to core 
inflation, while that of non- energy industrial 
goods was more on the low side. This was not 
only due to the greater weight of services in 
the HICP basket of goods (44% compared with 
26% for non- energy industrial goods) but also 
to the generally stronger price dynamics.
In July, consumer prices continued to increase 
in seasonally adjusted terms. Energy prices 
were up again significantly, while the prices of 
other products also rose somewhat. Accord -
ingly, overall annual headline HICP inflation and 
annual HICP inflation excluding energy and 
food increased to 2.1% and 1.1% respectively.The unabatedly positive sentiment among 
enter  prises and consumers suggests that the 
economic upturn in the euro area will con -
tinue. Though the Purchasing Managers’ Index 
for the whole economy dropped a little in July 
following a rise in June, it still far exceeded the 
expansion threshold. The European Commis -
sion’s indicator of business and consumer sen -
timent remained virtually unchanged at a rela -
tively high level. On the whole, major driving 
forces behind the euro area’s economy remain 
intact. These include favourable financing con -
ditions, the improved state of the labour mar -
ket and the expanding global economy. Exter -
nal risks to economic growth arise primarily 
from protectionist tendencies, while internal 
risks arise from the movement away from cru -
cial structural reforms as well as uncertain gov -
ernment setups in some member states.Core inflation 
stable at 
around 1%
Further rise in 
consumer prices 
in JulyEconomic 
activity  likely to 
remain robustDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
20

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
In the light of further progress towards a sus -
tained adjustment in the path of inflation to 
the medium- term target, the Governing Coun -
cil of the ECB made a number of decisions 
regard ing non- standard monetary policy meas -
ures and key interest rates at its meeting in 
June. As already announced, the purchases 
under the expanded asset purchase programme 
(APP) will continue at a monthly pace of €30 
billion net until the end of September 2018. 
Moreover, subject to incoming data confirming 
the Governing Council’s medium- term inflation 
outlook, it is now looking at reducing the net 
volume of monthly asset purchases to €15 bil -
lion after the end of September 2018 and dis -
continuing purchases entirely after the end of 
December 2018. The Governing Council still 
intends  to maintain its policy of reinvesting the 
principal payments for an extended period of 
time after the end of the net purchases, and in 
any case for as long as necessary to maintain 
favourable liquidity conditions and an ample 
degree of monetary accommodation.
The Governing Council of the ECB kept the key 
interest rates unchanged in the reporting 
period. The main refinancing rate thus remains 
at 0%, while the marginal lending rate stands 
at 0.25% and the deposit facility rate at 
-0.40%. At the same time, the ECB Governing 
Council strengthened its forward guidance on 
the future development of key interest rates 
following its June meeting. It now anticipates 
that policy rates will remain at their present 
levels at least through the summer of 2019, 
and in any case for as long as necessary to 
ensure  the continued sustained convergence of 
inflation to levels that are below, but close to, 
2% over the medium term.
The ECB Governing Council based its decision 
to probably terminate net asset purchases after December 2018 on the conclusion that pro -
gress towards a sustained adjustment in the 
path of inflation has been considerable. The 
Governing Council believes that the underlying 
strength of the euro area economy and well-  
anchored inflation expectations provide 
grounds to be confident that the convergence 
of inflation towards levels below, but close to, 
2% in the medium term will continue in the 
near future as well as after the reduction and 
discontinuation of the net purchases. Even so, 
it believes that a significant degree of monetary 
policy accommodation is still needed to sup -
port the build- up of domestic price pressures 
and headline inflation developments over the 
medium term. The decisions taken will ensure 
that this monetary policy support is maintained. 
Following the July meeting, the Governing 
Council recently confirmed that, despite uncer -
tainties related to global factors, the data avail -ECB Governing 
Council 
announces 
anticipated end 
of net asset 
purchases 
ECB Governing 
Council 
strengthens 
forward  
guidance  on key 
interest ratesSubstantial pro -
gress towards 
sustained 
adjustment in 
inflation
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 Three-
month Euribor less three-month Eonia swap rate. • Average 
1 to 15 August 2018.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 20180.40.200.20.40.6
––+++
01020Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
21

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 3 May 2018 and 31 July 2018 saw a 
marked increase in euro area liquidity needs 
stemming from autonomous factors (see the 
table below). Averaging €1,345.7 billion in the 
June- July 2018 reserve period, these needs 
were €70.7 billion up on their average level in 
the March- May 2018 reserve period. In year- 
on- year terms, ie compared with the June- July 
2017 reserve period, this even translated into 
an increase of around €257 billion. Overall, 
the sum of the autonomous factors fl  uctuated 
within a broad corridor of between €1,233.3 
billion and €1,386.7 billion in the two reserve 
maintenance periods under review. The 
above- mentioned average increase in liquidity 
needs of €70.7 billion arose, in particular, 
from the aggregate decline in net foreign 
assets and other factors. These autonomous 
factors, which are considered together be-
cause of liquidity- neutral valuation effects, 
contracted by €30.2 billion in net terms. 
Moreover, compared with the fi  gures for the March- May 2018 period, increases in bank-
notes in circulation and government deposits 
with the Euro system, by €24.6 billion and 
€15.9 billion respect ively, each helped to push 
up the calculated liquidity needs. Coming in at 
an average of €1,183.6 billion (the value of 
Eurosystem banknotes in circulation) and 
€263.4 billion (the volume of government 
deposits ), both autonomous factors recorded 
sizeable stock levels in the June- July 2018 
maintenance period. The minimum reserve 
require ment stood at €124.7 billion in the 
same period.
During the reporting period, market partici-
pants demonstrated a particular interest in the 
fi  rst voluntary early repayments of the fi  rst 
oper ation belonging to the second series of 
targeted  longer- term refi  nancing operations 
(TLTROs II). However, the credit institutions 
only took limited advantage of this option. A 
total of no more than €11.0 billion of the pre-
viously outstanding €396.0 billion under this 
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2018
3 May
to
19 June20 June
to
31 July
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) – 11.4 – 13.2
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 29.5 – 45.4
3 Net foreign assets 1 –  1.9 +  9.9
4 Other factors 1 –  6.9 – 31.3
Total +  9.3 – 80.0
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  0.1 +  0.3
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  2.2 – 13.1
(c) Other operations + 43.1 + 38.5
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.0 +  0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) +  8.5 +  7.3
Total + 49.3 + 33.0
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) + 58.6 – 47.0
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) +  0.7 –  0.9
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
22

tender had been repaid at the end of June. 
Owing to the attractive conditions offered by 
the TLTROs II – depending on the lending be-
haviour of a given credit institution, that insti-
tution’s interest rate can, in a best- case scen-
ario, mirror the deposit facility rate of -0.40% 
– market players had already anticipated a 
modest level of repayment in advance. The 
total outstanding amount for all four TLTROs II 
now stands at around €726 billion. Further-
more, in June, banks also had the option of 
voluntarily repaying four TLTRO I operations 
prior to maturity, with actual use of this facility 
amounting to €3.5 billion in total. The out-
standing, relatively low volumes pertaining to 
the eight TLTRO I operations and totalling 
€8.9 billion are scheduled to mature at the 
end of September 2018, at which time there 
will once again also be early repayment op-
tions for the TLTROs II. During the period 
under review, the outstanding tender volume 
was largely determined by the aforemen-
tioned repayments; in the June- July 2018 re-
serve period, it averaged around €746 billion, 
putting it just over €15 billion below the aver-
age fi  gure for the March- May 2018 period. Of 
this tender volume, a relatively small propor-
tion was again accounted for by the three- 
month tenders and the main refi  nancing op-
erations, which recorded average volumes of 
€7.2 billion and €2.1 billion respectively in the 
June- July 2018 reserve period. This repre-
sented only a slight change compared with 
the March- May 2018 reserve period, in which 
they had posted average volumes of €7.7 bil-
lion and €1.9 billion respectively (see the chart 
on page 25).
The Eurosystem continued to provide the bulk 
of central bank liquidity through the monetary 
policy asset purchase programmes (see the 
adjacent table), which accounted for just over 
three- quarters of the liquidity provided via the 
open market operations, according to the 
average fi  gures for the June- July 2018 reserve 
period. The average balance sheet holdings of 
all purchase programmes in this period stood 
at €2,558 billion, €82 billion above the corres-
ponding average holdings recorded for the 
May- March 2018 reserve period.Despite this injection of liquidity, the level of 
excess liquidity declined slightly on balance in 
the period under review. At an average vol-
ume of €1,834 billion in the June- July 2018 
reserve period, it was just under €5 billion 
below its level in the March- May 2018 period, 
notwithstanding a slight hike in the May- June 
2018 average for a time to a fi  gure of €1,851 
billion. This represented a continuation of the 
trend evident since the end of last year that 
saw excess liquidity cease to grow by any sig-Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as 
at 10 August 
2018
Active programmes
 PSPP + 66.5 2,046.1
CBPP3 +  3.6 256.7
CSPP + 12.8 165.7
ABSPP +  0.7 27.8
Completed programmes 
 SMP –  6.2 74.3
CBPP1 –  0.7 4.5
CBPP2 –  0.3 4.0
Deutsche BundesbankCentral bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankMar Apr May June July Aug
20180.50.40.30.20.10
–––––Daily data
€ bn% pa
1,6001,8002,000Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for the reserve
maintenance period 2Eonia
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
23

nifi  cant margin, or even shrink, primarily be-
cause of greater liquidity needs stemming from 
autonomous factors (see the above chart).
Thanks to the ongoing prevalence of ex-
tremely comfortable liquidity conditions, over-
night rates continued to be geared towards 
the deposit facility rate (see the chart on 
page 23). In the May- June 2018 and June- July 
2018 reserve periods, Eonia averaged -0.36% 
and thus remained above the deposit facility 
rate. Throughout the period under review, Eo-
nia fl  uctuated between -0.37% and -0.35%. 
The Eonia volumes reported for unsecured 
overnight money once again contracted, gen-
erating an average daily turnover of €4.6 bil-
lion in the June- July 2018 reserve period and 
€3.2 billion in the previous period. The volume 
concerned had averaged €5.6 billion in the 
March- May 2018 reserve period. Meanwhile, 
in the period under review, secured overnight 
money in GC Pooling traded at an average of 
-0.44% in the ECB basket. This resulted in an 
average rate that was one basis point above 
the previous review period and that continued to trade below the deposit facility rate. Over-
night money in the ECB EXTended basket, 
with its larger set of eligible securities, traded 
at -0.40% on average in the May- June 2018 
reserve period and at -0.39% in the June- July 
2018 reserve period. Compared with previous 
periods and the same period of the preceding 
year, at an average of €7.1 billion, the under-
lying GC  Pooling Overnight turnover in the 
two baskets was up in overall terms. In this 
context, at an average level of €7.6 billion, 
turnover in the June- July 2018 reserve period 
was once again higher than in the previous 
period, when it had averaged €6.6 billion. The 
trading volume had stood at an average level 
of €5.9 billion in the March- May 2018 reserve 
period. The end of the half- year period at the 
close of June 2018 again had an impact on 
overnight rates and their associated turnover. 
While Eonia was found to be up on the day by 
one basis point, secured overnight money in 
the EXT basket was trading two basis points 
lower at a rate of -0.46%. Reduced turnover 
was observed for unsecured and secured 
overnight money alike.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor  purchase  programme  (CSPP).  2 Current  account  holdings  minus  the  minimum  reserve  requirement  plus  the  deposit  facility. 
3 Volume so small it is hardly visible. 4 The marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank2,0001,5001,00050005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,500
––––+++++++
January February March April May June July August
2018Current account 
holdings in excess 
of the reserve 
requirementDeposit facility 4Purchase
programmes 1
Main refinancing
operations 3
Three-month 
tenders 3
Second series of
targeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations
(TLTRO II)First series of
targeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations
(TLTRO I) 3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
24

able in the meantime still point to solid and 
broad- based economic growth in the euro 
area.
On 10 August, the Eurosystem’s asset holdings 
under the APP came to €2,496.3 billion. At 
€2,046.1 billion, the largest share of this by far 
was attributable to securities holdings under 
the public sector purchase programme (PSPP). 
At last count, the average residual maturity of 
the PSPP portfolio remained unchanged at 7.6 
years. The outstanding amounts acquired to 
date under the third covered bond purchase 
programme (CBPP3) and the asset-  backed 
secur  ities purchase programme (ABSPP) came 
to €256.7 billion and €27.8 billion respectively. 
Holdings under the corporate sector purchase 
programme (CSPP) totalled €165.7 billion as at 
10 August.
On 27  June, credit institutions had their first 
chance to use the voluntary repayment option 
for the first operation of the second series of targeted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTROs II). A total of 41 institutions paid back 
loans totalling around €11 billion to the Euro -
system, which was only a relatively small pro -
portion of the outstanding tender volume of 
just under €400 billion. The attractive interest 
rates that apply to the entire maturity of the 
TLTRO II are probably one of the major reasons 
why early repayments were not higher.
Excess liquidity fell slightly in the period under 
review, declining by a total of €4 billion to 
€1,909 billion. From as early as the end of last 
year, the volume of excess liquidity has no 
longer risen significantly, but has instead moved 
within a certain range depending on fluctu -
ations in the autonomous factors. Here, trend 
growth in the autonomous factors is partially 
offsetting the additional liquidity provided by 
means of the monthly net purchases under the 
APP , which have been reduced to €30 billion 
since January 2018.Purchase 
volumes  still 
in line with 
announced 
target 
41 banks repay 
€11 billion from 
the first TLTRO II 
operationExcess liquidity 
shows slight 
declineOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 201803006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,0003,300€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
25

During the period under review, the unsecured 
overnight money market rate (Eonia) continued 
to move within a narrow range of between 
-0.35% and -0.37%, and the secured overnight 
rate (STOXX GC Pooling) remained in a range 
below the deposit rate of -0.40%. The three-  
month Euribor went up marginally in the 
report ing period, standing at -0.32% at last 
report .
In the first few days after the ECB Governing 
Council’s June meeting, the money market for -
ward rates derived from the Eonia swap curve 
went down markedly. At present, an increase in 
the deposit facility rate –  depending on the 
assumed   size of the first interest rate hike – is 
not factored into forward rates until the period 
from the fourth quarter of 2019 to the second 
quarter of 2020, which is much later than an -
ticipated before the June meeting.1 This delay 
of more than one quarter should probably 
partly be interpreted as a market response to 
the stronger forward guidance on key interest 
rates. However, money market rates are not 
solely a reflection of interest rate expectations, 
but also include term premiums, which may 
change in response to incoming economic 
data.2 Survey-  based measures, which exclu -
sively capture interest rate expectations, also 
showed a postponement of interest rate hike 
expectations following the June meeting; how -
ever, they point to September 2019 as the date 
for the first key interest rate hike, which is 
sooner than the dates derived from the money 
market forward rates. If money market forward 
rates are adjusted for term premiums, which 
are currently estimated to be negative,3 the 
interest rate path derived from this is closer to 
the survey results and thus also closer to the 
date- based element of the stronger forward 
guidance, which suggests that key interest 
rates will remain unchanged “at least through 
the summer of 2019”.Monetary developments in 
the euro area
Following two significantly weaker quarters, 
growth in the broad monetary aggregate M3 
in the spring months returned closer to the 
robust  developments of the previous year. The 
reduction in the monthly volume of asset pur -
chases by the Eurosystem under the APP since 
the beginning of the year has therefore not led 
to a sustained downward trend in monetary 
growth as yet. This was mainly due to a pick- up 
in lending to the private sector. With economic 
growth continuing to be sound, both loans to 
non- financial corporations and loans to house -
holds again posted significant inflows. The in -
creasingly lively demand for credit in the euro 
area was also bolstered by the interest rate en -
vironment. Furthermore, the results of the lat -
est Bank Lending Survey (BLS) indicate that 
euro area banks continued to ease their credit 
standards in all loan segments in the second 
quarter.
Monetary growth during the reporting period 
was again dominated by the increase in over -
night deposits, which rose again significantly 
after two weaker quarters. Furthermore, the 
increase  in other short- term deposits was also 
relatively robust. Looking at the sectors, house -
holds, in particular, stepped up their use of sav -
ings deposits as well as overnight deposits, Money market 
interest rates 
virtually  
unchanged 
overall
Shift in expected 
date of first key 
interest rate hikeCredit growth 
still reflected in 
monetary 
dynamics
Increase in over -
night deposits 
dominant factor 
in M3 growth
1 Plausible estimates as to how large the first interest rate 
hike might be can be derived from surveys on interest rate 
expectations and range from 10 to 25 basis points.
2 The term premiums for money market forward rates are 
currently negative according to model estimates. This can 
be explained by the fact that market participants are willing 
to accept a yield discount in order to hedge against 
(adverse ) scenarios in which interest rates remain low for 
longer than expected.
3 This type of adjustment is carried out using a term struc -
ture model, which breaks down the path followed by 
money market forward rates into the path followed by the 
exclusive interest rate expectations and the risk premiums. 
It shows that, at present, the most likely interest rate path 
generated by the model, adjusted for risk premiums, is 
closer to the survey results. For more detailed information 
on the extraction of interest rate expectations at the lower 
bound, see F Geiger and G Schupp, With a little help from 
my friends: Survey- based derivation of euro area short rate 
expectations at the effective lower bound, Deutsche Bun -
desbank Discussion Paper No 27/ 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
26

thus continuing the trend, observed for some 
time now, of risk- averse investors’ preference 
for deposits with the shortest possible matur -
ities in the face of persistently low interest rate 
spreads between deposit types. By contrast, 
non- monetary financial corporations increas -
ingly accumulated short- term time deposits in 
the quarter under review. However, the extent 
to which they did so varied widely between the 
different euro area countries (for more infor -
mation on developments in Germany, see also 
pages 30 to 31). On balance, the annual growth 
rate of M3 at the end of the quarter rose to 
4.4%, thus edging back up towards the 5% 
mark around which it had hovered in 2016 and 
2017.
Of the counterparts, lending by the MFI sector 
to the private non- MFI sector in the euro area 
was again the main driver of monetary growth 
in the second quarter of 2018. The correspond -
ing contribution to M3 growth compared to 
the previous year increased from 2.8 to 3.3 per -
centage points, primarily off the back of more 
dynamic lending to non- financial corporations. 
Adjusted for securitisations and other one- off 
effects, its annual growth rate rose to 4.1% in 
the second quarter, putting it around 2  per -
centage points higher than a year earlier.4 The 
significant growth in demand for loans was 
driven by the favourable financing conditions, as well as the continued economic upturn in -
volving, in particular, a substantial increase in 
investment in machinery and equipment in 
many euro area countries. In a cross- country 
comparison, the main growth stimuli for loans 
to non- financial corporations continued to 
emanate  from Germany and France. However, 
in the last few quarters, lending in a number of 
smaller core countries, as well as in Italy and 
Spain – albeit to a smaller degree – also con -
tributed to the euro area aggregate (see the 
chart on page 29).
This is consistent with the banks surveyed as 
part of the BLS reporting a marked increase in 
the demand for loans by non- financial corpor -
ations in the euro area as a whole in the second 
quarter. The dynamic developments reported in 
the recent survey rounds thus continued. Be -
sides citing the low general level of interest 
rates as the main factor, bank managers also 
attributed the increase in demand to, amongst 
other things, a rise in financing needs for in -
ventories and working capital, fixed investment Loans to 
non- financial 
corporations 
main driver 
of credit 
growth, …Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2018 Q2 2018 Q1
Holdings against central government 2 – 21.4 – 16.5
Monetary aggregate M3 175.4 82.5
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 165.2 105.2
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 19.2 – 15.2
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) –  9.1 –  7.5
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 45.6 11.4
of which
Capital and reserves – 11.3 16.3
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 34.3 –  4.9Assets 2018 Q2 2018 Q1
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 85.2 115.6
Loans 52.7 102.4
Loans, adjusted 1 104.3 97.2
Securities 32.6 13.2
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 34.7 – 39.6
Loans –  3.8 – 10.6
Securities 38.1 – 28.9
Net external assets – 75.8 61.6
Other counterparts of M3 64.6 – 60.3
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 In the second quarter of 2017, a one- off special effect in 
June dragged down the annual growth rate of loans to 
non- financial corporations in the euro area, but did not 
have a lasting effect on loan developments (see also Mon -
etary developments in the euro area: June 2017, ECB press 
release dated 27  July 2017). The corresponding annual 
growth rates in the first and the third quarters of 2017 
were 2.4% and 2.5% respectively.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
27

as well as for mergers, acquisitions and restruc -
turing. By contrast, enterprises’ use of internal 
financing as well as lending by non- banks had 
a dampening effect on demand when taken in 
isolation, as in earlier surveys.
Given what remains a very expansionary mon -
etary policy and fierce competition between 
banks, financing conditions were still extremely 
favourable. On the one hand, interest rates for 
loans to enterprises throughout the euro area 
were once again close to historical lows in the 
reporting quarter. On the other, the banks sur -
veyed as part of the BLS reported a further eas -
ing of credit standards. They stated that, on 
balance, they had continued to ease their credit 
standards and credit terms and conditions for 
loans to enterprises at the euro area aggregate 
level in the reporting quarter.
In the quarter under review, loans to house -
holds in the euro area likewise experienced dis -
tinct growth. Banks from Germany, France and 
Italy were the main contributors to the fairly 
stable year- on- year growth of just under 3% 
over the last few quarters. Loans for house pur -
chase were once again the driving force of 
growth, increasing slightly more markedly than 
in the previous quarter. This is consistent with 
the fact that the banks surveyed in the BLS 
reported  a significant increase in demand for 
housing loans. According to the bank man -
agers, the rise in the need for funds was mainly 
due to the low general interest rate level, but 
also to households’ continued upbeat assess -
ment of housing market prospects and stable 
consumer confidence. Institutions reported 
minor dampening effects on demand, mainly 
resulting from the internal financing of house 
purchases out of savings, as well as from lend -
ing by competitor institutions.
Banks’ lending policies remained expansionary 
in this loan segment as well. On balance, credit 
standards in this segment were eased moder -
ately in the reporting quarter. In addition, the 
surveyed banks were more accommodating 
with their credit terms and conditions and fur -… also 
supported  by 
further easing of 
banks’ lending 
policies
Continued 
growth in loans 
to households 
again driven by 
loans for house 
purchase, …
… likewise 
supported  by 
expansionary 
credit stand -
ards, …Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
202468
–++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterpartsPercentage 
growth
in M3
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households 5Securities-based lending to
general governmentContribution of components in percentage points
Percentage growth 
in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
28

ther reduced the margins for average- risk 
loans, in particular. According to what the 
surveyed   institutions reported, this essentially 
occurred – as in the previous quarters – against 
the backdrop of the high level of competition 
in the banking and non- banking sectors and a 
better assessment of the risks associated with 
loans extended by credit institutions.
Consumer credit growth stayed strong in the 
reporting quarter and, at an annual growth 
rate of 7.0% at the end of June, remained the 
fastest growing component of loans to house -
holds. In bank- supply- side terms, this was sup -
ported by the fact that the banks surveyed in 
the BLS on balance again marginally eased 
their credit standards in this loan segment as 
well. According to the surveyed euro area 
banks, the demand for consumer credit and 
other loans gained even more momentum 
compared with the last six quarters. Respond -
ents put the higher demand down to robust 
consumer confidence, the low general level of 
interest rates, and the high propensity to pur -
chase. The latter was further bolstered in the 
reporting quarter by the sound economic 
growth and the steady improvement in the 
labour  market.
Besides loans, securities- based lending to gen -
eral government and private enterprises in the 
euro area represented a key pillar of M3 growth 
in the reporting quarter (see adjacent chart). 
Growth was again driven by the Eurosystem’s 
monthly net asset purchases under the APP . 
Given the renewed scale- back of these monet -
ary policy purchases in January 2018, however, 
growth in the first half of 2018 was markedly 
weaker than in the period from 2015 to 2017. 
Another factor behind the increase in securities- 
based lending was that the commercial bank -
ing sector on balance substantially expanded 
its stock of debt securities issued by the private 
sector in the reporting quarter.
Another positive contribution to monetary 
growth came from the decline in other liabil -
ities of the MFI sector. Monetary capital, in par -ticular, again recorded significant net outflows 
in the reporting quarter. Given the low interest 
rate advantage, the attractiveness of longer-  
term deposits and debt securities is probably 
still limited from the point of view of non-  
banks.… but also 
by continued 
strong growth in 
consumer credit
Expansion of 
securities- based 
lending, in 
particular  by the 
Eurosystem, 
represents  an 
additional  pillar 
of M3 growth
Monetary 
capital  outflows 
support 
expansion  of the 
money stockLoans to non-financial corporations
in the euro area*
6050403020100102030405060
––––––++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data,
seasonally adjusted
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculation. * Loans to non-fin-
ancial corporations and quasi-corporations, adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Also  adjusted  for  positions  arising 
from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankExtended by the euro area MFI sector 1
... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which MFIs in ...
Securities-based lending* to non-banks in 
the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Eurosystem: debt 
securities only; MFIs excluding the Eurosystem: debt securities 
and equities. 1 Including money market instruments. 2 Including 
shares in investment funds (other than money market funds).
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 1820002004006008001,000
–+++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
of which:Extended by the euro area MFI sector
Debt securities1
Equities 2Eurosystem
MFIs excluding the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
29

By contrast, the MFI sector’s net external asset 
position curbed monetary growth in the quar -
ter under review. This counterpart consequently 
experienced a degree of volatility comparable 
to that of recent quarters. According to the 
balance of payments data for April and May 
available thus far, the outflow of funds was 
attribut able to the current account surplus of 
the euro area being more than offset by a 
higher negative financial account balance. 
Non- resident investors sold euro area assets on 
balance in April and May, whereas domestic 
non- banks continued to purchase foreign 
secur ities. Amongst other things, these capital 
flows are likely to be linked to the temporarily heightened political uncertainty in parts of the 
euro area, as well as to the statements by the 
Governing Council of the ECB on the future 
develop ment of key interest rates, which were 
perceived as being accommodative.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers remained positive in the second 
quarter and was even more buoyant than in 
previous quarters. Short- term types of deposit 
remained popular among investors. Thus, over -
night deposits once again recorded significant 
growth between April and June. At the same 
time, unlike in the previous quarters, short-  
term time deposits remunerated at close- to- 
market rates also expanded markedly once 
more. The persistently high preference of the 
money- holding sectors for short- term bank 
deposits  still needs to be seen in conjunction 
with the historically low yield premium on 
longer- term bank deposits (see adjacent chart).
Households again contributed the bulk of the 
increase in overnight deposits. Non- financial 
corporations, too, again perceptibly scaled up 
their overnight deposits in the reporting quar -
ter, even though remuneration on these de -
posits has been in negative territory for several 
quarters and fell slightly again of late. Besides 
the interest rate constellation, the persistently 
high levels of interest shown by these sectors in 
highly liquid bank deposits is likely to have 
been boosted by the declining yields on riskier 
forms of investment in recent quarters (see the 
box on pages 32-34).
Moreover, the financial corporations sector, 
which traditionally has a greater interest in 
seeking higher returns, saw an increase in bank 
deposits during the period under review. How -
ever, the investment behaviour of individual 
financial  agents remained very heterogeneous 
in the quarter under review as well. While in -Net external 
asset position 
has a per se 
dampening 
effect on 
monetary  
growthDeposit growth 
still dominated 
by build- up of 
overnight 
deposits
Largest contri -
bution once 
again from 
private  non- 
financial sector
Investment 
behaviour within 
the financial 
corporate sector 
remains very 
heterogeneousInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new 
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike 
the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-
plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 201801234% pa, monthly data
0123Overall volume1
New business2... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
30

surers and pension funds continued to reduce 
their long- term bank deposits during the 
report ing period –  a process observed since 
mid-2009 – other financial corporations built 
up their short- term time deposits significantly. 
This development was likely due, in part, to the 
expectation of rising interest rates and the 
asso ciated interest rate uncertainty, which, 
taken in isolation, favoured the temporary 
parking of funds in the form of liquid bank 
deposits .
Banks’ lending business with the domestic non- 
bank sector was exceptionally dynamic in the 
reporting quarter. This was mainly due to loans 
to the domestic private sector growing strongly 
as well as to the fact that banks once again 
distinctly  increased their holdings of securities 
issued by the private sector. In contrast to the 
previous year, banks purchased fewer equity 
and investment fund shares; instead, they 
increas ingly acquired  debt securities. This 
develop ment was once again counterbalanced 
by lending to the public sector. In view of the 
very favourable budgetary situation, loans to 
this sector declined for the eleventh consecu -
tive quarter. In addition, banks (again) reduced 
their net holdings of government bonds.
The largest net inflows in loans to the private 
sector in the quarter under review were re -
corded for loans to non- financial corporations. 
In line with the positive impetus from private 
consumption and rising levels of fixed invest -
ment, domestic enterprises again showed 
strong interest in bank loans; this meant that 
the increase in demand for this form of finan -
cing observed since the beginning of 2017 con -
tinued. The annual growth rate for loans came 
to 5.9% at the end of the quarter under review 
– a level higher in this credit segment than at 
any time since the end of 2008.
The latest expansion occurred across all matur -
ities, most notably for loans with a maturity of 
more than one year. This development sug -
gests that German enterprises continued more 
strongly to finance their short- term expenditure with their own funds. At the same time, enter -
prises’ demand for loans with longer maturities 
is likely to have been supported by the desire to 
lock in interest rates. Although interest rates for 
longer- term loans to enterprises have remained 
at a very low level, there has been a slight trend 
increase in the past few months (see the chart 
on page 36).
The latest BLS results provide additional infor -
mation on the underlying demand factors in 
Germany. According to the bank managers, the 
increase in demand was fuelled not only by the 
low general level of interest rates but, above 
all, by higher financing needs for fixed invest -Lending business 
with domestic 
non- banks 
expanded 
further  , driven 
by the private 
sector
Non- financial 
corporations 
show greater 
interest in bank 
loans
Lending policies 
eased for loans 
to enterprisesLending and deposits of monetary 
 fi  nancial institutions in Germany*
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2018
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 34.1 36.7
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years –  0.5 6.0
over 2 years –  4.7 – 1.0
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 0.3 1.2
over 3 months –  1.6 – 1.0
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 10.3 – 4.7
Securities –  8.9 – 6.9
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 31.9 33.6
of which to households 3 17.2 14.7
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 12.3 16.7
Securities –  5.9 5.2
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding central 
government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non- 
fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
31

Developments in the real portfolio returns of households 
in Germany
Interest rates on bank deposits in Germany 
remain at a historically low level. Taken in 
isolation, this is depressing the return accru-
ing to households from their fi  nancial asset 
holdings. That being said, aside from bank 
deposits, German households also have 
holdings in the form of securities and claims 
on insurance corporations, and the returns 
on these therefore also need to be taken 
into account. For instance, developments in 
the total return on fi  nancial assets in this 
sector are infl  uenced not just by deposit 
rates but also, and in particular, by returns 
on claims on insurance corporations as well 
as price effects and dividend payouts on 
secur ities. This box details the path of 
returns  on various types of fi  nancial asset 
and the total return up to the current end 
as defi  ned by the available data (the fi  rst 
quarter of 2018), thus carrying on from past 
calculations.1 In this context, there is merit in viewing generated returns in real terms, 
as the purchasing power of nominal returns 
fl  uctuates in line with infl  ation.2
The chart below shows the evolution of real 
returns on the main types of fi  nancial asset 
in the portfolio of households in Germany 
between 1991 and the fi  rst quarter of 2018. 
1 For details, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Investment 
behaviour in the low- interest- rate environment, An-
nual Report 2017, pp  16-18; Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Real portfolio returns of households in Germany, 
Monthly Report, August 2017, pp 31-33; and Deutsche 
Bundesbank, German households’ saving and invest-
ment behaviour in light of the low- interest- rate envir-
onment, Monthly Report, October 2015, pp 13-31.
2 In addition, it is also possible to view this after tax, 
leading to qualitatively similar results. However, com-
pensation for infl  ation, being a component of nominal 
interest, has customarily been taxed more heavily, par-
ticularly in the past. See also Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Return on private fi  nancial assets taking into account 
infl  ation and taxes, Monthly Report, July 2017, pp 69-
75.
Real returns on various types of financial asset held by households in Germany
302010010203040
–––++++% pa, annually / quarterly
1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Sources: Assekurata, German Insurance Association (Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft) and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 Data on the annual return on investment fund shares are only available as from 1995 Q4. 2 Nominal deposit interest rates are 
based on the Bundesbank's interest rate statistics until 2002 and on the harmonised MFI interst rate statistics as from 2003. The period 
prior to 2003 and the years from 2003 onwards can therefore only be compared to a limited degree.
Deutsche BundesbankClaims on insurance corporations
Investment fund shares 1Debt securities
Currency and deposits 2
3036
–++Enlarged in relation to the top part of this chart
Claims on insurance corporations
Currency and deposits 2
2015 2016 2017 18–30–20–100+10+20+30+40
–3 0+3+6SharesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
32

For much of that time, bank deposits (in-
cluding currency) which, at just under 40%, 
consistently constituted the bulk of the 
portfolio, yielded the lowest real returns; 
these slipped into clearly negative territory, 
most notably since the middle of 2016. 
Moreover, since the beginning of 2017, the 
real return on insurance claims dipped to a 
particularly low level, with returns on secur-
ities, which tend to be comparatively vola-
tile, likewise heading downward of late. 
This was initially driven by dwindling price 
gains in the capital market compounded by 
heavy losses, primarily in the fi  rst quarter of 
2018.
Weighting the returns on the various types 
of fi  nancial asset with their respective time- 
varying portfolio share reveals the real total 
return accruing to households in Germany 
as a whole (see the above chart). This total 
return rose to an average size of 1.4% in 
2017, having stood at 0.9% in 2016. In line 
with the path followed by returns on secur-
ities, however, it fell over the course of last 
year to stand at -0.8% at the beginning of 
2018, thereby entering into negative terri-
tory for the fi  rst time in six years.
In particular, the total return was damp-
ened by returns on bank deposits, whose 
contribution to the total return since the 
end of 2016 has entered further into nega-tive territory than ever before in the report-
ing period. Returns on securities also re-
duced the total return signifi  cantly in the 
fi  rst quarter of 2018. The only positive con-
tribution at the current end, as well as 
throughout the reporting period, stemmed 
from claims on insurance corporations; 
however, that contribution has been minor 
since 2017.
It is possible to calculate not just the role 
played by individual types of asset in con-
nection with the real total return, but also 
the contribution of nominal returns, on the 
one hand, and the rate of infl  ation (as 
measured by the consumer price index, 
CPI), on the other (see the upper chart on 
page 34). Generally speaking, nominal re-
turns had the largest, and a broadly posi-
tive, impact on the real total return over the 
entire reporting period. However, this con-
tribution waned considerably in the course 
of 2017, primarily as a result of price losses 
in the capital market. Given that infl  ation at 
the same time remained relatively stable at 
positive levels of between 1.5% and 2%, 
the real total return per se was reduced by 
a signifi  cant margin. Lastly, in the fi  rst quar-
ter of 2018, the negative contribution aris-
ing from the infl  ation rate exceeded the 
positive contribution generated by nominal 
returns, causing the real total return to fall 
below zero at the current end.Contribution of individual types of financial asset* to the real total return of households 
in Germany
* Weighted according to share of total financial assets.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 18–4–20+2+4+6+8Percentage points, annually / quarterly
Debt securitiesInvestment fund shares
SharesClaims on insurance corporationsCurrency and deposits
1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 174202468
––++++
Real total return (% pa)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
33

For the most part, changes in portfolio 
composition only affected the evolution of 
the total return in a minor way (see also the 
lower chart on this page). Such changes 
may be triggered by active portfolio shifts 
or, particularly in the case of securities, by 
valuation effects. Their negligible import-
ance is consistent with the observation 
that, despite the persistent low- interest- rate environment, no major portfolio shifts were 
carried out by households.3
3 With regard to possible portfolio shifts within the 
money- holding sectors in Germany, see Deutsche Bun-
desbank, Acquisition of fi  nancial assets and the search 
for yield in Germany, Monthly Report, May 2018, 
pp 30-33.Contributions to the real total return of households in Germany
420246810
––+++++Percentage points, annually / quarterly
1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 18–4–20+2+4+6+8+10
Consumer price indexNominal returns
Real total return (% pa)
Structure of German households' financial assets
1 Besides other accounts receivable, this also comprises other equity.
Deutsche Bundesbank%, end-of-quarter data
Other depositsClaims on insurance corporations
Investment fund sharesOther1
Debt securities
Shares
Currency and transferable deposits
1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 180102030405060708090100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
34

ment as well as for mergers, acquisitions and 
restructuring, while enterprises’ recourse to 
their ample internal financing resources con -
tinued to curb demand. Furthermore, the latest 
results of the BLS indicate that banks eased 
their credit standards as well as credit terms 
and conditions for loans to enterprises in the 
second quarter of 2018, with the effect that 
demand is likely to have been further stimu -
lated by banks’ supply behaviour.
The second key pillar of German banks’ lending 
business remained loans to households. Crucial 
for the most recent spell of growth were once 
again loans for house purchase, which were 
similarly buoyant during the reporting period as 
in the previous quarters. On balance, the 
growth rate of loans for house purchase again 
increased slightly to 4.4% on the year. In line 
with the stable consumer sentiment, the posi -
tive development in consumer credit seen over 
the past few quarters consolidated, providing 
additional support to loans to households. Be -
sides the sound income situation, the persist -
ently high demand by households for bank 
loans in the reporting quarter was also spurred 
on by the still exceptionally favourable finan -
cing conditions. According to MFI interest rate 
statistics, interest rates for both housing loans 
and loans for private consumption remained 
close to their all- time lows despite slight in -
creases.
This was consistent with the banks surveyed in 
the BLS reporting that the rise in demand for 
loans to households for house purchase in the 
quarter ended was once again attributable to 
the low general level of interest rates, favour -
able housing market prospects and robust con -
sumer confidence. By contrast, respondents 
reported that stifling effects on household de -
mand stemmed mainly from the heightened 
use of households’ own savings in the context 
of property financing and the loss of market 
shares to competitors. In the case of consumer 
credit and other lending, the banks chalked up 
the rise in demand to the low general level of 
interest rates, to households’ stable propensity to purchase and to robust consumer confi -
dence.
Moreover, banks’ expansionary lending policies 
supported demand for loans to households. 
Thus, credit standards for loans to households 
for house purchase were eased slightly for the 
fourth consecutive time, and the surveyed 
banks intend to lower their credit standards 
even further in the third quarter. In addition, 
banks somewhat eased the credit terms and 
conditions specified in the loan agreements 
with their customers. Here, the vast majority of 
the adjustments again occurred in the area of 
margins, which were narrowed considerably Persistently high 
household 
demand for 
loans for house 
purchase; posi -
tive momentum 
in consumer 
credit persists
Lending policies 
for private 
construction  
and consumer 
finance support 
demand overall2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
3210123456
–––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2Up to 1 year
More than 1 year and up to 5 years
More than 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total percentage 
growth rateLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal percentage 
growth rateMaturity contributions in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
35

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until 
May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 
2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is 
calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 3 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit 
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the num-
ber of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: differ-
ence between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the  number of respondents 
reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 4 Expectations for 2018 Q3.
Deutsche Bundesbank10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 20181.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 180.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
603003060
––++Credit to non-financial corporations
%
pa
%
%%
pa
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to 
€1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase4... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates 
on loans for house 
purchase2
with an initial rate 
fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
36

for average- risk loans, and markedly for riskier 
loans. Essentially, banks once again attributed 
the easing of standards and narrowing of mar -
gins to the high degree of competition.
The credit standards for consumer credit and 
other lending were eased marginally. Banks 
also eased their credit terms and conditions. 
On balance, the margins were thus narrowed 
markedly for average- risk loans and slightly for 
riskier exposures, while the other surveyed con -
ditions remained virtually unchanged.
As usual, the July survey of the BLS contained a 
number of ad hoc  questions. Against the back -
drop of the situation in the financial markets, 
German banks reported that their funding con -
ditions had remained virtually unchanged com -
pared with the previous quarter. As regards the 
effects of the new regulatory and supervisory 
activities, the surveyed banks stated that they 
had further strengthened their capital position 
in the first half of 2018. To answer the first- time 
question on the significance of various deter -
minants for the level of credit margins in new 
business, the bank managers surveyed under -
lined – with regard to the first half of 2018 – 
the importance of intense competition, risk 
perception, cost of capital, compliance with 
the profitability targets of institutions and their 
operating costs. Competition, profitability tar -
gets and the cost of capital gained most in im -
portance over the 2014 to 2017 period.
For the first time, the latest BLS contained a 
question on the impact of non- performing loans (NPLs) on lending policies. According to 
the data provided by the surveyed German 
credit institutions, the NPL ratio (defined as the 
stock of gross NPLs on banks’ balance sheets 
as a percentage of the gross carrying amount 
of loans) in the first half of 2018 had no impact 
on banks’ credit standards or on credit terms 
and conditions, and banks do not expect any 
significant impact in the next six months either. 
By contrast, the banks reported that, when 
viewed in isolation, the NPL ratio in the report -
ing period from 2014 to 2017 had a slight 
tightening impact on credit standards for loans 
to enterprises and loans to households for 
house purchase, while it had only a marginal 
tightening impact on consumer credit and 
other lending. In addition, the NPL ratio per se 
marginally tightened credit terms and condi -
tions for loans to enterprises. Compared with 
Germany, the NPL ratios of banks in the euro 
area led to a more pronounced tightening of 
lending policies. According to the participant 
banks, when viewed in isolation, the NPL ratio 
in the euro area overall had a slight tightening 
effect on credit standards and credit terms and 
conditions in the first half of 2018, and they 
expect similarly restrictive effects in the second 
half of the year as well. Furthermore, euro area 
banks reported that, for the period from 2014 
to 2017, NPL ratios had a markedly restrictive 
effect on credit standards and a moderately 
tightening effect on credit terms and condi -
tions.Further strength -
ening of banks’ 
capital position 
in the first half 
of the yearNPL ratio of 
German  banks 
has no impact 
on their lending 
policies in the 
first half of 2018Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
37

Financial markets
Financial market setting
In the second quarter and the early part of the 
third quarter, international financial markets 
reflected  the overall robust global economic 
growth, the intensity of which varied, however, 
from one currency area to the next. Monetary 
policy decisions, along with expectations of the 
future economic policy stance, also showed 
evidence of these differences. For example, the 
US Federal Reserve continued its policy of grad -
ually raising its benchmark interest rate. Fur -
thermore, whereas at the end of March only 
one interest rate move had been expected for 
the second half of 2018, the sound outlook for 
the economy at the end of the reporting period 
meant that two interest rate moves over the 
rest of the year were seen as the most likely 
scenario. By contrast, at last report the euro 
area was not expected to see its first policy rate 
increase until the second half of 2019. This was 
due in large measure to the ECB  Governing 
Council’s communication of mid-  June, which 
was perceived as being accommodative. Con -
cern about how the trade conflicts between 
the major economic areas would unfold, un -
certainty about the thrust of the new Italian 
government’s policy, and the collapse of the 
Turkish lira prompted bouts of safe haven 
flows. (Implied) volatility in the various financial 
markets spiked at times, but hovered close to 
its long- term average overall. On balance, 
yields on ten- year Federal bonds (Bunds) 
dropped to 0.3%, whereas yields on ten- year 
US Treasuries rose to 2.9%. The yield spread 
between these two instruments stood at 260 
basis points for a time, the widest it has been 
since the end of the 1980s. The GDP- weighted 
yield for the euro area excluding Germany 
climbed to 1.4%, largely on the back of an in -
crease in yields on Italian government bonds. 
Yields on euro area corporate bonds also edged 
higher. Equity markets largely mirrored the 
upbeat  path of the economy, though in the 
euro area the aforementioned political uncer -tainties did put a damper on price momentum. 
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro slipped 
slightly on balance.
Exchange rates
In foreign exchange markets, the euro’s ex -
change rate put in a mixed performance be -
tween the end of March and mid-  August, with 
the euro depreciating markedly against the US 
dollar. Owing to diverging economic prospects 
on each side of the Atlantic, the euro was 
already  beginning to lose value against the US 
dollar in mid-  April 2018. This fall in the value of 
the euro was given additional momentum in 
May in connection with the uncertainty over 
whether it would be possible to form a govern -
ment in Italy. At the same time, the vote of no 
confidence against the then Spanish Prime 
Minister weighed on the euro. The euro had a 
value at the end of May of US$1.16, its lowest 
level since July 2017.
Only when an Italian government began to 
emerge did the euro begin to recoup some of 
the losses it had incurred against the US dollar. 
Further tailwinds came from surprisingly high 
inflation figures for Germany and Italy, which 
appear to have been interpreted by market 
players as signalling a possible reduction in the 
Eurosystem’s extraordinary monetary policy 
stimulus. The euro was given additional lift by 
statements from the ECB  Governing Council 
hinting that there would be a discussion on the 
continuation of the asset purchase programme 
at its monetary policy meeting at the beginning 
of June. However, these gains began to erode 
again following the meeting. While the ECB 
Governing Council announced a timetable for 
ending the net asset purchases, policy rates are 
set to remain at their present levels at least 
through the summer of 2019. This decision Financial 
markets  
influenced  by 
heterogeneous 
growth rates 
and differing 
monetary policy 
stances
Euro down 
against the 
US dollar, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
38

came as a surprise to many market participants 
and weighed on the euro.
Thereafter, the euro-  dollar rate hovered be -
tween US$1.15 and US$1.18. On this side of 
the Atlantic, agreement on the disbursement of 
further financial assistance to Greece and some 
surprisingly upbeat sentiment indicators 
buoyed the single currency. For example, the 
Purchasing Managers’ Index for the euro area 
and the Ifo business climate index for the Ger -
man economy were unexpectedly favourable. 
This was counterbalanced, however, by some 
likewise surprisingly positive US economic data. 
Furthermore, the Chair of the Federal Reserve, 
Jerome Powell, firmed expectations of further 
interest rate hikes in 2018 in his speech before 
the US  Senate. At the end of the reporting 
period, the euro was trading slightly lower 
again at US$1.14, down by around 7.7% on its 
level at the end of March.
After a period of only minor fluctuations, the 
euro came under marked pressure against the 
yen in May. Headwinds included the aforemen -
tioned publication of surprisingly weak eco -
nomic data for the euro area, as well as the 
bouts of political uncertainty in Italy and Spain. 
At the end of May, the euro stood at approxi -
mately ¥126, its lowest level since June 2017. 
As the political prospects in these European 
countries brightened and inflation figures for 
the euro area came in higher than expected, 
this price movement reversed. In addition, a 
handful of unexpectedly weak economic num -
bers were reported for Japan. Both gross do -
mestic product (GDP) growth in the first quar -
ter of the year and the rise in consumer prices 
in June fell short of market participants’ expect -
ations. At the end of July, the monetary policy 
decisions taken by the Bank of Japan surprised 
some market participants, who had evidently 
been expecting a less expansionary stance. 
However, this only strengthened the euro 
against the yen for a short time. This was partly 
because the initial estimate of Japanese eco -
nomic growth in the second quarter was higher 
than the majority of market participants had expected. As this report  went to press, the euro 
stood at ¥126, down 3.9% on its level at the 
end of March.
From the beginning of May until the end of 
June, the euro’s exchange rate hovered at a 
level between £0.87 and £0.88 without any 
lasting price changes for this currency pair. 
However, at the end of June, statements from 
the Bank of England calling into question the 
need for higher interest rates in the United 
Kingdom placed the pound sterling under pres -
sure. While the continued uncertainty sur -
rounding the negotiations over the United 
Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European … and the 
yen, …
… but up 
against the 
pound sterlingExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J A S
2017 20181.051.101.151.201.25
115120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
9095100105Daily data, log scale
¥US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange 
rate: US$1.1789 1
... yen
Launch exchange
rate: ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange
rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
Launch exchange rate: 103.12 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
39

Union did not initially seem to have any lasting 
influence on the EUR- GBP exchange rate, the 
euro continued to appreciate when economic 
data from the United Kingdom in mid-  July dis -
appointed market observers and a no- deal 
Brexit came to be seen as a more likely scen -
ario. As this report went to press, the euro 
stood at £0.89, up 2.3% on its level at the end 
of March.
Overall, the euro depreciated slightly on a 
weighted average against the currencies of 
19 major trading partners (down 1.2% on bal -
ance), even if it did appreciate against individ -
ual currencies such as the renminbi (+1.2%). 
Factors weighing on the Chinese currency in -
cluded the trade dispute with the United States. 
Outside the group of 19 partner currencies, the 
euro recorded considerable gains against the 
Turkish lira (+35.5%). Various monetary policy 
measures were taken, but none succeeded in 
braking the lira’s depreciation for more than a 
temporary period. Market participants won -dered at times how much room for manoeuvre 
the Turkish central bank actually has. Since the 
beginning of August, the lira has been plumb -
ing ever greater depths against the euro, after 
the United States imposed sanctions on two 
Turkish ministers and a trade conflict erupted 
between these two countries.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  transactions
Government bond yields in the various cur -
rency areas saw mixed developments from the 
end of March. They initially rose worldwide via 
the interest rate linkage with the United States 
until mid- May. This was primarily a result of the 
temporary increase, most notably in the United 
States, in term premiums – that is, the pre -
miums that remunerate investors who are will -
ing to hold securities with longer residual ma -
turities. One reason for this, besides the com -
paratively robust pace of economic growth, 
was US government debt, which the Congres -
sional Budget Office estimates will grow signifi -
cantly in the future in the wake of the tax 
reform .
In mid- May, financial market participants’ con -
cerns about how the political situation in Italy 
would unfold led to safe haven flows, though 
these then reversed again rather quickly. Within 
the space of a week, yields on benchmark 
paper fell significantly in the major currency 
areas, above all in the euro area. They rose 
again thereafter, but without returning to their 
initial levels. Towards the end of the reporting 
period, the sharp depreciation of the Turkish 
lira and related concerns about the solvency of 
Turkish debtors who have taken out loans 
denom inated in foreign currency prompted a 
further flight into safe assets.
Recent months have seen US trade policy, 
which market observers have considered in -
creasingly confrontational and erratic, repeat -
edly have an influence on yield movements. At 
the end of July, the joint statement by the Euro depreciates 
slightly in 
effective  termsGovernment 
bond yields rose 
initially around 
the world
Politically 
induced safe 
haven flows 
seen for a time
Trade disputes 
influence yields, 
depending on 
news reportsBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual matu-
rity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 20180.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–+++++++++++% pa, daily data
Germany
JapanEuro areaUnited States
United
KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
40

US President and the President of the European 
Commission on sounding out the scope for a 
trade agreement temporarily led to a certain 
easing. However, almost at the same time, 
there were growing signs that the trade dis -
pute between the United States and China 
could intensify. Overall, though, uncertainty in 
bond markets, as measured by the implied 
volatility of options, remained within fairly nar -
row bounds. One reason for this could be that 
this ratio has a relatively short expectation hori -
zon of three months, which makes it less suited 
to modelling potential long- term negative con -
sequences for the world trade framework.
On balance, the yields on ten- year US Treasur -
ies climbed 13 basis points over the period 
under review to 2.9%. Looking at the entire 
period under review, the main reason for this 
was – as mentioned at the outset – that, over -
all, monetary policy interest rate expectations 
increased against the backdrop of the favour -
able economic data for the United States.
By contrast, the yield on ten- year Bunds has 
fallen to 0.3% since the end of March. In add -
ition to the dwindling term premium, the ex -
pected monetary policy also contributed to 
this. Against this backdrop, the spread between 
the United States and Germany widened to 
257 basis points at last count.
From the end of March, the yield curve derived 
from the yields on Federal securities twisted 
downwards at the long end, while short- term 
interest rates remained virtually constant. Inter -
est rates up to a maturity of seven years were 
in negative territory at last count. The an -
nouncement by the ECB Governing Council in 
June to prospectively reduce the monthly pace 
of the net asset purchases under the expanded 
asset purchase programme (APP) to €15 billion 
as of October and to discontinue them at the 
end of the year was largely in line with market 
expectations. One surprise for market partici -
pants, however, was the news that the ECB 
Governing Council decided at the same meet -
ing to keep the deposit facility rate at its cur -rent level at least through the summer of 2019. 
This caused the yield curve to shift somewhat 
downwards. At the end of the reporting period, 
the yield curve, as measured by the spread be -
tween ten- year and two- year yields, was 17 
basis points flatter than at the end of March.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP- weighted average) widened by 
48 basis points. The main reason for this was 
the uncertainty surrounding the monetary and 
fiscal policy stance that the new Italian govern -
ment would take; starting in mid-  May this led On balance, 
yield on ten- year 
US Treasuries  up 
and …
… yield on 
ten- year Bunds 
down
Downward shift 
in yield curveWidening of 
yield spreads in 
the euro areaYield curve on the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest 
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.20.40.6
––––+++
Residual maturity in years29 March 2018
16 August 2018% pa
Yield spread between US and German 
government bonds*
1 Source:  Bloomberg.  * Yield  spread  of  US  Treasuries  over 
Bunds, each with a residual maturity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 180.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
–++++++Percentage points, monthly dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
41

to a widening of yield spreads, particularly of 
Italian paper over Bunds. At last count, the 
yield spread of Italian bonds was still well above 
its end- of- March level, measuring 282 basis 
points. Creditors of the Italian government are 
evidently following the domestic debate closely 
and are demanding compensation for possible 
longer- term political risks. The yield spreads of 
government bonds from other euro area coun -
tries over German Bunds also widened during 
the period under review. On the whole, the 
yields of countries with lower credit ratings 
rose more sharply. One exception to this were 
Greek sovereign bonds, whose yields changed 
little on balance following the finalisation of 
deliberations on the forthcoming end of the 
third Economic Adjustment Programme for 
Greece and a subsequent upgrading by the rat -
ing agencies Standard & Poor’s and Fitch. Over -
all, the yield spread between bonds increased 
more sharply than the corresponding costs for 
credit default swap contracts – which are, in 
effect, insurance which market participants can take out to hedge their exposure to default 
risk. The wider spread is presumably an indica -
tion of higher liquidity premiums for Federal se -
curities. The fact that the spread of bonds is -
sued by the KfW banking group (Kreditanstalt 
für Wiederaufbau) over Bunds has also widened 
would certainly suggest that this is the case.1
At 1.2%, yields on ten- year UK gilts were some -
what down on the end of March at last count. 
The Bank of England’s decision at the start of 
August to raise its policy rate had no discern -
ible impact on long- term yields. The dispute 
within the UK government over how the coun -
try should withdraw from the EU likewise did 
not trigger any movements of note in the bond 
markets. The yield on ten- year Japanese gov -
ernment bonds, meanwhile, climbed to 10 
basis points, leaving it 5 basis points higher 
than at the end of March. The end of July saw 
the Bank of Japan decide to alter its yield curve 
control policy and widen the yield corridor for 
ten- year bonds. This move came after multiple 
BoJ interventions in the bond market at the 
ceiling previously in place.
During the period under review, the five- year 
forward inflation rates five years ahead derived 
from inflation swaps fluctuated within a nar -
row corridor around the 1.7% mark (+2 basis 
points). The long- term survey- based inflation 
expectations collected by Consensus Econom -
ics are still higher than that, at 2.0%. When 
interpreting this difference, it is necessary to 
consider potential scarcity, liquidity and infla -
tion risk premiums which can have a bearing 
on market- based measures and dilute their in -
formative value as economic indicators. Both 
market- based and survey- based deflation prob -
abilities are negligible for the coming years.Yields in the 
United Kingdom 
and Japan see 
little change
Forward and 
survey- based 
inflation expect -
ations steadySpreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Bunds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 201801002003004005006007008009001,0001,1001,200Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
IrelandPortugal
FranceGreece
1 Bonds issued by the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau 
(KfW) are explicitly guaranteed by the Federal Republic of 
Germany. Their default risk is therefore the same as that of 
German Federal securities, and the yield spread contains 
premiums for the higher market liquidity of Federal secur -
ities. See Deutsche Bundesbank, The market for Federal 
secur ities: holder structure and the main drivers of yield 
movements, Monthly Report, July 2018, pp 15-38.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
42

Yields on European corporate bonds have been 
picking up slightly since the end of the first 
quarter from what is still a low level. Bonds is -
sued by BBB- rated enterprises with a residual 
maturity of between seven and ten years 
yielded 22 basis points higher at 2.0%. The 
drop in yields on German Federal securities in 
the seven to ten- year residual maturity bracket 
in the same period meant that the yield spread 
widened still further. One contributing factor 
here is the somewhat higher level of attention 
overall which investors have been paying to 
riskier paper since mid- May. The yield spread of 
financial corporate bonds over Bunds rose 
somewhat more sharply than that of non-  
financial corporate bonds. This might have 
something to do with the fact that financial 
corporations were feeling the effects  of the 
yield on safe bonds in the euro area having re -
turned to a somewhat lower level. What is 
more, the price losses registered above all by 
Italian sovereign bonds from mid- May onwards 
spilled over to affect yields for financial corpor -
ations. This is normally the case because there 
are sometimes close financial ties between the 
state as an issuer  and banks as investors. To -
wards the end of the reporting period, some 
financial corporations were weighed down by 
their exposures in Turkey. Meanwhile, more 
creditworthy corporations rated AA have even 
seen their yields dwindle slightly since the end 
of March, while the spreads on high- yield 
bonds experienced stronger- than- average in -
creases. Compared with their five- year means, 
however, financing conditions for enterprises 
are still favourable.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
amounted to €326 billion in the second quarter 
of 2018, well up on its previous- quarter level 
(€298½ billion). After deducting redemptions 
and taking account of changes in issuers’ hold -
ings of their own bonds, net redemptions of 
bonds came to €5 billion. Foreign borrowers 
placed debt securities worth €3 billion net in 
the German market, meanwhile. The outstand -
ing volume of debt securities in the German bond market thus fell by €2 billion net in the 
period under review.
In the second quarter, the public sector again 
redeemed bonds, this time amounting to €8 
billion net, following €8½ billion in the previ -
ous quarter. These figures also include issues by 
resolution agencies set up for German banks, 
which are ascribed to the public sector for stat -
istical purposes. The Federal government itself 
redeemed mainly five- year Federal notes 
(Bobls), amounting to €23½ billion. This con -
trasted with net issuance of ten- year and 
30-year Bunds totalling €8½ billion and €6 bil -
lion, respectively, as well as Treasury discount 
paper (Bubills) worth €5 billion. The quarter 
under review saw state and local governments 
redeem their own bonds to the tune of €1½ 
billion net.
Across April, May and June, domestic credit in -
stitutions reduced their capital market debt by 
€4½ billion net, following net issuance of €25 Yields on 
corporate  bonds 
up from low 
level
Net redemptions 
in the German 
bond marketDecline in public 
sector capital 
market debt
Net redemptions 
by credit 
institutions Investment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2017 2018
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 28.8 40.6 17.6
Credit institutions – 13.6 – 1.9 – 11.1
of which
Foreign debt securities –  0.4 3.3 –  1.2
Deutsche Bundesbank 38.4 19.1 19.2
Other sectors 4.0 23.3 9.6
of which
Domestic debt securities – 13.4 4.5 4.7
Non-residents 1.1 5.1 – 19.6
Shares
Residents –  3.5 17.6 23.1
Credit institutions 3.1 – 6.5 0.9
of which
Domestic shares 5.7 – 3.9 1.3
Non-banks –  6.6 24.2 22.2
of which
Domestic shares –  4.7 1.8 6.1
Non-residents 0.1 4.4 3.6
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 9.3 25.4 12.9
Investment in retail funds 7.6 6.9 4.1
of which
Equity funds 1.1 0.2 –  1.6
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
43

billion in the previous quarter. The decline 
mainly concerned the outstanding volume of 
other bank debt securities that can be struc -
tured flexibly (€7½ billion) and of public Pfand -
briefe  (€3½ billion). By contrast, there was net 
issuance of mortgage Pfandbriefe and debt 
secur ities issued by specialised credit institu -
tions, amounting to €3½ billion and €3 billion, 
respectively.
Domestic enterprises issued debt securities 
worth €7½ billion net in the second quarter, 
the bulk of which, on balance, were bonds 
with maturities of more than one year. Net 
issuance  by non- financial corporations and by 
insurers (€1 billion and €½ billion, respectively) 
was lower than issuance by other financial 
intermediaries (€5 billion).
The Bundesbank was the main buyer of debt 
securities in the German bond market in the 
second quarter, acquiring €19 billion worth of 
paper, predominantly under the Eurosystem’s 
asset purchase programmes. These were pri -
marily domestic securities issued by the public 
sector (€16 billion). Domestic non- banks pur -
chased debt securities to the tune of €9½ bil -
lion. By contrast, foreign investors and domes -
tic credit institutions offloaded bonds amount -
ing to €19½ billion and €11 billion net, respect -
ively.
Equity market
The overall robust macroeconomic environ -
ment and an altogether upbeat corporate 
profit outlook shaped international equity mar -
kets from the end of March. However, price 
growth was dampened in the euro area espe -
cially by the political risks stemming from Italy 
and Turkey. At +0.6% and -0.5%, respectively, 
the broad EURO STOXX index and the German 
CDAX were virtually unchanged from their end- 
of- March levels. Taken in isolation, the easing 
risk- free interest rates buoyed up price develop -
ments in the euro area. Falling risk- free interest 
rates depress the discount factor, raising the value of future profits. In addition, profit ex -
pectations rose again from their already ele -
vated level. It is possible that the euro’s quite 
considerable depreciation against the US dollar 
also played a role here since it is serving to 
boost the sales opportunities of euro area 
enter prises in the medium term. However, 
against the backdrop of the political uncer -
tainty referred to above, market participants 
demanded a higher risk premium. The 
US S&P 500 racked up notable gains, climbing 
by 7.6%. With the US economy running 
smoothly, the quarterly reporting season is 
shaping up predominantly well there, and mar -
ket analysts revised their medium- term profit 
expectations upwards. The indices in Japan 
(Nikkei 225) and the United Kingdom (FTSE-  All 
Share) rose by 3.4% and 6.6%, respectively.
While the political uncertainties described 
above had a direct impact on both share prices 
and measures of volatility, the effects were, for 
the most part, short- lived. They do, however, 
remain a source of bother and could well cloud 
the favourable market environment – especially 
in those branches which are particularly 
affected  and stand at the centre of the trade 
dispute. European automotive stocks have 
recorded  significant losses since the end of 
March, for instance.
The same is true for bank shares which – on 
both sides of the Atlantic  – underperformed 
the total index for the respective region. While 
US bank stocks posted flatter gains of 4.5%, 
shares in euro area banks fell significantly in 
value even in absolute terms, losing 15.7%. The 
latter managed to recoup only a small portion 
of the fall in prices triggered at the end of May 
by the uncertainty in Italy. Some banks also saw 
their share prices take a hit from their exposure 
to Turkey. The yield curve, now flatter again 
than it was at the end of March, was another 
factor weighing on banks’ earnings prospects 
in the euro area.
The EURO STOXX earnings yield, calculated on 
the basis of earnings forecasts for the next 12 Increase in 
enterprises’ 
capital  market 
debt
Purchases of 
debt securities
Global stock 
markets influ -
enced by overall 
robust economic 
backdropEuropean auto -
motive and 
bank shares 
underperform 
total marketDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
44

months (the inverse price/ earnings ratio) fell 
against the end of March, indicating a higher 
valuation than at the end of the first quarter. By 
contrast, the implied cost of equity – which is 
derived using a dividend discount model from 
the sum of the risk- free interest rate and the 
equity risk premium  – remains virtually un -
changed.2 The equity risk premium compen -
sates investors for holding risky equities instead 
of safe Federal securities. Taken in isolation, the 
risk premium remained well above its multi-  
year average. This is a reflection of the fact that 
the risk- free interest rate and the risk premium 
normally move in opposite directions, offset -
ting each other’s effect on the cost of equity. In 
the United States, share prices rose so sharply 
that despite improved business outlooks, the 
earnings yield and implied cost of equity fell. 
The risk premium relative to US  Treasuries 
shrank during the period under review.
Issuance in the German equity market was 
somewhat brisker in the second quarter than it 
had been in the three months before that. 
Domes tic enterprises issued €11 billion worth 
of new shares. This was largely attributable to 
a capital increase carried out by one DAX- listed 
enterprise. The outstanding volume of foreign 
shares in the German market rose by €15½ bil -
lion over the same period. Equities were pur -
chased primarily by domestic non- banks (€22 
billion) and foreign investors (€3½ billion), but 
also – to a lesser extent – by domestic credit 
institutions (€1 billion).
During the quarter under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €17 
billion, after raising funds totalling €32½ billion 
in the previous three- month period. The fresh 
money mainly accrued to specialised funds 
reserved  for institutional investors (€13 billion). 
Among the various asset classes, mixed 
securities- based funds attracted the strongest 
inflows (€9½ billion), but bond funds (€3 bil -Implied cost of 
equity unchanged 
in the euro area, 
falling in the USA
Stock market 
funding and 
stock purchases
Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
sharesEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cal-
culated from the prices of index options. For the euro area, cal-
culated from options on the EURO STOXX 50.
Deutsche BundesbankLin scale
Implied volatility1Daily data
%Beginning of 2016 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
8090100110120130140
10203040
2016 2017 2018Euro area (EURO STOXX)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
Euro area (VSTOXX)
United States (VIX)
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  I/B/E/S,  Bundesbank  calculations. 
Earnings yields (EY) plotted as an inverted price/earnings ratio; 
implied cost of equity (CE) and equity risk premium (RP) derived 
from the dividend discount model. 
Deutsche Bundesbank246810121416% pa, data since January 2004Stock market valuations
RP EY CE RP EY CEUnited States (S&P 500) Euro area (EURO STOXX)Median level
25th percentileCurrent level75th percentile
MinimumMaximum
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Stock market valuations – 
theoretical basics and enhancing the metrics, Monthly 
Report , April 2016, pp 15-29.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
45

lion) also sold new shares, as did funds of funds 
and open- end real estate funds (€2½ billion in 
each case). Foreign funds operating in the Ger -
man market attracted fresh funds totalling €4½ 
billion net in the second quarter of 2018. 
Domes tic non- banks were the main buyers, 
adding mutual fund shares worth €23 billion to 
their portfolios, predominantly in the form of 
domestic fund units. German credit institutions 
purchased investment fund shares for €1½ bil -
lion, while foreign investors sold mutual fund 
shares worth €3 billion.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows totalling €25 billion in 
the second quarter of 2018, there were also 
net capital exports in the field of direct invest -
ment, amounting to €30½ billion.
Direct investment abroad by German enter -
prises came to €55 billion net in the April-  June 
2018 period. Domestic investors boosted their 
equity capital by €58 billion, with a clear em -
phasis on investment in equity capital in the 
narrower sense; foreign earnings were also 
reinvested  as well, however. By contrast, Ger -
man enterprises scaled back intra- group lend -
ing by €2½ billion in the period under review. 
Major euro area destinations for German for -
eign direct investment in the second quarter of 
2018 were the Netherlands (€30 billion), Spain 
(€16 billion) and Ireland (€5 billion), while out -
side of the euro area the United States was a 
key recipient (€2½ billion).
Foreign investors stepped up their direct invest -
ment in Germany by €24½ billion on balance in 
the second quarter, primarily in the shape of 
loans to affiliated enterprises in Germany, sup -
plied particularly by way of “reverse flows” – 
vehicles which foreign subsidiaries use to for -
ward funds raised in the international finan cial 
market to their parent companies as loans. By 
contrast, intra- group trade credits were mainly 
redeemed. Foreign investors increased their Direct invest -
ment sees 
capital  exports
German 
foreign  direct 
investment 
Foreign direct 
investment in 
GermanyMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2017 2018
Q2 Q1 Q2p
I Current account + 53.6 + 71.1 + 63.0
1 Goods 1 + 67.1 + 64.6 + 68.2
2 Services 2 –  4.8 –  0.6 –  3.3
3 Primary income +  3.1 + 21.6 +  3.5
4 Secondary income – 11.8 – 14.5 –  5.4
II Capital account –  0.7 +  0.2 +  0.1
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 72.1 + 74.6 + 64.4
1 Direct investment + 12.5 + 22.0 + 30.6
Domestic investment 
abroad + 19.3 + 42.6 + 55.1
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  6.8 + 20.5 + 24.5
2 Portfolio investment + 20.2 + 34.8 + 25.1
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 20.0 + 42.4 +  6.3
Shares 3 –  2.4 +  8.2 –  1.6
Investment fund shares 4+  4.7 +  8.6 +  4.7
of which
Money market fund 
shares –  5.3 –  1.1 –  0.0
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 + 19.2 + 25.2 +  4.3
of which
Denominated in euro 6 + 13.3 + 23.9 +  5.8
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –  1.5 +  0.5 –  1.1
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities –  0.1 +  7.6 – 18.8
Shares 3 +  0.1 +  4.3 +  3.6
Investment fund shares –  1.3 –  1.8 –  2.9
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 +  3.1 + 16.6 – 20.4
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 –  2.2 –  2.3 – 21.6
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –  2.0 – 11.5 +  0.9
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  2.6 +  1.2 +  9.6
4 Other investment 10 + 36.4 + 15.9 –  0.5
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 –  7.6 –  4.0 – 13.2
Enterprises and 
 households 12 + 14.6 + 16.1 – 11.3
General government –  1.1 –  0.1 –  4.2
Bundesbank + 30.4 +  4.0 + 28.2
5 Reserve assets +  0.4 +  0.7 –  0.4
IV Errors and omissions 13 + 19.2 +  3.3 +  1.3
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 
6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: 
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the Bun-
desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as 
non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13   Statistical errors and omissions, 
resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi  nan-
cial account and the balances on the current account and the 
capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
46

equity stakes in domestic enterprises only 
slightly (€1 billion), mainly using reinvested   
earnings to do so. In regional terms, investors from the euro area, particularly from the Neth -
erlands (€20½ billion) and Belgium (€5 billion), 
played a major role.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
47

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
After the year got off to a moderate start, 
aggre  gate economic activity rebounded quite 
strongly in spring 2018. According to the flash 
estimate by the Federal Statistical Office, the 
growth rate of real gross domestic product 
(GDP), after adjustment for seasonal and calen -
dar effects, rose slightly on the first quarter of 
2018 to 0.5%.1 Diminishing one- off effects 
such as the extremely virulent wave of influ -
enza, which had dampened economic activity 
in the winter months, are likely to have had 
merely a limited impact. This meant that the 
economic boom in Germany was still ongoing. 
However, the pace of growth in the first half of 
2018 failed to match the high rates of the pre -
vious year, and the current underlying cyclical 
trend is probably only marginally above the 
poten tial rate. The already high degree of aggre gate capacity utilisation is therefore only 
edging up. Private consumption – currently the 
linchpin of economic expansion – continued its 
ascent in the second quarter. Government con -
sumption probably likewise rose significantly 
following a distinct decline in the previous 
quarter, the first in many years. Moreover, fol -
lowing a drop at the beginning of the year, ex -
ports grew moderately. The same is probably 
the case for business investment in machinery 
and equipment.
In the second quarter of 2018, industrial activ -
ity remained largely listless. Although the 
manufacturing industry may well have contrib -
uted slightly to aggregate growth, it was un -
able to re- assume the role as the key economic 
driving force that it had in the previous year. 
For business-  related services, the upturn con -
tinued. In spite of capacity constraints, con -
struction output increased once again.
In real terms, German firms’ export business ex -
panded again in the second quarter of 2018, 
after declining significantly in the winter 
months. According to the seasonally adjusted 
figures available up to May, the recovery was 
due primarily to a countermovement in exports 
of goods to non- euro area countries, which 
had previously declined. Exports to the newly 
industrialised economies in Asia, the south and 
east Asian emerging markets and the United 
Kingdom rose particularly strongly. German ex -
porters were also able to considerably boost 
their export sales to central and east European 
countries. In terms of value, exports to the 
United States remained at the level of the pre -German 
economy  back 
to stronger 
growth in 
second quarter
Industry lacking 
momentum; 
services  and 
construction, 
by contrast, 
dynamic
Exports back in 
positive territoryOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18102104106108110112114116
–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
1 GDP growth in the first quarter of 2018 was revised up -
wards by 0.1  percentage point to 0.4%. Following the 
usual mid- year revision of previous years’ data, GDP growth 
at the beginning of 2017 was even stronger. By contrast, 
the pace of expansion throughout the rest of the year was 
somewhat more moderate. Furthermore, GDP growth was 
revised upwards by 0.3  percentage point in 2014 and 
2016. On the whole, the upswing is therefore stronger and 
probably also more mature than previously reported.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
48

vious quarter. By contrast, business with China 
declined again slightly. Exports to Japan, Russia 
and the OPEC countries even fell considerably 
in the quarter under review.
Business investment in new machinery and 
equipment is likely to have increased only mod -
erately in the second quarter. This was prob -
ably because of an overall decline in demand 
impulses for industry in the first half of the year 
and because corporate sentiment was also no 
longer as euphoric as before. Capital goods im -
ports rose strongly in the second quarter. Even 
excluding the very considerable rise in imports 
of other transport equipment, the increase was 
still strong. However, domestic sales of capital 
goods manufacturers declined considerably. 
Car manufacturers, in particular, suffered a 
sharp decline in domestic sales. Furthermore, 
the drop in the number of commercial motor 
vehicle registrations suggests that enterprises 
did not further expand their vehicle fleets in the 
reporting period.
Construction investment probably expanded 
further in the second quarter of 2018. The 
turnover figures for the main construction sec -
tor available up to May indicate that more was 
invested in commercial and public buildings in 
particular. Following the strong growth in the 
previous quarter, private housing investment 
probably rose much more moderately.
Household consumption expenditure again 
made a distinct contribution to overall eco -
nomic growth in the second quarter of 2018. 
This can be seen above all in the significant in -
crease in retail sales. Sales growth was strong -
est in online and mail order trade. Retail sales 
of information and communication technology 
(ICT) equipment also flourished, and sales of 
do- it- yourself (DIY) and home improvement 
goods likewise grew quite substantially. By con -
trast, sales of electrical household appliances, 
furniture and furnishings were down signifi -
cantly on the previous quarter. The hotel and 
restaurant sector was again able to perceptibly 
increase its turnover, which was probably due in part to the comparatively warm and sunny 
weather in the spring. By contrast, households 
were clearly holding back on purchasing new 
motor vehicles following the extremely buoy -
ant activity in the automotive sector in the pre -
vious quarters.
Imports in the second quarter of 2018 rose 
considerably on the level of the previous quar -
ter in price- adjusted terms. This was attribut -
able to the increase in domestic demand and 
the marked rise in exports. That said, some of 
the imports were probably used to restock 
warehouses. The increased uncertainty about 
greater restrictions on international trade in Enterprises’ 
investment 
activity probably 
showing little 
momentum
Construction 
investment 
still pointing 
upwards
Marked rise 
in private 
consumption 
Steep rise 
in imports100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18Apr-
May100110120130
Apr-
May
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
020406080 Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
price-adjusted 1110120130140
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
49

future  may have played a role in this. In re -
gional terms, imports from the euro area 
– accord ing to the seasonally adjusted value-  
based figures available up to May – increased 
only slightly. Imports from non- euro area coun -
tries rose strongly, however, and also on a 
broad basis. This was due mainly to very sub -
stantial growth in imports from the United 
Kingdom. However, this was attributable to 
orders from the aircraft and aerospace industry 
and is therefore likely to represent a one- off 
special effect. Manufacturers from the newly 
industrialised Asian countries and the United 
States also benefited strongly from buoyant 
domestic demand. The strong increase in the 
value of imports from the OPEC countries was 
probably the result of the considerable rise in 
crude oil prices in the report ing period.Sectoral trends
Industrial output went up again slightly in the 
second quarter of 2018 by a seasonally adjusted  
¼%, after virtually stagnating at the beginning 
of the year. The development across the eco -
nomic sectors was very heterogeneous, and 
the muted growth in output was driven by just 
a few industrial sectors. The production of 
pharmaceutical products rose particularly 
sharply, which meant that the consumer goods 
sector recorded the strongest overall growth in 
output among the main groups. By contrast, 
the output of capital goods was only slightly up 
on the level of the previous quarter. Here, too, 
the increase was attributable to just one im -
portant industrial segment, the automotive 
sector. German mechanical engineering firms, 
meanwhile, were forced to cut production 
sharply. The output of intermediate goods did 
not exceed the average of the first three 
months of the year.
According to Ifo Institute data, the level of cap -
acity utilisation of tangible fixed assets in manu -
facturing remained at the high level of the pre -
vious quarter. This is likely to be related to the 
fact that business investment in machinery and 
equipment rose only slightly. The modest 
growth in industrial output was probably ac -
companied by correspondingly weak capacity 
expansion. Capacity utilisation changed only 
slightly across the individual sectors of industry.
Construction activity rose steeply in the second 
quarter of 2018 after adjustment for seasonal 
variations. The main reason for the growth in 
construction output by 1½% was a substantial 
increase in production in the main construction 
sector, where exceptionally strong growth was 
recorded in both general building and civil 
engin eering. Activity in the finishing trades, by 
contrast, contracted considerably. There is still 
much evidence to suggest that the construc -
tion sector is working at full capacity. Accord-
ing to the Ifo Institute, for example, equipment 
utilisation in the main construction sector re -
mained very high, and the share of construc -Slight increase 
in industrial 
activity
No change 
in industrial 
capacity  
utilisation 
Strong growth 
in construction 
outputOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18Industry
95100105110
859095100105110115120
Construction1
Main construction2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
50

tion firms reporting production hold- ups owing 
to the shortage of skilled workers reached a 
new record high in the second quarter. There 
was a sharp rise in construction prices. The fact 
that seasonally adjusted construction output 
still increased considerably compared to the 
winter months could be attrib utable in part to 
the wave of influenza and the unfavourable 
weather conditions in February and March. 
This is suggested, in any case, by the circum -
stance that the number of hours worked in the 
main construction sector rose considerably 
slower than employment at the beginning of 
the year, whereas the opposite was observed in 
April and May. Enterprises also sought to ex -
pand their potential output, with the number 
of employees in the main construction sector 
rising distinctly after the turn of the year.
All in all, the services sectors are likely to have 
expanded perceptibly again in the second quar -
ter of 2018. Price- adjusted wholesale sales in -
creased significantly. Enterprises in the retail 
trade sector (excluding motor vehicle trade) 
likewise managed to increase their sales in real 
terms. Furthermore, growing activity in the 
hotel and restaurant sector provided a boost. 
Positive impetus probably also came from 
motor vehicle trade, where total sales rose 
signifi cantly despite a clear decline in motor 
vehicle  registrations. This was due in particular 
to strong growth in the sales of motor vehicle 
parts and accessories as well as motorcycles. 
Business activity in the other services sectors is 
also likely to have expanded. This is suggested 
by the fact that the business situation in this 
sector is viewed very optimistically despite a 
slight downward revision.
Labour market
In the second quarter, the labour market in 
Germany was again in very good shape, char -
acterised by high employment and low un -
employment. However, the situation did not 
improve as strongly as in previous quarters: 
although  employment rose markedly, this growth was no longer as buoyant. Employ -
ment growth continued to be driven by jobs 
subject to social security contributions. Exclu -
sively low- paid part- time employment, as be -
fore, fell slightly, while self- employment 
dropped more significantly. In the quarter 
under review, unemployment likewise did not 
fall as sharply as in the winter, yet given the 
low level achieved, this fall was still quite con -
siderable. Over the same period, the number of 
job vacancies went up only a little from the 
excep tionally high level achieved in the spring. 
Other, survey- based leading indicators of 
labour  market developments either fell slightly 
or remained virtually unchanged in the last few 
months. On the whole, the outlook for the 
labour  market remains good.
Employment in Germany rose more slowly in 
the second quarter of 2018 than it had done 
beforehand. It went up by a seasonally ad -
justed 86,000 persons, or 0.2%, after a revised 
+0.5% in the first quarter. The slowdown in the 
pace of expansion is likely to be due to the 
exten sive hiring of new workers immediately 
beforehand and the weaker underlying pace of 
growth since the beginning of the year. In add -
ition, the fact that it is becoming increasingly 
difficult to find suitable skilled labour may have 
had a negative impact on employment growth. 
The vacancy periods for open positions, for in -
stance, have been rising significantly across all 
sectors for quite some time.
The considerable increase in jobs subject to 
social  security contributions continued to drive 
the rise in employment. According to initial 
estimates  by the Federal Employment Agency 
(BA), on an average of April and May, the num -
ber of positions filled rose by just under 0.4% 
compared with the average for the first quar -
ter. Services such as IT and logistics recorded 
the highest growth rates. Employment in the 
manufacturing sector also experienced above-  
average growth, as did business- related services  
if temporary agency work is excluded, where 
the number of jobs fell relatively sharply. One 
possible explanation for this is that the reform Services sector 
still showing 
marked growth
Labour market 
situation very 
good, but 
improvement 
not as strong 
as in previous 
quartersSlowdown in 
employment 
growth
Growth in jobs 
subject to social 
security contri -
butions broadly 
based across 
sectors, but 
strong decline 
in temporary 
agency workDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
51

of the Act on Labour Leasing (Arbeitnehmer -
überlassungsgesetz)  of 1 April 2017 introduced 
a maximum period of labour leasing of 18 
months. This could now be having an effect as 
the first people would shortly have to be given 
permanent positions. Employment in the health 
and social services sector enjoyed predictably 
robust growth. In construction, in the whole -
sale and retail trade, and the hotel and restaur -
ant sector, the number of positions filled was 
up only slightly in the first months of the 
second quarter.
Registered unemployment fell distinctly in the 
second quarter after seasonal adjustment, 
although  taking the average of the reporting 
period, the decline of 39,000 persons was not 
as steep as in the preceding quarter. The un -
employment rate fell by 0.2 percentage point 
to 5.2%. However, this was partly attributable 
to the adjustment, which takes place every 
spring, to the labour force measure used by the 
Federal Employment Agency to calculate the 
unemployment rate. The number of registered 
unemployed continued to decrease slightly in 
July. While unemployment covered by the 
statutory insurance scheme has been very low 
for some time and did not fall appreciably, the 
number of unemployed persons receiving the 
basic welfare allowance went down. This is 
mainly due to a significantly smaller risk of 
receiv  ing the basic welfare allowance, as the 
current high demand for labour means that 
fewer persons are long- term unemployed or in 
need. By contrast, the rate of people no longer 
needing the basic allowance was up only 
slightly. The Federal Employment Agency’s 
more broadly defined measure of under -
employment, which also counts those partici -
pating in active labour market policy measures, 
fell even more strongly than registered un -
employment. Significantly fewer people are 
currently receiving support through short- term 
labour market reintegration measures, further 
professional training or one- euro jobs than a 
year ago.Number of 
unemployed 
persons down, 
particularly 
those receiving 
basic welfare 
allowanceLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018July42.042.543.043.544.044.545.0
29.029.530.030.531.031.532.032.533.005001,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JulyMillion
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Scale enlarged
Unsubsidised vacancies 2Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Apr-
MayDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
52

According to the leading labour market indica -
tors, employment is likely to expand over the 
next few months at much the same rate as dur -
ing the period under review. The most import -
ant leading indicators, including the Ifo em -
ployment barometer, the employment com -
ponent of the IAB labour market barometer 
and the Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X job 
index, remained virtually unchanged over the 
last few months and are still at an exceptionally 
expansive level. Nonetheless, the number of 
vacancies continued to rise, albeit somewhat 
more slowly. The leading indicator for un -
employment in the IAB labour market barom -
eter was down again slightly and is only just in 
positive territory. This suggests that registered 
unemployment will probably not decline appre -
ciably in the next few months.
Wages and prices
Negotiated wages rose sharply in the spring 
quarter, reflecting the fact that recent wage 
settlements were higher than in the last pay 
round given a healthy economy and a tight 
labour  market. The rise in negotiated rates of 
pay including all additional benefits in spring 
2018, at 3.2% on the year, was significantly 
higher than just three months before (2.2%). 
Already in the first quarter of 2018, actual earn -
ings had picked up somewhat more strongly 
than in earlier periods. This trend could well 
have continued in the second quarter.
At the end of June, the independent Minimum 
Wage Commission unanimously decided to 
recommend to the Federal Government a rise 
in the general minimum wage by a total of 
51 cents, or 5.8%, over the next two years.2 
The minimum wage will therefore rise in an ini -
tial stage as of January 2019 from the current 
€8.84 to €9.19 per hour and in a second stage 
as of January 2020 to €9.35 per hour. The Fed -
eral Government announced that it would im -
plement this proposal. The last rise in the min -
imum wage in January 2017 was lower, at 4% 
in total. The general statutory minimum wage tracks past negotiated wage developments 
with a lag and is intended to have the smallest 
possible impact on future wage rounds. The 
suggested rise in the minimum wage will prob -
ably have a significant impact on wage negoti -
ations only in individual low- wage sectors.
Consumer prices (as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices, or HICP) con -
tinued to rise sharply in the second quarter. 
Roughly half of the seasonally adjusted 0.6% 
increase was attributable to energy prices, 
reflect ing the distinct rise in crude oil prices 
denom inated in US dollars, an effect which Leading 
indicators  
remain high
Negotiated 
wages up more 
sharply in spring 
than before
Substantial 
two- stage 
increase 
in general  
statutory  
minimum  wageSharp rise in 
consumer prices 
in spring2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201800.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
% points
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5%
Q1Wage driftNegotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay).
Deutsche BundesbankQuarterly
2 The Minimum Wage Commission’s resolutions base the 
size of the statutory minimum wage on past developments 
in negotiated hourly earnings, excluding special payments, 
according to the negotiated wage index of the Federal 
Statistical Office. The latest decision to raise the minimum 
wage was based on the trend in negotiated wages for 
2016 and 2017 and the first half of 2018. The rise in nego -
tiated wages in the first half of 2016, which was already 
factored into the increase in the minimum wage at the 
beginning  of 2017, has thus obviously been taken into 
account  twice when raising the minimum wage.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
53

was amplified by the depreciation of the euro. 
Food products likewise became markedly more 
expensive, which was due in part to higher 
prices for tobacco products, which the HICP 
counts under food. Excluding energy and food, 
prices rose similarly moderately to the previous 
quarter. Prices in several sub- sectors of the ser -
vices sector went up, including rents. Prices for 
industrial goods excluding energy were barely 
up on the quarter, but began to accelerate over 
the course of the second quarter. One of the 
reasons for this may be that import prices for 
the relevant goods rose markedly owing to the 
euro’s depreciation. At the commercial produ -
cer level, too, prices continued their gradual climb. The headline annual HICP inflation rate 
rose clearly from 1.3% to 1.9%.3 It passed the 
+2% mark in May and in June owing to the 
sharp rise in energy prices. Excluding energy 
and food, annual inflation in the spring was 
more or less constant at 1.2% and, consistent 
with aggregate capacity overutilisation, re -
mained above its longer- term average.
In July, consumer prices remained unchanged 
in seasonally adjusted terms. Consumers had to 
pay just as much for energy and food as in the 
previous month. Prices for industrial goods ex -
cluding energy went down distinctly overall 
due to exceptionally strong discounts for cloth -
ing, although prices for other industrial goods 
excluding energy rose moderately. Prices for 
services including rents also rose somewhat. 
Annual headline HICP inflation was unchanged 
at 2.1%,4 and it was also more or less constant 
at 1.2% when excluding energy and food.
Headline inflation is likely to stabilise at around 
2% over the next few months. Energy and 
food price inflation is likely to slow somewhat. 
However, the rate excluding energy and food 
should edge up as prices for clothing are likely 
to be raised as new collections are introduced. 
Furthermore, the reductions in motor vehicle 
insurance premiums in October 2017 drop out 
of the annual inflation rate calculation in the 
autumn.
Orders received and outlook
The German economy will probably remain on 
a sound growth path in the summer of 2018. 
The pace of growth could end up being some -
what slower than the average for the first half 
of the year, however. Industry, for instance, is 
not expected to make any meaningful contri -
bution to aggregate growth. Although the 
stock of orders still being processed remains Inflation still 
above 2% 
in July …
… and is not 
expected to 
change substan -
tially over the 
next few months
German econ -
omy stays on 
expansionary 
courseEinfuhrpreise
Export pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201895100105110
100105110
95100105
0123
+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2
2015 = 100Producer prices1Log scale
%
July100105110
JulyImport prices
3 The headline CPI figure was +2.0% compared with 
+1.5%.
4 The CPI figure was +2.0% from likewise +2.1%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
54

exceptionally high and short- term output ex -
pectations in the manufacturing sector have 
stabilised at an elevated level, new orders re -
ceived by industry were down again in the 
quarter under review. To exacerbate matters, 
problems encountered during the transition to 
a new emission test cycle are likely to markedly 
constrain motor vehicle production in the sum -
mer months. By contrast, private consumption 
is likely to benefit from the excellent labour 
market situation and the current strong wage 
growth, thus maintaining its role as a key driver 
of German economic growth.
Sentiment in the German economy, having hit 
new record highs in the second half of last year 
before deteriorating markedly during the first 
few months of 2018, stabilised somewhat in 
the period under review. While the business 
situation was still considered to be very positive 
according to the Ifo surveys, business expect -
ations fell to their longer- term average. This 
was mainly because enterprises in the whole -
sale and retail trade were taking a more cau -
tious view of the future. By contrast, expect -
ations in the other service sectors brightened 
slightly. The business outlook in the manu-
facturing industry has been stable in recent 
months, and the sector’s assessments of short- 
term output and export expectations also 
remained  largely unchanged. Developments in 
the main construction industry stood out posi -
tively, however. Not only did the assessment of 
the business situation jump to a new record 
high, expectations also brightened distinctly.
German industry’s order books are still well 
filled. The decline in industrial orders since the 
beginning of the year must be viewed in the 
context of the exceptionally strong inflow of 
orders in the second half of 2017 and the only 
subdued growth in output in the first half of 
this year. In regional terms, businesses received 
considerably fewer orders in the second quar -
ter particularly from the euro area and Ger -
many. By contrast, the inflow of new orders 
from non- euro area countries increased sub -
stantially. However, order backlogs in the Scarcely any 
further  
deterioration  
in sentiment 
of late
Order situation 
still favourableDemand for industrial goods and 
construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 1890100110120
1001020
–++
90100110120
90100110
Apr-
MayApr-
May
100110120130140150
1001020
–++Volume, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
2010 = 100
%%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
55

manufacturing sector were still viewed as being 
well above average, according to the Ifo Insti -
tute surveys. The reported range of orders also 
remained close to its historical record high in 
the reporting period. Moreover, the order 
backlog in June was significantly higher than 
the average of the first quarter. The orders situ -
ation in industry can thus still be considered 
positive overall.
The construction boom in Germany is likely to 
continue in the third quarter of 2018. Con -
struction firms generally continue to enjoy very 
buoyant demand for construction services. On 
an average of April and May – the most recent 
months for which statistics are available – the 
order intake in the main construction sector 
went down steeply on the previous quarter. 
However, the inflow of new orders in the first 
quarter was exceptionally high and also, for the 
most part, characterised by large orders, which 
are often processed over longer periods of time. The brisk construction demand was also 
reflected in considerable and broad- based 
growth in the number of building permits 
granted. In view of the capacity constraints in 
the sector, however, it remains to be seen how 
quickly and strongly high demand will push up 
production.
The prerequisites for private consumption to 
continue as a mainstay of solid economic 
growth remain in place in the third quarter of 
2018. The recent improvement in the labour 
market situation was not as marked as that 
seen in 2017 but the outlook is still favourable. 
Moreover, significant price- adjusted wage 
growth is also likely to further increase house -
holds’ scope for expenditure. In line with this, 
consumer sentiment is optimistic according to 
the consumer climate index compiled by the 
market research company Gesellschaft für Kon -
sumforschung  (GfK). The same applies to con -
sumers’ income expectations.Demand for 
construction 
services  remains 
highBuoyant 
consumption  
continuesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
56

Public finances*
General government budget
German public finances are continuing to de -
velop favourably this year as well. The general 
government surplus is likely to keep rising 
(2017: 1.2% of gross domestic product (GDP)). 
The debt ratio is decreasing and is expected to 
come close to the 60% threshold by the end of 
the year. It fell to 62.9% in the first quarter, 
down from 64.1% at the end of 2017.
Public finances are benefiting from the favour -
able economic situation. In addition, temporary 
burdens are declining due to the nuclear fuel 
tax repayment in 2017 being a one- off event. 
Irrespective of the cyclical upswing, the favour -
able growth trend is giving rise to significant 
revenue increases. Growth is being further 
amplified by overall progressive taxation. On 
the expenditure side, this is being supported by 
falling interest payments and structurally posi -
tive labour market developments. However, 
spending is set to rise fairly significantly in a 
variety of other areas. For instance, payments 
to the EU are likely to go up considerably, while 
marked spending increases in the areas of in -
vestment, long- term care and healthcare are 
also expected.
As things stand, the framework conditions for 
public finances will remain favourable in the 
medium term. However, the surplus could well 
shrink in the coming years as the Federal Gov -
ernment is planning to raise spending in nu -
merous areas. The tax and social contributions 
ratio may change very little – on the one hand, 
income tax, the solidarity surcharge and the 
contribution rate for the unemployment insur -
ance scheme are set to be reduced but, on the 
other hand, an increase in the contribution rate 
for the long- term care insurance scheme is en -
visaged, and bracket creep in income taxation 
will generate additional revenue. Fiscal loosen -
ing is also in the offing for state and local gov -
ernments, which have run surpluses for many years. Overall, fiscal policy is likely to be clearly 
expansionary as a result. Given that economic 
conditions are favourable, the effect of this will 
be procyclical. As things currently stand, how -
ever, the risk of this giving rise to cyclical ex -
cesses such as increased price pressures ap -
pears limited overall. This notwithstanding, 
government investment in construction, to give 
one example, will have to be monitored so that 
additional spending does not dissipate in the 
face of price increases.
Looking further ahead, public finances will be 
faced with various challenges, especially that of 
demographic change. It will cause spending to 
soar and dampen revenue growth. To this 
extent , it is a welcome sign that the debt ratio 
is currently being rapidly reduced. The lower 
interest burden associated with a low debt 
ratio provides some breathing space, making it 
possible to shoulder increasing demographic 
burdens. This will be important, in particular, 
even when interest rates go up again.
The very favourable budgetary situation overall 
is due not least to positive economic and la -
bour market developments. In view of the high 
surpluses, however, fiscal policymakers are also 
under pressure to provide additional public 
services . The measures currently being rolled 
out are initially focusing on additional transfers. 
Means testing is not of primary importance 
here (as it is, for example, in the case of 
mothers’ pensions or home buyers’ child bene -
fit). The scope for spending in other areas 
– such as education, digitalisation or transport 
infrastructure, which constitute important cor -Public finances 
continuing to 
develop favour -
ably in 2018 …
… due to 
expansionary 
measures being 
slightly out -
weighed by 
positive effects
Fiscal loosening 
will cause sur -
plus to decline 
in coming yearsDemographic 
challenges 
easier  to over -
come with low 
debt ratio
Spending to 
initially  focus 
on transfers
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). As yet, there are no current quarterly data available 
for local government or the statutory health and public 
long- term care insurance schemes. These will be discussed 
in the short commentaries in subsequent editions of the 
Monthly Report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
57

nerstones for economic growth – is thus lower. 
In addition, the tax and social contributions 
ratio remains quite high as plans currently 
stand and will come under substantial upward 
pressure going forward as taxes and social con -
tributions will be used to finance additional 
spending in the face of demographic change. 
Should there be any additional fiscal space 
available, it would therefore be worth explor -
ing cuts in taxes and social contributions for 
employees and enterprises rather than expand -
ing transfers.
The financial challenges arising in connection 
with demographic trends will increase as a 
result  of current pension policy. The Federal 
Government’s first pension benefits package is 
set to focus on expanding benefits (particularly 
mothers’ pensions) that are not funded by 
dedicated social contributions. The lion’s share 
of these costs will initially be borne by contri -
bution payers. However, whenever additional 
spending on non- insurance- related benefits is 
approved – to meet certain distribution targets, 
for instance – it should be financed in a rule-  
based manner out of general taxation. This is 
designed, not least, to combat the tendency to 
exploit the sound state of the social security 
funds’ finances for non- insurance- related pur -
poses.It is important to quickly reach a consensus on 
the planned fundamental pension reform so as 
to provide some certainty over the longer term. 
The main levers for tackling the demographic 
burden on the pension insurance scheme are 
the pension level, the statutory retire ment age, 
the contribution rate and the central govern -
ment grant. At present, there is considerable 
opposition to further raising the statutory 
retire ment age. At the same time, there are 
often calls to set a high floor for the pension 
level and a low cap for the contribution rate. 
The funding gap that this would open up 
would then have to be plugged by higher cen -
tral government grants. It would appear here 
that central government’s ability to shoulder 
such a burden is sometimes clearly overesti -
mated – not least on account of the still highly 
favourable budgetary situation, presumably. 
Central government grants are already set to 
rise sharply in response to the current legal 
situation, however, which will increase their 
share in both central government spending and 
pension revenue. Private pension arrangements 
also require a reliable planning basis. It is there -
fore important to quickly reach an agreement 
on a burden-  sharing plan that will be sustain -
able in the long term.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Year-  on- year growth in tax revenue1 came to 
10½% in the second quarter of 2018 (see the 
chart above and the table on page 59). Exclud -
ing the previous year’s repayment of nuclear 
fuel tax amounting to €6½ billion,2 growth still Planned pension 
policy measures 
will increase 
pressure 
resulting  from 
demographic 
trendsPut pension 
finances on 
sound footing 
and improve 
planning 
certainty 
Extraordinary 
rise in tax 
revenue  in Q2 
owing to one- 
off effect in 
previous  yearTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 20182024681012
–++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
1 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes. The latter are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
2 In its ruling 2 BvL 6/ 13, the Federal Constitutional Court 
declared nuclear fuel tax unconstitutional and ordered cen -
tral government to repay all payments collected to the 
operators  of nuclear power plants. The aforementioned 
repay ment, made in June last year, was followed in August 
2017 by a further amount of €1 billion for accrued interest.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
58

stood at 6½%. But this figure, too, is likely to 
be somewhat overstated: it is based, inter alia,  
on high additional revenue from non- assessed 
taxes on earnings. Earlier profit distributions 
(compared with last year) probably have a part 
to play in this. As such, a countermovement is 
expected in the coming months.
The Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates 
projects revenue growth (including local gov -
ernment taxes) of 5% for the year as a whole. 
Excluding the one- off effect of the nuclear fuel 
tax repayment, the growth rate would stand at 
4%. Growth will be slightly depressed owing to 
other court rulings that are forecast to result in 
tax repayments later in the year. In addition, 
there will be revenue shortfalls stemming from 
legislative changes: income tax cuts, in particu -
lar, will reduce revenue. By contrast, lapsing re -
funds of corporation tax credit3 will lead to an 
increase in revenue.The tax estimate indicates that in the medium 
term, too, tax revenue will rise considerably 
and the tax ratio will go up. Although the 
planned income tax and solidarity surcharge 
cuts have not yet been taken into account, the 
ratio would probably remain at a historically 
high level even if they were. Additionally, more 
tax revenue will be needed in the longer term: 
it is foreseeable that demographic develop -
ments will put considerable funding pressure 
on the central government budget. In view of 
the calls for permanent increases in grants to 
the statutory pension insurance scheme, this 
pressure could intensify further. With that in 
mind, it should not be forgotten that rising 
taxes and social contributions could be detri -
mental to economic growth, the labour market 
and investment.Considerable 
growth expected 
for year as a 
wholeHigh tax ratio 
and further 
upward pressureTax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2018 1,2Q2
2017 2018 2017 2018
Year-on-year changeYear- on- 
year 
change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 326.4 350.2 + 23.8 +  7.3 +  5.3 161.0 178.1 + 17.1 + 10.6
of which
Wage tax 93.6 99.5 +  5.9 +  6.3 +  5.6 48.3 51.4 +  3.1 +  6.5
Profi  t-related taxes 3 61.6 68.6 +  7.0 + 11.3 +  5.8 29.9 34.9 +  5.0 + 16.7
Assessed income tax 31.8 32.5 +  0.7 +  2.2 +  3.7 14.8 14.9 +  0.1 +  0.4
Corporation tax 16.4 18.7 +  2.3 + 14.3 + 10.5 7.9 9.3 +  1.4 + 18.2
Investment income 
tax4 13.4 17.3 +  3.9 + 29.5 +  5.5 7.2 10.7 +  3.5 + 48.6
Turnover taxes 5 111.7 115.0 +  3.3 +  3.0 +  3.8 54.2 55.8 +  1.6 +  2.9
Other consumption-  
related  taxes 6 42.0 42.1 +  0.1 +  0.3 +  0.6 22.1 22.1 –  0.0 –  0.0
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2018. 2 Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 4 Withholding 
tax on interest  income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax. 6 Taxes on energy, 
tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and 
lottery, beer, fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 This credit was the result of switching from a full imput -
ation system to the half- income method as part of the cor -
porate tax reform of 2000-01. Refunds were staggered 
between 2008 and 2017.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
59

Corporate tax rates are an important part of 
the decision on where to locate and invest, and 
enterprises also respond to differences in cor -
porate tax rates from one country to the next.4 
The United States recently cut statutory and ef -
fective tax rates for corporations to levels well 
below those in Germany. On a scale of EU 
countries’ corporate tax rates, Germany already 
ranks in the top quarter at this time.5 Some EU 
countries have announced tax cuts, including 
countries with relatively high corporate tax 
rates. But other factors do also play a role in 
investment decisions. As Germany is a major 
economy and an oft-  attested top-  quality busi -
ness location,6 a level of taxation that is slightly 
above average does not appear problematic 
per se . In this respect, it is necessary to main -
tain that general high level of quality in the 
long term and cater to new requirements in 
good time. That said, it is important to also 
keep an eye on tax competitiveness and, if 
need be, fine- tune it if the gap between cor -
porate tax rates becomes too great.Central government budget
Central government generated a large surplus 
of €14½ billion in the second quarter of 2018. 
The budget outturn was €13 billion higher than 
in the second quarter of 2017. This was partly 
due to the nuclear fuel tax repayment of €6½ 
billion in 2017, which pushed down tax rev -
enue that year, being a one- off event. Tax rev -
enue also increased significantly, besides. By 
contrast, expenditure fell slightly. Amongst 
other things, interest expenditure declined, 
particularly in connection with inflation- linked 
Federal securities. There was also a transfer to 
the energy and climate fund in the second 
quarter of last year which was not repeated 
this year. A surplus of €18 billion was recorded 
for the first half of 2018 as a whole, which was 
also well up on the previous year’s level (€6½ 
billion).
By contrast, the recently adopted budget plan 
envisages a significant deterioration in the out -
turn for 2018 as a whole (€7 billion decrease 
compared with the surplus in 2017). A deficit of 
€2 billion was estimated. In order to maintain a 
balanced budget (ie avoid net borrowing), the 
government is entitled to use, first and fore -
most, the refugee reserve (see the excursus on 
pages 69 to 73 on the use of reserves and off- 
budget entities).
As the plans stand, the debt brake will be 
undershot by some way (see the table on 
page 61). The Federal Ministry of Finance links 
the ceiling to the level of structural net borrow -
ing, which is lowered by making reserve with -Corporate tax 
burden in Ger -
many becoming 
less advanta -
geous by 
international  
standardsSharp rise in 
surplus , also 
as a result of 
one- off effect
Nevertheless, 
balance set to 
clearly deterior -
ate according to 
2018 budget 
plan …
… but debt 
brake will still 
be clearly 
undershotCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q45051015
–+++
–50+5+10+15+20
2018
20172016Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
201620182017€ billion
4 This is suggested by empirical evidence. See, inter alia, 
R A de Mooij and S Ederveen (2008), Corporate tax elastici -
ties: a reader’s guide to empirical findings, Oxford Review 
of Economic Policy 24(4), pp  680-697; or L P  Feld and 
J H  Heckemeyer (2011), FDI and taxation: a meta-  study, 
Journal of Economic Surveys 25(2), pp 233-272.
5 For comparisons of the effective average tax rates and 
the cost of capital, see C Spengel et al (2018), Analysis of 
US corporate tax reform proposals and their effect for Eur -
ope and Germany: final report – update 2018.
6 See, for example, World Economic Forum (2017), The 
Global Competitiveness Report 2017-2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
60

drawals.7 Due to favourable economic condi -
tions, the structural balance is less favourable 
than the unadjusted one. Including the relevant 
off- budget entities, structural net borrowing 
amounts to €3½ billion. Nevertheless, the 
upper limit of 0.35% of GDP will still be clearly 
undershot.
The budget appears very prudent. Recent, 
highly favourable developments indicate a sig -
nificant surplus. For example, investment ex -
penditure8 in areas such as expanding the 
broadband network or calls on guarantees 
could once again be lower than estimated. 
Additionally, surging transfers to the energy 
and climate fund were earmarked. It seems 
plausible here that these outflows will be not -
ably lower, even over the remainder of the 
year. A planned global revenue shortfall of €1½ 
billion was not explained in any detail. The 
usual general global spending cut (2017: €2 bil -
lion) was struck from the record. If expenditure 
appropriations are not fully utilised in the course of implementing the budget, the out -
turn will thus immediately be better than 
planned as it will not first be netted against a 
global expenditure cut. All in all, there could be 
a similarly high surplus as in the previous year 
rather than the significant deterioration that 
was envisaged. As a result, the reserve is likely 
to keep swelling substantially in size rather 
than being depleted as planned.
The draft budget for 2019 was approved by the 
Federal Cabinet at the start of July. Compared 
with the 2018 budget estimates, expenditure is 
expected to rise by almost 4% (€13 billion), 
with additional funds earmarked for defence 
and the statutory pension insurance scheme, in Plan very 
prudent , and 
renewed surplus 
to be expected Draft budget for 
2019 sets out 
marked expend -
iture growth …Central government’s fi  scal planning up to 2022 
and the result as defi  ned in the debt brake rules*
€ billion
ItemActual
2017Target
2018Draft
2019Fiscal plan
2020 2021 2022
Expenditure 1 325.4 343.6 356.8 363.2 367.3 373.5
of which
Investment 34.0 39.8 37.9 37.9 37.9 37.9
Global spending increases/ cuts – –  0.7 1.7 1.3 0.3 0.6
Revenue 1, 2 330.4 341.7 351.5 356.6 358.7 374.5
of which
Tax revenue 1 309.4 321.3 333.0 333.8 346.8 359.7
Global revenue increases/ shortfalls – –  1.5 –  7.0 –  6.5 – 17.6 – 14.8
Fiscal balance 3 5.0 –  1.9 –  5.3 –  6.6 –  8.6 1.0
Allocations to (–)/withdrawals from (+) reserves –  5.3 1.6 5.0 6.3 8.3 –  1.3
Net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) – – – – – –
Cyclical component 4 1.4 4.2 6.4 4.0 1.5 0.0
Balance of fi  nancial transactions –  0.8 0.3 1.0 0.8 0.7 0.9
Balance of relevant off- budget entities
Energy and climate fund –  0.2 0.0 –  0.4 –  1.0 –  0.2 0.0
Relief fund (2013 fl  ood) –  0.7 –  0.4 –  0.7 . . .
Fund to promote municipal investment –  0.5 –  1.1 –  1.8 . . .
Digitalisation fund 5 – 2.4 – . . .
Structural net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) 6 –  2.0 –  3.6 – 10.2 . . .
Memo item
Ceiling – 10.6 – 11.4 – 11.4 – 11.9 – 12.4 – 12.8
Structural fi  scal balance 3.0 –  5.5 – 15.6 . . .
* For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Key central government budget data in connection with the debt brake, Monthly 
Report, February 2016, pp 68-69. 1 After deduction of supplementary central government grants, shares of energy tax revenue, compen-
sation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and consolidation/ budgetary recovery assistance to federal states, excluding allocations 
to/ withdrawals from reserves. 2 Excluding coin seigniorage (consistently €0.3 billion). 3 The difference between revenue and expenditure. 
Equals net borrowing/repayment less allocations to/withdrawals from reserves and less coin seigniorage. 4 Notwithstanding legal require-
ments, data for all years taken from the Federal Government’s 2018 spring forecast. 5 Planned, newly included in the 2018 budget. 
6 Meaning of structural: plus the balance of relevant off- budget entities less the cyclical component and less the balance of fi  nancial 
transactions.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7 By contrast, the deficit cannot be lowered by dissolving 
reserves. For more details, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Key 
central government budget data in connection with the 
debt brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp 68-69.
8 Pursuant to the Budget Principles Act (Haushaltsgrund -
sätzegesetz), investment expenditure includes fixed asset 
formation, acquisitions of financial assets (loans and share -
holding acquisitions), calls on guarantees and financial as -
sistance (intergovernmental and other investment grants).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
61

particular. Spending increases on transport are 
subdued, despite there being additional rev -
enue from the heavy goods vehicle toll avail -
able: the toll rates are set to be increased sig -
nificantly, and the toll was extended to all fed -
eral trunk roads from July 2018. Global add -
itional expenditure of €2½ billion was estimated 
for projects that have not yet been specified by 
the Federal Government.
Tax revenue growth of €11½ billion is envis -
aged on the revenue side. This increase will be 
dampened by the fact that transfers to the EU 
budget are forecast to be significantly higher 
again. In the budget, these are deducted from 
tax revenue. Furthermore, the planned Family 
Relief Act (Familienentlastungsgesetz)9 is fac -
tored in, with revenue shortfalls of €2 billion. 
As yet unspecified budgetary burdens are taken 
into account in the form of a single global rev -
enue shortfall item of €7 billion.10 It is not ex -
plained in any further detail and goes far be -
yond the scope of the priority projects agreed 
as part of the coalition deal.
All in all, a deficit of €5½ billion is estimated 
for 2019. This, too, is set to be financed mainly 
by tapping the refugee reserve in order to avoid 
net borrowing (see the table on page  61). 
Structural net borrowing will rise to €10 billion. 
The main reason for this is the deficit recorded 
by off-  budget entities. The outturn will deteri -
orate significantly in year- on- year terms due to 
the digitalisation fund no longer receiving a 
transfer. In addition, cyclical budget relief is set 
to intensify further. The margin below the debt 
brake limit will therefore amount to no more 
than just over €1 billion. If no recourse were 
made to the reserve, the threshold would be 
exceeded. That said, the outturn will probably 
be more favourable than planned in 2019, too. 
One reason for this is that the significantly bet -
ter outturn in 2018 is expected to continue 
making itself felt as a baseline effect. As things 
currently stand, the global precautionary items 
will not be needed in the budgeted amount 
either  . Overall, another surplus in the core 
budget is therefore possible. This would result in the reserve being topped up again rather 
than being reduced.
According to the budget plans for 2018 and 
2019, significant fiscal loosening is in the off -
ing. Thus, the structural balance will decrease 
by €8½ billion in 2018 compared with 2017, 
and by another €10 billion in 2019 compared 
with 2018 (see the table on page 61). Such a 
fiscal stimulus will have a procyclical effect on 
the back of the very favourable economic situ -
ation and cyclical developments that are ex -
pected. However, the associated risks to stabil -
ity policy seem to remain limited. This is due to 
the fact that price pressures will be contained 
overall, even taking this stimulus into account. 
The risk of other stronger cyclical excesses like -
wise seems limited. In addition, more favour -
able budgetary developments remain likely, as 
previously mentioned, with the result that fiscal 
loosening will be more modest than planned.
The enduring objective of the medium- term fis -
cal plan for 2020 to 2022 is to achieve a bal -
anced budget (ie no net borrowing). In the final 
year, reserves are to be topped up again slightly 
on balance and the positive effect of the eco -
nomic cycle is expected to have come to an 
end. To this extent, the plan is to reduce struc -
tural deficits. In the case of taxes, bracket creep 
will bring in a marked increase in revenue. 
However, this will be counterbalanced by 
growing shortfalls stemming from the Family 
Relief Act and, from 2021 onwards, the partial 
abolition of the solidarity surcharge. Moreover, 
provisions appear to have been made for a fur -
ther increase in child benefit, which was out -
lined in the coalition agreement, and additional … and consider -
able burdens on 
revenue side
Compliance with 
debt brake only 
ensured by 
planned reserve 
withdrawal, but 
outturn will 
probably be 
more favourablePlans for 2018 
and 2019 indi -
cate significant 
fiscal loosening
Fiscal plan up to 
2022 without 
net borrowing 
and with 
provisions  for 
tax relief 
measures  …
9 This contains the child benefit expansion in 2019 that is 
enshrined in the coalition agreement. Furthermore, higher 
basic tax allowances and compensation for the estimated 
effects of bracket creep in 2018 and 2019 are planned.
10 This probably includes central government grants for 
state and local governments to cover some of the integra -
tion costs for refugees. These will be deducted from central 
government tax revenue this year (€2 billion annually). 
These payments were initially only agreed until 2018, but 
they will now be continued as set out in the coalition 
agreement. They were not factored into tax revenue, how -
ever, as draft legislation on this matter was not yet avail -
able.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
62

income tax cuts. The latter are likely to concern 
raising the basic income tax allowance up to 
the minimum subsistence level and continuing 
to offset bracket creep. The sum of these tax 
measures was adequately taken into account 
by global revenue shortfalls. These will increase 
to €17½ billion up to 2021 before falling to 
€15 billion in 2022. However, this means that 
the global revenue shortfalls will no longer 
have a lot to offer in terms of room for fiscal 
manoeuvre, particularly since the Bundesbank’s 
profit has been budgeted at the maximum 
amount of €2½ billion.
According to the fiscal plan, expenditure (ex -
cluding allocations to reserves) will increase by 
1½% per year, which marks a substantial slow -
down compared with previous years. These 
rises are significantly lower than anticipated 
nominal GDP growth and will thus make it pos -
sible to scale back the structural deficit. Funds 
have been primarily set aside for the Federal 
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, more spe -
cifically for the pension insurance scheme. Add -
itionally, it is envisaged that a reserve for demo -
graphic challenges will receive a new allocation 
in the amount of €2 billion per year from 2021. 
This should offset agreed additional pension in -
surance scheme burdens until 2025 and, in par -
ticular, in 2025. Most other ministries’ budgets 
will all but stagnate. A number of priority pro -
jects from the coalition agreement still appear 
to be part of the departmental budget “General 
financial administration”, however. These in -
clude, for example, a higher intergovernmental 
grant to expand childcare facilities.11 Interest 
expenditure  is expected to rise moderately up 
until the final year. Thus, provision has been 
made for a certain interest rate rise.
Overall, a certain amount of additional leeway 
could emerge during the fiscal planning period 
if the more favourable developments of the 
preceding years continue to make themselves 
felt as a baseline effect. In case of such a scen -
ario, it was announced that development aid 
and defence expenditure would be increased. 
Planned expenditure relative to GDP in these areas appears to be lagging behind the 
amounts set in international agreements, and 
is  even declining in some cases. Additional 
needs may also arise when it comes to pay -
ments to the EU; in the context of Brexit, for 
example. The fact that the solidarity surcharge 
is only to be abolished in part is sometimes 
regarded  critically under current constitutional 
rules. However, were it to be completely abol -
ished, the result would be an additional finan -
cial requirement of around €12 billion in 2021. 
There are also certain risks in connection with 
the macroeconomic outlook: the assumed GDP 
growth rates seem plausible, but compared to 
estimates by other institutions, potential out -
put and its rate of growth are set at a fairly 
high level. This means there is a danger of the 
favourable cyclical impact being increasingly 
underestimated and the structural situation 
being reported too positively. Risks are also 
posed by factors such as greater trade protec -
tionism, and by renewed tensions within mon -
etary union.
In the longer term, demographic change is set 
to be one of the greatest challenges facing the 
central government budget. The associated 
burdens are likely to have been sufficiently 
taken into account in the fiscal planning period 
up to 2022. There is, however, a risk of sharply 
increasing burdens over time. Central govern -
ment grants to the statutory pension insurance 
scheme are already set to rise substantially 
under the current legislation. This means that 
central government will fund an ever greater 
proportion of the scheme with tax revenue.12 
This proportion would be greater still if add -
itional demographic burdens of the pay- as- … amid only 
moderate 
expenditure 
growth
Additional 
leeway  possible, 
but also 
additional  
burdens  and 
risksDemographic 
challenges in 
the long term
11 This constitutes an expansion of mixed financing, 
which, as a rule, should be viewed critically. See Deutsche 
Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2018, 
p 70.
12 This is also on account of the fact that central govern -
ment grants are likely to increase at a faster pace than con -
tribution receipts. A large proportion of the central govern -
ment grant will be increased in line with per capita wages 
(and the contribution rate). By contrast, contribution re -
ceipts grow along with gross wages and salaries (and also 
the contribution rate). The foreseeable demographic de -
cline in employment will therefore dampen contribution 
receipts, but not the central government grant.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
63

you- go pension system were to be transferred 
to central government. Such would be the case 
if the stringent limits set for the pension level 
and the contribution rates were to remain in 
force after 2025. The scope for forward- looking 
expenditure would then shrink considerably, 
and tax increases would be inevitable.
Central government’s budgetary and fiscal 
plans are becoming increasingly difficult to fol -
low. A medium- term analysis is particularly 
challenging as important aspects have not 
been illustrated in a transparent manner. An ex -
ample of this is information relating to the debt 
brake. Compliance with the debt brake cannot 
be assessed unless the budget estimates for all 
relevant items are shown. However, data are 
still missing for most of the off- budget en -
tities.13 Furthermore, a detailed explanation for, 
in some cases, very extensive global revenue 
shortfall and expenditure increase items would 
be needed to evaluate risks and budgetary buf -
fers. In addition, the increasing number of re -
serve pots, the planned allocations to and 
withdrawals from these, and their levels would 
have to be clearly shown.
Central government’s off- budget entities14 re-
corded a surplus of €1½ billion in the second 
quarter of 2018, compared with a figure of €2 
billion in the same period last year. Lower cen -
tral government grants had a negative effect. A 
marked surplus is expected once again for the 
year as a whole (2017: €3 billion). The fund to 
promote municipal investment may conclude 
the year with a somewhat larger deficit. Higher 
payouts are now expected from this fund since 
the conditions for funding investment in 
schools have been agreed on. Last year’s sur -
plus of €1½ billion for the repayment fund for 
inflation- linked Federal securities is not likely to 
be replicated, chiefly because a bond had to be 
repaid this year. Central government’s current 
transfers were also somewhat smaller as a re -
sult of decreased price pressures. The planned 
digitalisation fund, by contrast, is set to have 
the opposite effect. It is planned to pre- finance 
this fund with €2½ billion from the central gov -ernment budget. These financial resources will 
only be called upon in the coming years.
State government budgets15
In the second quarter of 2018, state govern -
ments achieved a very high surplus in their core 
budgets amounting to just over €11½ billion. 
The financial situation therefore improved con -
siderably compared with the result of the same 
period last year (+€2½ billion). Revenue rose by 
9%, significantly more strongly than in the first 
quarter. The fine that Volkswagen was required 
to pay on account of the diesel scandal had a 
positive impact in Lower Saxony (€1 billion). 
Expend iture, by contrast, declined by 1½%, 
mainly because a shift in North Rhine-  
Westphalia during the course of the year de -
creased other expenditure.16 Personnel expend -
iture –  a major component of state govern -
ment spending – showed only weak growth. 
Transfers to local government and other oper -
ating expenditure, conversely, increased 
strongly.
Overall in the first half of the year, the surplus 
increased significantly to €18 billion. As the 
year progresses, however, various negative fac -
tors will take effect. Schleswig- Holstein and 
Hamburg are anticipating extensive calls on 
guarantees from their Landesbank.17 In North 
Rhine-  Westphalia, a negative countermove -
ment resulting from the rescheduled payment, 
as mentioned above, will make itself felt in a 
year- on- year comparison. In addition, the Transparency of 
plans substan -
tially impaired
Potentially 
stable surplus 
for the year for 
off- budget 
entitiesFinancial 
situation  signifi -
cantly improved 
again in Q2, 
also due to 
one-off effects
High surplus 
foreseeable for 
year as a whole
13 A medium- term financial plan has only been drawn up 
for the energy and climate fund.
14 In line with the Federal Ministry of Finance’s quarterly 
overviews. These notably do not include bad banks and 
other entities keeping commercial accounts. The refugee 
reserve is not considered to be an off- budget entity.
15 The following data are based, unless other sources are 
stated, on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.
16 Grants to universities were brought forward to the 
second quarter last year (approximately €2 billion).
17 On account of transactions with their Landesbanken, in 
the second half of the year the state governments could 
face a burden that is €6 billion higher, on balance, than in 
2017. Aside from developments in the above- named fed -
eral states, a now lapsed capital repayment from BayernLB 
in 2017 also played a role.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
64

growth in tax revenue is likely to slow mark -
edly, according to the tax estimate. Personnel 
expenditure, on the other hand, is set to rise 
significantly more strongly, according to the 
June projection for the Stability Council. For the 
year as a whole, the surplus could nevertheless 
be close to the record level (€14 billion) 
achieved in 2017.
In the medium term, conditions are set to re -
main favourable for state government finances. 
This is particularly the case for tax revenue, 
which is expected to continue to increase sig -
nificantly. Additionally, central government will 
continue to provide funds for the integration of 
refugees, for instance. This means that, on bal -
ance, the burdens resulting from the planned 
Family Relief Act will probably be more or less 
offset. Further strong growth in pension ex -
penditure is on the horizon in the years to 
come, and the relief provided by the positive 
economic situation also has to be factored out. 
On the whole, however, there is sufficient 
budgetary leeway to focus on the areas of 
need with future benefits identified by many 
state governments. These areas include, in par -
ticular, education and childcare facilities, infra -
structure, internal security and strengthened 
administration. Central government projects, 
such as the digitalisation of schools and all- day 
childcare for children of primary school age, 
provide additional support here. Conditions are 
also favourable for local government finances. 
This equally presents an opportunity to correct 
structural imbalances while conditions are 
good – potentially with targeted support from 
state government.
The Stability Council established at the end of 
June that the five federal states in receipt of 
consolidation assistance had fulfilled their obli -
gation to reduce their deficits in 2017 as well.18 
However, Bremen’s safety margin now appears 
to be very small. In Saarland, funds were set 
aside for a “rainy day”, on the one hand, which 
reduced the safety margin. On the other hand, 
loss compensation was recorded as financial 
transactions, meaning that the structural budget outturn looked more positive. Most 
state governments now have sufficient finan -
cial leeway to absorb nationwide tax cuts or 
unforeseen negative developments. However, 
this will probably not be the case going for -
ward, particularly in Bremen and Saarland. But 
from 2020 onwards, both states are to receive 
more extensive financial aid from central gov -
ernment for at least fifteen years (€400 million 
each). These funds will have only low debt re -
demption obligations attached. This will give 
Bremen and Saarland additional budgetary lee -
way, but will also weaken their incentives to 
run an autonomous and sustainable budgetary 
policy.Medium- term 
outlook remains 
very positive
Bremen and 
Saarland just 
keeping within 
structural deficit 
limitsState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q42024681012
–++++++
24681012141618
2018
20172016Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20162018
2017€ billion
18 The federal states of Berlin, Bremen, Saarland, Saxony- 
Anhalt and Schleswig- Holstein are receiving consolidation 
assistance for the years 2011 to 2019. The payments 
amount to a total of €800 million per year. To qualify for 
this assistance, the federal states have to eliminate their 
structural deficits by at least reducing them in equal incre -
ments along a single path by 2020. Central government 
and the state governments as a whole each provide half of 
the financial resources.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
65

Social security funds
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
The favourable developments in the finances of 
the statutory pension insurance scheme con -
tinued in the second quarter of 2018. At €2 
billion, the surplus was more than twice as high 
as one year earlier. Total revenue continued to 
rise sharply, by 4½%. Contribution receipts in -
creased somewhat more strongly again in spite 
of the slight reduction in the contribution rate 
at the beginning of the year (0.1 percentage point). This reflects the positive employment 
and wage developments. Expenditure grew by 
2½%. This is primarily due to the pension in -
crease in mid-2017, which amounted to an 
average of just under 2½% for Germany as a 
whole.
Growth in pension payments is likely to gain 
momentum over the course of the year. Al -
though the number of pensions paid continues 
to increase at just a subdued pace, the mid-  
year pension adjustment in 2018 was percep -
tibly higher than in the previous year, at just 
under 3½%.19 Nonetheless, revenue will prob -
ably continue to rise faster than expenditure. A 
distinctly higher surplus than in 2017 is there -
fore on the cards for the year as a whole (€½ 
billion).
Pension finances will benefit from the expected 
positive developments in wages and employ -
ment in the medium term, too. It would be 
possible to considerably reduce the contribu -
tion rate again next year if no further interven -
tions are made in the meantime. The draft bill 
prepared by ministry officials for the first pen -
sion benefits package20 puts the potential con -
tribution rate cut at 0.3 percentage point (€3½ 
billion). In the first few years, however, the ex -
tensive benefit expansions provided by this 
package are largely to be financed by increased 
contributions. In a first step, therefore, a pos -
sible reduction in the contribution rate is being 
avoided.
The pension benefits package is intended to 
take effect as of 2019. Mothers with children 
born before 1992 are to receive increased 
mothers’ pensions. In addition, new pensions 
for persons with reduced earning capacity are Considerably 
higher surplus 
in Q2 …… and probably 
in year as a 
whole, too
Benefit expan -
sion rather than 
possible contri -
bution rate cut 
in 2019
Higher benefits 
for different 
groups, and 
limits set for 
pension level 
and contribution 
rateFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). Preliminary quarterly figures. The fi-
nal annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary  quarterly  figures  as  the  latter  are  not  revised  sub-
sequently.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4432101234
––––++++
–5–4–3–2–10+1Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201820172016
2017
201620182016 2017 20180123456
2016 2017 20180123456Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
19 On 1 July, pensions were raised by 3.22% in the west 
German states and 3.37% in the east German states.
20 Draft bill prepared by ministry officials of the Federal 
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs for the Act on Im -
provements in Benefits and Stabilisation of the Statutory 
Pension Insurance Scheme (Gesetz über Leistungsverbes -
serungen und Stabilisierung in der gesetzlichen Rentenver -
sicherung) of 12 July 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
66

set to be higher. In the case of “midi- jobs”,21 
social security contributions will be reduced for 
those earning a monthly wage of up to €1,300 
(as opposed to €850 up to now). Furthermore, 
pension entitlements from midi- jobs are to be 
upgraded. This means that pension entitle -
ments will no longer be derived solely from the 
reduced but the assumed full contribution 
level. Finally, new limits will be set for the pen -
sion level22 and the contribution rate (a meas -
ure referred to as the “double limit”) up until 
the end of 2025. The pension level may not fall 
below 48%, and the contribution rate is not to 
exceed 20%. It is intended to plug any funding 
gap with additional central government grants.
The financial impact of individual measures up 
to 2025 is set out in the draft bill. The add -
itional annual costs for mothers’ pensions are 
estimated to be €3½ billion. The reduced con -
tribution for those with low incomes is forecast 
at just under €½ billion. The increased spend -
ing on pensions for persons with reduced earn -
ing capacity is to rise gradually, reaching €1 
billion in 2025. However, no potential changes 
in behaviour resulting from the more advanta -
geous new rules have been taken into account. 
The total cost of the above measures will ini -
tially be €4 billion per year. This will increase to 
€5 billion by 2025.
By far the largest share of the additional bur -
dens on the statutory pension insurance 
scheme will be financed by contributions up to 
2025 (based on the burdens cumulated up to 
that point). Without the pension benefits pack -
age, the contribution rates would be below 
20% up to and including 2025, according to 
the projection. The package generally results in 
a markedly higher contribution rate, which will 
reach the 20% limit in 2024. A higher contribu -
tion rate also results in a lower level of pension 
growth when the pension adjustment formula 
is applied. According to the draft bill, the pen -
sion level will already have reached the limit by 
2022. Without the package, this would only 
have been the case in 2024.23 Consequently, 
pensioners are also to make a financial contri -bution (albeit significantly smaller) to the 
agreed expansion of benefits. However, the in -
crease in mothers’ pensions and decreased 
contributions for midi- jobs can be classified as 
non- insurance- related benefits (€4 billion per 
year). As such, it would be appropriate to fund 
these benefits with additional central govern -
ment grants, and thus with general tax rev -
enue, by extension.24 However, central govern -
ment’s additional burdens amount to only 
around €1 billion on average each year be -
tween 2019 and 2024. Only in 2025 will they 
rise significantly to €5 billion, as the contribu -
tion rate would otherwise increase to over 
20%.
Overall, the package places a considerable bur -
den on pension finances, mainly on account of 
the expansion of mothers’ pensions. As a re -
sult, the financial leeway for other government 
priorities currently under discussion is reduced. 
The special benefit expansions are not means- 
tested. While the current favourable budgetary 
situation will ensure that the additional finan -
cial burdens are likely to make less of an initial 
impact, spending on pensions will increase in 
structural terms, although expenditure will face 
strong demographic pressure in any case.
Future pensions for persons with reduced earn -
ing capacity will be significantly increased. In 
some cases, they will be substantially higher Additional 
expenditure on 
mothers’ 
pensions  in 
particular 
Additional 
non- insurance- 
related benefits 
chiefly financed 
by higher 
contributions Further 
complications  
in overcoming 
foreseeable 
demographic 
burdens
21 Midi- jobs are forms of employment for which the 
monthly wages usually lie between €450 and €850. In this 
area, certain reductions have been granted for social secur -
ity fund contributions (section 20 (2) of the Fourth Book of 
the Social Security Code (Sozialgesetzbuch IV)). However, 
this has also meant lower pension entitlements up until 
now.
22 The pension level is the ratio of the current standard 
pension (given respective average earnings subject to insur -
ance contributions over 45 contribution years) to current 
average pay. Income before taxes but less the relevant so -
cial contributions is used.
23 The envisaged adjustments to the contribution rates for 
the public long- term care and unemployment insurance 
schemes have not yet been included. They will reduce the 
pension level.
24 Generally speaking, it would be desirable to define 
those benefits regarded as non- insurance- related, and to 
finance them with central government grants in a rule-  
based manner. This would enhance transparency and clar -
ity. The fact that the classification of individual benefits is 
not always straightforward should not hinder this.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
67

than regular early retirement pensions. This in -
creases the incentive to exploit pensions for 
people with reduced earning capacity so as to 
retire early. From now on, it will be even more 
important to make provision for this. People 
working in professions which are detrimental 
to their health are intended to benefit from in -
creased pensions for reduced earning capaci -
ties. In this respect, concerns regarding a rising 
statutory retirement age have been taken into 
account, and this issue should therefore be re -
garded as less problematic.
The reduced contribution rate for those in midi- 
jobs will make this form of employment more attractive. The impact on the total number of 
hours worked, however, is unclear and is likely 
to be marginal. Only part- time employees will 
benefit from the reform, regardless of their 
hourly pay rate and of any other sources of 
income . The main criticism of the new midi- job 
rules appears to be that full pension entitle -
ments are to be accrued despite the reduced 
contributions, thereby breaching the principle 
of equivalence. Furthermore, this subsequent 
preferential treatment is not precisely based on 
means testing at the time the pension is drawn, 
and there are likely to be “free- rider” effects.
Serious financial problems are set to arise 
within the statutory pension insurance scheme 
as a result of demographic trends, particularly 
after 2025. Key variables therefore need to be 
adjusted to ensure the sustainability of the 
scheme. However, the relevant fundamental 
decisions have been put off for the years to 
come. A pensions commission was tasked with 
the preparations in the first instance. The cost 
trends and burden- sharing expected in the 
long term must be presented in a transparent 
manner if a sustainable solution is to be found. 
In addition, all material parameters of pension 
finances should be regarded as parts of an 
interconnected system. Aside from the pension 
level, contribution rates and central govern -
ment grants, this also includes the statutory 
retire ment age, which has already been linked 
to life expectancy in other countries. It would 
also make sense to take longer contribution 
periods into account when calculating the pen -
sion level, as these are set to increase in step 
with a rising statutory retirement age and will 
increase the level of benefits.25
Federal Employment Agency
In the second quarter of 2018, the Federal 
Employ ment Agency posted a surplus of al -Future pensions 
for persons with 
reduced earning 
capacity sub -
stantially higher 
than regular 
early retirement 
pensions in 
some casesMidi- job reform 
unlikely to be 
focused
Measures to 
stabilise  pension 
finances neces -
sary after 2025Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency *
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
+6
–10+1+2+3+4+5Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year2017
2018
2017
20162016
20182016 2017 2018–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2016 2017 2018963036912
–––++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
25 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: longer- term pen -
sion developments, Monthly Report, August 2016, pp 68-
77. For the burden on the central government budget, see 
also p 63 f. of this report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
68

most €1½ billion in the core budget.26 This 
stood just around the level of the previous year. 
As in the first quarter, a higher special transfer 
to the civil servants’ pension fund27 placed a 
strain on the Federal Employment Agency’s 
finances  compared with the previous year.
As a result of a further steep rise in contribution 
receipts (5%), revenue increased by a total of 
4%. Expenditure grew by 6½%. The increase 
was driven solely by additional payments to the 
civil servants’ pension fund. In particular, ex -
penditure on unemployment benefits and 
active  labour market policies declined further 
(by around 3% in each case).
Conditions are very favourable for the Federal 
Employment Agency’s finances – employment 
is increasing, unemployment is declining and 
per capita earnings are rising more sharply. No 
further special transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund have been planned for the second 
half of the year. Against this backdrop, a high 
surplus is also expected for this year. It could 
even exceed the prior- year figure of €6 billion, 
thus surpassing the budgeted amount of €2½ 
billion by a significant margin. The free reserves 
would rise to a record level of over €23 billion.
The positive development on the labour market 
is likely to continue. High surpluses and increas -
ing reserves are therefore still expected, even if 
the contribution rate is reduced from 3.0% to 
2.7% in accordance with the coalition agree -
ment. Even if spending were to increase some -
what – for active labour market policy meas -
ures, for example  – the Federal Employment 
Agency’s finances would still be able to cope 
with a lower contribution rate.Excursus: the use of 
reserves  and off- budget 
entities  by central and state 
government 
Current developments
Central government and numerous state gov -
ernments have used the sound budgetary situ -
ation of the past few years to channel more 
funds into reserves and off- budget entities 
(special funds). Reserve funds were thus set 
aside to be used when needed in future.28
However, this future use of reserves only ex -
pands budgetary scope if it is permitted under 
the debt brake rules. Central government links 
its debt brake to net borrowing. As net bor -
rowing can be reduced by a withdrawal from 
reserves, it is easier to comply with the budget 
ceiling by using reserves. As for central govern -
ment’s off- budget entities, their inclusion in the 
debt brake varies. Here, it is possible to achieve 
the same effect as with reserves if the off-  
budget entities are not consolidated under the 
debt brake: pension funds, for instance, are not 
included in the debt brake. In other words, 
transfers of funds from central government are 
recorded as central government expenditure 
and, under the debt brake, restrict its budget -
ary scope in the same year. Subsequent pen -
sion payments from the off- budget entity are 
not recorded as central government spending, 
however. The situation is different for the 
newer off- budget entities, such as the fund to Surplus at 
previous  year’s 
level in Q2
Strongly 
increased contri -
bution receipts 
amid declining 
operating 
expenditure
Higher surplus 
and growing 
reserves fore-
seeable for the 
year as a whole
Greater contri -
bution rate 
reduction 
feasible Sound position 
used to set 
aside reserve 
funds
Varying effects 
in context of 
debt brake
26 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. The transfers 
to the fund are recorded here as expenditure and reduce 
the core budget balance. Including the fund, the surplus 
amounted to €2 billion in the second quarter.
27 The additional transfer totalled just under €1 billion, 
compared with a little under €½ billion in the same period 
last year.
28 In most cases, no (financial) assets were set aside. In the 
central government budget, for example, topping up the 
refugee reserve was counted towards net borrowing in 
budgetary terms. In actual fact, however, the surpluses 
were used to repay debt. Ultimately, the refinancing of 
debt in the capital market was thus deferred. This occurs 
when, under the budget, funds are withdrawn from re -
serves without having to record net borrowing in the 
budget.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
69

promote municipal investment or the planned 
digitalisation fund. These are included in the 
debt brake. Transfers from the core budget 
thus do not constitute a burden; overall, they 
do not change the sum of net borrowing in the 
core budget and the balances of the relevant 
off- budget entities – the relevant metric under 
the debt brake.29 Subsequent outflows from 
the funds then constitute spending from the 
core budget in the context of the debt brake.30 
In contrast to reserves, then, when it comes to 
these consolidated off- budget entities, it is not 
possible to purposefully extend the debt brake 
limit using surpluses from previous periods 
when drafting the budget.
One important example of a reserve is the refu -
gee reserve. It was established by central gov -
ernment at the end of 2015 and stocked up 
using budget surpluses.31 Originally, its in -
tended use was to cover budgetary burdens 
stemming from the heavy influx of refugees at 
that time. However, no funds have so far been 
withdrawn, even though this was regularly en -
visaged in the budget plans. On the contrary, 
the reserve was topped up with further sur -
pluses and grew to €24 billion by the end of 
2017. As things stand today, it is not needed for 
its original purpose. To date, it has been pos -
sible to cover refugee- related expenditure with -
out using the reserve, and this expenditure is 
already declining markedly at the general gov -
ernment level.
In keeping with the intention of the debt brake, 
it would thus be logical to dissolve the refugee 
reserve by budgeting for a debt repayment. But 
instead, it is being used as an additional budget 
instrument, serving as a general overflow pot 
for surpluses during the budget implementa -
tion phase. In subsequent periods, the cumu -
lated funds allocated to the reserve make it 
easier to avoid net borrowing, as the budget 
plans make the reserve available to fund add -
itional increases in expenditure or tax cuts, for 
example. The reserve thus allows central gov -
ernment to avoid net borrowing even in the event of a fiscal loosening (see the table on 
page 61).
Another example at the central government 
level is the new arms reserve. If the funds ap -
proved in the budget for military procurements 
(€5 billion) are not fully tapped in the current 
year, the reserve will be topped up by up to €½ 
billion in the event of a surplus. Moreover, €2 
billion is to be channelled each year from 2021 
to 2024 into a reserve set up for demographic 
challenges. This reserve is intended to cover 
central government’s additional outlays in sub -
sequent years stemming from the planned 
limits set for the pension insurance scheme up 
until 2025.
At the state government level, not only differ -
ent forms of reserves but also off- budget en -
tities, in particular, are gaining in importance. 
The aim is for unused budgetary leeway to be 
carried over into the future. This appears to be 
possible because these entities are evidently 
not to be consolidated in the context of the 
relevant state government’s debt brake.32Sizeable 
refugee  reserve 
not needed 
for actual 
purpose , …
… but instead 
of being dis-
solved , it is now 
an instrument to 
finance new 
projectsAdditional 
reserves planned 
at central 
govern ment 
level
Some state 
govern ments 
also have 
growing  reserves
29 However, there is one difference regarding the supple -
mentary objective of no net borrowing: since this objective 
relates to the core budget, it is harder to achieve when 
transferring funds to an off- budget entity, and easier when 
withdrawing funds.
30 However, there is one difference in the budget imple -
mentation phase. If outflows from pre- funded off- budget 
entities turn out to be higher than estimated during budget 
implementation, no new borrowing authorisations are re -
quired. Additional expenditure of this kind is not restricted 
by the debt brake at that moment. In the central govern -
ment budget, by contrast, new borrowing authorisations 
are restricted in the form of a supplementary budget: the 
standard limit may be exceeded by a maximum of 3% of 
the planned tax revenue. Each time the debt brake limit is 
exceeded during budget implementation (core budget and 
relevant off- budget entities taken together), however, the 
control account is debited (for more on the control ac -
count, see p 71).
31 Plus central government’s coin seigniorage. Certain 
state governments established similar reserves. These 
federal  states sometimes ultimately transferred borrowing 
authorisations that were not needed when the budget was 
implemented to a reserve.
32 This also applies to state governments receiving consoli -
dation assistance. At the end of the last fiscal year, Berlin, 
Schleswig-  Holstein and Saarland, for example, topped up 
off- budget entities intended to finance future investment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
70

Difference from central 
govern ment’s control account
Under the debt brake, a control account was 
established for central government from 2011. 
At first glance, this resembles the aforemen -
tioned reserves, but in fact differs from them 
crucially. The debt brake stipulates a ceiling for 
central government’s structural budget outturn 
(-0.35% of GDP). Positive and negative devi -
ations from this ceiling during the budget im -
plementation phase are added up on the con -
trol account.33 A more favourable budget out -
turn thus results in a credit entry on the control 
account. However, a credit balance may only 
be used to offset unplanned breaches of the 
ceiling in the current fiscal year (during budget 
implementation).34 The control account there -
fore is not designed to open up additional fiscal 
space in coming years. By contrast, the reserves 
and the central government off- budget entities 
not included in the debt brake (also called re -
serve funds from now on) explicitly aim to do 
this, and make it possible. When reserves are 
accumulated, the surpluses to be booked to 
the control account are accordingly lower.35
Pros and cons of reserve funds
Reserves and off- budget entities excluded from 
the debt brake are budget instruments with 
specific pros and cons. It would be beneficial if 
they were used to further stabilise budgetary 
policy.
In good times, reserve funds can be topped up 
as a precaution against unpleasant surprises. 
Such surprises can have a serious impact, par -
ticularly when it comes to tax revenue. Often, 
they are not classified as cyclical by the conven -
tional cyclical adjustment methods. Conse -
quently, they affect the structural result, which 
is limited by the debt brake. Without reserve 
funds, an unexpected structural deterioration 
induced in this way would have to be fully 
compensated for when the next budget was 
drawn up, at the very latest, if the previous financial  plan had not included a safety margin 
below the debt brake ceiling.36 A procyclical 
policy in bad times is more likely in the absence 
of safety margins.
Reserve funds can also be used to frontload the 
burdens stemming from spending programmes 
with uneven outflows, the timing of which is 
difficult to estimate (such as military procure -
ments). When there is scope in the core budget, 
funds can be made available in advance which 
are then called upon if needed in future.
These potential benefits also stand in contrast to 
serious problems, however. Important budget -
ary principles, such as annuality and budgetary 
clarity, could be undermined. In particular, trans -
parency can be lost if the plans become increas -
ingly opaque due to numerous special pots. This 
is all the more true if overviews and information 
on key metrics are not provided or not provided 
in good time – or if these metrics can only be 
determined with some difficulty. Control by par -
liament and the general public can then be sig -
nificantly impaired.
In particular, it is critical if structural imbalances 
are concealed by reserves. For instance, a struc -
tural spending increase or tax cut could initially 
be funded from a reserve. The politically diffi -
cult decision on counterfinancing could thus be 
shelved relatively unobtrusively. Only when the 
reserve is fully depleted would the need for 
consolidation come to light.
Off- budget entities are particularly problematic 
if they are used to take on extra- budgetary 
debt. This could result in the actual debt pos -
ition being incorrectly assessed and risk being Debt brake 
control  account 
impaired by 
accumulation 
of reserves
Reserve funds 
can stabilise 
budgetary policy
Reserve funds 
can compensate 
for unpleasant 
surprisesBetter control 
of expenditure 
burdens in 
budget
Special pots 
may impair 
transparency 
and control by 
parliament and 
general public
Risk of 
budgetary  
imbalances 
being concealed
Taking on debt 
via off- budget 
entities could 
erode budgetary 
rules
33 For more details on the control account, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank, The debt brake in Germany – key aspects and 
implementation, Monthly Report, October 2011, pp 15-40.
34 Budget legislators are obligated to make realistic budget 
estimates. Tapping the balance by making optimistic budget 
estimates should therefore remain restricted.
35 In 2017, €5½ billion was transferred to the refugee 
reserve  from the core budget outturn (total available funds: 
€24 billion). The control account was credited with €7½ 
billion from the remaining margin to the debt brake ceiling 
(credit balance: €18½ billion).
36 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2011), op cit, p 32.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
71

understated. Under certain circumstances, the 
normal budgetary rules could also be under -
mined. While central government has closed 
this previous loophole in the German Basic Law 
(Grundgesetz)  for its own special funds, many 
state governments have not yet rigorously 
addressed  this issue.
As the volume of reserve funds at the various 
levels of government rises, so too does the risk 
that the national rules no longer sufficiently 
safeguard compliance with the European rules. 
This safeguarding by means of the national 
rules is laid down in the Fiscal Compact and the 
Basic Law. Yet the national and European rules 
are not identical. The debt brake limits net bor -
rowing by the relevant central and state gov -
ernments, which is decreased by a withdrawal 
from reserves or shifting expenditure to off-  
budget entities excluded from the debt brake. 
On the other hand, the EU rules target the 
annual  general government deficit (as defined 
in the national accounts), which is not posi -
tively affected by either of these actions.37
Minimise problems with 
appropriate  design
All things considered, the disadvantages of 
reserves  and special funds described above 
seem quite serious. If these budget instruments 
are to be used nonetheless, the associated risks 
should be recognised and minimised by the 
rules on their application.
Transparency and clarity
It is crucial that central and state governments 
disclose their special pots transparently, clearly 
and completely. The budgetary policy they are 
pursuing should also be well substantiated. The 
call for transparency applies to the short and 
medium- term plans, the budget implementa -
tion phase and the budget outturn. The rele -
vant fund levels as well as the financial links to 
the core budget would have to be shown in a timely manner using suitable overviews. There 
is considerable room for improvement here, for 
central government but especially for state 
government, too.
Safeguard national fiscal rules
The standard limits imposed by the debt brake 
place relatively tight constraints on net new 
borrowing by government. In relation to the 
size of the economy, this is likely to further 
reduce  debt, ie the debt ratio, significantly. This 
appears prudent as a precaution against demo -
graphic challenges and with resurgent interest 
rates in mind.
To avoid undermining the objectives of the 
debt brake, various aspects should be con -
sidered when using reserves. First, it should 
only be possible to establish a reserve if the 
standard limit is met. This means, for example, 
that it should be impossible to accumulate 
reserves  if the standard limit was exceeded 
owing to exceptional circumstances. Other -
wise, debt could be higher over time than per -
mitted by the standard limit. Moreover, the 
Basic Law explicitly makes provision for a con -
trol account. If central government were to 
regularly record the full margin below the 
standard limit as a reserve, the control account 
would conversely be transformed into a per -
manently available reserve. However, as central 
government is currently using a budget with -
out net new borrowing as a benchmark, only a 
part of the margin below the ceiling is being 
transferred to reserves. This stabilises and ef -
fectively puts a brake on central government’s 
debt level.38Use of reserve 
funds could lead 
to conflict with 
European fiscal 
rules
Use rules to limit 
risk of reserve 
pots
Timely full 
disclosure  and 
transparent 
planning 
important Declining 
debt ratio still 
prudent 
Accumulation of 
reserves given 
structurally 
balanced  
budget
37 Aside from this aspect, there are other differences be -
tween the national and European rules. Important ex -
amples are the definition of financial transactions and the 
cyclical adjustment methods used in each case. For more 
details, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2011), op cit, pp 28 ff.
38 The objective of no net borrowing is not to avoid 
structural  new borrowing; instead, an unadjusted figure is 
targeted. Thus, cyclical fluctuations are not taken into ac -
count. In this respect, the objective of no net borrowing 
appears less suited to ensuring a stable budgetary policy 
than a structurally balanced budget. Furthermore, there is 
the risk of conflict with the European rules.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
72

One particularly important advantage of reserves 
is their potential to stabilise budgetary policy in 
the face of unpleasant surprises. However, this 
does not ultimately line up with planning a full 
depletion of existing reserves on a regular basis 
in the medium term. Instead, it would make 
sense to use them only as an insurance policy for 
unexpected structural budget shortfalls. To this 
end, directly after a surprise of this kind, greater 
use of the reserves could be made at first and 
then subsequently scaled back (ie the withdraw -
als should gradually decline over the years). Any 
consolidation that may become necessary to 
close the unexpected funding gap could thus be 
stretched out over time. The spending path 
would be stabilised or an abrupt tax hike 
avoided, as the reserves would have served as 
an additional stabiliser. Safety margins below the 
normal ceilings could therefore be smaller. With 
a rule- based restriction on the use of reserves, it 
would be possible to prevent this from fostering 
an erratic or unsound budgetary policy.
Avoid structural problems 
through use of reserve funds
The budget should be structurally sound after 
the reserves are depleted, at the latest. This 
applies  given their function as insurance against 
unexpected unpleasant surprises, as described 
above. However, it also applies, in particular, if 
reserves are to be used not just in response to 
surprises, but on a discretionary basis for any 
additional measures that burden the budget. 
This refers to central government’s current 
approach  of budgeting for the full use of the 
reserve to finance the budget. Thus, it would be 
least concerning if the budget were to be bur -
dened with measures that largely have a tem -
porary effect, such as major investment projects. 
Structural burdens that still exist even after the 
reserve is depleted should be offset by tax hikes 
or spending cuts already agreed in advance 
(global cuts in expenditure or increases in rev -
enue do not achieve this). Central government’s 
new reserve for demographic challenges high -
lights the difficulties that arise otherwise: it is planned to use these funds in 2025 to compen -
sate for extensive financial burdens. However, it 
is still unclear how the significant additional 
structural burden after 2025 expected as part of 
the pension benefits package is to be financed.
Compliance with European 
rules
Finally, it must be ensured that the European 
fiscal rules are complied with. Given the signifi -
cant surpluses and sound underlying condi -
tions, there is currently no indication that the 
EU limits will be exceeded. However, the struc -
tural surpluses are likely to shrink in future.
The European rules are based on the general 
government structural deficit as defined in the 
national accounts, for which a standard limit of 
0.5% of GDP applies. Under these rules, central 
government bears responsibility for the social 
security funds, and the state governments are 
responsible for their local authorities. In Ger -
many, fiscal surveillance of general govern -
ment’s compliance with the European rules is 
the task of the Stability Council. Amongst other 
things, the Stability Council has to monitor 
whether there is a risk of the limit being ex -
ceeded even in the event of compliance with 
the relevant national rules. If this were the 
case, the Council would have to submit pro -
posals to prevent such a breach of the rules. 
But to do this, it needs detailed information 
about central and state government’s plans. 
Notably, this includes comprehensive disclos -
ures about the planned use of reserves and off- 
budget entities by these levels of government. 
The documents presented to the Stability 
Council do not appear to be adequate in this 
respect, particularly in the case of the state 
governments. This has been pointed out, not 
least, by the independent Advisory Board.39Rule- based use 
of reserves to 
cushion negative 
shocks
Use of reserves 
for structural 
burdens should 
require decisions 
on counter-
financing after 
depletion of 
reservesCompliance 
with EU rules 
currently 
assured
Stability Council 
needs much 
better  
information 
39 See Independent Advisory Board to the Stability Coun -
cil, Ninth statement on compliance with the upper limit for 
the structural general government budget deficit pursuant 
to section 51 (2) of the Budgetary Principles Act ( Haushalts -
grundsätzegesetz ), June 2018, pp 17-18.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
73

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
74

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ...................................................................  5 •
2 External transactions and positions  ...............................................................................  5 •
3 General economic indicators  ........................................................................................  6 •
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts  ..........................................................................  8 •
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ............................  10 •
3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ................................................................................  14 •
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1 Assets  ...........................................................................................................................  16 •
2 Liabilities  ......................................................................................................................  18 •
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  ..................................................................................................................  20 •
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ...........  24 •
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ...............................  26 •
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  ........................  28 •
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  ......................  30 •
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households,  housing 
loans, sectors of economic activity  ...............................................................................  32 •
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  ......................  34 •
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  ......................................................................................................................  36 •
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group  .........  36 •
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  38 •
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ....... 38 •
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  .........................................................  39 •
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ....................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
2•

V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  ..........................................................................  42 •
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  .................................................................................  42 •
VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates  .........................................................................................................  43 •
2 Base rates  .....................................................................................................................  43 •
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  .................................  43 •
4 Money market rates, by month  ....................................................................................  43 •
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ....................................................................................................  44 •
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
1 Assets  ...........................................................................................................................  48 •
2 Liabilities  ......................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  ......................................  50 •
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ...................................................................  51 •
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  ..........................................  52 •
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  ........................................................................  52 •
5 Yields and indices on German securities  .......................................................................  53 •
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ................................................  53 •
IX Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ...... 54 •
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  ..........................................  55 •
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  .............................  56 •
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  .................................................................  57 •
X Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty .... 58 •
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  .........................................................................................................  58 •
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial  statistics)   59 •
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development  ......................................  59 •
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue  .........................................................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
3•

6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ....................  60 •
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ....................................................  61 •
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  .......................  61 •
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  ..................................................  62 •
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development .........................................  62 •
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ...........................  63 •
12 Central government: borrowing in the market  ..............................................................  63 •
13 General government: debt by creditor  ..........................................................................  63 •
14 Maastricht debt by category  .........................................................................................  64 •
XI Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ............................  66 •
2 Output in the production sector  ...................................................................................  67 •
3 Orders received by industry  ..........................................................................................  68 •
4 Orders received by construction  ...................................................................................  69 •
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ................................................................  69 •
6 Labour market  ..............................................................................................................  70 •
7 Prices  ...........................................................................................................................  71 •
8 Households’ income  .....................................................................................................  72 •
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  ........................................................................  72 •
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ............................................  73 •
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  .....................................  74 •
XII External sector
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ............................................  75 •
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  76 •
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  ........................................................................................................  77 •
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................  78 •
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................................  78 •
6 Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .....................................................  78 •
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..................................................  79 •
8 External position of the Bundesbank  .............................................................................  80 •
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ...............................................................................................................  81 •
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  ..............................  82 •
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ................................................................  82 •
12 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ............................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
August 2018
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2016         Oct 8.0 4.6 4.5 4.7 4.3 2.2 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.31 0.7
         Nov 8.5 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.4 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.35 − 0.31 1.0         Dec 8.8 4.8 5.0 4.8 4.7 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.32 1.0
2017         Jan 8.4 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.5 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb 8.3 4.7 4.6 4.8 4.3 2.2 − 1.0 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2         Mar 9.0 5.0 5.1 4.8 4.8 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2
         Apr 9.1 5.0 4.8 4.9 4.5 2.6 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         May 9.2 5.1 4.9 4.8 4.3 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 9.6 5.2 4.9 4.8 4.1 2.8 − 1.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         July 9.2 5.0 4.6 4.8 3.8 2.6 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2
         Aug 9.6 5.4 5.0 4.9 3.8 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0         Sep 9.9 5.4 5.2 5.1 3.9 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         Oct 9.5 5.4 5.0 5.0 3.7 2.5 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Nov 9.1 5.3 4.9 4.8 3.9 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.35 − 0.33 0.9         Dec 8.7 5.1 4.6 4.7 3.6 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.34 − 0.33 0.9
2018         Jan 8.8 5.3 4.6 4.5 3.5 2.9 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb 8.4 4.9 4.3 4.2 3.3 2.6 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2         Mar 7.5 4.4 3.7 3.9 2.8 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Apr 7.0 4.1 3.8 3.8 2.8 2.7 − 0.7 − 0.37 − 0.33 1.0
         May 7.5 4.6 4.0 4.1 3.2 3.2 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 7.4 4.8 4.4 ... 3.0 2.8 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.36 − 0.32 1.0
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  .8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2016         Oct + 34,507 + 28,476 + 9,615 + 23,846 + 38,372 + 5,447 − 54,100 − 3,950 1.1026 95.1 90.3
         Nov + 39,284 + 34,333 + 14,421 + 11,880 − 30,097 + 2,207 + 27,886 + 2,545 1.0799 94.6 89.6         Dec + 47,674 + 33,186 + 98,106 + 30,366 + 53,214 + 7,094 + 1,385 + 6,046 1.0543 93.7 88.9
2017         Jan − 1,563 + 6,676 − 7,321 − 27,665 + 16,459 + 8,411 + 517 − 5,043 1.0614 93.9 89.1
         Feb + 20,488 + 18,717 + 22,638 + 13,241 + 73,511 + 8,337 − 74,495 + 2,044 1.0643 93.4 88.9         Mar + 45,247 + 37,569 + 39,826 + 10,374 − 1,842 + 7,743 + 22,832 + 719 1.0685 94.0 89.2
         Apr + 20,310 + 24,480 + 14,179 + 24,694 + 20,757 + 2,344 − 29,474 − 4,142 1.0723 93.7 89.0
         May + 15,614 + 29,449 + 8,985 + 20,086 − 20,950 + 4,135 + 4,582 + 1,132 1.1058 95.6 90.5         June + 28,851 + 34,138 + 55,981 − 28,179 + 25,173 − 5,980 + 63,402 + 1,565 1.1229 96.3 91.2
         July + 42,939 + 32,562 + 41,562 − 1,857 + 25,222 − 2,814 + 26,204 − 5,194 1.1511 97.6 92.4
         Aug + 38,883 + 25,690 + 6,067 − 14,388 + 70,769 − 5,622 − 44,009 − 682 1.1807 99.0 93.6         Sep + 46,488 + 34,903 + 79,242 + 9,537 + 38,359 − 1,884 + 26,810 + 6,420 1.1915 99.0 93.6
         Oct + 39,417 + 30,338 + 38,084 + 27,780 + 51,039 + 1,929 − 39,966 − 2,698 1.1756 98.6 93.1
         Nov + 41,641 + 36,352 + 35,978 + 784 + 5,694 + 4,143 + 19,181 + 6,177 1.1738 98.5 93.0         Dec + 48,252 + 32,175 + 78,945 + 9,618 + 10,822 + 4,674 + 55,458 − 1,628 1.1836 98.8 93.3
2018         Jan + 10,229 + 11,444 + 16,722 + 41,247 + 18,403 + 247 − 45,456 + 2,282 1.2200 99.4 93.9
         Feb + 25,909 + 25,416 + 35,820 + 32,673 + 48,258 − 577 − 44,416 − 119 1.2348 99.6 93.9         Mar + 44,557 + 37,378 + 99,916 + 59,952 − 14,819 − 3,842 + 49,229 + 9,396 1.2336 99.7 94.2
         Apr + 27,311 + 23,545 − 7,609 + 33,421 + 26,934 + 1,720 − 66,064 − 3,621 1.2276 99.5 p 93.9
         May + 4,617 + 20,859 − 14,910 − 18,808 + 26,457 + 5,738 − 30,644 + 2,347 1.1812 98.1 p 92.8         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1678 97.9 p 92.6
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1686 99.2 p 93.9
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp
82−83   .2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of the EER-19 group. 4  Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2018
I Key economic data for the euro area
 
3 General economic indicators
 
 
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2015 2.1 1.4 1.7 1.7 0.1 1.1 − 0.3 25.1 1.0 3.0
2016 1.8 1.4 2.2 2.1 2.5 1.2 − 0.2 5.0 0.9 2.2
2017 2.4 1.7 2.2 4.9 2.8 2.2 1.3 7.2 1.5 4.6
2017         Q1 2.0 1.8 3.4 4.4 4.2 1.7 0.7 2.8 2.0 4.1
         Q2 2.5 1.5 0.9 5.7 2.6 1.6 1.4 6.2 1.3 4.0
         Q3 2.8 1.6 2.2 4.2 2.1 2.5 1.4 13.2 1.4 5.8
         Q4 2.8 2.0 2.2 5.0 2.4 2.8 1.8 6.5 1.3 4.2
2018         Q1 2.5 1.4 1.4 3.6 2.8 2.0 2.3 9.1 1.2 3.9
         Q2 2.2 ... 2.3 ... ... 1.6 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 1,3
 
2015 2.6 − 1.2 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.1 1.6 1.0 35.9 1.1 3.4
2016 1.6 4.6 1.1 3.0 3.9 0.3 2.6 1.8 1.9 4.9
2017 3.0 3.0 3.4 8.0 4.1 2.4 4.8 − 2.2 3.6 8.5
2017         Q1 1.2 1.4 1.0 10.8 5.6 0.9 9.9 − 6.6 2.2 8.6
         Q2 2.5 4.2 3.1 12.4 3.0 1.6 3.4 − 6.6 3.8 9.2
         Q3 4.1 4.7 4.3 4.3 2.8 3.1 4.5 3.4 4.6 11.4
         Q4 4.2 1.8 5.0 4.9 5.0 4.1 1.9 0.5 4.0 4.9
2018         Q1 3.1 2.8 4.0 5.6 5.1 2.4 − 0.5 − 2.2 3.4 4.5
         Q2 e 2.2 ... p 2.6 2.7 3.9 1.1 ... ... 1.9 0.1
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2015 81.2 79.7 84.3 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.5
2016 81.7 80.0 84.6 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 − 76.3 72.6
2017 83.1 81.8 86.6 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 − 76.8 74.5
2017         Q2 82.6 81.4 86.1 76.4 82.1 84.3 68.1 − 76.0 74.8
         Q3 83.3 82.0 86.9 73.9 82.6 84.7 72.0 − 77.0 74.5
         Q4 84.0 82.9 87.7 74.8 83.6 85.2 71.2 − 77.6 74.2
2018         Q1 84.5 82.1 88.2 75.5 83.1 86.2 70.4 − 78.3 75.8
         Q2 84.3 81.2 87.8 73.9 84.3 85.9 71.2 − 78.1 76.3
         Q3 84.1 79.9 87.8 75.2 84.7 85.7 70.7 − 77.9 77.4
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 10.0 11.9 9.9
2016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 8.4 11.7 9.6
2017 9.1 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.4 21.5 6.7 11.2 8.7
2018         Jan 8.7 6.1 3.5 6.3 8.1 9.2 20.7 6.0 11.1 8.1
         Feb 8.6 6.1 3.5 6.2 8.0 9.3 20.7 5.8 11.0 7.8
         Mar 8.5 6.0 3.4 5.5 7.9 9.2 20.0 5.6 11.0 7.6
         Apr 8.4 6.0 3.5 5.0 7.7 9.2 20.0 5.4 11.0 7.5
         May 8.3 6.0 3.5 4.9 7.6 9.2 19.5 5.2 10.7 7.4
         June 8.3 6.0 3.5 ... 7.6 9.2 ... 5.1 10.9 7.4Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2018
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2015 6 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
2017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2018         Feb 1.1 1.5 1.2 3.2 0.6 1.3 0.4 0.7 0.5 1.8
         Mar 1.3 1.5 1.5 2.9 0.9 1.7 0.2 0.5 0.9 2.3
         Apr 1.3 1.6 1.4 2.9 0.8 1.8 0.5 − 0.1 0.6 2.1
         May 1.9 2.3 2.2 3.1 1.0 2.3 0.8 0.7 1.0 2.4
         June 2.0 2.6 2.1 3.9 1.2 2.3 1.0 0.7 1.4 2.7
         July e 2.1 2.7 2.1 3.3 1.4 2.6 e 0.8 1.0 1.9 2.7
 
 General government financial balance 7
 
2015 − 2.0 − 2.5 0.8 0.1 − 2.8 − 3.6 − 5.7 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 1.4
2016 − 1.5 − 2.5 1.0 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 3.4 0.6 − 0.5 − 2.5 0.1
2017 − 0.9 − 1.0 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 2.6 0.8 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 0.5
 
 General government debt 7
 
2015 89.9 106.1 71.0 10.0 63.5 95.6 176.8 76.9 131.5 36.8
2016 89.0 105.9 68.2 9.4 63.0 96.6 180.8 72.8 132.0 40.5
2017 86.7 103.1 64.1 9.0 61.4 97.0 178.6 68.0 131.8 40.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. variations. 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January,
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual April, July and October. 5  As a percentage of the civilian labour force; seasonally
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally ad- adjusted. Standardised unemployment rate of Germany: Bundesbank calculation
justed data. 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2018
I Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2.0 2.9 9.6 2.0 1.1 1.8 3.9 2.3 3.4 2.0 20152.3 3.1 5.2 2.2 1.4 1.6 3.3 3.1 3.3 3.4 20163.8 2.3 6.4 2.9 3.0 2.7 3.4 5.0 3.0 3.9 2017
4.2 2.6 6.6 3.0 3.1 3.2 3.0 5.0 2.8 3.8 2017          Q1
4.1 1.7 7.3 2.9 2.7 2.8 3.7 4.5 3.4 4.0          Q23.2 3.2 7.3 2.8 3.1 2.5 3.4 4.5 2.9 3.8          Q34.0 1.8 4.6 2.7 3.1 2.3 3.5 6.0 3.0 3.9          Q4
3.7 5.1 4.4 2.8 3.4 1.5 3.6 4.6 2.9 4.0 2018          Q1
3.7 ... ... 2.9 2.3 ... 4.1 ... 2.6 ...          Q2
Industrial production 1,3
4.2 1.2 6.3 − 3.3 2.2 2.1 6.0 5.1 3.4 5.1 20152.8 0.5 − 4.7 2.2 2.8 2.4 3.7 7.8 1.7 9.3 20166.8 2.5 4.1 2.0 4.6 3.5 3.1 8.3 3.2 8.1 2017
5.1 − 1.3 6.8 2.3 2.1 3.5 5.2 6.3 1.9 10.5 2017          Q1
6.2 1.0 3.5 1.4 4.0 2.7 0.4 7.5 2.7 7.4          Q28.7 5.2 5.3 2.2 6.3 5.6 3.1 8.4 3.1 7.6          Q37.0 5.1 0.9 2.1 5.8 2.4 3.7 10.9 5.3 7.3          Q4
6.5 5.6 − 3.1 3.0 6.3 2.0 0.3 8.2 2.9 3.2 2018          Q1
4.4
p 3.8 p − 2.1 p 0.5 ... 0.2 3.0 p 6.2 p 1.3 ...          Q2
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
74.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 80.4 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 2015
75.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 201677.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 2017
77.4 82.1 79.1 82.5 86.6 79.1 86.5 85.4 78.1 57.6 2017          Q2
77.6 80.1 80.0 83.1 86.9 80.9 84.4 85.1 78.7 61.5          Q377.4 81.1 82.8 83.1 88.0 81.7 83.0 85.2 79.1 59.1          Q4
77.8 83.1 81.1 83.9 88.8 81.6 83.7 85.0 79.7 60.4 2018          Q1
77.5 82.0 77.6 83.6 88.7 81.4 86.3 86.0 80.3 60.9          Q277.2 80.8 83.2 84.4 88.7 82.0 84.0 84.6 79.3 61.8          Q3
Standardised unemployment rate 5
9.1 6.5 5.9 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 20157.9 6.3 5.2 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.0 19.6 13.0 20167.1 5.6 4.6 4.9 5.5 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.2 11.1 2017
6.4 5.3 4.4 4.2 5.2 7.9 7.3 5.6 16.4 9.9 2018          Jan 
6.3 5.3 4.4 4.1 5.0 7.6 7.1 5.6 16.3 9.4          Feb 6.5 5.3 4.3 3.9 4.9 7.5 7.0 5.5 16.0 9.0          Mar 
6.9 5.2 4.0 3.9 4.8 7.1 6.9 5.6 15.6 8.6          Apr 
6.8 5.2 3.9 3.9 4.6 7.0 6.9 5.6 15.4 8.3          May6.8 5.2 3.9 3.9 4.7 6.7 6.9 5.6 15.2 8.2          JuneDeutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2018
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 20163.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 2017
3.2 1.1 1.3 1.3 1.9 0.7 2.2 1.4 1.2 − 0.4 2018          Feb 
2.5 1.1 1.3 1.0 2.0 0.8 2.5 1.5 1.3 − 0.4          Mar 
2.2 1.3 1.4 1.0 2.0 0.3 3.0 1.9 1.1 − 0.3          Apr 
2.9 2.1 1.7 1.9 2.1 1.4 2.7 2.2 2.1 1.0          May2.6 2.4 2.0 1.7 2.3 2.0 2.9 2.3 2.3 1.7          June
2.3
e 2.5 2.1 1.9 ... 2.2 e 2.7 2.1 2.3 1.4          July
General government financial balance 7
− 0.2 1.4 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 5.3 − 1.3 2015
0.3 1.6 1.0 0.4 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.3 20160.5 1.5 3.9 1.1 − 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 0.0 − 3.1 1.8 2017
General government debt 7
42.6 22.0 58.7 64.6 84.6 128.8 52.3 82.6 99.4 107.5 201540.1 20.8 56.2 61.8 83.6 129.9 51.8 78.6 99.0 106.6 201639.7 23.0 50.8 56.7 78.4 125.7 50.9 73.6 98.3 97.5 2017
6  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. 7  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht procedure (Eurostat). Germany: current data according to the Federal Statistical
Treaty definition). Euro area: European Central Bank, regularly updated. Member Office and Bundesbank calculations. states excluding Germany: latest data publication under the excessive deficit

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
August 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *
(a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2016         Nov 105.6 55.6 16.1 50.0 61.9 7.4 − 21.3 − 28.7 0.3 − 7.9 − 0.8 − 1.1 10.0
         Dec − 57.8 − 50.5 − 8.3 − 7.4 − 0.6 36.3 − 154.3 − 190.6 − 12.3 0.7 − 1.0 − 13.7 1.7
2017         Jan 130.6 43.4 31.0 87.2 69.1 − 13.3 233.2 246.6 − 15.3 − 9.8 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 1.4
         Feb 46.8 31.3 4.2 15.5 35.6 − 46.6 52.9 99.5 14.3 − 6.2 − 0.5 − 3.0 24.0
         Mar 151.3 92.7 25.4 58.6 62.4 − 8.8 − 51.5 − 42.6 − 14.8 1.6 − 0.5 − 22.7 6.8
         Apr 54.5 24.4 20.0 30.1 27.5 − 38.5 77.9 116.4 − 22.9 − 12.2 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 9.6
         May 48.5 24.0 16.3 24.4 35.1 0.7 − 4.0 − 4.8 15.5 − 7.7 − 2.4 16.6 9.0
         June 23.8 29.4 0.4 − 5.6 − 5.6 58.2 − 108.5 − 166.7 − 4.9 − 13.6 − 0.1 − 6.5 15.3
         July 6.9 − 0.0 15.3 6.9 9.4 6.9 105.9 99.0 − 7.2 − 7.8 − 0.9 − 3.0 4.4
         Aug 12.9 − 19.7 − 15.0 32.6 38.6 − 27.0 − 2.8 24.2 7.2 − 5.8 − 0.8 − 3.2 17.0
         Sep 54.5 43.0 − 13.8 11.5 16.9 6.4 − 34.7 − 41.2 − 24.0 − 12.0 − 0.9 − 29.9 18.7
         Oct 65.1 53.4 − 9.2 11.7 11.5 − 69.5 87.3 156.8 − 30.3 − 27.0 − 0.6 − 7.1 4.5
         Nov 127.7 99.1 22.1 28.6 34.7 18.7 − 1.0 − 19.6 3.7 4.5 − 0.8 − 2.6 2.6
         Dec − 107.5 − 89.2 − 8.6 − 18.3 − 8.9 15.4 − 153.1 − 168.5 − 6.1 11.4 − 0.6 − 5.8 − 11.2
2018         Jan 125.7 84.6 26.4 41.1 27.9 − 42.3 152.8 195.1 11.0 − 8.5 − 0.1 20.4 − 0.8
         Feb 4.3 − 0.1 − 0.4 4.4 20.4 − 11.6 47.1 58.7 − 17.8 0.1 − 0.5 − 12.4 − 4.9
         Mar 65.1 59.9 1.5 5.2 7.8 81.8 − 64.7 − 146.5 14.7 − 5.4 − 0.4 1.9 18.7
         Apr 65.4 65.5 52.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 74.6 41.2 115.8 − 7.9 − 2.1 − 0.5 − 3.2 − 2.1
         May 120.9 86.5 11.0 34.4 39.5 − 34.7 120.6 155.4 − 28.8 − 7.2 − 0.4 1.9 − 23.1
         June − 8.4 − 23.0 − 24.1 14.6 17.8 65.9 − 55.3 − 121.2 − 8.6 − 7.2 − 0.4 − 11.6 10.6
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2016         Nov 28.1 18.4 4.4 9.7 14.4 − 22.4 − 25.7 − 3.3 9.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 9.6 0.8
         Dec − 10.1 − 8.1 0.4 − 2.1 8.4 19.6 − 9.5 − 29.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.9 2.7
2017         Jan 23.6 15.0 2.3 8.6 8.5 − 24.4 31.8 56.2 9.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 15.9 − 2.3
         Feb 17.3 12.5 3.9 4.9 5.5 − 30.2 7.5 37.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.8
         Mar 18.2 12.7 1.8 5.5 9.5 − 3.6 6.3 9.9 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 5.5
         Apr 14.9 7.8 − 1.5 7.1 5.4 − 19.0 − 7.3 11.6 9.3 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.3 11.9
         May 13.8 13.3 3.5 0.6 7.9 7.1 − 13.0 − 20.1 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 1.8 1.4
         June 11.8 11.5 6.2 0.4 2.6 22.7 16.2 − 6.4 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.4 2.8 5.6
         July 18.1 12.8 1.8 5.3 3.5 − 10.3 − 23.0 − 12.7 − 4.0 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.5
         Aug 13.6 10.2 − 0.6 3.4 8.3 14.7 − 13.8 − 28.5 4.5 0.1 − 0.8 3.5 1.7
         Sep 17.8 14.1 − 1.8 3.7 8.0 − 22.3 9.2 31.5 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.3 2.3
         Oct 15.9 8.6 0.4 7.3 6.5 6.1 − 11.4 − 17.5 − 11.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 9.5 − 0.1
         Nov 27.2 16.7 6.4 10.5 11.2 23.1 − 2.6 − 25.7 2.6 3.3 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.1
         Dec − 5.4 − 3.5 4.3 − 1.8 1.0 − 48.9 − 8.1 40.8 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 1.9 5.3
2018         Jan 19.1 21.3 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.3 10.1 28.1 18.0 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 14.2 − 5.6
         Feb 5.1 10.7 − 1.7 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 20.7 11.6 32.4 − 5.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 2.9
         Mar 7.2 9.7 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.6 7.9 − 5.2 − 13.1 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 4.0 2.2
         Apr 7.3 7.2 0.9 0.1 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 13.9 − 8.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.1 1.9
         May 19.2 21.2 5.0 − 2.1 2.4 − 10.7 29.8 40.6 − 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 4.1 − 4.6
         June 16.7 17.7 2.0 − 1.0 1.3 − 18.5 − 20.4 − 1.9 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 3.1 8.0
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p 30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
August 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
5.1 20.3 − 87.4 82.7 95.0 1.2 93.7 − 10.3 − 1.9 − 2.2 7.0 1.2 2016          Nov 
− 48.3 − 12.6 − 51.6 72.1 89.8 16.1 73.7 − 24.1 6.4 4.4 − 6.0 − 7.3          Dec 
62.7 42.1 − 27.8 6.4 − 6.6 − 11.9 5.4 3.3 9.7 − 17.4 11.5 − 1.0 2017          Jan 
− 17.4 − 26.2 − 29.5 31.0 31.3 2.9 28.4 − 1.9 1.6 − 8.6 − 4.1 6.0          Feb 
24.2 26.5 − 106.5 92.5 92.9 4.4 88.5 − 5.6 5.2 14.8 11.9 − 1.0          Mar 
− 5.4 − 9.2 − 53.5 72.4 101.9 6.8 95.1 − 31.2 1.7 − 5.9 − 4.3 − 16.4          Apr 
13.4 − 12.6 − 33.0 30.2 42.0 0.4 41.6 − 20.9 9.1 − 11.7 − 4.7 6.1          May20.4 21.1 − 45.4 74.6 82.7 9.5 73.2 − 10.5 2.3 − 16.6 − 20.6 − 0.2          June
− 7.7 − 14.9 − 43.7 31.5 35.9 6.0 29.9 − 6.2 1.8 − 24.1 13.6 − 3.3          July
− 18.3 − 58.7 − 55.7 45.5 30.9 − 2.3 33.2 8.1 6.4 2.6 9.1 − 5.2          Aug 
41.3 23.1 − 20.6 23.3 47.9 0.9 47.0 − 21.6 − 3.0 7.0 − 4.1 10.5          Sep 
− 43.4 54.1 − 15.3 12.1 22.7 1.9 20.8 − 7.9 − 2.8 19.8 8.9 − 7.8          Oct 
− 8.8 72.9 − 78.6 73.2 81.7 0.9 80.8 − 7.7 − 0.9 17.2 − 3.8 1.3          Nov − 21.4 − 85.3 − 20.7 62.6 65.3 16.1 49.2 − 6.8 4.1 − 31.8 − 26.5 − 7.4          Dec 
41.3 22.6 − 8.5 − 2.6 − 19.9 − 15.2 − 4.7 5.6 11.7 − 7.6 19.6 − 11.8 2018          Jan 
13.5 10.0 − − 13.0 − 9.5 5.0 0.3 4.7 − 17.3 2.8 − 5.2 − 11.3 4.4          Feb 13.9 49.5 − 68.8 65.8 63.1 8.7 54.4 − 3.7 6.4 8.4 − 1.4 8.0          Mar 
− 19.6 − 34.3 − 52.6 31.7 50.6 4.2 46.4 − 20.9 2.0 − 3.9 12.3 1.8          Apr 
7.2 39.5 − 68.4 92.8 95.2 4.9 90.3 − 9.7 7.2 25.0 − 11.2 − 7.8          May
21.3 − 49.1 − 93.9 103.0 85.3 11.5 73.8 13.7 4.0 − 5.6 − 13.4 6.8          June
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
6.9 − 48.2 1.9 0.3 37.8 36.2 3.3 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 1.7 2016          Nov 
− 13.6 30.4 3.3 2.4 − 4.8 − 4.9 − 1.5 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 12.6 − 27.2 1.1 − 2.7 29.2 16.9 8.9 0.7 2.6 − 0.1 0.2 2017          Jan 
− 4.2 − 18.9 1.7 1.2 11.6 13.6 − 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 0.0          Feb 
14.2 − 2.7 1.8 1.1 0.5 2.4 3.5 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.0          Mar 
− 6.7 − 8.9 3.3 1.6 2.3 10.3 − 7.1 − 0.0 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.8          Apr 
7.7 − 8.7 2.9 − 0.7 19.2 18.3 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 0.8          May7.1 0.7 4.7 0.9 20.7 20.6 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.1 0.6          June
2.5 14.8 2.1 2.1 − 5.6 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.4 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6          July
7.4 5.1 3.7 − 1.3 11.2 14.7 − 2.9 − 0.3 0.1 0.2 − 0.5          Aug 9.6 − 14.2 3.5 − 0.3 5.9 5.6 0.8 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 0.3          Sep 
− 14.2 43.1 2.1 0.8 4.5 14.3 − 9.3 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5          Oct 
6.2 8.7 1.2 − 0.0 32.7 33.8 − 1.7 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.2          Nov 
10.0 − 58.0 3.8 2.0 − 8.8 − 10.1 0.4 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.8          Dec 
− 24.3 35.5 − 0.0 − 2.8 13.1 11.5 2.4 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 2018          Jan 
9.2 − 21.2 2.0 − 0.3 1.7 5.2 − 4.4 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 0.7          Feb 8.3 0.6 6.9 − 1.5 3.1 − 0.5 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1          Mar 
− 15.2 14.5 1.3 1.9 5.3 14.7 − 8.6 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr 
11.7 − 42.5 5.4 − 0.1 39.3 38.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.1          May17.7 − 26.3 3.6 2.5 4.6 − 6.4 14.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.8          June
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
August 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2016         May 26,807.2 16,994.0 12,842.5 10,733.4 1,341.4 767.8 4,151.4 1,121.8 3,029.6 5,270.0 4,543.3
         June 27,073.1 17,041.4 12,829.2 10,732.3 1,344.2 752.7 4,212.2 1,110.7 3,101.4 5,278.2 4,753.5
         July 27,135.3 17,093.7 12,852.5 10,737.6 1,359.7 755.3 4,241.2 1,111.6 3,129.5 5,326.7 4,714.8
         Aug 27,038.0 17,105.7 12,866.5 10,723.2 1,365.1 778.2 4,239.2 1,103.0 3,136.2 5,321.4 4,610.8
         Sep 26,973.5 17,147.5 12,892.5 10,756.7 1,359.3 776.5 4,255.0 1,098.8 3,156.2 5,266.4 4,559.5
         Oct 27,051.7 17,202.5 12,923.1 10,785.0 1,363.1 775.0 4,279.4 1,101.0 3,178.4 5,422.4 4,426.7
         Nov 27,160.3 17,294.9 12,983.2 10,829.9 1,383.3 770.0 4,311.7 1,089.0 3,222.7 5,451.6 4,413.8
         Dec 26,716.0 17,273.0 12,963.8 10,810.4 1,372.2 781.2 4,309.2 1,079.5 3,229.7 5,208.1 4,234.9
2017         Jan 26,797.3 17,356.0 12,994.9 10,815.3 1,393.4 786.2 4,361.1 1,097.6 3,263.5 5,377.9 4,063.4
         Feb 27,058.8 17,417.4 13,033.2 10,845.9 1,398.4 788.9 4,384.2 1,076.5 3,307.8 5,497.8 4,143.6
         Mar 27,010.2 17,549.8 13,115.7 10,902.1 1,423.7 789.8 4,434.2 1,073.0 3,361.2 5,418.3 4,042.0
         Apr 27,101.0 17,594.8 13,130.3 10,897.5 1,429.8 803.0 4,464.5 1,075.7 3,388.8 5,450.9 4,055.3
         May 27,016.8 17,632.4 13,145.3 10,895.9 1,451.1 798.3 4,487.1 1,062.5 3,424.6 5,361.2 4,023.3
         June 26,693.8 17,611.0 13,132.7 10,895.2 1,441.3 796.2 4,478.3 1,063.1 3,415.2 5,196.3 3,886.5
         July 26,650.9 17,603.9 13,118.6 10,866.0 1,460.1 792.5 4,485.3 1,060.3 3,425.0 5,229.1 3,818.0
         Aug 26,683.7 17,610.2 13,087.0 10,853.0 1,444.2 789.7 4,523.2 1,054.6 3,468.6 5,199.6 3,874.0
         Sep 26,562.3 17,654.9 13,129.8 10,905.5 1,433.3 791.0 4,525.1 1,046.0 3,479.1 5,172.0 3,735.3
         Oct 26,761.1 17,733.3 13,189.6 10,968.3 1,423.0 798.3 4,543.6 1,046.2 3,497.5 5,292.8 3,735.0
         Nov 26,790.6 17,846.4 13,272.3 11,037.5 1,431.0 803.8 4,574.1 1,038.2 3,535.9 5,247.3 3,696.9
         Dec 26,322.2 17,710.5 13,169.7 10,945.0 1,425.7 798.9 4,540.8 1,028.6 3,512.2 5,064.7 3,547.0
2018         Jan 26,337.1 17,822.7 13,244.6 10,994.0 1,449.1 801.5 4,578.1 1,041.1 3,537.0 5,253.4 3,261.0
         Feb 26,300.6 17,825.1 13,243.7 10,996.8 1,456.8 790.1 4,581.4 1,024.8 3,556.6 5,342.4 3,133.1
         Mar 26,293.2 17,882.8 13,281.9 11,034.6 1,466.9 780.4 4,600.8 1,022.3 3,578.5 5,258.7 3,151.8
         Apr 26,515.7 18,034.7 13,435.9 11,130.7 1,490.2 815.0 4,598.8 1,024.1 3,574.7 5,335.0 3,145.9
         May 26,915.1 18,104.8 13,515.4 11,203.2 1,504.6 807.6 4,589.5 1,019.5 3,570.0 5,543.4 3,266.9
         June 26,784.7 18,096.0 13,483.5 11,196.7 1,499.5 787.3 4,612.5 1,016.3 3,596.2 5,467.9 3,220.7
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2016         May 6,091.2 3,934.7 3,043.0 2,629.7 153.3 260.0 891.7 362.8 528.9 1,187.1 969.4
         June 6,221.2 3,939.7 3,042.5 2,629.1 152.9 260.5 897.2 357.3 540.0 1,221.3 1,060.1
         July 6,245.6 3,968.5 3,054.3 2,639.3 155.3 259.7 914.2 360.3 553.8 1,228.3 1,048.8
         Aug 6,218.9 3,977.8 3,062.7 2,646.2 155.3 261.2 915.1 358.5 556.6 1,226.9 1,014.2
         Sep 6,202.1 4,001.8 3,075.1 2,655.3 157.6 262.1 926.8 357.2 569.5 1,215.0 985.4
         Oct 6,208.1 4,019.0 3,087.3 2,664.9 161.9 260.5 931.7 360.3 571.4 1,260.2 928.9
         Nov 6,186.1 4,046.1 3,107.1 2,680.4 165.0 261.7 939.0 355.5 583.5 1,243.2 896.8
         Dec 6,131.1 4,037.0 3,099.2 2,671.7 164.0 263.6 937.8 345.2 592.6 1,234.7 859.4
2017         Jan 6,131.6 4,054.1 3,112.0 2,682.7 165.0 264.3 942.1 345.2 596.8 1,260.2 817.4
         Feb 6,196.5 4,075.7 3,124.9 2,691.3 168.1 265.5 950.8 344.6 606.2 1,281.9 839.0
         Mar 6,176.3 4,089.6 3,136.8 2,701.2 169.6 266.0 952.8 340.6 612.3 1,281.0 805.7
         Apr 6,174.4 4,103.1 3,143.3 2,709.1 170.4 263.9 959.8 342.3 617.5 1,264.2 807.1
         May 6,160.2 4,114.5 3,157.3 2,719.6 172.6 265.0 957.2 332.2 624.9 1,234.6 811.2
         June 6,106.3 4,120.6 3,165.9 2,722.5 173.2 270.2 954.7 330.8 623.9 1,238.6 747.1
         July 6,069.0 4,135.9 3,176.7 2,731.5 175.2 269.9 959.2 332.6 626.7 1,201.4 731.7
         Aug 6,084.5 4,152.3 3,186.3 2,741.6 174.3 270.3 966.1 327.8 638.3 1,185.1 747.2
         Sep 6,076.7 4,167.7 3,200.9 2,757.6 174.3 269.1 966.8 323.2 643.6 1,194.6 714.3
         Oct 6,082.0 4,185.9 3,210.4 2,766.1 174.6 269.8 975.4 324.0 651.4 1,188.5 707.7
         Nov 6,088.7 4,211.0 3,227.4 2,777.0 178.7 271.6 983.6 321.5 662.1 1,177.2 700.5
         Dec 6,051.1 4,202.2 3,222.8 2,768.6 180.4 273.8 979.4 318.5 660.9 1,163.4 685.4
2018         Jan 6,074.8 4,214.9 3,242.3 2,786.5 181.6 274.2 972.5 317.0 655.6 1,176.4 683.5
         Feb 6,051.9 4,220.1 3,253.3 2,799.4 183.1 270.8 966.8 311.4 655.4 1,195.1 636.8
         Mar 6,053.7 4,228.1 3,260.9 2,809.5 183.0 268.4 967.2 309.7 657.5 1,184.4 641.2
         Apr 6,046.4 4,233.3 3,267.7 2,816.0 184.4 267.4 965.6 310.5 655.0 1,178.5 634.6
         May 6,148.1 4,248.4 3,280.8 2,824.1 186.8 269.8 967.6 306.5 661.1 1,226.7 673.0
         June 6,120.9 4,264.2 3,297.2 2,838.8 187.5 270.9 967.0 304.3 662.7 1,201.8 654.9
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p 12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
August 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,049.3 11,766.9 11,005.9 11,092.6 5,545.2 945.2 331.9 2,066.3 2,134.0 70.0 2016          May
1,057.7 11,829.3 11,001.4 11,089.4 5,565.3 944.9 330.2 2,046.5 2,133.1 69.3          June
1,067.8 11,849.6 11,053.7 11,133.7 5,615.1 952.1 325.6 2,039.3 2,132.9 68.8          July
1,064.3 11,783.5 11,037.8 11,120.8 5,611.4 952.6 320.7 2,034.0 2,134.1 68.1          Aug 1,066.5 11,788.9 11,032.4 11,130.6 5,637.1 960.1 315.0 2,021.8 2,129.2 67.4          Sep 
1,069.7 11,797.5 11,047.9 11,134.7 5,680.7 936.8 307.6 2,018.8 2,123.8 67.2          Oct 
1,071.0 11,882.2 11,107.7 11,212.3 5,780.1 926.7 303.3 2,013.9 2,121.8 66.4          Nov 1,087.1 11,929.4 11,211.4 11,321.3 5,826.7 911.5 294.0 2,050.9 2,172.7 65.6          Dec 
1,075.6 11,985.1 11,191.6 11,306.4 5,823.9 914.2 286.6 2,034.5 2,182.1 65.0 2017          Jan 
1,078.5 11,994.0 11,210.5 11,330.1 5,849.1 919.5 284.5 2,028.8 2,183.6 64.6          Feb 1,082.9 12,103.6 11,279.9 11,422.6 5,945.0 910.9 285.3 2,029.0 2,188.3 64.1          Mar 
1,089.7 12,141.3 11,323.3 11,456.5 6,022.2 886.9 278.6 2,015.2 2,190.1 63.7          Apr 
1,090.2 12,151.7 11,338.9 11,444.1 6,044.4 861.0 273.0 2,004.8 2,199.0 62.0          May1,099.7 12,214.1 11,384.0 11,483.6 6,113.6 854.2 265.6 1,986.8 2,201.6 61.9          June
1,105.6 12,209.8 11,392.9 11,476.5 6,123.8 848.8 262.8 1,976.5 2,206.2 58.4          July
1,103.3 12,226.8 11,422.8 11,505.1 6,146.8 857.8 260.6 1,969.7 2,212.6 57.7          Aug 1,104.2 12,271.6 11,432.3 11,519.7 6,196.9 843.3 256.2 1,956.4 2,210.0 56.8          Sep 
1,106.2 12,217.2 11,420.3 11,507.4 6,217.3 846.5 250.5 1,929.6 2,207.3 56.2          Oct 
1,107.1 12,249.3 11,471.5 11,544.7 6,291.5 832.2 245.9 1,912.8 2,206.7 55.5          Nov 1,123.2 12,285.9 11,543.2 11,618.0 6,349.7 834.7 242.1 1,925.4 2,211.3 54.9          Dec 
1,108.0 12,317.5 11,527.5 11,609.5 6,341.2 840.5 236.7 1,914.3 2,221.0 55.8 2018          Jan 
1,108.3 12,329.4 11,524.5 11,603.1 6,345.1 831.1 232.3 1,916.0 2,223.5 55.1          Feb 1,117.0 12,391.8 11,578.8 11,659.2 6,407.6 831.5 226.4 1,909.3 2,229.7 54.8          Mar 
1,121.2 12,400.8 11,610.4 11,680.1 6,448.5 817.3 222.4 1,906.9 2,230.6 54.4          Apr 
1,126.1 12,501.8 11,690.2 11,762.6 6,547.5 810.9 217.7 1,900.7 2,231.7 54.0          May1,137.6 12,606.6 11,770.9 11,838.3 6,619.4 821.7 214.7 1,892.7 2,236.1 53.7          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
243.7 3,469.8 3,356.2 3,222.9 1,779.2 175.2 37.3 640.6 534.4 56.2 2016          May
245.2 3,481.5 3,352.9 3,218.7 1,779.1 173.1 38.3 638.8 533.9 55.4          June
247.4 3,464.1 3,368.1 3,233.1 1,793.5 174.7 38.2 638.3 533.8 54.6          July
246.5 3,480.0 3,376.0 3,238.3 1,803.0 173.4 38.2 636.2 533.8 53.8          Aug 245.9 3,494.5 3,380.7 3,247.0 1,807.9 179.4 38.3 635.0 533.3 53.1          Sep 
245.4 3,489.6 3,386.4 3,254.0 1,821.1 172.1 37.8 637.3 533.5 52.3          Oct 
245.7 3,536.5 3,424.0 3,288.1 1,857.7 171.0 37.4 636.6 533.7 51.7          Nov 248.1 3,517.1 3,419.8 3,284.1 1,851.0 171.5 38.4 635.6 536.3 51.3          Dec 
245.4 3,526.3 3,439.3 3,306.3 1,873.8 174.0 38.7 632.1 537.1 50.6 2017          Jan 
246.6 3,532.6 3,448.3 3,313.4 1,881.5 175.3 38.8 630.0 537.9 50.0          Feb 247.7 3,549.3 3,449.2 3,318.1 1,886.4 177.4 39.9 628.4 536.5 49.5          Mar 
249.3 3,540.9 3,447.5 3,317.0 1,895.9 170.7 40.0 624.7 536.6 49.0          Apr 
248.6 3,566.1 3,465.8 3,327.4 1,910.5 167.5 40.2 624.1 536.4 48.7          May249.5 3,590.5 3,482.0 3,339.9 1,928.7 165.5 40.3 621.4 535.7 48.3          June
251.6 3,583.1 3,472.8 3,333.0 1,927.8 162.6 40.3 619.5 537.9 44.9          July
250.4 3,600.7 3,483.1 3,338.6 1,938.3 159.0 40.3 619.3 537.5 44.1          Aug 250.1 3,616.3 3,486.8 3,345.9 1,945.0 162.3 39.6 617.9 537.5 43.5          Sep 
250.9 3,606.4 3,490.8 3,352.9 1,958.5 158.8 38.6 616.2 538.0 42.7          Oct 
250.9 3,646.8 3,521.5 3,383.7 1,990.6 157.1 37.4 618.2 538.3 42.1          Nov 252.9 3,647.9 3,515.8 3,378.5 1,976.2 162.0 37.7 620.4 540.7 41.5          Dec 
250.1 3,632.5 3,522.3 3,390.7 1,994.6 161.5 36.4 616.5 539.5 42.2 2018          Jan 
249.8 3,642.4 3,523.0 3,388.4 1,995.9 160.2 35.3 615.5 540.0 41.5          Feb 248.3 3,652.2 3,524.1 3,389.6 1,998.1 164.6 34.2 612.1 539.4 41.0          Mar 
250.3 3,641.8 3,529.8 3,395.0 2,013.5 157.6 33.6 610.6 539.1 40.6          Apr 
250.2 3,693.8 3,568.4 3,425.0 2,048.0 154.6 33.0 610.2 539.0 40.3          May252.7 3,716.6 3,574.1 3,423.1 2,039.5 165.5 32.6 607.2 538.5 39.8          June
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eu rosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“ ).5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
August 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2016         May 317.7 356.6 167.0 102.1 15.5 43.1 24.0 4.9 318.7 312.8 489.2 2,284.5 1,575.9
         June 378.3 361.6 171.3 102.4 15.9 43.7 23.5 4.8 321.3 318.0 479.7 2,281.8 1,569.3
         July 349.2 366.7 174.1 101.6 18.2 43.8 24.2 4.8 298.6 297.4 494.8 2,258.2 1,543.7
         Aug 294.6 368.1 175.7 100.8 18.7 44.3 23.8 4.9 301.0 299.9 495.5 2,253.2 1,534.5
         Sep 297.4 361.0 170.5 99.5 19.4 44.4 22.3 5.0 286.5 285.7 493.7 2,227.1 1,517.1
         Oct 295.3 367.4 182.2 94.3 19.9 44.5 21.3 5.3 266.4 265.7 511.7 2,226.0 1,503.3
         Nov 300.4 369.6 178.7 98.8 21.1 44.2 21.6 5.2 264.5 263.8 518.8 2,244.1 1,506.1
         Dec 253.0 355.1 168.6 93.9 21.5 43.3 22.6 5.1 268.9 268.2 512.8 2,230.4 1,502.6
2017         Jan 316.7 362.0 169.5 99.5 21.3 43.4 22.9 5.5 250.1 249.5 524.2 2,205.3 1,488.5
         Feb 299.9 364.1 175.0 96.2 20.2 44.1 23.1 5.4 241.7 241.0 520.1 2,216.6 1,494.0
         Mar 324.0 357.0 165.4 96.5 21.5 44.6 23.6 5.4 256.5 255.8 532.0 2,188.7 1,479.9
         Apr 318.6 366.2 176.4 92.4 23.7 44.7 23.5 5.5 250.4 249.7 527.7 2,160.3 1,466.8
         May 332.1 375.5 181.6 94.5 25.3 45.2 24.2 4.7 238.5 237.8 522.9 2,168.4 1,491.1
         June 352.5 378.0 181.2 95.7 26.6 45.8 24.0 4.7 221.7 221.0 502.2 2,151.7 1,479.7
         July 345.0 388.3 191.0 95.2 26.7 46.2 24.4 4.8 197.4 196.8 515.9 2,130.1 1,471.4
         Aug 326.7 395.0 197.1 94.8 27.8 46.2 24.4 4.7 199.6 198.9 525.0 2,115.2 1,464.4
         Sep 362.5 389.5 193.2 91.9 28.1 47.5 24.1 4.7 206.6 205.9 520.8 2,095.6 1,448.1
         Oct 318.9 390.9 197.9 87.6 28.3 48.3 24.1 4.7 226.5 225.8 529.8 2,086.5 1,431.4
         Nov 310.2 394.4 197.6 89.5 29.8 49.0 23.8 4.6 243.4 242.8 526.1 2,100.0 1,446.7
         Dec 288.8 379.1 191.1 81.5 31.5 46.8 23.5 4.6 211.5 211.0 499.7 2,081.3 1,437.5
2018         Jan 330.0 378.1 186.2 84.3 31.1 47.5 24.1 5.0 203.5 203.0 519.3 2,075.2 1,442.8
         Feb 343.6 382.7 191.4 83.5 30.4 47.8 24.7 4.8 198.6 198.1 508.0 2,077.7 1,434.9
         Mar 357.5 375.2 181.3 85.8 29.5 48.6 25.0 4.8 206.9 206.4 506.5 2,082.3 1,439.2
         Apr 337.8 382.9 190.3 84.7 28.4 49.7 25.0 4.7 227.7 227.2 518.7 2,090.3 1,440.9
         May 344.9 394.3 196.4 87.2 29.8 51.0 25.2 4.7 253.2 252.6 507.5 2,102.1 1,443.1
         June 366.2 402.1 199.3 91.7 29.8 51.9 24.8 4.7 247.5 247.0 493.9 2,097.6 1,443.8
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2016         May 50.6 196.3 60.4 84.9 11.1 36.2 3.3 0.5 3.5 2.4 2.5 530.9 244.9
         June 63.6 199.2 62.2 85.0 11.5 36.6 3.3 0.5 2.5 2.3 2.6 523.0 241.2
         July 31.9 199.1 59.9 85.2 13.3 36.8 3.3 0.5 3.4 3.2 2.4 524.2 241.2
         Aug 40.6 201.0 61.7 84.6 13.6 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 524.4 241.5
         Sep 49.3 198.3 59.7 83.5 14.0 37.2 3.4 0.5 2.9 2.9 2.4 516.7 240.8
         Oct 40.5 195.1 58.8 80.4 14.9 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 526.0 242.2
         Nov 47.4 201.0 59.5 84.2 16.1 37.3 3.3 0.6 3.0 3.0 2.3 542.1 251.4
         Dec 33.8 199.1 61.6 80.5 16.6 36.6 3.3 0.6 2.2 2.2 2.3 541.3 250.6
2017         Jan 21.2 198.8 55.1 86.6 16.4 36.9 3.2 0.6 4.8 4.8 2.2 553.4 261.4
         Feb 17.5 201.8 61.5 83.2 15.7 37.7 3.1 0.6 4.5 4.5 2.2 556.7 262.6
         Mar 31.6 199.5 58.7 82.5 16.5 38.2 3.1 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.1 551.8 263.6
         Apr 25.0 198.9 59.0 79.4 18.8 38.2 3.0 0.6 3.5 3.5 2.1 546.7 264.9
         May 32.7 206.1 61.6 81.6 20.6 38.7 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 542.6 263.2
         June 39.8 210.9 63.4 82.6 22.0 39.3 3.0 0.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 542.7 266.0
         July 42.3 207.8 60.3 81.5 22.6 39.8 3.0 0.7 3.3 3.3 2.1 534.5 264.9
         Aug 49.7 212.4 64.0 81.0 23.6 40.1 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.4 2.3 534.4 267.8
         Sep 59.5 210.9 63.2 78.5 24.3 41.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.3 529.1 264.0
         Oct 45.3 208.2 64.4 73.5 24.7 41.9 3.0 0.7 2.3 2.3 2.0 521.8 252.3
         Nov 51.7 211.4 65.5 73.0 26.2 43.1 2.9 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 518.3 251.1
         Dec 61.7 207.7 69.3 66.3 27.8 40.6 2.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.7 512.7 256.4
2018         Jan 37.4 204.4 61.6 70.3 27.5 41.4 2.8 0.8 4.3 4.3 1.7 518.8 262.8
         Feb 46.7 207.4 66.3 69.2 26.8 41.5 3.0 0.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 522.7 263.8
         Mar 55.0 207.6 63.2 72.7 25.8 42.3 3.0 0.6 2.9 2.9 2.2 523.5 265.6
         Apr 39.7 207.0 63.1 72.5 24.4 43.3 3.0 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 524.1 270.0
         May 51.4 217.4 68.6 74.9 25.7 44.5 3.1 0.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 536.8 274.3
         June 69.1 224.5 70.7 79.2 25.6 45.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.8 531.2 274.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
August 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
39.9 49.2 2,195.4 4,018.4 2,600.9 − 84.0 4,363.3 − 6,867.6 10,440.8 11,110.7 6,980.5 126.6 2016          May
49.8 47.2 2,184.8 3,941.0 2,664.9 − 62.8 4,560.1 − 6,901.6 10,472.1 11,131.7 7,014.1 127.7          June
54.6 47.8 2,155.8 4,071.9 2,678.7 − 105.4 4,521.1 − 6,967.7 10,543.0 11,225.5 6,991.2 131.5          July
53.9 46.2 2,153.1 4,113.9 2,676.2 − 85.1 4,435.5 − 6,962.0 10,533.4 11,214.3 6,980.4 131.4          Aug 48.7 46.1 2,132.3 4,069.0 2,698.3 − 45.1 4,388.5 − 6,984.6 10,550.9 11,216.3 6,969.2 131.3          Sep 
53.5 43.6 2,129.0 4,278.6 2,683.3 − 28.3 4,246.7 − 7,043.6 10,568.0 11,250.0 6,948.0 131.8          Oct 
54.6 42.9 2,146.6 4,317.8 2,662.6 − 55.9 4,255.2 − 7,145.6 10,659.4 11,345.5 6,939.0 136.4          Nov 48.1 42.0 2,140.3 4,039.0 2,654.2 − 42.2 4,036.2 − 7,193.7 10,734.0 11,399.6 6,959.4 135.4          Dec 
42.5 43.4 2,119.5 4,248.8 2,646.2 − 16.1 3,878.0 − 7,183.7 10,734.7 11,418.3 6,914.1 139.1 2017          Jan 
47.3 44.8 2,124.6 4,380.1 2,696.3 − 20.2 3,951.6 − 7,218.4 10,769.9 11,452.3 6,963.9 140.1          Feb 45.9 44.9 2,097.9 4,320.4 2,677.0 − 3.0 3,852.2 − 7,309.1 10,859.4 11,555.4 6,917.9 140.0          Mar 
33.1 41.5 2,085.8 4,403.3 2,662.8 1.1 3,864.2 − 7,406.4 10,925.6 11,602.7 6,877.7 142.1          Apr 
39.9 41.7 2,086.8 4,336.3 2,659.2 3.1 3,846.5 − 7,437.3 10,938.1 11,618.6 6,862.7 145.0          May40.4 40.8 2,070.5 4,137.3 2,631.1 10.0 3,725.9 − 7,516.1 11,007.6 11,658.3 6,800.8 145.5          June
37.5 39.2 2,053.4 4,182.8 2,616.1 9.6 3,683.6 − 7,544.5 11,032.5 11,694.2 6,755.5 148.0          July
33.0 39.3 2,042.9 4,179.6 2,647.6 − 0.7 3,687.4 − 7,572.0 11,073.6 11,746.0 6,768.7 148.5          Aug 41.9 38.9 2,014.8 4,157.5 2,650.6 17.1 3,538.1 − 7,620.8 11,098.3 11,765.8 6,730.9 150.4          Sep 
36.0 37.1 2,013.4 4,339.4 2,665.6 13.6 3,576.3 − 7,646.5 11,114.4 11,785.5 6,717.8 148.7          Oct 
40.9 37.5 2,021.7 4,289.2 2,657.4 46.1 3,572.0 − 7,724.4 11,175.5 11,855.7 6,701.0 151.3          Nov 35.8 35.3 2,010.1 4,097.5 2,730.5 28.6 3,264.1 − 7,787.2 11,234.6 11,873.0 6,772.3 146.0          Dec 
28.4 29.9 2,016.9 4,414.1 2,714.5 − 40.5 3,025.3 − 7,760.7 11,221.1 11,869.2 6,754.0 148.1 2018          Jan 
34.9 28.5 2,014.3 4,505.3 2,707.8 − 25.4 2,890.8 − 7,769.9 11,217.8 11,863.4 6,745.9 147.5          Feb 42.5 28.2 2,011.6 4,348.7 2,719.4 − 3.5 2,924.1 − 7,831.3 11,281.3 11,928.9 6,748.6 147.5          Mar 
44.7 28.3 2,017.3 4,492.4 2,720.2 12.8 2,931.6 − 7,886.3 11,316.9 11,988.9 6,753.2 148.4          Apr 
38.2 28.0 2,035.9 4,705.7 2,699.1 15.5 3,004.2 − 7,994.5 11,419.5 12,068.5 6,745.5 147.0          May45.8 27.5 2,024.3 4,582.8 2,671.0 26.9 2,920.7 − 8,080.3 11,523.1 12,163.1 6,698.2 147.9          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
22.8 12.3 495.8 758.5 571.4 − 823.1 1,577.5 303.9 1,839.6 2,685.7 2,726.9 1,800.7 − 2016          May
23.8 11.8 487.5 783.3 592.6 − 834.3 1,670.0 308.0 1,841.3 2,686.4 2,727.1 1,811.5 −          June
30.5 12.6 481.1 807.8 595.1 − 824.9 1,673.4 311.7 1,853.4 2,702.0 2,750.9 1,806.5 −          July
27.4 12.5 484.5 826.1 589.2 − 846.9 1,640.6 314.1 1,864.6 2,711.7 2,757.1 1,801.3 −          Aug 26.4 12.9 477.4 851.2 594.2 − 876.5 1,616.7 318.8 1,867.6 2,719.5 2,764.2 1,797.3 −          Sep 
25.3 13.4 487.3 899.9 585.7 − 863.2 1,564.6 322.0 1,879.9 2,721.9 2,766.1 1,800.2 −          Oct 
22.7 14.6 504.7 905.9 578.4 − 918.6 1,536.5 323.9 1,917.2 2,762.9 2,805.6 1,809.3 −          Nov 23.1 14.2 504.0 878.8 580.3 − 897.1 1,506.3 327.3 1,912.6 2,759.2 2,801.0 1,808.4 −          Dec 
22.8 14.4 516.2 930.2 575.5 − 926.5 1,465.7 328.3 1,928.9 2,784.9 2,829.2 1,811.9 − 2017          Jan 
22.2 15.2 519.2 972.2 587.9 − 944.3 1,484.8 330.1 1,943.0 2,797.0 2,841.1 1,825.3 −          Feb 19.5 15.9 516.4 979.6 586.5 − 957.7 1,462.2 331.9 1,945.1 2,801.0 2,841.1 1,819.5 −          Mar 
17.7 16.9 512.1 985.8 597.9 − 965.5 1,463.1 335.2 1,954.8 2,803.4 2,843.5 1,822.6 −          Apr 
18.4 16.8 507.4 957.7 595.0 − 967.6 1,461.9 338.1 1,972.1 2,821.5 2,861.2 1,814.4 −          May19.3 16.4 507.0 946.6 591.5 − 981.1 1,412.1 342.8 1,992.1 2,841.2 2,880.9 1,808.1 −          June
18.8 16.2 499.5 926.1 589.1 − 975.5 1,406.4 345.0 1,988.1 2,835.9 2,876.2 1,793.6 −          July
18.5 15.8 500.0 894.5 597.2 − 970.2 1,422.2 348.6 2,002.3 2,846.8 2,886.8 1,801.4 −          Aug 19.3 15.4 494.4 927.7 594.2 − 982.9 1,387.5 352.1 2,008.2 2,853.5 2,893.0 1,792.0 −          Sep 
18.6 15.7 487.5 913.6 596.3 − 946.7 1,386.3 354.2 2,023.0 2,859.6 2,898.2 1,785.4 −          Oct 
18.5 15.8 484.0 883.4 593.7 − 940.3 1,382.0 355.5 2,056.1 2,890.9 2,929.9 1,781.9 −          Nov 17.7 14.8 480.2 921.3 668.6 − 999.6 1,295.2 359.3 2,045.5 2,882.9 2,920.4 1,852.1 −          Dec 
16.0 14.2 488.5 931.6 656.8 − 974.7 1,303.7 359.3 2,056.2 2,894.2 2,930.5 1,846.2 − 2018          Jan 
16.7 14.3 491.6 968.4 653.3 − 1,003.8 1,263.2 361.3 2,062.1 2,896.6 2,933.5 1,844.1 −          Feb 16.0 13.9 493.6 953.5 657.7 − 1,016.5 1,278.1 368.2 2,061.3 2,901.1 2,936.2 1,847.4 −          Mar 
17.5 12.3 494.3 949.7 658.7 − 1,002.9 1,270.5 369.5 2,076.6 2,907.0 2,941.3 1,848.1 −          Apr 
19.0 13.1 504.7 997.9 662.3 − 1,044.2 1,297.9 374.9 2,116.6 2,946.8 2,982.4 1,862.6 −          May17.0 12.4 501.9 996.2 666.0 − 1,070.1 1,277.8 378.5 2,110.2 2,954.6 2,987.1 1,860.8 −          June
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central government s’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturiti es of over 2
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
August 2018
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2016         Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1,072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1,826.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 607.8 62.9 461.7 0.1 907.6 230.5 0.0 1,063.4 115.6 73.9 556.5 1,850.4
         Apr 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1,000.1 262.0 0.0 1,069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1,901.3
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1,105.3 309.0 0.0 1,076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2,009.4
         July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1,227.1 323.1 0.0 1,087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2,067.7
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1,339.7 355.1 0.0 1,096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2,200.2
         Oct 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1,447.0 387.3 0.0 1,094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2,259.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1,570.2 439.4 0.0 1,103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2,366.3
2017         Jan 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1,670.8 434.4 0.0 1,119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2,472.6
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1,787.5 479.2 0.0 1,110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2,550.9
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 678.6 18.5 707.4 0.3 1,905.3 550.0 0.0 1,118.4 182.0 378.8 1,081.1 2,749.4
         June 683.1 13.7 767.4 0.2 1,995.0 593.7 0.0 1,126.0 163.6 397.4 1,178.7 2,898.5
         July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2,076.1 595.3 0.0 1,136.3 229.8 379.4 1,169.2 2,900.8
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 639.0 5.5 768.6 0.3 2,150.2 611.4 0.0 1,142.5 181.8 385.1 1,242.7 2,996.7
         Oct 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2,239.2 648.1 0.0 1,142.8 218.3 383.9 1,253.3 3,044.2
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 634.5 3.0 763.7 0.2 2,333.5 682.5 0.0 1,146.6 188.5 407.6 1,309.7 3,138.8
2018         Jan 635.7 2.9 760.6 0.2 2,398.2 689.2 0.0 1,158.2 188.1 487.0 1,275.2 3,122.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 630.9 1.5 760.5 0.0 2,435.5 686.3 0.0 1,148.2 203.6 474.9 1,315.6 3,150.1
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 627.1 1.9 759.5 0.1 2,476.8 668.0 0.0 1,159.0 247.5 495.6 1,295.3 3,122.3
         June 625.2 1.8 757.3 0.1 2,519.9 659.5 0.0 1,170.4 218.0 502.5 1,353.9 3,183.8
         July 635.1 2.1 744.2 0.1 2,558.4 652.2 0.0 1,183.6 263.4 533.8 1,306.9 3,142.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2016         Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.7 1.9 46.3 0.0 193.9 59.8 0.0 250.4 26.1 − 113.3 162.9 473.1
         Apr 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
         July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
         Oct 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2017         Jan 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 164.4 1.0 86.0 0.1 412.4 181.4 0.0 264.1 29.7 − 185.3 374.0 819.5
         June 165.8 0.3 95.0 0.0 431.8 181.2 0.0 266.2 32.4 − 204.9 418.0 865.4
         July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 155.2 0.3 94.9 0.0 463.2 165.5 0.0 269.9 52.4 − 192.6 418.5 853.9
         Oct 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 154.2 0.5 94.8 0.0 501.4 187.5 0.0 270.3 56.0 − 218.6 455.8 913.6
2018         Jan 155.5 0.9 93.3 0.0 514.7 204.4 0.0 272.8 54.9 − 192.2 424.5 901.7
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 151.5 0.6 93.4 0.0 522.9 207.9 0.0 271.0 56.8 − 221.3 453.9 932.8
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 150.7 1.1 93.3 0.0 530.6 190.8 0.0 273.8 61.1 − 191.3 440.9 905.5
         June 150.1 1.1 93.1 0.0 540.6 200.3 0.0 277.4 59.2 − 217.9 466.0 943.6
         July 151.9 0.4 91.8 0.0 547.6 196.8 0.0 280.0 69.4 − 194.1 439.6 916.4
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
August 2018
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2016          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 3.8 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 95.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 − 9.4 + 33.1 + 20.7 − 0.6 + 23.9          Mar 
+ 19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1          June
+ 25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5          Sep 
+ 2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9          Dec 
− 12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2017          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
+ 16.2 − 10.5 + 153.1 + 0.0 + 117.8 + 70.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 21.7 + 56.6 + 120.2 + 198.5          May
+ 4.5 − 4.8 + 60.0 − 0.1 + 89.7 + 43.7 + 0.0 + 7.6 − 18.4 + 18.6 + 97.6 + 149.1          June
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 17.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 74.1 + 16.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 48.0 + 5.7 + 73.5 + 95.9          Sep 
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 94.3 + 34.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 29.8 + 23.7 + 56.4 + 94.6          Dec 
+ 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 64.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 11.6 − 0.4 + 79.4 − 34.5 − 16.3 2018          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 37.3 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 10.0 + 15.5 − 12.1 + 40.4 + 27.6          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
− 3.8 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 41.3 − 18.3 + 0.0 + 10.8 + 43.9 + 20.7 − 20.3 − 27.8          May
− 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 43.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 11.4 − 29.5 + 6.9 + 58.6 + 61.5          June
+ 9.9 + 0.3 − 13.1 + 0.0 + 38.5 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 13.2 + 45.4 + 31.3 − 47.0 − 41.2          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2016          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 9.8 + 0.0 − 2.1 + 8.1 + 10.7 − 11.5 − 3.8          Mar 
+ 8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3          June
+ 6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0          Sep 
+ 0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6          Dec 
− 4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2017          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
+ 4.9 + 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.0 + 25.9 + 27.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 6.6 − 15.6 + 33.0 + 62.5          May
+ 1.5 − 0.7 + 9.0 − 0.1 + 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.6 − 19.6 + 44.0 + 45.9          June
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 15.4 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 9.0 + 5.8 + 2.1          Sep 
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 16.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 9.9 − 21.0 + 33.1 + 50.4          Dec 
+ 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 13.3 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.1 + 26.4 − 31.3 − 11.9 2018          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.2 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 1.9 − 29.1 + 29.4 + 31.1          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
− 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 − 17.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 4.2 + 30.0 − 13.0 − 27.3          May
− 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 10.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 3.6 − 1.8 − 26.6 + 25.1 + 38.1          June
+ 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 10.2 + 23.9 − 26.4 − 27.2          July
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
August 2018
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claims
external loans residents with banks, arising from
On Gold and other denominated security the credit
reporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
date assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2018 Jan                19 4,484.0 376.3 297.6 70.2 227.4 29.9 15.8 15.8 −
                              26 4,493.1 376.3 296.4 70.1 226.3 29.1 15.7 15.7 −
         Feb                  2 4,491.2 376.3 295.9 70.0 225.9 32.7 16.1 16.1 −
                                9 4,493.7 376.3 297.1 69.9 227.3 32.5 16.8 16.8 −
                              16 4,504.8 376.3 296.8 69.9 226.9 34.7 17.4 17.4 −
                              23 4,511.5 376.3 296.2 69.9 226.3 35.4 17.4 17.4 −
         Mar                  2 4,519.4 376.3 297.1 69.9 227.2 34.5 16.6 16.6 −
                                9 4,530.1 376.3 299.6 69.9 229.7 32.5 18.7 18.7 −
                              16 4,532.6 376.3 300.2 69.8 230.4 29.6 17.8 17.8 −
                              23 4,539.1 376.3 304.6 69.8 234.7 26.5 18.5 18.5 −
                              30 4,529.6 374.1 299.6 69.3 230.3 26.6 17.7 17.7 −
         Apr                  6 4,531.5 374.1 297.2 69.3 227.9 25.7 17.1 17.1 −
                              13 4,548.2 374.1 294.8 69.3 225.5 29.5 17.7 17.7 −
                              20 4,544.0 374.1 294.9 69.3 225.6 28.9 15.4 15.4 −
                              27 4,554.3 374.1 296.2 69.4 226.8 28.6 18.8 18.8 −
2018 May                 4 4,552.6 374.1 295.8 69.3 226.5 28.8 17.0 17.0 −
                              11 4,562.1 374.1 296.6 69.3 227.4 26.5 17.3 17.3 −
                              18 4,561.6 374.1 295.8 69.3 226.5 26.1 17.1 17.1 −
                              25 4,562.7 374.1 299.8 69.2 230.6 25.7 13.9 13.9 −
         June                 1 4,567.7 374.1 298.5 69.2 229.3 27.0 15.8 15.8 −
                                8 4,577.2 374.1 301.0 69.2 231.8 26.2 15.8 15.8 −
                              15 4,578.5 374.1 301.9 69.2 232.8 24.4 15.8 15.8 −
                              22 4,585.6 374.0 305.5 72.0 233.5 21.8 16.3 16.3 −
                              29 4,592.5 373.2 317.8 73.7 244.1 18.6 17.4 17.4 −
         July                 6 4,593.3 373.2 314.3 73.7 240.6 22.0 16.7 16.7 −
                              13 4,599.9 373.2 312.6 73.8 238.8 22.9 15.9 15.9 −
                              20 4,605.0 373.2 313.5 73.9 239.6 22.9 18.0 18.0 −
                              27 4,612.0 373.2 314.2 73.8 240.4 24.0 17.3 17.3 −
         Aug                  3 4,602.3 373.2 314.9 74.0 240.8 23.2 18.2 18.2 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2018 Jan                19 1,682.7 117.3 50.0 18.3 31.7 0.1 1.8 1.8 −
                              26 1,653.8 117.3 49.5 18.2 31.3 0.1 2.0 2.0 −
         Feb                  2 1,710.7 117.3 49.5 18.2 31.3 0.0 2.3 2.3 −
                                9 1,712.9 117.3 49.5 18.1 31.4 0.0 2.2 2.2 −
                              16 1,731.0 117.3 49.8 18.1 31.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
                              23 1,712.4 117.3 50.2 18.1 32.0 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
         Mar                  2 1,738.6 117.3 49.9 18.1 31.8 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
                                9 1,720.8 117.3 49.3 18.1 31.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 −
                              16 1,713.8 117.3 49.1 18.1 31.0 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
                              23 1,725.0 117.3 49.8 18.1 31.6 − 0.0 2.1 2.1 −
                              30 1,756.2 116.6 49.2 18.0 31.2 0.0 1.5 1.5 −
         Apr                  6 1,717.4 116.6 48.9 18.0 30.8 0.0 1.5 1.5 −
                              13 1,712.7 116.6 49.6 18.0 31.6 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
                              20 1,681.8 116.6 49.0 18.0 31.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 −
                              27 1,706.5 116.6 48.6 18.0 30.6 0.0 2.7 2.7 −
2018 May                 4 1,730.7 116.6 48.7 18.0 30.7 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
                              11 1,700.4 116.6 48.4 18.0 30.4 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
                              18 1,752.4 116.6 48.1 18.0 30.1 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
                              25 1,777.6 116.6 48.8 18.0 30.9 0.0 0.8 0.8 −
         June                 1 1,799.4 116.6 48.4 18.0 30.4 0.0 2.7 2.7 −
                                8 1,783.7 116.6 48.4 18.0 30.4 0.0 1.5 1.5 −
                              15 1,794.6 116.6 48.4 18.0 30.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 −
                              22 1,793.2 116.5 49.1 18.8 30.3 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
                              29 1,823.0 116.3 50.8 19.2 31.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
         July                 6 1,744.4 116.3 50.9 19.2 31.7 0.1 1.3 1.3 −
                              13 1,743.6 116.3 50.7 19.2 31.5 0.0 1.0 1.0 −
                              20 1,744.8 116.3 50.7 19.2 31.5 0.1 3.1 3.1 −
                              27 1,745.0 116.3 51.1 19.2 31.9 0.1 1.5 1.5 −
         Aug                  3 1,753.5 116.3 51.3 19.2 32.1 0.1 2.1 2.1 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The bal ance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrume nts are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
August 2018
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for governmentfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    Onopera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
763.3 2.4 760.6 − − 0.2 − 47.7 2 679.3 2 406.6 272.7 25.0 249.1 2018 Jan                19
762.8 2.2 760.6 − − 0.1 − 49.5 2 688.7 2 415.3 273.4 25.0 249.5                               26
762.6 1.9 760.7 − − 0.0 − 51.5 2 685.3 2 416.1 269.1 25.0 245.7          Feb                  2
762.2 1.6 760.7 − − 0.0 − 45.5 2 694.9 2 425.2 269.7 25.0 243.3                                 9
762.1 1.3 760.7 − − 0.1 − 47.0 2 703.0 2 433.3 269.7 25.0 242.6                               16
762.2 1.5 760.7 − − 0.0 − 48.5 2 708.4 2 438.4 270.0 25.0 242.2                               23
762.0 1.7 760.3 − − 0.0 − 49.1 2 715.6 2 445.2 270.4 25.0 243.1          Mar                  2
761.4 1.1 760.3 − − − − 49.0 2 725.1 2 454.6 270.5 25.0 242.7                                 9
761.3 1.0 760.3 − − − − 48.7 2 731.2 2 461.0 270.2 25.0 242.6                               16
761.9 1.5 760.3 − − 0.1 − 50.2 2 738.0 2 468.6 269.4 25.0 238.1                               23
761.9 2.4 759.3 − − 0.2 − 48.5 2 732.7 2 464.6 268.1 24.9 243.5                               30
761.6 2.3 759.3 − − − − 44.9 2 742.4 2 474.5 268.0 24.9 243.5          Apr                  6
761.5 1.7 759.3 − 0.0 0.6 − 47.4 2 753.7 2 486.3 267.4 24.9 244.4                               13
761.0 1.6 759.3 − − 0.1 − 48.7 2 751.5 2 485.6 265.9 24.9 244.5                               20
761.9 2.8 759.1 − − 0.0 − 50.0 2 760.8 2 496.6 264.2 24.9 239.1                               27
761.7 2.6 759.1 − − 0.0 − 48.3 2 762.2 2 499.4 262.8 24.9 239.8 2018 May                  4
761.1 2.0 759.1 − − 0.1 − 50.6 2 771.7 2 509.0 262.6 24.9 239.2                               11
758.7 2.0 756.6 − − 0.1 − 47.6 2 777.9 2 514.2 263.7 24.9 239.5                               18
759.0 2.1 756.6 − − 0.2 − 47.3 2 781.1 2 517.8 263.3 24.9 236.9                               25
758.3 1.6 756.6 − − 0.1 − 48.9 2 785.3 2 524.0 261.3 24.9 235.0          June                  1
757.8 1.2 756.6 − − 0.0 − 46.3 2 794.7 2 533.1 261.7 24.9 236.3                                 8
757.8 1.1 756.6 − − 0.1 − 46.7 2 795.5 2 535.1 260.4 24.9 237.3                               15
758.2 1.5 756.6 − − 0.1 − 43.9 2 803.7 2 544.0 259.7 24.9 237.2                               22
744.8 2.7 742.0 − − 0.1 − 39.2 2 806.1 2 547.0 259.1 24.5 250.9                               29
744.3 2.3 742.0 − − 0.1 − 37.9 2 810.7 2 551.8 258.9 24.5 249.8          July                  6
744.0 1.9 742.0 − − 0.1 − 32.8 2 822.1 2 563.0 259.1 24.5 251.9                               13
744.0 2.0 742.0 − − 0.1 − 30.8 2 827.4 2 568.6 258.8 24.5 250.7                               20
742.6 2.0 740.5 − − 0.1 − 29.4 2 835.4 2 577.2 258.2 24.5 251.4                               27
743.3 2.5 740.5 − − 0.3 − 30.3 2 827.4 2 572.4 255.0 24.5 247.2          Aug                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
94.0 0.7 93.3 − − 0.0 − 3.5 516.8 516.8 − 4.4 894.9 2018 Jan                19
94.1 0.8 93.3 − − − − 3.7 517.7 517.7 − 4.4 865.0                               26
94.0 0.6 93.4 − − 0.0 − 3.3 518.5 518.5 − 4.4 921.4          Feb                  2
93.8 0.5 93.4 − − − − 3.8 521.6 521.6 − 4.4 920.0                                 9
93.8 0.5 93.4 − − − − 3.4 522.7 522.7 − 4.4 937.4                               16
94.0 0.6 93.4 − − − − 3.7 522.7 522.7 − 4.4 918.2                               23
94.2 0.8 93.4 − − − − 3.9 524.9 524.9 − 4.4 942.8          Mar                  2
93.8 0.5 93.4 − − − − 4.3 526.8 526.8 − 4.4 921.3                                 9
93.8 0.4 93.4 − − 0.0 − 4.4 527.3 527.3 − 4.4 915.6                               16
93.9 0.5 93.4 − − 0.0 − 3.9 529.7 529.7 − 4.4 923.8                               23
94.7 1.2 93.3 − − 0.1 − 5.1 529.0 529.0 − 4.4 955.7                               30
94.6 1.3 93.3 − − − − 4.4 531.2 531.2 − 4.4 915.7          Apr                  6
94.2 0.9 93.3 − − 0.0 − 4.5 532.5 532.5 − 4.4 908.3                               13
94.2 0.9 93.3 − − 0.0 − 3.9 530.3 530.3 − 4.4 882.4                               20
95.2 2.0 93.2 − − − − 3.8 533.2 533.2 − 4.4 901.9                               27
95.1 1.9 93.2 − − 0.0 − 3.8 535.4 535.4 − 4.4 924.8 2018 May                  4
94.7 1.5 93.2 − − 0.0 − 6.0 537.5 537.5 − 4.4 890.5                               11
94.5 1.3 93.2 − − − − 5.4 539.2 539.2 − 4.4 941.3                               18
94.6 1.4 93.2 − − − − 6.0 540.1 540.1 − 4.4 966.1                               25
93.8 0.7 93.1 − − 0.0 − 6.8 542.2 542.2 − 4.4 984.6          June                  1
93.4 0.3 93.1 − − 0.0 − 6.1 544.6 544.6 − 4.4 968.6                                 8
93.4 0.3 93.1 − − 0.0 − 5.8 542.9 542.9 − 4.4 981.8                               15
93.4 0.3 93.1 − − 0.0 − 6.2 546.2 546.2 − 4.4 975.6                               22
92.0 0.4 91.6 − − 0.0 − 3.8 546.8 546.8 − 4.4 1,007.0                               29
91.9 0.3 91.6 − − − − 6.4 543.7 543.7 − 4.4 929.4          July                  6
92.1 0.5 91.6 − − 0.0 − 6.2 547.0 547.0 − 4.4 926.0                               13
92.1 0.5 91.6 − − − − 6.3 549.5 549.5 − 4.4 922.2                               20
92.1 0.6 91.5 − − 0.0 − 6.2 552.3 552.3 − 4.4 921.0                               27
92.1 0.5 91.5 − − 0.1 − 6.0 552.2 552.2 − 4.4 929.0          Aug                  3
 
end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB.  

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
August 2018
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro-
(covering Fine- area credit
the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
On Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
date liabilities lation  1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 3
 
2018 Jan                19 4,484.0 1,149.5 1,987.8 1,294.8 692.9 − − 0.1 11.7 − 317.0 198.7 118.3
                              26 4,493.1 1,146.4 1,998.1 1,316.7 681.2 − − 0.2 11.1 − 349.8 230.6 119.2
         Feb                  2 4,491.2 1,148.9 2,021.1 1,330.9 690.2 − − 0.0 12.0 − 296.1 173.1 123.0
                                9 4,493.7 1,149.5 2,023.5 1,329.4 694.0 − − 0.2 12.4 − 303.6 184.0 119.6
                              16 4,504.8 1,147.9 1,986.8 1,294.5 692.2 − − 0.0 12.3 − 342.2 219.5 122.6
                              23 4,511.5 1,146.0 1,958.5 1,280.8 677.6 − − 0.1 11.4 − 374.3 250.2 124.1
         Mar                  2 4,519.4 1,149.7 2,009.8 1,347.2 662.5 − − 0.1 12.2 − 316.2 190.4 125.8
                                9 4,530.1 1,150.2 2,021.6 1,337.3 684.1 − − 0.2 13.9 − 315.6 189.1 126.5
                              16 4,532.6 1,150.1 1,959.5 1,295.8 663.5 − − 0.2 12.8 − 369.4 241.2 128.2
                              23 4,539.1 1,154.2 1,925.7 1,263.9 661.8 − − 0.0 14.7 − 405.0 275.7 129.4
                              30 4,529.6 1,164.2 1,883.4 1,236.2 647.2 − − 0.1 19.7 − 363.8 237.8 126.0
         Apr                  6 4,531.5 1,161.8 1,989.2 1,298.6 690.4 − − 0.2 12.4 − 355.5 229.6 125.9
                              13 4,548.2 1,159.9 1,994.3 1,311.4 682.9 − − 0.0 8.9 − 370.1 244.3 125.8
                              20 4,544.0 1,159.4 1,973.4 1,293.3 680.0 − − 0.0 10.7 − 383.8 265.2 118.6
                              27 4,554.3 1,165.2 1,983.7 1,342.2 641.3 − − 0.1 8.6 − 377.1 254.4 122.6
2018 May                 4 4,552.6 1,168.9 2,022.2 1,361.8 660.4 − − 0.1 9.0 − 319.9 194.0 126.0
                              11 4,562.1 1,169.4 2,032.4 1,359.8 672.5 − − 0.1 10.9 − 337.3 210.8 126.6
                              18 4,561.6 1,169.5 1,997.5 1,338.3 659.1 − − 0.1 9.2 − 376.1 246.5 129.6
                              25 4,562.7 1,167.4 1,968.8 1,321.8 647.0 − − 0.1 7.2 − 402.8 266.6 136.2
         June                 1 4,567.7 1,172.1 2,049.1 1,382.3 666.7 − − 0.1 8.5 − 310.6 176.8 133.8
                                8 4,577.2 1,173.8 2,051.5 1,383.0 668.3 − − 0.1 9.7 − 309.3 175.5 133.9
                              15 4,578.5 1,174.3 1,986.6 1,344.2 642.3 − − 0.1 7.9 − 367.4 230.6 136.7
                              22 4,585.6 1,175.0 1,954.5 1,311.9 642.4 − − 0.2 8.1 − 402.9 263.6 139.3
                              29 4,592.5 1,181.5 1,906.0 1,231.8 674.2 − − 0.0 13.8 − 374.2 239.6 134.5
         July                 6 4,593.3 1,185.5 2,004.6 1,329.6 674.9 − − 0.1 9.1 − 350.0 221.0 129.0
                              13 4,599.9 1,187.3 1,992.4 1,324.1 668.3 − − 0.0 6.4 − 377.2 243.9 133.3
                              20 4,605.0 1,187.0 1,931.6 1,299.0 632.5 − − 0.2 6.5 − 445.7 305.9 139.8
                              27 4,612.0 1,188.6 1,949.7 1,314.5 635.1 − − 0.1 6.4 − 441.4 301.9 139.4
         Aug                  3 4,602.3 1,192.0 2,032.7 1,380.8 651.6 − − 0.3 5.9 − 332.7 198.9 133.8
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2018 Jan                19 1,682.7 269.9 633.1 426.1 207.0 − − 0.0 5.4 − 99.1 46.7 52.4
                              26 1,653.8 269.4 629.9 419.6 210.3 − − 0.0 4.2 − 102.3 50.5 51.8
         Feb                  2 1,710.7 270.7 668.3 448.7 219.6 − − 0.0 6.0 − 99.6 45.1 54.5
                                9 1,712.9 271.7 672.8 458.8 214.0 − − 0.0 5.8 − 101.9 51.6 50.3
                              16 1,731.0 271.4 660.4 454.3 206.1 − − 0.0 5.5 − 127.5 73.9 53.6
                              23 1,712.4 271.3 638.5 442.8 195.7 − − 0.0 5.9 − 124.5 67.4 57.1
         Mar                  2 1,738.6 270.9 680.2 464.7 215.5 − − 0.0 6.0 − 104.5 46.6 57.8
                                9 1,720.8 271.7 657.2 460.4 196.8 − − 0.0 6.8 − 111.3 52.6 58.6
                              16 1,713.8 272.0 620.5 433.8 186.8 − − 0.0 6.2 − 137.6 75.4 62.2
                              23 1,725.0 276.6 626.2 437.0 189.3 − − 0.0 5.8 − 136.5 73.9 62.6
                              30 1,756.2 273.8 633.1 442.4 190.6 − − 0.0 8.2 − 114.5 55.9 58.6
         Apr                  6 1,717.4 272.8 645.7 454.5 191.2 − − 0.0 6.7 − 113.9 55.5 58.4
                              13 1,712.7 273.0 638.7 444.8 193.9 − − 0.0 4.1 − 116.8 58.1 58.7
                              20 1,681.8 273.1 617.5 426.4 191.0 − − 0.0 6.1 − 107.2 54.8 52.3
                              27 1,706.5 275.6 634.6 447.9 186.7 − − 0.0 3.1 − 110.1 57.8 52.3
2018 May                 4 1,730.7 275.4 666.5 472.2 194.3 − − 0.0 4.2 − 91.7 38.1 53.6
                              11 1,700.4 277.3 641.7 452.6 189.1 − − 0.0 5.9 − 97.8 43.9 54.0
                              18 1,752.4 279.2 658.2 468.8 189.4 − − 0.0 4.8 − 123.5 69.2 54.3
                              25 1,777.6 278.9 673.4 470.8 202.6 − − 0.0 3.6 − 130.9 71.0 60.0
         June                 1 1,799.4 275.9 703.9 480.6 223.3 − − 0.0 4.1 − 107.2 47.1 60.1
                                8 1,783.7 277.0 676.9 468.7 208.2 − − 0.0 5.7 − 114.9 54.4 60.5
                              15 1,794.6 277.8 654.5 449.0 205.4 − − 0.0 3.8 − 149.1 90.2 58.9
                              22 1,793.2 278.7 642.8 450.2 192.6 − − 0.0 3.5 − 158.0 95.5 62.5
                              29 1,823.0 277.9 653.5 439.1 214.4 − − 0.0 4.4 − 133.6 71.2 62.4
         July                 6 1,744.4 279.4 649.0 440.6 208.4 − − 0.0 3.9 − 105.7 43.9 61.9
                              13 1,743.6 280.7 634.3 436.9 197.4 − − 0.0 3.3 − 121.0 59.5 61.5
                              20 1,744.8 281.4 616.2 433.2 183.0 − − 0.0 3.9 − 137.6 72.3 65.3
                              27 1,745.0 282.6 618.1 432.0 186.1 − − 0.0 4.0 − 141.8 76.6 65.2
         Aug                  3 1,753.5 281.1 649.1 465.3 183.7 − − 0.0 3.7 − 108.4 45.3 63.0
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial market rates at the end of the quarter. 1According to the accounting regime chosen
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the tot al value
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Euros ystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
August 2018
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to  area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    Ondenominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    reporting credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
1 accounts reserves    date liabilities  2 
Eurosystem 3
 
252.1 7.0 12.1 12.1 − 55.2 231.6 − 357.9 102.2 2018 Jan                19
220.8 5.4 11.5 11.5 − 55.2 234.6 − 357.9 102.2                               26
239.1 8.4 11.9 11.9 − 55.2 237.9 − 357.9 102.7          Feb                  2
237.9 7.5 12.7 12.7 − 55.2 230.8 − 357.9 102.7                                 9
245.8 8.6 12.9 12.9 − 55.2 232.7 − 357.9 102.6                               16
251.9 9.0 12.4 12.4 − 55.2 232.5 − 357.9 102.6                               23
260.4 8.5 12.7 12.7 − 55.2 234.1 − 357.9 102.7          Mar                  2
258.1 9.8 11.6 11.6 − 55.2 233.6 − 357.9 102.7                                 9
270.4 7.7 11.4 11.4 − 55.2 235.7 − 357.9 102.7                               16
266.5 7.3 12.9 12.9 − 55.2 236.1 − 357.9 103.5                               23
339.8 5.1 12.3 12.3 − 54.9 231.3 − 351.2 104.0                               30
258.6 6.3 11.7 11.7 − 54.9 225.4 − 351.2 104.3          Apr                  6
257.3 6.8 12.4 12.4 − 54.9 228.0 − 351.2 104.3                               13
257.1 7.6 11.1 11.1 − 54.9 230.5 − 351.2 104.4                               20
262.7 8.6 10.9 10.9 − 54.9 227.1 − 351.2 104.4                               27
273.9 7.4 11.8 11.8 − 54.9 228.8 − 351.2 104.5 2018 May                  4
257.1 7.1 10.5 10.5 − 54.9 226.9 − 351.2 104.4                               11
256.6 6.2 9.8 9.8 − 54.9 226.3 − 351.2 104.4                               18
258.4 7.8 11.6 11.6 − 54.9 228.1 − 351.2 104.4                               25
272.3 8.6 10.8 10.8 − 54.9 225.4 − 351.2 104.4          June                  1
276.0 10.7 10.1 10.1 − 54.9 225.7 − 351.2 104.4                                 8
285.0 9.9 10.1 10.1 − 54.9 226.8 − 351.2 104.4                               15
288.2 8.1 10.5 10.5 − 54.9 228.0 − 351.2 104.4                               22
348.0 4.5 10.5 10.5 − 56.1 233.0 − 360.4 104.4                               29
276.5 6.2 10.5 10.5 − 56.1 229.9 − 360.4 104.4          July                  6
269.9 4.8 10.8 10.8 − 56.1 230.0 − 360.4 104.4                               13
267.2 4.8 11.5 11.5 − 56.1 229.7 − 360.4 104.4                               20
257.1 6.8 11.3 11.3 − 56.1 229.8 − 360.4 104.4                               27
269.1 6.4 11.3 11.3 − 56.1 231.3 − 360.4 104.4          Aug                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
153.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.3 28.4 359.3 113.1 5.6 2018 Jan                19
126.1 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 14.3 28.1 359.7 113.1 5.6                               26
144.5 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.3 28.3 359.3 113.1 5.6          Feb                  2
139.0 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 14.3 28.3 359.3 113.1 5.6                                 9
144.2 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.3 28.4 359.3 113.1 5.6                               16
149.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 14.3 28.6 359.3 113.1 5.6                               23
154.3 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 14.3 26.8 361.3 113.1 5.7          Mar                  2
151.9 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.3 26.8 361.3 113.1 5.7                                 9
155.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.3 27.0 361.3 113.1 5.7                               16
157.1 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.3 27.0 361.3 113.1 5.7                               23
198.2 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 14.2 27.0 368.2 111.5 5.7                               30
150.0 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.2 27.2 368.2 111.5 5.7          Apr                  6
151.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 14.2 27.2 368.2 111.5 5.7                               13
149.5 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 14.2 27.3 368.2 111.5 5.7                               20
155.2 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.2 27.3 368.2 111.5 5.7                               27
163.4 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.2 27.6 369.5 111.5 5.7 2018 May                  4
148.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 27.7 369.5 111.5 5.7                               11
157.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.2 27.8 369.5 111.5 5.7                               18
161.0 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.2 27.9 369.5 111.5 5.7                               25
173.2 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 28.1 374.9 111.5 5.7          June                  1
174.1 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 28.2 374.9 111.5 5.7                                 8
174.0 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 28.6 374.9 111.5 5.7                               15
174.5 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.2 28.9 374.9 111.5 5.7                               22
213.3 − 0.3 0.3 − 14.6 28.3 378.5 112.9 5.7                               29
165.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.6 28.9 378.5 112.9 5.7          July                  6
163.4 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.6 28.9 378.5 112.9 5.7                               13
164.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.6 29.0 378.5 112.9 5.7                               20
157.3 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.6 29.0 378.5 112.9 5.7                               27
166.5 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.6 29.3 381.6 112.9 5.7          Aug                  3
 
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circu- notes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounti ng regime and
lation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as anbalance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its “Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue“. 2For the Deutsche
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro bank- Bundesbank: including DM banknotes still in circulation . 3 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2016         Sep 7,863.9 21.0 2,074.5 1,636.4 1,343.9 292.5 438.2 300.7 137.5 3,766.0 3,343.0 2,785.6 2,497.3
         Oct 7,868.7 22.8 2,079.5 1,641.2 1,349.4 291.8 438.3 301.6 136.7 3,773.0 3,349.9 2,793.6 2,502.5
         Nov 7,911.6 22.9 2,154.7 1,712.1 1,421.7 290.5 442.6 306.3 136.2 3,785.7 3,361.6 2,810.0 2,518.4
         Dec 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017         Jan 7,889.3 24.6 2,210.1 1,777.0 1,490.7 286.3 433.1 299.8 133.3 3,769.9 3,347.6 2,813.5 2,519.3
         Feb 7,944.8 23.9 2,225.4 1,783.3 1,497.9 285.4 442.1 307.6 134.5 3,774.5 3,347.6 2,819.5 2,525.6
         Mar 7,926.1 23.6 2,237.5 1,797.8 1,513.2 284.6 439.7 306.9 132.7 3,776.8 3,351.3 2,828.1 2,533.8
         Apr 7,954.6 24.7 2,276.6 1,847.6 1,563.1 284.6 428.9 298.2 130.8 3,780.1 3,357.1 2,836.6 2,541.1
         May 7,947.0 25.6 2,286.5 1,864.4 1,579.4 285.0 422.1 290.1 132.0 3,782.1 3,360.7 2,847.3 2,552.6
         June 7,849.7 27.3 2,245.7 1,830.9 1,548.9 282.1 414.8 284.2 130.6 3,780.7 3,364.7 2,859.4 2,559.7
         July 7,818.7 26.6 2,258.5 1,840.3 1,560.2 280.0 418.2 289.0 129.2 3,787.1 3,370.5 2,867.1 2,567.3
         Aug 7,807.7 27.5 2,243.1 1,828.2 1,553.7 274.5 415.0 286.9 128.0 3,792.2 3,377.0 2,876.6 2,576.3
         Sep 7,811.3 28.4 2,262.7 1,847.3 1,578.3 269.0 415.4 288.4 127.0 3,799.4 3,385.3 2,890.2 2,589.5
         Oct 7,825.7 28.4 2,285.3 1,873.3 1,604.0 269.2 412.1 285.1 127.0 3,804.7 3,393.5 2,899.1 2,598.2
         Nov 7,849.9 28.0 2,312.8 1,901.5 1,633.0 268.5 411.3 285.5 125.8 3,818.1 3,411.2 2,919.0 2,612.6
         Dec 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018         Jan 7,817.2 29.2 2,296.1 1,891.0 1,624.5 266.5 405.1 280.3 124.9 3,813.9 3,407.5 2,930.5 2,622.5
         Feb 7,790.8 29.6 2,298.1 1,892.3 1,627.0 265.2 405.9 280.6 125.2 3,814.1 3,406.5 2,938.1 2,633.4
         Mar 7,746.6 35.1 2,254.6 1,852.5 1,585.3 267.1 402.1 274.9 127.2 3,814.9 3,410.8 2,946.8 2,644.4
         Apr 7,781.1 33.8 2,300.8 1,892.1 1,625.1 267.0 408.7 280.6 128.0 3,818.5 3,417.4 2,956.1 2,650.7
         May 7,882.8 35.0 2,314.0 1,900.7 1,630.1 270.6 413.3 284.6 128.6 3,823.8 3,418.9 2,963.0 2,656.6
         June 7,804.7 35.0 2,266.6 1,853.0 1,584.7 268.3 413.6 285.5 128.1 3,832.7 3,430.7 2,979.8 2,672.2
 Changes 3
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2016         Oct − 0.5 1.8 4.8 5.2 5.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.9 6.5 7.1 7.9 5.2
         Nov 25.9 0.1 72.2 69.4 71.4 − 2.0 2.8 3.4 − 0.5 11.6 11.3 15.8 15.2
         Dec − 121.7 3.1 − 53.6 − 41.3 − 37.8 − 3.5 − 12.3 − 11.7 − 0.6 − 23.1 − 17.0 − 4.4 − 6.1
2017         Jan 108.8 − 1.4 110.7 107.1 107.1 0.0 3.5 5.7 − 2.2 9.4 4.6 9.3 8.5
         Feb 47.4 − 0.7 14.0 5.6 6.8 − 1.2 8.4 7.1 1.2 4.3 0.3 6.3 6.5
         Mar − 13.0 − 0.3 13.1 14.9 15.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 3.2 4.3 9.0 8.9
         Apr 40.0 1.1 41.0 50.7 50.5 0.2 − 9.7 − 7.8 − 1.9 4.7 6.8 9.4 8.2
         May 8.8 0.9 12.6 18.0 17.1 0.9 − 5.4 − 6.8 1.4 4.0 4.6 9.0 9.9
         June − 85.4 1.7 − 38.0 − 31.5 − 29.2 − 2.3 − 6.5 − 5.2 − 1.4 0.5 5.3 13.2 8.0
         July − 14.3 − 0.7 14.5 10.5 12.2 − 1.7 4.0 5.2 − 1.2 8.6 7.1 8.9 8.6
         Aug − 4.7 0.9 − 14.3 − 11.6 − 6.3 − 5.3 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.2 5.6 6.8 9.9 9.3
         Sep 4.8 0.9 21.8 21.5 26.0 − 4.5 0.3 1.2 − 0.9 6.9 7.1 12.0 13.5
         Oct 8.6 0.1 21.9 25.5 25.4 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.7 0.1 4.6 8.0 8.6 8.6
         Nov 33.4 − 0.4 28.9 28.8 29.4 − 0.6 0.0 1.2 − 1.1 14.8 18.7 19.0 13.5
         Dec − 126.4 4.1 − 90.1 − 74.7 − 72.0 − 2.7 − 15.4 − 15.0 − 0.4 − 15.2 − 10.0 0.1 − 2.4
2018         Jan 124.2 − 2.9 82.2 70.9 68.7 2.2 11.3 11.5 − 0.2 14.7 8.2 12.4 13.0
         Feb 6.3 0.3 0.5 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.7 7.7 10.7
         Mar − 37.4 5.5 − 42.9 − 39.5 − 41.4 1.9 − 3.4 − 5.3 2.0 2.7 5.6 10.1 12.3
         Apr 28.9 − 1.3 45.6 39.7 39.9 − 0.2 5.9 5.1 0.9 4.0 7.1 9.8 6.3
         May 85.0 1.3 12.4 9.1 5.7 3.4 3.4 2.8 0.5 12.9 9.4 15.3 14.3
         June − 76.9 − 0.1 − 47.3 − 47.7 − 45.4 − 2.3 0.4 0.9 − 0.5 9.8 12.8 17.7 16.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
288.3 557.5 323.0 234.5 422.9 282.2 157.8 140.7 29.8 110.9 1,030.5 774.4 971.9 2016          Sep 
291.0 556.4 326.3 230.0 423.0 284.6 162.1 138.5 29.5 108.9 1,077.9 823.1 915.5          Oct 
291.6 551.6 321.9 229.7 424.1 285.9 161.9 138.3 29.2 109.1 1,065.1 811.1 883.2          Nov 293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1          Dec 
294.2 534.1 312.2 221.9 422.4 284.6 163.1 137.7 28.6 109.2 1,080.8 826.0 803.9 2017          Jan 
294.0 528.0 311.6 216.5 427.0 289.4 165.6 137.6 28.6 109.0 1,095.4 843.6 825.5          Feb 294.3 523.2 307.1 216.1 425.5 290.8 167.2 134.7 29.0 105.7 1,097.1 847.5 791.1          Mar 
295.5 520.5 307.9 212.6 423.0 287.1 167.8 135.8 29.9 105.9 1,080.7 832.2 792.5          Apr 
294.6 513.4 298.9 214.6 421.4 288.5 166.8 132.9 28.9 103.9 1,056.3 808.0 796.5          May299.7 505.4 296.4 208.9 416.0 283.4 162.6 132.6 29.9 102.6 1,064.9 817.0 731.1          June
299.8 503.4 298.3 205.1 416.6 285.0 164.1 131.7 29.9 101.8 1,028.5 780.9 717.9          July
300.4 500.4 293.4 207.0 415.2 283.8 165.2 131.4 30.0 101.4 1,011.0 765.3 733.9          Aug 300.7 495.1 289.0 206.1 414.1 283.0 167.9 131.1 29.8 101.3 1,021.2 776.3 699.6          Sep 
301.0 494.4 289.2 205.3 411.2 281.6 167.7 129.6 30.4 99.2 1,014.2 768.9 693.0          Oct 
306.4 492.2 287.3 205.0 406.8 276.8 164.2 130.0 29.8 100.2 1,005.3 759.4 685.6          Nov 308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9          Dec 
308.0 477.0 282.8 194.2 406.4 278.6 163.9 127.8 29.7 98.0 1,009.1 758.2 668.9 2018          Jan 
304.7 468.4 277.4 191.0 407.6 280.5 165.9 127.1 29.6 97.5 1,026.5 775.9 622.5          Feb 302.4 463.9 275.5 188.4 404.1 278.3 164.9 125.9 29.8 96.1 1,016.8 763.8 625.3          Mar 
305.4 461.2 276.2 185.0 401.2 275.1 165.1 126.0 29.9 96.2 1,009.2 757.3 618.9          Apr 
306.4 455.9 272.3 183.6 404.9 280.2 167.4 124.8 29.8 95.0 1,052.9 799.1 657.1          May307.6 450.9 270.0 180.9 402.0 278.4 166.4 123.6 29.9 93.7 1,032.5 777.4 637.9          June
Changes 3
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
2.8 − 0.9 3.5 − 4.3 − 0.6 1.9 4.0 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 42.7 44.1 − 56.4 2016          Oct 
0.6 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 0.4 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 − 25.7 − 24.1 − 32.3          Nov 1.7 − 12.6 − 9.7 − 2.9 − 6.0 − 4.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 9.4 − 11.4 − 38.8          Dec 
0.8 − 4.7 0.0 − 4.8 4.9 3.7 4.2 1.2 0.1 1.1 30.4 31.0 − 40.2 2017          Jan 
− 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.6 − 5.4 4.0 4.2 2.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.2 8.2 11.7 21.6          Feb 
0.2 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 1.2 1.7 2.1 − 2.9 0.4 − 3.3 5.5 7.5 − 34.5          Mar 
1.2 − 2.6 0.8 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 3.3 1.1 1.2 0.9 0.3 − 8.2 − 7.4 1.4          Apr 
− 0.8 − 4.4 − 6.4 2.0 − 0.6 2.3 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 12.7 − 13.1 4.0          May
5.2 − 7.9 − 2.3 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 3.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.3 15.6 15.3 − 65.2          June
0.3 − 1.7 2.0 − 3.7 1.4 2.4 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 24.4 − 24.9 − 12.3          July
0.6 − 3.0 − 4.9 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.9 − 11.3 16.0          Aug 
− 1.5 − 4.9 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 8.3 9.0 − 33.1          Sep 
0.1 − 0.7 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.2 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 6.6          Oct 
5.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 4.3 − 3.1 0.4 − 0.6 1.0 − 2.5 − 3.6 − 7.3          Nov 2.5 − 10.1 − 2.8 − 7.2 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 5.4 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.3 − 9.5 − 16.9          Dec 
− 0.6 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 6.5 7.7 6.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.2 29.4 24.6 0.7 2018          Jan 
− 3.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 − 3.3 1.0 1.7 1.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 10.6 11.1 − 5.4          Feb − 2.2 − 4.5 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 5.5 − 8.2 2.8          Mar 
3.5 − 2.6 0.7 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 3.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 13.2 − 11.9 − 6.2          Apr 
0.9 − 5.8 − 4.3 − 1.5 3.5 4.6 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 30.9 29.9 27.5          May1.4 − 5.0 − 2.3 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 20.1 − 21.5 − 19.2          June
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2016         Sep 7,863.9 1,194.8 1,029.1 165.7 3,372.1 3,274.9 1,743.8 944.0 297.4 587.1 534.0 88.0 41.4
         Oct 7,868.7 1,186.8 1,025.4 161.3 3,378.8 3,286.5 1,763.9 936.0 288.5 586.6 534.3 83.7 37.1
         Nov 7,911.6 1,205.6 1,042.2 163.4 3,420.0 3,320.5 1,795.0 939.3 292.8 586.1 534.4 89.8 43.4
         Dec 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017         Jan 7,889.3 1,237.0 1,053.4 183.6 3,433.4 3,337.5 1,807.5 941.6 300.1 588.4 537.7 88.4 42.2
         Feb 7,944.8 1,245.6 1,055.3 190.3 3,435.3 3,336.9 1,812.7 935.8 295.0 588.5 538.3 89.6 41.7
         Mar 7,926.1 1,259.8 1,077.3 182.5 3,433.9 3,334.5 1,813.5 934.4 296.4 586.6 537.0 91.2 39.6
         Apr 7,954.6 1,254.1 1,075.4 178.8 3,452.0 3,352.3 1,840.8 925.4 290.7 586.2 536.9 91.2 41.7
         May 7,947.0 1,259.3 1,079.9 179.4 3,463.2 3,360.6 1,848.6 926.4 292.7 585.7 536.8 93.5 44.2
         June 7,849.7 1,235.2 1,054.2 181.0 3,477.7 3,362.0 1,865.6 911.8 290.3 584.6 536.2 107.1 44.8
         July 7,818.7 1,239.8 1,062.3 177.5 3,470.9 3,353.4 1,862.3 907.6 287.9 583.4 538.2 107.5 45.8
         Aug 7,807.7 1,243.3 1,065.8 177.4 3,486.1 3,368.4 1,880.5 905.5 285.7 582.4 537.9 108.3 47.5
         Sep 7,811.3 1,256.2 1,071.9 184.3 3,494.8 3,371.4 1,886.8 902.8 284.3 581.8 537.9 114.7 50.7
         Oct 7,825.7 1,272.0 1,081.9 190.1 3,505.8 3,388.0 1,912.7 893.9 277.3 581.5 538.4 109.2 46.3
         Nov 7,849.9 1,275.5 1,081.0 194.5 3,542.9 3,417.4 1,939.9 896.5 276.9 581.0 538.6 113.6 52.1
         Dec 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018         Jan 7,817.2 1,249.4 1,060.8 188.6 3,539.8 3,419.1 1,944.5 892.2 276.8 582.4 539.7 110.6 46.4
         Feb 7,790.8 1,246.9 1,058.2 188.8 3,536.8 3,416.5 1,945.4 888.9 273.3 582.1 540.4 109.7 47.1
         Mar 7,746.6 1,238.1 1,057.5 180.6 3,537.7 3,413.3 1,944.1 888.1 274.7 581.2 539.9 115.3 48.7
         Apr 7,781.1 1,233.9 1,053.5 180.4 3,551.3 3,430.7 1,967.4 882.9 270.2 580.4 539.6 108.8 46.7
         May 7,882.8 1,232.4 1,037.1 195.3 3,582.2 3,462.4 1,998.3 884.0 271.4 580.1 539.5 109.4 47.7
         June 7,804.7 1,224.7 1,035.7 189.0 3,583.0 3,463.8 1,991.4 893.1 281.1 579.2 539.1 109.0 44.0
 Changes 4
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2016         Oct − 0.5 − 8.4 − 3.7 − 4.7 6.2 11.2 19.8 − 8.1 − 8.9 − 0.6 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4
         Nov 25.9 17.3 15.9 1.4 39.7 32.7 30.1 3.0 4.0 − 0.4 0.1 5.8 6.1
         Dec − 121.7 − 0.9 − 9.3 8.4 − 9.0 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 1.3 2.3 2.7 − 5.7 − 6.2
2017         Jan 108.8 32.8 20.7 12.1 23.0 19.7 13.3 6.4 9.1 − 0.0 0.7 4.4 5.1
         Feb 47.4 7.6 1.6 6.1 1.2 − 0.7 4.7 − 5.5 − 4.8 0.1 0.7 1.1 − 0.5
         Mar − 13.0 14.8 22.2 − 7.4 − 1.0 − 2.1 1.1 − 1.3 1.5 − 1.9 − 1.4 1.6 − 2.1
         Apr 40.0 − 4.4 − 1.3 − 3.1 19.1 18.7 27.8 − 8.7 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.2 2.2
         May 8.8 6.7 5.3 1.5 12.7 9.5 8.7 1.3 2.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.5 2.6
         June − 85.4 − 22.2 − 24.3 2.1 15.3 11.1 17.5 − 5.4 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 0.7 4.7 0.7
         July − 14.3 5.3 8.9 − 3.5 − 5.3 − 7.4 − 2.4 − 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.4 0.7 1.1
         Aug − 4.7 4.1 3.8 0.3 15.8 15.5 18.5 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 1.7
         Sep 4.8 3.0 − 3.8 6.7 8.4 2.9 6.1 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.6 0.0 6.4 3.2
         Oct 8.6 15.2 9.8 5.5 10.3 16.0 25.5 − 9.1 − 7.1 − 0.3 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.4
         Nov 33.4 4.6 − 0.3 4.9 37.9 30.2 27.9 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 0.2 4.6 5.9
         Dec − 126.4 − 36.9 − 27.7 − 9.2 − 13.1 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 4.6 − 2.6 1.9 2.4 − 4.9 − 9.6
2018         Jan 124.2 17.6 13.1 4.5 12.2 9.1 8.7 0.9 3.2 − 0.5 0.2 2.4 4.0
         Feb 6.3 − 3.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.5 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 0.2 0.4 − 1.1 0.7
         Mar − 37.4 − 8.3 − 0.5 − 7.9 1.3 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 5.7 1.6
         Apr 28.9 − 4.5 − 3.8 − 0.6 13.5 17.5 22.8 − 4.6 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 6.6 − 2.0
         May 85.0 − 3.5 − 17.3 13.9 29.2 30.2 29.9 0.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 0.9
         June − 76.9 − 7.7 − 1.4 − 6.3 0.8 1.4 − 6.8 9.1 9.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 3.8
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 201663.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
43.4 17.9 3.1 2.7 9.2 8.1 2.9 2.5 1,011.1 51.9 655.7 596.9 1,028.0 2016          Sep 
43.6 16.6 3.1 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.2 2.4 1,019.6 50.7 710.2 594.9 972.9          Oct 
43.4 16.0 3.1 2.6 9.7 8.2 3.0 2.4 1,035.2 48.4 711.7 591.2 942.6          Nov 43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3          Dec 
43.2 15.6 3.0 2.6 7.5 6.9 4.8 2.3 1,043.2 47.5 716.8 585.0 866.9 2017          Jan 
44.8 18.0 3.0 2.6 8.8 7.7 4.5 2.3 1,050.8 48.0 734.1 588.5 883.7          Feb 48.6 19.9 3.0 2.6 8.3 7.9 2.6 2.2 1,045.7 45.9 730.2 594.1 857.6          Mar 
46.6 18.3 3.0 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.5 2.2 1,042.1 43.9 749.0 598.3 853.4          Apr 
46.4 17.2 3.0 2.6 9.1 7.8 2.4 2.1 1,042.5 44.6 724.9 603.2 849.4          May59.3 20.1 3.0 2.6 8.6 7.9 1.8 2.2 1,039.2 44.8 689.8 610.2 793.5          June
58.8 19.1 3.0 2.6 10.0 7.9 3.3 2.2 1,029.2 43.9 684.2 606.2 782.9          July
57.8 18.3 3.0 2.6 9.4 7.9 3.4 2.4 1,024.7 42.6 643.1 608.1 796.7          Aug 61.0 20.5 2.9 2.6 8.7 8.0 2.6 2.4 1,015.2 42.2 669.5 612.4 758.2          Sep 
59.9 18.3 2.9 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.3 2.2 1,008.9 40.7 667.9 612.7 753.9          Oct 
58.6 16.7 2.9 2.6 11.8 8.3 2.6 2.2 1,004.7 40.1 664.4 609.8 747.9          Nov 63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8          Dec 
61.3 18.9 2.9 2.6 10.0 8.9 4.3 2.1 1,002.6 35.4 682.4 666.5 670.0 2018          Jan 
59.7 18.2 2.9 2.6 10.7 8.8 3.8 2.1 1,006.3 36.0 690.3 678.6 625.9          Feb 63.8 22.6 2.9 2.6 9.1 8.3 2.9 2.3 1,014.0 35.2 641.0 675.0 635.6          Mar 
59.2 18.0 2.9 2.5 11.7 8.4 2.4 2.2 1,016.6 34.7 672.9 677.3 624.6          Apr 
58.8 16.8 2.9 2.5 10.4 8.8 1.6 2.0 1,031.1 36.4 707.2 679.7 646.6          May62.2 21.7 2.9 2.5 10.2 9.3 1.3 2.1 1,022.0 33.5 670.8 680.2 620.6          June
Changes 4
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 5.3 − 1.3 52.6 − 2.9 − 53.5 2016          Oct 
− 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.6 − 0.2 0.1 7.3 − 2.6 − 5.1 − 6.2 − 27.0          Nov 
0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 6.8 − 1.3 − 69.7 − 0.2 − 34.3          Dec 
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.9 0.5 76.7 − 5.1 − 38.9 2017          Jan 
1.6 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 3.4 0.3 14.4 2.4 18.7          Feb 3.7 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.2 6.2 − 26.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.0 1.4 − 1.8 22.7 5.6 − 5.3          Apr 
− 0.1 − 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 7.8 0.9 − 18.5 7.0 − 5.7          May
4.0 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 0.1 1.0 0.3 − 31.9 8.9 − 56.0          June
− 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 10.6          July
− 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 39.0 2.7 13.0          Aug 
3.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.7 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.5 25.3 4.7 − 25.6          Sep 
− 1.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.6          Oct 
− 1.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 0.3 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 7.1          Nov 
4.7 3.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 2.3 − 59.2 5.6 − 16.1          Dec 
− 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 15.8 − 2.2 84.0 − 17.5 11.0 2018          Jan 
− 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 5.0 10.8 − 1.0          Feb 
4.1 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 0.2 9.4 − 0.8 − 48.1 − 3.0 12.1          Mar 
− 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 28.0 1.7 − 8.4          Apr 
− 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 7.3 1.4 29.3 0.1 23.6          May
3.3 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.3 0.1 − 9.0 − 2.8 − 36.4 0.5 − 24.8          June
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which of which
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2018         Jan 1,627 7,861.7 500.8 2,407.1 1,934.0 470.6 4,074.4 353.7 3,001.5 0.6 712.2 112.5 766.8
         Feb 1,627 7,836.4 513.0 2,408.7 1,936.1 469.6 4,080.8 357.4 3,012.0 0.5 703.6 112.5 721.5
         Mar 1,627 7,791.9 494.0 2,382.8 1,903.2 476.5 4,078.8 360.8 3,014.7 0.5 695.2 112.7 723.6
         Apr 1,625 7,826.7 508.0 2,409.6 1,929.4 476.9 4,078.6 357.1 3,023.3 0.5 689.4 112.9 717.6
         May 1,623 7,929.0 525.6 2,429.1 1,950.0 475.8 4,099.8 364.6 3,033.9 0.5 693.2 117.7 756.8
         June 1,615 7,851.0 485.4 2,415.9 1,938.6 474.0 4,094.1 352.3 3,043.9 0.6 689.6 117.9 737.7
Commercial banks 6
2018         May 263 3,184.9 311.9 1,023.5 945.6 77.2 1,260.5 208.5 830.9 0.4 217.9 55.7 533.3
         June 263 3,119.0 285.2 1,008.4 931.3 76.7 1,247.7 193.7 833.9 0.5 216.9 55.8 521.9
   Big banks 7
2018         May 4 1,858.8 147.4 571.9 541.3 30.6 602.1 117.8 363.0 0.1 119.5 49.9 487.5
         June 4 1,797.0 127.5 557.9 527.4 30.5 586.3 104.2 363.6 0.1 116.8 49.9 475.4
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2018         May 150 883.0 85.7 193.5 149.5 43.8 561.2 60.0 410.5 0.2 89.6 5.1 37.5
         June 150 877.7 74.1 197.9 154.3 43.4 562.5 58.6 411.4 0.3 91.5 5.1 38.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2018         May 109 443.1 78.8 258.1 254.8 2.8 97.2 30.7 57.4 0.1 8.7 0.7 8.3
         June 109 444.3 83.6 252.6 249.6 2.7 98.9 30.8 58.9 0.1 8.7 0.7 8.5
Landesbanken
2018         May 8 897.3 60.9 271.5 202.3 68.5 460.6 54.0 341.0 0.0 63.1 10.0 94.3
         June 8 895.0 61.7 273.7 205.9 67.1 460.9 55.0 342.3 0.0 61.1 10.0 88.8
Savings banks
2018         May 385 1,213.6 42.7 176.3 62.7 113.5 962.9 48.4 756.0 0.0 158.4 14.0 17.7
         June 385 1,216.6 42.9 174.8 61.4 113.2 967.4 49.0 759.3 0.0 158.8 14.1 17.5
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2018         May 915 905.8 19.9 169.4 63.5 105.3 680.9 32.5 537.3 0.0 110.8 16.9 18.7
         June 907 907.7 19.2 169.0 63.1 105.2 683.5 33.3 539.2 0.0 110.8 16.9 19.0
Mortgage banks
2018         May 13 224.8 3.9 29.7 19.2 10.5 184.4 2.9 158.9 − 22.5 0.1 6.8
         June 13 224.9 4.3 29.1 18.7 10.5 184.8 3.1 160.0 − 21.7 0.1 6.5
Building and loan associations
2018         May 20 232.6 1.5 57.0 40.8 16.2 169.3 1.2 142.7 . 25.5 0.3 4.5
         June 20 232.9 1.0 56.8 40.6 16.2 170.2 1.2 143.5 . 25.6 0.3 4.6
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2018         May 19 1,270.0 84.8 701.7 615.9 84.6 381.3 17.1 267.1 − 95.0 20.6 81.6
         June 19 1,255.0 71.2 704.2 617.6 85.2 379.6 16.9 265.7 − 94.7 20.6 79.4
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2018         May 142 1,155.3 132.1 431.2 393.2 37.4 497.0 78.4 318.4 0.3 98.2 4.0 90.9
         June 142 1,151.1 130.6 428.1 391.6 36.1 498.8 78.0 320.7 0.4 97.9 4.0 89.5
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2018         May 33 712.2 53.3 173.1 138.4 34.7 399.9 47.7 261.0 0.2 89.5 3.3 82.6
         June 33 706.8 47.0 175.5 142.0 33.4 399.9 47.2 261.8 0.3 89.2 3.3 81.0
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of t he Credit Institution
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung d er Kreditinstitute)
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the Dec ember 2010 reporting
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statistical Supplement
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For building and
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the loan associations: Including deposits under savings an d loan contracts (see Table
meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,772.0 566.8 1,205.1 3,703.9 2,079.8 287.2 697.6 75.0 589.9 546.3 49.4 1,090.7 510.5 784.6 2018          Jan 
1,772.3 551.4 1,220.9 3,705.4 2,084.4 288.9 695.3 84.4 589.6 546.9 47.2 1,107.4 511.5 739.9          Feb 1,724.9 504.2 1,220.7 3,694.7 2,074.3 294.2 691.0 71.1 588.6 546.4 46.7 1,112.0 512.7 747.6          Mar 
1,738.2 528.9 1,209.3 3,722.1 2,109.8 289.5 688.9 81.3 587.7 546.1 46.2 1,115.8 513.6 737.0          Apr 
1,766.0 559.7 1,206.3 3,757.2 2,143.1 291.3 690.6 82.4 587.4 546.0 44.8 1,133.6 515.7 756.4          May1,747.3 554.8 1,192.5 3,732.2 2,119.8 293.7 687.7 61.7 586.4 545.5 44.5 1,119.0 522.7 729.7          June
Commercial banks 6
863.8 405.1 458.7 1,509.4 950.6 167.8 272.5 67.7 100.3 93.0 18.2 159.4 179.1 473.1 2018          May
857.1 400.2 456.9 1,474.0 922.2 164.3 269.6 48.2 99.9 92.7 18.0 152.8 179.5 455.6          June
Big banks 7
429.2 147.8 281.3 770.8 463.9 103.8 116.4 65.3 83.2 77.0 3.5 123.8 106.5 428.7 2018          May
418.9 140.6 278.3 742.5 438.4 102.2 115.6 48.1 82.9 76.8 3.5 116.0 106.4 413.1          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
169.7 70.1 99.7 580.1 374.9 42.7 130.9 2.4 16.9 15.8 14.7 35.4 64.3 33.5 2018          May
168.3 73.2 95.0 576.0 373.7 40.6 130.2 0.1 16.8 15.8 14.5 36.5 64.5 32.4          June
Branches of foreign banks
264.9 187.2 77.7 158.6 111.8 21.3 25.2 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.3 8.4 10.9 2018          May
269.9 186.3 83.6 155.5 110.0 21.5 23.7 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.3 8.5 10.0          June
Landesbanken
260.5 64.0 196.5 296.3 134.6 58.8 89.7 11.0 12.5 12.3 0.7 194.8 50.9 94.7 2018          May
257.5 64.4 193.1 299.3 137.2 58.3 90.7 9.3 12.5 12.3 0.7 194.3 50.7 93.2          June
Savings banks
129.8 3.6 126.2 915.7 577.5 15.0 15.2 − 289.0 264.3 18.9 14.2 109.9 43.9 2018          May
129.2 4.8 124.4 918.1 580.9 14.7 15.1 − 288.6 264.1 18.9 15.0 114.0 40.3          June
 
Credit cooperatives
 
115.9 1.0 114.9 673.1 434.5 34.1 14.0 − 185.1 175.9 5.4 9.3 76.3 31.2 2018          May
115.8 1.6 114.2 674.7 436.1 34.2 14.1 − 185.0 175.9 5.3 9.2 78.8 29.2          June
Mortgage banks
42.8 2.8 40.0 77.7 3.0 3.3 71.4 − − − . 88.3 8.9 7.2 2018          May
43.3 2.7 40.6 77.4 3.1 3.5 70.8 − − − . 88.8 8.8 6.5          June
Building and loan associations
26.9 4.3 22.6 179.9 3.4 1.3 174.5 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 3.1 11.6 11.2 2018          May
25.4 4.5 21.0 181.2 3.4 2.6 174.7 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 3.1 11.6 11.4          June
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
326.3 78.9 247.4 105.1 39.5 11.0 53.2 3.7 − − . 664.4 79.1 95.1 2018          May
319.0 76.8 242.3 107.4 36.9 16.1 52.9 4.2 − − . 655.8 79.2 93.5          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
439.7 266.7 173.1 549.0 388.5 51.3 81.6 11.3 20.8 20.3 6.9 23.6 49.6 93.4 2018          May
445.5 267.6 177.9 544.7 389.3 47.5 80.6 9.2 20.6 20.2 6.7 23.2 49.7 88.0          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
174.8 79.5 95.3 390.4 276.6 30.0 56.4 11.3 20.5 20.1 6.8 23.3 41.2 82.5 2018          May
175.6 81.3 94.2 389.2 279.3 25.9 56.8 9.2 20.4 20.0 6.7 22.9 41.2 78.0          June
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches (with
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to April 2018) majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categ ories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.9
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2017         Jan 24.3 346.9 1,407.0 1,142.5 0.0 1.0 263.5 1.7 3,277.7 2,831.2 0.3 0.8 445.4
         Feb 23.6 346.6 1,413.8 1,150.2 0.0 1.1 262.5 1.8 3,279.0 2,836.8 0.3 0.8 441.1
         Mar 23.4 352.1 1,423.3 1,160.4 0.0 1.3 261.6 1.7 3,283.0 2,840.6 0.3 1.0 441.1
         Apr 24.4 400.2 1,424.8 1,161.7 0.0 1.1 262.0 1.7 3,288.9 2,848.6 0.3 1.1 438.9
         May 25.4 426.0 1,415.5 1,152.3 0.0 1.1 262.1 1.7 3,292.9 2,851.3 0.2 1.8 439.6
         June 27.0 417.8 1,391.1 1,130.4 0.0 1.2 259.4 1.7 3,296.8 2,855.9 0.2 1.1 439.6
         July 26.4 420.0 1,398.0 1,139.4 0.0 1.4 257.2 1.7 3,302.5 2,865.2 0.3 1.0 436.0
         Aug 27.3 421.3 1,384.2 1,131.4 0.0 1.4 251.3 1.7 3,308.9 2,869.4 0.2 0.8 438.5
         Sep 28.1 409.2 1,416.1 1,168.3 0.0 1.3 246.5 1.7 3,317.6 2,878.2 0.3 0.7 438.4
         Oct 28.1 472.7 1,378.5 1,130.6 0.0 0.9 247.0 1.7 3,326.1 2,887.0 0.3 0.8 438.0
         Nov 27.7 457.1 1,422.2 1,175.1 0.0 0.8 246.3 1.8 3,343.7 2,899.6 0.2 1.2 442.6
         Dec 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018         Jan 29.0 448.1 1,421.7 1,176.0 0.0 0.7 245.1 2.5 3,339.3 2,904.9 0.3 1.0 433.1
         Feb 29.3 460.7 1,409.5 1,165.3 0.0 0.8 243.3 2.9 3,338.3 2,910.6 0.2 1.2 426.4
         Mar 34.8 440.7 1,389.5 1,143.5 0.0 0.9 245.2 3.2 3,342.5 2,919.6 0.3 1.0 421.7
         Apr 33.5 464.4 1,405.8 1,159.9 0.0 0.8 245.1 3.6 3,348.5 2,926.7 0.2 1.6 420.0
         May 34.8 475.7 1,398.4 1,153.4 0.0 1.0 244.1 4.1 3,350.0 2,928.6 0.2 2.3 418.8
         June 34.7 437.6 1,388.9 1,146.3 0.0 1.0 241.6 4.5 3,361.8 2,941.9 0.2 1.8 417.7
Changes *
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2017         Jan − 1.4 + 62.9 + 42.1 + 42.6 − + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 3.3 + 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.4
         Feb − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.8 + 7.7 − + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2
         Mar − 0.3 + 5.5 + 9.5 + 10.2 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
         Apr + 1.1 + 48.1 + 1.7 + 1.3 − − + 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.3
         May + 0.9 + 25.8 − 9.4 − 9.5 − − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7
         June + 1.7 − 8.2 − 23.5 − 20.9 − + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0
         July − 0.7 + 2.2 + 6.9 + 9.0 − + 0.2 − 2.2 − + 5.6 + 9.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
         Aug + 0.9 + 1.3 − 13.8 − 8.0 − + 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.6
         Sep + 0.8 − 12.1 + 34.1 + 38.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.5
         Oct + 0.1 + 63.5 − 37.6 − 37.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
         Nov − 0.4 − 15.6 + 43.7 + 44.4 − − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 17.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.6
         Dec + 4.1 − 64.6 − 10.3 − 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.1
2018         Jan − 2.9 + 55.6 + 13.7 + 12.1 − + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 11.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 4.4
         Feb + 0.3 + 12.7 − 12.3 − 10.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 6.7
         Mar + 5.5 − 20.0 − 19.9 − 21.9 − + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 4.7
         Apr − 1.3 + 23.6 + 16.8 + 16.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 6.4 + 7.1 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.3
         May + 1.3 + 11.4 − 5.8 − 4.9 − + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 10.4 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.2
         June − 0.1 − 38.1 − 9.5 − 7.1 − + 0.0 − 2.4 + 0.4 + 11.8 + 13.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
− 20.3 90.8 1,052.6 136.9 915.6 0.1 5.5 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 588.5 49.5 30.6 2017          Jan 
− 20.3 89.4 1,054.6 141.4 913.1 0.0 5.6 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 588.5 49.0 30.5          Feb − 20.1 89.1 1,077.0 137.4 939.6 0.0 5.5 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 586.7 48.2 30.4          Mar 
− 20.1 88.8 1,074.8 140.7 934.2 0.0 5.5 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 586.2 47.8 30.3          Apr 
− 20.0 88.7 1,079.5 142.0 937.5 − 5.5 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 585.7 47.0 30.4          May− 19.7 88.4 1,053.9 125.6 928.3 0.0 5.5 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 584.7 46.6 29.8          June
− 19.6 88.5 1,061.7 125.0 936.6 0.0 5.4 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 583.5 46.0 29.9          July
− 19.6 88.9 1,065.1 121.2 943.9 0.0 5.4 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 582.4 45.4 30.0          Aug − 19.5 88.1 1,071.5 120.2 951.3 0.0 5.3 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 581.8 45.3 30.0          Sep 
− 19.4 87.9 1,081.0 122.8 958.2 0.0 5.3 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 581.5 44.8 29.9          Oct 
− 19.4 88.1 1,079.8 125.9 953.9 0.0 5.3 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 581.0 44.3 30.1          Nov − 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0          Dec 
− 18.9 88.2 1,060.1 116.0 944.1 0.0 5.0 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 582.4 42.9 30.4 2018          Jan 
− 19.0 88.5 1,056.6 110.3 946.4 0.0 5.0 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 582.2 42.3 30.9          Feb − 18.9 88.5 1,056.3 118.6 937.7 0.0 5.0 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 581.3 41.8 31.5          Mar 
− 18.8 89.2 1,052.8 118.2 934.6 0.0 5.0 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 580.5 41.3 31.9          Apr 
− 18.8 93.8 1,035.9 107.1 928.9 0.0 5.0 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 580.2 40.9 32.4          May− 18.7 94.0 1,034.3 122.0 912.2 0.0 4.9 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 579.3 40.6 32.6          June
Changes *
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017
− + 1.2 − 0.2 + 19.7 + 7.4 + 12.3 − − 0.1 + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 2017          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 1.4 + 2.0 + 4.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 22.4 − 4.1 + 26.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.6 + 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          May− − 0.4 + 0.0 − 24.6 − 16.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6          June
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.8 − 0.5 + 8.3 − − 0.0 − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2          July
− − 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 − 3.9 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.3 − − 0.1 + 4.3 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 − + 0.0 + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 3.1 − 4.2 − + 0.0 + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1          Nov − − 0.3 + 0.5 − 27.3 − 15.0 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 5.2 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 2018          Jan 
− − 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.5 − 5.8 + 2.3 − + 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5          Feb − − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 8.3 − 8.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5          Mar 
− − 0.1 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4          Apr 
− + 0.0 + 4.6 − 16.9 − 11.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5          May− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 15.0 − 16.6 − − 0.1 + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3          June
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.6
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2017         Jan 0.3 1,069.4 836.4 537.3 299.0 0.8 232.2 1.7 772.9 468.4 109.0 359.4 5.3 299.1
         Feb 0.3 1,088.4 854.7 552.1 302.6 1.3 232.5 1.7 782.0 474.4 110.6 363.8 6.2 301.3
         Mar 0.3 1,086.7 854.7 548.7 306.0 1.9 230.0 1.7 777.5 475.7 110.9 364.9 4.1 297.7
         Apr 0.3 1,063.7 833.7 529.7 304.0 1.9 228.0 1.7 774.4 477.4 114.5 362.9 4.8 292.2
         May 0.3 1,037.5 804.3 506.9 297.4 2.2 231.0 1.9 771.7 475.9 112.3 363.6 5.1 290.8
         June 0.3 1,043.5 812.2 515.4 296.8 2.3 229.0 1.9 756.2 461.8 102.5 359.3 6.3 288.1
         July 0.3 1,018.5 788.2 493.2 295.0 2.3 227.9 2.1 751.5 458.0 102.6 355.4 6.1 287.4
         Aug 0.2 1,000.5 772.3 478.4 293.9 2.2 226.0 2.1 743.9 454.3 104.0 350.3 6.0 283.6
         Sep 0.3 1,007.0 780.1 484.7 295.4 1.9 225.1 2.1 743.3 457.8 107.9 349.9 6.7 278.8
         Oct 0.3 996.7 769.4 473.5 295.9 1.9 225.3 2.1 739.9 457.9 104.8 353.1 6.5 275.6
         Nov 0.3 988.3 761.0 467.6 293.4 1.4 225.9 2.2 736.5 454.9 105.5 349.3 6.4 275.2
         Dec 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018         Jan 0.3 985.4 758.1 466.7 291.4 1.8 225.5 2.2 735.1 450.6 105.6 345.0 5.5 279.1
         Feb 0.3 999.3 770.8 477.7 293.1 2.1 226.3 2.3 742.5 459.1 111.5 347.7 6.2 277.2
         Mar 0.3 993.3 759.8 469.7 290.0 2.2 231.3 2.4 736.2 456.1 108.7 347.4 6.5 273.6
         Apr 0.3 1,003.7 769.6 478.3 291.3 2.3 231.8 2.4 730.1 453.9 105.2 348.7 6.8 269.4
         May 0.3 1,030.6 796.6 501.0 295.6 2.3 231.7 2.5 749.9 470.2 112.9 357.2 5.3 274.4
         June 0.3 1,027.1 792.4 501.1 291.2 2.3 232.4 2.5 732.4 454.6 97.7 356.9 5.9 271.8
Changes *
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2017         Jan + 0.0 + 18.9 + 21.1 + 19.8 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 19.9 + 19.5 + 19.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Feb − 0.0 + 14.0 + 13.5 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.8
         Mar − 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 4.7
         Apr + 0.0 − 16.1 − 14.2 − 15.4 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 4.9
         May − 0.0 − 17.3 − 20.9 − 18.6 − 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.6
         June − 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.7 + 10.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 9.3 − 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.2
         July − 0.0 − 16.8 − 16.1 − 18.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.0 − 19.5 − 17.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 3.5
         Sep + 0.1 + 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 3.5
         Oct + 0.0 − 13.4 − 13.6 − 12.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.4 + 2.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
         Nov − 0.0 − 3.2 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.1
         Dec − 0.0 − 21.1 − 19.6 − 25.1 + 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 11.1 − 11.9 + 0.8 − 2.2 + 2.5
2018         Jan + 0.0 + 30.6 + 28.8 + 29.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 15.8 + 12.3 + 12.8 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 2.3
         Feb − 0.0 + 8.4 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3
         Mar − 0.0 − 3.1 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 3.4
         Apr + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 4.3
         May − 0.0 + 16.9 + 17.3 + 17.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 14.7 + 12.1 + 7.0 + 5.1 − 1.5 + 4.2
         June + 0.0 − 4.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 17.4 − 15.4 − 15.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
13.0 28.4 746.1 452.6 293.5 206.4 87.1 0.0 246.7 125.6 121.1 71.1 50.0 0.7 2017          Jan 
13.0 24.8 765.2 480.7 284.5 197.4 87.1 0.0 254.0 129.5 124.5 74.8 49.7 0.7          Feb 12.9 24.7 768.8 488.1 280.7 192.1 88.6 0.0 237.6 113.7 124.0 72.2 51.8 0.7          Mar 
12.9 24.8 751.4 429.4 322.0 234.2 87.7 0.0 271.9 132.3 139.7 89.0 50.6 0.7          Apr 
12.8 24.6 732.4 464.0 268.4 181.8 86.5 0.0 269.4 134.1 135.3 85.0 50.3 0.6          May12.5 24.4 720.3 463.2 257.1 170.1 87.0 0.0 259.9 123.7 136.1 75.7 60.4 0.6          June
12.5 24.4 692.4 441.0 251.4 165.5 85.9 0.0 282.5 137.7 144.8 84.4 60.5 0.6          July
12.4 24.4 648.0 389.2 258.9 174.0 84.9 0.0 286.0 133.1 152.9 92.5 60.4 0.5          Aug 12.4 24.8 691.5 430.5 261.0 176.6 84.3 0.0 279.1 133.5 145.7 84.3 61.4 0.5          Sep 
12.3 24.8 687.6 433.6 254.0 169.4 84.7 0.0 282.8 132.3 150.5 87.9 62.6 0.4          Oct 
12.4 24.7 694.2 428.8 265.4 179.7 85.7 0.0 284.4 140.6 143.8 81.7 62.1 0.4          Nov 12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3          Dec 
12.0 24.2 711.8 450.8 261.0 172.7 88.3 0.0 275.0 130.5 144.6 82.2 62.3 0.3 2018          Jan 
12.1 23.7 715.7 441.2 274.5 185.5 89.0 0.0 279.6 134.8 144.8 85.5 59.3 0.3          Feb 12.2 24.0 668.6 385.6 283.0 196.4 86.5 0.0 272.9 126.3 146.6 87.8 58.8 0.3          Mar 
12.3 23.6 685.3 410.6 274.7 188.3 86.4 0.0 282.6 138.4 144.2 85.2 59.0 0.3          Apr 
12.2 23.7 730.1 452.6 277.4 188.0 89.4 0.0 285.8 140.5 145.4 86.9 58.5 0.3          May12.1 23.7 713.1 432.8 280.3 187.1 93.1 0.0 259.1 123.3 135.8 78.9 56.9 0.3          June
Changes *
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 52.9 + 79.0 − 26.1 − 26.2 + 0.1 − + 41.2 + 25.6 + 15.6 + 16.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2017          Jan 
− 0.1 − 3.6 + 15.9 + 26.6 − 10.7 − 10.3 − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          Feb − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 8.3 − 2.8 − 4.5 + 1.7 − − 15.9 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 2.2 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 12.8 − 56.2 + 43.4 + 43.7 − 0.4 − + 34.4 + 18.2 + 16.2 + 17.1 − 0.9 −          Apr 
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 13.8 + 36.5 − 50.3 − 49.8 − 0.5 − − 0.9 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0          May− 0.3 − 0.2 − 9.0 + 0.6 − 9.6 − 10.5 + 0.9 − − 17.8 − 10.0 − 7.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.9 − 19.7 − 4.2 − 3.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 24.0 + 14.4 + 9.6 + 9.3 + 0.3 − 0.0          July
− 0.1 + 0.0 − 42.9 − 51.2 + 8.3 + 9.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.6 − 4.0 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Aug − 0.0 + 0.4 + 42.4 + 41.0 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.7 − − 7.2 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 8.4 + 0.9 + 0.0          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 2.4 − 8.3 − 8.3 + 0.0 − + 3.0 − 1.4 + 4.4 + 3.4 + 1.1 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.0 + 9.4 − 3.6 + 13.0 + 11.6 + 1.4 − + 2.3 + 8.6 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 0.0          Nov − 0.3 − 0.4 − 33.3 − 38.4 + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.5 − − 42.5 − 31.0 − 11.6 − 13.4 + 1.8 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 57.4 + 63.5 − 6.1 − 5.0 − 1.1 − + 35.0 + 21.4 + 13.6 + 14.4 − 0.8 − 0.0 2018          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 10.9 + 12.0 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 4.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 − 3.2 + 0.0          Feb + 0.1 + 0.3 − 45.8 − 55.0 + 9.1 + 11.5 − 2.3 − − 6.4 − 8.3 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Mar 
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.1 + 22.9 − 9.8 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.9 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 39.7 + 40.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 2.3 − + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − − 17.3 − 19.9 + 2.7 − 1.0 + 3.7 − − 26.8 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 8.0 − 1.6 −          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.8
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2017         Jan 3,277.7 2,831.5 252.1 208.6 208.0 0.6 43.5 43.3 0.2 3,025.6 2,535.3
         Feb 3,279.0 2,837.1 252.8 209.7 209.1 0.7 43.1 42.9 0.1 3,026.2 2,541.5
         Mar 3,283.0 2,840.9 252.7 212.6 211.8 0.8 40.0 39.8 0.2 3,030.4 2,547.5
         Apr 3,288.9 2,849.0 253.7 210.6 209.8 0.8 43.1 42.8 0.3 3,035.2 2,558.1
         May 3,292.9 2,851.5 249.3 211.0 210.0 0.9 38.4 37.5 0.8 3,043.5 2,568.8
         June 3,296.8 2,856.1 251.1 214.1 213.5 0.6 37.0 36.5 0.5 3,045.7 2,577.7
         July 3,302.5 2,865.5 249.4 210.2 209.5 0.7 39.2 38.8 0.3 3,053.1 2,589.2
         Aug 3,308.9 2,869.6 242.8 207.6 207.0 0.6 35.2 35.0 0.2 3,066.1 2,601.2
         Sep 3,317.6 2,878.5 246.2 214.1 213.5 0.6 32.2 32.0 0.2 3,071.3 2,608.7
         Oct 3,326.1 2,887.3 248.0 215.3 214.7 0.6 32.7 32.6 0.2 3,078.1 2,616.7
         Nov 3,343.7 2,899.8 248.0 215.4 214.9 0.5 32.6 31.9 0.7 3,095.6 2,636.3
         Dec 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018         Jan 3,339.3 2,905.2 249.7 217.4 216.8 0.6 32.3 31.9 0.4 3,089.6 2,645.2
         Feb 3,338.3 2,910.8 247.6 219.8 219.3 0.6 27.8 27.1 0.6 3,090.7 2,650.4
         Mar 3,342.5 2,919.9 253.5 225.6 224.9 0.7 27.9 27.6 0.2 3,089.0 2,653.3
         Apr 3,348.5 2,926.9 254.0 223.0 222.1 0.9 31.0 30.3 0.7 3,094.5 2,664.6
         May 3,350.0 2,928.9 254.5 226.6 225.4 1.2 27.9 26.8 1.1 3,095.5 2,667.7
         June 3,361.8 2,942.2 257.0 229.8 228.9 0.9 27.2 26.3 0.9 3,104.7 2,681.4
Changes *
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2017         Jan + 3.3 + 7.3 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 5.3
         Feb + 1.4 + 5.6 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 6.2
         Mar + 3.9 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 5.9
         Apr + 5.9 + 8.1 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 10.6
         May + 3.9 + 2.5 − 4.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 5.2 + 0.5 + 8.0 + 7.8
         June + 4.0 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 3.3 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 8.8
         July + 5.6 + 9.4 − 1.8 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 11.4
         Aug + 6.4 + 4.1 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 13.0 + 12.0
         Sep + 7.3 + 8.9 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 6.5 − 0.0 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.8
         Oct + 8.6 + 8.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 8.0
         Nov + 17.7 + 12.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 17.6 + 17.8
         Dec − 11.1 − 5.5 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 4.7 + 3.6
2018         Jan + 6.9 + 11.0 + 8.0 + 6.5 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.7
         Feb − 1.0 + 5.5 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 − 4.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 5.0
         Mar + 4.2 + 9.2 + 5.9 + 5.8 + 5.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.9
         Apr + 6.4 + 7.0 + 0.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 11.7
         May + 10.4 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 9.9 + 12.4
         June + 11.8 + 13.3 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 9.3 + 13.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 2017
2,311.3 264.5 2,046.8 224.0 18.6 490.3 268.9 24.2 244.7 221.4 − 1.7 2017          Jan 
2,316.5 263.2 2,053.3 225.1 18.5 484.7 268.6 25.0 243.7 216.1 − 1.7          Feb 2,322.0 264.4 2,057.6 225.5 18.4 482.9 267.3 24.6 242.7 215.6 − 1.7          Mar 
2,331.2 265.4 2,065.9 226.8 18.4 477.2 265.1 23.6 241.5 212.0 − 1.7          Apr 
2,342.6 266.2 2,076.4 226.2 18.3 474.8 261.3 23.4 238.0 213.4 − 1.7          May2,346.1 267.4 2,078.7 231.6 18.0 468.0 260.0 23.0 237.0 208.1 − 1.6          June
2,357.7 268.3 2,089.4 231.5 18.0 463.9 259.4 23.1 236.3 204.5 − 1.6          July
2,369.2 269.4 2,099.8 232.0 18.0 464.9 258.4 22.9 235.5 206.5 − 1.6          Aug 2,376.0 269.6 2,106.3 232.7 17.9 462.7 257.0 22.4 234.6 205.7 − 1.6          Sep 
2,383.4 270.9 2,112.5 233.2 17.8 461.4 256.6 22.7 234.0 204.8 − 1.6          Oct 
2,397.7 274.4 2,123.3 238.6 17.8 459.3 255.4 22.8 232.6 204.0 − 1.6          Nov 2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7          Dec 
2,405.7 274.8 2,130.8 239.5 17.4 444.4 250.9 22.0 228.9 193.6 − 1.5 2018          Jan 
2,414.1 275.1 2,139.0 236.3 17.5 440.3 250.3 21.9 228.4 190.1 − 1.5          Feb 2,419.5 275.2 2,144.2 233.8 17.4 435.8 247.9 22.1 225.8 187.9 − 1.6          Mar 
2,428.6 277.1 2,151.5 236.0 17.3 430.0 245.9 21.9 224.1 184.0 − 1.5          Apr 
2,431.2 270.8 2,160.4 236.6 17.3 427.7 245.5 21.9 223.6 182.2 − 1.5          May2,443.3 275.3 2,168.0 238.1 17.2 423.4 243.7 21.0 222.7 179.7 − 1.5          June
Changes *
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017
+ 4.8 + 0.3 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 5.0 − − 0.0 2017          Jan 
+ 5.1 − 1.3 + 6.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 5.3 − − 0.0          Feb + 5.5 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 9.3 + 1.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 2.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 3.6 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 8.5 + 0.8 + 7.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.4 − − 0.0          May+ 3.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 5.4 − 0.3 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 5.4 − − 0.1          June
+ 11.4 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − + 0.0          July
+ 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 2.0 − − 0.0          Aug + 6.6 + 0.2 + 6.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.9 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 12.4 + 3.5 + 9.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.8 − −          Nov + 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 8.3 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 5.7 + 1.6 + 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.9 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 3.4 − − 0.1 2018          Jan 
+ 8.2 + 0.3 + 8.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5 − − 0.0          Feb + 5.4 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 2.2 − + 0.0          Mar 
+ 9.1 + 1.8 + 7.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 3.9 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 11.8 + 2.6 + 9.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.8 − + 0.0          May+ 12.1 + 4.5 + 7.6 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 2.6 − − 0.1          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2016 2,512.0 1,259.7 1,276.6 1,016.5 260.1 1,347.5 354.1 125.1 104.7 62.2 128.2 50.6 57.0 139.7
2017         June 2,559.7 1,280.1 1,297.8 1,033.7 264.1 1,377.8 360.9 131.5 108.3 65.7 130.8 51.0 54.7 141.5
         Sep 2,589.5 1,296.7 1,315.7 1,046.9 268.8 1,392.7 366.5 131.8 109.7 67.1 133.3 50.9 53.0 146.0
         Dec 2,610.1 1,304.3 1,326.6 1,053.0 273.6 1,403.1 368.5 131.3 112.6 67.3 133.3 50.2 51.5 147.9
2018         Mar 2,644.4 1,317.6 1,338.2 1,061.5 276.7 1,429.5 373.4 136.0 115.2 69.4 137.5 50.1 51.2 151.4
         June 2,672.2 1,333.8 1,357.5 1,074.2 283.3 1,445.5 380.1 139.2 114.2 71.9 136.5 50.5 51.0 152.8
 Short-term lending
2016 205.5 − 6.9 − 6.9 174.3 3.7 29.7 4.4 11.8 43.2 3.6 4.4 29.3
2017         June 213.6 − 6.7 − 6.7 183.3 3.5 34.7 4.7 13.7 43.3 4.0 4.6 28.1
         Sep 213.5 − 6.5 − 6.5 183.5 3.6 33.8 4.0 14.0 45.2 3.9 4.3 28.1
         Dec 210.6 − 6.5 − 6.5 180.8 3.6 32.3 4.0 13.6 45.2 3.4 4.0 27.4
2018         Mar 224.9 − 6.8 − 6.8 195.3 3.8 36.6 5.0 14.9 48.4 3.5 4.2 29.1
         June 228.9 − 7.1 − 7.1 199.2 4.0 36.7 4.8 16.6 47.3 3.9 4.2 28.5
 Medium-term lending
2016 264.1 − 34.5 − 34.5 186.4 13.5 23.6 5.5 10.5 17.2 4.5 11.2 41.8
2017         June 267.4 − 33.8 − 33.8 188.7 13.3 23.3 5.0 10.9 18.2 4.4 10.7 44.3
         Sep 269.6 − 33.9 − 33.9 190.2 13.6 23.1 5.1 11.2 18.2 4.4 10.4 45.6
         Dec 273.5 − 34.0 − 34.0 193.1 14.0 23.6 5.1 11.3 18.2 4.3 10.3 46.7
2018         Mar 275.2 − 34.0 − 34.0 194.0 14.4 23.3 5.0 11.7 18.6 4.2 10.4 47.0
         June 275.3 − 34.7 − 34.7 195.1 15.0 25.5 4.4 11.8 18.2 4.2 10.4 47.5
 Long-term lending
2016 2,042.4 1,259.7 1,235.1 1,016.5 218.6 986.8 336.9 71.8 94.8 39.9 67.7 42.5 41.4 68.6
2017         June 2,078.7 1,280.1 1,257.3 1,033.7 223.6 1,005.8 344.0 73.5 98.6 41.1 69.3 42.6 39.4 69.2
         Sep 2,106.3 1,296.7 1,275.3 1,046.9 228.3 1,018.9 349.3 74.9 100.5 41.9 69.9 42.6 38.3 72.2
         Dec 2,125.9 1,304.3 1,286.1 1,053.0 233.1 1,029.2 351.0 75.4 103.5 42.4 70.0 42.4 37.2 73.8
2018         Mar 2,144.2 1,317.6 1,297.3 1,061.5 235.8 1,040.2 355.2 76.1 105.2 42.8 70.4 42.3 36.7 75.3
         June 2,168.0 1,333.8 1,315.7 1,074.2 241.5 1,051.1 361.1 77.0 105.0 43.5 71.0 42.4 36.4 76.8
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2017         Q2 + 23.3 + 12.7 + 13.8 + 11.2 + 2.6 + 11.1 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.4
         Q3 + 29.5 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 14.5 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.0
         Q4 + 18.7 + 9.7 + 12.7 + 7.8 + 4.9 + 8.9 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.5 + 1.5
2018         Q1 + 33.6 + 10.6 + 11.1 + 8.1 + 3.0 + 26.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.4
         Q2 + 37.0 + 15.8 + 17.9 + 12.1 + 5.8 + 23.1 + 6.6 + 4.1 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.6
 Short-term lending
2017         Q2 + 2.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4
         Q3 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Q4 − 2.8 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.8
2018         Q1 + 14.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 14.4 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.7
         Q2 + 4.0 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6
 Medium-term lending
2017         Q2 + 3.0 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.3
         Q3 + 2.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3
         Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.1
2018         Q1 + 2.0 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
         Q2 + 8.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 7.3 + 0.6 + 3.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6
 Long-term lending
2017         Q2 + 18.2 + 12.7 + 14.0 + 11.2 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.5
         Q3 + 27.2 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 12.8 + 5.4 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.7
         Q4 + 17.6 + 9.7 + 12.6 + 7.8 + 4.8 + 8.7 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.1
2018         Q1 + 17.4 + 10.6 + 10.8 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 10.3 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6
         Q2 + 24.2 + 15.8 + 17.0 + 12.1 + 4.9 + 11.7 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
680.0 204.7 36.3 181.6 401.3 46.0 1,150.1 919.0 231.2 163.3 9.2 14.4 3.6 2016
694.3 209.8 39.6 183.6 408.2 48.5 1,167.3 933.2 234.2 168.0 8.9 14.5 3.8 2017          June
700.9 211.2 41.1 185.7 410.4 48.3 1,182.2 945.4 236.7 170.4 8.9 14.6 3.7          Sep 709.0 214.9 42.3 186.4 411.2 47.7 1,192.3 954.3 237.9 171.6 8.6 14.8 3.7          Dec 
718.8 217.2 44.1 188.5 414.4 48.2 1,200.0 961.1 239.0 173.3 8.4 14.9 3.7 2018          Mar 
729.3 221.8 47.3 190.7 415.5 48.3 1,211.8 973.7 238.1 173.0 8.4 14.9 3.8          June
Short-term lending
47.9 8.4 5.7 10.2 23.9 5.1 30.6 3.2 27.4 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 201650.1 9.0 6.5 9.7 24.5 5.7 29.7 3.1 26.6 1.8 8.9 0.5 0.0 2017          June
50.2 9.6 6.7 10.0 23.7 5.5 29.4 2.9 26.5 1.7 8.9 0.5 0.0          Sep 50.9 10.1 6.8 10.3 23.3 5.0 29.3 2.9 26.4 1.6 8.6 0.5 0.0          Dec 
53.5 10.2 7.9 10.7 23.7 5.8 29.0 3.0 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.6 − 2018          Mar 
57.2 10.7 10.2 10.6 23.5 5.7 29.2 3.1 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.5 −          June
Medium-term lending
72.1 11.1 8.2 19.3 32.9 3.6 77.3 21.1 56.2 51.0 − 0.5 0.0 201672.1 11.5 8.8 18.6 32.8 3.6 78.1 20.5 57.7 52.9 − 0.5 0.0 2017          June
72.2 11.9 9.1 18.3 32.9 3.6 78.9 20.2 58.6 54.0 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 73.5 12.1 9.3 18.3 32.7 3.6 79.9 20.0 59.9 55.2 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
73.9 12.6 9.3 18.3 32.8 3.4 80.7 19.7 61.0 56.5 − 0.5 0.0 2018          Mar 
73.0 13.0 9.7 19.2 31.0 3.4 79.6 19.7 59.9 55.4 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
560.0 185.2 22.4 152.2 344.5 37.3 1,042.3 894.7 147.6 110.5 − 13.3 3.5 2016572.2 189.2 24.3 155.3 350.8 39.2 1,059.4 909.6 149.9 113.3 − 13.5 3.7 2017          June
578.5 189.8 25.3 157.4 353.8 39.3 1,073.8 922.3 151.6 114.8 − 13.6 3.7          Sep 584.6 192.6 26.2 157.8 355.3 39.2 1,083.1 931.4 151.6 114.8 − 13.7 3.7          Dec 
591.3 194.5 27.0 159.4 357.9 39.1 1,090.3 938.5 151.9 115.3 − 13.7 3.7 2018          Mar 
599.1 198.1 27.4 160.9 361.1 39.2 1,103.0 950.9 152.1 116.0 − 13.9 3.7          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 10.5 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 12.2 + 9.7 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 2017          Q2
+ 8.9 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 14.9 + 12.1 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 8.5 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 9.8 + 8.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
+ 11.0 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 2.9 + 3.6 + 0.5 + 7.5 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 14.5 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 14.0 + 11.3 + 2.7 + 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 2.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.8 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 2017          Q2
+ 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 3.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2017          Q2
+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3+ 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 3.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 7.4 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 9.8 + 1.4 + 1.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2017          Q2
+ 8.6 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.6 − + 0.2 − 0.0          Q3+ 6.5 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 7.7 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 7.0 + 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 7.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 12.3 + 11.2 + 1.1 + 1.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.5
2016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2017         July 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 223.2 642.8 54.1 588.6 583.5 46.0 29.9 16.7 0.7
         Aug 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 220.0 644.4 55.2 589.2 582.4 45.4 30.0 16.7 0.7
         Sep 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 218.7 643.2 55.3 587.9 581.8 45.3 30.0 15.8 1.8
         Oct 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 212.7 640.7 54.5 586.2 581.5 44.8 29.9 15.7 1.1
         Nov 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 212.4 645.0 55.3 589.7 581.0 44.3 30.1 15.1 1.6
         Dec 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2018         Jan 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 211.5 642.6 55.8 586.8 582.4 42.9 30.4 16.1 1.4
         Feb 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 209.9 641.8 54.4 587.4 582.2 42.3 30.9 15.9 1.1
         Mar 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 212.9 637.8 52.6 585.2 581.3 41.8 31.5 15.8 0.6
         Apr 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 210.7 635.6 50.7 584.9 580.5 41.3 31.9 15.1 0.9
         May 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 210.8 636.9 51.9 585.0 580.2 40.9 32.4 14.8 0.7
         June 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 221.2 635.6 51.4 584.2 579.3 40.6 32.6 15.3 0.7
Changes*
2016 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 8.9 + 2.0 + 10.2 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.3
2017 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 24.7 − 2.8 + 10.1 − 12.8 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.8
2017         July − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Aug + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Sep + 4.3 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.1
         Oct + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6
         Nov + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.4
         Dec − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 − 4.8 + 0.6 + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0
2018         Jan + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 + 3.9 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Feb − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3
         Mar − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 + 3.0 − 3.9 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.5
         Apr + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 1.3 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2
         May + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2
         June + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 + 10.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.0
Domestic government End of year or month*
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2017         July 207.2 55.6 143.2 80.4 62.8 22.4 40.4 3.7 4.7 25.8 2.4 −
         Aug 213.6 61.2 144.2 79.9 64.3 23.4 40.8 3.7 4.5 25.9 2.5 −
         Sep 210.5 58.8 143.4 77.5 66.0 24.1 41.9 3.7 4.5 25.9 2.3 −
         Oct 207.6 60.0 139.5 72.6 67.0 24.4 42.6 3.7 4.4 25.8 2.3 0.0
         Nov 211.1 61.1 142.2 72.3 69.9 25.8 44.1 3.6 4.2 25.8 2.3 0.0
         Dec 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018         Jan 202.1 55.0 139.0 69.6 69.4 27.0 42.4 3.7 4.4 26.1 2.4 −
         Feb 204.3 58.8 137.5 68.7 68.7 26.2 42.5 3.7 4.4 26.1 2.4 −
         Mar 205.9 57.2 140.6 72.2 68.4 25.2 43.2 3.7 4.4 26.0 2.3 −
         Apr 205.1 56.9 140.2 72.3 67.9 23.8 44.1 3.7 4.4 26.0 2.3 −
         May 215.9 62.8 145.0 74.7 70.3 25.1 45.2 3.8 4.3 26.0 2.2 −
         June 221.4 63.3 150.0 79.3 70.7 24.9 45.8 3.8 4.3 25.8 2.2 −
Changes*
2016 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.7 + 8.7 + 6.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.5
2017 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 2.4 − 14.1 + 11.7 + 10.7 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0
2017         July − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Aug + 6.4 + 5.6 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Sep − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.5 − 2.7 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −
         Oct − 3.5 + 1.1 − 4.5 − 5.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov + 4.1 + 1.6 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Dec − 11.1 − 2.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.6 − 4.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
2018         Jan + 0.4 − 3.9 + 4.3 + 3.8 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Mar + 1.6 − 1.6 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
         Apr − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 −
         May + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.8 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.0 −
         June + 5.3 + 0.5 + 4.9 + 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.92017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.6
2017         July 3,154.3 1,810.5 722.7 142.8 580.0 31.8 548.2 579.8 41.3 4.1 14.3 0.7
         Aug 3,162.8 1,823.0 720.2 140.1 580.1 31.8 548.3 578.7 40.9 4.1 14.2 0.7         Sep 3,170.2 1,832.9 718.5 141.2 577.2 31.2 546.1 578.1 40.8 4.1 13.5 1.8
         Oct 3,188.8 1,856.9 713.8 140.1 573.7 30.1 543.5 577.8 40.3 4.1 13.4 1.1
         Nov 3,215.7 1,882.9 715.3 140.1 575.2 29.5 545.6 577.5 40.1 4.3 12.8 1.6         Dec 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.6
2018         Jan 3,226.8 1,894.3 715.1 142.0 573.2 28.7 544.5 578.8 38.6 4.4 13.8 1.4
         Feb 3,221.5 1,890.8 714.2 141.1 573.0 28.2 544.9 578.5 38.0 4.9 13.6 1.1         Mar 3,215.8 1,890.8 710.1 140.7 569.4 27.4 542.1 577.6 37.4 5.5 13.5 0.6
         Apr 3,234.4 1,914.4 706.1 138.5 567.7 26.9 540.8 576.8 37.0 5.9 12.8 0.9
         May 3,255.5 1,939.8 702.7 136.1 566.6 26.8 539.7 576.4 36.6 6.4 12.6 0.7         June 3,251.8 1,933.3 706.7 141.8 564.9 26.5 538.4 575.5 36.3 6.9 13.1 0.7
Changes*
2016 + 101.7 + 124.2 − 8.9 − 2.2 − 6.7 + 3.8 − 10.5 − 8.0 − 5.7 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.92017 + 104.1 + 141.3 − 25.1 − 10.6 − 14.4 − 0.7 − 13.8 − 5.3 − 6.7 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.8
2017         July − 5.9 − 0.7 − 3.4 − 1.9 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Aug + 8.6 + 12.6 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Sep + 8.1 + 9.9 − 1.0 + 1.4 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1
         Oct + 19.2 + 23.9 − 4.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7
         Nov + 26.2 + 25.6 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.4         Dec + 5.2 − 0.9 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.8 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1
2018         Jan + 7.2 + 11.8 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Feb − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3         Mar − 5.6 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 0.8 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5
         Apr + 19.4 + 23.7 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2
         May + 21.1 + 25.3 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2         June − 3.6 − 6.5 + 4.2 + 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.92017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.6
2017         July 1,022.6 537.7 465.4 91.5 373.9 19.1 354.8 6.8 12.8 2.8 11.8 0.7
         Aug 1,026.6 543.9 463.2 89.1 374.1 19.2 354.8 6.8 12.7 2.8 11.7 0.7         Sep 1,028.0 546.3 462.0 90.9 371.1 18.7 352.4 6.9 12.9 2.8 11.0 1.8
         Oct 1,038.4 561.0 457.7 90.0 367.7 17.8 349.8 6.9 12.9 2.8 10.9 1.1
         Nov 1,047.0 567.1 459.8 90.6 369.3 17.3 352.0 6.9 13.1 2.9 10.4 1.6         Dec 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.6
2018         Jan 1,051.4 573.9 458.0 93.6 364.4 16.0 348.4 6.9 12.6 2.6 11.4 1.4
         Feb 1,036.8 560.8 456.5 92.5 364.0 15.5 348.6 7.0 12.5 2.7 11.2 1.1         Mar 1,026.9 555.0 452.5 92.1 360.5 14.9 345.6 7.0 12.4 2.8 11.1 0.6
         Apr 1,034.1 566.2 448.6 89.6 359.0 14.6 344.4 7.1 12.3 2.9 10.5 0.9
         May 1,042.4 578.3 444.6 87.0 357.7 14.6 343.0 7.2 12.3 2.9 10.2 0.7         June 1,030.4 562.4 448.5 92.7 355.8 14.2 341.6 7.2 12.4 2.9 10.7 0.7
Changes*
2016 + 4.6 + 15.9 − 11.2 − 1.2 − 10.1 + 3.2 − 13.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.92017 + 19.5 + 40.2 − 20.0 − 4.7 − 15.4 − 0.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.8
2017         July − 9.7 − 7.4 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1
         Aug + 4.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 2.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Sep + 2.1 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1
         Oct + 11.0 + 14.7 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.7
         Nov + 7.9 + 5.7 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4         Dec − 5.7 − 8.2 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.1
2018         Jan + 11.5 + 14.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Feb − 14.5 − 13.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3         Mar − 9.9 − 5.9 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.5
         Apr + 8.1 + 11.2 − 3.0 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2
         May + 8.3 + 12.1 − 3.9 − 2.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2         June − 11.9 − 15.9 + 4.1 + 5.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.6
2016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2018         Jan 2,175.4 1,320.4 1,284.1 226.0 903.3 154.8 36.3 257.1 243.3 22.9 183.3 37.1
         Feb 2,184.7 1,330.0 1,293.1 226.1 911.8 155.2 36.9 257.7 243.8 22.7 183.9 37.3
         Mar 2,189.0 1,335.8 1,298.8 223.3 920.1 155.4 37.0 257.6 243.7 22.1 184.3 37.2
         Apr 2,200.2 1,348.3 1,310.8 228.2 926.6 156.0 37.5 257.5 243.7 21.8 184.7 37.3
         May 2,213.1 1,361.5 1,323.2 231.2 935.5 156.5 38.3 258.1 244.3 21.7 185.3 37.2
         June 2,221.4 1,370.9 1,332.7 228.7 946.4 157.5 38.2 258.2 244.4 21.7 185.6 37.1
Changes*
2016 + 97.1 + 108.4 + 105.3 + 17.5 + 78.7 + 9.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.3
2017 + 84.7 + 101.1 + 99.8 + 17.5 + 77.8 + 4.5 + 1.3 − 5.0 − 5.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 1.3
2018         Jan − 4.3 − 2.7 − 2.6 + 2.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 9.3 + 9.6 + 9.0 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.2
         Mar + 4.3 + 5.8 + 5.7 − 2.8 + 8.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.1
         Apr + 11.3 + 12.5 + 12.0 + 5.0 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0
         May + 12.8 + 13.2 + 12.4 + 3.0 + 8.8 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.0
         June + 8.3 + 9.4 + 9.5 − 2.5 + 10.9 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are no t specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
 
 
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.5
2016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2018         Jan 202.1 8.9 4.6 1.2 2.9 0.1 12.9 40.1 10.3 13.9 14.6 1.3 13.1
         Feb 204.3 8.8 4.4 1.4 2.9 0.1 12.9 40.3 10.3 14.2 14.6 1.3 13.1
         Mar 205.9 8.3 4.1 1.3 2.8 0.1 12.9 45.6 11.3 18.8 14.2 1.2 13.1
         Apr 205.1 8.4 4.1 1.4 2.7 0.1 13.0 45.0 11.2 18.1 14.4 1.2 13.0
         May 215.9 8.8 4.5 1.4 2.8 0.1 12.9 45.7 10.8 19.3 14.4 1.2 13.0
         June 221.4 9.3 4.9 1.6 2.6 0.1 12.7 49.3 11.3 22.4 14.4 1.2 13.0
Changes*
2016 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3
2017 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 − 0.5
2018         Jan + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb + 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Mar + 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Apr − 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 10.8 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         June + 5.3 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.6 + 0.5 + 3.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Ent erprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 201513.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 201614.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 2017
13.8 48.3 208.8 12.7 196.1 571.9 564.0 7.8 26.0 1.8 2.4 − 2018          Jan 
13.8 48.7 209.0 12.7 196.3 571.5 563.8 7.7 25.5 2.2 2.4 −          Feb 13.9 48.6 209.0 12.5 196.5 570.5 562.8 7.7 25.1 2.6 2.4 −          Mar 
13.9 48.8 208.7 12.3 196.4 569.7 562.0 7.7 24.7 3.0 2.4 −          Apr 
13.8 49.2 208.9 12.2 196.7 569.2 561.5 7.7 24.3 3.5 2.4 −          May13.8 49.1 209.1 12.3 196.8 568.3 560.6 7.7 23.9 4.0 2.4 −          June
Changes*
+ 0.6 − 1.0 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 7.9 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 2016+ 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 2017
− 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2018          Jan 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 −          Feb + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 −          Mar 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 −          Apr 
− 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          May− 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 −          June
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
52.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 201556.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 201661.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 2017
54.0 26.2 8.3 14.0 5.5 0.0 99.2 14.0 46.1 38.0 1.1 − 2018          Jan 
57.4 29.6 8.3 14.1 5.5 0.0 97.8 14.6 44.8 37.2 1.2 −          Feb 55.4 27.6 7.9 14.2 5.6 0.0 96.6 14.2 44.1 37.2 1.1 −          Mar 
55.4 27.9 7.6 14.3 5.6 0.0 96.3 13.6 45.0 36.5 1.1 −          Apr 
61.0 32.6 8.2 14.6 5.6 0.0 100.4 14.9 45.8 38.6 1.1 −          May60.5 31.0 9.3 14.6 5.6 0.0 102.3 16.1 45.9 39.2 1.1 −          June
Changes*
+ 3.7 + 2.4 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.2 − 2016+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 11.8 +11.6 − 0.4 − 2017
− 7.6 − 7.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.3 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 2018          Jan 
+ 3.5 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 −          Feb − 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.0 −          Apr 
+ 5.5 + 4.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − + 4.2 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 −          May− 0.5 − 1.7 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − + 1.7 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.0 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds  3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.7
2016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2018         Feb 589.6 582.2 540.5 343.9 41.7 30.7 7.4 6.5 0.1 47.2 42.3 30.5 4.9
         Mar 588.6 581.3 540.0 342.7 41.3 30.3 7.3 6.4 0.1 46.7 41.8 30.3 4.9
         Apr 587.7 580.5 539.7 341.4 40.8 29.8 7.3 6.4 0.1 46.2 41.3 30.0 4.9
         May 587.4 580.2 539.6 340.6 40.6 29.5 7.2 6.4 0.1 44.8 40.9 29.9 3.9
         June 586.4 579.3 539.1 339.4 40.1 29.1 7.2 6.3 0.1 44.5 40.6 29.8 4.0
Changes*
2016 − 8.8 − 7.9 + 2.5 − 18.4 − 10.4 − 10.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 . − 5.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 0.0
2017 − 6.2 − 5.6 + 1.5 − 13.1 − 7.1 − 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 . − 7.2 − 6.7 − 4.4 − 0.5
2018         Feb − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.6
         Mar − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Apr − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.0
         May − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9
         June − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. 
marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
 
 
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.5
2016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2018         Feb 1,076.8 143.7 26.1 371.5 86.2 104.0 4.4 33.2 7.3 939.6 0.3 0.2 30.6 0.5
         Mar 1,081.8 146.2 25.8 367.5 83.6 100.6 4.3 32.6 7.1 948.6 0.3 0.2 30.2 0.5
         Apr 1,085.5 144.6 25.0 363.9 87.1 103.0 4.4 31.0 7.4 951.6 0.3 0.2 30.3 0.5
         May 1,103.2 146.5 27.0 376.1 89.7 107.7 4.4 31.3 7.5 964.3 0.3 0.2 30.4 0.4
         June 1,088.9 141.9 26.1 364.4 83.4 101.1 4.2 29.4 7.1 958.3 0.5 0.2 30.1 0.5
Changes*
2016 + 22.1 − 12.0 − 2.1 + 23.0 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 8.8 + 0.1 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0
2017 − 30.8 − 29.7 − 2.1 − 36.7 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 − 22.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0
2018         Feb + 16.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 16.3 + 9.7 + 11.6 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 −
         Mar + 5.0 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 9.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 −
         Apr + 4.2 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 3.5 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 3.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0
         May + 17.6 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 12.2 + 2.5 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 12.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
         June − 14.3 − 4.6 − 0.9 − 11.7 − 6.3 − 6.6 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 5.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2016 20 218.8 43.6 0.0 16.6 13.8 98.6 18.1 23.4 2.5 21.4 163.8 5.5 2.0 10.2 89.2
2017 20 229.2 41.8 0.0 15.8 12.3 104.4 24.8 25.1 2.6 23.0 168.6 9.5 3.0 11.0 83.6
2018         Apr 20 232.2 42.3 0.0 16.2 12.1 106.0 25.4 25.5 2.6 24.5 170.1 9.2 3.1 11.6 6.9
         May 20 232.6 42.3 0.0 16.2 12.1 106.3 25.5 25.5 2.6 24.3 170.6 9.2 3.1 11.6 7.3         June 20 232.9 41.6 0.0 16.2 12.0 107.2 25.4 25.6 2.6 22.8 170.8 10.5 3.1 11.6 7.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         Apr 12 162.1 26.3 − 7.0 9.1 82.2 22.0 11.6 1.7 21.9 110.7 9.0 3.1 8.0 4.3
         May 12 162.2 26.3 − 7.0 9.1 82.4 22.1 11.6 1.7 21.7 111.1 8.9 3.1 8.0 4.5         June 12 162.5 25.7 − 7.1 9.0 83.2 22.0 11.6 1.7 20.3 111.2 10.2 3.1 8.0 4.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         Apr 8 70.1 15.9 0.0 9.2 3.0 23.8 3.4 13.9 0.9 2.6 59.4 0.3 − 3.6 2.6
         May 8 70.4 16.1 0.0 9.2 3.0 23.9 3.4 13.9 0.9 2.5 59.6 0.3 − 3.6 2.9         June 8 70.4 15.9 0.0 9.1 3.0 24.0 3.4 13.9 0.9 2.5 59.6 0.3 − 3.7 2.8
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2016 27.5 2.2 7.6 46.8 27.4 40.9 17.2 4.4 4.9 3.7 18.8 16.3 8.0 8.0 7.2 0.2
2017 26.7 2.3 7.6 45.3 26.0 39.6 16.4 4.1 4.5 3.4 18.7 16.4 7.4 7.1 6.2 0.2
2018         Apr 2.2 0.0 0.7 4.1 2.3 3.5 1.4 0.4 0.5 0.4 1.6 17.6 7.6 0.5 0.0
         May 2.5 0.0 0.7 3.8 2.1 3.2 1.3 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.5 17.8 7.5 0.5 0.0         June 2.2 0.0 0.7 3.8 2.1 3.6 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.8 17.5 7.3 0.5 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         Apr 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.6 2.7 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.3 12.5 4.2 0.4 0.0
         May 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.4 2.5 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.2 12.6 4.2 0.4 0.0         June 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.4 2.7 1.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.5 12.4 4.1 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         Apr 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.1 3.3 0.1 0.0
         May 0.9 0.0 0.4 1.1 0.7 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 5.2 3.4 0.1 0.0         June 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.1 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.1 3.3 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.0
2016 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2017 52 187 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2017         Aug 51 191 1,752.1 537.7 526.1 171.1 355.0 11.6 545.3 461.7 13.2 448.5 83.7 669.1 432.2
         Sep 51 190 1,746.8 549.5 537.6 176.8 360.8 11.9 568.1 481.8 13.5 468.3 86.3 629.2 408.3
         Oct 51 187 1,788.9 579.0 567.0 185.8 381.1 12.1 558.7 477.1 13.5 463.6 81.5 651.2 418.3
         Nov 51 187 1,712.1 516.9 505.0 187.2 317.9 11.9 562.5 481.7 13.6 468.1 80.9 632.7 416.0
         Dec 52 187 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2018         Jan 50 184 1,741.4 508.5 496.7 201.0 295.7 11.8 536.6 454.7 13.2 441.5 81.9 696.3 444.0
         Feb 50 183 1,670.4 510.1 497.5 210.0 287.5 12.5 526.2 450.5 12.7 437.8 75.7 634.1 413.4
         Mar 50 183 1,594.2 507.4 495.1 188.2 306.8 12.4 506.8 426.9 12.9 414.0 79.9 580.0 385.2
         Apr 49 182 1,634.4 504.6 491.8 187.1 304.8 12.7 524.6 443.8 10.8 433.1 80.8 605.2 408.0
         May 48 181 1,612.2 497.1 484.2 190.3 293.9 12.8 531.9 452.8 14.5 438.3 79.1 583.2 364.2
Changes *
2016 + 0 − 7 + 29.1 + 49.3 + 52.9 + 43.7 + 9.2 − 3.5 − 56.4 − 24.6 + 0.5 − 25.1 − 31.8 + 24.9 − 14.8
2017 + 1 − 4 − 216.7 − 52.5 − 49.4 − 7.9 − 41.5 − 3.1 − 10.9 − 10.0 − 1.4 − 8.6 − 0.9 − 74.6 − 60.4
2017         Sep − − 1 − 5.5 + 10.6 + 10.3 + 5.6 + 4.6 + 0.3 + 20.5 + 18.6 + 0.3 + 18.3 + 1.9 − 40.0 − 25.1
         Oct − − 3 + 41.1 + 25.6 + 25.5 + 9.1 + 16.5 + 0.1 − 13.6 − 8.4 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 + 21.0 + 7.9
         Nov − − − 75.5 − 56.8 − 56.7 + 1.3 − 58.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.3 + 0.1 + 9.2 − 0.2 − 17.3 + 0.3
         Dec + 1 − − 63.5 − 20.0 − 18.0 + 9.9 − 27.9 − 2.0 − 29.8 − 35.0 − 0.5 − 34.5 + 5.2 − 6.7 − 11.1
2018         Jan − 2 − 3 + 95.9 + 22.3 + 20.2 + 4.0 + 16.2 + 2.1 + 17.0 + 19.5 + 0.1 + 19.4 − 2.5 + 73.5 + 46.4
         Feb − − 1 − 72.6 − 2.9 − 3.6 + 9.0 − 12.6 + 0.7 − 16.0 − 9.2 − 0.5 − 8.8 − 6.7 − 63.8 − 33.9
         Mar − − − 75.6 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 21.8 + 21.0 − 0.2 − 17.5 − 21.8 + 0.2 − 22.0 + 4.3 − 53.6 − 26.9
         Apr − 1 − 1 + 39.1 − 7.0 − 7.3 − 1.2 − 6.2 + 0.3 + 13.6 + 13.2 − 2.2 + 15.3 + 0.5 + 24.1 + 19.4
         May − 1 − 1 − 24.6 − 15.2 − 15.1 + 3.2 − 18.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 3.8 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 24.4 − 50.3
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −
2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2017         Aug 20 52 279.0 74.8 67.8 28.8 39.0 6.9 153.1 125.7 23.0 102.7 27.5 51.1 −
         Sep 20 52 284.6 77.0 70.2 30.2 39.9 6.8 155.2 127.1 23.0 104.1 28.1 52.4 −
         Oct 20 50 276.9 73.1 66.7 27.8 38.9 6.4 145.5 118.2 22.9 95.3 27.3 58.3 −
         Nov 20 50 277.3 74.1 67.5 27.8 39.7 6.6 145.5 117.9 22.6 95.3 27.6 57.7 −
         Dec 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2018         Jan 20 50 274.8 71.5 64.6 25.6 39.0 6.9 146.3 119.8 22.2 97.6 26.5 56.9 −
         Feb 20 50 273.9 73.0 66.4 26.6 39.8 6.6 147.0 120.3 22.7 97.7 26.6 53.9 −
         Mar 20 50 276.0 72.3 65.8 26.5 39.3 6.5 150.3 123.1 22.5 100.6 27.2 53.4 −
         Apr 20 50 267.7 64.4 58.0 23.6 34.3 6.4 147.7 120.7 21.7 99.0 27.0 55.7 −
         May 20 50 274.5 67.0 60.5 26.3 34.1 6.6 149.3 121.6 21.8 99.8 27.6 58.2 −
Changes *
2016 − 4 − 5 − 56.8 − 45.9 − 42.6 − 28.7 − 13.9 − 3.3 − 22.7 − 22.1 + 0.4 − 22.4 − 0.6 + 11.8 −
2017 − − 3 − 33.3 − 4.9 − 2.4 + 3.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 8.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 20.2 −
2017         Sep − − + 5.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.4 −
         Oct − − 2 − 8.4 − 4.3 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 10.0 − 9.2 − 0.1 − 9.1 − 0.8 + 5.9 −
         Nov − − + 1.5 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 −
         Dec − − + 0.1 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 4.5 − 0.4 + 4.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 −
2018         Jan − − + 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.8 + 0.3 −
         Feb − − − 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 3.0 −
         Mar − − + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.5 − 0.5 −
         Apr − − − 9.2 − 8.5 − 8.2 − 2.9 − 5.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.2 −
         May − − + 4.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.7 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 2.5 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
August 2018
IV  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 20151,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 20161,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
1,075.3 739.6 372.0 367.5 335.7 13.8 11.1 2.8 321.8 98.3 49.7 528.9 431.3 2017          Aug 
1,094.2 760.6 385.6 375.0 333.6 14.3 11.4 2.9 319.3 95.6 49.2 507.7 401.6          Sep 
1,127.3 768.4 379.7 388.7 358.9 14.1 11.4 2.7 344.8 98.4 49.8 513.3 412.8          Oct 
1,051.4 695.8 352.4 343.4 355.6 16.0 13.1 2.8 339.6 95.1 49.4 516.2 412.2          Nov 1,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2          Dec 
1,040.4 688.7 379.5 309.2 351.8 15.6 14.0 1.6 336.2 109.6 51.4 539.9 442.8 2018          Jan 
1,013.9 653.6 383.8 269.8 360.3 14.9 13.2 1.6 345.4 105.7 51.4 499.5 413.3          Feb 1,006.2 672.6 386.6 285.9 333.6 14.7 13.0 1.7 318.9 97.3 50.9 439.9 387.6          Mar 
1,015.5 678.3 389.4 288.9 337.2 14.8 13.2 1.6 322.5 99.6 51.1 468.2 399.6          Apr 
1,034.4 685.7 411.6 274.1 348.7 13.5 11.9 1.5 335.2 104.5 51.7 421.6 358.5          May
Changes *
+ 66.8 + 76.8 + 65.6 + 11.2 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 29.6 + 1.2 − 18.1 − 17.3 2016− 97.3 − 80.7 − 52.1 − 28.6 − 16.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 17.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 86.5 − 58.1 2017
+ 18.1 + 20.2 + 13.6 + 6.6 − 2.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 21.2 − 30.7 2017          Sep 
+ 29.1 + 3.9 − 6.0 + 9.8 + 25.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 25.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 5.6 + 9.0          Oct 
− 70.5 − 67.4 − 27.3 − 40.1 − 3.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.2 − 0.3 + 2.9 + 2.2          Nov − 47.9 − 10.3 + 20.4 − 30.6 − 37.7 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.9 − 37.7 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 17.6 − 10.8          Dec 
+ 48.2 + 13.9 + 6.7 + 7.2 + 34.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 34.6 + 15.0 − 0.5 + 41.4 + 49.2 2018          Jan 
− 31.1 − 39.4 + 4.4 − 43.8 + 8.3 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 40.4 − 32.9          Feb − 6.1 + 20.5 + 2.8 + 17.7 − 26.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 26.4 − 7.9 − 0.5 − 59.6 − 24.3          Mar 
+ 5.5 + 2.0 + 2.8 − 0.8 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 28.2 + 8.4          Apr 
+ 11.5 + 0.3 + 22.2 − 21.8 + 11.2 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 12.5 + 2.5 + 0.6 − 46.6 − 47.6          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017
211.8 103.9 56.6 47.3 108.0 13.4 7.7 5.7 94.6 13.0 23.1 31.1 − 2017          Aug 
217.0 105.9 58.1 47.9 111.1 12.6 7.1 5.6 98.5 12.9 23.2 31.5 −          Sep 
208.6 99.9 53.3 46.7 108.7 11.7 5.9 5.8 97.0 12.9 23.1 32.3 −          Oct 
207.8 98.1 53.3 44.8 109.7 11.9 6.1 5.8 97.8 12.9 23.1 33.6 −          Nov 207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 −          Dec 
206.0 96.1 50.3 45.8 110.0 12.1 6.3 5.9 97.8 13.0 24.0 31.7 − 2018          Jan 
205.2 94.1 50.6 43.6 111.1 12.0 6.2 5.8 99.1 13.8 23.6 31.3 −          Feb 207.3 96.0 50.4 45.5 111.3 11.2 5.3 5.9 100.1 13.7 23.9 31.1 −          Mar 
200.4 90.3 48.5 41.7 110.1 11.6 5.7 5.9 98.6 13.4 23.8 30.1 −          Apr 
206.7 95.4 49.8 45.6 111.2 12.3 6.4 5.9 98.9 13.4 23.9 30.5 −          May
Changes *
− 46.2 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 12.7 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 2.9 − 11.9 − 0.8 − 2.5 − 7.3 − 2016− 32.8 − 33.7 − 22.0 − 11.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2017
+ 4.9 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 3.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 2017          Sep 
− 9.0 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 −          Oct 
− 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.6 −          Nov − 0.1 − 1.4 − 3.5 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 1.1 −          Dec 
+ 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 2018          Jan 
− 1.7 − 2.4 + 0.3 − 2.7 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.8 −          Feb + 2.4 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 −          Mar 
− 7.7 − 6.2 − 1.9 − 4.3 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 −          Apr 
+ 4.9 + 4.4 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 −          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
August 2018
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018         June  p 12,509.3 125.1 124.7 ... ... ...
         July . . . . . .
         Aug  p ... ... 126.7 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base  2 in per cent Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018         June 3,502,652 28.0 35,027 34,870 439,552 404,682 0
         July . . . . . . .
         Aug  p 3,540,040 ... 35,400 35,245 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,324
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018         June 6,164 5,765 3,323 11,397 6,406 99 1,716
         July . . . . . . .
         Aug 7,117 4,860 3,397 11,525 6,479 100 1,766
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro-area countries
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018         June 2,384,432 1,138 423,273 579,885 113,927
         July . . . . .
         Aug 2,417,835 1,505 430,763 578,742 111,196
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it was
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
August 2018
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code  1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July               13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dec                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June               11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July               1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2018 July               18 1,958 1,958 0.0 0−−−7
         July               25 1,951 1,951 0.0 0−−−7
         Aug                  1 2,544 2,544 0.0 0−−−7
         Aug                  8 2,748 2,748 0.0 0−−−7
         Aug                15 2,738 2,738 0.0 0−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2018 Apr                26 2,281 2,281 2 0 . 0 0−−− 9 1
         May               31 2,887 2,887 2 ... − − − 91
         June               28 2,266 2,266 2 ... − − − 91
         July               26 797 797 2 ... − − − 98
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR  2 
Monthlyaverage EONIA  
1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2018         Jan − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19
         Feb − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19         Mar − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19
         Apr − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19
         May − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19         June − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.27 − 0.21 − 0.18
         July − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.18
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published v ia
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the Reuters. 2Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by
EURIBOR. 1Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for inter- Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
bank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
August 2018
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2017         June 0.33 69,952 1.40 217,154 0.08 80,018 1.35 20,770
         July 0.32 69,365 1.39 216,115 0.08 78,396 1.31 21,529
         Aug 0.31 69,014 1.37 215,909 0.09 78,517 1.30 22,146
         Sep 0.31 67,904 1.36 215,817 0.08 77,405 1.25 22,356
         Oct 0.30 67,393 1.35 215,503 0.08 76,092 1.18 23,093
         Nov 0.30 66,679 1.34 215,034 0.08 77,669 1.12 24,421
         Dec 0.29 66,585 1.34 216,841 0.06 78,428 1.07 25,136
2018         Jan 0.29 66,589 1.32 216,681 0.05 78,112 1.05 26,055
         Feb 0.28 65,984 1.31 216,585 0.04 75,362 1.03 26,887
         Mar 0.27 65,081 1.30 216,572 0.05 72,699 1.01 26,676
         Apr 0.27 64,883 1.29 216,237 0.04 69,677 0.99 26,913
         May 0.27 64,743 1.28 216,238 0.06 68,665 0.97 26,848
         June 0.26 64,554 1.27 216,143 0.03 68,825 0.94 26,988
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2017         June 2.44 4,200 2.03 26,206 2.83 1,115,307 7.17 50,307 3.95 85,111 4.04 310,769
         July 2.46 4,076 2.01 26,017 2.80 1,120,699 7.15 49,247 3.93 85,513 4.03 311,617
         Aug 2.45 4,035 2.00 25,937 2.77 1,125,823 7.17 48,525 3.92 85,972 4.01 313,025
         Sep 2.42 3,934 2.00 25,996 2.75 1,131,500 7.12 49,521 3.91 86,239 4.00 312,467
         Oct 2.38 4,208 1.99 25,925 2.73 1,135,284 7.14 48,762 3.89 86,683 3.98 312,869
         Nov 2.44 3,898 1.98 25,924 2.71 1,139,714 7.00 48,352 3.87 87,393 3.96 312,973
         Dec 2.44 3,851 1.97 25,850 2.68 1,143,333 6.98 48,885 3.87 87,210 3.95 311,861
2018         Jan 2.33 3,906 1.96 25,566 2.66 1,144,088 7.07 48,461 3.85 87,632 3.93 312,287
         Feb 2.31 3,869 1.95 25,474 2.65 1,147,522 7.07 48,468 3.84 87,842 3.92 312,671
         Mar 2.31 3,983 1.94 25,497 2.62 1,153,724 7.03 49,131 3.82 88,481 3.91 311,587
         Apr 2.32 3,933 1.93 25,480 2.60 1,157,212 6.99 48,590 3.79 89,131 3.90 312,321
         May 2.31 4,024 1.93 25,609 2.58 1,162,731 7.04 48,209 3.76 84,759 3.89 312,220
         June 2.27 4,139 1.92 25,721 2.56 1,169,692 7.03 48,827 3.74 85,404 3.88 311,756
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2017         June 2.51 132,255 1.95 134,974 2.33 645,396
         July 2.45 131,691 1.95 135,710 2.31 650,498
         Aug 2.44 130,333 1.94 136,527 2.30 654,312
         Sep 2.45 135,493 1.93 135,872 2.28 654,806
         Oct 2.39 136,523 1.92 136,647 2.26 657,911
         Nov 2.42 137,523 1.91 138,041 2.25 664,018
         Dec 2.47 133,105 1.90 137,708 2.22 664,374
2018         Jan 2.34 141,326 1.88 138,344 2.20 668,281
         Feb 2.39 142,819 1.88 138,735 2.19 672,403
         Mar 2.39 145,640 1.87 139,810 2.18 672,250
         Apr 2.33 145,705 1.86 140,823 2.16 675,236
         May 2.26 149,325 1.78 138,956 2.15 678,530
         June 2.29 149,188 1.76 140,045 2.13 680,128
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined eff ective rates. Both
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans bu t not any
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administrat ion, preparation of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan a ssociations
corporations include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the re porting agents in
other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and
specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education, e tc.6Including overdrafts
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 on p. 47   ). 
are collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
August 2018
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8  of
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2017         June 0.04 1,264,791 0.22 4,078 0.27 947 0.73 633 0.21 535,416 0.30 48,253
         July 0.04 1,271,823 0.17 5,276 0.31 653 0.70 617 0.20 537,553 0.31 44,902
         Aug 0.03 1,278,289 0.14 5,198 0.41 492 0.65 716 0.19 537,173 0.30 44,119         Sep 0.03 1,285,601 0.15 3,992 0.31 598 0.65 636 0.19 537,108 0.30 43,509
         Oct 0.03 1,294,797 0.18 3,750 0.28 800 0.65 696 0.19 537,700 0.28 42,721
         Nov 0.03 1,314,663 0.17 4,022 0.39 696 0.72 747 0.18 537,935 0.27 42,074         Dec 0.03 1,322,096 0.13 4,043 0.35 880 0.59 627 0.18 540,332 0.28 41,475
2018         Jan 0.03 1,319,368 0.19 4,348 0.31 866 0.71 780 0.18 539,145 0.28 42,193
         Feb 0.03 1,328,779 0.26 4,181 0.31 652 0.80 737 0.17 539,604 0.27 41,465         Mar 0.02 1,334,702 0.30 3,995 0.38 470 0.74 765 0.17 539,077 0.27 41,021
         Apr 0.02 1,347,466 0.31 4,240 0.32 552 0.60 712 0.17 538,787 0.26 40,559
         May 0.02 1,360,605 0.36 4,235 0.42 446 0.62 587 0.16 538,616 0.27 40,277         June 0.02 1,370,361 0.30 4,294 0.51 597 0.66 737 0.16 538,165 0.26 39,811
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2017         June − 0.02 415,078 − 0.14 14,661 0.07 525 0.24 586
         July − 0.01 402,113 − 0.09 11,516 0.19 859 0.26 1,382
         Aug − 0.02 409,698 − 0.04 9,710 0.21 185 0.52 666         Sep − 0.02 414,461 − 0.08 10,040 0.09 351 0.37 704
         Oct − 0.02 425,806 − 0.10 9,134 0.04 412 0.26 1,456
         Nov − 0.02 428,784 − 0.08 9,337 0.09 897 0.22 1,237         Dec − 0.02 425,477 − 0.07 13,102 0.09 351 0.28 1,477
2018         Jan − 0.02 429,587 − 0.07 11,368 0.01 520 0.30 1,271
         Feb − 0.02 419,428 − 0.09 8,751 0.11 186 0.32 932         Mar − 0.02 418,683 − 0.08 10,133 0.13 347 0.31 427
         Apr − 0.03 430,412 − 0.11 8,954 0.06 314 0.35 815
         May − 0.03 440,268 − 0.04 9,576 0.11 490 0.34 587         June − 0.03 424,715 − 0.10 11,185 0.06 240 0.23 447
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million
2017         June 5.90 5.88 8,683 7.24 1,685 6.28 308 4.49 3,574 6.89 4,801
         July 5.99 5.97 8,940 7.32 1,872 6.22 299 4.57 3,561 6.95 5,080
         Aug 5.88 5.86 8,827 7.20 1,724 6.51 312 4.54 3,703 6.84 4,812         Sep 5.67 5.65 8,212 7.11 1,465 6.09 305 4.31 3,579 6.72 4,328
         Oct 5.67 5.65 8,338 7.07 1,495 6.06 302 4.30 3,758 6.81 4,278
         Nov 5.63 5.61 8,216 7.10 1,410 6.09 306 4.31 3,827 6.80 4,083         Dec 5.39 5.37 6,701 6.83 1,004 5.81 297 4.15 3,315 6.63 3,089
2018         Jan 5.85 5.83 9,288 7.26 1,729 6.04 328 4.32 3,860 6.96 5,100
         Feb 5.70 5.68 8,315 7.09 1,451 6.15 258 4.28 3,497 6.72 4,560         Mar 5.44 5.43 9,545 7.04 1,732 5.97 287 4.10 4,259 6.53 4,999
         Apr 5.66 5.64 9,413 7.17 1,772 6.14 290 4.27 3,912 6.64 5,211
         May 5.87 5.85 9,002 7.40 1,846 6.12 292 4.42 3,737 6.91 4,973         June 5.87 5.85 9,052 7.39 1,870 6.25 279 4.39 3,737 6.92 5,036
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  .+For deposits with an agreed maturity and all means that all outstanding deposit and lending business at the end of the month has
loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business covers to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of inter est.7Estimated. The
all new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the bank. volume of new business is extrapolated to form the underlying tota l using a
The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates of all new grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including
agreements concluded during the reporting month. For overnight deposits, deposits fidelity and growth premiums. 9Excluding overdrafts. 10Annual percentage rate of
redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business charge, which contains other related charges which may occur fo r enquiries,
is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the sake of simplicity. This administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
August 2018
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans to households for other purposes  5  with an initial rate fixation of
of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
Loans to households
2017         June 2.06 5,933 1.89 1,852 1.95 2,722 2.73 859 1.93 2,352
         July 1.96 6,388 1.75 2,282 1.76 2,873 2.48 964 1.99 2,551
         Aug 1.99 5,667 1.74 1,625 1.81 2,171 2.66 814 1.92 2,682
         Sep 1.99 5,275 1.80 1,455 1.79 2,341 2.60 804 1.99 2,130
         Oct 2.08 5,682 1.91 1,915 1.91 2,646 2.64 854 2.07 2,182
         Nov 1.98 5,587 1.84 1,569 1.76 2,471 2.63 873 1.96 2,243
         Dec 2.00 6,193 1.80 1,624 1.80 2,705 2.76 958 1.92 2,530
2018         Jan 2.01 6,017 1.94 2,035 1.85 2,693 2.62 888 1.97 2,436
         Feb 1.97 5,062 1.77 1,470 1.77 2,161 2.50 753 1.99 2,148
         Mar 2.03 5,883 1.87 1,424 1.77 2,440 2.58 950 2.08 2,493
         Apr 2.12 5,995 2.02 1,826 1.95 2,612 2.65 1,008 2.09 2,375
         May 2.04 5,257 1.84 1,476 1.87 2,165 2.48 737 2.07 2,355
         June 2.06 6,351 1.93 1,713 1.86 2,588 2.58 903 2.07 2,860
of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2017         June 2.15 4,197 . . 2.13 1,964 2.84 681 1.88 1,552
         July 2.06 4,142 . . 1.89 1,917 2.82 688 1.94 1,537
         Aug 2.08 3,640 . . 1.95 1,445 2.79 629 1.92 1,566
         Sep 2.04 3,411 . . 1.84 1,436 2.81 598 1.90 1,377
         Oct 2.13 3,707 . . 1.98 1,694 2.82 628 2.00 1,385
         Nov 2.07 3,725 . . 1.94 1,592 2.80 662 1.88 1,471
         Dec 2.09 4,266 . . 2.00 1,822 2.83 753 1.85 1,691
2018         Jan 2.07 4,146 . . 1.99 1,817 2.72 679 1.89 1,650
         Feb 2.07 3,412 . . 2.01 1,390 2.61 564 1.93 1,458
         Mar 2.07 4,103 . . 1.87 1,645 2.65 741 2.02 1,717
         Apr 2.18 4,204 . . 2.05 1,850 2.75 793 2.04 1,561
         May 2.11 3,558 . . 2.09 1,373 2.50 560 2.00 1,625
         June 2.06 4,509 . . 1.91 1,850 2.58 692 2.02 1,967
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans  3  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) Renegotiated loans  9 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2017         June 1.87 1.82 19,294 1.92 3,767 2.02 2,265 1.70 1,541 1.68 6,573 1.89 8,915
         July 1.88 1.82 20,405 1.88 4,612 2.04 2,389 1.68 1,726 1.66 7,420 1.92 8,870
         Aug 1.94 1.87 20,228 2.00 3,743 2.05 2,340 1.89 1,888 1.67 7,199 1.98 8,801
         Sep 1.92 1.86 17,363 1.91 3,289 2.04 2,025 1.71 1,571 1.71 5,950 1.96 7,817
         Oct 1.90 1.85 18,128 1.90 3,955 2.08 2,134 1.70 1,634 1.68 6,611 1.96 7,749
         Nov 1.90 1.84 18,793 1.89 3,525 2.04 2,170 1.72 1,640 1.68 6,550 1.94 8,433
         Dec 1.86 1.79 17,473 1.87 3,242 2.04 2,150 1.69 1,553 1.65 6,084 1.86 7,686
2018         Jan 1.88 1.82 19,643 1.90 4,529 2.03 2,354 1.69 1,798 1.65 6,864 1.92 8,627
         Feb 1.90 1.84 18,839 1.95 3,687 2.07 2,090 1.73 1,624 1.68 6,400 1.92 8,725
         Mar 1.94 1.89 20,592 1.95 3,981 2.05 2,256 1.73 1,773 1.74 7,047 1.98 9,516
         Apr 1.94 1.89 21,351 1.92 4,645 2.09 2,369 1.72 1,895 1.77 7,418 1.96 9,669
         May 1.96 1.91 19,514 1.97 3,803 2.09 2,193 1.74 1,735 1.77 6,847 2.00 8,739
         June 1.95 1.90 21,464 1.98 4,691 2.07 3,226 1.76 1,882 1.75 6,771 1.97 9,585
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2017         June . 1.72 8,374 . . 1.87 865 1.53 726 1.61 3,030 1.82 3,753
         July . 1.72 9,062 . . 1.84 896 1.53 891 1.60 3,529 1.84 3,746
         Aug . 1.79 8,461 . . 1.96 821 1.87 996 1.59 3,204 1.92 3,440
         Sep . 1.78 7,701 . . 1.97 711 1.53 797 1.63 2,707 1.92 3,486
         Oct . 1.77 8,217 . . 1.97 780 1.53 782 1.62 3,095 1.92 3,560
         Nov . 1.76 8,464 . . 1.93 771 1.53 796 1.60 3,031 1.90 3,866
         Dec . 1.69 7,644 . . 1.97 685 1.51 740 1.57 2,733 1.77 3,486
2018         Jan . 1.75 9,069 . . 2.00 837 1.57 946 1.59 3,283 1.88 4,003
         Feb . 1.76 8,579 . . 2.02 702 1.53 803 1.61 2,946 1.86 4,128
         Mar . 1.81 9,154 . . 1.96 831 1.61 871 1.67 3,271 1.94 4,181
         Apr . 1.82 9,782 . . 2.08 866 1.55 907 1.71 3,606 1.91 4,403
         May . 1.84 8,392 . . 2.02 733 1.55 834 1.71 3,043 1.96 3,782
         June . 1.83 9,038 . . 2.00 1,087 1.61 901 1.71 3,025 1.94 4,025
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . For   
footnote 11, see p. 47   .  

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
August 2018
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12 Revolving loans  12 
and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 Extended and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 
Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 credit card debt Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2017         June 8.44 40,606 8.47 32,739 15.13 4,328 3.59 67,282 3.61 66,992
         July 8.45 39,300 8.46 31,374 15.11 4,423 3.52 65,979 3.54 65,695
         Aug 8.48 38,663 8.47 30,914 15.12 4,364 3.48 66,012 3.49 65,718         Sep 8.44 39,630 8.48 31,635 15.09 4,393 3.52 67,886 3.54 67,559
         Oct 8.47 39,133 8.48 31,101 15.10 4,493 3.41 67,481 3.42 67,162
         Nov 8.30 38,672 8.35 30,489 15.11 4,386 3.45 67,793 3.46 67,457         Dec 8.21 39,538 8.35 31,187 14.94 4,303 3.47 65,936 3.49 65,625
2018         Jan 8.33 39,136 8.38 31,128 14.92 4,369 3.36 68,733 3.37 68,418
         Feb 8.36 39,233 8.39 31,380 14.92 4,334 3.40 70,798 3.42 70,488         Mar 8.31 39,818 8.36 31,844 14.87 4,340 3.41 71,713 3.43 71,381
         Apr 8.29 39,308 8.35 31,176 14.85 4,408 3.29 72,449 3.30 72,100
         May 8.29 39,115 8.38 30,991 14.79 4,376 3.35 71,010 3.37 70,690         June 8.26 39,717 8.34 31,627 14.77 4,370 3.30 74,485 3.32 74,136
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of
Renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2017         June 1.41 71,950 1.50 21,083 2.51 8,904 2.57 1,681 1.84 1,442 1.13 46,903 1.08 3,655 1.61 9,365
         July 1.39 67,430 1.48 20,770 2.42 8,497 2.57 1,583 1.87 1,403 1.08 43,495 1.28 3,021 1.61 9,431
         Aug 1.38 59,046 1.52 13,769 2.39 7,401 2.58 1,441 1.82 1,335 1.08 37,547 1.38 2,627 1.57 8,695         Sep 1.38 66,182 1.52 19,843 2.50 8,124 2.60 1,446 1.86 1,236 1.08 43,731 1.24 2,419 1.63 9,226
         Oct 1.35 66,679 1.47 19,173 2.48 8,209 2.59 1,490 1.81 1,214 1.05 45,005 1.25 2,354 1.59 8,407
         Nov 1.40 63,110 1.49 16,676 2.50 8,257 2.57 1,582 1.87 1,423 1.09 41,581 1.32 2,565 1.58 7,702         Dec 1.43 78,501 1.52 21,693 2.45 8,207 2.55 1,862 1.82 1,628 1.15 49,208 1.51 5,166 1.63 12,430
2018         Jan 1.22 69,664 1.49 18,190 2.48 8,321 2.53 1,607 1.92 1,361 0.89 50,613 1.72 2,238 1.55 5,524
         Feb 1.32 53,831 1.48 13,339 2.47 7,501 2.57 1,390 1.97 1,123 0.94 36,050 1.43 1,794 1.68 5,973         Mar 1.42 69,102 1.52 18,706 2.48 8,966 2.52 1,744 1.93 1,470 1.09 44,944 1.50 3,379 1.74 8,599
         Apr 1.39 65,864 1.46 18,840 2.44 8,704 2.54 1,749 1.94 1,527 1.04 43,667 1.64 2,828 1.73 7,389
         May 1.20 72,958 1.36 17,150 2.31 9,732 2.40 1,395 1.95 1,290 0.85 51,023 1.59 2,988 1.73 6,530         June 1.31 84,386 1.42 24,657 2.23 11,511 2.44 1,531 1.97 1,470 0.97 55,948 1.64 3,981 1.77 9,945
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2017         June 1.55 11,011 . . 1.85 632 2.60 150 1.75 444 1.44 6,484 1.64 625 1.66 2,676
         July 1.52 9,023 . . 1.78 661 2.46 155 1.77 415 1.34 5,050 1.74 464 1.68 2,278
         Aug 1.47 9,188 . . 1.99 480 2.39 153 1.69 431 1.30 4,961 1.94 560 1.50 2,603         Sep 1.52 9,811 . . 1.83 535 2.50 132 1.77 351 1.41 5,743 1.64 370 1.62 2,680
         Oct 1.46 9,398 . . 1.90 557 2.61 131 1.77 349 1.25 5,480 2.19 304 1.64 2,577
         Nov 1.60 8,531 . . 1.95 545 2.41 147 1.74 414 1.40 5,212 2.68 423 1.74 1,790         Dec 1.59 13,235 . . 1.92 627 2.65 167 1.75 426 1.44 7,644 2.33 1,098 1.56 3,273
2018         Jan 1.53 7,387 . . 1.92 627 2.36 148 1.90 426 1.32 4,529 1.93 357 1.73 1,300
         Feb 1.55 6,461 . . 1.96 428 2.77 134 1.79 324 1.30 3,638 1.54 457 1.88 1,480         Mar 1.62 11,118 . . 1.92 608 2.46 160 1.78 396 1.44 6,583 1.68 1,010 1.93 2,361
         Apr 1.57 8,174 . . 1.91 620 2.50 152 1.83 434 1.26 4,155 2.07 764 1.77 2,049
         May 1.61 7,425 . . 1.93 540 2.47 158 1.77 354 1.38 4,223 1.82 639 1.92 1,511         June 1.71 12,669 . . 1.88 647 2.60 182 1.82 380 1.42 7,324 2.60 1,202 1.95 2,934
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  .11For (d) there is no obligation of regular repayment of funds. 13Overdrafts are defined as
the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if debit balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdraft s regardless of
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed be tween customers and the
at least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or bank. 14Including convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is
assigned. 12Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without payment transactions effected with the card during one billing cycle and the date at
giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become d ue.15The amount
decrease as funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
August 2018
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets
 
 
 € billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and fund Financial technical Non-financial Remaining
year/quarter Total deposits  2 securities Loans  3 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
 
2015 1,954.1 344.4 344.7 278.9 228.7 578.3 4.5 71.9 51.8 50.8
2016         Q1 2,007.8 343.6 374.1 280.2 230.0 596.3 5.2 73.7 53.1 51.7
         Q2 2,034.6 336.1 395.8 281.9 229.6 607.7 4.8 73.5 53.2 52.0
2016         Q3  1 2,219.9 378.7 397.3 387.3 280.2 613.9 5.3 46.1 31.4 79.9
         Q4 2,190.1 361.5 371.3 374.6 308.6 623.6 3.3 44.1 32.4 70.6
2017         Q1 2,189.3 355.4 377.5 367.6 297.7 635.7 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
         Q2 2,177.9 343.9 378.8 365.2 301.9 643.7 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6
         Q3 2,187.4 331.1 386.0 370.9 305.5 650.3 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.3
         Q4 2,211.6 320.8 386.9 354.2 336.1 671.1 2.9 48.2 34.3 57.3
2018         Q1 2,214.7 343.8 395.0 325.6 343.1 662.0 2.3 50.6 33.9 58.4
Life insurance
2015 1,063.7 219.7 169.8 158.0 34.9 414.6 2.2 16.3 30.7 17.4
2016         Q1 1,095.7 219.1 187.0 159.2 35.3 428.0 2.5 15.6 31.9 17.2
         Q2 1,116.7 214.5 201.7 160.7 35.6 438.0 2.4 14.9 32.0 16.9
2016         Q3  1 1,247.0 242.9 203.0 241.2 47.0 445.8 4.0 10.2 18.7 34.0
         Q4 1,197.3 231.3 182.7 223.0 50.7 456.9 2.1 9.6 19.1 21.9
2017         Q1 1,170.4 223.8 185.3 217.2 37.2 462.6 1.8 8.2 19.1 15.3
         Q2 1,172.7 215.6 189.4 217.6 38.6 467.1 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3
         Q3 1,177.4 207.6 193.5 220.6 38.4 472.4 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0
         Q4 1,192.7 199.1 192.4 226.0 41.3 487.6 1.8 8.6 19.9 16.0
2018         Q1 1,185.2 212.6 199.6 205.5 43.0 479.9 1.2 8.5 19.3 15.5
Non-life insurance
2015 511.0 113.9 97.6 55.6 48.5 134.8 1.3 32.9 14.5 11.9
2016         Q1 527.6 113.2 108.2 55.5 49.6 140.6 1.5 32.8 14.5 11.8
         Q2 532.8 109.4 113.6 55.8 49.3 144.5 1.4 32.8 14.4 11.7
2016         Q3  1 592.3 123.8 103.2 93.6 50.8 154.4 0.5 28.5 8.6 28.8
         Q4 584.2 118.9 98.9 91.8 56.8 152.5 0.5 26.8 9.0 29.0
2017         Q1 606.5 120.2 102.4 92.0 56.9 157.3 0.3 34.0 9.1 34.2
         Q2 603.3 116.7 103.9 91.2 58.5 160.3 0.4 33.2 9.1 30.1
         Q3 602.5 111.8 106.2 92.9 58.5 162.8 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4
         Q4 606.6 111.5 108.0 82.2 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.4 9.7 26.5
2018         Q1 622.3 120.0 112.3 75.0 72.3 166.8 0.3 34.5 9.8 31.4
Reinsurance  4 
2015 379.4 10.8 77.3 65.3 145.4 28.9 1.1 22.7 6.5 21.4
2016         Q1 376.0 11.2 78.5 64.0 145.1 27.3 1.1 20.4 6.4 21.9
         Q2 373.7 11.9 79.8 62.8 144.8 25.8 1.0 18.8 6.4 22.4
2016         Q3  1 380.7 12.0 91.0 52.5 182.3 13.8 0.8 7.3 4.0 17.0
         Q4 408.6 11.3 89.7 59.7 201.0 14.3 0.7 7.7 4.3 19.7
2017         Q1 412.5 11.4 89.8 58.4 203.6 15.9 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
         Q2 401.9 11.6 85.5 56.5 204.8 16.3 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2
         Q3 407.5 11.7 86.3 57.5 208.6 15.1 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9
         Q4 412.3 10.2 86.5 45.9 223.9 17.6 0.7 8.2 4.7 14.7
2018         Q1 407.2 11.2 83.1 45.0 227.8 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
Pension funds  5 
2015 579.5 145.5 60.2 28.8 19.1 268.5 − 5.4 31.5 20.4
2016         Q1 588.8 143.1 66.0 29.0 19.4 273.4 − 5.5 31.9 20.5
         Q2 601.7 142.7 69.1 29.2 20.0 281.9 − 5.5 32.5 20.7
         Q3 611.6 144.4 69.2 29.3 20.1 289.0 − 5.6 33.2 20.9
         Q4 613.5 144.7 67.8 29.8 20.6 288.9 − 5.7 34.5 21.4
2017         Q1 619.9 146.2 66.1 30.3 21.2 293.9 − 5.8 34.9 21.6
         Q2 623.7 143.7 69.0 30.7 21.4 295.3 − 6.8 35.3 21.5
         Q3 632.5 141.8 70.7 30.8 21.7 303.3 − 6.9 35.5 21.8
         Q4 653.4 136.4 74.0 31.1 24.6 318.1 − 7.0 39.5 22.7
2018         Q1 654.0 136.0 74.3 31.5 25.3 317.1 − 7.1 40.0 22.8
1Data as of 2016 Q3 are based on Solvency II supervisory data, valuation of listed se- well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pf andbriefe. 4Not in-
curities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB’s securities database. Fig- cluding the reinsurance business conducted by primary ins urers, which is included
ures from 2016 Q3 on have been revised. Up to and including 2016 Q2 data are there. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “pension funds“
based on Solvency I supervisory data from the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus compri se company pension
(BaFin), supplemented by estimates and own calculations. 2Accounts receivable to schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security
monetary financial institutions, including registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans funds are not included. 
and registered Pfandbriefe. 3Including deposits retained on assumed reinsurance as

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
August 2018
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities
  
 € billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life/
Debt Claims on
End of securities Shares and pension fund Financial Remainingyear/quarter Total issued Loans  
2 other equity Total reserves  3 Non-life  4 derivatives liabilities Net worth  7 
Insurance corporations
 
2015 1,954.1 18.3 91.7 214.8 1,474.7 1,160.6 314.1 0.0 70.2 84.4
2016         Q1 2,007.8 17.7 92.9 220.4 1,501.0 1,179.8 321.2 0.0 71.5 104.3
         Q2 2,034.6 17.6 93.0 191.1 1,508.4 1,188.4 320.1 0.0 71.6 152.9
2016         Q3  1 2,219.9 30.7 73.7 383.0 1,579.4 1,396.9 182.5 1.5 151.5 −
         Q4 2,190.1 30.7 70.3 441.0 1,494.4 1,313.3 181.1 2.3 151.4 −
2017         Q1 2,189.3 30.5 57.2 448.5 1,511.7 1,309.5 202.2 1.8 139.5 −
         Q2 2,177.9 28.6 57.0 450.7 1,505.2 1,308.4 196.8 2.1 134.3 −         Q3 2,187.4 28.5 58.4 455.4 1,512.8 1,317.1 195.7 2.3 130.1 −         Q4 2,211.6 28.3 62.6 465.9 1,521.1 1,333.7 187.4 2.2 131.6 −
2018         Q1 2,214.7 28.0 61.8 460.1 1,536.5 1,331.3 205.2 1.5 126.7 −
Life insurance
2015 1,063.7 0.0 24.5 24.6 926.0 911.0 15.0 0.0 30.9 57.7
2016         Q1 1,095.7 0.0 26.0 23.6 938.7 923.4 15.2 0.0 30.7 76.8
         Q2 1,116.7 0.0 27.8 22.3 943.1 927.8 15.3 0.0 30.2 93.3
2016         Q3  1 1,247.0 3.8 25.9 96.0 1,066.2 1,066.2 − 0.7 54.4 −
         Q4 1,197.3 4.1 25.0 116.3 993.7 993.7 − 1.2 56.9 −
2017         Q1 1,170.4 4.1 12.5 116.3 991.7 991.7 − 0.9 44.8 −
         Q2 1,172.7 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.5 989.5 − 1.0 46.2 −         Q3 1,177.4 4.1 12.3 121.5 993.9 993.9 − 1.1 44.5 −         Q4 1,192.7 4.1 12.8 122.2 1,006.6 1,006.6 − 1.1 45.9 −
2018         Q1 1,185.2 4.0 13.3 119.6 1,005.0 1,005.0 − 0.7 42.6 −
Non-life insurance
2015 511.0 0.0 14.2 63.7 390.5 249.6 140.9 0.0 17.1 25.5
2016         Q1 527.6 0.0 14.6 62.0 399.6 253.8 145.9 0.0 17.5 33.9
         Q2 532.8 0.0 14.5 57.7 401.6 256.8 144.9 0.0 17.2 41.9
2016         Q3  1 592.3 0.9 6.6 120.0 407.4 310.1 97.3 0.0 57.3 −
         Q4 584.2 1.1 6.3 130.4 390.1 300.5 89.7 0.2 56.2 −
2017         Q1 606.5 1.1 7.3 134.0 408.9 300.8 108.2 0.1 55.0 −
         Q2 603.3 1.1 6.8 135.6 406.7 302.4 104.2 0.1 53.0 −         Q3 602.5 1.1 6.9 137.3 406.6 305.7 100.9 0.1 50.6 −         Q4 606.6 1.1 6.7 141.2 405.6 309.7 95.9 0.1 51.9 −
2018         Q1 622.3 1.1 7.7 141.2 422.5 310.9 111.5 0.0 49.8 −
Reinsurance  5 
2015 379.4 18.3 53.0 124.8 158.2 − 158.2 0.0 22.2 2.8
2016         Q1 376.0 17.7 52.5 118.3 157.3 − 157.3 0.0 22.5 7.7
         Q2 373.7 17.6 51.7 111.2 156.6 − 156.6 0.0 22.9 13.6
2016         Q3  1 380.7 26.0 41.3 167.0 105.8 20.5 85.3 0.8 39.8 −
         Q4 408.6 25.5 39.0 194.3 110.5 19.1 91.4 0.9 38.3 −
2017         Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
         Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −         Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.8 1.1 35.0 −         Q4 412.3 23.1 43.1 202.6 108.8 17.4 91.4 1.0 33.8 −
2018         Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 −
Pension funds  6 
2015 579.5 − 4.9 11.3 518.3 517.9 0.4 − 6.1 38.9
2016         Q1 588.8 − 5.0 11.4 522.7 522.2 0.5 − 5.8 44.1
         Q2 601.7 − 5.0 10.0 529.6 529.1 0.5 − 5.8 51.3         Q3 611.6 − 5.1 10.3 535.2 535.2 − − 5.8 55.3         Q4 613.5 − 5.2 11.3 544.7 544.7 − − 6.0 46.4
2017         Q1 619.9 − 5.2 11.9 552.4 552.4 − − 6.0 44.3
         Q2 623.7 − 6.1 11.6 554.3 554.3 − − 6.2 45.5         Q3 632.5 − 6.3 11.6 561.5 561.5 − − 3.5 49.7         Q4 653.4 − 6.4 11.9 578.6 578.6 − − 3.5 52.9
2018         Q1 654.0 − 6.5 11.7 581.8 581.8 − − 3.6 50.5
1Data as of 2016 Q3 are based on Solvency II supervisory data. Figures from um refund) and pension fund reserves pursuant to ESA 1995. 4As of 2016 Q3 insur-
2016 Q3 on have been revised. Up to and including 2016 Q2 data are based on Sol- ance technical reserves “non-life“ pursuant to Solvency II. Up to and inc luding
vency I supervisory data from the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin), sup- 2016 Q2 unearned premiums and reserves for outstanding cla ims pursuant to ESA
plemented by estimates and own calculations. 2Including deposits retained on ced- 1995. 5Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which
ed business as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfand- is included there. 6The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “pen-
briefe. 3As of 2016 Q3 insurance technical reserves “life“ pursuant to Solvency II tak- sion funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comp rise compa-
ing account of transitional measures. Up to and including 2016 Q2: Long-term net ny pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-emp loyed. Social
equity of households in life insurance (including ageing provisions of health insurance security funds are not included. 7Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth
schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance schemes with guaranteed premi- and the liability item “Shares and other equity“. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
August 2018
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities ities  3 Total 4 Bundesbank sectors  6 residents  7 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  5 
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,526
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,580
2013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,646 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,380
2014 64,774 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,409 − 12,124 − 11,951 74,484 14,366
2015 32,609 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 68,620 119,379 − 66,330 121,164 64,546 − 86,770
2016 72,270 27,429 19,177 18,265 − 10,012 44,840 174,162 − 58,012 187,500 44,674 − 101,894
2017 54,930 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,368 145,410 − 71,454 161,012 55,852 − 90,477
2017         Aug 13,342 12,771 − 1,814 − 1,581 16,166 571 6,897 − 8,730 9,902 5,725 6,445
         Sep − 13,756 − 18,254 − 8,577 − 3,456 − 6,221 4,497 1,838 − 8,357 12,865 − 2,670 − 15,594
         Oct − 12,129 − 10,152 − 9,775 − 2,760 2,383 − 1,977 9,642 − 4,841 12,199 2,284 − 21,771
         Nov 28,537 22,066 893 6,338 14,835 6,471 25,664 3,359 13,355 8,950 2,873
         Dec − 20,490 − 18,944 − 5,802 − 952 − 12,190 − 1,546 3,495 − 12,058 10,057 5,496 − 23,985
2018         Jan 14,802 − 2,330 1,183 530 − 4,043 17,132 19,710 1,164 6,138 12,408 − 4,908
         Feb 5,636 5,264 12,736 2,054 − 9,526 372 1,898 − 5,017 5,725 1,190 3,738
         Mar 25,191 17,065 11,318 820 4,927 8,125 18,942 1,950 7,268 9,724 6,249
         Apr − 9,403 − 12,541 − 469 7,199 − 19,271 3,138 8,824 − 2,582 5,172 6,234 − 18,228
         May 20,653 20,327 6,728 2,570 11,028 327 1,462 − 1,553 7,676 − 4,661 19,192
         June − 13,189 − 12,897 − 10,982 − 2,030 115 − 293 7,331 − 7,009 6,353 7,987 − 20,520
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total 10 tutions  5 Other sectors  11 residents  12 
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 − 449
2015 40,488 7,668 32,820 30,568 − 5,421 35,989 9,920
2016 33,491 4,409 29,082 31,261 − 5,143 36,404 2,230
2017 48,645 15,570 33,075 47,482 7,031 40,451 1,163
2017         Aug 2,276 155 2,121 4,782 − 603 5,385 − 2,506
         Sep 5,766 1,482 4,284 4,296 − 1,738 6,034 1,470
         Oct 2,242 572 1,670 − 535 735 − 1,270 2,777
         Nov 3,310 110 3,200 4,121 1,198 2,923 − 811
         Dec 13,617 484 13,133 15,596 2,898 12,698 − 1,979
2018         Jan 7,746 153 7,593 9,297 867 8,430 − 1,551
         Feb 15,184 1,122 14,062 15,596 − 3,709 19,305 − 412
         Mar − 939 1,023 − 1,962 − 7,256 − 3,672 − 3,584 6,317
         Apr 2,843 3,219 − 376 − 33 − 2,546 2,513 2,876
         May 16,950 1,175 15,775 16,363 1,156 15,207 587
         June 6,927 6,593 334 6,748 2,250 4,498 179
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 8Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction residents;  transaction  values. 10Domestic and foreign shares. 11Residual; also
values. 4Domestic and foreign debt securities. 5Book values; statistically adjusted. including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
6Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 7Net pur- non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
August 2018
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 
 
Debt securities
Corporate issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions debt securities (non-MFIs)  2 debt securities
Gross sales  3 
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,8722008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,9742009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,3762012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,5292013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,8912014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700
2016 
4 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,370 416,110
2017 4 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,289 362,333
2017         Nov 84,080 37,055 1,823 340 22,871 12,021 11,681 35,345
         Dec  4 59,026 33,899 1,727 1,727 17,999 12,446 6,113 19,014
2018         Jan 92,293 59,191 3,459 1,002 42,821 11,910 3,144 29,958
         Feb 96,820 59,349 3,387 564 43,208 12,189 3,434 34,036         Mar 100,288 58,524 3,781 1,229 44,183 9,331 6,202 35,561
         Apr 123,774 67,848 1,487 97 58,169 8,094 27,752 28,175
         May 97,205 61,722 3,459 63 46,110 12,089 5,306 30,178         June 90,599 59,456 5,737 364 42,846 10,509 4,220 26,923
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,6592008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,4072009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,4312012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,8882013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,7652014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 
4 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017 4 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2017         Nov 35,497 12,555 1,528 320 6,294 4,413 8,990 13,952
         Dec  4 18,711 8,098 420 1,607 2,704 3,368 4,821 5,791
2018         Jan 37,248 26,777 2,697 967 19,026 4,087 1,626 8,845
         Feb 27,037 11,485 2,917 254 4,196 4,118 2,194 13,358         Mar 40,145 18,509 3,400 1,080 11,579 2,450 4,095 17,542
         Apr 49,383 12,888 1,187 22 8,840 2,839 25,454 11,040
         May 24,413 11,107 2,333 63 5,804 2,906 3,425 9,881         June 32,355 20,213 4,237 84 12,615 3,277 2,251 9,891
Net sales  6 
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,0932008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,3022009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,2892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,2982013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,4792014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 
4 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017 4 2,669 5,954 6,389 − 4,697 18,788 − 14,525 6,828 − 10,114
2017         Nov 22,681 − 24 444 123 − 1,471 880 6,842 15,863
         Dec  4 − 28,202 − 16,824 − 1,367 − 329 − 7,519 − 7,609 − 469 − 10,909
2018         Jan − 8,981 3,064 1,643 − 998 3,302 − 883 21 − 12,067
         Feb 1,784 10,154 544 143 10,663 − 1,196 1,225 − 9,596         Mar 14,572 9,345 2,792 751 8,127 − 2,326 − 428 5,655
         Apr − 15,565 751 50 − 639 3,478 − 2,138 5,636 − 21,952
         May 21,542 8,519 3,037 − 1,827 5,950 1,358 1,258 11,765         June − 11,298 − 10,143 2,597 − 869 − 6,515 − 5,356 − 627 − 528
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital initial sales of newly issued securities. 4 Sectoral reclassification of debt
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 6Gross sales less
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Gross sales means only redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
August 2018
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities
 
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Public
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017 1 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2017         Dec 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 1 651,211 1 320,432 302,543 1,617,244
2018         Jan 3,081,726 1,173,984 142,916 57,006 654,514 319,549 302,565 1,605,177
         Feb 3,083,510 1,184,139 143,460 57,149 665,177 318,354 303,790 1,595,582
         Mar 3,098,082 1,193,483 146,252 57,900 673,304 316,027 303,362 1,601,237
         Apr 3,082,517 1,194,234 146,302 57,260 676,782 313,889 308,998 1,579,285
         May 3,104,059 1,202,753 149,339 55,434 682,732 315,248 310,256 1,591,050
         June 3,092,761 1,192,610 151,936 54,564 676,217 309,892 309,629 1,590,522
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-June 2018 
996,699 443,065 40,909 21,355 279,335 101,464 63,350 490,285    less than 2
617,642 274,013 38,029 11,564 153,970 70,450 49,593 294,034 2 to less than 4
490,890 183,003 33,250 7,532 99,173 43,050 40,560 267,329 4 to less than 6
315,588 127,417 20,512 6,589 70,868 29,448 33,541 154,629 6 to less than 8
240,913 78,529 15,089 5,530 34,991 22,919 16,363 146,021 8 to less than 10
119,785 35,254 2,935 393 18,551 13,375 22,702 61,829 10 to less than 15
78,245 17,900 424 1,153 12,870 3,453 6,054 54,290 15 to less than 20
233,000 33,429 788 448 6,458 25,735 77,467 122,104 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount
reclassification of debt securities. 2Increase due to change in issuers’ country of outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
residence. 3Calculated from month under review until final maturity for debt
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita- cash payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims of shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 − − 457 − 661 − 1,615 1,933,733
2017         Dec 178,828 − 598 128 − 1 − − 140 − 363 − 224 1,933,733
2018         Jan 178,752 − 75 102 −1−0 − 1 1 8 − 6 1 1,981,815
         Feb 179,778 1,026 1,094 7 19 − 0 − 28 − 66 1,887,325
         Mar 180,086 308 553 2 42−0 − 2 3 9 − 3 1 1,874,136
         Apr 180,359 273 239 64 11 − − 5 − 1 − 36 1,939,502
         May 179,930 − 429 142 18 5 − − 548 − 10 − 36 1,929,120
         June 180,298 368 258 228 16 − − 7 − 52 − 75 1,867,155
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche
out of company profits. 2All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
August 2018
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.062017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018         Feb 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.7 1.2 2.1 139.24 107.33 577.02 12,435.85
         Mar 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.7 1.0 2.1 140.36 108.53 561.97 12,096.73
         Apr 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 1.0 2.3 139.85 108.02 579.61 12,612.11
         May 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.5 0.6 1.0 2.3 141.11 109.76 572.08 12,604.89         June 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.6 1.0 2.4 141.29 109.87 557.27 12,306.00
         July 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.9 2.5 140.83 108.50 580.49 12,805.50
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly fig ures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual f igures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,469
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4382013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,709
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,522 144,075 819 − 1,745 143,256 44,266 − 3,841
2015 181,888 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,750 174,529 7,362 494 167,167 35,257 7,3572016 155,511 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 36,142 162,429 2,877 − 3,172 159,552 39,315 − 6,9192017 142,669 94,921 29,560 − 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 47,747 146,108 4,938 1,048 141,170 46,700 − 3,441
2017         Dec 15,285 9,757 1,665 − 7 585 774 8,092 5,528 14,441 − 656 53 15,097 5,475 844
2018         Jan 24,773 15,003 6,014 − 5 4,152 756 8,989 9,771 23,890 876 713 23,014 9,058 883
         Feb 7,429 8,628 1,860 − 22 955 520 6,768 − 1,199 7,439 − 92 − 1,141 7,531 − 58 − 10         Mar 8,732 8,718 − 937 222 − 1,923 493 9,656 14 11,397 813 − 239 10,584 253 − 2,666
         Apr 8,430 8,351 1,860 − 66 1,401 223 6,491 80 11,470 961 469 10,509 − 389 − 3,039
         May 5,064 1,859 1,215 − 225 934 275 644 3,205 5,430 1,217 732 4,213 2,473 − 366         June 8,237 6,787 1,068 66 352 479 5,719 1,450 7,691 − 459 − 781 8,150 2,231 545
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
August 2018
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2016 2017 2018 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 30.93 40.40 52.76 − 0.57 6.96 19.02 − 0.75 27.52 − 11.52
Debt securities − 1.20 − 3.40 − 5.65 − 0.98 − 0.95 − 0.65 − 1.05 − 3.01 0.65
short-term debt securities − 0.84 − 0.58 − 2.26 − 0.83 0.23 − 1.89 − 0.26 − 0.34 − 0.12
long-term debt securities − 0.36 − 2.81 − 3.39 − 0.15 − 1.18 1.24 − 0.78 − 2.67 0.77
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 0.64 − 2.68 − 2.80 − 0.54 − 0.54 − 0.04 − 1.07 − 1.15 0.11
Non-financial corporations − 0.80 0.67 − 0.56 0.15 0.85 − 0.72 − 0.56 − 0.14 − 0.01
Financial corporations 1.86 − 2.53 − 0.41 − 0.49 − 0.35 0.67 − 0.14 − 0.59 0.19
General government − 0.42 − 0.82 − 1.82 − 0.20 − 1.03 0.01 − 0.37 − 0.43 − 0.07
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 1.83 − 0.72 − 2.85 − 0.44 − 0.41 − 0.61 0.02 − 1.86 0.54
Loans 27.14 9.96 39.45 20.17 25.43 5.51 2.73 5.79 0.16
short-term loans 34.68 2.59 20.00 18.33 14.28 − 0.61 − 0.45 6.79 4.13
long-term loans − 7.54 7.38 19.45 1.83 11.15 6.11 3.18 − 1.00 − 3.97
Memo item
to domestic sectors 6.25 − 4.75 18.10 7.55 9.04 − 0.01 − 1.43 10.49 2.19
Non-financial corporations 1.26 − 11.78 9.53 6.12 0.23 2.88 − 0.28 6.70 0.12
Financial corporations 4.80 6.89 8.27 1.39 8.74 − 2.97 − 1.22 3.72 2.07
General government 0.18 0.15 0.29 0.04 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.00
to the rest of the world 20.89 14.71 21.36 12.62 16.38 5.52 4.16 − 4.70 − 2.03
Equity and investment fund shares 54.90 73.73 48.76 46.14 17.20 − 0.51 16.00 16.07 27.90
Equity 38.50 67.90 40.21 44.10 18.44 1.68 13.74 6.35 24.38
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 10.40 22.91 − 3.82 20.70 − 4.34 − 2.05 1.91 0.65 21.74
Non-financial corporations − 8.04 22.59 − 3.76 20.62 − 4.25 − 2.26 1.96 0.80 21.64
Financial corporations − 2.36 0.31 − 0.06 0.08 − 0.09 0.21 − 0.04 − 0.14 0.10
Listed shares of the rest of the world 4.95 12.69 7.40 8.56 1.68 10.53 − 5.34 0.53 − 0.40
Other equity  1 43.95 32.30 36.63 14.84 21.09 − 6.80 17.16 5.17 3.04
Investment fund shares 16.40 5.83 8.55 2.05 − 1.24 − 2.18 2.26 9.71 3.52
Money market fund shares 0.21 0.36 − 0.46 0.79 − 0.28 0.00 − 1.07 0.89 − 0.63
Non-MMF investment fund shares 16.19 5.47 9.01 1.26 − 0.96 − 2.19 3.34 8.83 4.15
Insurance technical reserves 2.94 1.12 1.00 0.31 0.06 0.50 0.43 0.02 0.08
Financial derivatives − 1.42 22.74 15.20 6.53 3.91 4.13 3.42 3.75 3.13
Other accounts receivable 41.69 − 6.10 102.75 − 7.50 77.37 − 18.66 25.57 18.47 26.74
Total 154.98 138.45 254.27 64.10 129.98 9.34 46.35 68.60 47.13
External financing
Debt securities 7.78 23.71 8.56 5.82 7.57 − 0.52 0.96 0.55 2.79
short-term securities 1.96 − 0.15 0.60 − 1.79 5.47 − 0.42 − 2.62 − 1.83 2.54
long-term securities 5.82 23.85 7.95 7.61 2.11 − 0.10 3.58 2.37 0.24
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.70 10.84 7.13 3.09 3.31 1.24 0.78 1.80 2.48
Non-financial corporations − 0.80 0.67 − 0.56 0.15 0.85 − 0.72 − 0.56 − 0.14 − 0.01
Financial corporations 2.05 10.08 9.13 3.01 3.19 2.08 1.51 2.36 2.19
General government 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.00 − 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.01
Households 0.42 0.08 − 1.45 − 0.06 − 0.71 − 0.14 − 0.16 − 0.42 0.29
Debt securities of the rest of the world 6.08 12.87 1.42 2.73 4.26 − 1.76 0.17 − 1.25 0.30
Loans 54.65 32.73 105.83 − 10.51 49.56 12.40 20.06 23.80 37.33
short-term loans 40.97 0.89 26.05 − 4.54 11.15 3.21 8.58 3.11 20.59
long-term loans 13.69 31.84 79.78 − 5.97 38.41 9.19 11.48 20.70 16.74
Memo item
from domestic sectors 23.98 14.45 67.47 − 4.37 27.21 8.41 11.90 19.96 24.01
Non-financial corporations 1.26 − 11.78 9.53 6.12 0.23 2.88 − 0.28 6.70 0.12
Financial corporations 29.69 23.43 49.00 − 6.57 20.15 5.61 13.97 9.27 28.86
General government − 6.98 2.80 8.94 − 3.93 6.82 − 0.08 − 1.78 3.99 − 4.98
from the rest of the world 30.68 18.28 38.35 − 6.14 22.36 4.00 8.16 3.84 13.32
Equity 16.67 11.18 17.86 2.47 3.23 6.06 5.69 2.88 1.58
Listed shares of domestic sectors 7.42 27.31 6.93 17.00 − 4.55 2.68 3.43 5.36 19.82
Non-financial corporations − 8.04 22.59 − 3.76 20.62 − 4.25 − 2.26 1.96 0.80 21.64
Financial corporations 11.70 − 2.10 9.53 − 2.12 − 0.78 6.21 0.26 3.83 − 5.23
General government 0.11 0.07 0.51 − 0.02 0.07 0.13 0.16 0.15 0.16
Households 3.66 6.74 0.65 − 1.48 0.41 − 1.39 1.05 0.59 3.26
Quoted shares of the rest of the world − 1.40 − 25.79 − 2.59 − 16.17 4.88 − 1.28 − 1.47 − 4.71 8.91
Other equity  1 10.65 9.66 13.53 1.64 2.91 4.66 3.74 2.23 − 27.15
Insurance technical reserves 5.60 3.60 3.60 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 10.81 − 0.13 3.69 − 7.81 2.60 2.23 1.00 − 2.12 1.72
Other accounts payable 23.15 28.84 − 0.23 23.45 28.87 − 25.48 − 7.52 3.90 19.88
Total 97.05 99.92 139.30 14.32 92.73 − 4.42 21.09 29.90 64.19
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
August 2018
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2016 2017 2018 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 463.1 514.9 556.2 514.9 517.2 525.5 532.8 556.2 527.2
Debt securities 47.8 44.8 38.8 44.8 43.9 42.8 41.9 38.8 39.2
short-term debt securities 6.0 5.5 3.3 5.5 5.8 3.9 3.6 3.3 3.1long-term debt securities 41.7 39.3 35.6 39.3 38.1 39.0 38.3 35.6 36.0
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 20.8 18.2 20.8 20.3 20.2 19.3 18.2 18.2
Non-financial corporations 3.6 4.4 3.9 4.4 5.3 4.6 4.1 3.9 3.8Financial corporations 14.5 12.0 11.7 12.0 11.6 12.3 12.3 11.7 11.9General government 5.2 4.4 2.5 4.4 3.4 3.3 3.0 2.5 2.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 24.4 24.0 20.7 24.0 23.6 22.7 22.6 20.7 21.0
Loans 511.5 523.0 556.2 523.0 548.4 550.3 551.3 556.2 556.4
short-term loans 409.4 414.3 431.1 414.3 428.5 426.1 424.7 431.1 435.7long-term loans 102.1 108.7 125.1 108.7 119.9 124.2 126.5 125.1 120.8
Memo item
to domestic sectors 335.7 331.0 349.1 331.0 340.0 340.0 338.6 349.1 351.3
Non-financial corporations 233.3 221.6 231.1 221.6 221.8 224.7 224.4 231.1 231.2Financial corporations 95.9 102.8 111.0 102.8 111.5 108.5 107.3 111.0 113.1General government 6.5 6.6 6.9 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 6.9 6.9
to the rest of the world 175.8 192.0 207.1 192.0 208.4 210.3 212.7 207.1 205.2
Equity and investment fund shares 1,876.2 1,919.8 2,063.8 1,919.8 2,001.5 1,989.5 2,020.1 2,063.8 2,052.5
Equity 1,724.3 1,759.9 1,893.7 1,759.9 1,840.7 1,831.3 1,858.7 1,893.7 1,881.6
Listed shares of domestic sectors 273.0 292.3 332.2 292.3 304.1 304.1 322.7 332.2 349.4
Non-financial corporations 266.6 286.2 325.3 286.2 298.6 297.9 315.9 325.3 342.2Financial corporations 6.3 6.1 6.8 6.1 5.5 6.2 6.9 6.8 7.1
Listed shares of the rest of the world 35.2 49.2 53.5 49.2 53.3 61.4 52.7 53.5 53.1
Other equity  
1 1,416.1 1,418.4 1,508.0 1,418.4 1,483.3 1,465.8 1,483.3 1,508.0 1,479.2
Investment fund shares 151.9 159.9 170.1 159.9 160.8 158.2 161.4 170.1 170.9
Money market fund shares 1.4 1.9 1.5 1.9 1.7 1.7 0.6 1.5 0.9Non-MMF investment fund shares 150.6 158.0 168.6 158.0 159.1 156.4 160.7 168.6 170.0
Insurance technical reserves 48.8 50.2 51.4 50.2 50.5 50.8 51.1 51.4 51.6Financial derivatives 42.7 60.1 51.6 60.1 55.7 52.1 51.6 51.6 50.9Other accounts receivable 927.6 960.3 1,032.0 960.3 1,044.5 993.1 1,042.6 1,032.0 1,088.3
Total 3,917.8 4,073.1 4,350.0 4,073.1 4,261.6 4,204.0 4,291.3 4,350.0 4,366.2
Liabilities
Debt securities 156.8 183.8 210.6 183.8 189.7 188.1 210.2 210.6 185.4
short-term securities 3.0 2.9 3.4 2.9 8.3 7.9 5.3 3.4 5.9
long-term securities 153.7 180.9 207.2 180.9 181.4 180.2 205.0 207.2 179.4
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 58.7 72.2 82.9 72.2 74.9 75.4 80.1 82.9 79.7
Non-financial corporations 3.6 4.4 3.9 4.4 5.3 4.6 4.1 3.9 3.8Financial corporations 40.0 51.9 64.4 51.9 54.5 55.9 61.1 64.4 61.3General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1Households 15.0 15.7 14.4 15.7 15.0 14.8 14.8 14.4 14.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 98.1 111.6 127.7 111.6 114.8 112.6 130.1 127.7 105.7
Loans 1,449.7 1,479.2 1,571.9 1,479.2 1,527.6 1,535.2 1,551.3 1,571.9 1,607.3
short-term loans 535.0 538.9 559.4 538.9 549.8 550.0 557.4 559.4 579.4long-term loans 914.7 940.4 1,012.6 940.4 977.8 985.2 994.0 1,012.6 1,027.9
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,117.3 1,126.8 1,188.7 1,126.8 1,153.1 1,160.6 1,170.5 1,188.7 1,211.5
Non-financial corporations 233.3 221.6 231.1 221.6 221.8 224.7 224.4 231.1 231.2Financial corporations 832.3 852.3 895.8 852.3 872.6 876.4 887.8 895.8 923.1General government 51.6 53.0 61.8 53.0 58.7 59.5 58.3 61.8 57.2
from the rest of the world 332.4 352.4 383.3 352.4 374.5 374.6 380.8 383.3 395.8
Equity 2,695.7 2,773.4 3,054.5 2,773.4 2,895.0 2,916.4 3,001.4 3,054.5 2,949.1
Listed shares of domestic sectors 626.4 664.0 756.6 664.0 696.5 697.8 737.6 756.6 745.7
Non-financial corporations 266.6 286.2 325.3 286.2 298.6 297.9 315.9 325.3 342.2Financial corporations 150.1 154.7 180.2 154.7 161.3 166.4 173.4 180.2 163.6General government 43.4 44.4 51.8 44.4 47.0 46.7 51.0 51.8 48.7Households 166.2 178.7 199.2 178.7 189.7 186.8 197.4 199.2 191.1
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 756.3 803.7 925.3 803.7 865.4 879.1 906.1 925.3 881.6
Other equity  
1 1,313.0 1,305.7 1,372.6 1,305.7 1,333.0 1,339.5 1,357.7 1,372.6 1,321.9
Insurance technical reserves 255.9 259.5 263.1 259.5 260.4 261.3 262.2 263.1 264.0Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 42.0 38.2 26.9 38.2 35.4 32.7 31.3 26.9 26.7
Other accounts payable 1,007.8 1,043.1 1,047.4 1,043.1 1,076.2 1,022.1 1,050.2 1,047.4 1,076.5
Total 5,607.8 5,777.2 6,174.4 5,777.2 5,984.3 5,955.7 6,106.7 6,174.4 6,108.9
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
August 2018
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2016 2017 2018 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 96.67 114.98 103.59 52.40 12.35 30.16 18.03 43.05 14.75
Currency 25.51 21.30 17.15 6.32 3.63 5.57 2.46 5.49 4.41
Deposits 71.16 93.68 86.45 46.09 8.72 24.59 15.58 37.57 10.33
Transferable deposits 100.96 105.26 99.72 46.52 13.26 29.95 20.65 35.86 12.14
Time deposits − 9.22 1.28 − 4.03 0.02 − 1.59 − 2.32 − 2.47 2.34 1.15
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 20.58 − 12.87 − 9.24 − 0.45 − 2.96 − 3.04 − 2.61 − 0.64 − 2.95
Debt securities − 18.40 − 12.80 − 8.14 − 3.32 − 1.36 − 1.49 − 2.28 − 3.01 − 1.00
short-term debt securities 0.75 − 0.16 − 0.20 0.31 0.37 0.18 − 0.34 − 0.41 − 0.37
long-term debt securities − 19.15 − 12.63 − 7.93 − 3.62 − 1.72 − 1.67 − 1.94 − 2.60 − 0.63
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 10.06 − 4.14 − 5.09 − 1.65 0.01 − 0.67 − 1.88 − 2.56 − 0.01
Non-financial corporations 0.36 − 0.01 − 1.43 − 0.10 − 0.66 − 0.22 − 0.14 − 0.40 0.08
Financial corporations − 7.42 − 2.48 − 2.68 − 1.37 1.01 − 0.17 − 1.55 − 1.97 0.07
General government − 2.99 − 1.65 − 0.99 − 0.18 − 0.33 − 0.28 − 0.18 − 0.19 − 0.17
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 8.34 − 8.66 − 3.05 − 1.67 − 1.37 − 0.82 − 0.41 − 0.45 − 0.98
Equity and investment fund shares 47.95 45.78 55.13 4.54 12.11 12.32 14.08 16.62 17.73
Equity 16.62 21.65 14.69 − 0.90 3.40 2.21 5.11 3.97 7.35
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 4.17 9.37 0.90 − 3.03 0.15 − 0.18 0.89 0.04 4.27
Non-financial corporations 3.88 6.09 0.54 − 1.70 0.48 − 1.42 1.01 0.47 3.12
Financial corporations 0.28 3.28 0.36 − 1.33 − 0.33 1.24 − 0.12 − 0.43 1.15
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 8.00 6.94 9.66 1.69 2.25 1.69 2.94 2.77 1.47
Other equity  1 4.45 5.35 4.13 0.44 1.00 0.70 1.28 1.15 1.61
Investment fund shares 31.34 24.13 40.44 5.44 8.70 10.11 8.97 12.65 10.38
Money market fund shares − 0.57 − 0.53 − 0.28 − 0.17 − 0.22 0.04 − 0.16 0.05 − 0.40
Non-MMF investment fund shares 31.90 24.66 40.72 5.61 8.92 10.08 9.12 12.60 10.79
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 20.09 19.58 11.43 8.01 2.85 2.87 2.82 2.89 2.88
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 31.69 24.82 31.59 5.65 13.31 10.71 4.91 2.67 15.50
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 30.85 20.63 29.47 1.63 7.67 4.34 7.09 10.37 3.67
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  2 − 17.31 − 11.76 − 12.68 − 21.60 15.21 − 6.13 2.70 − 24.47 14.98
Total 191.54 201.23 210.39 47.32 62.14 52.77 47.35 48.13 68.51
  External financing
Loans 38.20 47.38 55.63 9.48 7.90 16.64 18.56 12.53 10.79
short-term loans − 3.17 − 4.31 − 2.19 − 2.05 − 0.35 − 0.34 − 1.09 − 0.40 − 0.02
long-term loans 41.36 51.69 57.82 11.53 8.25 16.98 19.66 12.93 10.81
Memo item
Mortage loans 35.63 41.84 47.49 11.04 6.12 13.31 15.84 12.23 8.98
Consumer loans 5.44 9.78 11.25 0.88 2.41 3.25 3.41 2.19 1.78
Entrepreneurial loans − 2.88 − 4.24 − 3.11 − 2.44 − 0.62 0.07 − 0.68 − 1.89 0.04
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 39.35 42.87 49.99 8.08 7.10 15.54 16.93 10.42 11.00
Loans from other financial institutions − 1.16 4.51 5.65 1.40 0.80 1.10 1.63 2.11 − 0.21
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable − 1.14 − 0.23 0.22 0.06 0.12 0.07 0.02 0.02 − 0.04
Total 37.06 47.15 55.85 9.54 8.02 16.70 18.58 12.55 10.75
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
August 2018
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2016 2017 2018 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,094.8 2,208.9 2,311.3 2,208.9 2,221.9 2,252.1 2,270.1 2,311.3 2,326.0
Currency 153.2 174.5 191.6 174.5 178.1 183.7 186.2 191.6 196.1
Deposits 1,941.6 2,034.4 2,119.6 2,034.4 2,043.8 2,068.4 2,084.0 2,119.6 2,130.0
Transferable deposits 1,082.4 1,188.0 1,287.7 1,188.0 1,201.2 1,231.2 1,251.8 1,287.7 1,299.8
Time deposits 246.8 248.7 245.4 248.7 247.9 245.6 243.1 245.4 246.6
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 612.4 597.7 586.5 597.7 594.7 591.7 589.1 586.5 583.6
Debt securities 139.8 127.4 120.5 127.4 126.7 125.4 123.6 120.5 117.7
short-term debt securities 2.9 2.7 2.5 2.7 3.1 3.2 2.9 2.5 2.1
long-term debt securities 136.9 124.7 118.0 124.7 123.6 122.2 120.7 118.0 115.6
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 89.4 85.6 82.5 85.6 86.1 86.2 85.1 82.5 81.2
Non-financial corporations 13.4 13.9 12.5 13.9 13.3 13.0 12.9 12.5 12.4Financial corporations 69.5 66.7 66.1 66.7 68.2 68.9 68.1 66.1 65.1General government 6.5 5.0 3.9 5.0 4.6 4.3 4.1 3.9 3.7
Debt securities of the rest of the world 50.3 41.8 37.9 41.8 40.6 39.3 38.5 37.9 36.4
Equity and investment fund shares 1,040.7 1,107.9 1,218.2 1,107.9 1,155.7 1,158.4 1,193.2 1,218.2 1,198.2
Equity 555.9 590.0 642.1 590.0 614.8 611.2 632.5 642.1 626.1
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 188.9 200.8 226.4 200.8 213.0 211.1 223.7 226.4 217.3
Non-financial corporations 158.7 169.8 190.3 169.8 180.4 177.5 188.4 190.3 182.5
Financial corporations 30.3 31.0 36.1 31.0 32.6 33.6 35.4 36.1 34.8
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 74.8 86.8 101.0 86.8 93.1 92.7 96.5 101.0 97.7
Other equity  
1 292.2 302.5 314.7 302.5 308.7 307.4 312.2 314.7 311.0
Investment fund shares 484.8 517.8 576.2 517.8 540.9 547.2 560.7 576.2 572.1
Money market fund shares 3.4 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.6 2.7 2.3
Non-MMF investment fund shares 481.4 515.0 573.5 515.0 538.2 544.4 558.1 573.5 569.8
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 324.3 339.9 351.3 339.9 342.7 345.6 348.4 351.3 354.2
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 919.5 947.8 979.8 947.8 961.2 972.0 977.1 979.8 995.3
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 786.6 816.7 846.2 816.7 824.4 828.7 835.8 846.2 849.9
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 37.1 32.6 33.5 32.6 32.8 33.2 33.3 33.5 33.9
Total 5,342.8 5,581.1 5,860.8 5,581.1 5,665.5 5,715.4 5,781.5 5,860.8 5,875.1
  Liabilities
Loans 1,606.6 1,654.6 1,711.9 1,654.6 1,662.5 1,680.5 1,699.0 1,711.9 1,722.6
short-term loans 60.9 56.6 54.4 56.6 56.3 55.9 54.8 54.4 54.4
long-term loans 1,545.8 1,598.0 1,657.5 1,598.0 1,606.2 1,624.5 1,644.2 1,657.5 1,668.2
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,153.8 1,195.8 1,247.4 1,195.8 1,201.9 1,218.3 1,234.6 1,247.4 1,257.4Consumer loans 191.9 201.8 211.8 201.8 204.2 207.4 210.6 211.8 212.8Entrepreneurial loans 260.9 257.0 252.7 257.0 256.4 254.8 253.8 252.7 252.5
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,514.9 1,558.3 1,610.0 1,558.3 1,565.4 1,582.3 1,599.2 1,610.0 1,620.9Loans from other financial institutions 91.8 96.3 101.9 96.3 97.1 98.2 99.8 101.9 101.7Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.1 15.4 15.6 15.4 16.5 16.2 16.4 15.6 16.6
Total 1,621.7 1,670.1 1,727.5 1,670.1 1,679.0 1,696.6 1,715.4 1,727.5 1,739.2
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 − 4.0 − 7.4 − 2.5 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2014 p + 15.5 + 14.7 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 3.2 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
2015 p + 25.4 + 15.7 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 31.9 + 13.6 + 4.9 + 5.2 + 8.2 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 pe + 38.2 + 7.1 + 10.8 + 9.9 + 10.5 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
2016         H1  p + 20.6 + 8.1 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 6.6 + 1.3 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4
         H2  p + 11.2 + 5.5 + 0.8 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1
2017         H1  pe + 22.2 + 2.1 + 6.3 + 6.7 + 7.1 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.4
         H2  pe + 16.0 + 5.0 + 4.4 + 3.2 + 3.4 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2011 2,125.1 1,344.1 653.8 143.5 1.3 78.6 49.7 24.2 5.3 0.0
2012 2,202.3 1,387.9 683.6 147.5 1.2 79.8 50.3 24.8 5.3 0.0
2013 2,190.5 1,390.4 665.6 150.6 1.3 77.5 49.2 23.5 5.3 0.0
2014 p 2,192.0 1,396.5 660.1 152.0 1.4 74.7 47.6 22.5 5.2 0.0
2015 p 2,161.8 1,372.6 656.5 152.2 1.4 71.0 45.1 21.6 5.0 0.0
2016 p 2,145.5 1,366.8 639.5 153.4 1.1 68.2 43.5 20.3 4.9 0.0
2017 p 2,092.6 1,351.6 612.1 147.2 0.8 64.1 41.4 18.8 4.5 0.0
2016         Q1  p 2,170.2 1,382.5 649.6 154.4 1.2 70.8 45.1 21.2 5.0 0.0
         Q2  p 2,173.6 1,391.1 646.1 154.0 1.1 70.1 44.8 20.8 5.0 0.0
         Q3  p 2,167.0 1,381.1 646.5 154.8 1.0 69.4 44.2 20.7 5.0 0.0
         Q4  p 2,145.5 1,366.8 639.5 153.4 1.1 68.2 43.5 20.3 4.9 0.0
2017         Q1  p 2,118.2 1,351.0 629.0 152.0 1.2 66.7 42.5 19.8 4.8 0.0
         Q2  p 2,112.5 1,353.6 622.2 151.4 0.9 66.1 42.3 19.5 4.7 0.0
         Q3  p 2,105.6 1,353.0 620.1 149.7 0.8 65.2 41.9 19.2 4.6 0.0
         Q4  p 2,092.6 1,351.6 612.1 147.2 0.8 64.1 41.4 18.8 4.5 0.0
2018         Q1  p 2,071.4 1,338.8 602.1 147.5 1.0 62.9 40.7 18.3 4.5 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 124.1 61.4 67.5 113.1 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 1,259.0 651.0 465.0 143.0 1,263.0 666.4 217.8 133.0 60.1 55.5 130.2 − 4.0 1,120.3
2014 p 1,308.3 674.1 482.0 152.3 1,292.8 691.0 224.0 137.4 60.0 45.3 135.2 + 15.5 1,160.7
2015 p 1,354.3 704.3 500.8 149.2 1,328.8 722.3 229.2 142.2 64.2 40.4 130.6 + 25.4 1,212.2
2016 p 1,414.2 739.0 523.8 151.5 1,382.4 754.9 236.5 150.0 66.8 35.4 138.8 + 31.9 1,269.6
2017 pe 1,473.3 772.0 548.0 153.4 1,435.1 784.0 246.1 155.7 70.3 33.8 145.2 + 38.2 1,326.7
as a percentage of GDP
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.3 2.5 4.2 − 1.0 38.7
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.3
2013 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.1 39.6
2014 p 44.6 23.0 16.4 5.2 44.1 23.6 7.6 4.7 2.0 1.5 4.6 + 0.5 39.6
2015 p 44.5 23.1 16.5 4.9 43.7 23.7 7.5 4.7 2.1 1.3 4.3 + 0.8 39.8
2016 p 45.0 23.5 16.7 4.8 44.0 24.0 7.5 4.8 2.1 1.1 4.4 + 1.0 40.4
2017 pe 45.1 23.7 16.8 4.7 44.0 24.0 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.0 4.4 + 1.2 40.7
Percentage growth rates
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.1 + 3.3 + 5.7 − 19.2 . + 6.0
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.6
2013 + 3.1 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 3.2 + 2.6 + 5.1 − 2.2 − 12.0 + 15.4 . + 3.4
2014 p + 3.9 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 6.4 + 2.4 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.3 − 0.3 − 18.5 + 3.9 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.5 + 4.5 + 3.9 − 2.0 + 2.8 + 4.5 + 2.3 + 3.5 + 7.0 − 10.7 − 3.4 . + 4.4
2016 p + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 3.2 + 5.5 + 4.1 − 12.4 + 6.2 . + 4.7
2017 pe + 4.2 + 4.5 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 3.8 + 3.9 + 4.1 + 3.8 + 5.2 − 4.6 + 4.6 . + 4.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and lution Fund established at the European level. 
social contributions plus customs duties and levies from banks to the Single Reso-

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.2 + 15.1 1,104.2 1,111.1 − 6.9
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 + 17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.3 1,236.7 + 8.6
2015 p 829.5 673.3 10.4 804.1 244.1 302.6 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,300.8 1,273.4 + 27.4
2016 p 862.1 705.8 9.0 843.4 251.3 320.5 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 18.7 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.0 1,329.2 + 25.8
2017 p 900.0 734.5 7.9 872.1 261.6 325.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 27.9 630.9 621.6 + 9.4 1,416.7 1,379.4 + 37.3
2015         Q1  p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
         Q2  p 208.4 167.7 1.5 185.2 59.5 72.8 7.2 9.1 3.0 + 23.1 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 325.0 301.8 + 23.2
         Q3  p 202.8 166.5 3.8 198.0 62.3 71.3 16.6 11.6 3.4 + 4.7 141.2 143.4 − 2.1 318.1 315.5 + 2.6
         Q4  p 221.5 178.2 2.6 219.3 63.4 77.4 7.3 17.3 3.5 + 2.2 152.7 145.3 + 7.4 348.4 338.8 + 9.6
2016         Q1  p 206.1 169.9 1.4 206.0 60.0 81.2 17.7 8.4 2.2 + 0.1 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 322.2 325.7 − 3.5
         Q2  p 216.7 176.6 2.4 194.1 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 338.5 314.2 + 24.3
         Q3  p 207.1 169.3 2.9 210.4 62.0 78.8 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.3 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 328.2 332.9 − 4.7
         Q4  p 232.6 189.2 2.1 233.2 68.1 83.1 7.7 17.2 4.8 − 0.6 160.1 152.2 + 7.8 365.3 358.1 + 7.2
2017         Q1  p 216.0 180.4 0.9 200.1 62.9 80.3 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 15.9 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 338.0 326.9 + 11.1
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.7 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.8 + 13.4
         Q3  p 219.6 180.4 3.5 215.4 64.4 78.1 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 4.3 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 346.1 342.7 + 3.3
         Q4  p 243.8 196.3 2.1 244.4 69.8 85.1 6.9 19.2 4.1 − 0.6 168.2 158.0 + 10.2 383.4 373.8 + 9.6
2018         Q1  p 223.3 189.1 1.0 207.9 61.1 81.0 11.5 8.8 2.5 + 15.4 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 350.4 339.7 + 10.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012, also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans gran ted.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2015         Q1  p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2  p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 58.1 53.4 + 4.7
         Q3  p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 57.5 56.3 + 1.2
         Q4  p 91.5 83.4 + 8.1 94.1 96.8 − 2.8 69.0 65.9 + 3.0
2016         Q1  p 81.1 82.7 − 1.6 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
         Q2  p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
         Q3  p 85.2 88.2 − 3.0 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
         Q4  p 90.9 93.9 − 3.0 104.3 104.4 − 0.0 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
2017         Q1  p 88.2 83.3 + 4.8 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.1 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
         Q3  p 88.6 93.1 − 4.6 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
         Q4  p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.7 109.2 − 4.5 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
2018         Q1  p 87.9 84.4 + 3.5 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and ing years, Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,368
2016         Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
         Q2 176,879 152,042 82,184 64,684 5,175 25,169 − 332 6,512
         Q3 169,374 145,700 76,638 61,573 7,489 23,839 − 165 7,584
         Q4 189,186 164,382 83,919 72,608 7,855 32,518 − 7,714 7,253
2017         Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
         Q2 177,090 149,915 76,391 66,605 6,918 27,631 − 456 6,825
         Q3 180,407 155,250 82,576 66,718 5,957 25,517 − 361 7,467
         Q4 195,537 170,139 92,507 71,019 6,613 34,060 − 8,662 6,471
2018         Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
         Q2 ... 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 ... ... 6,592
2017         June . 58,559 28,353 27,904 2,302 . . 2,275
2018         June . 70,195 37,802 30,695 1,698 . . 2,197
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2016         Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
         Q2 162,096 74,489 45,311 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,054
         Q3 155,524 68,137 44,656 11,898 5,546 6,037 53,906 40,877 13,029 2,046 24,857 5,263 1,316 9,824
         Q4 175,797 78,076 52,275 14,422 6,134 5,245 56,071 42,593 13,478 3,656 31,247 5,454 1,293 11,415
2017         Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
         Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121
         Q3 165,923 75,218 47,253 12,720 6,034 9,211 56,481 42,571 13,911 2,214 25,114 5,580 1,315 10,673
         Q4 182,288 82,077 54,707 14,873 6,843 5,654 58,128 43,846 14,282 3,868 31,587 5,384 1,243 12,149
2018         Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
         Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912
2017         June 63,666 39,961 17,319 13,145 7,041 2,456 17,878 13,124 4,755 − 7 3,500 1,888 446 5,107
2018         June 75,555 44,503 18,212 13,143 8,035 5,112 18,901 13,986 4,915 3 9,758 2,007 382 5,360
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2017: 50.7:46.6:2.7. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2017: 22.6:77.4. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2011 40,036 12,781 14,414 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 6,366 4,246 1,420 1,064 52,984 40,424 11,674
2012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2016         Q1 4,620 3,979 2,722 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 3,217 1,668 451 336 15,639 12,090 3,121
         Q2 9,860 4,470 4,139 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 2,952 2,283 451 267 16,740 12,635 3,715         Q3 10,149 3,938 3,010 2,510 2,198 1,641 499 911 3,050 1,501 446 266 15,896 11,699 3,794         Q4 15,461 4,468 4,315 2,038 1,899 1,728 532 806 3,189 1,554 460 251 17,045 13,679 3,024
2017         Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
         Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 − 5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 18,113 13,881 3,832         Q3 10,497 4,144 3,867 2,669 2,132 1,628 502 −324 3,394 1,497 417 273 16,698 12,443 3,824         Q4 15,622 4,677 4,261 2,070 1,906 1,786 538 727 3,257 1,438 456 233 17,118 13,670 3,082
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
         Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 ... ... ...
2017         June 3,515 2,445 1,270 657 843 686 155 − 6,071 1,074 563 157 94 . . .
2018         June 3,608 2,575 1,054 674 820 674 142 210 1,097 652 160 98 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,379
2012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,032
2015         Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259         Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2016         Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213         Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115         Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2015         Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −
         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −
         Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
2016         Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −
         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −
         Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −
         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −
         Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of t he basic allowance for
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,041
2015         Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501
         Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996
         Q4 55,872 52,085 2,875 54,124 16,553 8,773 8,998 3,449 3,618 2,834 3,102 + 1,747
2016         Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615
         Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517
         Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298
         Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415
         Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social insurance funds. 
sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,557
2015         Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472         Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236         Q4 8,198 8,180 7,571 966 2,722 1,682 240 295 + 626
2016         Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259         Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147         Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400         Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999         Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,125,099 11,785 605,907 206,631 53,974 1,246,801
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,202,307 12,126 629,513 199,132 60,140 1,301,3972013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,190,496 12,438 639,922 190,555 43,969 1,303,6122014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,192,004 12,774 610,509 190,130 44,915 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,161,775 85,952 597,515 186,661 44,977 1,246,670
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,145,473 205,391 574,727 179,755 41,352 1,144,2482017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017  
p 2,092,643 319,159 522,427 175,618 39,207 1,036,232
2015         Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 2,198,049 20,802 619,047 189,048 44,414 1,324,738
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 2,163,452 42,807 599,029 187,280 44,792 1,289,545         Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091          Q3 2,165,441 63,558 604,195 188,165 44,785 1,264,738         Q4 + 32,541 − 5,929 + 2,344 − 142          Q4 2,161,775 85,952 597,515 186,661 44,977 1,246,670
2016         Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1 2,170,197 108,746 612,193 183,160 41,334 1,224,764
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2 2,173,554 142,139 600,804 181,372 39,529 1,209,709         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864          Q3 2,166,995 172,567 587,282 179,359 38,827 1,188,959         Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333          Q4 2,145,473 205,391 574,727 179,755 41,352 1,144,248
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1  
p 2,118,194 239,495 559,898 178,219 39,505 1,101,077
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2  p 2,112,479 265,130 546,493 176,810 38,785 1,085,262
         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941          Q3  p 2,105,556 290,214 533,924 176,646 39,130 1,065,643
         Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95          Q4  p 2,092,643 319,159 522,427 175,618 39,207 1,036,232
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1  p 2,071,401 329,387 503,643 176,495 37,902 1,023,974
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
 
 
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(End of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other government
or quarter) Total and deposits  1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) sub-sectors sub-sectors
General government
2011 2,125,099 10,429 116,289 1,345,967 194,442 457,972 . .
2012 2,202,307 9,742 106,945 1,441,406 149,015 495,199 . .
2013 2,190,496 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 124,821 498,547 . .
2014 2,192,004 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 120,540 485,202 . .
2015         Q1 2,198,049 10,652 77,601 1,491,918 137,777 480,102 . .
         Q2 2,163,452 10,546 73,874 1,492,759 109,759 476,514 . .
         Q3 2,165,441 10,727 71,482 1,497,360 111,735 474,136 . .
         Q4 2,161,775 14,303 65,676 1,499,119 109,509 473,167 . .
2016         Q1 2,170,197 11,976 69,372 1,491,147 129,934 467,768 . .
         Q2 2,173,554 12,181 76,710 1,485,055 136,482 463,126 . .
         Q3 2,166,995 15,370 77,249 1,491,981 123,297 459,098 . .
         Q4 2,145,473 15,845 69,715 1,484,384 115,296 460,233 . .
2017         Q1  p 2,118,194 12,891 60,701 1,479,170 112,664 452,768 . .
         Q2  p 2,112,479 15,196 54,196 1,487,366 107,319 448,403 . .
         Q3  p 2,105,556 16,161 47,938 1,490,072 105,907 445,478 . .
         Q4  p 2,092,643 14,651 48,002 1,485,792 103,045 441,154 . .
2018         Q1  p 2,071,401 12,540 48,105 1,480,643 94,498 435,616 . .
Central government
2011 1,344,082 10,429 104,121 1,017,210 138,112 74,210 1,908 11,382
2012 1,387,857 9,742 88,372 1,088,796 88,311 112,636 1,465 11,354
2013 1,390,440 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,897 122,926 2,696 10,303
2014 1,396,496 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,315 123,829 1,202 12,833
2015         Q1 1,397,998 10,652 60,213 1,136,442 67,501 123,190 3,490 14,566
         Q2 1,380,556 10,546 59,283 1,141,784 45,327 123,616 3,359 10,879
         Q3 1,374,737 10,727 52,289 1,142,896 44,812 124,014 3,411 11,436
         Q4 1,372,626 14,303 49,512 1,139,060 45,149 124,601 2,932 13,577
2016         Q1 1,382,491 11,976 49,030 1,138,068 58,260 125,156 2,853 10,025
         Q2 1,391,145 12,181 59,399 1,129,888 65,048 124,629 2,803 11,367
         Q3 1,381,065 15,370 61,408 1,134,336 46,711 123,240 2,634 9,042
         Q4 1,366,847 15,845 55,208 1,124,451 49,898 121,446 2,238 8,478
2017         Q1  p 1,350,991 12,891 45,509 1,124,436 47,983 120,172 2,381 7,522
         Q2  p 1,353,598 15,196 40,224 1,132,692 44,606 120,880 2,348 8,244
         Q3  p 1,352,969 16,161 34,215 1,136,879 45,181 120,534 2,342 10,320
         Q4  p 1,351,622 14,651 36,296 1,132,623 47,743 120,310 2,666 10,761
2018         Q1  p 1,338,835 12,540 35,919 1,133,439 37,162 119,775 2,645 9,956
State government
2011 653,834 − 12,404 330,924 11,015 299,492 12,246 3,174
2012 683,613 − 18,802 355,756 12,314 296,742 13,197 2,968
2013 665,560 − 6,847 360,706 11,573 286,433 12,141 2,655
2014 660,076 − 8,391 361,916 19,003 270,766 14,825 2,297
2015         Q1 668,579 − 17,391 357,929 23,267 269,991 16,462 4,715
         Q2 647,822 − 14,595 353,507 15,592 264,129 12,909 4,731
         Q3 655,486 − 19,197 357,262 18,788 260,240 13,577 4,841
         Q4 656,454 − 16,169 362,376 18,510 259,399 15,867 4,218
2016         Q1 649,631 − 20,347 355,304 21,563 252,416 12,358 4,230
         Q2 646,105 − 17,318 357,069 23,455 248,263 13,860 4,061
         Q3 646,514 − 15,848 359,618 26,149 244,899 11,685 3,871
         Q4 639,506 − 14,515 361,996 16,331 246,664 11,408 3,376
2017         Q1  p 628,977 − 15,201 356,818 15,433 241,525 10,582 3,501
         Q2  p 622,217 − 13,981 356,896 14,990 236,349 11,285 3,518
         Q3  p 620,065 − 13,731 355,606 16,519 234,209 13,573 3,476
         Q4  p 612,117 − 11,716 355,628 16,168 228,605 14,411 3,631
2018         Q1  p 602,085 − 12,196 350,397 15,076 224,416 13,383 3,591
Local government
2011 143,510 − − 381 46,550 96,579 3,504 360
2012 147,452 − − 423 49,417 97,612 3,124 802
2013 150,569 − − 646 49,973 99,950 2,523 530
2014 151,987 − − 1,297 50,969 99,721 1,959 734
2015         Q1 152,384 − − 1,597 52,521 98,266 2,325 538
         Q2 152,232 − − 1,847 51,857 98,528 2,281 512
         Q3 153,088 − − 1,997 52,438 98,653 2,343 477
         Q4 152,227 − − 2,047 51,578 98,602 2,143 463
2016         Q1 154,423 − − 2,076 52,566 99,781 2,348 476
         Q2 154,034 − − 2,453 51,964 99,617 2,216 503
         Q3 154,832 − − 2,455 52,116 100,261 2,123 527
         Q4 153,441 − − 2,404 50,302 100,735 1,819 566
2017         Q1  p 152,037 − − 2,645 49,692 99,700 1,998 558
         Q2  p 151,430 − − 2,672 49,061 99,696 2,028 566
         Q3  p 149,654 − − 2,687 47,752 99,214 1,967 689
         Q4  p 147,220 − − 2,960 43,710 100,549 2,031 692
2018         Q1  p 147,460 − − 2,427 45,606 99,427 1,926 677
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(End of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) sub-sectors sub-sectors
Social security funds
2011 1,331 − − − 237 1,094 − 2,743
2012 1,171 − − − 195 976 − 2,6612013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,8722014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,122
2015         Q1 1,365 − − − 329 1,036 − 2,457
         Q2 1,391 − − − 355 1,036 − 2,428         Q3 1,460 − − − 450 1,010 − 2,578         Q4 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,685
2016         Q1 1,211 − − − 458 753 − 2,828
         Q2 1,147 − − − 443 704 − 2,948         Q3 1,025 − − − 334 691 − 3,002         Q4 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2017         Q1  
p 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,380
         Q2  p 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,333
         Q3  p 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,396
         Q4  p 792 − − − 247 545 − 4,025
2018         Q1  p 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,729
Sources: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government sub-sectors also comprise securiti es holdings purchased
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- on the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships claims and debt between different government sub-sectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which  3 of which  3
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(End of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 Day Bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 984,256 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,997
2008 1,016,364 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 75,1442009 1,082,644 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,592
2010 1,334,021 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 239,112
2011 1,344,082 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 212,3222012 1,387,857 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,9472013 1,390,440 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,8222014 1,396,496 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 178,144
2015 1,372,626 14,303 1,070 1,188,572 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,750
2016 1,366,847 15,845 1,010 1,179,659 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,3432017 
p 1,351,622 14,651 966 1,168,919 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 168,053
2015         Q1 1,397,998 10,652 1,155 1,196,655 653,801 235,849 52,507 14,583 4,211 102,203 26,495 2,271 190,691
         Q2 1,380,556 10,546 1,133 1,201,068 664,278 228,755 56,437 14,543 5,626 101,090 27,535 2,031 168,943         Q3 1,374,737 10,727 1,106 1,195,185 655,574 242,085 58,192 14,528 5,308 98,087 24,157 1,677 168,825         Q4 1,372,626 14,303 1,070 1,188,572 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,750
2016         Q1 1,382,491 11,976 1,051 1,187,099 666,565 225,678 61,893 14,603 4,395 98,232 20,526 1,205 183,417
         Q2 1,391,145 12,181 1,033 1,189,287 675,794 220,840 49,675 14,550 3,099 99,417 28,369 1,108 189,677         Q3 1,381,065 15,370 1,021 1,195,744 664,034 231,375 50,869 14,570 3,097 102,053 30,626 922 169,950         Q4 1,366,847 15,845 1,010 1,179,659 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,343
2017         Q1  
p 1,350,991 12,891 995 1,169,945 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 168,155
         Q2  p 1,353,598 15,196 986 1,172,916 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,486
         Q3  p 1,352,969 16,161 977 1,171,094 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,715
         Q4  p 1,351,622 14,651 966 1,168,919 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 168,053
2018         Q1  p 1,338,835 12,540 951 1,169,358 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,937
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, (ESA) 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all extra- the Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
budgetary units in addition to core central government, including govern- cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
ment-owned bad bank ”FMS Wertmanagement“ and liabilities attributed to central ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
government from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2018
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2016   2017   2018
  2015   2016   2017   2015   2016   2017   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 112.8 114.9 117.9 2.2 1.9 2.7 1.2 0.6 4.4 − 0.4 2.8 4.1 2.0
Construction 102.9 104.9 107.3 0.0 1.9 2.3 1.7 − 0.4 5.7 0.2 1.7 2.5 1.3
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and restaurant
services 108.5 111.1 114.3 0.7 2.4 2.9 1.6 2.5 4.7 1.9 3.1 2.2 2.3
Information and communication 128.5 132.0 137.2 2.6 2.7 3.9 3.5 1.6 4.4 3.5 3.8 3.9 3.2
Financial and insurance
activities 104.3 107.4 107.4 − 0.7 3.0 − 0.1 4.1 2.3 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.1 0.8
Real estate activities 103.3 103.9 105.1 0.2 0.6 1.1 0.4 0.5 1.3 0.5 1.3 1.5 1.0
Business services  1 108.1 110.0 112.6 1.9 1.8 2.4 1.7 1.5 3.8 0.7 2.6 2.3 1.7
Public services, education and
health 105.3 107.7 110.0 2.2 2.2 2.2 2.3 2.4 2.6 2.0 2.3 1.8 1.5
Other services 99.3 100.2 101.5 0.7 0.9 1.3 1.2 1.0 2.7 0.2 1.4 0.7 0.0
Gross value added 108.3 110.4 112.9 1.5 1.9 2.3 1.7 1.4 3.5 0.8 2.4 2.5 1.7
Gross domestic product  2 108.6 110.7 113.1 1.7 1.9 2.2 1.7 1.3 3.4 1.0 2.2 2.3 1.6
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 106.1 108.3 110.2 1.7 2.1 1.8 1.7 1.7 2.1 1.9 2.0 1.1 1.4
Government consumption 108.0 111.9 113.7 2.9 3.7 1.5 3.4 3.0 1.5 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.0
Machinery and equipment 111.1 113.4 118.0 3.9 2.2 4.0 1.4 − 2.6 3.6 1.7 4.5 6.0 4.4
Premises 108.3 111.3 114.4 − 1.4 2.7 2.7 2.1 0.4 5.6 1.3 2.8 1.7 1.3
Other investment  4 117.3 123.8 128.0 5.5 5.5 3.5 6.1 2.6 3.9 3.4 3.2 3.4 3.1
Changes in inventories  5, 6 . . . − 0.3 − 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.1 0.5 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
Domestic demand 106.1 108.7 111.1 1.6 2.4 2.2 2.4 1.9 2.6 2.4 2.4 1.6 1.6
Net exports  6 . . . 0.2 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 1.0 − 1.1 0.0 0.8 0.1
Exports 124.7 128.0 133.9 5.2 2.6 4.6 1.3 2.6 6.9 1.4 4.9 5.5 3.0
Imports 120.5 125.2 131.6 5.6 3.9 5.2 2.8 4.3 5.6 4.7 5.8 4.6 3.3
Gross domestic product  2 108.6 110.7 113.1 1.7 1.9 2.2 1.7 1.3 3.4 1.0 2.2 2.3 1.6
At  current  prices  ( € billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,630.5 1,674.4 1,732.8 2.3 2.7 3.5 2.2 2.8 4.0 3.5 3.7 2.7 2.9
Government consumption 587.1 615.4 637.9 4.1 4.8 3.6 4.5 4.1 3.3 3.3 3.9 4.1 3.2
Machinery and equipment 200.8 205.8 214.6 4.7 2.5 4.3 1.7 − 2.3 3.8 2.0 4.8 6.3 4.9
Premises 291.0 304.5 323.0 0.4 4.6 6.1 4.1 2.5 8.4 4.5 6.2 5.6 5.6
Other investment  4 112.5 119.7 125.4 7.0 6.4 4.8 6.9 3.7 4.9 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.9
Changes in inventories  5 − 21.5 − 26.4 − 17.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,800.3 2,893.4 3,016.2 2.6 3.3 4.2 3.2 3.2 4.4 4.4 4.5 3.6 3.5
Net exports 243.3 250.6 247.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,426.7 1,450.0 1,541.5 6.4 1.6 6.3 − 0.0 2.3 8.6 3.5 6.5 6.8 3.5
Imports 1,183.4 1,199.4 1,294.3 4.1 1.4 7.9 0.2 3.9 9.8 8.2 7.5 6.4 3.6
Gross domestic product  2 3,043.7 3,144.1 3,263.4 3.8 3.3 3.8 2.9 2.5 4.3 2.6 4.3 4.0 3.5
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 106.2 106.9 108.7 0.6 0.6 1.7 0.5 1.1 1.9 1.6 1.7 1.6 1.4
Gross domestic product 108.7 110.1 111.8 2.0 1.3 1.5 1.2 1.2 0.9 1.6 2.0 1.7 1.8
Terms of trade 102.1 103.7 102.7 2.7 1.5 − 1.0 1.3 0.2 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.3
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,542.3 1,600.3 1,668.9 3.9 3.8 4.3 3.7 3.9 4.2 4.4 4.4 4.1 4.6
Entrepreneurial and property
income 722.6 737.7 765.8 3.8 2.1 3.8 − 0.2 − 1.2 4.1 − 0.9 6.4 5.5 2.9
National income 2,264.9 2,338.0 2,434.7 3.8 3.2 4.1 2.3 2.5 4.2 2.7 5.1 4.5 4.0
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,099.8 3,197.2 3,323.6 3.7 3.1 4.0 2.4 2.5 4.1 2.9 4.6 4.2 3.9
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2018. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
August 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.60 29.44 36.96 2.28 10.92 10.27 9.95 12.73 14.14
Period
2014 98.8 101.9 95.2 99.3 99.9 98.8 97.5 100.1 99.7 99.0 100.0 99.8
2015 99.8 99.6 100.1 99.7 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.8 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.6
2016 101.6 105.3 98.7 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.7 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.12017 104.9 108.7 98.8 104.8 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.3
 
2017         Q2 104.4 111.1 93.8 104.1 105.4 104.0 105.6 100.4 107.0 104.6 101.8 106.0
         Q3 106.5 116.6 92.4 105.8 107.4 104.7 106.3 105.2 107.8 109.5 103.0 105.2         Q4 110.0 122.3 104.6 108.2 104.6 111.3 109.6 107.1 106.7 111.6 115.9 104.8
2018         Q1 102.7 87.8 105.1 105.2 106.1 104.3 108.9 104.7 107.3 108.3 100.5 109.5
         Q2
x 106.8 112.3 91.2 107.2 107.5 107.0 105.4 107.0 109.4 107.3 104.3 110.7
 
2017         June 107.1 114.6 91.3 107.1 106.8 108.7 108.0 102.0 109.1 108.9 109.1 106.4
         July 2 106.7 119.2 91.3 105.8 108.6 104.1 101.6 104.6 108.6 109.2 101.8 103.9
         Aug 2 101.2 112.3 93.0 99.9 103.5 96.4 98.2 102.6 102.2 104.3 94.9 95.6
         Sep 111.5 118.4 93.0 111.8 110.2 113.7 119.0 108.4 112.5 115.0 112.4 116.1
         Oct 109.6 120.9 103.0 108.1 109.8 106.4 114.1 108.2 112.0 109.6 103.1 108.2
         Nov 116.0 123.4 104.3 115.6 111.6 119.3 117.7 113.2 115.0 117.4 115.9 122.4         Dec 104.3 122.7 106.6 100.9 92.4 108.2 97.1 99.8 93.2 107.9 128.6 83.8
2018         Jan 95.7 75.2 106.0 98.5 102.4 93.8 102.7 102.8 101.5 102.0 87.9 99.4
         Feb 98.8 83.0 101.6 101.4 102.6 100.7 105.4 99.4 104.9 104.3 97.1 105.3         Mar 113.6 105.1 107.7 115.6 113.3 118.4 118.5 112.0 115.5 118.7 116.6 123.9
         Apr 
x 104.6 109.2 92.7 104.8 105.5 105.0 103.4 102.6 108.0 103.8 99.8 112.0
         May x 106.1 113.1 90.5 106.2 107.7 104.3 102.9 109.1 108.8 105.8 101.2 108.0
         June x,p 109.8 114.7 90.4 110.5 109.3 111.8 109.8 109.2 111.5 112.2 111.8 112.1
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2014 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 3.8 + 2.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.1
2015 + 1.0 − 2.3 + 5.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.8 + 5.7 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.52017 + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.1
 
2017         Q2 + 3.4 + 5.2 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 5.9 + 4.3 + 2.1
         Q3 + 4.1 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 5.2 + 4.8 + 6.1 + 2.9 + 6.3 + 6.7 + 4.7 + 5.0         Q4 + 4.7 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 5.3 + 6.3 + 5.4 + 3.1 + 3.2 + 5.9 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 5.7
2018         Q1 + 3.9 + 3.5 + 0.6 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 4.3 + 2.6 + 5.4 + 3.9 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 4.3
         Q2
x + 2.3 + 1.1 − 2.8 + 2.9 + 2.0 + 2.9 − 0.3 + 6.6 + 2.2 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 4.4
 
2017         June + 2.7 + 4.2 + 3.3 + 2.4 + 3.3 + 1.9 + 0.8 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 4.0 + 3.3 − 0.7
         July 2 + 3.9 + 2.8 − 2.7 + 4.8 + 5.4 + 4.3 + 5.3 + 3.7 + 6.8 + 8.0 + 5.5 + 1.8
         Aug 2 + 4.4 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 7.4 + 2.2 + 6.1 + 6.8 + 3.3 + 9.3
         Sep + 4.0 + 3.9 − 2.6 + 4.5 + 5.0 + 4.5 + 5.6 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 5.4 + 5.3 + 4.6
         Oct + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 4.4 + 0.6 + 2.3 + 0.7 + 5.0 + 3.5 + 3.8 − 2.7
         Nov + 5.7 + 3.7 − 0.7 + 6.5 + 6.8 + 7.1 + 4.8 + 4.2 + 4.9 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 11.8         Dec + 6.3 + 2.9 + 0.7 + 7.7 + 7.9 + 8.6 + 2.1 + 4.9 + 8.1 + 11.5 + 12.1 + 9.1
2018         Jan + 6.1 + 16.6 − 4.6 + 5.8 + 5.0 + 6.0 + 3.7 + 7.3 + 4.9 + 6.4 + 5.6 + 5.4
         Feb + 2.1 − 1.3 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 4.2 + 4.2 + 5.2 + 2.5 − 0.4         Mar + 3.6 − 0.6 + 5.0 + 4.3 + 3.0 + 5.4 + 3.6 + 4.7 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 6.4 + 7.6
         Apr 
x + 1.4 − 0.1 − 2.8 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 2.4 + 4.6
         May x + 3.0 + 3.3 − 4.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 8.7 + 2.2 + 3.7 + 2.5 + 3.3
         June x,p + 2.5 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 3.2 + 2.3 + 2.9 + 1.7 + 7.1 + 2.2 + 3.0 + 2.5 + 5.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, dates. xProvisional; estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey and th e Quarterly Survey in
II.12. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
the production sector in the base year 2015. 2Influenced by a change in holiday

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
August 2018
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2015=100 change 2015=100 change 2015=100 change 2015=100 change 2015=100 change 2015=100 change
Total
2013 95.2 + 2.4 100.0 − 0.9 92.6 + 4.6 92.5 + 2.0 95.2 + 2.4 91.7 + 2.0
2014 97.8 + 2.7 100.6 + 0.6 96.2 + 3.9 96.8 + 4.6 95.8 + 0.6 97.1 + 5.9
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.8
2016 100.7 + 0.9 98.9 − 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.0 − 0.8
2017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.8 + 5.2 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2017         June 110.7 + 7.4 110.9 + 11.0 111.4 + 5.4 104.0 + 4.8 117.6 + 13.6 99.5 + 1.6
         July 105.8 + 6.3 108.8 + 9.9 103.8 + 4.4 107.8 + 5.0 108.8 + 5.4 107.4 + 4.8
         Aug 99.0 + 9.8 104.9 + 16.6 94.2 + 5.7 107.9 + 8.2 115.3 + 21.2 105.5 + 4.1
         Sep 110.3 + 11.0 108.9 + 11.8 111.8 + 11.4 107.0 + 6.2 126.2 + 13.3 100.7 + 3.5
         Oct 112.9 + 9.0 113.5 + 11.4 112.9 + 7.9 109.7 + 6.4 127.9 + 5.3 103.7 + 6.8
         Nov 114.8 + 10.9 118.2 + 13.8 113.1 + 9.5 111.4 + 8.1 129.8 + 17.0 105.4 + 4.8
         Dec 115.2 + 9.1 103.4 + 14.0 125.2 + 7.2 94.5 + 4.2 108.6 + 12.2 89.8 + 1.2
2018         Jan 110.9 + 9.9 115.7 + 10.5 107.9 + 9.7 111.3 + 8.8 112.6 + 5.2 110.8 + 10.0
         Feb 110.3 + 4.1 110.9 + 2.3 110.1 + 5.9 108.7 − 1.4 112.2 + 3.1 107.6 − 2.8
         Mar 121.6 + 3.8 121.2 + 4.1 122.9 + 3.6 113.6 + 2.8 123.6 − 2.3 110.4 + 4.9
         Apr 108.4 + 1.6 116.0 + 7.4 104.7 − 1.7 101.5 − 0.6 114.1 + 2.6 97.3 − 1.8
         May 109.9 + 5.9 114.1 + 7.1 107.6 + 5.1 106.7 + 5.0 121.3 + 10.0 101.8 + 3.2
         June p 111.5 + 0.7 114.7 + 3.4 110.3 − 1.0 104.8 + 0.8 119.4 + 1.5 100.1 + 0.6
From the domestic market
2013 97.0 + 0.5 102.8 − 1.3 92.3 + 2.1 95.2 + 1.2 100.4 + 0.9 93.4 + 1.3
2014 98.1 + 1.1 101.7 − 1.1 95.2 + 3.1 97.1 + 2.0 100.4 + 0.0 96.0 + 2.8
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.9 + 2.2 98.0 − 1.8 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.8 101.7 + 3.8 108.7 + 5.4 99.3 + 3.1
2017         June 108.7 + 7.8 105.5 + 7.7 112.8 + 8.4 99.9 + 4.8 107.2 + 8.6 97.4 + 3.4
         July 107.2 + 9.3 108.2 + 10.0 106.7 + 9.4 104.9 + 4.8 102.3 + 1.5 105.8 + 6.0
         Aug 101.2 + 9.3 107.0 + 16.6 95.4 + 3.1 106.3 + 8.9 110.9 + 12.5 104.8 + 7.7
         Sep 107.5 + 10.7 105.9 + 13.0 109.4 + 9.7 104.5 + 5.9 121.1 + 7.1 98.9 + 5.4
         Oct 111.0 + 7.7 112.3 + 10.7 110.2 + 5.2 108.7 + 7.1 128.7 + 8.9 101.9 + 6.3
         Nov 112.7 + 9.3 114.1 + 10.9 111.7 + 7.9 111.6 + 10.0 123.1 + 10.5 107.7 + 9.7
         Dec 101.3 + 1.5 98.4 + 12.7 106.1 − 5.8 86.2 + 0.0 89.0 + 2.4 85.2 − 0.9
2018         Jan 107.8 + 8.8 113.4 + 11.0 104.0 + 7.5 101.8 + 4.0 103.1 + 0.4 101.3 + 5.2
         Feb 105.6 − 3.5 108.1 − 0.9 103.5 − 6.2 105.3 + 0.5 109.5 + 7.1 103.9 − 1.7
         Mar 119.7 + 4.3 119.4 + 5.9 121.6 + 3.1 109.0 + 3.5 122.1 + 5.2 104.6 + 3.0
         Apr 105.0 − 4.6 108.7 + 2.7 103.0 − 11.4 97.9 + 4.9 115.5 + 13.3 91.9 + 1.7
         May 106.5 + 5.1 110.2 + 6.3 103.4 + 3.4 106.2 + 10.1 127.6 + 29.3 99.0 + 3.4
         June p 107.5 − 1.1 110.9 + 5.1 105.6 − 6.4 100.9 + 1.0 110.6 + 3.2 97.6 + 0.2
From abroad
2013 93.9 + 3.9 97.1 − 0.4 92.8 + 6.2 90.5 + 2.7 91.0 + 3.6 90.4 + 2.5
2014 97.5 + 3.8 99.5 + 2.5 96.7 + 4.2 96.5 + 6.6 92.0 + 1.1 97.9 + 8.3
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.4 + 0.6 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.1 + 7.3 101.1 + 1.3
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.5 109.0 + 7.0 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.7 104.4 + 3.3
2017         June 112.2 + 7.0 116.8 + 14.6 110.6 + 3.8 107.2 + 4.8 125.9 + 17.3 101.1 + 0.4
         July 104.8 + 4.2 109.5 + 9.9 102.0 + 1.4 110.0 + 5.0 114.1 + 8.5 108.7 + 3.9
         Aug 97.3 + 10.1 102.7 + 16.7 93.4 + 7.2 109.2 + 7.7 118.8 + 28.9 106.1 + 1.6
         Sep 112.5 + 11.2 112.1 + 10.6 113.2 + 12.2 109.0 + 6.4 130.3 + 18.5 102.1 + 2.1
         Oct 114.4 + 10.1 114.9 + 12.2 114.5 + 9.6 110.4 + 5.7 127.3 + 2.5 105.0 + 7.0
         Nov 116.4 + 12.1 122.7 + 16.9 113.9 + 10.5 111.3 + 6.6 135.2 + 22.4 103.6 + 1.2
         Dec 125.7 + 14.3 108.8 + 15.3 136.7 + 14.6 100.9 + 7.2 124.3 + 18.7 93.3 + 2.9
2018         Jan 113.3 + 10.9 118.2 + 10.1 110.3 + 11.0 118.6 + 12.2 120.3 + 8.9 118.0 + 13.4
         Feb 113.9 + 10.2 113.9 + 5.9 114.1 + 13.9 111.4 − 2.6 114.3 + 0.2 110.4 − 3.6
         Mar 123.0 + 3.3 123.1 + 2.2 123.7 + 3.9 117.2 + 2.4 124.8 − 7.4 114.8 + 6.3
         Apr 111.0 + 6.5 123.8 + 12.1 105.8 + 5.1 104.3 − 4.2 112.9 − 4.8 101.5 − 4.1
         May 112.4 + 6.3 118.4 + 8.0 110.2 + 6.2 107.0 + 1.4 116.2 − 2.8 104.0 + 3.1
         June p 114.5 + 2.0 118.8 + 1.7 113.2 + 2.4 107.9 + 0.7 126.4 + 0.4 102.0 + 0.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex-   
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,  
Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
August 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2014 118.5 − 0.6 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.8 − 0.9 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.8 − 0.1 104.1 − 3.3
2015 124.2 + 4.8 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.3 − 2.0 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.3 + 5.0
2016 142.2 + 14.5 153.8 + 15.1 193.5 + 17.0 143.0 + 15.0 107.5 + 9.1 130.8 + 13.9 137.1 + 11.8 127.0 + 16.22017 152.2 + 7.0 164.6 + 7.0 203.9 + 5.4 153.5 + 7.3 120.3 + 11.9 139.8 + 6.9 147.1 + 7.3 136.7 + 7.6
 
2017         May 155.4 − 1.3 162.5 − 7.7 202.2 − 3.5 143.0 − 17.7 142.1 + 20.8 148.4 + 7.0 138.5 − 11.2 154.0 + 11.7
         June 173.3 + 5.0 188.1 + 3.9 238.5 + 6.9 164.4 − 5.9 159.2 + 36.3 158.5 + 6.2 156.1 − 3.3 164.6 + 13.0
         July 164.0 + 7.4 167.7 + 2.5 203.9 + 4.6 159.6 + 0.7 120.4 + 2.6 160.4 + 13.2 155.2 + 7.7 157.1 + 8.8
         Aug 145.3 + 4.6 152.9 + 2.9 184.8 + 0.4 142.3 + 0.5 121.5 + 22.0 137.7 + 6.6 138.9 + 4.9 135.9 + 6.6         Sep 151.8 + 5.1 163.7 + 1.3 200.0 − 11.3 148.2 + 11.3 138.3 + 15.0 140.0 + 9.9 144.9 + 11.7 139.5 + 9.8
         Oct 141.2 − 2.8 152.7 − 2.7 203.3 + 4.6 131.0 − 11.5 117.8 + 6.8 129.8 − 2.8 132.5 − 8.6 125.3 − 0.6
         Nov 140.7 + 10.7 158.1 + 13.2 188.6 − 0.4 157.1 + 29.0 101.3 + 6.5 123.2 + 7.6 152.9 + 22.9 108.9 + 3.9         Dec 166.7 + 27.0 199.5 + 32.8 247.1 + 43.2 196.0 + 27.4 116.3 + 21.9 133.9 + 19.1 174.7 + 23.9 126.2 + 20.4
2018         Jan 123.8 + 9.1 135.6 + 8.5 170.0 + 10.0 129.5 + 5.7 86.0 + 15.6 112.1 + 9.8 130.3 + 4.7 98.7 + 14.9
         Feb 154.2 + 18.3 157.6 + 9.2 186.6 + 6.0 154.8 + 11.3 108.7 + 11.6 150.8 + 29.8 167.1 + 31.2 127.9 + 11.4         Mar 180.7 + 0.9 186.9 − 1.8 228.8 − 6.1 169.6 − 1.5 155.7 + 11.5 174.5 + 4.1 168.4 + 2.0 174.0 + 4.0
         Apr 169.0 + 2.3 174.9 + 2.6 234.0 + 14.4 156.6 − 6.1 113.0 − 1.5 163.2 + 2.0 155.9 + 1.2 156.3 − 2.9
         May 177.3 + 14.1 182.6 + 12.4 216.0 + 6.8 177.3 + 24.0 132.9 − 6.5 172.0 + 15.9 174.9 + 26.3 164.2 + 6.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of whichin stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current At prices in
prices year 2010  3 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2014 96.5 + 1.6 96.4 + 1.2 97.3 + 2.0 99.9 + 1.8 99.2 − 0.8 97.6 − 0.5 95.0 + 7.1 83.3 + 1.8
2015 4 100.1 + 3.7 4 100.1 + 3.8 100.1 + 2.9 100.2 + 0.3 100.2 + 1.0 100.2 + 2.7 100.0 + 5.3 4 100.0 + 20.0
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.1 + 2.0 101.7 + 1.6 100.9 + 0.7 99.9 − 0.3 101.5 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.82017
5 107.6 + 5.0 105.1 + 2.9 105.6 + 3.8 108.2 + 7.2 107.0 + 7.1 103.6 + 2.1 107.9 + 3.8 120.6 + 9.8
 
2017         June 105.2 + 5.8 103.3 + 4.1 104.8 + 3.9 105.4 + 8.4 95.1 + 6.5 102.4 + 3.4 106.2 + 6.0 111.7 + 11.3
         July 107.2 + 4.5 105.8 + 2.9 107.2 + 3.7 105.2 + 2.9 102.3 + 10.4 104.2 + 2.7 109.3 + 2.9 112.3 + 13.3
         Aug 103.0 + 3.9 101.2 + 1.9 103.4 + 2.7 99.2 + 6.7 97.7 + 9.8 98.1 + 0.9 104.6 + 3.8 110.7 + 9.4         Sep 106.2 + 7.5 103.4 + 5.5 102.4 + 5.0 124.9 + 27.4 102.9 + 11.2 99.8 + 3.5 105.7 + 3.2 116.7 + 12.1
         Oct 110.4 + 2.4 107.2 + 0.8 105.7 + 2.4 121.7 − 3.9 111.4 + 4.5 109.8 + 1.8 108.8 + 2.3 122.2 + 2.9
         Nov 115.1 + 6.0 111.4 + 4.0 108.0 + 4.7 117.6 + 9.7 123.0 + 7.0 111.1 + 3.3 113.1 + 4.1 150.4 + 13.3         Dec 129.8 + 4.5 125.8 + 2.8 125.8 + 4.8 132.0 + 6.5 160.7 + 1.4 112.6 + 2.3 123.8 + 5.2 154.1 + 7.6
2018         Jan 100.1 + 3.7 97.6 + 2.3 98.7 + 3.8 91.2 + 3.5 109.6 − 2.3 91.1 + 4.0 107.1 + 5.3 119.4 + 4.3
         Feb 96.4 + 2.3 93.7 + 1.1 97.9 + 3.4 81.7 + 1.6 92.7 + 0.2 89.1 − 0.4 104.0 + 4.5 108.7 + 1.2         Mar 110.8 + 1.4 106.9 + 0.1 110.0 + 3.7 104.0 − 5.1 104.5 + 1.2 107.2 − 4.7 112.4 + 3.1 125.9 + 5.7
         Apr 112.2 + 4.9 107.8 + 3.2 111.4 + 3.5 117.8 + 8.4 91.3 − 2.1 113.3 + 4.0 111.3 + 5.1 121.6 + 6.3
         May 109.5 + 2.5 105.1 + 0.9 111.2 + 4.7 105.6
+ 0.0 89.0 + 0.0 105.8 − 0.8 107.2 + 0.6 118.5 + 3.9
         June 108.3 + 2.9 104.1 + 0.8 110.8 + 5.7 102.5 − 2.8 99.7 + 4.8 100.8 − 1.6 107.5 + 1.2 113.5 + 1.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added integration of a larger online retail sales based enterprise that founded a business
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business establishment in Germany in May 2015. 5As of January 2017, figures are provision-
statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. al, in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months due to esti-
1Including stalls and markets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3Values at current mates for missing reports. 
prices deflated with retail price indices in 2010 weights. 4As of May 2015,

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
August 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legal
category
Solely of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary social Unem- Temporary Security
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies,  4,6 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4,5 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2013 42,319 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 191 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 r 42,670 r + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 r 43,071 r + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 r 43,642 r + 1.3 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 r 44,269 r + 1.4 32,234 + 2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 113 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2015         Q2 r 42,997 r + 0.8 30,671 + 2.0 8,895 20,740 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822 6.3 560
         Q3 r 43,290 r + 1.0 30,928 + 2.1 8,974 20,865 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595
         Q4 r 43,485 r + 1.2 31,333 + 2.3 9,049 21,204 837 4,829 101 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2016         Q1 r 43,087 r + 1.4 31,077 + 2.4 8,929 21,131 793 4,785 312 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 r 43,563 r + 1.3 31,350 + 2.2 8,988 21,298 820 4,823 59 47 2,674 782 6.1 653
         Q3 r 43,842 r + 1.3 31,593 + 2.1 9,056 21,431 858 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682
         Q4 r 44,076 r + 1.4 32,014 + 2.2 9,137 21,770 866 4,781 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017         Q1 r 43,729 r + 1.5 31,790 + 2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734 7 987 6.2 671
         Q2 r 44,195 r + 1.5 32,064 + 2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 5.6 717
         Q3 r 44,479 r + 1.5 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763
         Q4 r 44,672 r + 1.4 32,759 + 2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 79 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1 r 44,385 r + 1.5 8 32,574 8 + 2.5 8 9,216 8 22,287 8 844 8 4,663 ... 8 20 2,525 909 5.7 760
         Q2 9 44,794 9 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,325 760 10 5.1 794
2015         Mar r 42,635 r + 0.8 30,528 + 2.0 8,865 20,651 777 4,829 251 50 2,932 955 6.8 542
         Apr r 42,830 r + 0.8 30,645 + 1.9 8,895 20,723 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552
         May r 43,012 r + 0.8 30,718 + 2.0 8,901 20,776 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815 6.3 557
         June r 43,150 r + 0.9 30,771 + 2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572
         July r 43,191 r + 0.9 30,744 + 2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589
         Aug r 43,250 r + 1.0 30,988 + 2.2 8,993 20,901 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597
         Sep r 43,429 r + 1.1 31,333 + 2.2 9,076 21,153 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600
         Oct r 43,517 r + 1.1 31,368 + 2.3 9,068 21,206 846 4,814 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612
         Nov r 43,554 r + 1.3 31,389 + 2.5 9,060 21,247 842 4,846 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610
         Dec r 43,385 r + 1.3 31,150 + 2.5 8,964 21,167 798 4,843 177 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016         Jan r 42,993 r + 1.3 30,983 + 2.3 8,906 21,073 784 4,774 343 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb r 43,049 r + 1.4 31,069 + 2.4 8,923 21,127 793 4,769 343 50 2,911 947 6.6 614
         Mar r 43,218 r + 1.4 31,209 + 2.2 8,954 21,217 804 4,782 252 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
         Apr r 43,386 r + 1.3 31,314 + 2.2 8,983 21,279 809 4,806 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640
         May r 43,580 r + 1.3 31,410 + 2.3 9,000 21,337 826 4,838 57 45 2,664 774 6.0 655
         June r 43,724 r + 1.3 31,443 + 2.2 9,010 21,339 846 4,865 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665
         July r 43,704 r + 1.2 31,378 + 2.1 9,007 21,273 853 4,863 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674
         Aug r 43,810 r + 1.3 31,675 + 2.2 9,076 21,486 865 4,802 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685
         Sep r 44,011 r + 1.3 32,007 + 2.2 9,157 21,729 869 4,768 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687
         Oct r 44,093 r + 1.3 32,045 + 2.2 9,154 21,773 871 4,767 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691
         Nov r 44,140 r + 1.3 32,069 + 2.2 9,147 21,807 876 4,794 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681
         Dec r 43,994 r + 1.4 31,848 + 2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan r 43,644 r + 1.5 31,707 + 2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777 7 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb r 43,694 r + 1.5 31,774 + 2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
         Mar r 43,850 r + 1.5 31,930 + 2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr r 44,024 r + 1.5 32,013 + 2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
         May r 44,205 r + 1.4 32,131 + 2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 5.6 714
         June r 44,356 r + 1.4 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July r 44,375 r + 1.5 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
         Aug r 44,445 r + 1.4 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765
         Sep r 44,618 r + 1.4 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
         Oct r 44,683 r + 1.3 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
         Nov r 44,737 r + 1.4 32,830 + 2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772
         Dec r 44,595 r + 1.4 32,609 + 2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 183 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan r 44,320 r + 1.5 32,504 + 2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 256 21 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb r 44,357 r + 1.5 8 32,576 8 + 2.5 8 9,228 8 22,281 8 840 8 4,642 ... 8 20 2,546 927 5.7 764
         Mar r 44,479 r + 1.4 8 32,678 8 + 2.3 8 9,258 8 22,347 8 838 8 4,654 ... 8 18 2,458 859 5.5 778
         Apr r 44,635 r + 1.4 8 32,792 8 + 2.4 8 9,295 8 22,412 8 840 8 4,684 ... 8 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
         May r 44,810 r + 1.4 8 32,878 8 + 2.3 8 9,314 8 22,466 8 846 8 4,718 ... 8 11 2,315 751 10 5.1 793
         June 9 44,936 9 + 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,276 735 5.0 805
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,325 788 5.1 823
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and of the Social Security Code (SGB III). 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- Employment Agency. In 2016 and 2017, the estimated values for G ermany deviated
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: from the final data by a maximum of 1.1 % for employees subject to social contribu-
end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the tions, by a maximum of 0.4 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contribu-
total civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment tions, and by a maximum of 70.0 % for cyclically induced short-time work. 9Initial
and seasonal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From January 2017, persons preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 10From May 2018 calculated
receiving additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment on the basis of new labour force figures. 
benefit II at the same time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
August 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  6 
prices ofindustrial
of which
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy struction the prices  of price index
(national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial Housing
Total Food  2 Energy  3 Services rents  4 concept) index market  5 Exports Imports Energy  7 products  5 goods materials  8 
Period 2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2013 99.1 97.4 98.7 109.8 97.4 97.3 105.7 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 160.2 117.6
2014 99.9 98.8 99.2 107.5 98.8 98.8 106.6 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 142.8 108.3
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 111.3 103.9 106.9 104.9 100.9 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.2 101.2 107.4 113.4 102.1 106.6 104.0 97.8 83.2 98.42017 102.1 104.0 102.3 97.5 102.5 102.9 109.3 117.0 104.8
9 115.1 105.9 101.5 99.6 107.1
 
2016         Sep 100.6 101.2 101.5 94.9 101.4 101.5 107.7 102.0 104.7 104.0 97.8 83.9 97.0
         Oct 100.8 101.2 102.0 96.2 101.2 101.7 107.9 102.7 108.8 104.3 98.7 96.2 99.8
         Nov 100.8 102.0 102.0 95.2 101.1 101.8 108.0 114.1 103.0 111.3 104.8 99.4 95.4 108.5         Dec 101.8 102.6 101.6 97.3 102.8 102.0 108.8 103.4 113.1 105.2 101.3 106.6 114.0
2017         Jan 101.0 103.2 100.7 98.2 101.0 102.2 108.1 104.1 114.8 105.8 102.2 108.9 115.9
         Feb 101.7 104.6 101.0 98.4 101.9 102.3 108.8 115.5 104.3 116.2 106.0 102.9 110.2 118.9         Mar 101.8 103.4 102.6 97.5 102.0 102.4 109.0 104.3 117.6 106.0 102.4 99.7 116.4
         Apr 101.8 103.4 102.7 98.3 101.5 102.6 109.0 104.7 119.9 106.2 102.3 100.4 110.1
         May 101.6 103.5 102.7 96.9 101.5 102.8 108.8 116.6 104.5 120.9 106.0 101.3 93.1 104.2         June 101.8 103.6 102.0 96.1 102.5 102.9 109.0 104.5 121.3 105.8 100.2 85.7 100.4
         July 102.2 103.8 101.4 95.9 103.8 103.0 109.4 104.7 120.2 105.7 99.8 86.5 102.9
         Aug 102.4 103.8 101.8 96.3 103.8 103.1 109.5 117.5 104.9 121.2 105.6 99.8 90.1 103.3         Sep 102.4 104.1 102.9 97.5 102.8 103.2 109.6 105.2
9 115.9 105.8 100.7 96.3 102.8
         Oct 102.3 104.8 103.2 97.4 102.2 103.3 109.6 105.5 114.3 105.9 101.3 101.6 102.7
         Nov 102.6 104.8 103.2 98.7 102.6 103.5 109.9 118.4 105.6 114.7 106.1 102.1 110.3 103.8         Dec 103.4 105.5 102.8 98.5 104.2 103.6 110.6 105.8 114.3 106.2 102.4 113.7 103.6
2018         Jan 102.4 106.2 101.8 98.9 102.4 103.9 109.8 106.3 110.5 106.5 102.9 115.9 105.4
         Feb 102.9 106.2 102.2 98.5 103.3 104.0 110.3 120.4 106.2 110.0 106.5 102.3 108.7 106.0         Mar 103.3 106.4 103.2 97.9 103.7 104.1 110.7 106.3 111.3 106.7 102.3 109.5 104.9
         Apr 103.2 106.8 103.4 99.5 102.7 104.3 110.7 106.8 110.7 106.9 102.9 116.7 106.1
         May 103.8 106.9 103.3 101.9 103.4 104.4 111.2 121.7 107.3 109.6 107.4 104.5 129.9 112.5         June 103.9 106.9 102.9 102.4 103.8 104.5 111.3 107.6 110.5 107.7 105.0 130.5 111.3
         July 104.3 106.6 101.9 102.3 105.5 104.7 111.6 ... ... ... ... 129.9 105.8
Annual percentage change  
  
2013 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 8.6
2014 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.8 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 16.8 − 1.62017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.2 + 2.6
9 + 8.0 + 1.8 + 3.8 + 19.7 + 8.8
 
2016         Sep + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.4 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 7.6 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.0 + 6.9
         Nov + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 17.0         Dec + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.0 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 37.5 + 27.5
2017         Jan + 1.9 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 7.5 + 1.8 + 6.0 + 68.8 + 31.4
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 7.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 9.6 + 2.5 + 7.4 + 72.2 + 34.2         Mar + 1.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 3.1 + 10.3 + 2.3 + 6.1 + 37.9 + 24.4
         Apr + 2.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 13.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 33.7 + 15.3
         May + 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.8 + 14.1 + 2.2 + 4.1 + 12.7 + 7.2         June + 1.5 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 14.0 + 1.8 + 2.5 − 2.5 + 1.5
         July + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 9.3 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.7
         Aug + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 13.6 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 7.4 + 4.8         Sep + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.1
9 + 10.7 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 14.8 + 6.0
         Oct + 1.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 5.1 + 1.5 + 2.6 + 5.6 + 2.9
         Nov + 1.8 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.7 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.8 + 2.5 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 15.6 − 4.3         Dec + 1.6 + 2.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 6.7 − 9.1
2018         Jan + 1.4 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 6.4 − 9.1
         Feb + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 1.8 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 10.8         Mar + 1.5 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 5.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.8 − 9.9
         Apr + 1.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 2.0 − 7.7 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 16.2 − 3.6
         May + 2.2 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 5.2 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 − 9.3 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 39.5 + 8.0         June + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 6.6 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 3.0 − 8.9 + 1.8 + 4.8 + 52.3 + 10.9
         July + 2.1 + 2.7 + 0.5 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.0 ... ... ... ... + 50.2 + 2.8
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on transport fuels and lubricants. 4Net rents. 5Excluding value-added tax. 6For the
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw euro area, in euro. 7Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas. 8Food, beverages and to-
Materials: HWWI. 1Differences from the official figures are due to rounding. 2Inclu- bacco as well as industrial raw materials. 9From September 2017 onwards, provisio-
ding alcoholic beverages and tobacco. 3Electricity, gas and other fuels as well as nal figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2018
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- As
age age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.3
2013 1,167.4 3.0 778.3 2.8 388.1 0.1 1,166.4 1.9 1,717.2 1.3 153.7 − 2.5 8.9
2014 1,212.7 3.9 806.9 3.7 398.4 2.6 1,205.2 3.3 1,759.8 2.5 166.6 8.4 9.5
2015 1,260.8 4.0 836.6 3.7 417.0 4.7 1,253.7 4.0 1,804.0 2.5 173.5 4.2 9.6
2016 1,311.5 4.0 869.1 3.9 430.1 3.1 1,299.2 3.6 1,854.1 2.8 179.7 3.5 9.7
2017 1,369.5 4.4 906.0 4.2 444.6 3.4 1,350.6 4.0 1,922.8 3.7 190.0 5.8 9.9
2016         Q4 363.1 4.1 240.4 3.8 106.9 3.0 347.4 3.6 472.4 2.9 39.9 4.4 8.5
2017         Q1 319.1 4.4 211.5 4.5 112.9 4.2 324.4 4.4 477.2 4.4 62.6 7.0 13.1
         Q2 333.7 4.4 215.8 3.9 109.9 3.7 325.7 3.9 479.2 3.5 45.0 3.2 9.4
         Q3 338.3 4.6 228.7 4.6 111.7 2.6 340.4 4.0 479.8 3.9 40.0 6.2 8.3
         Q4 378.4 4.2 250.0 4.0 110.1 3.0 360.1 3.7 486.7 3.0 42.5 6.4 8.7
2018         Q1 334.0 4.7 221.0 4.5 115.2 2.1 336.1 3.6 492.7 3.3 66.2 5.8 13.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2018. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.4
2012 104.4 2.7 104.4 2.6 104.7 2.8 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.7
2013 107.0 2.4 106.9 2.4 107.3 2.5 107.2 2.4 108.4 2.1
2014 110.1 2.9 109.9 2.8 110.1 2.7 110.1 2.7 111.4 2.8
2015 112.6 2.3 112.4 2.2 112.6 2.3 112.7 2.3 114.5 2.8
2016 114.9 2.1 114.7 2.1 115.0 2.1 115.2 2.2 117.3 2.4
2017 117.4 2.1 117.1 2.1 117.5 2.2 117.8 2.3 120.5 2.7
2017         Q1 109.0 2.6 108.8 2.5 109.1 2.5 116.8 2.5 113.6 2.7
         Q2 110.1 2.1 109.9 2.1 110.2 2.4 117.6 2.4 117.7 2.7
         Q3 119.9 2.1 119.6 2.0 120.0 2.0 118.3 2.1 118.7 2.8
         Q4 130.5 1.9 130.2 1.8 130.6 1.9 118.6 2.1 131.6 2.5
2018         Q1 111.4 2.2 111.2 2.2 111.3 2.1 119.3 2.1 116.9 2.9
         Q2 113.6 3.2 113.4 3.2 113.4 2.9 121.0 2.9 . .
2017         Dec 112.4 2.0 112.2 2.0 112.5 2.1 118.6 2.1 . .
2018         Jan 111.1 1.9 110.8 2.0 111.2 2.1 119.1 2.2 . .
         Feb 111.2 2.0 110.9 2.0 111.2 1.9 119.1 2.0 . .
         Mar 112.1 2.7 111.9 2.7 111.6 2.2 119.6 2.2 . .
         Apr 113.2 2.7 113.0 2.7 113.1 2.5 120.5 2.6 . .
         May 114.4 3.9 114.2 3.9 113.7 3.1 121.2 3.0 . .
         June 113.1 2.9 112.9 3.0 113.3 3.0 121.3 3.0 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2018. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13 thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
August 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
  
End-of-year/end-of-half data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2014 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 207.2 175.8
2015 2,225.6 1,394.0 470.7 564.7 273.1 831.6 215.5 190.5 136.0 633.3 1,592.3 860.4 465.3 731.9 222.7 180.32016 2,366.2 1,476.7 493.0 594.9 288.9 889.5 226.8 217.9 150.4 671.8 1,694.4 888.2 481.6 806.2 249.0 192.82017
p 2,399.9 1,489.1 500.0 602.9 291.3 910.8 230.6 226.5 159.3 758.8 1,641.1 866.4 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2016         H1 2,255.6 1,380.4 462.4 549.3 272.0 875.2 226.6 195.1 140.4 607.1 1,648.5 894.8 464.6 753.7 243.8 174.9
         H2 2,366.2 1,476.7 493.0 594.9 288.9 889.5 226.8 217.9 150.4 671.8 1,694.4 888.2 481.6 806.2 249.0 192.8
2017         H1 2,383.1 1,469.8 501.7 582.8 288.6 913.3 238.2 220.7 149.8 701.1 1,682.0 886.5 496.9 795.5 246.1 194.9
         H2 p 2,399.9 1,489.1 500.0 602.9 291.3 910.8 230.6 226.5 159.3 758.8 1,641.1 866.4 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
as a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.0 8.5
2015 100.0 62.6 21.2 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.12016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.5 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.22017
p 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.1 38.0 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2016         H1 100.0 61.2 20.5 24.4 12.1 38.8 10.0 8.7 6.2 26.9 73.1 39.7 20.6 33.4 10.8 7.8
         H2 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.5 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.2
2017         H1 100.0 61.7 21.1 24.5 12.1 38.3 10.0 9.3 6.3 29.4 70.6 37.2 20.9 33.4 10.3 8.2
         H2 p 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.1 38.0 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2014 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 185.6 122.42015 1,781.1 1,076.8 304.0 446.3 259.0 704.3 198.8 147.0 104.3 485.0 1,296.1 689.4 353.1 606.7 198.3 127.52016 1,908.6 1,145.8 322.1 472.9 270.8 762.8 209.7 169.9 115.4 514.1 1,394.5 714.8 369.4 679.7 223.1 140.92017
p 1,935.4 1,149.4 323.1 474.5 277.2 786.0 212.5 176.0 128.1 588.2 1,347.1 697.5 381.6 649.7 215.5 148.4
2016         H1 1,817.3 1,058.7 296.6 432.0 254.2 758.6 210.0 149.8 112.2 465.7 1,351.6 717.4 350.9 634.3 219.2 129.9
         H2 1,908.6 1,145.8 322.1 472.9 270.8 762.8 209.7 169.9 115.4 514.1 1,394.5 714.8 369.4 679.7 223.1 140.9
2017         H1 1,921.2 1,136.9 324.7 463.5 273.1 784.3 224.2 171.9 125.3 550.0 1,371.2 708.2 378.1 663.0 224.3 153.1
         H2 p 1,935.4 1,149.4 323.1 474.5 277.2 786.0 212.5 176.0 128.1 588.2 1,347.1 697.5 381.6 649.7 215.5 148.4
as a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.2 7.4
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.1 7.22016 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.42017
p 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.3 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.0 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2016         H1 100.0 58.3 16.3 23.8 14.0 41.7 11.6 8.3 6.2 25.6 74.4 39.5 19.3 34.9 12.1 7.2
         H2 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.4
2017         H1 100.0 59.2 16.9 24.1 14.2 40.8 11.7 9.0 6.5 28.6 71.4 36.9 19.7 34.5 11.7 8.0
         H2 p 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.3 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.0 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.42015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.72016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.92017
p 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2016         H1 438.3 321.7 165.8 117.3 17.8 116.6 16.6 45.3 28.2 141.4 296.9 177.4 113.6 119.4 24.7 45.0
         H2 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.9
2017         H1 461.9 332.9 177.0 119.3 15.5 129.0 14.0 48.8 24.5 151.1 310.7 178.3 118.9 132.5 21.8 41.8
         H2 p 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
as a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.92016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.32017
p 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2016         H1 100.0 73.4 37.8 26.8 4.1 26.6 3.8 10.3 6.4 32.3 67.7 40.5 25.9 27.3 5.6 10.3
         H2 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.3
2017         H1 100.0 72.1 38.3 25.8 3.4 27.9 3.0 10.6 5.3 32.7 67.3 38.6 25.7 28.7 4.7 9.0
         H2 p 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
August 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciation
and amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-
change change centage change centage
Period in %  4 in % 4 % points  4 % % % in %  4 % points  4 %%% € billion  3 € billion  3 € billion  3 
Total
2010 1,320.9 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.6 98.3 66.6 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.9 12.1
2011 1,414.3 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.5 11.0 17.4 93.8 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 − 0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 1.9 6.1 11.0
2013 1,541.0 − 0.6 187.1 − 2.8 12.1 − 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.3 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 10.9
2014 1,565.6 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.7 10.3 17.2 109.3 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,635.3 6.9 196.1 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.8 91.6 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.6 11.3
2016 1,626.0 − 0.4 214.8 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.6 11.4 18.0 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 p 1,722.8 5.2 244.5 14.5 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 143.9 33.2 8.4 1.7 2.5 6.8 12.2
2013         H1 762.7 − 0.2 93.4 − 3.6 12.2 − 0.4 3.4 9.3 16.5 53.8 − 7.6 7.1 − 0.6 0.6 4.9 10.7
         H2 780.0 − 1.1 93.8 − 2.0 12.0 − 0.1 5.4 10.8 19.2 45.7 25.5 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.2 12.1
2014         H1 757.2 − 0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.7 9.5 16.0 57.8 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
         H2 808.7 2.9 101.5 5.2 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2015         H1 815.2 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 4.8 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.2 − 0.5 1.1 5.8 10.9
         H2 831.3 5.1 93.5 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.7 − 36.7 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.1 11.7
2016         H1 782.7 − 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 5.9 10.4 17.7 65.6 2.9 8.4 0.4 1.6 6.4 11.3
         H2 843.3 1.1 103.0 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.8 11.9 19.1 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 2.9 7.5 12.5
2017         H1 844.9 6.8 125.8 14.4 14.9 1.0 5.6 10.1 17.2 78.5 29.3 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
         H2 p 881.1 3.7 118.5 14.7 13.5 1.3 6.8 12.0 19.2 64.9 38.4 7.4 1.8 3.2 7.5 12.4
Groups with a focus on the production sector  5 
 
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.4 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.0
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.1 6.8 11.5
2012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.8 6.1 9.8
2013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.7 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 4.4 10.3 15.5 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.3 5.7 10.0
2014 1,197.3 1.0 147.9 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.1 9.6 15.3 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,282.4 7.0 143.9 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.1 10.4 15.5 65.1 − 20.3 5.1 − 1.8 1.8 6.5 10.0
2016 1,267.1 − 1.0 156.4 6.0 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.5 16.0 80.5 4.4 6.4 0.3 2.7 6.3 10.4
2017 p 1,362.8 5.5 182.2 16.8 13.4 1.3 6.7 11.0 15.8 109.6 41.0 8.0 2.0 2.9 6.7 10.5
2013         H1 588.8 − 0.1 71.7 − 4.8 12.2 − 0.6 3.1 9.3 15.0 43.1 − 10.9 7.3 − 0.9 0.6 5.3 9.7
         H2 591.7 − 1.4 67.1 − 0.3 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.4 15.8 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 10.9
2014         H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.2 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.0 46.2 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.4 9.6
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.7 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 15.8 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.7
2015         H1 636.4 8.7 80.1 7.8 12.6 − 0.1 5.1 10.0 15.4 48.7 4.8 7.7 − 0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 646.6 5.3 63.8 − 13.4 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.5 16.4 − 52.4 2.5 − 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.3
2016         H1 611.2 − 2.6 83.9 1.3 13.7 0.5 6.6 10.5 15.7 50.7 − 6.5 8.3 − 0.3 2.8 6.4 9.9
         H2 655.9 0.5 72.5 11.9 11.1 1.1 6.1 11.2 16.0 29.8 34.8 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.5
2017         H1 678.6 7.2 98.4 18.6 14.5 1.4 5.9 9.9 16.0 63.9 37.5 9.4 2.1 2.2 5.8 10.5
         H2 p 684.9 3.9 83.7 14.6 12.2 1.2 6.6 11.8 16.5 45.6 46.4 6.7 1.9 3.4 7.3 10.8
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2010 340.2 5.8 45.1 9.0 13.3 0.4 6.0 11.2 19.7 22.6 47.0 6.7 1.8 3.4 6.0 12.8
2011 335.3 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 6.0 10.4 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.2 13.8
2012 359.1 2.8 48.0 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.2
2013 362.0 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.4 13.4 − 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.4 5.9 12.5
2014 368.3 1.1 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.1 6.0 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.2 4.8 14.8 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.4 58.4 14.6 16.3 1.8 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 24.7 8.8 1.5 2.5 8.3 15.5
2017 p 360.0 3.8 62.3 7.7 17.3 0.6 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 10.0 9.5 0.5 2.4 7.2 15.1
2013         H1 173.9 − 0.5 21.7 1.1 12.5 0.2 3.9 8.1 19.2 10.7 12.8 6.2 0.7 0.9 4.6 12.8
         H2 188.2 0.2 26.7 − 6.7 14.2 − 1.1 5.6 11.4 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.4 13.5
2014         H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.7 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.7 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.5 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.5 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.7 10.8 16.1 0.9 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 187.4 3.6 30.6 4.6 16.3 0.2 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.7 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2017         H1 166.3 4.8 27.4 − 0.2 16.5 − 0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 − 0.8 8.8 − 0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
         H2 p 196.2 2.8 34.7 14.9 17.7 1.9 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.3 20.2 9.8 1.4 3.0 7.8 17.9
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt return on sales. 3Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statemen t statistics, p 3.
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. 4Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
August 2018
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2017 2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar Apr May  p
Current account + 339,804 + 388,042 + 386,567 + 128,310 + 129,310 + 80,695 + 44,557 + 27,311 + 4,617A
1 Goods
Exports 2,138,202 2,130,057 2,285,193 564,067 594,145 569,268 205,570 188,375 194,517Imports 1,779,019 1,754,756 1,942,144 470,912 495,279 495,030 168,192 164,830 173,657
Balance + 359,184 + 375,300 + 343,049 + 93,155 + 98,865 + 74,238 + 37,378 + 23,545 + 20,859
2 Services
Receipts 771,662 784,711 855,969 225,108 224,102 196,884 69,854 67,626 71,027Expenditure 708,219 745,202 754,213 188,869 197,822 176,017 61,454 59,568 62,917
Balance + 63,444 + 39,509 + 101,756 + 36,238 + 26,279 + 20,867 + 8,401 + 8,059 + 8,110
3 Primary income
Receipts 654,888 637,064 662,499 162,777 176,210 154,066 58,394 56,083 55,433Expenditure 598,912 524,924 576,450 130,755 139,810 125,304 45,165 50,297 73,300
Balance + 55,975 + 112,142 + 86,050 + 32,021 + 36,401 + 28,761 + 13,229 + 5,787 − 17,867
4 Secondary income
Receipts 112,149 105,041 108,753 25,551 29,154 25,783 9,811 8,719 10,820Expenditure 250,950 243,952 253,042 58,655 61,389 68,956 24,262 18,799 17,304
Balance − 138,799 − 138,910 − 144,288 − 33,105 − 32,235 − 43,172 − 14,451 − 10,079 − 6,484
Capital account − 11,548 + 1,035 − 20,913 − 1,241 + 1,637 + 2,685 + 970 + 56 + 169B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 267,248 + 347,103 + 414,166 + 126,871 + 153,007 + 152,458 + 99,916 − 7,609 − 14,910C
1 Direct investment + 248,833 + 169,006 + 44,025 − 6,708 + 38,182 + 133,872 + 59,952 + 33,421 − 18,808
By resident units abroad +1,075,532 + 425,381 + 96,038 − 153,052 + 36,317 + 95,158 + 18,902 + 20,419 + 11,752By non-resident units in the euro area + 826,697 + 256,376 + 52,015 − 146,344 − 1,865 − 38,714 − 41,050 − 13,002 + 30,560
2 Portfolio investment + 71,869 + 499,308 + 315,013 + 134,350 + 67,555 + 51,842 − 14,819 + 26,934 + 26,457
By resident units abroad + 386,724 + 394,649 + 630,953 + 187,421 + 90,918 + 193,500 + 46,432 + 17,918 − 7,672
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 11,280 + 21,350 + 168,961 + 56,946 + 27,262 + 54,154 − 7,265 + 14,778 − 9,027
Long-term debt securities + 367,161 + 365,565 + 396,402 + 112,099 + 53,291 + 110,849 + 41,925 + 3,900 + 2,338Short-term debt securities + 8,281 + 7,735 + 65,591 + 18,375 + 10,367 + 28,496 + 11,771 − 760 − 983
By non-resident units in the euro area + 314,853 − 104,655 + 315,942 + 53,071 + 23,365 + 141,658 + 61,251 − 9,016 − 34,129
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 207,409 + 98,539 + 494,408 + 101,253 + 134,589 + 119,107 + 61,186 − 7,129 − 1,382
Long-term debt securities + 141,691 − 258,262 − 175,679 − 48,190 − 61,666 − 10,240 + 1,073 + 5,438 − 25,286Short-term debt securities − 34,248 + 55,067 − 2,789 + 7 − 49,558 + 32,791 − 1,009 − 7,324 − 7,461
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 87,029 + 17,694 + 25,416 − 10,320 + 10,746 − 4,172 − 3,842 + 1,720 + 5,738
4 Other investment − 151,157 − 354,604 + 31,042 + 9,005 + 34,673 − 40,643 + 49,229 − 66,064 − 30,644
Eurosystem − 25,393 − 151,292 − 172,184 − 10,057 − 123,423 + 3,345 − 75,009 + 50,691 + 882General government + 18,920 + 9,063 + 17,453 − 4,399 + 23,906 − 2,024 − 2,557 − 1,036 − 3,031MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 123,682 − 149,026 + 134,813 + 20,687 + 108,013 − 32,895 + 120,194 − 111,821 − 34,309Enterprises and households − 21,004 − 63,350 + 50,956 + 2,773 + 26,175 − 9,071 + 6,599 − 3,899 + 5,814
5 Reserve assets + 10,671 + 15,700 − 1,330 + 544 + 1,851 + 11,559 + 9,396 − 3,621 + 2,347
Net errors and omissions − 61,007 − 41,975 + 48,507 − 199 + 22,058 + 69,078 + 54,389 − 34,976 − 19,696D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
August 2018
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob)  1 
of which
Supple-
mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,292
2004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,748
2005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,960
2006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,511
2007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,130
2008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,088
2009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,683
2010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,351
2011 + 165,078 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 31,574 + 68,235 − 35,010 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 44,639
2012 + 193,590 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 64,858 − 38,894 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 41,759
2013 + 190,092 + 212,662 − 3,663 − 41,376 + 62,444 − 43,639 − 563 + 225,360 + 838 + 35,831
2014 + 218,965 + 228,185 − 5,741 − 24,485 + 56,549 − 41,283 + 2,936 + 240,116 − 2,564 + 18,215
2015 + 271,403 + 261,135 − 2,565 − 16,910 + 67,222 − 40,044 + 534 + 239,418 − 2,213 − 32,520
2016 + 268,812 + 267,999 − 1,845 − 19,948 + 60,639 − 39,879 + 3,468 + 257,693 + 1,686 − 14,587
2017 + 257,725 + 265,361 + 1,256 − 20,874 + 67,357 − 54,120 − 254 + 279,967 − 1,269 + 22,496
2015         Q3 + 71,124 + 67,467 + 1,030 − 10,245 + 20,490 − 6,587 + 778 + 68,865 − 1,455 − 3,037
         Q4 + 78,172 + 64,632 − 435 − 2,391 + 26,238 − 10,307 − 2,004 + 68,701 − 272 − 7,467
2016         Q1 + 66,589 + 63,353 + 566 − 3,042 + 19,599 − 13,320 − 205 + 40,617 + 1,228 − 25,767
         Q2 + 69,819 + 76,770 − 54 − 3,707 + 125 − 3,370 + 1,009 + 62,621 + 761 − 8,207
         Q3 + 61,051 + 66,795 − 346 − 11,309 + 16,175 − 10,610 + 307 + 59,558 − 261 − 1,801
         Q4 + 71,353 + 61,082 − 2,012 − 1,889 + 24,740 − 12,579 + 2,356 + 94,897 − 43 + 21,188
2017         Q1 + 67,578 + 65,985 + 2,402 − 2,921 + 21,296 − 16,781 + 616 + 67,316 − 360 − 879
         Q2 + 53,573 + 67,141 − 187 − 4,785 + 3,058 − 11,841 − 727 + 72,061 + 385 + 19,216
         Q3 + 63,145 + 68,051 − 113 − 11,794 + 17,922 − 11,035 + 904 + 54,979 + 152 − 9,069
         Q4 + 73,429 + 64,184 − 846 − 1,374 + 25,082 − 14,463 − 1,047 + 85,610 − 1,446 + 13,228
2018         Q1 + 71,112 + 64,606 − 1,397 − 630 + 21,620 − 14,483 + 214 + 74,584 + 699 + 3,258
         Q2  p + 63,019 + 68,216 + 260 − 3,314 + 3,505 − 5,388 + 119 + 64,401 − 374 + 1,263
2016         Jan + 15,865 + 14,208 + 71 − 1,412 + 5,307 − 2,238 − 19 − 1,987 − 186 − 17,833
         Feb + 20,854 + 21,911 + 619 − 84 + 6,519 − 7,491 + 545 + 21,103 + 1,478 − 296
         Mar + 29,869 + 27,234 − 124 − 1,546 + 7,772 − 3,591 − 731 + 21,501 − 64 − 7,638
         Apr + 28,952 + 27,797 − 179 − 661 + 3,533 − 1,718 + 1,303 + 26,217 + 696 − 4,039
         May + 17,745 + 23,050 + 409 − 838 − 3,921 − 546 + 277 + 14,290 + 776 − 3,733
         June + 23,122 + 25,923 − 284 − 2,209 + 513 − 1,106 − 571 + 22,115 − 711 − 435
         July + 18,927 + 20,453 + 413 − 3,460 + 5,372 − 3,437 − 103 + 17,363 + 342 − 1,461
         Aug + 17,632 + 20,933 − 435 − 4,807 + 6,016 − 4,510 − 101 + 17,217 + 93 − 314
         Sep + 24,492 + 25,409 − 324 − 3,042 + 4,788 − 2,662 + 511 + 24,977 − 695 − 26
         Oct + 19,777 + 20,598 + 294 − 3,425 + 6,117 − 3,513 − 117 + 28,457 − 145 + 8,797
         Nov + 25,394 + 23,647 − 347 − 255 + 6,949 − 4,948 − 69 + 22,295 + 140 − 3,031
         Dec + 26,182 + 16,837 − 1,959 + 1,790 + 11,675 − 4,119 + 2,541 + 44,145 − 38 + 15,422
2017         Jan + 11,883 + 15,705 + 171 − 979 + 6,851 − 9,693 − 145 + 7,119 − 124 − 4,620
         Feb + 22,966 + 22,275 + 1,022 − 955 + 6,280 − 4,634 + 291 + 14,387 − 216 − 8,871
         Mar + 32,729 + 28,004 + 1,209 − 987 + 8,165 − 2,453 + 470 + 45,810 − 21 + 12,611
         Apr + 16,017 + 19,682 + 21 − 1,181 + 5,852 − 8,336 − 321 + 21,216 − 2 + 5,520
         May + 15,153 + 22,995 − 968 − 1,674 − 5,295 − 872 + 85 + 11,773 − 47 − 3,465
         June + 22,402 + 24,464 + 760 − 1,930 + 2,501 − 2,632 − 491 + 39,072 + 434 + 17,160
         July + 18,741 + 21,046 + 679 − 4,043 + 6,159 − 4,420 + 525 + 14,479 + 463 − 4,787
         Aug + 17,820 + 21,530 − 765 − 5,392 + 5,158 − 3,476 + 174 + 8,062 − 912 − 9,933
         Sep + 26,583 + 25,476 − 27 − 2,359 + 6,605 − 3,139 + 204 + 32,438 + 602 + 5,650
         Oct + 19,221 + 20,764 + 393 − 3,846 + 6,527 − 4,224 − 206 + 15,799 + 1,176 − 3,216
         Nov + 26,146 + 25,047 − 587 − 508 + 6,868 − 5,260 − 536 + 29,624 − 270 + 4,015
         Dec + 28,062 + 18,373 − 652 + 2,980 + 11,687 − 4,979 − 305 + 40,187 − 2,353 + 12,430
2018         Jan + 20,211 + 18,211 − 1,171 − 550 + 7,601 − 5,052 + 489 + 29,307 − 121 + 8,606
         Feb + 21,437 + 20,698 + 351 + 710 + 5,419 − 5,390 + 19 + 21,329 + 583 − 127
         Mar + 29,463 + 25,696 − 576 − 791 + 8,600 − 4,041 − 294 + 23,948 + 236 − 5,222
         Apr + 23,487 + 22,685 + 97 − 576 + 4,014 − 2,636 + 357 + 30,208 − 670 + 6,364
         May + 13,321 + 21,515 + 195 − 1,003 − 7,293 + 102 + 50 + 15,322 + 83 + 1,952
         June  p + 26,212 + 24,016 − 33 − 1,735 + 6,784 − 2,853 − 287 + 18,871 + 213 − 7,053
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the fina ncial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital  account. 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
August 2018
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2018
Group of countries/country  2015  2016  2017 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,193,555 1,203,833 1,278,936 107,071 104,716 116,093 110,282 109,114 115,537
Imports 949,245 954,917 1,034,491 89,887 86,460 91,529 90,202 89,465 93,745Balance + 244,310 + 248,916 + 244,445 + 17,184 + 18,256 + 24,564 + 20,080 + 19,649 + 21,792
I Exports 803,425 818,644 872,421 74,719 73,330 79,797 76,524 75,913 ...European countries
Imports 653,782 657,753 707,760 60,192 60,015 64,229 62,279 62,010 ...Balance + 149,643 + 160,891 + 164,661 + 14,527 + 13,315 + 15,568 + 14,245 + 13,903 ...
Exports 692,493 705,548 749,701 64,907 63,263 68,827 66,150 65,693 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 543,334 551,344 590,363 49,852 49,865 53,718 52,083 51,860 ...Balance + 149,159 + 154,204 + 159,338 + 15,055 + 13,398 + 15,109 + 14,067 + 13,834 ...
Euro-area (19) Exports 434,075 441,092 471,641 41,087 40,230 44,337 41,926 40,869 ...
countries Imports 356,643 358,848 381,351 32,320 32,536 35,043 33,906 32,928 ...
Balance + 77,432 + 82,244 + 90,290 + 8,767 + 7,694 + 9,294 + 8,020 + 7,942 ...
of which
Austria Exports 58,217 59,778 62,805 5,255 5,149 5,654 5,531 5,173 ...
Imports 37,250 38,543 41,125 3,373 3,490 3,714 3,737 3,489 ...Balance + 20,967 + 21,235 + 21,680 + 1,881 + 1,659 + 1,941 + 1,794 + 1,685 ...
Belgium and Exports 46,196 46,931 50,080 4,223 4,260 4,563 4,358 4,277 ...
Luxembourg Imports 40,116 40,960 44,044 4,270 3,694 4,350 4,402 3,849 ...
Balance + 6,079 + 5,971 + 6,036 − 48 + 566 + 212 − 44 + 427 ...
France Exports 102,762 101,106 105,244 9,224 8,417 9,642 9,163 8,335 ...
Imports 66,819 65,651 64,157 5,067 5,340 5,526 5,632 5,149 ...Balance + 35,943 + 35,454 + 41,086 + 4,156 + 3,077 + 4,115 + 3,531 + 3,186 ...
Italy Exports 57,987 61,265 65,527 5,808 5,797 6,257 5,821 5,999 ...
Imports 49,038 51,737 55,889 4,676 4,993 4,937 4,934 5,192 ...Balance + 8,949 + 9,528 + 9,638 + 1,132 + 804 + 1,319 + 888 + 807 ...
Netherlands Exports 79,191 78,433 85,703 7,547 7,576 8,571 7,717 7,642 ...
Imports 87,889 83,142 91,219 8,143 8,046 9,038 7,779 8,062 ...Balance − 8,697 − 4,709 − 5,516 − 596 − 470 − 467 − 61 − 420 ...
Spain Exports 38,715 40,497 43,054 3,813 3,715 3,827 3,843 3,844 ...
Imports 26,442 27,870 31,608 2,691 2,700 2,937 3,072 2,768 ...Balance + 12,273 + 12,627 + 11,446 + 1,122 + 1,015 + 891 + 772 + 1,076 ...
Other EU member Exports 258,417 264,456 278,060 23,819 23,033 24,490 24,224 24,824 ...
states Imports 186,691 192,496 209,012 17,531 17,330 18,674 18,177 18,932 ...
Balance + 71,727 + 71,960 + 69,048 + 6,288 + 5,703 + 5,816 + 6,047 + 5,892 ...
of which
United Exports 89,018 85,939 84,450 7,161 6,911 7,248 6,993 6,890 ...Kingdom Imports 38,414 35,654 37,183 2,972 2,815 3,111 3,043 4,010 ...
Balance + 50,604 + 50,285 + 47,267 + 4,189 + 4,097 + 4,138 + 3,950 + 2,880 ...
Exports 110,932 113,096 122,720 9,812 10,067 10,970 10,374 10,220 ... 2 Other European
Imports 110,448 106,409 117,397 10,340 10,150 10,512 10,196 10,150 ... countries
Balance + 484 + 6,687 + 5,323 − 528 − 82 + 458 + 177 + 70 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 49,070 50,161 53,963 4,540 4,353 4,726 4,431 4,389 ...
Imports 42,089 43,896 45,773 3,657 3,691 3,927 3,732 3,556 ...Balance + 6,981 + 6,265 + 8,190 + 883 + 662 + 799 + 699 + 833 ...
II Exports 387,398 382,486 403,385 32,107 31,127 36,158 33,466 32,860 ...Non-European
Imports 295,461 297,164 326,730 29,567 26,312 27,083 27,743 27,277 ... countries
Balance + 91,936 + 85,322 + 76,655 + 2,539 + 4,815 + 9,075 + 5,724 + 5,583 ...
Exports 23,897 24,434 25,557 1,707 1,699 1,933 1,814 1,882 ... 1 Africa
Imports 18,307 16,675 20,394 1,720 1,660 1,738 1,765 1,569 ...Balance + 5,590 + 7,759 + 5,163 − 14 + 39 + 195 + 49 + 313 ...
Exports 156,982 147,542 154,333 12,070 12,189 14,621 12,999 12,294 ... 2 America
Imports 85,582 83,499 89,372 7,296 7,343 7,619 8,062 7,984 ...Balance + 71,400 + 64,043 + 64,961 + 4,773 + 4,846 + 7,002 + 4,937 + 4,310 ...
of which
Exports 113,733 106,822 111,495 8,565 8,659 10,903 9,337 8,526 ... United States
Imports 60,217 57,968 61,090 5,055 5,147 5,256 5,505 5,501 ...Balance + 53,516 + 48,855 + 50,405 + 3,510 + 3,512 + 5,646 + 3,832 + 3,025 ...
Exports 196,297 200,158 212,147 17,121 16,248 18,579 17,708 17,718 ... 3 Asia
Imports 188,621 193,979 213,106 20,266 17,009 17,447 17,664 17,352 ...Balance + 7,676 + 6,179 − 960 − 3,145 − 760 + 1,132 + 44 + 366 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 39,518 36,659 33,159 2,075 2,279 2,291 2,391 2,111 ...
Imports 7,330 6,581 6,953 614 596 510 679 687 ...Balance + 32,188 + 30,079 + 26,206 + 1,461 + 1,682 + 1,781 + 1,712 + 1,424 ...
Japan Exports 16,968 18,307 19,531 1,606 1,536 1,863 1,424 1,564 ...
Imports 20,180 21,922 22,876 2,101 1,867 2,004 2,075 1,916 ...Balance − 3,213 − 3,615 − 3,345 − 495 − 331 − 141 − 651 − 352 ...
Exports 71,284 76,046 86,170 7,321 6,922 7,887 7,446 7,562 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 91,930 94,172 100,711 10,085 7,732 8,126 7,787 7,744 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 20,646 − 18,126 − 14,541 − 2,765 − 811 − 238 − 341 − 183 ...
Exports 51,510 51,921 53,418 4,580 4,031 4,767 4,763 4,846 ... New industrial countries
Imports 42,478 42,966 50,860 4,482 3,992 4,013 4,355 4,335 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 9,032 + 8,955 + 2,559 + 98 + 39 + 754 + 408 + 510 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 10,221 10,352 11,348 1,210 990 1,025 945 966 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,951 3,011 3,857 285 300 279 252 372 ... polar regions
Balance + 7,271 + 7,341 + 7,491 + 925 + 690 + 747 + 693 + 595 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Kore a, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
August 2018
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2013 − 41,376 − 9,881 − 37,713 + 8,056 + 3,656 − 870 − 5,518 + 3,073 + 541 + 60,681 + 1,223
2014 − 24,485 − 6,902 − 37,653 + 7,007 + 3,549 + 2,666 − 700 + 2,971 + 1,184 + 54,473 + 891
2015 − 16,910 − 5,258 − 36,595 + 9,587 + 4,830 + 4,064 − 2,488 + 3,160 + 1,521 + 66,048 − 347
2016 − 19,948 − 6,185 − 38,247 + 9,856 + 6,203 + 3,224 − 3,004 + 3,094 + 750 + 60,943 − 1,054
2017 − 20,874 − 4,047 − 43,588 + 10,683 + 6,494 + 3,252 − 1,683 + 2,092 − 36 + 68,622 − 1,229
2016         Q4 − 1,889 − 1,888 − 7,385 + 3,241 + 2,366 + 1,236 − 1,605 + 596 + 307 + 21,418 + 3,015
2017         Q1 − 2,921 − 1,257 − 6,332 + 2,207 + 1,029 + 377 − 855 + 551 + 589 + 21,868 − 1,162
         Q2 − 4,785 − 407 − 10,675 + 2,655 + 1,538 + 893 − 608 + 625 − 203 + 5,303 − 2,042
         Q3 − 11,794 − 1,134 − 17,166 + 2,746 + 1,433 + 512 + 53 + 545 − 620 + 19,690 − 1,148
         Q4 − 1,374 − 1,249 − 9,415 + 3,076 + 2,494 + 1,470 − 274 + 370 + 197 + 21,761 + 3,123
2018         Q1 − 630 − 787 − 6,238 + 2,684 + 1,059 + 867 − 314 + 655 + 559 + 21,896 − 835
         Q2  p − 3,314 + 59 − 10,459 + 2,231 + 1,632 + 1,690 − 666 + 737 − 251 + 5,851 − 2,095
2017         Aug − 5,392 − 473 − 7,084 + 1,193 + 435 + 70 − 224 + 244 − 203 + 5,773 − 412
         Sep − 2,359 − 447 − 4,753 + 661 + 268 + 548 + 853 + 129 − 199 + 7,170 − 366
         Oct − 3,846 − 453 − 5,790 + 775 + 1,240 − 5 − 266 + 231 + 52 + 6,979 − 504
         Nov − 508 − 400 − 2,372 + 1,353 + 586 + 162 − 369 + 174 + 57 + 7,151 − 340
         Dec + 2,980 − 396 − 1,253 + 948 + 668 + 1,312 + 362 − 35 + 88 + 7,632 + 3,968
2018         Jan − 550 − 301 − 1,649 + 842 + 161 − 365 − 49 + 191 + 188 + 7,806 − 393
         Feb + 710 − 249 − 1,577 + 693 + 762 + 675 − 162 + 218 + 208 + 5,446 − 235
         Mar − 791 − 237 − 3,012 + 1,149 + 136 + 557 − 103 + 246 + 162 + 8,645 − 207
         Apr − 576 − 46 − 2,230 + 796 + 456 + 194 − 515 + 247 − 79 + 4,532 − 439
         May − 1,003 + 46 − 3,775 + 709 + 780 + 474 − 152 + 243 − 80 − 5,905 − 1,307
         June  p − 1,735 + 59 − 4,455 + 725 + 396 + 1,022 + 1 + 246 − 92 + 7,224 − 348
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001, the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2013 − 43,639 − 28,923 − 4,733 + 6,174 − 14,715 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 563 + 1,105 − 1,668
2014 − 41,283 − 28,146 − 6,419 + 8,105 − 13,137 − 3,477 − 3,451 + 2,936 + 2,841 + 95
2015 − 40,044 − 23,965 − 6,805 + 10,638 − 16,079 − 3,540 − 3,523 + 534 + 2,366 − 1,832
2016 − 39,879 − 24,870 − 11,523 + 10,994 − 15,009 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 3,468 + 3,372 + 96
2017 − 54,120 − 23,688 − 11,496 + 10,584 − 30,432 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 254 + 3,021 − 3,275
2016         Q4 − 12,579 − 8,362 − 3,186 + 1,325 − 4,217 − 1,055 − 1,049 + 2,356 + 791 + 1,565
2017         Q1 − 16,781 − 7,604 − 2,995 + 1,796 − 9,176 − 1,158 − 1,153 + 616 + 734 − 118
         Q2 − 11,841 − 1,706 − 1,500 + 6,239 − 10,135 − 1,159 − 1,153 − 727 + 384 − 1,111
         Q3 − 11,035 − 5,432 − 1,557 + 1,755 − 5,603 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 904 + 1,531 − 627
         Q4 − 14,463 − 8,946 − 5,444 + 794 − 5,517 − 1,159 − 1,153 − 1,047 + 372 − 1,419
2018         Q1 − 14,483 − 9,356 − 2,233 + 1,655 − 5,127 − 1,291 − 1,286 + 214 − 431 + 645
         Q2  p − 5,388 − 563 − 1,257 + 6,134 − 4,825 − 1,287 − 1,286 + 119 + 140 − 21
2017         Aug − 3,476 − 1,441 − 395 + 465 − 2,035 − 386 − 384 + 174 + 334 − 160
         Sep − 3,139 − 1,430 − 229 + 799 − 1,709 − 386 − 384 + 204 + 494 − 290
         Oct − 4,224 − 2,939 − 1,036 + 108 − 1,285 − 387 − 384 − 206 − 6 − 200
         Nov − 5,260 − 2,807 − 1,685 + 70 − 2,453 − 386 − 384 − 536 + 78 − 614
         Dec − 4,979 − 3,201 − 2,723 + 615 − 1,778 − 386 − 384 − 305 + 300 − 605
2018         Jan − 5,052 − 3,518 − 1,332 + 230 − 1,534 − 430 − 429 + 489 + 118 + 371
         Feb − 5,390 − 3,679 − 558 + 814 − 1,712 − 429 − 429 + 19 − 269 + 288
         Mar − 4,041 − 2,160 − 343 + 612 − 1,881 − 432 − 429 − 294 − 281 − 14
         Apr − 2,636 − 994 − 314 + 1,479 − 1,643 − 429 − 429 + 357 + 505 − 148
         May + 102 + 1,640 − 281 + 3,635 − 1,538 − 429 − 429 + 50 − 108 + 158
         June  p − 2,853 − 1,210 − 663 + 1,020 − 1,644 − 429 − 429 − 287 − 256 − 31
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
August 2018
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2017 2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q4 Q1 Q2  p Apr May June  p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 270,235 + 397,043 + 363,024 + 36,972 + 163,507 + 117,380 − 24,330 + 103,375 + 38,335
1 Direct investment + 116,141 + 82,985 + 111,797 + 27,372 + 42,552 + 55,073 + 8,038 + 16,328 + 30,706
Equity + 75,292 + 70,623 + 71,205 + 22,786 + 35,042 + 57,817 + 12,295 + 19,266 + 26,255
of whichReinvestment of earnings  
1 + 16,804 + 10,867 + 23,779 + 3,009 + 12,044 + 5,672 + 4,196 + 888 + 587
Debt instruments + 40,849 + 12,362 + 40,592 + 4,585 + 7,510 − 2,744 − 4,257 − 2,938 + 4,451
2 Portfolio investment + 124,062 + 98,236 + 105,157 + 23,329 + 42,396 + 6,306 + 818 + 3,528 + 1,959
Shares  2 + 19,692 + 17,254 + 14,042 + 5,695 + 8,182 − 1,600 − 2,399 − 4 + 802
Investment fund shares  3 + 35,750 + 36,142 + 47,747 + 14,687 + 8,585 + 4,735 + 80 + 3,205 + 1,450
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 74,342 + 51,037 + 47,101 + 7,636 + 25,157 + 4,275 + 3,789 + 1,429 − 943
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 5,723 − 6,196 − 3,733 − 4,689 + 473 − 1,103 − 651 − 1,102 + 650
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 26,026 + 32,535 + 8,937 + 4,038 + 1,154 + 9,633 + 1,605 + 4,227 + 3,801
4. Other investment  7 + 6,219 + 181,602 + 138,402 − 16,321 + 76,706 + 46,742 − 34,122 + 79,208 + 1,655
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 90,288 + 18,627 − 21,008 − 50,588 + 41,060 + 6,134 − 7,014 + 34,196 − 21,049
Long-term − 2,804 + 44,980 + 19,619 + 5,438 − 1,407 − 494 − 1,429 + 5,372 − 4,438Short-term − 87,484 − 26,353 − 40,627 − 56,026 + 42,467 + 6,628 − 5,585 + 28,824 − 16,611
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 14,618 − 6,248 + 7,927 + 3,952 + 20,540 − 7,740 − 2,256 − 7,972 + 2,488
Long-term + 19,127 + 1,725 − 3,372 − 1,290 + 1,660 + 4,398 + 2,292 + 470 + 1,636Short-term − 33,744 − 7,974 + 11,298 + 5,241 + 18,880 − 12,138 − 4,548 − 8,442 + 852
General government − 12,239 − 1,268 − 5,154 + 991 + 1,523 − 4,847 − 4,362 − 713 + 228
Long-term − 7,591 − 7,595 − 3,730 − 489 − 310 − 764 + 76 − 175 − 665Short-term − 4,648 + 6,327 − 1,424 + 1,480 + 1,833 − 4,083 − 4,438 − 538 + 893
Bundesbank + 123,364 + 170,491 + 156,637 + 29,324 + 13,583 + 53,195 − 20,490 + 53,697 + 19,988
5. Reserve assets − 2,213 + 1,686 − 1,269 − 1,446 + 699 − 374 − 670 + 83 + 213
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 30,817 + 139,350 + 83,057 − 48,638 + 88,923 + 52,978 − 54,538 + 88,053 + 19,463
1 Direct investment + 48,606 + 51,816 + 69,548 + 12,040 + 20,537 + 24,492 − 5,424 + 4,274 + 25,642
Equity + 10,567 + 11,894 + 24,077 + 10,118 + 2,089 + 1,088 + 1,365 + 171 − 449
of whichReinvestment of earnings  
1 − 1,524 + 3,935 + 9,216 + 2,107 + 2,671 + 944 + 1,356 − 54 − 359
Debt instruments + 38,039 + 39,921 + 45,471 + 1,922 + 18,449 + 23,404 − 6,790 + 4,103 + 26,091
2 Portfolio investment − 68,808 − 108,471 − 95,045 − 46,598 + 7,592 − 18,783 − 18,390 + 19,412 − 19,805
Shares  2) + 10,605 + 342 − 1,126 − 821 + 4,306 + 3,633 + 2,876 + 587 + 169
Investment fund shares  3 + 7,357 − 6,919 − 3,441 − 2,894 − 1,792 − 2,860 − 3,039 − 366 + 545
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 96,048 − 97,281 − 70,559 − 40,436 + 16,555 − 20,438 − 18,405 + 11,302 − 13,335
Short-termdebt securities  
5 + 9,278 − 4,613 − 19,919 − 2,447 − 11,476 + 882 + 178 + 7,889 − 7,185
3. Other investment  7 + 51,019 + 196,006 + 108,554 − 14,080 + 60,794 + 47,270 − 30,723 + 64,367 + 13,626
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 41,165 + 86,742 + 17,476 − 67,367 + 45,097 + 19,374 + 22,359 + 40,821 − 43,806
Long-term − 19,535 + 5,774 + 7,541 + 5,550 − 7,418 + 3,309 − 419 + 1,680 + 2,048Short-term − 21,630 + 80,968 + 9,935 − 72,917 + 52,515 + 16,065 + 22,778 + 39,141 − 45,854
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 18,920 + 3,716 + 17,557 + 16,752 + 4,463 + 3,559 − 7,519 − 365 + 11,443
Long-term + 23,006 + 8,579 + 3,339 − 328 + 1,879 + 10,085 + 1,026 − 239 + 9,298Short-term − 4,085 − 4,863 + 14,218 + 17,079 + 2,584 − 6,526 − 8,545 − 126 + 2,145
General government − 11,105 − 5,309 − 6,313 − 12,219 + 1,660 − 656 − 1,302 + 309 + 337
Long-term − 3,941 − 4,682 − 3,290 + 170 − 1 + 90 + 48 − 12 + 53Short-term − 7,164 − 626 − 3,023 − 12,389 + 1,662 − 746 − 1,350 + 321 + 284
Bundesbank + 84,369 + 110,857 + 79,834 + 48,754 + 9,574 + 24,993 − 44,261 + 23,601 + 45,652
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 239,418 + 257,693 + 279,967 + 85,610 + 74,584 + 64,401 + 30,208 + 15,322 + 18,871
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
August 2018
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  1 col 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,475
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,719
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 675,253 467,592
2015         Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 482,764 330,555
         Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016         Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 473,104 334,867
         Feb 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 489,464 349,871
         Mar 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 492,119 345,256
         Apr 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 495,580 360,687
         May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 501,620 383,267
         June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 518,491 403,741
         July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 518,946 385,099
         Aug 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 525,347 393,345
         Sep 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 549,909 407,951
         Oct 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 543,001 404,717
         Nov 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 552,565 438,543
         Dec 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,719
2017         Jan 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 577,969 456,835
         Feb 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,255 451,639
         Mar 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,579 451,460
         Apr 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 601,538 487,606
         May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 601,130 497,749
         June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 623,941 474,939
         July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 614,300 478,469
         Aug 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 623,104 466,780
         Sep 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 622,729 492,470
         Oct 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 605,438 480,477
         Nov 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 582,362 509,470
         Dec 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 675,253 467,592
2018         Jan 1,114,634 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,525 882,043 53,165 619,483 495,151
         Feb 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 638,927 509,051
         Mar 1,157,102 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 937,348 923,466 53,924 680,791 476,311
         Apr 1,137,942 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 916,858 902,364 54,115 636,684 501,259
         May 1,196,227 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 970,555 956,150 54,203 660,554 535,673
         June 1,212,477 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 990,543 976,266 54,857 706,166 506,312
         July 1,145,236 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 927,466 913,270 54,463 672,992 472,244
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro opening
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
August 2018
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2014 835,476 280,176 555,301 365,738 189,562 174,764 14,798 963,495 154,960 808,534 639,186 169,348 102,535 66,8132015 875,758 264,291 611,467 415,697 195,770 181,271 14,499 1,018,333 152,109 866,224 681,923 184,301 112,677 71,6252016 870,375 243,728 626,646 416,534 210,112 195,934 14,179 1,045,869 131,535 914,333 717,688 196,646 124,059 72,5872017 879,462 216,300 663,162 438,824 224,338 210,673 13,666 1,073,004 136,001 937,003 738,896 198,107 129,693 68,413
2018         Jan 882,690 224,986 657,704 436,357 221,347 207,523 13,824 1,070,728 130,675 940,053 745,611 194,443 124,933 69,509
         Feb 887,933 224,648 663,285 439,284 224,001 210,115 13,886 1,085,830 129,196 956,634 759,351 197,283 127,076 70,207         Mar 904,879 228,815 676,064 441,346 234,718 220,890 13,828 1,097,127 132,952 964,175 759,309 204,867 134,620 70,247
         Apr 902,159 226,492 675,668 447,451 228,217 214,343 13,874 1,086,714 126,092 960,622 763,887 196,735 125,846 70,889
         May 893,057 217,728 675,329 450,281 225,048 211,060 13,988 1,095,399 129,565 965,833 769,452 196,381 124,483 71,898         June 897,745 215,723 682,023 447,324 234,699 220,378 14,321 1,129,913 137,136 992,777 784,547 208,230 136,436 71,794
Industrial countries 1
 
2014 735,152 275,277 459,876 330,740 129,136 116,037 13,099 872,950 153,807 719,142 598,249 120,894 85,432 35,4612015 767,018 260,389 506,629 373,705 132,924 119,877 13,047 918,524 147,252 771,272 644,228 127,044 91,130 35,9142016 754,210 239,866 514,344 374,776 139,568 126,889 12,679 943,314 127,540 815,774 682,238 133,536 96,378 37,1582017 761,078 212,247 548,830 396,409 152,422 140,229 12,193 969,214 129,153 840,060 701,848 138,212 104,583 33,629
2018         Jan 765,019 220,912 544,107 393,460 150,647 138,449 12,198 964,879 121,947 842,932 706,863 136,068 101,612 34,456
         Feb 768,227 220,485 547,742 395,684 152,058 139,792 12,266 981,205 122,026 859,179 721,624 137,555 102,859 34,696         Mar 783,096 224,723 558,373 398,065 160,308 148,102 12,206 984,827 121,642 863,185 720,607 142,578 108,180 34,398
         Apr 780,643 222,207 558,436 402,345 156,091 143,940 12,151 979,674 116,887 862,788 725,030 137,758 103,229 34,529
         May 769,576 213,548 556,028 402,958 153,069 140,739 12,331 990,518 122,145 868,373 731,502 136,871 101,979 34,893         June 773,451 211,375 562,076 401,461 160,614 148,009 12,605 1,024,406 131,143 893,263 747,223 146,040 111,441 34,600
EU member states 1
 
2014 618,804 260,133 358,671 266,920 91,752 81,141 10,611 727,491 139,209 588,282 504,292 83,989 56,842 27,1472015 630,450 242,362 388,088 293,629 94,459 83,964 10,495 751,636 136,375 615,261 530,824 84,437 58,686 25,7512016 611,322 221,947 389,375 292,074 97,300 87,283 10,017 767,040 117,466 649,573 561,444 88,129 61,234 26,8952017 605,152 192,336 412,815 305,890 106,925 97,037 9,889 796,346 112,898 683,448 587,325 96,123 71,906 24,217
2018         Jan 610,859 200,779 410,080 303,634 106,446 96,482 9,964 794,165 106,244 687,921 593,084 94,837 70,119 24,718
         Feb 614,860 199,991 414,868 306,053 108,815 98,868 9,947 807,915 106,471 701,444 603,847 97,597 72,647 24,949         Mar 623,052 204,057 418,995 305,562 113,433 103,483 9,950 812,202 108,362 703,840 604,123 99,717 74,803 24,914
         Apr 618,946 200,386 418,559 307,098 111,461 101,490 9,972 807,184 103,217 703,967 606,598 97,369 72,470 24,899
         May 611,952 191,698 420,254 310,430 109,824 99,699 10,124 815,990 106,300 709,690 611,977 97,713 72,672 25,041         June 610,901 189,449 421,452 306,236 115,216 105,036 10,180 842,712 113,801 728,911 626,890 102,021 77,311 24,710
of which:  Euro-area 2
 
2014 457,077 204,589 252,488 194,201 58,288 52,067 6,221 607,716 107,561 500,155 445,643 54,513 37,580 16,9332015 468,303 195,218 273,085 211,614 61,471 54,892 6,579 605,579 94,369 511,210 458,386 52,824 38,178 14,6462016 449,741 169,681 280,060 215,560 64,500 57,774 6,726 614,469 77,067 537,402 481,462 55,940 41,076 14,8642017 451,112 148,460 302,652 230,442 72,211 64,753 7,458 634,898 74,496 560,402 495,566 64,836 50,038 14,798
2018         Jan 451,513 155,370 296,143 225,480 70,664 63,141 7,522 634,999 68,044 566,956 505,298 61,658 46,464 15,194
         Feb 448,766 151,624 297,142 225,466 71,676 64,149 7,527 645,319 68,857 576,461 513,162 63,299 47,982 15,317         Mar 457,092 156,608 300,485 225,837 74,648 67,098 7,549 649,780 68,277 581,503 515,229 66,274 50,736 15,539
         Apr 449,522 149,615 299,907 226,350 73,557 65,988 7,569 644,732 66,118 578,614 513,494 65,120 49,435 15,685
         May 449,216 147,339 301,877 229,527 72,350 64,751 7,599 658,336 68,170 590,167 524,101 66,066 50,194 15,872         June 449,021 146,537 302,483 226,193 76,291 68,613 7,678 683,176 71,357 611,819 542,234 69,585 53,731 15,854
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2014 100,274 4,849 95,425 34,998 60,427 58,728 1,699 90,545 1,153 89,392 40,937 48,455 17,103 31,3522015 107,753 3,094 104,659 41,992 62,667 61,215 1,452 95,639 886 94,752 37,495 57,257 21,547 35,7112016 114,754 2,616 112,138 41,742 70,396 68,896 1,500 99,412 1,069 98,342 35,250 63,093 27,681 35,4122017 116,755 2,619 114,136 42,373 71,764 70,291 1,472 97,759 1,110 96,650 36,848 59,802 25,110 34,692
2018         Jan 115,931 2,539 113,391 42,830 70,561 68,935 1,626 97,894 1,091 96,803 38,548 58,256 23,291 34,965
         Feb 117,914 2,632 115,282 43,473 71,809 70,190 1,620 98,249 1,082 97,167 37,527 59,640 24,186 35,454         Mar 119,921 2,509 117,412 43,153 74,259 72,637 1,622 101,834 1,138 100,695 38,502 62,194 26,410 35,783
         Apr 119,650 2,700 116,950 44,978 71,972 70,249 1,723 98,867 1,334 97,533 38,657 58,876 22,582 36,294
         May 121,574 2,562 119,012 47,194 71,818 70,160 1,658 98,536 1,378 97,157 37,751 59,407 22,467 36,940         June 122,368 2,729 119,639 45,734 73,905 72,189 1,716 100,563 1,354 99,209 37,124 62,085 24,957 37,128
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
August 2018
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2017         Apr 1.4241 1.4408 7.3892 7.4376 118.29 9.1993 9.5941 1.0727 0.84824 1.0723
         May 1.4878 1.5041 7.6130 7.4400 124.09 9.4001 9.7097 1.0904 0.85554 1.1058
         June 1.4861 1.4941 7.6459 7.4376 124.58 9.4992 9.7538 1.0874 0.87724 1.1229
         July 1.4772 1.4641 7.7965 7.4366 129.48 9.3988 9.5892 1.1059 0.88617 1.1511
         Aug 1.4919 1.4889 7.8760 7.4379 129.70 9.3201 9.5485 1.1398 0.91121 1.1807
         Sep 1.4946 1.4639 7.8257 7.4401 131.92 9.3275 9.5334 1.1470 0.89470 1.1915
         Oct 1.5099 1.4801 7.7890 7.4429 132.76 9.3976 9.6138 1.1546 0.89071 1.1756
         Nov 1.5395 1.4978 7.7723 7.4420 132.39 9.6082 9.8479 1.1640 0.88795 1.1738
         Dec 1.5486 1.5108 7.8073 7.4433 133.64 9.8412 9.9370 1.1689 0.88265 1.1836
2018         Jan 1.5340 1.5167 7.8398 7.4455 135.25 9.6464 9.8200 1.1723 0.88331 1.2200
         Feb 1.5684 1.5526 7.8068 7.4457 133.29 9.6712 9.9384 1.1542 0.88396 1.2348
         Mar 1.5889 1.5943 7.7982 7.4490 130.86 9.5848 10.1608 1.1685 0.88287 1.2336
         Apr 1.5972 1.5622 7.7347 7.4479 132.16 9.6202 10.3717 1.1890 0.87212 1.2276
         May 1.5695 1.5197 7.5291 7.4482 129.57 9.5642 10.3419 1.1780 0.87726 1.1812
         June 1.5579 1.5327 7.5512 7.4493 128.53 9.4746 10.2788 1.1562 0.87886 1.1678
         July 1.5792 1.5356 7.8504 7.4523 130.23 9.4975 10.3076 1.1622 0.88726 1.1686
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics.    
11 Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
August 2018
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
1999 Q1=100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the Euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  5 
In real terms In real terms
of which based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selectedconsumer domestic national consumer Euro
 area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 56 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.1 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.1 85.3 88.0 85.9 91.8 97.3 85.1 90.8 93.0 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.5 86.0 90.6 86.9 91.6 96.4 85.9 90.1 93.0 91.4 90.82002 90.1 90.2 89.5 89.3 95.2 90.5 92.2 95.5 88.4 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.72003 100.7 101.2 100.3 100.4 107.1 101.4 95.6 94.5 97.5 94.7 97.0 96.5 96.72004 104.6 104.9 103.1 103.6 111.7 105.0 95.8 93.3 99.8 94.9 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.4 100.9 101.6 109.6 102.4 94.6 92.0 98.9 92.8 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.3 100.1 100.3 109.6 101.7 93.3 90.3 98.1 91.0 98.5 96.4 95.82007 106.1 106.0 101.8 102.5 113.0 103.6 94.2 89.5 101.9 91.2 100.7 97.8 96.92008 109.3 108.1 103.1 105.7 117.1 105.5 94.4 88.1 105.1 90.3 102.1 97.7 97.02009 110.7 108.8 104.1 110.5 120.2 106.5 94.6 88.8 104.4 90.8 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.1 95.8 102.4 111.6 97.6 92.2 88.6 98.1 87.1 98.7 93.6 91.9
2011 103.3 100.1 93.6 100.9 112.3 97.0 91.8 88.4 97.4 86.2 98.1 92.7 91.32012 97.7 94.8 88.2 94.8 107.2 92.2 89.9 88.3 92.4 83.5 95.8 89.7 88.22013 101.0 97.7 90.9 97.4 111.8 95.0 92.2 88.8 97.6 85.4 98.1 91.4 90.12014 101.4 97.2 90.9 98.3 114.1 95.4 92.8 89.7 97.8 86.2 98.1 91.6 90.7
2015 91.7 87.6 82.8 88.2 105.7 87.0 90.0 90.5 89.2 82.5 94.1 86.4 85.8
2016 94.4 89.5 84.9
p 89.3 109.7 p 88.9 91.0 91.1 90.7 84.0 94.7 87.4 p 87.0
2017 96.6 91.4 85.8 p 90.0 112.0 p 90.0 92.2 91.3 93.5 84.7 96.0 88.6 p 87.8
2015         July 90.7 86.6 104.2 85.7 93.7 85.8 85.0
         Aug 92.4 88.0 83.1 88.2 107.1 88.0 90.2 90.6 89.5 82.8 94.3 86.7 86.4         Sep 93.2 88.9 108.7 89.2 94.5 87.1 87.1
         Oct 93.0 88.8 108.1 88.7 94.5 87.1 86.8
         Nov 90.5 86.3 83.1 87.9 105.0 86.0 90.2 90.7 89.4 82.8 93.5 85.8 85.3         Dec 91.9 87.5 107.1 87.5 93.7 86.2 85.9
2016         Jan 93.0 88.4 108.9
p 88.6 93.9 86.7 p 86.7
         Feb 94.2 89.3 84.7 p 89.0 110.3 p 89.5 90.9 91.2 90.3 83.8 94.4 87.2 p 87.1
         Mar 93.6 88.8 109.0 p 88.5 94.5 87.0 p 86.7
         Apr 94.4 89.5 109.8 p 89.0 94.9 87.5 p 87.1
         May 94.6 89.9 85.1 p 89.5 110.2 p 89.4 90.9 91.1 90.6 84.1 94.8 87.7 p 87.4
         June 94.4 89.7 109.8 p 89.1 94.5 87.5 p 87.1
         July 94.6 89.8 109.5 p 88.7 94.8 87.6 p 86.9
         Aug 94.9 90.0 85.2 p 89.5 110.0 p 89.0 91.1 91.2 91.1 84.2 95.0 87.6 p 87.0
         Sep 95.1 90.1 110.2 p 89.2 95.1 87.8 p 87.2
         Oct 95.1 90.3 110.0 p 89.0 95.4 87.9 p 87.1
         Nov 94.6 89.6 84.6 p 89.1 109.6 p 88.6 90.9 91.0 90.6 83.8 94.8 87.5 p 86.8
         Dec 93.7 88.9 108.6 p 87.8 94.6 87.3 p 86.5
2017         Jan 93.9 89.1 109.0 p 88.0 94.5 87.2 p 86.4
         Feb 93.4 88.9 83.4 p 88.1 108.1 p 87.4 90.6 91.0 90.0 83.2 94.5 87.1 p 86.2
         Mar 94.0 89.2 108.5 p 87.5 94.6 87.2 p 86.1
         Apr 93.7 89.0 108.2 p 87.2 94.5 87.1 p 86.0
         May 95.6 90.5 84.8 p 88.9 110.5 p 88.8 91.6 91.4 91.8 84.2 95.4 88.0 p 87.0
         June 96.3 91.2 111.4 p 89.6 95.9 88.5 p 87.6
         July 97.6 92.4 113.3 p 91.0 96.6 89.2 p 88.5
         Aug 99.0 93.6 87.6 p 91.5 115.0 p 92.3 93.2 91.5 95.9 85.8 97.2 89.8 p 89.2
         Sep 99.0 93.6 115.0 p 92.2 97.3 89.8 p 89.3
         Oct 98.6 93.1 114.8 p 91.9 97.1 89.5 p 89.0
         Nov 98.5 93.0 87.4 p 91.3 115.0 p 92.0 93.2 91.2 96.3 85.6 97.2 89.5 p 89.0
         Dec 98.8 93.3 115.3 p 92.1 97.5 89.8 p 89.3
2018         Jan 99.4 93.9 116.1 p 92.7 97.6 89.8 p 89.3
         Feb 99.6 93.9 p 88.0 p 91.7 117.3 p 93.6 93.9 91.4 97.9 86.0 97.7 89.9 p 89.5
         Mar 99.7 94.2 117.7 p 93.9 97.8 90.0 p 89.7
         Apr 99.5 p 93.9 117.9 p 94.0 97.7 p 89.8 p 89.6
         May 98.1 p 92.8 ... ... 116.6 p 93.1 ... ... ... ... p 97.4 p 89.4 p 89.4
         June 97.9 p 92.6 116.7 p 93.0 p 97.2 p 89.4 p 89.4
         July 99.2 p 93.9 118.2 p 94.2 p 97.4 p 90.1 p 90.0
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the lable, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German group EER-19 (see footnote 1) and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Brazi l, Chile,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, N ew Zealand,
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Tu rkey and
2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2017, pp  41-43). For more Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyp rus and
(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral including Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, De nmark, Japan,
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the Unit ed States. 5Euro
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, area countries (see footnote 4) and countries belonging to the g roup EER-19. 6Euro
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United area countries and countries belonging to the group EER- 38 (see footnote 2). 
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai-

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2017 see the index attached 
to the January 2018 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
October 2017
– Global liquidity, foreign exchange reserves 
and exchange rates of emerging market 
economies
– The natural rate of interest
– The supervisory review and evaluation pro -
cess for smaller institutions and proportion -
ality considerations
– The Eurosystem’s new money market statis -
tical reporting – initial results for Germany
– The new ESCB insurance statistics – inte -
grated reporting flow and initial results
November 2017
– The current economic situation in GermanyDecember 2017
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2018 and 2019 and 
an outlook for 2020
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2016
– Mark-ups of firms in selected European 
countries
– The Eurosystem’s financial market infrastruc -
ture – origin and future set- up
January 2018
– The impact of the internationalisation of 
German firms on domestic investment
– The importance of bank profitability and 
bank capital for monetary policy
– Developments in corporate financing in the 
euro area since the financial and economic 
crisis
– Finalising Basel III
February 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2018
– German balance of payments in 2017
– The demand for euro banknotes at the Bun -
desbank
– Contingent convertible bonds: design, regu -
lation, usefulnessDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
85•

April 2018
– Wage growth in Germany: assessment and 
determinants of recent developments
– Germany’s external position: new statistical 
approaches and results since the financial 
crisis 
– Current regulatory developments in the field 
of payments and in the settlement of secur -
ities and derivatives
– Maastricht debt: methodological principles, 
compilation and development  in Germany
May 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2018
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2018 and 2019 and 
an outlook for 2020
– Lower bound, inflation target and the an -
choring of inflation expectations
July 2018
– The market for Federal securities: holder 
structure and the main drivers of yield move -
ments
– The realignment of the Chinese economy 
and its global  implications
– Trends in the financing structures of   German 
non- financial  corporations as reflected in the 
corporate financial  statements  statistics
August 2018
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20133
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
86•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20182, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification ,  
January 20182
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2011 to 
2016, May 20172
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2015, 
December 20162
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2014 bis 2015 , 
May 20182, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 20132
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20181, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
19/ 2018  
International trade and retail market perform -
ance and structure: theory and empirical evi -
dence
20/2018  
Quantitative easing, portfolio rebalancing and 
credit growth: micro evidence from Germany
21/2018  
Pre-emptive sovereign debt restructuring and 
holdout litigation
22/2018  
Unconventional monetary policy, bank lending, 
and security holdings: the yield-induced port -
folio rebalancing channel
23/2018  
Love and money with inheritance: marital sort -
ing by labor income and inherited wealth in the 
modern partnership
24/2018  
Convertible bonds and bank risk-taking
25/2018  
Interest rate pass-through to the rates of core 
deposits – a new perspective
26/ 2018  
Bank use of sovereign CDS in the eurozone 
crisis : hedging and risk incentives
27/ 2018  
With a little help from my friends: Survey- based 
derivation of euro area short rate expectations 
at the effective lower bound
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since 
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
87•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2018  
88•

