Monthly Report
May 2018
Vol 70  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postal address  
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel +49 69 9566 0
Fax +49 69 9566 3077
http://www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report  
went to press at 11 am on 18 May 2018.Annual and weekly publishing schedules for  
selected statistics of the Deutsche Bundes -
bank  can be downloaded from our website. 
The statistical data are also published on the 
website.
The Monthly Report  is published by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, 
by  virtue of section 18 of the Bundesbank 
Act. It is available to interested parties free of 
charge.
This is a translation of the original German-
language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Longer-term growth prospects in the euro area  .................................................................  17
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  20
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  21
Acquisition of financial assets and the search for yield in Germany  ....................................  30
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  37
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  47
Gradual changeover to JDemetra+ software for seasonal adjustment  
of the official statistics  ........................................................................................................  50
Part- time employment in Germany and France  ...................................................................  54
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  61
Current fiscal developments in the euro area  ......................................................................  62Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
5

Overview
Growth restrained 
at  beginning of year, 
but  upswing still intact
Global economic growth probably tailed off 
somewhat in the first three months of 2018, 
but the deceleration varied considerably from 
one country to the next. Having increased ro -
bustly in the previous quarters, real gross do -
mestic product (GDP) in the euro area climbed 
at a moderate rate of late. The UK saw its 
macroeconomic upswing more or less peter 
out, while momentum faded just a little in the 
United States. The Chinese economy continued 
what was, by international standards, a strong 
and steady rate of expansion, and activity prob -
ably remained rather upbeat in most of the 
other emerging market economies as well. One 
factor that contributed to the slowdown in 
economic growth was the weaker pace of in -
dustrial activity. However, the recent downturn 
should be seen against the backdrop of the 
very vibrant growth observed at times since 
mid-2016. The Bundesbank leading indicator 
for the global economy suggests that world -
wide industrial activity will ease somewhat, 
most likely on the back of a deterioration in the 
upbeat sentiment that was still in evidence at 
enterprises and among investors during the 
winter months. The aggregate purchasing 
managers’ index for global economic activity 
did level off recently, however. Needless to say, 
consumer sentiment remains as buoyant as 
ever, so the global economy can be expected 
to enjoy vibrant growth in the coming quarters.
That said, there are downside risks for the 
world economy, not least in connection with 
the United States’ trade policy. The dispute 
with China, in particular, has thrust the spectre 
of a trade war into the public eye. Macroeco -
nomic model simulations indicate that the 
introduction of tariffs can dampen economic 
activity and amplify price pressures. Complying 
with the World Trade Organization’s dispute settlement mechanism and holding back on 
unilateral measures could avert the risk of fur -
ther escalation.
The hazard posed by potentially spiralling trade 
disputes had no more than a short- lived and, if 
anything, isolated impact on individual seg -
ments of international financial markets, but 
this scenario nonetheless remains perilous. Fur -
thermore, the slightly less buoyant global activ -
ity, as well as diverging expectations for the 
future path of monetary policy in the major 
currency areas, did not leave international fi -
nancial markets unscathed in the first few 
months of 2018.
The heightened uncertainty seen in early Febru -
ary did not do any lasting damage to sentiment 
in financial markets, however, and receded 
quite quickly. The robust increase in interest 
rates observed in the year to date sent equity 
markets distinctly lower; for the most part, 
however, this was largely regarded as a correc -
tion warranted by the fundamentals. Further -
more, it was at this time that the sentiment in -
dicators began to portend the continuation of 
a very substantial rate of growth for the USA 
and China and a slightly slower pace for the 
euro area and Japan. This slightly greater over -
all divergence in the growth outlook was also 
reflected in market participants’ monetary pol -
icy expectations. While the turbulence that 
reared its head in February did nothing to shake 
their conviction that the Federal Reserve would 
stick to gradually normalising policy over the 
course of the year, they shifted their expect -
ations for the first interest rate hike in the euro 
area back to mid-2019. This widened the inter -
est rate spread between US Treasuries and Ger -
man securities across the entire maturity spec -
trum, taking the spread between ten- year 
US  Treasuries and German Bunds with the 
same maturity to 250 basis points at last count. 
International equity markets had to navigate 
bouts of strong volatility, registering price gains Global activity 
slightly less brisk 
in first quarter
Downside risks 
in connection 
with US trade 
policy …… and for 
financial 
 markets, too
Confident 
 economic 
assessment and 
expectations for 
monetary policy 
overall shaping 
developments 
in financial 
 marketsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
6

on balance in the USA and the euro area. 
Measured in terms of the equity risk premium, 
investors are slightly less willing to invest in US 
enterprises (having been keen to do so at the 
beginning of the year) and are displaying a 
somewhat greater propensity to invest in euro 
area stocks. In foreign exchange markets, the 
euro relinquished the gains it had run up 
against the US dollar between January and the 
end of the reporting period, and it has lost 1% 
overall in weighted average terms in the year to 
date.
The Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) kept its policy rates unchanged 
throughout the reporting period. Pursuant to 
the decision taken in October 2017, purchases 
under the expanded asset purchase programme 
(APP) will continue at the monthly volume of 
€30 billion until at least the end of September 
2018. March saw the Governing Council bring 
its communication into line with the improved 
state of the economy and greater confidence in 
the inflation outlook by removing the easing 
bias attached to the APP (ie the reference to 
increasing the size and/ or duration of net pur -
chases should certain conditions materialise) 
from the Governing Council’s forward guid -
ance.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregate M3 
in the first quarter of 2018 was driven primarily 
by the continued recovery in the volume of 
loans granted to the euro area non-  financial 
private sector. Loans to non- financial corpor -
ations and households registered another 
marked upturn on the back of the ongoing 
economic growth, the very low interest rates 
and the favourable credit supply conditions in 
the euro area. Viewed as a whole, however, 
the positive – and, in the past two years, re -
markably stable – pace of underlying monetary 
growth faltered in the first three months of 
2018. One reason for this was the further re -
duction, in January, of the Eurosystem’s 
monthly net asset purchases which, taken in 
isolation, acted to dampen securities- based lending by the MFI sector (including the Euro -
system) to general government.
Having expanded at a very robust pace in the 
previous quarters, aggregate activity in Ger -
many grew at a far more subdued pace in the 
first quarter of the current year. The Federal 
Statistical Office’s flash estimate noted that real 
GDP was 0.3% higher than in the fourth quar -
ter of 2017 in seasonally and calendar- adjusted 
terms. One- off effects were partly responsible 
for the slower pace of growth. For instance, it 
appears as if economic activity was temporarily 
restrained by an unusually high sickness level, 
which is why the underlying economic boom in 
Germany is expected to continue. That said, 
the underlying cyclical trend may well have de -
celerated unexpectedly quickly to a pace of 
growth that is now only slightly above poten -
tial growth. If this were the case, it would 
mean that the already high level of aggregate 
capacity utilisation would increase at a slower 
rate.
Industry made no contribution of any note to 
aggregate growth in the first quarter of 2018 
and therefore did nothing to boost the econ -
omy as a whole. This will have been due mainly 
to the decline in exports. Similarly, it would ap -
pear that, despite brisk demand, production 
levels barely increased in the construction sec -
tor, which is experiencing capacity constraints. 
In a departure from the lacklustre develop -
ments in the manufacturing sector, business-  
related service sectors probably continued to 
chart an upward path. On the demand side, 
exports relinquished their role as the main 
source of momentum. The flatter growth in 
economic activity was bolstered more by in -
vestment and private consumption, the latter 
bouncing back after taking a breather in the 
second half of 2017.
The stronger rate of growth in private con -
sumption is also reflected by credit develop -
ments. The biggest net gains were registered 
by loans to households, buoyed primarily by 
yet another spike in demand for mortgages. ECB Governing 
Council leaves 
policy rates 
unchanged
Monetary 
dynamics 
increasingly 
driven by loan 
growthGerman 
 economy 
 experiences dip 
in growth in first 
quarter of 2018
No contribution 
to growth from 
industry; exports 
on the decline
Broad-based 
robust expan -
sion in loans to 
the private sec -
tor in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
7

Consumer credit growth continued to pick up 
speed as well. Loans to non- financial corpor -
ations, the growth of which lags a few quarters 
behind GDP growth, likewise picked up strongly 
on the back of the continued favourable lend -
ing conditions. All in all, lending by banks in 
Germany to the domestic private sector in the 
first quarter of 2018 continued to accelerate 
significantly, despite the slight slowdown in 
economic growth.
Conditions in Germany’s labour market im -
proved again at the beginning of 2018. Em -
ployment increased very substantially in the 
first quarter of the year owing to another ex -
ceptionally strong rise in the number of jobs 
subject to social security contributions. In a 
year- on- year comparison, February saw half of 
the new jobs being taken by German nationals 
and half by migrants. Immigration and greater 
labour force participation among German na -
tionals, then, are continuing to facilitate strong 
job growth. Unemployment dwindled quite 
rapidly in the first quarter, probably because 
the dampening effect caused by the increasing 
number of refugees registered as being un -
employed petered out. That said, the supply of 
job vacancies in the reporting quarter grew at a 
far slower pace than it had done previously, 
and other leading indicators have also deterior -
ated somewhat of late. The outlook is none -
theless still very upbeat.
The new wage agreements which manage -
ment and labour sealed in the current pay 
round contain, in many instances, far stronger 
wage increases than in the past two years and 
reflect the very good situation in the labour 
market to a greater extent than before. The 
agreements for central and local government 
and for the metal- working and electrical engin -
eering industries which, when measured in 
terms of the number of employees, affect the 
most employees in this year’s wage round, will 
see wages climb by around 3% to 3¼% in an -
nualised terms. Equally noteworthy is the un -
usually long term of the wage agreements – 30 
and 27 months, respectively – which has also been a feature of recent wage agreements in a 
number of other areas as well. The wage deal 
proposed by the mediator for the main con -
struction sector likewise runs for a long term of 
26 months, besides boosting pay levels consid -
erably. The wage demands by the trade unions 
for the forthcoming negotiations in the chem -
ical industry, the painting and varnishing trades 
and the regional hotel and catering trade 
amount to 6% over a term of 12 months. In 
the wage negotiations that have already been 
wrapped up, there were some sectors in which 
the social partners attached particular import -
ance to giving employees greater flexibility to 
align their working time arrangements with 
their personal situations.
Consumer prices as measured by the Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose fairly 
sharply again in Germany in the first quarter of 
the year. In a quarter- on- quarter comparison, 
they appreciated by 0.4% after seasonal adjust -
ment, though the components driving this de -
velopment shifted. Whereas inflation in the 
fourth quarter of last year had been driven 
mainly by energy and food prices, the rate of 
price increase for these goods eased noticeably 
in the first quarter of the current year. Exclud -
ing these two components, the rate of price 
increase was, by contrast, significant again fol -
lowing a temporary dip at the end of 2017. This 
was largely attributable to services, where 
prices accelerated a lot more in the first quarter 
of the year – in part because Easter was early 
this year. The previously weak price trend in 
travel services saw a turnaround, and the re -
ductions in premiums for motor vehicle insur -
ance which took place in the fourth quarter of 
2017 stopped having a dampening effect and 
were, in fact, even reversed in some cases. In 
addition, rents grew somewhat more strongly. 
By contrast, the rate of price increase for non- 
energy industrial goods remained weak. This 
was probably in part because an appreciation 
of the euro had driven import prices down 
fairly sharply in the run- up to the New Year and 
this was subsequently having a lagged impact 
on consumer prices. On the year, headline HICP Situation and 
outlook in 
labour market 
very favourable
Wage agree -
ments so far 
often with 
higher pay risesRenewed clear 
increase in HICP 
inflation over 
the reporting 
periodDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
8

inflation nonetheless fell from 1.6% to 1.3% 
because energy and food prices had risen per -
ceptibly at the beginning of 2017. By contrast, 
the rate excluding energy and food products 
rose from 1.2% to 1.3%, in part because the 
dampening impact on prices of the reform of 
long- term care in January 2017 was no longer 
influencing the year- on- year rate.
Following the dip in growth during the first 
quarter, the German economy is likely to ex -
pand more strongly again in the second quar -
ter of 2018. The one- off impact of the un -
usually severe flu season, which probably had a 
dampening impact on economic activity in the 
first quarter, is coming to an end, and govern -
ment consumption is also set to rise again. 
Moreover, the orders situation in industry re -
mains very favourable despite a recent drop in 
incoming orders. Similarly, short- term produc -
tion expectations have not fallen any further 
according to the Ifo Institute, in fact rising 
somewhat, and exports are likely to recover 
from their setback. As a result, manufacturing, 
in particular, could re- emerge as an important 
driver of economic activity. With utilisation of 
tangible fixed assets in manufacturing en -
trenched at a high level and sales prospects 
looking favourable overall, enterprises are likely 
to further expand investment in machinery and 
equipment. Buoyed by positive labour market 
dynamics and accelerating wage growth, pri -
vate consumption is also likely to rise notice -
ably. Nonetheless, the less optimistic sentiment 
among businesses suggests that the pace of 
growth in economic activity is unlikely to match 
last year’s high growth rates overall.
Germany’s public finances have been develop -
ing very satisfactorily for some time now, and a 
considerable surplus and falling debt ratio are 
likely again in the current year. The general 
government surplus could be at a similarly high 
level as last year (2017: +1.3% of GDP). The 
continuing benefits of the economic upturn 
and falling interest expenditure are likely to ab -
sorb the otherwise anticipated lively growth in 
expenses. The new Federal Government’s pro -jects are unlikely to have much of an impact on 
public finances in the current year. Overall, the 
structural surplus could remain at more than 
1% of GDP . The debt ratio is likely to stay on its 
downward trajectory (end-2017: 64.1%).
As things currently stand, it looks as though 
government budgets will continue to benefit 
from the favourable economic conditions and 
beneficial financing terms beyond the current 
year. At the same time, significant fiscal easing 
is on the cards as the new German government 
has announced tax cuts and additional spend -
ing. Moreover, state and local governments 
are, in many cases, reporting perceptible struc -
tural surpluses, and central government has 
promised additional transfers on a large scale. 
The potential this opens up is likely to be used 
to cover additional needs identified there, say, 
in terms of staffing or real investment and, 
potentially  , also to reverse tax increases. Social 
contributions might potentially also be lowered, 
and these cuts could be larger than originally 
agreed, for instance at the Federal Employment 
Agency. All things considered, general govern -
ment surpluses are therefore likely to shrink 
again, especially in structural terms. Although 
fiscal easing coincides with a strong economy 
and will thus tend to have a procyclical impact, 
it would not be advisable to delay meaningful 
additional spending or relief on the revenue 
side as long as they do not jeopardise the 
sound structural foundation. The economic 
problems that this could potentially cause cur -
rently look limited. Nonetheless, concrete cap -
acity bottlenecks will have to be monitored so 
that additional investment spending, say, does 
not dissipate entirely through price increases. 
Overall, there are, however, still good reasons 
for all levels of government not to aim for 
structural deficits, but rather to target moder -
ate structural surpluses.
In its recently presented plans, Germany’s new 
government is holding on to its goal of no net 
new borrowing. Its plans would, however, in -
volve noticeable fiscal easing and structural 
deficits, as cyclical increases in tax revenue and Growth to pick 
up again in the 
second quarter
Public finances 
remain favour -
able in 2018: 
considerable 
surplus and 
declining debt 
ratioClearly expan -
sionary budget -
ary stance on 
the cards from 
next year 
onwards
Decisions on the 
federal budget 
involve notice -
able fiscal 
 easingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
9

the currently large refugee reserve are to be 
used to fund the agreed new measures. Over 
time, the structural deficit is expected to come 
back down, although fairly optimistic potential 
growth was assumed. That said, the concrete 
budget estimates initially appear conservative. 
All in all, there may well already be sufficient 
funds to cover not only the priority projects laid 
down in the coalition agreement but also other 
measures such as compensation for bracket 
creep in the income tax regime and higher EU 
contributions from 2021 onwards. Looking at 
recent forecasts of higher tax revenue, it should 
be noted that additional demands are being 
made, especially by the Ministry of Defence 
and for development aid. Overall, the medium- 
term budgetary outlook, therefore, does not 
look entirely unproblematic despite very fa -
vourable conditions.
The government’s plans also envisage central 
government being more involved in tasks gen -
erally performed at the state and local govern -
ment levels. However, with substantial sur -
pluses being generated almost everywhere in 
Germany, state and local governments already 
have financial leeway for the projects being 
supported in this way. In the final analysis, it 
does not seem to make any sense to (partially) 
uphold the solidarity surcharge whilst at the 
same time providing state and local govern -
ments throughout the country with additional 
funding for their tasks. A better idea would be 
a more fundamental reform of income tax in -volving the abolition of the solidarity surcharge, 
a clear division of labour between central, state 
and local governments, and appropriate distri -
bution of tax revenues. The Federal states’ indi -
vidual responsibility could also be strengthened 
by giving them the right to enact tax surcharges 
or discounts. One of the benefits of this ap -
proach would be to make allowances for dif -
ferent regional preferences regarding the ex -
tent of tasks to be performed by government.
A key challenge for fiscal policy is not to lose 
sight of the demographic strains further down 
the line even though conditions currently look 
good in the medium term. This is particularly 
true of the statutory pension insurance scheme, 
which is scheduled for a thorough overhaul as 
from 2025. Factors to consider are not only the 
level of pensions and contribution rates, but 
also the additional tax burden as a result of po -
tentially higher central government grants, and 
the statutory retirement age. One way to avoid 
the number of years in retirement growing des -
pite no change in average working lives, which 
would increase funding pressures, would be to 
gradually raise the statutory retirement age in 
line with life expectancy. Looking at the Federal 
grants, it should be noted that they will rise sig -
nificantly faster than contributions to the statu -
tory pension insurance scheme even without 
the currently mooted expansion in benefits and 
will take up an ever larger percentage of cen -
tral government’s tax revenue.Mixed financing 
blurs responsibil -
itiesIn pension 
reforms, sound 
pension finances 
should be 
secured through 
balanced 
burden- sharingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
10

Global and European setting
World economic activity
Global economic growth probably tailed off 
somewhat in the first three months of the year, 
but the deceleration varied considerably from 
one country to the next. Having increased ro -
bustly in the previous quarters, real gross do -
mestic product (GDP) in the euro area has 
climbed at a moderate rate of late. The United 
Kingdom saw its macroeconomic upswing 
more or less peter out. In Japan, economic out -
put even contracted slightly, while momentum 
faded just a little in the United States. The Chi -
nese economy continued to see what was, by 
international standards, a strong and steady 
rate of expansion. In most of the other emer -
ging economies, economic activity is also likely 
to have remained rather favourable.
One- off factors probably contributed in part to 
the slowdown in growth experienced in some 
advanced economies. Moreover, momentum 
appears to have waned in particular in the in -
dustrial sector, which was a key driving force in 
the preceding quarters. Manufacturing output 
in the euro area in the first quarter declined 
compared with the preceding quarter, and 
even fell sharply in Japan. This weakness 
should, however, be viewed against the back -
drop of the very steep rise since mid-2016. In 
the six quarters leading up to the end of 2017, 
euro area manufacturing output had increased 
by more than 6%, whilst in Japan, it had 
climbed by almost 8%. In the USA, output in -
creased by only 2½% in the same period. On 
an average of the first four months of this year, 
however, it rose by just over half a percentage 
point on the fourth quarter of 2017.
The Bundesbank leading indicator for the 
global economy also points to a certain slow -down in worldwide industrial activity. Accord -
ing to the data currently available, it has de -
clined since January and is now falling slightly 
short of its long- term average.1 This is probably 
due not least to a deterioration in the upbeat 
sentiment still in evidence at enterprises and 
amongst investors at the global level. Geopolit -
ical tensions and trade disputes, in particular, 
presumably dented confidence during the win -
ter months. In April, however, the aggregate 
purchasing managers’ index for global eco -
nomic activity levelled off. Global consumer 
sentiment remains buoyant. Optimism also pre -
vailed among the staff of the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF), who confirmed their 
January projections of brisk global economic 
growth this year and next year in their spring 
forecast.
That said, there are downside risks for the 
world economy, not least in connection with 
the United States’ trade policy. Citing national 
security considerations, the US government im -
posed new tariffs on steel and aluminium im -
ports in March in order to protect domestic in -
dustries. Imports from some countries and eco -
nomic areas (including the EU) were at least 
temporarily exempted. In addition, trade policy Global economy 
likely to have 
grown at some -
what slower 
pace at start 
of year
Industrial 
 activity faltering 
in some 
 countriesSentiment 
 indicators 
 stabilised 
 following 
decline
Trade disputes 
and risk of 
escalation
Manufacturing output in selected 
industrial countries
Sources:  Eurostat,  national  statistics,  Haver  Analytics  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 201896981001021041061082016 Q2 = 100, seasonally and calendar-adjusted, log scale
United Kingdom
JapanEuro area
USA
April
1 As a result of the underlying smoothing procedure, the 
indicator is subject to revision at the current end. The val -
ues should therefore be interpreted with caution.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
11

measures against China were announced in re -
taliation for the violation of intellectual prop -
erty rights. In turn, China threatened to apply 
punitive tariffs to imports from the United 
States. This conflict thrust the global risk of in -
creased protectionism or even a trade war into 
the public eye. Macroeconomic model simula -
tions indicate that the introduction of tariffs 
could dampen economic activity and amplify 
price pressures.2 In particular, an economy with 
protectionist policies is ultimately at risk of 
causing damage to itself. The member states of 
the World Trade Organization (WTO) have 
committed to following an agreed multilateral 
framework to settle the dispute. The risk of fur -ther escalation could be averted if all parties 
concerned were to comply with this framework 
and hold back on unilateral measures. Both the 
United States and China have submitted com -
plaints to the WTO.
The new US import duties initially depressed 
steel and aluminium prices on the international 
markets. On account of the United States im -
posing targeted sanctions on a Russian manu -
facturer, however, the price of aluminium 
surged in the first half of April, though it stood 
considerably below its peak again towards the 
end of the month. Overall, the prices of non-  
energy commodities in April (denominated in 
US dollars) barely differed from their January 
level. By contrast, the price of crude oil has 
been increasing sharply since mid- March. This 
was probably mainly due to heightened geo -
political tensions in the Middle East. Adopted 
at the beginning of May, US sanctions against 
Iran could result in marked shortages in the 
global oil supply given continued OPEC produc -
tion restrictions and declining production in 
Venezuela. As this report went to press, the 
spot price for a barrel of Brent crude oil was 
US$79 – its highest level since the fourth quar -
ter of 2014. Forward quotations did not keep 
up with the latest increase, meaning that the 
discounts for futures increased considerably.
The impact of the increase in oil prices is likely 
to pass through to the consumer level in indus -
trial countries. The inflation rate for a corres -
ponding aggregate of countries had already 
risen to 2.0% in March, which was its highest 
level since February 2017 and 0.2 percentage 
point more than at the end of the preceding 
year. The core inflation rate, for the calculation 
of which energy and food were excluded from 
the basket of consumer goods, increased by a 
similar margin. At 1.6% in March, it was still 
somewhat lower than the headline rate.Crude oil prices 
at highest level 
since 2014
Consumer 
price inflation 
stabilisedWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and food
and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance LP and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 11 May 2018, or 1 to 17 May 2018 for crude 
oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 1835
30405060708090100110120Monthly averages, log scale
60708090100110
5060
65708090100110US dollar basis,
2012 = 100
Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beverages
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The danger posed to the 
global economy by protectionist tendencies, Monthly Re -
port, July 2017, pp 77-91.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
12

Selected emerging market 
economies
China’s real GDP increased by 6.8% on the year 
in the first quarter of 2018, according to the 
official estimate. The pace of growth in the two 
preceding quarters was thus maintained; indus -
trial activity even increased slightly. The re -
newed sharp rise in Chinese exports is likely to 
have played a role here. In addition, private 
consumption demand proved to be a mainstay 
of economic activity. Surveys suggest that 
households’ sentiment was very upbeat 
throughout the reporting period. Consumer 
price inflation did increase slightly, but re -
mained moderate at 2.1% on an average of the 
winter months. On the housing market, on the 
other hand, the downturn persisted; selling 
prices were even lower than they had been a 
year previously in a number of major cities.
At 7.2%, India’s year- on- year growth rate in 
the final quarter of 2017 was at its highest 
since the summer of 2016. In the first quarter 
of 2018, for which no GDP estimate has been 
published as of yet, economic activity probably 
increased strongly once again, according to the 
available indicators. Overall, economic activity 
has rebounded in the wake of sweeping re -
forms, including the introduction of a single 
Goods & Services Tax (GST) across the country. 
However, the tax reform could also have 
spurred on inflation. Despite a rather low in -
crease in food prices, the annual consumer 
price index (CPI) climbed by 4.6% on an aver -
age of the first quarter of the year, just as in the 
final quarter of 2017.
In Brazil, economic output at end-2017 re -
mained at the level of the previous quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms. While gross fixed 
capital formation continued to recover dis -
tinctly, the expansion of private consumption 
almost came to a standstill. The indicators 
available for the first quarter suggest that eco -
nomic activity has been persistently weak. 
Thus, industrial production stagnated, and the 
labour market situation also remained difficult. The unemployment rate recently went back 
over 13%. Weak wage growth continued to 
dampen consumer price inflation. Annual CPI 
inflation rose by +2.8% on an average of the 
January to March period. Against this back -
ground, the central bank continued its monet -
ary policy easing, lowering the policy rate by 25 
basis points on two occasions since the begin -
ning of the year.
According to a preliminary estimate by the Rus -
sian Federal State Statistics Service, real GDP in 
Russia was 1.3% higher in the first quarter of 
2018 than in the same period of the previous 
year. The economy thus continued to expand 
at a slightly faster pace than at the end of 2017. 
This was due, amongst other things, to a re -
covery in industrial output, which increased by 
1.6% on the year in the first quarter of 2018 
following an unexpected decline in the fourth 
quarter of 2017.3 On the whole, in spite of the 
upward trend in the price of oil, which was 
beneficial to Russia, cyclical momentum re -
mained very subdued. On average over the first 
quarter, CPI inflation declined to a rate of 2.3%. 
In both February and March, therefore, the 
Russian central bank cut its policy rate by 25 
basis points. Following the devaluation of the 
rouble in April, which was the result of new US 
sanctions, it refrained from any further interest 
rate moves.
USA
The US economy was not quite able to sustain 
the momentum of the past few quarters into 
the beginning of 2018. According to an initial 
estimate, real GDP in the first quarter rose by 
0.6% on the previous period, following adjust -
ment for seasonal effects. From spring until au -
tumn 2017, growth rates fluctuated between 
+0.7% and +0.8%. Gross fixed capital forma -
tion recently experienced renewed strong Sustained high 
growth in China
Strong upward 
trend in India
Recovery in 
 Brazil remains 
tentativeModerate 
growth in Russia
Growth has 
eased off 
slightly
3 The weakness at the end of 2017 may predominantly 
have been due to a decline in armaments production, 
which is not identified separately in the statistics.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
13

growth, and a greater build- up of inventories 
and foreign trade supported the macroeco -
nomic upswing slightly. However, private con -
sumption growth slowed down sharply as 
households had increasingly exhausted their 
scope for expenditure. Yet against the back -
ground of tax relief, which came into force in 
January, as well as further improvements on 
the labour market, conditions remain favour -
able for private consumption. In April, the un -
employment rate fell to its lowest level since 
December 2000. In addition, some indicators 
are pointing to an advancing consolidation of 
wage growth.4 Consumer price inflation has 
also increased in line with rising domestic cost 
pressures in the last few months. The CPI infla -
tion rate climbed to 2.5% in April, while core 
inflation increased to 2.1%. In this setting, the 
US Federal Reserve maintained its stance of a 
gradual normalisation of monetary policy and 
raised its policy rate by 25 basis points.
Japan
The recovery of the Japanese economy did not 
continue into the beginning of the year. A pro -
visional estimate shows that real GDP declined 
by 0.2% on the final quarter of 2017 after ad -
justment for seasonal factors. This was the first 
decline on the quarter after a two- year period 
of expansion. Once again, housing investment, 
in particular, fell sharply. The other components 
of domestic demand were weak. At the same 
time, the upward momentum of foreign trade 
flows slowed. However, as exports grew slightly 
more than imports, real GDP received another 
slight positive stimulus. Although the un -
employment rate sank to a cyclical low of 2.5% 
in the first quarter, domestic inflationary pres -
sures remained weak. The annual core rate of 
CPI inflation (excluding energy and food) came 
in at +0.3% in March, while the headline rate 
stood at +1.1%. The Japanese central bank kept 
its monetary policy on an expansionary track.United Kingdom
After adjustment for seasonal variations, real 
first quarter GDP in the United Kingdom was 
up by just 0.1% on the previous quarter accord -
ing to a provisional estimate; the economy had 
grown moderately in the second half of 2017. 
A significant drop in output in the construction 
sector, to which adverse weather conditions 
may have contributed, was a considerable fac -
tor behind this slowdown. The rebound in the 
services sector was held back by a decline in 
the gross value added of consumer- related sec -
tors. This is consistent with the marked fall in 
real retail turnover, which some have likewise 
associated with inclement weather. While out -
put in the production sector experienced con -
siderable growth, this was primarily due to a 
rise in energy production as a result of the cold 
weather, and to the significant recovery in oil 
and gas production.5 The unemployment rate 
in the first quarter nevertheless did fall to its 
lowest level since the winter of 1975. While 
nominal wage growth remained moderate, in -
flation as measured by the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) dropped further in 
March, to 2.5%. The Bank of England main -
tained its monetary policy stance in light of the 
recent sluggishness in the overall economy.
New EU member states
In the new EU member states (EU-6),6 the eco -
nomic upswing continued in the first quarter of 
2018. Real GDP rose significantly, or even 
sharply, compared to the previous quarter in 
most countries in the region. Despite a certain 
deterioration in some sentiment indicators, in -
dustrial activity remained robust. Looking at the Upward macro -
economic trend 
interruptedOnly limited 
macroeconomic 
growth
Robust growth 
with moderate 
inflation
4 Thus the annual rate of the Employment Cost Index for 
employees in the private sector, which largely eliminates 
distorting composition effects, rose to +2.8% in the first 
quarter of 2018. Two years earlier, it had been one per -
centage point lower.
5 The breakdown of the Forties pipeline had strongly 
limited oil and gas production at the end of 2017.
6 This group comprises the non- euro area countries that 
have joined the EU since 2004, ie Poland, the Czech Re -
public, Hungary, Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
14

expenditure side of GDP , aggregate growth 
was probably given a boost particularly by pri -
vate consumption. Households have long been 
benefiting from high wage increases without 
this having resulted in any major acceleration in 
consumer price inflation so far. HICP inflation 
even fell somewhat to +1.7% in the first quar -
ter of 2018, which was mainly owing to declin -
ing inflationary pressures from food. Excluding 
energy and food, consumer price inflation re -
mained at 0.9%.
Macroeconomic trends 
in the euro area
The euro area upswing continued at a more 
subdued pace at the beginning of 2018. Euro -
stat’s flash estimate indicates that, after sea -
sonal adjustment, real GDP growth contracted 
to 0.4% from 0.7% in the fourth quarter of 
2017.7 Compared with the previous year, the in -
crease amounted to 2.5%, following 2.8% in 
the previous quarter. In terms of expenditure, 
this slowdown was likely caused by domestic 
and external economic factors. While private 
consumption is likely to have kept increasing at 
a subdued rate in winter, investment activity 
tailed off. Meanwhile, exports rose less strongly 
than in the previous quarter. In regional terms, 
economic growth in the euro area appeared to 
be somewhat less homogenous. Economic ac -
tivity dropped in some member states, while 
underlying momentum remained dynamic else -
where. Sentiment indicators suggest a rate of 
aggregate expansion for the second quarter 
similar to that at the start of 2018.
Private consumption is likely to have risen 
somewhat in the first quarter. Price and sea -
sonally adjusted retail sales remained almost 
unchanged on the quarter, though the signifi -
cant rise in new motor vehicle registrations has 
probably offset this. The fact that households 
have upped their saving may be a key factor 
behind the muted consumption growth that 
has persisted for a number of quarters. It is 
likely that the real income gains in the first quarter were also not entirely used to increase 
private consumption expenditure. Since the 
saving ratio had reached a historical low at the 
beginning of 2017 due to increased inflationary 
pressures, a certain correction appeared to be 
in the cards.8
Investment in machinery and equipment, which 
had still recorded respectable gains in the final 
quarter of 2017, has presumably lost steam re -Slowdown in 
growth at the 
start of the year
Subdued growth 
in private 
 consumption
Lower invest -
ment activityAggregate output in the euro area
Source:  Eurostat.  1 Affected  by  jump  in  Irish  GDP  since 
2015 Q1.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 1898100102104106108110Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data,
log scale
9698100102104106
94969810010210410610898100102104106108110
Italy
SpainFranceEuro area1
of which
7 A growth rate of 0.6% was originally calculated for the 
fourth quarter of 2017, but this was revised to 0.7% in the 
wake of Ireland’s GDP result (+3.2%).
8 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Energy prices and private 
consumption, Monthly Report, February 2017, pp 13-15.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
15

cently, as the steep decline in the output of 
capital goods would suggest in any case. 
Meanwhile, the corresponding seasonally and 
price adjusted domestic turnover rose at a simi -
lar rate in January/  February as in the autumn. 
There was also probably no major increase in 
construction investment following noticeable 
gains in the autumn. Construction decreased 
slightly in the winter months.
Exports in the first quarter of 2018 were also 
presumably unable to maintain the extremely 
high momentum of the final quarter. The slow -
down in export growth was broad- based 
across the most important trading partners in 
the euro area. Income from goods exports to 
non- euro area countries barely changed, even 
in real terms. Spending on goods imported 
from outside the euro area was also less brisk 
at the start of the year. At the same time, im -
port prices rose distinctly again, meaning that 
the imports of goods in the first quarter, once 
adjusted for prices, fell short of the level at the end of 2017. Trade between member states in -
creased slightly.
In line with the declining impetus coming from 
exports and investment, industry was unable to 
match the favourable growth of the preceding 
quarters. In the first quarter, seasonally ad -
justed industrial output in the euro area fell by 
0.6% on the previous period. This drop was 
particularly pronounced for capital goods, and 
only consumer goods were able to record a 
slight increase.
Following the regionally broad- based, powerful 
upsurge in the fourth quarter of 2017, eco -
nomic growth among the member states was 
somewhat more disparate again at the start of 
2018. In France, real first quarter GDP was a 
seasonally adjusted 0.3% up from the previous 
quarter, in which it had climbed by 0.7%. This 
weaker growth was primarily caused by ex -
ports, which were virtually stagnating after a 
very sharp rise in autumn. Additionally, private 
consumption only grew slightly, while invest -
ment expanded markedly, albeit at a slower 
rate. The upswing in Italy continued in the first 
quarter without any change of pace, with eco -
nomic output rising by 0.3%. Foreign trade fig -
ures for the first quarter indicate that the previ -
ously extremely buoyant export activity is slow -
ing. Private consumption has probably gone up 
only slightly given the stagnant employment 
growth, and investment activity was also likely 
to have been relatively restrained. Spain experi -
enced the strongest growth among the major 
member states, with an unchanged quarterly 
GDP growth rate of 0.7%. Economic growth 
was once again probably boosted primarily by 
its domestic economy. Although the upsurge in 
investment appears to have eased up some -
what, this has likely been offset by the rather 
steep rise in private consumption. Strong GDP 
growth could also be seen in the Netherlands, 
Austria and Finland.
Despite the somewhat slower upturn in macro -
economic growth, the situation in the labour 
market continued to improve in the euro area. Weaker rise in 
exportsSetback for 
industrial 
 production
Regional growth 
in the euro area 
somewhat more 
disparate again
Recovery in the 
labour market 
continuingSentiment indicators for the euro area
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018–25–20–15–10–50+5Percentage balances, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
353025201510505101520
–––––––++++
Consumer confidenceManufacturing
industryServices sectorBusiness confidence
ConstructionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
16

Longer-term growth prospects in the euro area
Economic growth in the euro area picked 
up distinctly last year, with real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) expanding at a 
calendar- adjusted rate of 2.5% – a pace last 
seen more than ten years ago – after con-
tracting in 2012 and 2013. Aggregate cap-
acity utilisation will have increased appre-
ciably in 2017.1 However, potential output is 
a variable that is diﬃ   cult to quantify in real 
time,2 hence the lack of consensus over 
whether utilisation in the euro area as a 
whole has already returned to normal.3
There is also the question of whether the 
brisker macroeconomic dynamics observed 
in the past years can be put down entirely 
to more benign cyclical conditions, or 
whether they might also be masking a 
strengthening of growth potential. The lat-
est estimates by the European Commission 
reveal that potential growth in the euro 
area soared from 0.3% in 2012 to 1.5% in 
2017. Note, however, that 2012 marked a 
low point in the European Commission’s 
data since their estimates of potential 
growth track cyclical fl  uctuations with a re-
duced amplitude. This is because some 
components of potential output are infl  u-
enced not just by structural factors, but pre-
sumably by the economic cycle, too – a 
phenomenon that can be seen in total fac-
tor productivity (TFP), for example. The rise 
in estimated potential growth recorded in the last few years is thus likely, in part, to be 
a refl  ection of past cyclical weaknesses hav-
ing been overcome.4
One way of fathoming the outlook for 
growth is to use estimates of the longer- 
term potential rate that are less dependent 
on cyclical developments. In its 2018 spring 
forecast, the European Commission puts 
potential growth in the euro area fi  ve years 
ahead at 1.3%, which, though slightly 
higher than in earlier reports, is weaker 
1 Judging by the surveys of the European Commission, 
capacity utilisation in the manufacturing sector re-
turned to its long- term average back in the fi  rst quar-
ter of 2015 and has been approaching the peak of the 
series of late.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, On the reliability of inter-
national organisations’ estimates of the output gap, 
Monthly Report, April 2014, pp 13-35.
3 See European Central Bank, Measures of slack in the 
euro area, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3/ 2018, pp 31-35.
4 The European Commission’s estimates indicate that 
the contribution from capital accumulation has risen 
only marginally since 2012.Estimated potential growth and 
longer-term growth expectations in the 
euro area
Sources: European Commission, ECB and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 According to the spring forecast in the year shown. 
The projections for the euro area for the years 2005, 2006 and 
2008 were calculated on the basis of national forecasts (12 
countries).  2 Annual  averages  of  the  quarterly  rounds  each 
year and average outcome of the Q1 and Q2 rounds in 2018.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 180.91.21.51.82.12.4 European Commission’s estimates of 
potential growth five years ahead1Estimated annual potential growth 
according to the European Commission’s 
2018 spring forecast
1.51.82.12.4Expectations for growth five 
years ahead according to the ECB Survey 
of Professional Forecasters 20.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.4%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
17

The number of unemployed people in the first 
quarter fell by just under 260,000 compared to 
the fourth quarter of 2017, after seasonal ad -
justment, and by around 1.5 million on the 
year. The standardised unemployment rate in 
March fell to 8.5%, after 8.6% in December 
and 9.4% one year earlier. The employment 
data show a sharp rise in employment for the 
final quarter of 2017, with a year-  on- year in -
crease of 2.4 million people, or 1.6%. Wage 
growth strengthened slightly, and given an in -
crease in the average number of hours worked 
per employee, the year- on- year rise in gross 
hourly earnings accelerated slightly in the 
fourth quarter to 1.6%. Hourly employee com -
pensation rose by 1.4% over the same period.
Consumer prices in the euro area rose in the 
first quarter of 2018 by a seasonally adjusted 
0.5% on the quarter, an even stronger increase 
than in the fourth quarter of 2017. As was al -
ready the case then, the fact that energy prices 
were raised on the back of higher crude oil prices was especially noticeable. Processed 
food, especially dairy and fat products, also be -
came markedly more expensive, while prices 
for unprocessed food largely remained un -
changed following the significant increase in 
the preceding period. Likewise, consumers did 
not have to spend much more on industrial 
goods (excluding energy) than in the autumn, 
though services prices rose noticeably by 0.5%, 
which was also linked to the early date of 
Easter. Despite the clear inflation viewed over 
the period, headline annual HICP inflation was 
somewhat lower than in the two previous 
quarters, at 1.3%, on a quarterly average. A 
key factor in this was that energy prices had 
increased steeply a year earlier and that the 
prices for unprocessed food had risen strongly 
owing to the especially poor weather condi -
tions at the time.
The average inflation rate excluding energy and 
food stood at 1.0% in the first quarter, slightly 
higher than the rate in the autumn of 2017. Consumer prices 
up noticeably 
again in first 
quarter
Core inflation in 
Germany still 
above euro area 
ratethan the potential growth rate for 2018 and 
2017. This expected contraction in potential 
growth over the next fi  ve years will be 
driven chiefl  y by adverse demographic de-
velopments, which will dampen the supply 
of labour. As regards other potential growth 
factors, the European Commission’s projec-
tions include a renewed uptick in impetus 
from capital accumulation and a largely un-
changed TFP growth rate going forward.
Similarly, surveys on the growth outlook for 
the euro area do not suggest that potential 
rates in the euro area will pick up noticeably 
over a longer- term horizon. The private sec-
tor expectations for real GDP growth over a 
fi  ve- year horizon5 surveyed as part of the 
ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) 
remained practically unchanged from the 
previous year’s level at 1.6% in the fi  rst half 
of 2018. Unlike the European Commission’s estimates, the projections from the SPF 
even declined slightly in the past few years.
Overall, both the European Commission’s 
forecasts and the expectations surveyed as 
part of the SPF suggest that potential out-
put in the euro area will follow a subdued 
path. Bearing this in mind, there is good 
reason to believe that, in the absence of 
structural reforms that boost potential 
growth, macroeconomic growth will lose 
traction again over the longer run.
5 The SPF expectations for real GDP growth fi  ve years 
ahead will probably mirror the longer- term expect-
ations for potential growth because it can generally be 
assumed that these two variables will converge over 
the longer run. A special SPF questionnaire likewise re-
veals that most respondents, when asked where they 
see real GDP growth over the longer term, make 
judgement- based calls of the potential growth rate. 
See European Central Bank, Fifteen years of the 
ECB Survey of Professional Forecasters, Monthly Bul-
letin, January 2014, pp 55-67.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
18

Rates in the euro area ranged from 0.0% in 
Cyprus  to 2.1% in Austria. Germany’s core rate 
(1.3%) exceeded the euro area average by 
0.3 percentage point, which is highly consist -
ent with Germany’s cyclical position.
Consumer price inflation continued to rise 
slightly in April particularly on account of energy 
and food. This increase in consumer prices was 
down on the year, however, at 1.2%, primarily 
due to travel prices, which had increased much 
more sharply last year than this year owing to 
the later date of Easter. As a result, annual HICP 
inflation excluding energy and food fell mark -
edly by 0.3 percentage point to 0.7%.
It is likely that the economic upturn in the euro 
area will continue in the second quarter at a 
similar pace to that recorded in winter. Senti -
ment among businesses and consumers is still 
good following a noticeable corrective move -
ment. The domestic economy will probably 
continue to benefit from the labour market re -
covery and favourable financing terms, while 
exporters are expected to continue to share the benefits of the global economic upturn. Al -
though the underlying expansionary forces re -
main intact, it is possible that aggregate growth 
will no longer reach the extremely high rates 
experienced last year. This is also suggested by 
the path of potential output for the euro area’s 
economy, which is only sloping upwards mod -
erately (see also the box on pages 17 and 18.).Further slight 
rise in consumer 
prices in April
Moderate eco -
nomic growth 
likely in the 
second quarter 
again HICP excluding energy and food
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 1800.30.60.91.21.51.8Year-on-year percentage change
Euro area excluding Germany GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
19

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Based on its economic and monetary analysis, 
the ECB Governing Council kept key interest 
rates unchanged in the reporting period. The 
main refinancing rate thus remains at 0%, 
while the marginal lending rate stands at 
0.25% and the deposit facility rate at -0.40%. 
The Governing Council continues to expect the 
key interest rates to remain at their present 
levels for an extended period of time, and well 
past the horizon of its net asset purchases. 
Purchases under the expanded asset purchase 
programme (APP) will be made at the monthly 
pace of €30 billion net until the end of 
September 2018, or beyond, if necessary, and 
in any case until the Governing Council sees a 
sustained adjustment in the path of inflation 
consistent with its inflation aim. Redemption amounts will be reinvested alongside the net 
purchases. The Eurosystem will reinvest the 
principal payments from maturing securities for 
an extended period of time after ending net 
asset purchases, and in any case for as long as 
necessary.
At its meeting in March 2018, the Governing 
Council decided to remove from its 
communication what had thus far been an 
explicit statement that it would potentially 
increase or extend the monthly purchases 
under the APP . This statement had been 
introduced in December 2016 and was linked 
to a deterioration in the economic outlook or 
in financing conditions, which would otherwise 
no longer have been in line with further 
progress towards a sustained adjustment in the 
path of inflation. In so doing, the Governing 
Council adjusted its communication to reflect 
the considerably improved economic situation 
and its growing confidence in the path of 
inflation.
After several quarters of economic growth 
being higher than expected, the data received 
since the March meeting suggest a slight 
slowdown in economic growth since the 
beginning of 2018. This is probably indicative, 
at least in part, of a normalisation in the 
underlying cyclical trend. According to the 
Governing Council, this development continues 
on the whole to be consistent with the strong 
and broad-based growth momentum in the 
euro area. This growth outlook supported the 
Governing Council’s confidence that inflation 
will converge towards its aim of below, but 
close to, 2%. However, domestic price pressures 
remain subdued, and the Governing Council 
has not yet identified any convincing signs of a 
permanent, self-sustaining upward trend. 
Overall, the ECB Governing Council therefore 
concluded that a high degree of monetary 
policy accommodation remains necessary to ECB Governing 
Council leaves 
policy rates 
unchanged
ECB Governing 
Council adjusts 
monetary policy 
communication
Continued 
strong and 
broad-based 
economic 
growth 
 momentumMoney market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 Three-
month Euribor less three-month Eonia swap rate. • Average 
1 to 17 May 2018.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 20180.40.200.20.40.6
––+++
01020Money market risk premium:
Euribor-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points%
Marginal lending rate
Three-month Euribor 1
Eonia 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
20

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods be-
tween 31 January 2018 and 2 May 2018 saw 
a signifi  cant increase in euro area liquidity 
needs stemming from autonomous factors 
(see the table below). Levels were high in the 
March- May 2018 reserve period, averaging 
€1,275.1 billion. This was €87.6 billion more 
than in the December 2017-January 2018 re-
serve period, ie the last period before the 
period under review, and constituted an in-
crease of around €275 billion against the cor-
responding period in 2017. Overall, the sum of 
the autonomous factors moved within a 
broad corridor of between €1,152.3 billion 
and €1,343.2 billion in the two reserve main-
tenance periods. The main factor behind the 
average increase in liquidity needs stemming 
from autonomous factors against the Decem-
ber 2017-January 2018 reserve period was the 
net €70.9 billion aggregate decline in net for-
eign assets and other factors, which are con-
sidered together on account of liquidity- 
neutral valuation effects. In addition, the in-crease both in government deposits with the 
Eurosystem and the volume of banknotes in 
circulation raised the calculated need for cen-
tral bank liquidity by an average of €15.1 bil-
lion and €1.6 billion respectively. In the March- 
May 2018 reserve period, average govern-
ment deposits were high, at €247.5 billion, 
while banknotes in circulation in the Eurosys-
tem averaged €1,159.0 billion. The minimum 
reserve requirement was €124.4 billion in the 
March- May 2018 reserve period (previous 
year: €120.6 billion), which equated to a 
liquidity- absorbing increase totalling €1.0 bil-
lion across the two reserve maintenance 
periods.
There was little overall change in liquidity pro-
vision from refi  nancing operations. In the 
period under review, the option of voluntary 
early repayment was available for four of the 
targeted longer- term refi  nancing operations 
from the fi  rst series (TLTRO I), allowing the 
participating institutions to cut the original 
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2018
31 January
to
13 March14 March
to
2 May
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) – 11.6 + 10.0
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  0.4 – 15.5
3 Net foreign assets 1 +  1.2 –  4.8
4 Other factors 1 – 79.4 + 12.1
Total – 89.4 +  1.8
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  0.1 –  1.4
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  3.1 –  0.1
(c) Other operations + 64.7 + 37.3
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.0 –  0.2
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  6.7 +  2.9
Total + 54.8 + 38.5
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) – 34.5 + 40.4
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  0.9 –  0.1
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
21

maturities of those operations by six months. 
Nine institutions opted to take part, repaying 
a total of €0.9 billion, with the fi  fth TLTRO I of 
30 September 2015 accounting for the lion’s 
share of €0.6 billion. The net supply of liquid-
ity from TLTRO I amounted to €13.4 billion on 
2 May 2018. With a total volume of €739.2 
billion, TLTRO II are by far more signifi  cant in 
terms of liquidity provision. On 2 May 2018, 
they accounted for 97% of the outstanding 
tender volume and their maximum maturity is not due to end – in the case of the fourth 
TLTRO II – until March 2021 (see the chart on 
page 23).
In the light of the strong TLTRO effect and the 
very accommodative liquidity conditions, 
there continued to be scarcely any demand 
for the main refi  nancing operations; the vol-
ume shrank a further €1.0 billion against the 
December 2017-January 2018 reserve period, 
standing at an average of €1.9 billion for the 
March- May 2018 reserve period. Over the 
same timeframe, the total volume of the 
three- month tenders remained virtually un-
changed at €7.7 billion. All in all, the out-
standing tender volume barely changed, aver-
aging €761.5 billion in the March- May 2018 
reserve period (see the chart on page 24).
Monetary policy asset purchase programmes 
again accounted for the majority of the liquid-
ity provided through the Eurosystem in the 
period under review. During the March- May 
2018 reserve period, they represented average 
balance sheet holdings of €2,477 billion, 
which equated to a plus of €79 billion relative 
to the average balance sheet holdings of all 
purchase programmes in the December 
2017-January 2018 reserve period (see the ad-
jacent table).
On balance, there was a slight net decrease in 
excess liquidity in the Eurosystem owing to 
the marked increase in autonomous factors in 
the period under review, meaning that the in-
jection of liquidity from the purchase pro-
grammes was not directly refl  ected in the ex-
cess liquidity. In the March- May 2018 reserve 
period, excess liquidity averaged €1,838 bil-
lion, which was €3 billion less than the aver-
age for the December 2017-January 2018 re-
serve period.
Against the backdrop of this very comfortable 
liquidity situation, the deposit facility rate re-
mained the benchmark for overnight rates 
during the period under review (see the chart 
above). Eonia continued to move just above 
the deposit rate, despite the gap narrowing 
slightly. Across both of the observation 
periods, Eonia stood at an average of -0.36%, Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as 
at 11 May 
2018
Active programmes
 PSPP + 60.2 1,980.7
CBPP3 +  8.2 253.3
CSPP + 15.3 153.6
ABSPP +  1.7 27.1
Completed programmes 
 SMP –  4.5 84.7
CBPP1 –  0.8 5.2
CBPP2 –  0.4 4.3
Deutsche BundesbankCentral bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankDec Jan Feb Mar Apr May
2017 20180.90.80.70.60.50.40.30.20.10
–––––––––Daily data
€ bn%
1,2001,4001,6001,8002,000Excess 
liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for the reserve
maintenance period 2Eonia
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling
OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
22

ie 1 basis point lower than the average for the 
two previous reserve maintenance periods. 
Comparing averages for the same periods, the 
underlying turnover decreased by €0.2 billion 
to €5.1 billion. By contrast, secured overnight 
money in GC Pooling still mostly traded below 
the deposit facility rate. In the period under 
review, the average interest rate in the ECB 
basket stood at -0.45%, matching the aver-
age of both preceding reserve maintenance 
periods. In the ECB EXTended basket, with its 
larger set of eligible securities, the average 
interest rate was -0.40%, having averaged 
-0.41% in the two previous reserve mainten-
ance periods. As in the case of the two pre-
ceding periods, the aggregate turnover across 
both baskets totalled an average of €5.4 bil-
lion over the two reserve maintenance 
periods, placing it at roughly the same level as 
Eonia turnover. However, volumes in the ECB 
basket saw somewhat larger fl  uctuations, ris-
ing from an average of €1.9 billion per trading 
day for the January- March 2018 reserve 
period to €3.1 billion in the March- May 2018 
reserve period.There were virtually no major changes in over-
night rates at the end of each month in the 
two reserve maintenance periods. Against a 
backdrop of lower turnover volumes, Eonia 
mostly rose around 1 basis point. By contrast, 
the overnight rates in GC Pooling in both bas-
kets reacted inconsistently and, on those re-
porting days, were either above or below the 
respective previous day’s rate. The most pro-
nounced deviation in the period under review 
was observed at the close of April 2018, when 
the rate in the ECB basket rose by 5 basis 
points to -0.40% – though turnover was very 
low. By comparison, this rate had fallen by 32 
basis points to -0.76% at year- end 2017.Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor  purchase  programme  (CSPP).  2 Current  account  holdings  minus  the  minimum  reserve  requirement  plus  the  deposit  facility. 
3 Volume so small it is hardly visible. 4 The marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank2,0001,5001,00050005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,500
––––+++++++
October November December January February March April May
2017 2018Current account 
holdings in excess 
of the reserve 
requirementDeposit facility 4Purchase
programmes 1
Main refinancing
operations 3
Three-month 
tenders 3
Second series of
targeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations
(TLTRO II)First series of
targeted longer-
term refinan-
cing operations
(TLTRO I) 3Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
23

ensure a sustained return of the inflation rate 
to a level of below, but close to, 2%.
On 16 May, the Eurosystem held assets in the 
amount of €1,981.5 billion under the public 
sector purchase programme (PSPP). The 
average residual maturity of the PSPP portfolio 
fell yet again slightly from previously 7.7 years 
to a maturity of 7.6 years at present. The 
outstanding amounts acquired to date under 
the third covered bond purchase programme 
(CBPP3) and the asset-backed securities 
purchase programme (ABSPP) came to €253.5 
billion and €27.4 billion respectively. As for the 
corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP), 
asset purchases totalled €154.5 billion by 16 
May.
Excess liquidity increased only slightly in the 
period under review. Overall, excess liquidity 
grew by €13 billion to €1,913 billion. The 
subdued increase reflects the significantly 
higher level of autonomous factors in the period under review, which compensated for 
the liquidity supply from the reduced monthly 
purchases of €30 billion under the APP since 
January 2018. The volumes in the standard 
tender operations rose slightly in the same 
period, but remained at a very low level. 
Whether or not excess liquidity levels will 
record another strong increase in the course of 
2018 due to the planned purchases under the 
APP until September this year could partly 
depend on the extent to which autonomous 
factors saw only temporary strong growth and 
on the amount of the voluntary repayments 
under the second series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO II), which are 
possible from the end of June 2018.
In the reporting period, the unsecured 
overnight money market rate (Eonia) hovered 
in a narrow range of between -0.36% and 
-0.37%, above the deposit facility rate of 
-0.40%, while the secured overnight rate 
(STOXX GC Pooling) remained slightly below Purchase 
 volumes still 
in line with 
announced 
 target
Growth in 
excess liquidity 
slows down 
slightlyMoney market 
interest rates 
 virtually 
unchanged 
overallOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 201803006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,0003,300€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO II)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
24

the deposit facility rate. The three-month 
Euribor was largely unchanged throughout the 
reporting period, standing at -0.33% at last 
report.
Money market forward rates, too, moved in a 
narrow range in the period under review, 
recording a slight decrease overall. At the same 
time, the expectations priced in by the markets 
about the future interest rate path remained 
largely unchanged. At the current end, markets 
are pricing in an interest rate hike of 15 basis 
points for the beginning of the third quarter of 
2019.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
As in the fourth quarter of 2017, the growth of 
the broad monetary aggregate M3 in terms of 
counterparts was driven mainly by the ongoing 
recovery of loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the quarter under review. Against the 
backdrop of the economy’s broad-based 
growth path, both loans to non-financial 
corporations and loans to households 
continued to post strong inflows. The 
persistently buoyant demand for credit was 
also supported by the still very low interest rate 
level. In addition, the banks reporting to the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) stated that they had 
further eased their lending policies in all credit 
segments surveyed in the quarter under review.
Despite the ongoing upward trend in lending, 
the annual growth rate of M3 in the reporting 
quarter fell from 4.6% at the end of December 
to 3.7% at the end of March. Taken in isolation, 
the decline in the MFI sector’s securitised 
lending to general government, above all, had 
a dampening effect on monetary growth; this 
was linked to the Eurosystem further reducing 
the monthly purchase volumes under the APP 
from January. In addition, monetary capital for 
the first time since 2011 again recorded net 
inflows in the reporting period. All in all, the 
declining importance of these counterparts of 
M3, in particular, caused the gap between 
monetary growth and the growth of loans to 
the private sector, which had risen to up to 5 
percentage points in the wake of the sovereign 
debt crisis and the non-standard monetary 
policy measures, to drop to below 1 percentage 
point in annual terms.
The dominant force behind monetary growth 
in the reporting quarter, too, was the increase 
in overnight deposits. However, the growth in 
overnight deposits compared with the already 
weak previous quarter once again dropped 
perceptibly. From a sectoral perspective, Policy rate 
expectations 
largely 
unchanged
Monetary 
dynamics 
increasingly 
driven by loan 
growth
Overnight 
deposits still 
dominant force 
behind M3 
growthConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities 2018 Q1 2017 Q4
Holdings against central government 2 – 16.6 –  9.2
Monetary aggregate M3 80.4 84.9
of which Components
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 102.6 116.9
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) – 13.4 – 11.4
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) –  8.8 – 20.6
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 8.2 – 36.1
of which
Capital and reserves 15.6 –  5.2
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities –  7.4 – 30.9Assets 2018 Q1 2017 Q4
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 111.5 87.8
Loans 99.8 75.3
Loans, adjusted 1 96.6 92.8
Securities 11.7 12.4
Credit to general government 
in the euro area – 39.2 89.4
Loans – 10.4 – 16.3
Securities – 28.7 105.5
Net external assets 57.0 – 77.1
Other counterparts of M3 – 57.4 – 60.2
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
25

non-monetary financial corporations even saw 
significant outflows from overnight deposits, 
which are likely, inter alia,  to be related to the 
reduction in bond sales by this sector to the 
Eurosystem. By contrast, maintaining money 
holdings remained attractive for risk-averse 
investors, with both households and non-  
 financial corporations recording further strong 
inflows to overnight deposits. Moreover, given 
the persistently low interest rate spreads 
between deposit types, the shifts observed for 
some time now from time deposits to more 
liquid short-term savings and overnight deposits 
continued.
In terms of counterparts, monetary growth in 
the first quarter of 2018 was mainly supported 
by the further expansion in lending by the MFI 
sector to the non-financial private sector. The 
biggest contribution in this quarter took the 
form of loans to households, which continued 
on their steady growth path; primarily banks in 
Germany and France, but also in Italy, 
contributed to this development. The expansion 
of this particular credit aggregate was again 
mainly down to loans for house purchase. 
According to the assessment made by the 
banks surveyed in the BLS, household demand 
for loans for house purchase increased slightly 
again in the first quarter of 2018. Euro area 
banks cited the low general interest rate level, 
stable consumer confidence and a still-upbeat 
household assessment of the outlook for the 
residential housing market as explanatory 
factors for the rising need for funds. Effects 
pushing down demand were mainly the result 
of loans extended by competitors and 
households’ use of their own savings to help 
fund house purchases. On balance, credit 
standards in this segment were eased markedly. 
According to the information provided by the 
banks, the easing essentially occurred against 
the backdrop of the high level of competition 
in the banking and non-banking sectors, the 
more positive assessment of the economic 
situation and outlook as well as an improved 
risk assessment of borrowers’ creditworthiness.Continued 
growth in loans 
to households, 
again driven by 
loans for house 
purchaseMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial  
corporations. 4 Including non-profit institutions serving house-
holds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
202468
–++++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterpartsPercentage growth
in M3
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations
Households 4Securities-based lending to
general governmentContribution of components in percentage points
Percentage growth in M3
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
26

Consumer credit continued to grow strongly in 
the reporting period and thus remained the 
most dynamic component of loans to 
households. The persistently high inflows 
probably reflect the ongoing expansionary 
underlying trend in private consumption. This is 
consistent with the fact that households’ need 
for consumer credit posted another noteworthy 
increase in the first quarter of 2018, according 
to the results of the BLS. Respondents put the 
higher demand down to stable consumer 
confidence, the low general level of interest 
rates, and the high propensity to purchase. On 
balance, credit standards were loosened 
marginally.
In the quarter under review, loans to 
non-financial corporations in the euro area 
experienced distinct growth as well. Growth 
stimuli continued to emanate mainly from 
banks in Germany and France, and – albeit to a 
lesser extent – from Italy, in addition to a 
number of smaller core countries (see the 
adjacent chart). The annual growth rate of the 
euro area aggregate (adjusted for securitisation 
and other one-off effects) increased to 3.3% at 
the end of March, ie almost one percentage 
point higher than a year earlier. The continued 
increase in loans to enterprises was supported 
by the strong and broad-based economic 
growth across euro area member states over 
the past few quarters. Further supporting 
factors came in the form of lending rates, 
which remained close to their historical lows 
throughout the euro area, and the high level of 
competition between banks.
This is consistent with the banks surveyed as 
part of the BLS reporting a marked increase in 
the demand for credit by non-financial 
corporations in the euro area as a whole. 
Although the increase was somewhat weaker 
compared with the significant rise in the fourth 
quarter of 2017, the dynamic development of 
the most recent survey rounds continued 
overall. Besides the low general level of interest 
rates, the bank managers mainly attributed this 
expansionary development to a higher financing need for mergers, acquisitions and 
corporate restructuring, as well as for fixed 
investment. By contrast, as in the previous 
surveys, enterprises’ use of internal financing 
had a dampening effect on demand when 
taken in isolation. The credit standards for 
loans to enterprises were eased moderately.
Next to loans, the increase in the MFI sector’s 
net external asset position observed in the 
reporting quarter constituted the second pillar 
of monetary growth. Net external assets thus 
continued the upward trend seen since the 
beginning of 2017. One reason for the positive 
development of this counterpart was foreign 
investors’ higher demand for euro area 
securities. In the last few quarters, foreign 
investors scaled back their sales of euro area 
government bonds while increasing their 
purchases of euro area shares and mutual fund 
shares, in some cases significantly. The further 
reduction in the Eurosystem’s monthly 
purchases since the beginning of this year is In addition, 
dynamic growth 
in consumer 
credit persists
Loans to 
non-financial 
corporations 
record distinct 
rise, too
Net external 
asset position 
characterised 
less by Euro-
system asset 
purchasesLoans to non-financial corporations
in the euro area*
6050403020100102030405060
––––––++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data,
seasonally adjusted
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculation. * Loans adjusted for 
loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Also  adjusted  for  positions 
arising from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankExtended by the euro area MFI sector 1
... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which MFIs in ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
27

likely to have resulted in the demand for euro 
area securities by non-resident investors rising 
on balance.
Moreover, the reduction of net purchases 
under the APP was one of the key reasons 
behind securitised lending by the MFI sector to 
general government in the euro area losing 
even more significance in the quarter under 
review (see the adjacent chart). This effect was 
aggravated by the fact that the Eurosystem 
central banks reduced their government bond 
purchases disproportionately. In addition, 
commercial banks once again significantly 
lowered their holdings of government bonds in 
the reporting quarter (in seasonally adjusted 
terms), meaning that securities-based lending 
by the MFI sector to general government even 
declined on the whole.
A per se  dampening effect on monetary growth 
also emanated from monetary capital, where 
slight net inflows were recorded in the reporting 
quarter. Besides institutions’ capital and 
reserves, longer-term bank debt securities in 
the hands of the money-holding sector likewise 
rose for the first time since 2013. One reason 
could be that this type of financing is gradually 
becoming more attractive again to banks given 
that the Eurosystem no longer offers multi-year 
tenders. Furthermore, non-banks are also likely 
to be finding this type of investment increasingly 
attractive due to the temporary hike in yields.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
Between January and March 2018, domestic 
investors continued to make substantial 
deposits with German banks. Recent growth 
was once again fuelled by overnight deposits, 
which, despite negative interest rates in some 
cases, again saw significant build-up in the 
quarter under review. Short-term time deposits 
and long-term bank deposits, by contrast, were 
reduced again in net terms. This meant that the Reduced 
 securitised 
 lending, inter 
alia due to the 
Eurosystem 
halving its 
monthly APP 
net purchases, 
dampens M3 
growth
Monetary 
 capital inflows 
dampen monet -
ary growth
Deposit growth 
again domin -
ated by build-up 
of overnight 
deposits
Securities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 20182001000100200300400500600700
––+++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof whichExtended by the euro area MFI sector 
Interest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new 
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike 
the overall volume of contracts (ie deposit contracts on the bal-
ance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new busi-
ness (ie all contracts concluded in the course of a month) is ex-
plicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 201801234% pa, monthly data
0123Overall volume1
New business2... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
28

investment behaviour of the money-holding 
sectors in Germany remained unchanged in its 
underlying trends and was strongly influenced 
by low interest rates (see the chart on page 28) 
and the flat yield curve also in the quarter 
under review.
Growth in overnight deposits was again mainly 
fuelled by households (see the box on pages 30 
to 33), but non-financial corporations also 
recorded inflows in the quarter under review, 
despite the fact that, in some cases, interest 
rates on overnight deposits fell deeper into 
negative territory. However, at the same time, 
non-financial corporations reduced large 
amounts of short-term time deposits, meaning 
that the increase in deposit business with this 
sector was only slightly positive as a whole.
Financial corporations, whose investment 
behaviour is traditionally characterised more 
strongly by return considerations, once again 
had a negative impact on deposits in net terms. 
In the quarter under review, too, this was 
primarily due to insurance corporations and 
pension funds, which again made significant 
reductions in their long-term bank deposits. 
This reflects the portfolio shifts that have been 
characteristic of these enterprises for quite 
some time now. Alongside the search for forms 
of investment with better yields, these shifts 
are also attributable to regulatory requirements 
(introduction of Solvency II). These provisions 
reinforce the incentive to hedge risks – which, 
in the case of insurance corporations, arise 
from the generally long maturities of their 
liabilities – by investing, wherever possible, in 
long-term assets at matching maturities and 
thereby aligning the maturities of their assets 
and liabilities (see also the box on pages 30 to 
33).
In contrast to deposit business, growth in loans 
from German banks to domestic non-banks 
slowed substantially in the quarter under 
review. The main cause of this was the 
continued fall in credit to general government, 
which steepened again in that quarter. This development particularly reflects the further 
decline in the financing needs of the public 
sector, which is not especially surprising given 
the considerable surpluses in government 
budgets overall.
By contrast, lending business with the domestic 
private sector grew to a similar extent as in the 
previous quarters. Although the banks markedly 
reduced their securities holdings from private 
issuers for the first time in seven quarters, at 
the same time they again increased their 
lending to the private sector to a greater degree 
than in the previous quarter.Households 
 continue to 
make largest 
contribution to 
build-up of over -
night deposits
Financial 
 corporations’ 
investment 
behaviour still 
fuelled by 
search for yield
Expansion of 
lending business 
with domestic 
non-banks 
weaker than in 
previous quarter 
due to general 
government ...... but renewed 
expansion in 
lending to 
domestic private  
sectorsLending and deposits of monetary 
 fi  nancial institutions in Germany*
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2017 2018
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 31.4 34.1
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 7.7 –  1.2
over 2 years – 1.7 –  4.7
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 0.3 0.3
over 3 months – 2.3 –  1.6
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 1.4 – 10.3
Securities – 6.9 –  8.9
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 22.9 32.0
of which to households 3 12.6 17.2
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 9.9 12.5
Securities 5.4 –  5.9
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding central 
government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non- 
fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
29

Acquisition of fi  nancial assets and the search for yield 
in Germany
The development of the acquisition of fi  -
nancial assets by the individual sectors in 
Germany has already been the subject of 
the Monthly Report in previous years. The 
results suggested that the persistent low- 
interest- rate environment was having only a 
limited impact on the private non- fi  nancial 
sector’s search for yield.1 Though it grad-
ually picked up in the years 2014 to 2016, 
the search for yield played a minor role in 
the acquisition of fi  nancial assets by house-
holds and non- fi  nancial corporations on the 
whole. Risk aversion and a preference for 
liquidity were the predominant drivers. In 
the case of fi  nancial corporations,2 on the 
other hand, the search for yield featured 
comparatively strongly. Most of the sectors 
did not engage in large- scale portfolio 
shifts, however.Overall, this investment behaviour remained 
evident in the most recent data (concerning 
2017) from monetary statistics and fi  nancial 
accounts for the money- holding sectors in 
Germany. In particular, there was no indica-
tion of a substantial increase in the search 
for yield in that period. Such an increase 
could especially be expected if the share of 
bank deposits in investors’ portfolios fell 
distinctly and preference were given to 
forms of investment which, on average, 
generated higher yields. In fact, the share 
of bank deposits moved sideways over the 
course of 2017. This was attributable, fi  rst, 
to a weaker build- up of deposits in the pri-
vate non- fi  nancial sector and, second, to a 
slightly slower reduction in fi  nancial corpor-
ations’ deposits (see the adjacent chart).
The development of bank deposits as a per-
centage of the total fi  nancial assets of the 
private non- fi  nancial sector was character-
ised by the fact that the build- up of house-
holds’ deposits in 2017 fell somewhat be-
hind the previous year’s very high level. 
Nevertheless, deposits were still the most 
important form of investment. Once again, 
infl  ows were due mainly to the unusually 
strong build- up of overnight deposits, 
which are particularly liquid, amidst even 
tighter interest rate spreads between the 
different types of deposit. The second most 
important form of investment for house-
holds remained claims on insurance corpor-
ations. Combined with the persistently high 
level of importance of overnight deposits, 
this continues to indicate a pronounced 
aversion to risk on the part of households.
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Ongoing portfolio shifts 
into higher- yielding assets in Germany, Monthly Re-
port, May 2017, pp 30-33.
2 For the purposes of this box, fi  nancial corporations 
are defi  ned as excluding monetary fi  nancial institu-
tions, as the analysis relates to the money- holding sec-
tors. In addition, the following sectoral analysis disre-
gards the general government sector, as its acquisition 
of fi  nancial assets is comparably modest and volatile.Deposits as a percentage of total 
sectoral financial assets in Germany
1 To adjust for statistical changes and revaluations . 2 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households. 3 Non-financial cor-
porations and quasi-corporations. 4  Including investment funds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 20178101214161820222426Notional stocks with base year 20001, %
Money-holding sectors
of which
Households 2
and non-financial
corporations 3
Other financial intermediaries 4
as well as insurance corporations
and pension fundsTotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
30

However, the sector’s capital market expos-
ure rose clearly compared with the years 
2007-14. This build- up was mainly driven by 
the acquisition of investment fund shares, 
which was considerably stronger in 2017 
than in the year before. Households also 
purchased more listed shares issued outside 
the euro area. These developments suggest 
that households were increasingly basing 
their investment decisions on yield calcula-
tions, too, and often turned to indirect in-
vestment products that are managed by in-
stitutional investors and therefore more di-
versifi  ed.The non- fi  nancial corporate sector again 
slightly accelerated the build- up of deposits 
already seen in the previous two years. De-
mand was mainly for overnight deposits, 
whereby the distribution of demand within 
the sector was mixed. Overnight deposits 
suffered a decline in attractiveness for many 
enterprises as banks again lowered over-
night deposit rates across the board – and 
more sharply than for households – and in 
numerous cases pushed them into negative 
territory. Overall, however, the main factor 
was that a number of mostly larger enter-
prises showed a strong preference for se-
cure and liquid assets as part of their liquid-
ity management considerations, and they Build-up of deposits and total acquisition of financial assets in the private 
non-financial sector in Germany
1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. Deposits figures seasonally adjusted. 2 Households including non-profit institutions 
serving households. 3 Non-financial corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 201720015010050050100150200250
––––+++++€ billion, 12-month flows at quarter-end 1
2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 201750050100150200
–++++
–30–20–100+10+20+30+40+50+60
–150–100–500+50+100+150+200+250+300Households 2
Non-financial corporations 3... with a longer maturity... redeemable at notice of up to 3 months... with an agreed maturity of up to 2 years
Overnight depositsDeposits ... Deposits
Securities
Claims on insurance corporations
Other
Loans
TotalTotalTotal acquisition of financial assets DepositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
31

were able to implement such investment 
strategies at adequate conditions despite 
the general low- interest- rate environment.3
A much larger role in non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations’ acquisition of fi  nancial assets, which 
was very strong in 2017 on the whole, was 
played by the acquisition of securities – not-
ably shares, purchases of which had not 
been as high since 2008. This is connected 
with the increase in equity investment, 
which recently picked up pace, not least 
abroad. In addition – following rather weak 
lending activity in 2016 – lending to other 
non- fi  nancial corporations in Germany and 
abroad is currently on the rise again, includ-ing in some cases loans in a group context. 
All in all, yield considerations do not seem 
to be the sole driver behind the investment 
decisions of German non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations; corporate policy aspects also play a 
part, as does preference for secure and li-
quid investments.4
3 For more on the drivers of non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations’ money holdings in selected countries, see Fi-
nancial Stability Board, Corporate cash holdings as a 
demand factor for non- bank fi  nancial instruments, 
Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2017, 
pp 79-84; and, on liquidity management in Germany, 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Long- term developments in 
corporate fi  nancing in Germany – evidence based on 
the fi  nancial accounts, Monthly Report, January 2012, 
pp 13-27.
4 See also Financial Stability Board, op cit.Build-up of deposits and total acquisition of financial assets in the financial sector
in Germany
1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. Deposits figures seasonally adjusted. 2 Other financial intermediaries including in-
vestment funds but excluding monetary financial institutions and thus excluding money market funds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 201740302010010
––––+€ billion, 12-month flows at quarter-end 1
2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 201750050100150
–+++
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30+40
–100–500+50+100+150+200+250+300Insurance corporations and pension funds
Other financial intermediaries 2... with a longer maturity... redeemable at notice of up to 3 months... with an agreed maturity of up to 2 years
Overnight depositsDeposits ... Deposits
Equity
Loans
Debt securities
Other
TotalTotalDeposits Total acquisition of financial assetsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
32

In the fi  nancial sector, insurance corpor-
ations and pension funds have been scaling 
back their stock of bank deposits substan-
tially since 2010. Once again, they mostly 
reduced longer- term time deposits. In so 
doing, German insurers – whose deposits 
as a percentage of total balance sheet 
assets were strikingly high in the past by 
euro area standards  – gradually lowered 
their direct interconnectedness with the 
German banking sector, which is considered 
a particularly safe counterparty.5 Given the 
persistence of low interest rates, they in-
stead gave preference to forms of invest-
ment with returns that enjoy more favour-
able treatment under commercial and tax 
law due to the possibility of retention of 
profi  ts.6 Investment in investment fund 
shares was therefore high, as in previous 
years. Moreover, long- term debt securities 
issued by foreign sectors were also pur-
chased in signifi  cant quantities. The increas-
ing share of these securities in relation to 
total assets refl  ects the efforts of insurance 
corporations to match the maturities of 
their assets with those of their largely long- 
term liabilities. This should be seen against 
the backdrop of the persistently low level of 
interest rates and the new European super-
visory regime for the insurance sector (Solv-
ency II), which came into force in 2016.7
The other fi  nancial institutions8 raised their 
stock of deposits, which was relatively vola-
tile over time, appreciably compared with 
the previous year. This growth was mainly 
attributable to infl  ows to overnight deposits 
of investment funds, which are heavily de-
pendent on the reporting date, and long- 
term time deposits of fi  nancial vehicle cor-
porations (FVCs).9 Besides the rise in de-
posits, credit claims of other fi  nancial insti-
tutions on the private non- fi  nancial sector 
likewise saw an increase. This was also re-
lated, in part, to securitisation activities. The 
purchase of securities accounted for the 
largest share of the total acquisition of fi  -
nancial assets by this sector, however. The 
main buyers here were investment funds, which mainly acquired shares in other in-
vestment funds. In addition, they again 
stepped up their direct involvement in listed 
shares and long- term debt securities, par-
ticularly those from abroad. In so far as for-
eign investments entail increased risk, this is 
probably due, not least, to the continued 
expectation of higher yields.
On the whole, however, there is no indica-
tion that the money- holding sectors that 
were searching for yield took on a markedly 
higher level of risk than in the previous year. 
This applies, in particular, to the private 
non- fi  nancial sector, whose investment de-
cisions continued to be guided by risk aver-
sion and a preference for liquidity. However, 
the rise in investment by households in the 
capital market, including in foreign secur-
ities, shows that yield aspects were increas-
ingly taken into account. The fi  nancial sec-
tor, which opted for higher- yielding forms 
of investment, extended the maturities of 
assets and stepped up investment abroad, 
likewise showed signs of a slightly intensi-
fi  ed search for yield.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Risks for insurers, pen-
sion institutions and investment funds, Financial Stabil-
ity Review 2017, pp 83-101.
6 As is pointed out in Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), 
Financial Stability Review, op cit, this portfolio shift, 
which was perceptible in the aggregate, took place 
with a high degree of variation between the individual 
insurers, and was driven primarily by a handful of large 
life insurers.
7 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Risks in the life insurance sector, Financial Stability Re-
view 2015, pp 41-54, op cit; and D Domanski, H S Shin 
and V Sushko (2017), The hunt for duration: not wav-
ing but drowning?, IMF  Economic Review, 65 (1), 
pp 113-153.
8 Including investment funds, but excluding monetary 
fi  nancial institutions and thus also money market 
funds.
9 The latter arise for accounting reasons following a 
net increase in securitisation transactions in the bank-
ing sector. If a bank securitises loans without removing 
them from its balance sheet, the transaction is booked 
according to the countervalue received by the bank 
from the fi  nancial vehicle corporation for those securi-
tised loans, typically as a long- term liability of the bank 
to that FVC.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
33

The largest contributors to the growth in loans 
were again households, whose demand for 
housing loans continued to rise significantly in 
the reporting quarter. The positive trend from 
the previous quarters also carried on in the 
case of consumer credit. Alongside the positive 
development in income and assets, households’ 
demand for bank loans was encouraged by 
financing terms that remain exceptionally 
favourable. According to MFI interest rate 
statistics, interest rates for both housing loans 
and loans for private consumption remained 
close to their all-time lows in the reporting 
quarter despite slight upward adjustments.The results of the latest BLS provide evidence of 
further factors influencing these developments. 
Banks indicated that the demand for private 
housing loans in the reporting quarter was 
more dynamic than in the preceding quarters. 
Respondents believed that this was caused by 
the positive outlook for the housing market 
and robust consumer confidence, in addition 
to the low general level of interest rates. 
Refinancing, restructuring and renegotiation 
also had a positive influence on demand. 
According to the survey, demand was 
dampened by increased use of own savings, 
amongst other factors. In the case of consumer 
credit, the banks largely attributed the rise in 
demand to households’ stable propensity to 
purchase and robust consumer confidence.
Demand for housing loans and consumer credit 
was also supported by a further easing of 
lending policies. The banks surveyed as part of 
the BLS stated that, for the third time in 
succession, they somewhat eased credit 
standards for private housing loans in the first 
quarter of 2018 and also have plans to loosen 
standards further in the second quarter. As in 
previous quarters, credit terms and conditions 
agreed in loan contracts were also eased as a 
whole by the banks. However, unlike in previous 
quarters, this only affected margins; the other 
surveyed conditions remained unchanged.
In the case of consumer credit, too, credit 
standards were moderately eased and credit 
terms and conditions were adjusted to a 
significant extent overall. The banks attributed 
these adjustments to the high degree of 
competition as well as to their increased risk 
tolerance.
The other mainstay of lending business with 
the domestic private sector in the quarter under 
review was loans to non-financial corporations. 
The growth in this sector typically trails GDP 
growth by a few quarters, which explains why 
these enterprises – in line with the ongoing 
economic boom – once again significantly 
increased their demand for bank loans in the Persistently 
strong demand 
among house -
holds for hous -
ing loans and 
consumer creditLending policies 
in the areas of 
private construc -
tion and con -
sumer credit 
support demand 
overall
Increased 
 interest in bank 
loans from 
non-financial 
corporations 
as well2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
321012345
–––+++++ Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2Up to 1 year
More than 1 year and
up to 5 years
More than 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total percentage 
growth rateLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal percentage 
growth rateMaturity contributions in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
34

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until 
May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 
2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is 
calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 3 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit 
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the 
number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: 
difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of re-
spondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 4 Expectations for 
2018 Q2.
Deutsche Bundesbank10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 20181.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 180.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
603003060
––++Credit to non-financial corporations
%
pa
%
%%
pa
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%%
Average loansChange in margins3
for loans to enterprisesChange in margins3 for ...... with an initial rate fixation of
    over one year and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to 
€1 million
4
Riskier loans... consumer creditBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... loans for house purchase1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates 
on loans for house 
purchase2
with an initial rate 
fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...
%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
35

quarter under review. In addition to the 
continued high demand for long-term loans, 
short-term loans were also taken out in larger 
volumes, as had already been observed in the 
last few quarters. One possible reason for this 
is the interest rate spread, which widened 
slightly in favour of short-term loans. Overall, 
however, financing terms on the credit market 
remained favourable. For example, at the end 
of March, domestic enterprises paid interest 
amounting to 2.5% for small-volume and 1.1% 
for large-volume loans in the short-term 
segment, while interest on long-term loans 
stood at 1.9% and 1.7% respectively of late.
From the perspective of the banks surveyed in 
the BLS, the high financing needs of 
non-financial corporations for fixed investments 
as well as for refinancing, restructuring, and 
renegotiation were key to the rise in demand 
for bank loans, while enterprises’ use of internal 
financing and borrowing from other banks 
were the main factors dampening demand.
Banks’ credit standards also supported lending 
to enterprises in the reporting quarter. The 
minimum requirements that non-financial 
corporations must fulfil in order to be granted 
loans were marginally eased in net terms, and 
the credit terms and conditions were repeatedly 
loosened markedly. As well as narrowing 
margins, the banks made considerable 
concessions to their corporate customers with 
regard to loan maturities and also relaxed 
conditions concerning covenants, credit 
amounts as well as non-interest rate charges. The banks stated that intense competition was 
one of the key reasons for easing their lending 
policies in the corporate financing sector.
The April BLS survey contained additional 
questions on banks’ financing conditions, the 
current levels of credit standards, the impact of 
the Eurosystem’s expanded APP , and the 
consequences for credit business of the 
negative interest rate on the Eurosystem’s 
deposit facility. The German banks reported 
that, given the situation in the financial markets, 
their funding situation showed very little 
change compared with the preceding quarter. 
Relative to the midpoint of the range set by the 
credit standards implemented since the second 
quarter of 2010, credit standards for loans to 
enterprises are currently somewhat looser, 
whereas the current standards for housing 
loans are considerably tighter and standards for 
consumer loans are at the same level. With 
regard to the Eurosystem’s expanded APP , the 
banks reported, on the one hand, further 
improvements in their liquidity position and 
financing conditions. On the other hand, the 
programme also continued to place a strain on 
their profitability. The negative interest rate on 
the deposit facility likewise contributed 
considerably to the decline in banks’ net 
interest income over the past six months and, 
taken by itself, also led to falling lending rates 
and shrinking margins. At the same time, the 
negative interest rate on the deposit facility, 
viewed in isolation, led to a slight increase in 
the volume of loans to households, yet had no 
impact on loans to enterprises.Credit standards 
in lending to 
enterprises 
eased markedly 
as a wholeBanks’ profit -
ability dented by 
APP and nega -
tive deposit 
facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
36

Financial markets
Financial market setting
In the first few months of 2018, the inter -
national financial markets were influenced by a 
slightly more moderate global upturn and, in 
some cases, divergent expectations regarding 
the monetary policy stance in the major cur -
rency areas. The temporary rise in uncertainty 
did not do any lasting damage to sentiment in 
financial markets, however, and receded again 
fairly quickly. The threat of a trade dispute be -
tween the major currency areas had only a 
fleeting and fairly isolated impact on individual 
market segments, but still remains a risk. At the 
beginning of February, the sharp increase in 
interest rates observed since the start of the 
year sent equity markets distinctly lower; for 
the most part, however, this was largely re -
garded as a correction warranted by the funda -
mentals. Furthermore, it was at this time that 
the sentiment indicators began to portend a 
continued very substantial rate of growth for 
the United States and China and a slightly 
slower pace for the euro area and Japan. This 
slight overall divergence in the growth outlook 
was also reflected in market participants’ mon -
etary policy expectations. While the turbulence 
that emerged in February did nothing to shake 
their conviction that the Federal Reserve would 
stick to gradually normalising policy over the 
course of the year, expectations of when the 
first euro area interest rate hike would take 
place were shifted back to mid-2019. This 
widened the interest rate differential between 
US Treasuries and German Bunds across the en -
tire maturity spectrum, taking the differential 
between ten-  year US  Treasuries and German 
Bunds with the same maturity to more than 
250 basis points at last count. International 
equity markets saw bouts of strong volatility, 
but registered price gains on balance in the 
United States and the euro area. Measured in 
terms of the equity risk premium, investors are 
slightly less willing to invest in US enterprises 
(having been very keen to do so at the begin -ning of the year) and are displaying a slightly 
greater propensity to invest in euro area stocks. 
In the foreign exchange markets, the euro re -
linquished the gains it had run up against the 
US dollar in January by the end of the period 
under review.
Exchange rates
In the past few months, the foreign exchange 
markets, unlike the equity markets, have seen 
fairly little volatility in terms of the exchange 
rates between the major currencies. For ex -
ample, the implied volatility of the EUR/ USD 
currency pair, calculated from currency options 
with a maturity of three months, has stood at 
7.2% on average since the beginning of the 
year, which is considerably lower than its long- 
term average of 10.2% since the introduction 
of the euro. The historical volatility for the EUR/ 
USD exchange rate is currently very low, too, 
even though, in January, the euro continued to 
appreciate distinctly against the US dollar, 
reaching its highest level for more than three 
years in mid- February at US$1.25.
However, in the second half of February, the 
euro surrendered some of these gains when, 
just a few days after the adoption of the US 
budget, which involved plans to increase net 
new borrowing in the market, debate about 
the risk of the US economy overheating inten -
sified. One specific reason for this was the pub -
lication of higher- than- expected inflation fig -
ures from the United States, which was then 
followed by surprisingly positive leading indica -
tors (eg for consumer confidence). Many mar -
ket participants thus began to adjust their ex -
pectations towards a more rapid policy rate in -
crease in the United States, which benefited 
the US dollar. Their confidence in these expect -
ations was reinforced by optimistic comments 
made by the new Chairman of the Federal 
Open Market Committee (FOMC) about eco -Financial mar -
kets shaped by 
divergent eco -
nomic data and 
monetary policy 
stance
Low volatility in 
major foreign 
exchange rates
After a strong 
start to the 
year …
… euro 
 depreciates 
against  
US dollar in the 
second half 
of FebruaryDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
37

nomic developments in the United States as 
well as the minutes of the FOMC meeting, 
which had already been published prior to this 
and which indicated the growing likelihood 
that further gradual increases would be war -
ranted. On this side of the Atlantic, unexpect -
edly weak inflation and economic data from 
the euro area and Germany helped push the 
euro down to US$1.22.
At the beginning of March, the euro appreci -
ated again after the President of the United 
States announced the imposition of protective 
tariffs on steel and aluminium imports. Even if 
higher import tariffs per se tend to improve a country’s trade balance, thus potentially exert -
ing upward pressure on its currency, in this 
case, market participants’ concerns about in -
creasing protectionism in the United States, 
possible countermeasures by trading partners 
and, ultimately, an impairment of the economic 
outlook for the US, seem to have predomin -
ated.
For the next month and a half, the euro hovered 
fairly evenly at a level of around US $1.23 to US 
$1.24. This changed only towards the end of 
April when a series of surprisingly positive eco -
nomic data was reported from the United 
States in areas such as retail sales, industrial 
production, capacity utilisation and data from 
the construction sector. Ultimately, the first es -
timate of economic growth in the United States 
in the first quarter of 2018 was also more fa -
vourable than projected on average. Prior to 
this, a further increase in consumer price infla -
tion and the minutes of another FOMC meet -
ing had already been published, which indi -
cated that a steeper rise in policy rates than 
previously expected is likely to be appropriate 
for the next few years. All this put the euro 
under renewed downward pressure against the 
US dollar. In the first half of May, this was com -
pounded by surprisingly weak economic data 
from the euro area. For instance, not only was 
euro area consumer price inflation lower than 
expected; retail sales and the Purchasing Man -
agers’ Index for the euro area as a whole as 
well as growth figures for Germany were also 
disappointing. As a result, the euro most re -
cently stood at US$1.18, which was 1.6% down 
on its level at the beginning of the year.
In the second half of February, the euro con -
tinued to depreciate against the yen as it had 
done since the start of the month, prompted 
by corrections in the global stock markets and 
the uncertainty that ensued. In mid- February, 
this price movement gained fresh momentum 
when the Japanese finance minister announced 
that the appreciation of the yen did not mean 
that special intervention was needed. In add -
ition to this, a surprisingly strong increase in A countermove -
ment at the 
beginning of 
March …… was followed 
by further losses 
in the value of 
the euro from 
the end of April
Euro depreciates 
against yen …Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J
2017 20181.051.101.151.201.25
115120130140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
9095100105Daily data, log scale
US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
¥ ... yenLaunch exchange 
rate: US$1.1789 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange
rate: £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate 2
1999 Q1 = 100
Launch exchange
rate: 103.12 1Launch exchange
rate: ¥133.73 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
38

Japanese exports was reported for January. 
However, the euro- yen exchange rate stabilised 
at the beginning of March when the Japanese 
central bank stressed that it would continue its 
current policy of quantitative and qualitative 
easing. Afterwards, this currency pair showed 
no lasting price change until, at the beginning 
of May, the abovementioned data published 
for the euro area placed the euro under strain. 
At the end of the reporting period, this left the 
euro at ¥131, which was 3.2% lower than at 
the beginning of the year.
Following small fluctuations in the exchange 
rate between the euro and the pound sterling 
in the first part of the reporting period, the 
euro began to depreciate markedly as of mid- 
March. This was due, above all, to an agree -
ment regarding transitional arrangements for 
the period after the planned withdrawal of the 
United Kingdom from the European Union, 
which, in the eyes of the market, improved the 
UK’s economic prospects. However, mid-  April 
brought news of an unexpected drop in UK 
consumer price inflation, which prompted 
some market participants to lower their expect -
ations of future policy rate hikes. This tempor -
arily benefited the euro, as did the subsequent 
publication of surprisingly weak growth in the 
British economy in the first quarter. Most re -
cently, the euro stood at £0.88, which was 
1.5% lower than at the beginning of the year.
On a weighted average against 19 major trad -
ing partners, the euro depreciated on balance 
(-1.1%). The losses against the currencies men -
tioned above and the renminbi (-3.7%) were 
partly offset by marked price gains vis- à- vis the 
Swedish krona in particular (+4.6%). The euro 
temporarily reached its highest level against the 
krona in more than eight years. The main rea -
son for the weakness of the krona was the 
continuation of the extremely expansionary 
monetary policy by the Swedish central bank, 
which disappointed some market participants’ 
expectations of a tightening of policy. Outside 
the group of 19 partner currencies, the euro 
also recorded marked gains against the Argen -tine peso (+28.0%) and the Turkish lira 
(+15.5%).
Securities markets and 
 portfolio transactions
Buoyed by market participants’ confidence 
with respect to global economic activity at the 
beginning of the year, bond markets on both 
sides of the Atlantic also experienced a sharp 
rise in yields at first. As already mentioned, in 
the first half of February, expectations about fu -
ture economic developments and the future 
monetary policy stance of both major currency 
areas then began to diverge somewhat more 
strongly, which was also reflected in different 
return patterns. For the first time since 2014, 
yields on ten- year US  Treasuries temporarily 
rose to more than 3% (+72 basis points since 
the end of 2017) and also exceeded this figure 
as this report went to press. The fact that, ac -
cording to estimates by the Congressional … and against 
pound sterling
Effective euro 
weaker on 
 balance since 
beginning of 
the yearMixed develop -
ments in the 
bond marketsYields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual matu-
rity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 20180.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–+++++++++++% pa, weekly averages
Germany
JapanEuro areaUnited States
United
KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
39

Budget Office (CBO), US government debt 
could grow considerably as a result of the tax 
reform probably also placed the price of US se -
curities under strain.
Given the Eurosystem’s continued accommo -
dative monetary policy and the weaker eco -
nomic data from Germany, yields on ten- year 
Bunds fell to 0.6% from mid-  February after 
having climbed sharply at the beginning of the 
year. Compared to the yield level at the end of 
2017, on the other hand, this represented an 
increase of 18 basis points.As a result, the yield spread between ten-  year 
US Treasuries and ten- year German Bunds grew 
by 51 basis points to 250 basis points at last 
count – the highest level for the last 30 years. 
The uneven rise in interest rates on each side of 
the Atlantic is mainly due to differences in the 
growth of the term premiums, which are the 
premiums that remunerate investors’ willing -
ness to hold securities with longer residual ma -
turities. This premium has risen sharply in the 
United States since the end of 2017 (+29 basis 
points); by contrast, it has climbed by a mere 6 
basis points for German Bunds.1
While money market participants expected Eu -
rosystem rate increases to start at a later date, 
the yield curve derived from yields on Federal 
securities shifted upwards somewhat and 
steepened slightly. With regard to unconven -
tional monetary policy measures, this upward 
shift demonstrates that expectations of a nor -
malisation have risen. The spread between ten- 
year and two- year bonds widened by 10 basis 
points. The yield spread between EONIA swaps 
and Bunds with an equivalent maturity nar -
rowed further. This suggests that market par -
ticipants perceive there to be fewer scarcity 
problems with regard to Federal securities until 
the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes 
are potentially phased out.
At last report, the GDP- weighted yield on ten- 
year government bonds in the euro area was 
13 basis points higher than at the start of the 
year. This reflected the countervailing trends of 
rising yields on ten- year Bunds and falling inter -
est rates on ten- year government bonds issued 
by other euro area countries. The GDP-  
weighted average of yield spreads over Bunds 
has therefore fallen by 11 basis points to 70 
basis points since the beginning of the year. 
Spreads on Spanish and Portuguese govern -
ment bonds narrowed, in particular, doing so 
by more than 35 basis points each. The con -Term premiums 
up, especially in 
the United 
States
Yield curve 
shifted upwards
Yield spreads in 
the euro area 
mostly narrowerYield curve on the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero-coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest 
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.20.40.60.8
––––++++
Residual maturity in years29 December 201717 May 2018%
Yield spread between US and German 
government bonds*
1 Source:  Bloomberg.  * US  Treasury  yields  less  Bunds,  each 
with a residual maturity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 180.500.51.01.52.02.5
–+++++Percentage points, monthly data
1 At the same time, short- term interest rate expectations 
for the next ten years have gone up more sharply in the 
United States than in the euro area, reflecting increasingly 
different monetary policy stances.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
40

tinuing upward trend in economic activity in 
the euro area and ratings upgrades may have 
played a role here. Although the yield spread 
on ten- year Italian government bonds also de -
creased considerably for a time, plans by the 
potential new coalition government in Italy to 
lower taxes whilst ramping up public spending 
then led to a marked increase in spreads.
In the United Kingdom, yields have also gone 
up significantly since the beginning of the year. 
Ten- year gilts increased by 38 basis points to 
1.6%. After the Bank of England raised its pol -
icy rates last November, market participants’ 
expectations are currently fairly evenly split be -
tween a further interest rate hike and an un -
altered interest rate level. In Japan, yields 
moved within a narrow corridor and, on bal -
ance, remained virtually unchanged at 0.06%. 
Yields on Japanese government bonds are still 
being heavily influenced by the Bank of Japan’s 
yield curve control programme, which aims to 
maintain the yield on ten-  year government 
bonds at close to 0%.
The five- year forward inflation rates in five 
years derived from inflation swaps fluctuated 
only slightly by 1.7%. Currently standing at 
1.9%, the inflation expectations for the euro 
area six to ten years ahead, as computed by 
Consensus Economics on the basis of surveys, 
likewise remained virtually unchanged. Hence, 
the difference between market- based and 
survey- based inflation expectations for the euro 
area continued to be negative. When interpret -
ing the discrepancy between survey- based and 
market- based expectations, however, it is ne -
cessary to bear in mind possible liquidity and, 
above all, inflation risk premiums which can af -
fect market- based measures. The probability of 
deflation over the next five years based on op -
tions data remained close to its level in January 
2018, and thus at its lowest point since the end 
of 2009, the time when option quotations 
began to be available.
Yields on European corporate bonds have in -
creased since the beginning of the year, having started at very low levels. Bonds issued by fi -
nancial corporations with a BBB rating and a 
residual maturity of seven to ten years were 
yielding 2.4% as this report went to press, 50 
basis points up from the beginning of the year. 
Meanwhile, yields on non- financial corporate 
bonds with the same maturity were up by 
1.8%, an increase of 33 basis points. The yield 
spreads of non- financial and financial corpor -
ate bonds over Bunds also went up on balance, 
rising by 29 basis points and 12 basis points 
respectively. For a while however (in early Feb -
ruary), yield spreads in both corporate sectors 
hovered at veritably low levels of a kind not 
seen since before the onset of the financial cri -
sis in July 2007. Against this background, the 
financing conditions for European enterprises 
should still be categorised as favourable, with 
the market conditions for corporate bonds still 
having been influenced by the prevailing ac -
commodative monetary policy and the corpor -
ate sector purchase programme.Yields up in the 
United Kingdom 
and largely 
unchanged 
in Japan
Forward 
 inflation rates 
remain almost 
unchangedEuropean 
 corporate bond 
yields increaseSpreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 201801002003004005006007008009001,0001,1001,200Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
IrelandPortugal
FranceGreeceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
41

Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €298½ billion in the first quarter of 
2018, well up on the figure for the previous 
quarter (€240½ billion). After deducting re -
demptions and taking account of changes in 
issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net issu -
ance came to €20 billion. In addition, foreign 
borrowers placed debt securities worth €25½ 
billion in the German market. Funds totalling 
€45½ billion net were consequently raised in 
the German bond market in the reporting 
period.
Domestic credit institutions issued new bonds 
totalling €25 billion net in the first quarter of 
2018. Debt securities of specialised credit insti -
tutions (€21½ billion) constituted the lion’s 
share of issues, followed on a smaller scale by 
mortgage Pfandbriefe (€5 billion). This con -
trasted with net redemptions of other bank 
debt securities that can be structured flexibly 
(€1 billion).In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises issued debt securities worth €3½ billion 
net. On balance, the vast majority of these 
were bonds with maturities of less than one 
year. Viewed in net terms, the issues were at -
tributable solely to other financial intermediar -
ies, while non- financial corporations redeemed 
bonds on balance.
The public sector took advantage of the fa -
vourable fiscal situation and pared back its cap -
ital market debt by €8½ billion net in the first 
quarter of 2018. These figures include issues by 
resolution agencies set up for German banks, 
which are ascribed to the public sector for stat -
istical purposes. Central government itself prin -
cipally redeemed five- year Federal notes (Bobls; 
€10 billion) and Treasury discount paper (Bu -
bills; €1 billion). This contrasted with net issu -
ance of 10 and 30-year Federal bonds (Bunds) 
totalling €4 billion and €5½ billion respectively, 
as well as two- year Federal Treasury notes 
(Schätze) in the amount of €3 billion. In the 
quarter under review, state and local govern -
ments redeemed their own bonds to the tune 
of €10 billion net.
In the first quarter of 2018, domestic non-  
banks, including mutual funds, were the princi -
pal buyers on the bond market; they added in -
struments worth €23½ billion to their port -
folios, most of this paper being foreign. For its 
part, the Bundesbank added a net €19 billion 
worth of paper to its balance sheet, mainly 
under the Eurosystem’s asset purchase pro -
grammes (compared with €35½ billion in the 
fourth quarter of 2017). This primarily entailed 
domestic public sector instruments. The lower 
quarter- on- quarter amounts reflect the reduced 
volume of monthly asset purchases that has 
been in evidence since the beginning of the 
year. Non- resident investors acquired bonds to 
the tune of €5 billion net, while domestic credit 
institutions parted with debt securities worth 
€2 billion net.Net sales in the 
bond market up
Significant rise 
in credit institu -
tions’ capital 
market debtNet issuance of 
corporate bonds
Public sector 
capital market 
debt down
Purchases of 
debt securitiesInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2017 2018
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 59.5 38.8 40.6
Credit institutions – 20.8 – 13.5 – 1.9
of which
Foreign debt securities – 10.1 –  0.3 3.3
Deutsche Bundesbank 52.6 35.6 19.1
Other sectors 27.6 16.7 23.4
of which
Domestic debt securities 13.5 11.9 4.5
Non-residents – 22.2 – 42.9 5.0
Shares
Residents 18.6 19.2 18.2
Credit institutions 2.1 4.8 – 6.5
of which
Domestic shares –  0.1 2.9 – 3.9
Non-banks 16.4 14.4 24.7
of which
Domestic shares 8.0 –  1.7 1.9
Non-residents 3.3 0.0 4.3
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 21.4 24.1 25.4
Investment in open-end funds 7.9 5.2 6.9
of which
Equity funds 1.4 0.8 0.2
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
42

Equity market
In the period under review, the international 
stock markets were influenced by a temporary 
spike in market uncertainty. During the first half 
of February, there was a worldwide dip in 
prices on the stock markets, compounded by 
heightened uncertainty, as measured by the 
implied volatility of equity indices calculated on 
the basis of options. This emanated from grow -
ing expectations that the Federal Reserve might 
raise interest rates sooner than previously an -
ticipated and culminated in a sharp correction 
to the equity market. Over the months that fol -
lowed, however, stock market investors’ uncer -
tainty about future price developments petered 
out. Their sense of uncertainty is still above its 
level at the beginning of the year, not least in 
the United States, but well below its level re -
corded in early February, which was the highest 
for several years. The higher volatility is partly 
attributable to the fact that predictions regard -
ing the extent of trade disputes between the 
US and a number of other countries have var -
ied, depending on individual news reports, thus 
fuelling uncertainty. Overall, prices listed on the 
broad equity indices listed for the United States 
and the euro area hovered around their current 
levels during the reporting period. The Euro 
Stoxx (+3.1%) performed slightly better than 
the S&P 500 (+1.7%), although the economic 
sentiment indicators for the euro area have re -
cently worsened, down from their previously 
high level. The German equity market –  as 
measured by the CDAX price index – was trad -
ing only slightly above levels at the beginning 
of 2018 (+0.2%), chiefly on account of the 
negative trajectory of bank shares.
While German banks suffered losses of more 
than 24%, Italian, Greek and Portuguese bank 
shares made above- average gains of 9%, 3% 
and 11% respectively. Moreover, at the Euro -
pean level, energy companies, in particular, 
performed considerably better than the market 
as a whole during the period under review 
(+17.2%), mainly on the back of the recent 
sharp increase in the price of oil. By contrast, enterprises engaged in the steel industry 
– prompted by the US administration’s threat 
that it might also impose tariffs on transatlantic 
trade – lost value compared with the beginning 
of the year, after delivering above- average per -
formances in the final quarter of 2017.Signs of stock 
market recovery 
following tem -
porary slump
Sectoral prices 
affected by 
higher oil prices 
and concerns 
about trade 
 disputesEquity market
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calcu-
lations.
Deutsche BundesbankBeginning of 2016 = 100, log scale, daily data
8090100110120130140
2016 2017 2018Euro area (Euro Stoxx)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  I/B/E/S,  Bundesbank  calculations. 
Earnings yields (EY) shown as an inverted price/earnings ratio; 
implied cost of equity (CE) and equity risk premium (RP) derived 
from the dividend discount model. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2468101214Data since January 2004Stock market valuations
RP EY CE RP EY CES&P 500 Euro StoxxMedian level
25% quantileCurrent level75% quantile
MinimumMaximumDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
43

The Japanese and UK equity markets recently 
recouped the temporary losses sustained previ -
ously. On balance, the Nikkei 225 rose by 0.3%, 
having in the interim peaked at its highest level 
since 1991 before embarking on a sharp de -
cline. The broad FTSE All-  Share Index also saw 
gains (+1.3%).
While estimates by IBES analysts of European 
enterprises’ earnings in the year ahead were re -
vised upwards, their estimates relating to 
medium- term earnings growth were revised 
downwards. Taking into account interest rate 
and share price movements, the equity risk pre -
mium, which arises from a multi- stage dividend discount model, fell slightly, indicating an in -
creased valuation level. Conversely, during the 
reporting period, analysts substantially raised 
their projections regarding the future earnings 
trajectory of US enterprises, both for the short 
and medium term. These revisions to projected 
earnings in the US probably stem largely from 
the tax relief that companies can expect as a 
result of the US tax reforms adopted at the end 
of 2017. This is also reflected in the significant 
increase in profits experienced by enterprises 
belonging to the S&P 500 in the first quarter. 
Amid a sharp increase in interest rates and 
higher share prices overall, the equity risk pre -
mium applying to US enterprises only went up Slight price 
gains in the Jap -
anese and UK 
equity markets
Divergent 
 earnings 
 revisionsImplied volatility in the financial markets
1 Implied volatility of options on the Bund future (Germany) or T-Note Future (USA) for a three-month horizon. 2 Calculated using the 
prices of index options with a maturity of 30 days. 3 Implied volatility of currency options with a maturity of three months.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018051015As a percentage, monthly averages
101520253035404550556065
51015202530
J FMAM
2018051015
101520253035404550556065
51015202530Bond market 1
Stock market 2
Foreign exchange market 3Daily data
Euro area VStoxx (Euro Stoxx 50)
United States VIX (S&P 500)Germany VDAXUnited StatesGermany
Euro / US dollar
Euro / yenDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
44

slightly on balance. By this yardstick, US share 
prices remain at a high level, despite the lower 
price- earnings ratio.
Issuing activity in the German equity market 
was moderate in the first quarter of 2018. Do -
mestic enterprises issued €2½ billion worth of 
new shares in net terms. The outstanding vol -
ume of foreign shares in the German market 
rose by €20 billion over the same period. In the 
main, equities were purchased by German non- 
banks (€24½ billion) while non- resident invest -
ors bought shares worth €4½ billion net, and 
domestic credit institutions pared back their 
holdings by €6½ billion net.
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €32½ bil -
lion, after raising funds totalling €29½ billion in 
the previous three months. The fresh cash 
mainly accrued to specialised funds reserved 
for institutional investors (€25½ billion). Among 
the various asset classes, mixed securities funds 
were the chief sellers of new fund shares (€17 
billion) but open- end real estate funds (€4 bil -
lion), funds of funds (€3½ billion), equity funds 
(€3 billion), and bond funds (€2½ billion) also 
engaged in sales, albeit to a lesser extent. For -
eign funds operating in the German market at -
tracted fresh funds totalling €8½ billion net in 
the first quarter of 2018. Domestic non- banks 
were the main buyers, adding mutual fund 
shares worth €41 billion to their portfolios. On 
balance, their focus was largely on German 
paper. Domestic credit institutions acquired 
mutual fund shares for €1½ billion net, while 
foreign investors scaled back their German 
fund portfolio by €2 billion net.
Direct investment
As with cross- border portfolio investment, 
which saw net outflows amounting to €35 bil -
lion in the first quarter of 2018, net capital ex -
ports were likewise recorded in the field of dir -
ect investment, where they came to €19½ bil -
lion.Stock market 
funding and 
stock purchases
Sales and 
 purchases of 
mutual fund 
shares
Direct invest -
ment sees 
 capital exportsMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2017 2018
Q1 Q4 Q1p
I Current account + 68.0 + 75.3 + 71.1
1 Goods 1 + 66.0 + 64.2 + 66.1
2 Services 2 –  2.5 +  0.4 –  0.7
3 Primary income + 21.3 + 25.1 + 19.9
4 Secondary income – 16.8 – 14.5 – 14.2
II Capital account +  0.6 –  1.0 +  0.1
III Financial account 
(increase: +) + 67.3 + 81.4 + 60.4
1 Direct investment + 15.2 + 15.3 + 19.7
Domestic investment 
abroad + 44.6 + 27.4 + 39.9
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 29.4 + 12.0 + 20.2
2 Portfolio investment + 51.6 + 69.9 + 34.9
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 31.4 + 23.3 + 42.4
Shares 3 +  5.6 +  5.7 +  8.2
Investment fund shares 4+ 17.6 + 14.7 +  8.6
of which
Money market fund 
shares +  6.3 +  1.8 –  1.1
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 +  5.0 +  7.6 + 25.6
of which
Denominated in euro 6 +  5.8 +  4.3 + 24.2
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  3.2 –  4.7 0.0
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 20.2 – 46.6 +  7.5
Shares 3 +  1.9 –  0.8 +  4.3
Investment fund shares +  0.1 –  2.9 –  1.8
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 – 12.1 – 40.4 + 16.4
of which
Issued by the public 
sector 8 – 21.5 – 22.6 –  1.9
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 – 10.1 –  2.4 – 11.5
3 Financial derivatives 9 +  0.2 +  4.0 +  1.1
4 Other investment 10 +  0.7 –  6.5 +  3.9
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 – 35.2 + 16.8 –  4.0
Enterprises and 
 households 12 –  7.7 – 17.0 + 16.3
General government –  2.2 + 13.2 –  2.5
Bundesbank + 45.8 – 19.4 –  5.8
5 Reserve assets –  0.4 –  1.4 +  0.7
IV Errors and omissions 13 –  1.3 +  7.2 – 10.8
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 
6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: 
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the Bun-
desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as 
non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13   Statistical errors and omissions, 
resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi  nan-
cial account and the balances on the current account and the 
capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
45

Direct investment abroad by German enter -
prises totalled €40 billion net in the first three 
months of 2018. Domestic investors boosted 
their equity capital by €33 billion, with a clear 
emphasis on investment in equity capital in the 
narrower sense, with foreign earnings being re -
invested as well. German enterprises also ex -
panded their intra- group lending in the period 
under review (+€7 billion). Countries receiving 
substantial direct investments from Germany 
included the Netherlands (€4 billion) and Ire -
land (€2½ billion) within the euro area, as well 
as the United States (€11½ billion) and China 
(€4½ billion) beyond it.
Foreign investors also increased their direct in -
vestment in Germany from January to March 
2018 by €20 billion, mainly by means of intra- 
group credit transactions (€16½ billion). The 
number of financial credits saw a particular in -
crease, facilitated by reverse flows which allow foreign subsidiaries to channel funds to their 
parent companies in Germany2, whereas intra- 
group trade credits were mainly redeemed. On 
top of this, foreign investors also bolstered 
their equity stakes in German subsidiaries (€3½ 
billion), primarily by reinvesting net earnings. In 
regional terms, investors from the euro area, 
particularly from the Netherlands (€10½ billion) 
and Luxembourg (€5 billion), played a major 
role.German direct 
investment 
abroad
Foreign direct 
investment in 
Germany2 Since the last set of methodological adjustments were 
made, these loans flowing in the opposite direction to the 
equity capital have been recorded in accordance with the 
“asset/ liability principle” pursuant to the sixth edition of the 
IMF’s Balance of Payments and International Investment 
Position Manual (BPM6). They are therefore classified as 
direct investment from the country in which the subsidiary 
is resident to the country in which the parent company is 
located. For a description of these and other data record -
ing principles applying to the balance of payments and the 
international investment position, see Deutsche Bundes -
bank, Changes in the methodology and classifications of 
the balance of payments and the international investment 
position, Monthly Report, June 2014, pp 57-68.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
46

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
Having expanded at a very robust pace in the 
preceding quarters, aggregate activity in Ger -
many grew at a considerably slower pace in the 
first quarter of the current year. According to 
the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) was 0.3% 
up on the final quarter of 2017 in seasonally 
and calendar-  adjusted terms. One-  off effects 
were partly responsible for the slower pace of 
growth. For instance, economic activity was 
probably inhibited by the extremely high num -
ber of working hours lost due to illness. More -
over, the declines in exports and government 
consumption are likely to remain temporary, 
and it can therefore be expected that the econ -
omy in Germany will continue to thrive. That 
said, the underlying cyclical trend may well 
have decelerated earlier than expected to a 
pace of expansion that is now only slightly 
above potential growth. This would lead to a 
slower increase in the existing high level of ag -
gregate capacity utilisation. Although the la -
bour market continued to develop extremely 
positively and the orders situation in industry is 
still very good, new orders were returning to a 
more normal level towards the end of the 
period under review and enterprises’ optimism 
regarding their business expectations has been 
declining for some time now.
Industry made no significant contribution to 
aggregate growth in the first quarter of 2018 
and therefore did not act as a driver of the 
economy. Declining exports are likely to have 
been the main factor in this context. Similarly, 
the construction sector, which was experien -
cing capacity shortages, was apparently unable 
to step up its output despite demand being at 
a high level. In contrast to subdued growth in 
manufacturing, however, the business- related 
services sectors continued on their upward 
path. On the demand side, exports were no 
longer playing their role as the main driving force. Instead, the more modest growth in eco -
nomic activity was underpinned by investment 
and private consumption, the latter picking up 
again following a lull in the second half of 
2017.
In real terms, German firms’ export business 
declined significantly in the first quarter of 
2018. This is likely to be due mainly to a coun -
termovement to the very strong export growth 
at the end of 2017. According to the figures 
available up to February, demand for German 
products fell sharply, particularly in non-  euro 
area countries. This was especially true of ex -
ports to the United States and the United King -
dom. Exports to the south and east Asian 
emerging market economies, Japan and the 
OPEC countries also showed a considerable de -
cline, however. By contrast, exports to central 
and eastern European countries as well as busi -German 
 economy sees 
dip in growth 
in 2018 Q1
No contribution 
to growth from 
industry; exports 
on the declineExports clearly 
down on prior- 
quarter level
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18102104106108110112114116
–20+2+4+62010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
47

ness with China declined only slightly, and ex -
ports of goods to the newly industrialised 
economies in Asia even posted a significant in -
crease in terms of value. Trade with the Russian 
Federation continued on its recent upward 
trend path in line with its economic recovery.
Despite weaker industrial activity, firms are 
likely to have continued stepping up their in -
vestment in new machinery and equipment 
after the turn of the year. Capital goods im -
ports fell steeply, although this was probably 
more than offset by substantially higher do -
mestic sales by German capital goods manu -
facturers. Strong increases in sales were re -corded in particular by the mechanical engin -
eering sector, motor vehicle manufacturers and 
producers of computers, electronic and optical 
products. In line with this, industrial enter -
prises, at least in some cases, probably became 
less reluctant to renew their motor vehicle 
fleets. This is indicated by the number of com -
mercial motor vehicle registrations, which went 
up again following a downturn in the second 
half of 2017.
Construction investment is likely to have clearly 
exceeded its prior- quarter level. The figures on 
turnover in the main construction sector avail -
able up to February indicate an increase, above 
all, in investment in private housing construc -
tion and in commercial buildings. Investment in 
public construction was probably also ex -
panded.
Following the period of weak growth in the 
second half of 2017, private consumption in 
the first quarter of 2018 is again likely to have 
made a marked contribution to aggregate 
growth. The strong increase in the number of 
new car registrations by households indicates 
that motor vehicle traders recorded substantial 
sales growth. Hotel and restaurant services 
were also buoyant, while activity in the retail 
trade sector proved to be more subdued. There 
was a sharp drop in sales in online and mail 
order trade as well as in sales of textiles, cloth -
ing and footwear at retail outlets. Sales of DIY 
and home improvement goods also fell sharply. 
This is likely to have been due to the unfavour -
able weather conditions in February and March.
Against the backdrop of declining exports and 
rather subdued domestic demand, imports 
were somewhat down in the first quarter of 
2018. While – according to the figures available 
up to February – fewer goods were imported 
from the euro area, demand for products from 
non- euro area countries remained on an up -
ward trajectory. There was strong growth in 
imports from the United States in particular. 
Japanese products were also in greater de -
mand on the German market. Imports from Enterprises’ 
 propensity to 
invest still highConstruction 
investment 
likely to have 
increased 
 significantly
Private con -
sumption back 
on expansionary 
course
Decline in 
imports100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18Jan-
Feb100110120130
Jan-
Feb
100110120130Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro area countries2010 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
price-adjusted1
Total
020406080 Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
price-adjusted 1110120130140
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
48

China and the south and east Asian emerging 
markets, on the other hand, declined consider -
ably. British manufacturers also suffered a steep 
drop in sales in Germany. The sharp rise in oil 
prices at the turn of the year was probably the 
main driving force behind the growth in terms 
of the value of imports from Russia and the 
OPEC countries.
Sectoral trends
Following the strong expansion in industrial 
production in Germany in the second half of 
last year, output in the first quarter of 2018 
persisted at the previous quarter’s level in sea -
sonally adjusted terms (see page 50 for further 
information on the changeover to a new soft -
ware tool for seasonal adjustment of the offi -
cial statistics). The extremely high number of 
working days lost due to illness in the winter 
months along with the existing tight staffing 
levels in some cases is likely to have led to 
losses of production in industry, as well as in 
other sectors of the economy. Against this 
backdrop, developments in the individual in -
dustrial sectors were quite mixed. Above all, 
the overall decline in intermediate goods out -
put had a dampening impact, with manufac -
turers of chemical products, in particular, cut -
ting back their output substantially. The manu -
facture of basic metals was also down on the 
high level of the previous quarter. Although 
there was a marginal increase in the manufac -
ture of capital goods, the overall positive result 
was mainly attributable to motor vehicle pro -
duction, which tends to be quite susceptible to 
fluctuations. This suggests that strike- related 
production losses in the run- up to the collective 
wage agreement in the metalworking and elec -
trical engineering industries, which are likely to 
have contributed to the sharp decline in Febru -
ary, were at least partially offset over the quar -
ter as a whole. Output in the consumer goods 
industry expanded strongly, however. Never -
theless, the upturn in this sector was also due 
to strong growth in just one branch of industry, 
namely the manufacture of pharmaceutical products. In contrast to the other sectors, the 
particularly strong flu epidemic this year could 
have given a boost to demand in the first quar -
ter.
According to the Ifo Institute, there was a slight 
decline in the capacity utilisation of tangible 
fixed assets in manufacturing. While output 
was stagnating, production capacities were 
probably being expanded further on the back 
of an ongoing high level of investment activity 
on the part of enterprises. The decline in cap -
acity utilisation was broadly based across sec -
tors.
In the construction sector, too, output in the 
first quarter of 2018 remained at the level of 
the previous quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms. This means that the subdued growth 
that has been persisting for almost a year was 
still ongoing. While output in the main con -
struction sector saw a steep increase, it con -
tracted significantly in the finishing trades. In Industry lacking 
further stimulus
Slight decline 
in industrial 
 capacity 
 utilisation
Construction 
sector probably 
still at full 
 capacityOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18Industry
95100105110
859095100105110115
Construction1
Main construction2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
49

Gradual changeover to JDemetra+ software for seasonal 
adjustment of the oﬃ   cial statistics
The Bundesbank is currently phasing in 
JDemetra+ as its new software tool for the 
seasonal adjustment of offi   cial economic in-
dicators in Germany.1 JDemetra+ is thus re-
placing Census X-12-ARIMA (version 0.2.8), 
which was the program used previously. 
JDemetra+ is a user- friendly open source 
software tool which contains both the 
X-12-ARIMA method2 developed by the 
US Census Bureau and the TRAMO/ SEATS 
method3 promoted by Banco de España. 
The methods most widely used internation-
ally and recommended for seasonal adjust-
ment in Europe are thus both available in 
this software.4 Its modular implementation 
means that JDemetra+ can be easily en-
hanced and adapted.
The National Bank of Belgium and the Bun-
desbank are responsible for developing and 
maintaining JDemetra+ in line with the rec-
ommendations of the European Statistical 
System and the European System of Central 
Banks. It is also used by the European Cen-
tral Bank, Eurostat and many of the national 
statistics offi   ces and central banks in the 
European Union.5
The approach applied at present with Census  
X-12-ARIMA will initially be retained by the 
Bundesbank in JDemetra+. The new soft-
ware has benefi  ts in terms of its graphical 
user interface and its multiple new diagnos-
tics for statistical quality assurance.6 Look-
ing ahead, the changeover to JDemetra+ 
will make it possible to extend the scope of 
application to higher- frequency data, such 
as weekly or daily data.7 Moreover, the in-
clusion of the ARIMA model- based ap-
proach, which was carried over from 
TRAMO/ SEATS, could further improve the 
quality of the adjusted data.8In connection with JDemetra+ a number of 
software plug- ins used in the offi   cial Ger-
man statistics are being made available by 
the Bundesbank to other users free of 
charge. This allows, for example, the aggre-
gation and disaggregation of chain indices, 
the calculation of mathematical contribu-
tions to growth and the centring of regres-
sors for the purposes of calendar adjust-
ment.9
1 In collaboration with the Federal Statistical Offi   ce, 
the indices for orders received by industry and the 
stock of orders in industry as well as the indices of out-
put in the production sector were already adjusted 
using the new software in April and May 2018, re-
spectively. These will be followed in stages by the 
other monthly indicators, such as the current account 
and the monetary indicators. Jointly with the Federal 
Employment Agency, the changeover to the new sea-
sonal adjustment software for their labour market indi-
cators is scheduled for the second half of 2018. The 
changeover to JDemetra+ for the seasonal adjustment 
of the national accounts is planned to be implemented 
along with the major revision scheduled for the sum-
mer of 2019.
2 See D F Findley, B C Monsell, W R Bell, M C Otto and 
B C Chen (1998), New Capabilities and Methods of the 
X-12-ARIMA Seasonal Adjustment Program, Journal of 
Business and Economic Statistics, 16, pp  127-177; 
D Ladiray and B Quenneville (2001), Seasonal Adjust-
ment with the X-11 Method, Volume 158 of Lecture 
Notes in Statistics, New York, Springer.
3 Time Series Regression with ARIMA Noise, Missing 
Observations and Outliers and Signal Extraction in 
ARIMA  Time Series. For further information, see 
V Gómez, A Maravall (2001), Seasonal Adjustment and 
Signal Extraction in Economic Time Series, Chapter 8, 
in D Peña, G C Tiao and R S Tsay (eds), A Course in Time 
Series Analysis, New York, J Wiley and Sons.
4 See Eurostat (2015), ESS Guidelines on Seasonal Ad-
justment, ISSN 2315-0815, section 3.1.
5 See Eurostat and European Central Bank (2015), 
Note to the attention of the members of the ESS and 
ESCB, Ref Ares(2015)241738.
6 JDemetra+ contains, inter alia, additional tests for 
identifying seasonality, residual seasonality and residual 
calendar effects as well as the description of the stabil-
ity of the model.
7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Seasonal adjustment of 
daily data, Monthly Report, March 2018, p 40.
8 See K Webel (2016), A data- driven selection of an 
appropriate seasonal adjustment approach, Deutsche 
Bundesbank Discussion Paper, 7/ 2016.
9 For further information, see https://www.
bundesbank.de/Redaktion/EN/Standardartikel/
Statistics/jdemetra.html?nsc=true&https=1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
50

the main construction sector, it was building 
construction that flourished in particular, 
whereas activity in the civil engineering sector 
showed a marked decline. On the whole, the 
economic indicators for the construction sector 
are continuing to paint the picture of a sector 
working at full capacity. According to the Ifo 
Institute, capacity utilisation in the main con -
struction sector reached a record level. The per -
centage of firms affected by staff shortages as 
well as the reach of the order books remained 
only marginally below their peak levels. The 
fact that weak demand is probably not behind 
the largely stagnant construction output is also 
shown by construction prices, which, after the 
turn of the year, were going up, at over 4%, 
even more strongly than before.
On the whole, economic activity in the services 
sectors is likely to have increased markedly in 
the first quarter of 2018. This is suggested in 
particular by real wholesale sales, which con -
tinued on their upward trajectory despite the 
subdued growth in industry. A boost was prob -
ably also provided by the motor vehicle trade, 
which benefited from the high demand for 
motor vehicles in both the private and the 
commercial sectors. Furthermore, there was a 
strong expansion in business activity in the 
hotel and restaurant sector. By contrast, enter -
prises in the retail trade sector (excluding the 
motor vehicle trade) suffered a significant set -
back in their business. However, enterprises in 
the other service sectors are likely to have en -
joyed higher turnover. This is indicated by the 
Ifo Institute’s excellent assessment of the busi -
ness situation in this economic sector.
Labour market
Conditions in Germany’s labour market con -
tinued to improve at the beginning of 2018. 
Employment increased very substantially in the 
first quarter of the year owing to the continued 
exceptionally strong growth in employment 
subject to social security contributions. More -
over, the fall in exclusively low- paid part- time employment was less pronounced than in the 
previous quarters. Self- employment is still on 
the decline, however. Unemployment fell quite 
rapidly in the first quarter, probably because 
the dampening effect of the increasing number 
of refugees registered as unemployed had run 
its course. The supply of job vacancies in the 
reporting quarter grew at a far slower pace 
than it had done previously, and other leading 
indicators also deteriorated somewhat towards 
the end of the period under review. The out -
look is nonetheless still very upbeat.
The number of persons in work in Germany in 
the first quarter of 2018 showed a somewhat 
stronger rise than in the previous quarters. Total 
employment went up by 196,000 persons, or 
0.4%, after adjustment for seasonal variations. 
This accelerated growth is primarily attributable 
to the rise towards the end of the year and in 
January. In February and March, by contrast, en -
terprises were more cautious with regard to the 
number of new staff they hired, although spe -
cial factors may also have played a part in this. 
The fact that the development is nevertheless 
very favourable overall is due solely to the in -
crease in employment subject to social security 
contributions. According to initial estimates by 
the Federal Employment Agency (BA), January 
and February already saw a 0.6% increase in 
the number of jobs compared with the average 
of the fourth quarter of 2017.
From a sectoral perspective, the faster pace of 
employment growth in both manufacturing 
and construction is particularly striking when 
compared with the previous quarters. In add -
ition to the high level of demand, the mild 
weather at the beginning of the first quarter 
could have played a role in this respect.1 Em-
ployment continued to grow at an above-  
average rate, including in the areas of business- 
related services, logistics and the information 
and communication sector. A large number of Significant over -
all expansion of 
activity in the 
services sector
Labour market 
situation and 
outlook very 
favourableStrong employ -
ment growth
Employment 
growth broadly 
based
1 Data on employment subject to social security contribu -
tions in March, in which the weather was unfavourable in 
a long- term comparison, are not yet available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
51

new positions subject to social security contri -
butions were also created in the health and so -
cial care sector and in the retail trade. By con -
trast, there was no growth this time in tempor -
ary agency employment or in the finance and 
insurance sector.
In February 2018, 773,000 more positions sub -
ject to social security contributions were filled 
than in the same month last year. Half of the 
newly created positions were taken up by Ger -
man nationals and half by foreign nationals. Job 
growth was possibly driven, first, by immigra -
tion and, second, by a higher labour force par -
ticipation rate of German nationals. Since 2004, 
in particular, there has been a significant rise in 
the participation rate of all persons aged be -
tween 15 and 74 in Germany – a common age 
category used internationally in order to also 
take account of the not insignificant share of 
the working population aged over 65. At 
69.5%, it is now on a level comparable to Scan -
dinavia, the Netherlands and the United King -
dom, making it one of the highest in the EU.2 
The labour force participation rate among older 
persons and women showed a particularly 
sharp increase. These are two groups of individ -
uals which have a greater preference for part-  
time working arrangements. Accordingly, the 
importance of part- time work has increased 
considerably in recent decades across all regular 
jobs subject to social security contributions.3 As 
much as 45% of employment growth over the 
past 12 months was due to part- time positions 
subject to social security contributions. The rea -
sons for the development of part- time working 
in Germany in comparison with France are ex -
plained in the box text on pages 54 to 56.
Registered unemployment showed a very clear 
fall in the first quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms. Taking the average of the reporting Labour supply 
boosted by 
immigration and 
higher labour 
force participa -
tion rate
Further decline 
in unemploy -
mentLabour market
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and Fed-
eral Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Exclud-
ing seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 18Apr41.542.042.543.043.544.044.545.0
28.529.029.530.030.531.031.532.032.533.005001,000
2.22.42.62.83.03.2
–400–2000+200AprSeasonally adjusted, quarterly
AprMillion
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registrered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Scale enlarged
Unsubsidised vacancies 2Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Jan-
Feb
2 According to Eurostat data based on Labour Force Sur -
veys of the individual EU member states.
3 At the same time, the number of involuntary part- time 
employees, who are unable to find a full- time position on 
the labour market, has fallen sharply in line with the fa -
vourable development in unemployment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
52

period, the decline, at 70,000 persons, was 
also distinctly stronger than in the preceding 
quarters. However, due to rounding, the un -
employment rate contracted by only 0.1 per -
centage point compared with the average of 
the fourth quarter of 2017. Although there was 
a relatively small decline in unemployment in 
April, the unemployment rate fell further to 
5.3%. The favourable development in the first 
quarter lowered the number of unemployed 
persons receiving the basic welfare allowance 
as well as of those registered in the statutory 
insurance system. In the latter, the current fig -
ure for unemployed persons was exceptionally 
low, at 800,000, and further reductions are 
likely to become increasingly difficult to achieve. 
The average length of time for which un -
employed persons claim insurance benefits 
(SGB III) is now less than three months.
Enterprises are still planning to increase their 
workforce. However, at the end of the period 
under review, the relevant leading indicators 
declined slightly from their earlier peak levels. 
This is true of both the Ifo employment barom -
eter, which surveys the employment plans of 
enterprises in industry over the coming three 
months, as well as the IAB labour market bar -
ometer, which collects information from em -
ployment agency managers about the expected 
regional development over the next three 
months. The Federal Employment Agency’s 
BA-X job index has not shown any further rise 
since as long ago as the end of 2017. The slight 
decline in the inflow of new vacant positions 
reported to the Federal Labour Agency had a 
particularly dampening effect, while the num -
ber of reported vacancies was continuing to 
rise up to the end of the period under review 
owing to the increasing duration of vacancies. 
The production sector, in particular, reported 
more vacancies, with the IAB Job Vacancy Sur -
vey for the first quarter of 2018 coming to the 
same conclusion. The leading indicator for un -
employment in the IAB labour market barom -
eter also showed something of a contraction 
recently, but remained in positive territory. In 
line with this, the official unemployment figure is likely to fall at a slower pace over the follow -
ing months than it did in the first quarter.
Wages and prices
The rise in negotiated rates of pay in the first 
quarter of 2018 remained modest given the 
very tight situation on the labour market. It 
was still being shaped predominantly by the 
moderate wage settlements of last year’s pay 
rounds and the low increases in remuneration 
from the second stage of pay rounds agreed 
earlier. Including additional benefits, the year-  
on- year increase in negotiated pay rates, at 
2.3%, was somewhat stronger than in the final 
quarter of 2017, however. As in the preceding 
quarters, actual earnings are likely to have 
gone up distinctly more sharply.
The new agreements which management and 
labour sealed in the current pay round reflect 
the very positive situation on the labour market Labour market 
outlook remains 
very favourable 
despite slight 
deterioration in 
some indicators
Negotiated rates 
of pay moderate 
in the first 
 quarter, too
Wage agree -
ments so far 
often with 
higher pay rises2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201800.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
% points
–0.50+0.5+1.0+1.5%
Q1
Wage driftNegotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay).
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
53

Part- time employment in Germany and France
In the European Union, the proportion of 
employed persons working part time varies 
considerably among the member states. In 
the case of employed persons aged be-
tween 30 and 54 years – a group in which 
employment behaviour should barely be af-
fected by differences in the normal duration 
of education or options for early retire-
ment – the proportion in part- time employ-
ment in Germany, at 27%, was 10 percent-
age points higher on average between 
2006 and 2016, for example, than in 
France.1 This difference is almost entirely due to the part- time employment of 
women, with half of the women employed 
in Germany working reduced hours, com-
pared with 30% in France. By contrast, 
there was hardly any difference in the em-
ployment behaviour of men, with 6% of 
employed males working part time in Ger-
many and 5% in France.
The European labour force survey provides 
detailed information on the motivation be-
hind the decision to work part time. Factors 
such as education or illness play only a minor 
role for persons aged between 30 and 54 
years. A considerable proportion of women 
working part time (38% in France and 21% 
in Germany) are involuntarily working re-
duced hours, with the term “involuntary” 
meaning here that they were unable to fi  nd 
full- time work or that no suitable facilities 
were available to care for children or incap-
acitated adults.2 In line with the less favour-
able labour market situation in France, a ma-
terially higher proportion of women there 
stated that they were unable to fi  nd full- 
time work. If the situation on the labour 
market were comparable in the two coun-
tries, involuntary part- time employment 
would probably be considerably lower in 
France, meaning that the discrepancy rela-
tive to the proportion of women working 
1 This analysis is based on an ongoing research project 
which uses microdata from Eurostat (2017 labour force 
survey). Responsibility for the conclusions drawn from 
these survey results does not lie with Eurostat, the 
European Commission or the institutions collecting the 
data.
2 In Germany, there was quite often no response to 
the question about the role that the care facilities 
offered played in the decision to work part time. As-
suming that the proportion of responses given on the 
importance of care facilities offered matched the pro-
portion within the group of part- time workers who in-
dicated looking after children or incapacitated adults 
as a reason for their reduced hours, this would raise 
the percentage of women in involuntary part- time em-
ployment in Germany to 24%.Reasons for part-time employment*
%
Reason Germany France
Involuntary part- time 
 employment
Could not fi  nd a 
full-time job 15 32
Looking after children 
or incapacitated adults 
and suitable care facility 
not available or 
 unaffordable 1 6 6
“Voluntary” part- time 
 employment
Looking after children or 
incapacitated adults, 
 irrespective of the care 
facilities offered 1 16 34
Other (including other 
family or personal 
 responsibilities) 48 22
Other reasons
Looking after children or 
incapacitated adults, 
without mention of the 
role played by the care 
facilities offered 1 12 0
In education or training 1 1
Own illness or disability 2 5
Total 100 100
Source: Bundesbank calculations on the basis of micro-
data from Eurostat (labour force survey). * Proportion of 
women in part- time employment aged between 30 and 
54, average for 2006 to 2016. 1 If looking after children 
or incapacitated adults was given as a reason for the part- 
time employment, respondents were asked about the role 
played by the care facilities offered in their decision to 
work part time. In Germany, the second question was 
quite often left unanswered. This outcome is captured in 
the table under “Looking after children or incapacitated 
adults, without mention of the role played by the care 
 facilities offered”.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
54

part time in Germany would be even greater 
on the whole. Equal proportions of respond-ents in Germany and France indicated a lack 
of suitable facilities to care for children or 
incapacitated adults as the main reason for 
their involuntary part- time employment.3
Other reasons for part- time employment are looking after children or incapacitated adults, irrespective of the care facilities 
offered, as well as “other” reasons (includ-
ing other family or personal responsibilities). 
Both categories are referred to as “volun-
tary” part- time employment in this box. This 
choice to work part time could be infl  u-enced by social norms, for instance, or fi  -
nancial incentives available in tax and bene-
fi  t systems. For example, in both Germany 
and France, married couples are taxed on 
their combined income. With a progressive 
tax scale in place, this tends to reduce the 
attractiveness of additional work on the 
part of the second earner. In addition, the 
option in Germany of taking up exclusively 
low- paid part- time employment without being subject to individual income tax, 
while still benefi  ting from non- contributory 
co- insurance in the statutory health insur-
ance scheme (“mini jobs”), is also likely to 
have an infl  uence.
The determinants of women’s “voluntary” 
part- time employment in place of full- time 
employment in both countries can be inves-tigated in more detail using microdata from 
the labour force survey. According to esti-
mations in the logistic regressions, a higher level of education reduces the probability of 
part- time employment in both countries. Married women are more likely to work 
part time than single women, with the cor-
relation being stronger in Germany. This is 
consistent with the expectations resulting 
from the analysis of the tax systems. In Ger-
many, in particular, the percentage burden 
of taxes and social security contributions rises for married couples if the spouse with 
the lower income increases their hours worked.
4 However, a separate estimation 
reveals that a person’s marital status has a 
considerably weaker impact in eastern Ger-many (including Berlin) than in western Ger-
3 The share might be even greater in Germany, as 12% 
of women working part time cited looking after chil-
dren or incapacitated adults as a reason for their re-
duced hours, without mentioning the role played by the care facilities offered. In France, a considerably 
larger portion of public funds go toward childcare than 
in Germany; in 2013, public expenditure on childcare 
as a percentage of GDP was 1.3% in France, compared 
with 0.6% in Germany (source: OECD  Family Data-
base).
4 See OECD (2016), PF1.4: Neutrality of tax- benefi  t 
systems, OECD  Family Database, http:// www.oecd.
org/ els/ soc/ PF1_4_Neutrality_of_tax_benefi  t_systems.pdfResults of the country-specifi  c  logistic regressions
°
Variables Germany France
Level of education 
(reference = mean: upper-secondary and post-secondary, non-tertiary)
High: tertiary – 0.117*** – 0.012***
Low: below primary,  primary and lower-secondary 0.050*** 0.026***
Marital status (reference = single)
Married 0.202*** 0.071***
Age of youngest child in years (reference = no child under 25 living in the same household)
< 1 year 0.097*** 0.188***
1 to 2 years 0.372*** 0.262***
3 to 6 years 0.368*** 0.126***
7 to 14 years 0.271*** 0.075***
15 to 24 years 0.159*** 0.030***
Two or more children 0.094*** 0.092***
Unemployment rate 
(as a percentage) – 0.011*** – 0.005***
Percentage of employed women working part time 0.011*** 0.008***
Observations 284,049 546,026
° Average marginal effect on the estimated probability of 
women being in “voluntary” part-time employment. Un-employment rates and the proportion of women working part time are regional and year-dependent and relate to the age group of 15 to 64 years. Further regressors: dummy variable for widowed/divorced, dummy variables for age in years (30 to 34, 35 to 39, …), year (2006, …, 2016) and sector. *** Statistically signifi  cant at the 1% level.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report 
May 2018  
55

many. This difference within the same tax 
system is an indication that, alongside fi  -
nancial incentives, the social environment 
may play a role.5 Another sign of this is the 
fact that women are more likely to choose 
part- time employment if it is already more 
prevalent among working women.6
As the number of children increases, so too 
does the probability of a woman being in 
“voluntary” part- time employment. Add-
itional estimations show that a large propor-
tion of women with children under the age 
of one year temporarily give up employment 
altogether. The part- time effect is at its high-
est when the youngest child is between one 
and three years old. The marginal impact of 
the age of the youngest child is considerably 
greater in Germany than in France,7 which is 
consistent with the longer tradition of in-
fants and children being placed in public 
childcare facilities there.8
The labour market situation could also infl  u-
ence a person’s decision to work part time. 
If regional and year- dependent unemploy-
ment rates are included in the estimations, 
it is evident that higher unemployment 
levels are associated with a reduced ten-
dency to “voluntarily” work part time. One 
explanation for this could be that an un-
favourable labour market poses a risk of 
lower household income, and thus the de-
sire to work full time is likely to increase.
The results for both countries, which were 
estimated separately, show that marital sta-
tus and the existence of economically de-
pendent children have a stronger infl  uence 
on women’s decision to work part time in 
Germany than they do in France. However, 
the effects outlined relate to different sam-
ples. For this reason, a logit model, in which 
the explanatory variables are interacted 
with a country dummy, is used for both 
countries to examine in more detail the dif-ferences between the countries in the prob-
ability of “voluntary” part- time employment 
in place of full- time employment for various 
groups. After taking into account discrep-
ancies in education, marital status and age, 
number and age of children, regional and 
year- dependent labour market conditions, 
regional and year- dependent part- time em-
ployment of women, years of observation 
and economic sectors, single women are 
found to have a slightly greater tendency to 
be in part- time employment in France than 
in Germany. By contrast, this tendency is 
visibly weaker among married women in 
France compared with Germany. Among 
women not living with children in the same 
household, estimated part- time employ-
ment rates are relatively similar in both 
countries. By contrast, the probability of 
part- time employment is higher for women 
with children in Germany than in France, 
with the difference particularly pronounced 
when the youngest child is between the 
ages of three and fi  fteen.
Overall, the results suggest that the current 
economic and social environments play an 
important role in households’ decisions re-
garding the labour supply in Germany and 
France.
5 Fernández and Fogli (2009) demonstrate that culture 
– defi  ned in their study as the distribution of prefer-
ences and beliefs – plays a role in the participation of 
women in the labour market. See R  Fernández and 
A Fogli (2009), Culture: an empirical investigation of 
beliefs, work, and fertility, American Economic Journal: 
Macroeconomics, 1 (1), pp 146-177. For an overview 
of the literature on the effect of culture on economic 
outcomes, see R Fernández (2011), Chapter 11 – Does 
culture matter?, in Handbook of Social Economics, 
Vol 1, Elsevier, pp 481-510.
6 When individuals base their choices on the behav-
iour of others in their peer group, this is referred to as 
a “peer effect”.
7 The results for eastern Germany, on the other hand, 
lie somewhere between those of western Germany 
and France in this respect.
8 See J Fagnani (2012), Recent reforms in childcare and 
family policies in France and Germany: what was at 
stake?, Children and Youth Services Review, 34 (3), 
pp 509-516.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
56

to a greater extent and, in many instances, pro -
vide for significantly higher wage increases 
than in the two preceding years. Even so, in 
several sectors such as the metal- working and 
electrical engineering industries, the increases 
enter into force only after a number of months 
with no pay rise. The agreements for central 
and local government and for the metal-  
working and electrical engineering industries 
which, measured by the number of persons 
employed, will affect the largest number of 
employees in this year’s wage round, will see 
wages go up in annualised terms from around 
3% to 3¼%. The rise is thus significantly higher 
than the figure of around 2½% in both cases in 
the earlier agreements of 2016. What is also 
striking is the extremely long duration of the 
wage agreements – at 30 and 27 months, re -
spectively – which has been a feature of recent 
settlements in other sectors, such as Deutsche 
Telekom, Deutsche Post and Volkswagen. The 
pay settlement proposed by the mediator for 
the main construction sector likewise provides 
for a long duration of 26 months, besides 
boosting pay levels considerably. The wage de -
mands of the trade unions for the forthcoming 
negotiations in the chemicals industry, the 
painting and varnishing trade and the regional 
hotel and catering trade amount to 6% over a 
term of 12 months. In the wage negotiations 
that have already been concluded, there were 
some sectors in which the social partners at -
tached particular importance to options allow -
ing workers greater flexibility in aligning their 
working time arrangements with their individ -
ual circumstances.
Consumer prices (HICP) rose fairly steeply again 
at the beginning of the year. In a quarter-  on- 
quarter comparison, they went up by 0.4%, al -
though there were shifts in the components 
driving this development. Whereas inflation in 
the fourth quarter of last year was driven 
mainly by energy and food prices, the upward 
movements in the prices of these goods eased 
noticeably in the first quarter of the current 
year. Excluding these two components, the 
rate of price increase was, by contrast, well into positive territory again following a tempor -
ary dip at the end of 2017. This was largely at -
tributable to services, where prices accelerated 
much more strongly in the first quarter of the 
year – partly because Easter fell early this year. 
In services, there was a reversal of the earlier 
weak price trend in travel services, and the re -
ductions in premiums for motor vehicle insur -
ance of the fourth quarter of 2017 no longer 
had a dampening impact and were, in fact, 
completely offset again in some cases.4 In add -Core Harmon -
ised Index of 
Consumer Prices 
inflation shows 
clear increase 
again in the 
reporting periodEinfuhrpreise
Export pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 1895100105110
100105110
95100105
0123
+++2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2
2015 = 100Producer prices1Log scale
%
Apr100105110
AprImport prices
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, The volatility of the trad -
itional core inflation rate in Germany, Monthly Report, 
 November 2017, pp 49-51.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
57

ition, rents were being raised somewhat more 
strongly. The rate of price increase for non-  
energy industrial goods prices remained weak, 
however. One likely factor in this is that import 
prices were falling quite noticeably up to the 
end of last year owing to the appreciation of 
the euro, and this was now having a lagged 
impact on consumer prices. Headline HICP in -
flation nonetheless fell from 1.6% to 1.3%5 on 
the year owing to the perceptible rise in energy 
and food prices at the beginning of 2017. By 
contrast, the rate excluding energy and food 
products went up from 1.2% to 1.3%, partly 
because the price- dampening impact of the re -
form of long- term care in January 2017 was no 
longer influencing the year- on- year rate.
In April, consumer prices rose again overall by a 
seasonally adjusted 0.1%. This was mainly due 
to higher prices for energy on the back of the 
steep rise in crude oil prices, although prices 
for food and rents were up somewhat, too. By 
contrast, other services became distinctly 
cheaper, chiefly as a result of price reductions 
for travel services. Prices for non- energy indus -
trial goods barely changed. Annual headline 
HICP inflation went down from 1.5% to 1.4% 
and, excluding energy and food, from 1.3% to 
1.0%.6 One factor in this was that the Easter 
holidays fell in April last year but partly in March 
this year.
In the coming months, the headline rate is 
likely to register a distinctly higher level, mainly 
on account of a marked rise in crude oil prices. 
Excluding energy, higher domestic wage pres -
sure will probably begin to emerge more clearly, 
as the impact of the earlier appreciation of the 
euro, which is mostly apparent in non- energy 
industrial goods, is likely to have largely run its 
course. Import prices, which are in line with 
these goods at the consumer level, have not 
shown any further fall since the beginning of 
the year, while consumer prices were showing 
a slight upward tendency at the industrial pro -
ducer level.Orders received and outlook
Following the dip in growth during the first 
quarter, the German economy is likely to ex -
pand more strongly again in the second quar -
ter of 2018. The one-  off impact of the excep -
tionally severe outbreak of influenza, which 
probably had a dampening impact on eco -
nomic activity in the first quarter, is coming to 
an end, and government consumption is also 
set to rise again. Moreover, the orders situation 
in industry remains very favourable despite a 
recent drop in incoming orders. Similarly, short- 
term production expectations have not fallen 
any further according to the Ifo Institute, but 
have risen somewhat, and exports are likely to 
have bounced back from their lull. As a result, 
manufacturing, in particular, could re- emerge 
as a major driver of economic activity. With util -
isation of tangible fixed assets in manufactur -
ing entrenched at a high level and sales pro -
spects looking favourable overall, enterprises 
are likely to further expand their investment in 
machinery and equipment. Buoyed by positive 
labour market dynamics and accelerating wage 
growth, private consumption is also likely to 
rise distinctly. Nonetheless, the less optimistic 
sentiment among businesses at the end of the 
period under review, in particular, suggests that 
economic activity is unlikely to match last year’s 
high growth rates overall.
Sentiment in the German economy failed to 
match last year’s pursuit of record levels and 
deteriorated again somewhat. The Ifo business 
climate index was published for the German 
economy as a whole for the first time in April 
–  it used to cover only trade and industry 
(manufacturing, main construction sector, 
wholesale and retail trade) – and contracted for 
the fifth consecutive month. While less optimis -
tic expectations were initially the main reason 
for this decline, the assessment of the business 
situation was also no longer quite as favour -
able at the end of the period under review. The Increase in 
 consumer prices 
in April mainly 
due to energy
Increasing price 
pressure 
expected not 
just in energyStronger growth 
again in second 
 quarter
German 
 economy less 
optimistic
5 Annual headline CPI inflation fell from 1.7% to 1.5%.
6 Annual CPI inflation held steady at +1.6%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
58

deterioration was broadly based and affected 
the manufacturing sector, the wholesale and 
retail trade, as well as the services sector (ex -
cluding trade). Only the business climate in the 
main construction sector saw an improvement, 
climbing again to the record level achieved last 
year. However, the declining optimism of Ger -
man enterprises overall is to be viewed in the 
context of the business climate currently still 
being at a far above-average level at present. 
Especially with regard to the expectations com -
ponent, fundamental concerns about adverse 
effects on world trade due to increasing pro -
tectionism, as well as the current geopolitical 
tensions, may have dampened optimism 
among economic agents.
Industrial orders fell steeply in the first quarter 
of 2018. In regional terms, fewer new orders 
were received, in particular, from Germany 
and non- euro area countries. By contrast, the 
inflow of orders from the euro area increased 
slightly. However, here there was a particu -
larly large percentage of major orders for 
other transport equipment, which often go 
into production only with a considerable time 
lag. If such orders are not included, new 
orders showed a sharp decline, too. Broken 
down by sector, the slump was likewise quite 
widely spread. All things considered, the de -
cline in orders should still be seen against the 
backdrop of the extremely substantial inflow 
of orders in the second half of the previous 
year. The order backlog in March was signifi -
cantly up on the level of the previous quarter, 
however. According to surveys carried out by 
the Ifo Institute, the reach of the order books 
remains at an exceptionally high level, despite 
a slight decline. The orders situation in indus -
try can thus still be considered as very posi -
tive.
The construction boom in Germany is likely to 
continue in the second quarter of 2018. De -
mand for construction work is still at a high 
level. After seasonal adjustment, new orders in 
the main construction sector in January and 
February – the most recent months for which Steep fall in new 
orders
Only moderate 
growth in out -
put expected 
despite con -
struction boomDemand for industrial goods and 
construction work
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Only 
calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 1890100110120
1001020
–++
90100110120
90100110
Jan-
FebJan-
Feb
100110120130140150
1001020
–++Volume, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
DomesticForeignLog scaleLog scale
Total industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
Main construction orders
2010 = 100
%%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
59

statistics are available – showed a further rise 
on the already exceptionally robust final quar -
ter of 2017. According to the Ifo Institute, the 
assessment of the business situation in this sec -
tor reached a new all- time high, and the ex -
pectations of construction firms have increased 
recently, too. That said, the construction sector 
is likely to see only moderate growth in output. 
The main reason for this is that construction 
firms are still facing significant capacity con -
straints. As in the preceding months, along 
with the considerable shortage of staff, the fact 
that the level of equipment utilisation is much 
higher than average is making it difficult to 
step up output.Private consumption is likely to continue its role 
as a major driver of growth in the second quar -
ter. The situation and short- term outlook on the 
labour market both still look favourable despite 
the dip in growth after the turn of the year. 
Moreover, the latest pay agreements are likely 
to give an additional boost to households’ dis -
posable income. Although consumer sentiment 
showed a slight deterioration according to the 
consumer climate index compiled by the market 
research institution Gesellschaft für Konsum -
forschung (GfK), the index remains at an ex -
tremely high level. This is also true of con -
sumers’ economic and income expectations, 
which went down somewhat of late.Private 
 consumption 
remains an 
important driver 
of growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
60

Public finances*
General government budget
Germany’s public finances have been develop -
ing very satisfactorily for some time now, and a 
considerable surplus and falling debt ratio are 
likely again in the current year. The general 
government surplus could reach a similarly high 
level as last year (2017: +1.3% of gross domes -
tic product (GDP)).1 In particular, public finances 
are benefiting from the economic upturn and 
falling interest expenditure. This is taking pres -
sure off the expenditure side amid dynamic 
growth in other expenditure (cyclically adjusted 
primary expenditure).2 On the revenue side, 
cyclical developments and fiscal drag3 are hav -
ing a positive impact, while smaller tax cuts are 
causing revenue shortfalls. Based on the infor -
mation currently available, the new Federal 
Government’s projects will have only a limited 
effect on public finances in the current year. 
The structural surplus could thus remain above 
1% of GDP . The debt ratio had fallen to 64.1% 
by the end of last year (end-2016: 68.2%). As 
things currently stand, it will continue to de -
crease significantly in the medium term, falling 
below the 60% threshold by 2019 at the latest.
The current assessment is that government 
budgets will continue to benefit from the fa -
vourable economic conditions and falling inter -
est expenditure beyond the current year. In the 
absence of new measures, the surplus would 
therefore continue to improve in the medium 
term – towards 2% of GDP .4 However, the new 
Federal Government has announced cuts in 
taxes and social contributions and additional 
spending. Furthermore, state and local govern -
ments are expected to make use of what are, 
in many cases, perceptible structural surpluses 
to cover additional needs identified in terms of 
staffing or fixed asset formation, for instance. 
Some could potentially also lower their rates on 
real estate acquisition tax and local govern -
ment taxes, having raised them significantly in 
some cases in the past. Furthermore, some -what greater use could be made of the scope 
for lowering social contributions, be it at the 
Federal Employment Agency or at least tem -
porarily in the case of the statutory health in -
surance scheme.
All things considered, general government sur -
pluses are therefore likely to shrink again in fu -
ture, especially in structural terms. However, 
structural surpluses are not currently expected 
to be fully depleted. Although the fiscal easing 
coincides with a strong economy and will thus 
tend to have a procyclical impact, it would not 
be advisable to delay meaningful additional 
spending or relief on the revenue side as long 
as they do not jeopardise the sound structural 
foundation. As things stand today, the eco -
nomic problems that this could potentially 
cause look limited. This notwithstanding, con -
crete capacity bottlenecks will have to be moni -
tored so that additional investment spending, 
say, does not dissipate through price increases.Public finances 
remain favour -
able in 2018: 
still considerable 
surplus and …
… declining 
debt ratio
Clearly expan -
sionary budget -
ary stance on 
the cards from 
next year 
onwardsEven so, a 
certain  level of 
structural sur -
pluses still likely
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. The subsequent more detailed reporting is 
based on the figures as defined in the government finance 
statistics (which are generally in line with the budget ac -
counts).
1 The way in which interest expenditure is recorded was 
amended in the spring notification, which increased the 
surplus by 0.1% of GDP .
2 In 2017, the capital transfers made by general govern -
ment temporarily increased by a total of €9 billion owing to 
nuclear fuel tax repayments and guarantee payments made 
by Hamburg and Schleswig- Holstein for HSH  Nordbank. 
With expected further guarantee payments of €6 billion, 
burdens will be lower this year. By contrast, it is likely that  
transfers to the EU will rise sharply, given a temporarily low 
level last year.
3 This encompasses the effect of bracket creep in income 
taxation and the impact of the fact that specific excise du -
ties are largely independent of prices.
4 In its latest stability programme (excluding measures 
from the coalition deal), the Federal Ministry of Finance is 
somewhat more pessimistic about developments in the 
current year. After this year, both the unadjusted and the 
structural general government surplus are expected to rise 
to 1½% of GDP by 2021. The aforementioned upward revi -
sion of the surplus has not yet been taken into account 
here, and the programme is based on central government’s 
macroeconomic forecast from January.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
61

Current fi  scal developments in the euro area
2017: lower defi  cit ratio due to economic 
developments and interest savings
The general government defi  cit ratio in the 
euro area stood at 0.9% last year, compared 
with 1.5% in 2016. According to the Euro-
pean Commission’s calculations in its spring 
forecast, this signifi  cant decrease is primarily 
attributable to continuing favourable eco-
nomic developments and –  to a lesser ex-
tent  – to lower interest expenditure. The 
underlying fi  scal stance (ie the change in the 
cyclically adjusted primary balance1) was neu-
tral. The debt ratio contracted from 91.1% to 
88.8%.2 The debt- increasing effect of the def-
icit (given interest expenditure of 2% of gross 
domestic product (GDP) and a primary surplus 
of around 1% of GDP) was more than offset 
by growth in nominal GDP (denominator ef-
fect, around 3 percentage points), in particu-
lar.
Marked fi  scal loosening expected
The European Commission expects only a 
marginal decline in the defi  cit ratio to 0.7% 
this year and 0.6% next year. The ongoing 
positive cyclical impact and the reduction in 
interest expenditure will be contrasted by a 
marked fi  scal loosening. The debt ratio is set 
to continue on the downward path that 
began in 2015 and fall to 84.1% by 2019.
Greece: no agreements as yet for the 
period after programme conclusion
Greece’s assistance programme under the 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) will run 
until 20 August 2018. Fiscal developments are 
therefore assessed not just on the basis of the 
European fi  scal rules but also on the object-
ives of the assistance programme. In 2017, 
Greece recorded a primary surplus of just over 
4% of GDP , thus considerably exceeding the 
fi  scal target of 1.75% of GDP , which was 
agreed between the participating institutions (ESM, European Central Bank (ECB), European 
Commission, International Monetary Fund 
(IMF)) and Greece.3 This result was supported, 
in particular, by temporary factors and lower- 
than- planned investment spending. Although 
these alleviating factors are not set to recur in 
the coming years, the Commission forecast 
projects that the agreed primary surplus will 
be achieved in 2018 and 2019 (3.5% of GDP 
in each case). This outcome should be signifi  -
cantly aided by a cyclical upturn coupled with 
declining underutilisation, while a structural 
loosening of fi  scal policy is expected at the 
same time.
To successfully complete the fi  nal programme 
review, Greece still has to implement numer-
ous prior actions. Only then can the fi  nal loan 
tranche be released. From the end of August 
2018, Greece will once again be reliant on the 
fi  nancial markets to raise funds, which means 
that private lenders will have to be convinced 
of its solvency and willingness to pay. As this 
is not always considered to be assured, it is 
sometimes judged necessary to provide add-
itional protection for a transitional period 
after the programme’s conclusion. The ECB 
and the Greek central bank, for example, are 
in favour of an ESM precautionary credit line 
for Greece. In principle, this can be granted 
once the decision- making body has come to 
its conclusion and this has been approved by 
the relevant national parliaments. By contrast, 
the Greek government is evidently aiming to 
1 The primary balance equals the fi  scal balance exclud-
ing interest expenditure.
2 Unlike the data reported in the Eurostat notifi  cation, 
the European Commission fi  gures on the debt level in 
the euro area as a whole cited in this box also include 
lending between euro area countries. Excluding these 
inter- governmental loans, the debt ratio for 2017 de-
clined by the same magnitude to 86.7%.
3 The assistance programme’s objectives concern the 
general government primary balance, which deviates 
from the usual ESA defi  nition in that, in particular, it 
does not include expenditure related to support for the 
banking sector or revenue from transfers in connection 
with the Eurosystem’s SMP/ ANFA transactions.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
62

create a cash reserve as a safety buffer using 
funds from the current programme, amongst 
other sources. Greece could use this reserve 
to cover its fi  nancing needs temporarily, with-
out recourse to the capital market. Yet the 
deciding  factor for future developments in 
Greece and its ability to tap the capital market 
will be the expectation of a reliable and sound 
fi  scal and economic policy stance in the longer 
term. In the past, however, the implementa-
tion of reforms was often fraught with con-
siderable diffi   culties, and seemed dependent 
on the pressure exerted by the conditionality 
attached to the release of further loan 
tranches, in particular. Being largely shielded 
from market reactions after the conclusion of 
the programme could reduce the momentum 
for further reforms.
A fi  nal decision on how to proceed after the 
programme’s conclusion is currently expected 
at the end of June 2018. It also remains to be 
determined whether additional transfers in 
the form of debt relief will be granted – not 
least to pave the way for Greece to raise its 
own funds in the capital market as far as pos-
sible. In May 2016, the Eurogroup held out the possibility of various stages of additional 
debt relief, particularly by means of maturity 
extensions and interest rate cuts. By the end 
of 2017, some of these measures had already 
been implemented, which, according to ESM 
calculations, should lead to a reduction of 
Greece’s debt ratio of 25 percentage points 
until 2060. Analyses conducted by the Euro-
pean institutions fi  nd that Greece’s public fi  -
nances are sustainable, provided that a pri-
mary surplus of 3.5% of GDP is maintained 
over an extended period. Far more ambitious 
fi  gures were agreed upon at the start of the 
assistance programme. Now, the requirement 
is apparently that even this lower fi  gure is to 
be met only until 2022. If primary surpluses 
are lower, it will also be deemed necessary to 
grant further considerable extensions to ma-
turities, which now stand at over 30 years, 
having already been extended multiple times, 
in addition to renewed interest payment de-
ferrals. Only then would the sustainability 
threshold for gross fi  nancing needs not be Forecast for the public fi  nances of the euro area countries
European Commission spring forecast, May 2018
CountryBudget balance as a percentage 
of GDPGovernment debt as a percent-
age of GDPStructural balance as a 
 percentage of potential GDP
2017 2018 2019 2017 2018 2019 2017 2018 2019
Austria – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.2 78.4 74.8 71.7 – 0.6 – 0.8 – 0.6
Belgium – 1.0 – 1.1 – 1.3 103.1 101.5 100.2 – 1.3 – 1.4 – 1.7
Cyprus 1.8 2.0 2.2 97.5 105.7 99.5 1.4 0.8 0.5
Estonia – 0.3 0.0 0.3 9.0 8.8 8.4 – 1.2 – 1.3 – 0.9
Finland – 0.6 – 0.7 – 0.2 61.4 60.4 59.6 – 0.1 – 0.8 – 0.9
France – 2.6 – 2.3 – 2.8 97.0 96.4 96.0 – 2.1 – 2.1 – 3.1
Germany 1.3 1.2 1.4 64.1 60.2 56.3 1.5 1.2 1.0
Greece 0.8 0.4 0.2 178.6 177.8 170.3 4.0 2.5 1.6
Ireland – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 68.0 65.6 63.2 – 0.1 – 0.6 – 0.4
Italy – 2.3 – 1.7 – 1.7 131.8 130.7 129.7 – 1.7 – 1.7 – 2.0
Latvia – 0.5 – 1.1 – 1.2 40.1 37.0 37.3 – 1.2 – 1.9 – 1.9
Lithuania 0.5 0.5 0.3 39.7 36.0 38.2 – 0.6 – 0.7 – 0.6
Luxembourg 1.5 0.9 0.7 23.0 22.6 22.5 1.8 0.8 0.3
Malta 3.9 1.1 1.3 50.8 47.1 43.4 3.5 0.6 1.1
Netherlands 1.1 0.7 0.9 56.7 53.5 50.1 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.3
Portugal – 3.0 – 0.9 – 0.6 125.7 122.5 119.5 – 1.1 – 1.1 – 1.1
Slovakia – 1.0 – 0.9 – 0.3 50.9 49.0 46.6 – 1.0 – 1.2 – 0.8
Slovenia 0.0 0.5 0.4 73.6 69.3 65.1 – 0.6 – 1.1 – 1.5
Spain – 3.1 – 2.6 – 1.9 98.3 97.6 95.9 – 3.0 – 3.3 – 3.2
Euro area – 0.9 – 0.7 – 0.6 88.8 86.5 84.1 – 0.6 – 0.8 – 1.1
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
63

overstepped.4 Furthermore, discussions are 
currently under way in this context about a 
relief mechanism pegging repayment of the 
loans to GDP growth. According to the cur-
rent Commission forecast, Greece will achieve 
a structural primary surplus of 5.1% of GDP in 
2019. This means that no further restrictive 
stimulus will be required to ensure a high pri-
mary surplus even in the longer term, and pri-
mary surpluses of 3.5% of GDP will be reason-
able in the longer term, too. As a result, it is 
not necessary for additional debt relief meas-
ures to be taken soon.
From 2018, many countries still quite far 
from achieving medium- term budgetary 
objectives and not getting any closer
In 2017, the defi  cit ratio was still (slightly) over 
the 3% limit only in Spain. France’s fi  gure was 
back below this threshold for the fi  rst time 
since 2007. According to the European Com-
mission’s latest estimate, the ratio should re-
main below the limit until the end of 2019, 
which means that the termination of France’s 
excessive defi  cit procedure can be expected. 
The forecast projects a further decline in 
Spain’s defi  cit ratio, giving rise to the expected 
correction of the excessive defi  cit this year 
and the end of the procedure next year.5 In 
almost all other countries, too, defi  cit ratios 
continued to narrow in 2017, and in most 
cases will decline in the coming years as well.
Even so, 11 member states still fell short of the 
medium- term budgetary objectives in 2017, 
and the current forecast does not expect them 
to get any closer. Rather, the European Com-
mission expects the structural defi  cit to widen 
in all euro area countries in 2018 – despite fur-
ther declining interest expenditure ratios. The 
fi  scal stance is thus being loosened in good 
times, although when the medium- term 
budgetary objective is not achieved, member 
states are generally required to improve their 
structural budget balance by 0.5% of GDP per 
year.6 At the end of 2019, only seven countries 
(Cyprus, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Luxem-bourg, Malta and the Netherlands) will record 
a structural balance of -0.5% of GDP or better.
Of all countries, it is Belgium, France, Italy, 
Portugal and Spain – which were running es-
pecially high levels of debt (over 90% of GDP) 
in 2017 – that are consistently falling short of 
their country- specifi  c medium- term budgetary 
objectives. In those countries and in Cyprus, 
which also has a particularly high debt level, 
the structural balance is set to deteriorate up 
until 2019 in each case. Although the debt 
ratios will decline in all countries but Cyprus7 
by 2019, the particularly heavily indebted 
countries will not achieve the regular reduc-
tion before the end of 2019.8 Belgium, Greece, 
Italy and Portugal will then still have debt 
ratios of more than 100%, and Cyprus, France 
and Spain of over 90%.
4 Both the ECB and the IMF are in favour of granting 
further debt relief at an early stage. The IMF is even mak-
ing further debt relief a condition for the disbursement 
of funds under its current programme with Greece.
5 It is concerning, though, that the only reason the ref-
erence value is not being exceeded is the favourable cyc-
lical impact and a shrinking interest expenditure ratio. 
The structural improvement required to correct the ex-
cessive defi  cit has not been achieved a priori in any year 
since 2014. The structural defi  cit will even increase to 
over 3% in 2018 owing to a marked fi  scal loosening.
6 Both the preventive and corrective arms of the Sta-
bility and Growth Pact prescribe structural improve-
ments of 0.5% of GDP per year until the objectives are 
achieved. However, country- specifi  c recommendations 
can deviate from this in both processes.
7 Despite the budget surplus, Cyprus’ debt ratio is ex-
pected to increase strongly in 2018. This is because the 
Cypriot government has placed a large deposit with a 
Cypriot bank which it is fi  nancing by issuing govern-
ment bonds (amounting to 12% of GDP). As it was 
assumed that this debt was issued to fi  nance the pur-
chase of fi  nancial assets considered to be fully recover-
able claims, it constitutes purely a fi  nancial transaction 
which does not increase the defi  cit (though it does the 
debt ratio). Furthermore, any legal aspects relating to 
state aid have to be clarifi  ed.
8 However, an excessive defi  cit procedure based on 
the debt criterion would only be launched if, at the 
same time, the debt exceeding the reference value of 
60% has not been reduced by an average of one- 
twentieth per year over the preceding three years, and 
if this reduction is not achieved even when cyclical ef-
fects are taken into account. Furthermore, transitional 
provisions exist for those countries that were subject 
to an excessive defi  cit procedure at the time that this 
debt criterion was operationalised (November 2011). 
These provisions are valid for three years after their 
defi  cit procedure has come to a close.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
64

Overall, there are still good reasons for all levels 
of government to aim for moderate structural 
surpluses.5 A key challenge for fiscal policy is 
not to lose sight of the demographic strains 
further down the line despite the good 
medium- term conditions that are currently an -
ticipated. The sustainability of public finances 
will come under pressure, in particular, due to 
the fact that general government spending on 
pensions, long- term care and healthcare will in -
crease sharply while the aggregate government 
revenue base expands at a slower rate. Against 
this backdrop, rigorously reining in general 
government debt and the associated interest 
burden – as well as measures to boost employ -
ment and strengthen the economy’s growth 
potential – are important.
Moreover, further adjustments are needed to 
put the social welfare systems, in particular, on 
a sound long- term footing. Amongst other 
things, the Federal Government has scheduled 
the statutory pension insurance scheme for a 
thorough overhaul from 2025. Despite the un -
certainties, the reform proposals ought to also 
factor in developments over the very long term 
based on relevant projections: only by doing so 
can the financial impact of demographic shifts 
towards a larger share of older people in the 
population be made transparent.6 Policy discus -
sions, many of which focus on the pension 
level and contribution rates, should also take 
into account the additional tax burden stem -
ming from potentially higher central govern -
ment grants, as well as the statutory retirement 
age. For example, by continually raising the 
statutory retirement age in line with (further ris -
ing) life expectancy after 2030, the average 
ratio of retirement years to working years could 
be kept broadly constant. The central govern -
ment grants are currently, for the most part, 
adjusted in line with the contribution rate and 
average wage growth, while demographic de -
velopments are weighing on employment and 
thus on contribution receipts from insured per -
sons. This means that – even in the absence of 
the adjustments currently being discussed7  – 
the burden on the central government budget and the weight of financing pensions through 
general taxation will gradually increase further 
and further.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Year-  on- year growth in tax revenue8 came to 
4% in the first quarter of 2018 (see the chart 
on page 66 and the table on page 67). On -
going favourable developments in gross wages 
and salaries made an important contribution 
here, giving rise to dynamic wage tax growth 
(6%). Progressive taxation increased revenue, 
whereas changes in tax legislation had a damp -
ening effect. In particular, a small tax cut was 
made at the start of this year which was in -
tended to compensate for bracket creep last 
year.9 Child benefit payments deducted from 
revenue raised the rate of growth as, despite 
the slight increase in child benefit, they rose at 
a slower pace than gross revenue. All in all, 
profit- related taxes recorded dynamic growth 
(6%). Starting from high levels in the previous 
year, there was solid growth in assessed in -
come tax and strong growth in corporation 
tax. There was a decrease in revenue from non- 
assessed taxes on earnings, the main compon -
ent of which is investment income tax on divi -
dends. Intra- year shifts in dividend payments 
could have played a role here. By contrast, re -
ceipts from withholding tax on interest income Bear long- term 
sustainability 
in mind
In pension 
reforms, secure 
sound pension 
finances through 
balanced 
burden- sharingSignificant rise 
in tax revenue 
in Q1
5 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public 
finances, Monthly Report, November 2017, p 53.
6 For example, the horizon in the EU’s latest Ageing Report 
spans as far as 2070. See European Commission, The 2018 
Ageing Report: Underlying Assumptions and Projection 
Methodologies, European Economy Institutional Paper 
065, November 2017.
7 See pp 72-74.
8 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
9 The basic income tax allowance and child tax allowances 
were raised and the other income tax brackets shifted to 
the right. Furthermore, the increasing level of tax exemp -
tion, in particular, of contributions to the statutory pension 
insurance scheme once again resulted in marked shortfalls.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
65

and capital gains were up sharply, probably as 
a result of increased capital gains. Turnover tax 
revenue, which is generally quite volatile, in -
creased by 3%, which is in line with the under -
lying trend displayed by the macroeconomic 
reference variables.
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue (including local government taxes) is 
expected to increase by 5% for 2018 as a 
whole. Forecast growth in the macroeconomic 
reference variables10 already accounts for sig -
nificant revenue growth, and fiscal drag is an -
other factor. Furthermore, the repayment of 
nuclear fuel tax after it was ruled void,11 which 
pushed down revenue by €7½ billion last year, 
was a one- off event in 2017. Although repay -
ments are also expected this year as a result of 
court rulings,12 these will be significantly lower. 
On balance, legislative changes will have a 
moderate dampening effect on revenue 
growth: it is primarily the aforementioned in -
come tax cuts that are behind the shortfalls. By 
contrast, lapsing refunds of corporation tax 
credit13 will lead to a marked year- on- year in -
crease in revenue.
According to the official tax estimate, which is 
generally based on current legislation, growth 
in tax revenue is set to be slightly lower next 
year, at 4½%. The main reason for this is the lesser importance of one-  off effects resulting 
from court rulings.14 By contrast, developments 
in the macroeconomic reference variables for 
tax revenue, fiscal drag and legislative changes 
will each boost tax revenue to a similar extent 
as in the current year. Revenue growth of 4% is 
expected for the subsequent years up to 2022. 
This projection is shaped primarily by macro -
economic assumptions and fiscal drag. Tax cuts 
that have already been approved will have only 
a slight dampening effect in net terms. The tax 
ratio (as defined in the government finance 
statistics) is projected to increase significantly 
to 23.2% by the end of the forecast period 
(2017: 22.5%; adjusted for the nuclear fuel tax 
repayment: 22.7%). Taking into account the 
tax relief measures and, in particular, the partial 
abolition of the solidarity surcharge announced 
by the new Federal Government, the ratio 
could yet go up slightly.
Compared with the November 2017 forecast, 
the budgeted figures have been revised up -
wards by €8 billion for 2018. The main reason 
for this is the upward revision of the assump -
tions made for the macroeconomic reference Clear revenue 
increase 
expected 
for 2018
Somewhat 
lower growth 
in subsequent 
yearsRevenue expect -
ations up signifi -
cantly overallTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018101234567
–+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
10 This estimate is based on the Federal Government’s cur -
rent macroeconomic projection from the end of April 
2018. The projection indicates that, in 2018, GDP will rise 
by 2.3% in real terms and 4.2% in nominal terms (October 
2017: 1.9% and 3.6% respectively). GDP growth for 2019 
is forecast to be 2.1% in real terms and 4.1% in nominal 
terms (October: 1.7% and 3.4% respectively). In the me -
dium term, nominal growth of around 3½% per year is 
forecast (October: roughly 3%).
11 See Federal Constitutional Court, Order of the Second 
Senate of 13 April 2017 (2 BvL 6/ 13).
12 This pertains, first and foremost, to rulings (Federal Fis -
cal Court rulings I R 33/ 09 and I R 74/ 12) on section 40a of 
the Act on Asset Management Companies ( Gesetz über 
Kapitalanlagegesellschaften ) and STEKO (section 8b (3) of 
the Corporation Tax Act ( Körperschaftsteuergesetz )); see 
also Bundestags- Drucksache  18/ 5560. Unlike the cash re -
ceipt developments described here, the effect of these rul -
ings is recorded in the national accounts at the time of 
each of the rulings (2014), increasing expenditure.
13 These refunds as a result of switching from a full imput -
ation system to the half- income method as part of the 
business tax reform of 2000-01 were staggered between 
2008 and 2017.
14 The refunds in connection with the aforementioned rul -
ings on section 40a of the Act on Asset Management 
Companies and STEKO are expected to be paid in full this 
year. However, it is assumed that repayments in connection 
with a European Court of Justice ruling on the taxation of 
dividends paid to EU/ EEA companies (case C-284/ 09) will 
continue into 2019 and 2020.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
66

variables for tax revenue. The fact that, going 
beyond the revision of the reference variables, 
growth in profit- related taxes this year was re -
vised upwards owing to cash balances in the 
first quarter also had a part to play here. In 
addition, the projected losses as a result of 
court rulings were reallocated once again to 
later years. The revised and additional effects of 
legislative changes will dampen the impact of 
this marginally. Tax revenue estimates were in -
creased by between €11½ billion and €16½ bil -
lion for each of the years from 2019 to 2022, 
which is attributable in very large part to the 
upward revision of the macroeconomic as -
sumptions. Another minor contributing factor 
is the expectation that the higher level of profit- 
related taxes will continue. The brighter eco -
nomic setting compared with the benchmark 
figures for the November 2017 tax estimate 
had already been discernible for some time. 
The need for upward revision was therefore al -
ready known to some extent during the new 
Federal Government’s coalition negotiations.
Central government budget
Central government recorded a surplus of €3½ 
billion in the first quarter of 2018 compared 
with a surplus of €5 billion one year previ -
ously.15 Revenue declined slightly (-½%). In the 
case of tax receipts, the decline was more sig -
nificant (-2½%, or €2 billion). While tax rev -
enue inflows to central government continued 
to rise markedly, deductions for transfers to the 
EU budget were up by €5 billion. This was 
largely due to a one- off factor that had pushed 
down the level in the previous year.16 Despite 
an increase of €1½ billion in the Bundesbank’s 
profit distribution, other revenue did not quite 
manage to offset the tax shortfall. A moderate 
increase of 1% (€1 billion) in total was recorded 
on the expenditure side. Interest expenditure 
stagnated owing to the fact that persistent re -
financing advantages for Federal bonds were 
offset by lower premiums upon issuance. In 
particular, there was growth in payments to 
the statutory pension insurance scheme and to state governments17 (+€1 billion each). By con -
trast, current transfers to enterprises were 
down by €1 billion. This could also be the result 
of stricter spending curbs during the period of 
interim budget management.
At the start of May, the new Federal Govern -
ment adopted a revised draft of the 2018 cen -
tral government budget. Expenditure appropri -Lower surplus 
at start of year 
as a result of 
higher transfers 
to EU budgetTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2018 1,2 2017 2018
€ billionYear-
on-year 
change 
%Year-
on-year 
change 
%
Tax revenue, total 2 165.4 172.1 +  4.1 +  5.3
of which
Wage tax 45.3 48.1 +  6.1 +  5.6
Profi  t-related taxes 3 31.7 33.7 +  6.2 +  5.8
Assessed income 
tax 17.0 17.6 +  3.7 +  3.7
Corporation tax 8.5 9.4 + 10.7 + 10.5
Investment 
 income tax 4 6.2 6.6 +  7.0 +  5.5
Turnover taxes 5 57.5 59.2 +  3.0 +  3.8
Other consumption-
related taxes 6 19.9 20.0 +  0.6 +  0.6
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2018. 2 In-
cluding EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts 
from local government taxes. 3  Employee refunds deducted 
from revenue. 4 Withholding tax on interest  income and capital 
gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and im-
port turnover tax. 6 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor 
vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, 
intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and 
fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
15 The quarterly figures presented here deviate (in contrast 
to the annual figures) from the figures published by the 
Federal Ministry of Finance due to adjustments. This affects 
regular payments that are to be made in advance and are 
recorded twice by the Federal Ministry of Finance in Janu -
ary but, as a result, are not recorded in December. Due to 
updated adjustments, there are deviations from previous 
Monthly Reports.
16 One- off relief amounting to €3 billion was provided in 
early 2017 due to the EU own funds decision of autumn 
2016 being applied retroactively to the budget in Germany. 
In addition, the outflows of funds from the EU budget, and 
thus, accordingly, Germany’s contributions, are set to be 
considerably higher this year.
17 The fact that settlements for the basic allowance for the 
elderly that were still outstanding at the end of 2017 were 
included in the 2018 budget seems to have played an im -
portant role here. By contrast, there were no such refunds 
in the 2017 budget.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
67

ations were raised by a total of €3½ billion 
compared with the previous government’s 
draft from summer 2017. Of this total, €1½ bil -
lion was earmarked for measures in the coali -
tion agreement, such as home buyers’ child 
benefit (€½ billion). Provisions of €1 billion 
were made for the increases in negotiated rates 
of pay agreed in April and the intended adjust -
ment of civil servants’ pay based on these, 
while the planned global spending cut in a 
comprehensive item was lowered by €1½ bil -
lion. Overall, however, tax projections were 
raised far more significantly, by €10 billion. On 
balance, it was possible to reduce the esti -
mated deficit by €6½ billion to €2 billion. The 
withdrawal from the refugee reserve to cover 
the deficit was thus budgeted correspondingly 
lower.
As in the budget plans of previous years, sig -
nificant easing is foreseen this year compared 
with last year. Overall, this would lower the bal -
ance by €7 billion. At the same time, the cyclic -
ally induced fiscal relief to be taken into ac -
count under the debt brake will effectively in -
crease by almost €3 billion.18 Excluding finan -
cial transactions, which are likewise to be 
factored out, the balance is expected to deteri -
orate by a further €1 billion, and the deficits of 
the off- budget entities included under the debt 
brake are set to increase by €½ billion. Overall, 
the structural balance is thus envisaged to de -
teriorate by just over €11 billion to -€8½ billion 
(-¼% of GDP) according to the budget plans. 
However, the Federal Government is focusing 
on net borrowing rather than the deficit in the 
context of the debt brake, with net borrowing, 
unlike the balance, being lowered by reserve 
withdrawals and coin seigniorage.19 This leaves 
a margin of €5 billion below the debt brake 
limit of -0.35% of GDP (at present: -€11½ bil -
lion).
In actual fact, the budget outturn is set to be 
more favourable than envisaged so far. It would 
seem that the additional revenue of €2½ billion 
expected according to the latest tax estimate 
(mainly brought about by lower EU contribu -tions20) is to be used primarily to build up a 
digitalisation fund, and the inflows in connec -
tion with the settlement of the dispute con -
cerning the delayed introduction of the heavy 
goods vehicle toll could still be redirected. But 
interest expenditure not least could be lower, 
mainly because –  in a departure from the 
budget estimates – it is likely that premiums on 
newly issued government bonds will continue 
to be received. In the case of investment ex -
penditure, it would appear likely that outflows 
will be lower than estimated again, not least 
with respect to the expansion of the broad -
band network financed directly out of the 
budget and calls on guarantees and as a result 
of the spending curbs now in effect until July in 
connection with interim budget management. 
Provided no further additional burdens are 
agreed upon in the course of budget discus -
sions, a surplus could once again be recorded, 
which would result in the refugee reserve po -
tentially growing again rather than decreas -
ing.21 It would still appear advisable to promptly 
dissolve the reserve, which is not needed for its 
original purpose, to pay down debt.22
In early May, the benchmark figures for the 
2019 budget and the financial plan up to 2022 
were also adopted. The Federal Government is 
holding on to its goal of refraining from net 
new borrowing. However, reserve withdrawals 
of just over €20 billion are planned in order to Revised draft 
budget for 2018 
contains signifi -
cantly lower 
deficit than 
 initial draft …
… but still 
includes consid -
erable structural 
easing com -
pared with 2017
Another surplus 
possible in 201818 In a departure from the Federal Ministry of Finance’s 
approach, the cyclical components for 2017 and 2018 cal -
culated in the April estimate of potential output were taken 
into account here. The tax projections in the new 2018 
draft budget, however, are based on earlier estimates pub -
lished in the Annual Economic Report, which included an 
almost €1 billion higher increase in cyclical relief.
19 For the relevant classifications, see Deutsche Bundes -
bank, Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2016, 
pp 68-69.
20 As usual, token entries for which no amount is given 
are made in the draft budget for EU grants, ie no revenue 
is factored in. The EU contributes to various areas of central 
government spending. Although specific amounts are not 
yet known, contributions regularly totalling around €1 bil -
lion are collected per year in the course of implementing 
the budget; to this extent, they exceed budget plan figures.
21 At the end of 2017, the reserves from the surpluses that 
have accumulated since 2015 stood at €24 billion.
22 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly 
 Report, August 2016, pp 63-65.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
68

finance new projects up to 2021. Moreover, 
compared with the last financial plan, eco -
nomic developments are expected to be even 
better – including in structural terms – bringing 
in significantly higher tax revenue. The new 
projects are expected to put a burden of 
around €7 billion on the 2019 budget, with this 
figure set to rise further to roughly €22 billion 
(½% of GDP) by 2021, though the details are 
not yet known. In addition to the partial aboli -
tion of the solidarity surcharge, the extension 
beyond 2018 of aid to state and local govern -
ment to cover refugee- related expenses should, 
in view of its scope, be highlighted in this con -
text. These levels of government are also set to 
receive higher payments for areas such as kin -
dergartens, after- school childcare for primary 
school children, social housing and regional 
policy. Furthermore, an increase in child benefit 
by a total of €25 a month will be felt more 
strongly. In addition to these measures, the pay 
agreement and its application to civil servants 
also needed to be taken into account. The 
overall annual impact of these will rise to 
around €3 billion up to 2020.
As in previous years, the structural outcome 
was only included in the benchmark figures in 
a press release, even though the associated 
limit of -0.35% of GDP represents the linchpin 
of the debt brake.23 The Federal Government’s 
continued aim is to avoid net borrowing, and it 
is making full use of the fiscal space it has in 
this regard. In addition to withdrawals from re -
serves in the first few years, marked relief is 
forecast on account of the favourable cyclical 
conditions. Factoring in the expected deficits of 
the off- budget entities included under the debt 
brake, there will be marked structural deficits in 
some years. It is likely that a value of 0.5% of 
GDP will be aimed at in 2019. Considerable 
additional loosening is thus implied, and, ac -
cording to the budget plans, it will only be pos -
sible to comply with the debt brake through 
envisaged withdrawals from the reserve. Going 
forward, structural deficits should then start 
declining again. The assumed fairly high level 
of potential growth and the resulting signifi -cant tax revenue growth in structural terms 
play a particularly important role here. In view 
of the prospective demographic challenges and 
only provisional relief provided by extremely fa -
vourable financing conditions, it would appear 
sensible in the medium term not to fully ex -
haust any fiscal space perceived in the central 
government budget given the aim of avoiding 
net borrowing, but to strive for moderate struc -
tural surpluses.
On the whole, the budget plans appear to have 
still been drawn up cautiously for the first years, 
and there are likely to be reserves, in particular, 
in the form of global revenue shortfall entries. 
All in all, it is possible that there are already 
funds to cover not only the aforementioned Benchmark 
 figures up to 
2022: no net 
borrowing even 
amid new pro -
jects thanks to 
reserve with -
drawals and 
higher tax 
receipts
2019: continued 
fiscal loosening 
and marked 
structural 
 deficits planned
Reserves will 
remain available 
initially, but 
foreseeable 
needs will 
deplete bufferCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q45051015
–+++
–50+5+10+15
201820172016Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
201620182017€ billion
23 There are no data on the balances of financial transac -
tions and of the incorporated off- budget entities. While 
reference is made to a “structural deficit” in the press re -
lease of 2 May 2018, this must actually be structural net 
borrowing based on the information in the published back -
ground document.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
69

priority projects laid down in the coalition 
agreement but also additional measures with 
an impact on public finances such as compen -
sation for bracket creep in the income tax re -
gime or slightly higher EU contributions from 
2021 onwards. However, additional demands 
have been made in areas such as the Ministry 
of Defence, where no sizeable increase in 
spending as a percentage of GDP appears to 
have been planned thus far. Under the coali -
tion arrangements, the lion’s share of the ex -
pected additional revenue of €2 billion for cen -
tral government on an annual average up to 
2022 (according to the latest official tax esti -
mate) could be spread equally between de -
fence and expanding development aid. Overall, 
the budget position therefore does not look 
entirely free from strain despite very favourable 
conditions.
The financial plans also envisage central gov -
ernment being much more involved in tasks 
generally performed at the state and local gov -
ernment level. A change in Germany’s Basic 
Law is to enable central government to in -
crease grants for local education and transport 
infrastructure as well as for social housing. 
However, with notable surpluses being gener -
ated almost nationwide by subnational govern -
ment levels, state and local governments al -
ready have financial leeway to implement those 
projects considered worthwhile without the 
need for additional central government grants. 
In the past, it has not proven expedient to blur 
the responsibilities of the various government 
levels. It therefore only seems worth consider -
ing increasing central government grants if 
these are for very specific purposes. For in -
stance, in the field of education, grants could 
be used to help encourage authorities to im -
prove their educational outcomes. In this re -
gard, it would seem appropriate to agree on 
comparable benchmarks for the federal states 
and to publish this data on a regular basis. This 
would enable voters to see the strengths and 
weaknesses of each state in a timely manner 
and, where appropriate, to push for improve -
ments in their state. It is also worth considering giving states the right to introduce surcharges 
or discounts on income tax – subject to limits – 
in order to enable individual states to follow 
the preferences of their population, for in -
stance to spend more on education or to pro -
vide fewer services and reduce the level of 
taxes. This would additionally boost the incen -
tives for efficient budget management and in -
crease the instruments available to comply with 
the debt brake.
In addition to funding the planned higher 
transfers to state government, the financial lee -
way calculated in the central government 
budget will chiefly be used for a partial aboli -
tion of the solidarity surcharge as of 2021. In 
legal terms, this add- on to income taxes re -
quires central government to have particular 
financing needs; a situation which can hardly 
be identified for the medium term without new 
burdens. To sum up, there seems to be no 
compelling case for using the remaining parts 
of the solidarity surcharge on balance to effect -
ively provide nationwide support to state and 
local governments for use in their own tasks. 
Once the special assistance for (infrastructure) 
reconstruction in eastern Germany has come to 
an end, it would be more appropriate to do 
away with the solidarity surcharge entirely and 
to adjust the regular income tax scale should 
there be an overall need for additional funds. 
This would ensure that the responsibility for 
tasks lies with state and local governments 
alone and avoid the disadvantages associated 
with mixed financing.
Central government’s off-  budget entities24 re-
corded a deficit of €½ billion at the start of the 
year, compared with a surplus of €½ billion at 
the start of 2017. Expenditure in the amount of 
€1 billion by the precautionary fund for re -
demption payments for inflation- indexed Fed -
eral securities had a negative effect. The fund 
to promote municipal investment, the flood re -If mixed 
 financing is 
expanded, 
strengthen 
 federal states’ 
individual 
responsibilityNo apparent 
need to 
 continue the 
solidarity 
 surcharge
Surplus in off- 
budget entities 
again possible 
for year as a 
whole
24 The off-  budget entities discussed here are those that 
are included in the Federal Ministry of Finance’s quarterly 
data. This notably does not take into account bad banks 
and other entities keeping commercial accounts.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
70

lief fund as well as the energy and climate fund 
(which are included in the central government’s 
debt brake) all again reported only small def -
icits. For the year as a whole, the precautionary 
special funds for civil servants’ pensions are set 
to record clearly positive results. On the whole, 
the off- budget entities could therefore once 
again conclude the year in surplus (2017: €3 
billion).
State government budgets25
At the beginning of the year, state govern -
ment’s core budgets recorded a surplus of €6½ 
billion, exceeding the results from the same 
quarter last year by €1 billion. Overall, revenue 
was up by just over 4% (€4 billion), driven by 
steep growth in tax revenue (+5%). Expend -
iture grew at a slightly slower pace (+3%, or €3 
billion). Spending on personnel rose by 5%. 
Contributory factors were the second adjust -
ment stage of the 2017 collective wage agree -
ment, including rises in civil servant remuner -
ation and pensions, a higher number of retired 
civil servants as well as apparently increased 
staffing levels. Current transfers to local gov -
ernment (+3%) as well as the less significant 
investment (+13½%) also rose. Other operating 
expenditure stagnated, after having fallen dis -
tinctly in most cases in the previous quarters. 
The decline in the associated refugee- related 
expenses is evidently slowing.26 By contrast, 
interest expenditure continued its significant 
downward trend (-10½%).
For the entire year, state government as a 
whole is likely to again record a high surplus. 
This is due to expectations of continued posi -
tive tax development (increase of 4% according 
to the latest tax estimate27) and a further fall in 
interest expenditure. However, this surplus will 
probably be somewhat lower than in 2017, as 
one- off effects (no capital repayment from Bay -
ern LB (€1 billion) and expected further calls on 
guarantees in connection with the privatisation 
of HSH Nordbank28) will take their toll.Under a no- policy- change assumption, sur -
pluses are likely to again be higher in the com -
ing years. The latest tax estimate expects rev -
enue to increase by an annual average of just 
over 4% in the medium term and temporary 
central government funds, such as the flat im -
migrant integration payment of €2 billion per Higher surplus 
in Q1 owing 
to steep tax 
growth
One- off effects 
to lead to lower 
surplus in 
 current year, …… but outlook 
for medium 
term remains 
very favourableState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4202468
–++++
246810121416
2018
20172016Quarterly figures
Cumulated from 
start of year
20162018
2017€ billion
25 The development of local government finances in 2017 
was analysed in greater detail in the short articles in the 
April 2018 Monthly Report. The following data on state 
government budgets are based, unless otherwise stated, 
on the monthly cash statistics on the core budgets.
26 Following the sharp influx of refugees, other operating 
expenditure recorded substantial growth up to the summer 
of 2016. However, this item then declined up to the end of 
2017 (disregarding a one-off effect in North Rhine-  
Westphalia), evidently in connection with a clear fall in ex -
penses for the initial reception of refugees, which was or -
ganised at state government level.
27 Excluding the city states’ revenue from municipal taxes.
28 With the privatisation of HSH Nordbank, in 2018 the 
shareholders –  Hamburg and Schleswig- Holstein  – will 
have extra burdens in their core budgets from guarantees 
in the amount of €3 billion each (classified as a loan pay -
ment in the financial statistics but as a capital transfer (and 
thus affecting the fiscal balance) in the national accounts). 
This is partly offset by revenue from privatisation of €1 bil -
lion (classified as a financial transaction in the national ac -
counts (and thus not affecting the fiscal balance)).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
71

year, are now to be granted beyond 2018. If 
central government implements its new plans, 
this would have a financial impact on state 
government budgets. However, it is still only 
possible to estimate budget effects in part. 
Under the current rules, the planned increases 
in child benefit would push up state govern -
ment contributions to €2 billion in 2022. Even 
if central government provides its envisaged 
contribution, the planned digitalisation of 
schools and, in particular, the implementation 
of the legal entitlement to all- day childcare for 
children of primary school age from 2025 on -
wards could mean that state governments 
need to come up with considerable additional 
funds. All in all, financial scope appears to be 
available overall that could be used for these 
and, if applicable, for further measures, such as 
involvement in an income tax cut. However, it 
is essential to bear in mind that the current sur -
pluses are partly due to the very good eco -
nomic situation.
There are still great differences in the structural 
financial situation of the individual states. 
Bremen and Saarland, in particular, were still 
reporting structural deficits of close to €½ bil -
lion in their consolidation/ restructuring reports 
for 2017. The gap between this and the rele -
vant upper limits (which are to decline grad -
ually up to 2020) was only very small, despite 
the fact that the development of cyclically ad -
justed tax revenue and interest expenditure has 
been very favourable to date. If the booking 
rules from the national accounts concerning 
which financial transactions are to be excluded 
from the calculations are applied strictly, Saar -
land at least would actually fall short of the re -
quirement.29
Overall, despite the favourable outlook, it must 
not be forgotten that the debt brake under 
German Basic Law will apply to all state gov -
ernment budgets from 2020 onwards. Struc -
tural net borrowing will no longer be permit -
ted. Compliance with the European Fiscal Com -
pact will also be mandatory. This limits the 
structural general government deficit to 0.5% of GDP . Unlike the central government’s debt 
rules – and those of most of the federal states – 
which are geared to net borrowing, it is not 
possible to dissolve reserves to meet this limit. 
In this respect, the use of this option in connec -
tion with the debt brake should be restricted, 
at least in those cases where there is a risk that 
the general government requirements may be 
exceeded. The Stability Council is called on to 
conduct targeted budgetary surveillance to en -
sure that the European rules are met. All in all, 
it is advisable for the state governments, too, 
to aim for moderate structural surpluses in their 
medium- term plans as a safety buffer.
Social security funds30
Statutory pension insurance 
scheme
In the first quarter of 2018, the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme recorded a deficit of €1 
billion. The deficit – usual for this time of year – 
thus declined significantly (-€1½ billion) in year- 
on- year terms. Revenue rose substantially by 
4½% despite the 0.1 percentage point lower -
ing of the contribution rate at the beginning of 
the year.31 This was driven by a significant in -
crease in contribution receipts (just over 4½%), 
due to continued very positive developments 
on the labour market and growth in per capita  
earnings. By contrast, expenditure rose at a 
much weaker rate (+2½%). The pension in -
crease of July 2017 amounted to just under 
2½% in Germany as a whole and the number 
of pensions grew slightly.But, further 
 consolidation 
required in some 
states
Rigorously 
implement debt 
brake and Fiscal 
CompactSignificant 
improvement 
in Q1 …
29 For instance, in its 2016 annual report (Landtags-  
Drucksache 16/ 290, p 58), the Court of Auditors of Saar -
land notes that the deficit of Saarland’s State Theatre has 
been offset by a capital injection for years. This practice 
was continued last year and does not appear to be in line 
with the objectives of the deficit limits.
30 The financial development of the public long- term care 
and statutory health insurance schemes in the final quarter 
of 2017 was analysed in the short articles of the March 
2018 Monthly Report. These are the most recent data 
available.
31 Excluding the lowering of the contribution rate, growth 
would have been ½ percentage point higher.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
72

In mid-2018, pensions will be raised by 3.22% 
in the west German states and 3.37% in the 
east German states. Overall, this primarily re -
flects the development of per capita  earnings 
over the past year. Owing to the very favour -
able labour market situation, the number of 
contribution payers also increased at a some -
what faster pace than the number of pension -
ers. This has an additional slightly positive im -
pact on the pension adjustment via the sustain -
ability factor. Taking into account the mid-2017 
increase, on an annual average – at just under 
3% – the overall rise in pensions is significantly 
lower than in the previous year (3½%) when 
the impact of the sharp mid-2016 increase 
could still be felt. Overall, pension expenditure 
is expected to rise at a somewhat weaker rate 
this year (2017: just over 3½%). On the revenue 
side, steep growth is expected to continue over 
the year as a whole. On balance, the financial 
situation of the pension insurance scheme is 
likely to improve markedly and it is set to re -
cord a much higher surplus than in the previ -
ous year.
In the absence of new measures, there would 
have been potential to cut the contribution 
rate further at the beginning of 2019. However, 
the new Federal Government’s projects will up 
spending pressure as early as next year (in par -
ticular, the increase in the “mothers’ pension”, 
but also higher pensions for persons with re -
duced earning capacity and the introduction of 
a “basic pension”).32 This means that the merely 
temporarily favourable financial situation is 
being used to agree to additional burdens that 
further intensify the strain from demographic 
change that is already on the cards. This expan -
sion of benefits in favour of individual groups 
of insured persons will require a higher contri -
bution rate – unless it is financed through add -
itional central government grants. In the cur -
rent legal environment, this, in turn, reduces 
the pension level33 via the annual pension ad -
justments. As a result, there is a greater risk 
that the limits for the contribution rate (max 
20%) and the pension level (min 48%) an -
chored in the coalition agreement until 2025 will not be met in this period without compen -
satory intervention. This would necessitate fur -
ther measures – such as an extension of central 
government funds (which ultimately require … and same 
expected for 
2018 as a whole
Interim peak 
in finances of 
statutory pen -
sion insurance 
scheme cur -
tailed by add -
itional burdensFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). Preliminary quarterly figures. The fi-
nal annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary  quarterly  figures  as  the  latter  are  not  revised  sub-
sequently.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4432101234
––––++++
–5–4–3–2–10Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201820172016
2017
201620182016 2017 20180123456
2016 2017 20180123456Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
32 As of 2019, the pension insurance scheme will come 
under additional pressure of €1½ billion from the planned 
return to full joint financing of the statutory health insur -
ance scheme as it will have to take on half of the individual 
health insurance institutions’ supplementary contribution 
rates for pension recipients.
33 The pension level in the statutory pension insurance 
scheme measures the ratio of the standard pension (given 
average earnings over 45 contribution years) to average 
pay (before tax but less social contributions in both cases). 
The above- mentioned expansion of benefits as well as 
those in the surviving dependents’ pensions and for re -
habilitation purposes are not included in the calculation of 
the pension level.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
73

higher tax rates), a reduction of the benefits 
not included in the pension level or an earlier 
increase in the statutory retirement age.
Federal Employment Agency
In the first quarter of 2018, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency recorded a deficit of €½ billion in 
the core area,34 thus worsening the balance by 
€½ billion on the year. The result was strained 
by a much higher special allocation (just over 
€1 billion) to the civil servants’ pension fund in 
comparison with the previous year.35 Without this effect, the financial situation would have 
improved by €½ billion.
Total revenue increased significantly by 3½%. 
Contributions again rose steeply (by almost 
5%) while the slightly lower insolvency benefit 
contributions at the beginning of the year 
dampened the growth rate somewhat. How -
ever, at 8%, the increase in expenditure was 
considerably higher due to the above-  
mentioned special allocation. By contrast, 
spending on unemployment benefits (-3½%) 
and the active labour market policy (-1½%) 
continued to decline. Without the extra pay -
ments this year and last year, spending would 
actually have fallen slightly.
The favourable developments on the revenue 
side as well as for unemployment benefits are 
set to continue as the year progresses. No not -
able acceleration in active labour market policy 
seems likely so far. Despite higher special trans -
fers to the civil servants’ pension fund (€2 bil -
lion for the year as a whole compared to just 
over €½ billion in 2017), the annual result of 
the Federal Employment Agency’s core budget 
could still continue to improve somewhat 
(2017: surplus of €6 billion). It would then once 
again be well above the budgeted amount 
(€2½ billion), and the free reserves would again 
be topped up by a substantial amount (end-
2017: €17 billion).
Current forecasts expect the very positive de -
velopment on the labour market to continue. If 
no adjustments are made, surpluses will con -
tinue to rise and the free reserves will shoot up. 
The new Federal Government thus intends to 
cut the contribution rate. Given the current 
very positive situation on the labour market 
– in structural terms, too – there is a good case 
for cutting the contribution rate by more than 
the envisaged 0.3 percentage point.Special alloca -
tion to pension 
fund strains 
result in Q1Expenditure on 
unemployment 
benefits and 
active labour 
market policies 
continues to 
decline
For year as a 
whole, surplus 
may be higher 
than last year 
despite strain 
from one- off 
effects
Greater 
 contribution 
rate reduction 
 appropriateFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency *
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year2017
2018
2017
201620162016 2017 2018–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2016 2017 2018963036912
–––++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
34 Federal Employment Agency excluding the pension 
fund, ie the transfers to this fund lower the fiscal balance 
considered here.
35 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public 
finances, Monthly Report, February 2018, p 73.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
74

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
1•

Contents
I Key economic data for the euro area
1 Monetary developments and interest rates  ...................................................................  5 •
2 External transactions and positions  ...............................................................................  5 •
3 General economic indicators  ........................................................................................  6 •
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1 The money stock and its counterparts  ..........................................................................  8 •
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ............................  10 •
3 Banking system’s liquidity position  ................................................................................  14 •
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1 Assets  ...........................................................................................................................  16 •
2 Liabilities  ......................................................................................................................  18 •
IV Banks
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  ..................................................................................................................  20 •
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ...........  24 •
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ...............................  26 •
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  ........................  28 •
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  ......................  30 •
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households,  housing 
loans, sectors of economic activity  ...............................................................................  32 •
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  ......................  34 •
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  ......................................................................................................................  36 •
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group  .........  36 •
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  38 •
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ....... 38 •
12 Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  .........................................................  39 •
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ....................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
2•

V Minimum reserves
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area  ..........................................................................  42 •
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany  .................................................................................  42 •
VI Interest rates
1 ECB interest rates  .........................................................................................................  43 •
2 Base rates  .....................................................................................................................  43 •
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  .................................  43 •
4 Money market rates, by month  ....................................................................................  43 •
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ....................................................................................................  44 •
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
1 Assets  ...........................................................................................................................  48 •
2 Liabilities  ......................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII Capital market
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  ......................................  50 •
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ...................................................................  51 •
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  ..........................................  52 •
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  ........................................................................  52 •
5 Yields and indices on German securities  .......................................................................  53 •
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ................................................  53 •
IX Financial accounts
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ...... 54 •
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  ..........................................  55 •
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  .............................  56 •
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households  .................................................................  57 •
X Public finances in Germany
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty .... 58 •
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  .........................................................................................................  58 •
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial  statistics)   59 •
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development  ......................................  59 •
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue  .........................................................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
3•

6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ....................  60 •
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ....................................................  61 •
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  .......................  61 •
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  ..................................................  62 •
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development .........................................  62 •
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ...........................  63 •
12 Central government: borrowing in the market  ..............................................................  63 •
13 General government: debt by creditor  ..........................................................................  63 •
14 Maastricht debt by category  .........................................................................................  64 •
XI Economic conditions in Germany
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ............................  66 •
2 Output in the production sector  ...................................................................................  67 •
3 Orders received by industry  ..........................................................................................  68 •
4 Orders received by construction  ...................................................................................  69 •
5 Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ................................................................  69 •
6 Labour market  ..............................................................................................................  70 •
7 Prices  ...........................................................................................................................  71 •
8 Households’ income  .....................................................................................................  72 •
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  ........................................................................  72 •
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ............................................  73 •
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  .....................................  74 •
XII External sector
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ............................................  75 •
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............  76 •
3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  ........................................................................................................  77 •
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................  78 •
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................................  78 •
6 Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .....................................................  78 •
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..................................................  79 •
8 External position of the Bundesbank  .............................................................................  80 •
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ...............................................................................................................  81 •
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  ..............................  82 •
11 Euro-area member states and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage  
of European Economic and Monetary Union  ................................................................  82 •
12 Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ............................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
May 2018
I Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1 Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M 3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 Eonia  5,7 Euribor  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % Annual percentage as a monthly average
2016         July 8.7 5.1 5.2 5.1 3.9 1.3 − 2.4 − 0.33 − 0.29 0.6
         Aug 8.6 5.0 5.0 5.1 3.9 1.6 − 2.3 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.5         Sep 8.3 5.0 5.0 4.8 4.0 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.34 − 0.30 0.6
         Oct 8.0 4.6 4.5 4.7 4.3 2.2 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.31 0.7
         Nov 8.5 4.8 4.7 4.7 4.4 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.35 − 0.31 1.0         Dec 8.8 4.8 5.0 4.8 4.7 2.4 − 1.6 − 0.35 − 0.32 1.0
2017         Jan 8.4 4.6 4.7 4.8 4.5 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb 8.3 4.7 4.6 4.8 4.3 2.3 − 1.0 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2         Mar 9.0 5.0 5.1 4.8 4.8 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.35 − 0.33 1.2
         Apr 9.1 5.0 4.8 4.9 4.5 2.6 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         May 9.2 5.1 4.9 4.8 4.3 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 9.6 5.2 4.9 4.8 4.1 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         July 9.2 5.0 4.5 4.8 3.8 2.6 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2
         Aug 9.6 5.4 5.0 4.9 3.8 2.3 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0         Sep 9.8 5.4 5.2 5.1 3.9 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         Oct 9.5 5.4 5.0 5.0 3.8 2.5 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Nov 9.2 5.3 4.9 4.8 3.9 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.35 − 0.33 0.9         Dec 8.8 5.1 4.6 4.7 3.6 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.34 − 0.33 0.9
2018         Jan 8.8 5.3 4.6 4.5 3.5 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb 8.4 4.9 4.2 4.2 3.3 2.6 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2         Mar 7.5 4.4 3.7 ... 2.7 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.37 − 0.33 1.0
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, OverNight Index Average. 6 Euro Interbank Offered Rate. 7 See also footnotes to
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by Table VI.4, p 43  .8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro-area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro-area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2 External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro-area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 1 EUR = ... USD
2016         July + 36,591 + 33,851 + 18,917 + 14,599 + 44,375 + 13,286 − 52,402 − 941 1.1069 94.6 89.8
         Aug + 26,955 + 25,238 + 40,489 + 37,483 + 57,106 + 6,526 − 62,598 + 1,973 1.1212 94.9 90.0         Sep + 38,079 + 33,606 + 50,627 + 60,951 + 28,222 + 4,190 − 49,481 + 6,745 1.1212 95.1 90.1
         Oct + 34,507 + 28,476 + 9,615 + 23,846 + 38,372 + 5,447 − 54,100 − 3,950 1.1026 95.1 90.3
         Nov + 39,284 + 34,333 + 14,421 + 11,880 − 30,097 + 2,207 + 27,886 + 2,545 1.0799 94.6 89.6         Dec + 47,674 + 33,186 + 98,106 + 30,366 + 53,214 + 7,094 + 1,385 + 6,046 1.0543 93.7 88.9
2017         Jan − 2,071 + 7,068 − 5,926 − 29,596 + 18,304 + 7,003 + 3,406 − 5,043 1.0614 93.9 89.1
         Feb + 19,437 + 18,911 + 15,368 + 10,879 + 76,200 + 7,481 − 81,236 + 2,044 1.0643 93.4 88.9         Mar + 45,244 + 37,942 + 36,962 + 8,569 + 2,597 + 8,971 + 16,107 + 719 1.0685 94.0 89.2
         Apr + 19,559 + 24,853 + 14,776 + 24,754 + 15,081 + 2,698 − 23,614 − 4,142 1.0723 93.7 89.0
         May + 15,199 + 29,746 + 11,552 + 20,157 − 19,706 + 4,038 + 5,931 + 1,132 1.1058 95.6 90.5         June + 28,681 + 34,446 + 50,556 − 27,988 + 26,068 − 7,284 + 58,196 + 1,565 1.1229 96.3 91.2
         July + 42,908 + 32,530 + 41,389 − 1,881 + 25,288 − 2,814 + 25,990 − 5,194 1.1511 97.6 92.4
         Aug + 38,920 + 25,696 + 6,159 − 14,376 + 70,842 − 5,623 − 44,002 − 682 1.1807 99.0 93.6         Sep + 46,467 + 34,892 + 79,315 + 9,488 + 38,296 − 1,884 + 26,995 + 6,420 1.1915 99.0 93.6
         Oct + 40,289 + 30,493 + 47,797 + 32,169 + 53,761 + 323 − 35,764 − 2,692 1.1756 98.6 93.1
         Nov + 42,680 + 36,523 + 42,381 + 5,081 + 8,434 + 2,565 + 20,120 + 6,182 1.1738 98.5 93.0         Dec + 50,244 + 32,210 + 88,817 + 13,583 + 13,028 + 3,099 + 60,730 − 1,624 1.1836 98.8 93.3
2018         Jan + 12,598 + 9,807 + 14,940 + 26,199 + 21,196 + 641 − 35,378 + 2,282 1.2200 99.4 p 93.9
         Feb + 22,735 + 23,886 + 14,586 + 4,860 + 42,301 + 3 − 32,457 − 121 1.2348 99.6 p 93.9         Mar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2336 99.7 p 94.1
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2276 99.5 p 93.8
*  Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments XII.10 and 12, pp
82−83   .2  Including employee stock options. 3  Vis-à-vis the
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 1  See also Tables currencies of the EER-19 group. 4  Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2018
I  Key economic data for the euro area 
 
3  General economic indicators
  
                   
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2015 2.1 1.4 1.7 1.7 0.1 1.1 − 0.3 25.6 1.0 3.02016 1.8 1.4 1.9 2.1 2.1 1.2 − 0.2 5.1 0.9 2.22017 2.4 1.7 2.2 4.9 2.6 1.8 1.3 7.8 1.5 4.6
2016         Q4 1.9 1.4 1.3 3.1 2.2 1.0 − 1.3 9.9 0.7 3.0
2017         Q1 2.1 1.8 3.4 4.4 3.9 1.6 0.7 5.3 2.0 4.1
         Q2 2.4 1.5 1.0 5.7 2.6 1.2 1.4 6.3 1.2 4.0         Q3 2.7 1.6 2.2 4.2 2.0 2.1 1.4 10.9 1.5 5.8         Q4 2.8 2.0 2.3 5.0 2.2 2.5 1.8 8.4 1.3 4.2
2018         Q1 2.5 ... 1.6 ... ... 1.9 ... ... ... ...
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
2015 2.6 − 1.2 0.9 0.1 − 1.1 1.6 1.0 35.9 1.1 3.42016 1.6 4.6 1.1 2.6 3.9 0.3 2.6 1.8 1.9 4.92017 3.0 3.0 3.4 8.0 4.2 2.4 4.8 − 2.2 3.6 8.5
2016         Q4 3.2 5.3 1.5 9.0 5.2 0.9 3.9 13.4 3.9 9.7
2017         Q1 1.2 1.4 1.0 10.8 5.7 1.0 9.9 − 6.5 2.2 8.6
         Q2 2.5 4.2 3.1 12.4 3.2 1.7 3.4 − 6.5 3.8 9.2         Q3 4.1 4.7 4.3 4.3 2.8 3.1 4.5 3.3 4.6 11.4         Q4 4.1 1.8 5.0 4.9 5.1 3.9 1.9 0.6 4.0 4.9
2018         Q1
e 3.1 ... p 3.8 6.1 5.4 2.2 − 0.5 p − 2.0 3.5 4.5
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
2015 81.3 79.7 84.5 71.4 79.2 82.7 66.2 − 75.5 71.52016 81.7 80.0 84.5 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 − 76.3 72.62017 83.1 81.8 86.5 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 − 76.8 74.5
2017         Q1 82.4 80.7 85.4 74.4 81.0 84.6 68.6 − 76.5 74.5
         Q2 82.5 81.4 85.8 76.4 82.1 84.3 68.1 − 76.0 74.8         Q3 83.2 82.0 86.5 73.9 82.6 84.7 72.0 − 77.0 74.5         Q4 84.2 82.9 88.2 74.8 83.6 85.2 71.2 − 77.6 74.2
2018         Q1 84.7 82.1 88.5 75.5 83.1 86.2 70.4 − 78.3 75.8
         Q2 84.4 81.2 88.0 73.9 84.3 85.8 71.2 − 78.1 76.3
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
2015 10.9 8.5 4.6 6.2 9.4 10.4 24.9 10.0 11.9 9.92016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 8.4 11.7 9.62017 9.1 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.4 21.5 6.7 11.2 8.7
2017         Nov 8.7 6.3 3.5 5.6 8.4 9.0 21.1 6.4 11.1 8.3
         Dec 8.6 6.2 3.6 5.7 8.4 9.0 20.8 6.3 11.0 8.2
2018         Jan 8.6 6.3 3.5 6.5 8.3 9.0 20.7 6.2 11.2 8.3
         Feb 8.5 6.4 3.5 6.5 8.3 8.9 20.8 6.1 11.0 8.0         Mar 8.5 6.4 3.4 ... 8.2 8.8 ... 6.0 11.0 7.9
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.9 ... ...
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
2015 6 0.0 0.6 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 0.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.12017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2017         Nov 1.5 2.1 1.8 4.5 0.9 1.2 1.1 0.5 1.1 2.7
         Dec 1.4 2.1 1.6 3.8 0.5 1.2 1.0 0.5 1.0 2.2
2018         Jan 1.3 1.8 1.4 3.6 0.8 1.5 0.2 0.3 1.2 2.0
         Feb 1.1 1.5 1.2 3.2 0.6 1.3 0.4 0.7 0.5 1.8         Mar 1.3 1.5 1.5 2.9 0.9 1.7 0.2 0.5 0.9 2.3
         Apr 1.2 1.6 1.4 2.9 0.8 1.8 0.5 − 0.1 0.6 2.1
 
General government financial balance 7
 
2015 − 2.0 − 2.5 0.6 0.1 − 2.8 − 3.6 − 5.7 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 1.42016 − 1.5 − 2.5 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 3.4 0.6 − 0.5 − 2.5 0.12017 − 0.9 − 1.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 2.6 0.8 − 0.3 − 2.3 − 0.5
 
General government debt 7
 
2015 89.9 106.1 71.0 10.0 63.5 95.6 176.8 76.9 131.5 36.82016 89.0 105.9 68.2 9.4 63.0 96.6 180.8 72.8 132.0 40.52017 86.7 103.1 64.1 9.0 61.4 97.0 178.6 68.0 131.8 40.1
Sources: National data, European Commission, Eurostat, European Central Bank. 4  Manufacturing, in %; seasonally adjusted; data are collected in January, April, July
Latest data are partly based on press reports and are provisional. 1  Annual and October. 5  As a percentage of the civilian labour force;
percentage change. 2  GDP of the euro area calculated from seasonally adjusted seasonally adjusted. Standardised unemployment rate of Germany:
data. 3  Manufacturing, mining and energy; adjusted for working-day variations. Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted data from the Federal Statis tical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2018
I  Key economic data for the euro area  
    
                   
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus   Period
 
Real gross domestic product 1,2
 
2.0 2.9 9.9 2.3 1.1 1.8 3.9 2.3 3.4 2.0 20152.3 3.1 5.5 2.2 1.4 1.6 3.3 3.1 3.3 3.4 20163.8 2.3 6.6 3.2 2.9 2.7 3.4 5.0 3.0 3.9 2017
3.6 4.3 5.7 2.4 1.1 2.0 3.2 3.5 2.5 3.9 2016          Q4
4.2 3.1 6.8 3.3 3.1 3.2 3.0 5.0 2.8 3.8 2017          Q1
4.1 1.5 7.6 3.4 2.6 2.7 3.7 4.5 3.4 4.0          Q23.2 3.0 7.6 3.0 3.0 2.5 3.4 4.5 2.9 3.8          Q34.0 1.7 4.3 2.9 3.1 2.3 3.5 6.0 3.0 3.9          Q4
3.6 ... ... 2.8 3.1 ... 3.6 ... ... ... 2018          Q1
 
Industrial production 1,3
 
4.2 1.2 6.3 − 3.3 2.2 2.1 6.0 5.1 3.4 5.0 20152.8 0.5 − 4.7 2.2 2.8 2.4 3.8 7.8 1.7 9.1 20166.8 2.5 4.1 2.0 4.6 3.5 3.1 8.5 3.3 7.5 2017
2.9 0.6 − 2.5 5.5 4.5 1.6 2.8 9.3 1.8 8.5 2016          Q4
5.1 − 1.3 6.8 2.3 2.1 3.5 5.3 6.6 1.9 8.2 2017          Q1
6.2 1.0 3.5 1.4 4.0 2.7 0.4 7.7 2.7 4.7          Q28.7 5.2 5.3 2.2 6.3 5.6 2.9 8.7 3.1 7.1          Q37.0 5.1 0.9 2.1 5.8 2.4 3.7 11.1 5.3 9.9          Q4
6.4 5.5
p − 4.2 p 3.1 ... 1.7 0.2 p 8.3 3.0 ... 2018          Q1
 
Capacity utilisation in industry 4
 
74.2 68.3 78.6 81.8 84.0 80.4 82.4 83.6 77.8 58.2 201575.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 201677.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 2017
76.5 82.6 79.3 81.4 85.1 79.8 87.1 84.5 78.8 58.1 2017          Q1
77.4 82.1 79.1 82.5 86.6 79.1 86.5 85.4 78.1 57.6          Q277.6 80.1 80.0 83.1 86.9 80.9 84.4 85.1 78.7 61.5          Q377.4 81.1 82.8 83.1 88.0 81.7 83.0 85.2 79.1 59.1          Q4
77.8 83.1 81.1 83.9 88.8 81.6 83.7 85.0 79.7 60.4 2018          Q1
77.5 82.0 77.6 83.6 88.7 81.4 86.3 86.0 80.3 60.9          Q2
 
Standardised unemployment rate 5
 
9.1 6.5 5.4 6.9 5.7 12.6 11.5 9.0 22.1 15.0 20157.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.0 19.6 13.0 20167.1 5.6 4.0 4.9 5.5 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.2 11.1 2017
6.7 5.4 3.8 4.4 5.4 8.1 7.7 5.7 16.6 10.4 2017          Nov 
6.8 5.4 3.8 4.4 5.4 7.9 7.6 5.6 16.5 10.5          Dec 
7.3 5.3 3.6 4.2 5.2 7.9 7.6 5.4 16.4 9.9 2018          Jan 
7.3 5.4 3.5 4.1 5.0 7.6 7.5 5.3 16.2 9.5          Feb 7.5 5.4 3.3 3.9 5.0 7.4 7.5 5.2 16.1 9.1          Mar 
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Apr 
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 1
 
− 0.7 0.1 1.2 0.2 0.8 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 1.5 2015
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 20163.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 2017
4.2 2.0 1.5 1.5 2.4 1.8 2.1 1.4 1.8 0.2 2017          Nov 
3.8 1.6 1.3 1.2 2.3 1.6 2.0 1.9 1.2 − 0.4          Dec 
3.6 1.3 1.2 1.5 1.9 1.1 2.6 1.7 0.7 − 1.5 2018          Jan 
3.2 1.1 1.3 1.3 1.9 0.7 2.2 1.4 1.2 − 0.4          Feb 2.5 1.1 1.3 1.0 2.0 0.8 2.5 1.5 1.3 − 0.4          Mar 
2.2 1.3 1.8 0.7 1.9 0.3 3.0 1.9 1.1 − 0.3          Apr 
 
General government financial balance 7
 
− 0.2 1.4 − 1.1 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.9 − 5.3 − 1.3 2015
0.3 1.6 1.0 0.4 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.3 20160.5 1.5 3.9 1.1 − 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 0.0 − 3.1 1.8 2017
 
General government debt 7
 
42.6 22.0 58.7 64.6 84.6 128.8 52.3 82.6 99.4 107.5 201540.1 20.8 56.2 61.8 83.6 129.9 51.8 78.6 99.0 106.6 201639.7 23.0 50.8 56.7 78.4 125.7 50.9 73.6 98.3 97.5 2017
6  Including Lithuania from 2015 onwards. 7  As a percentage of GDP (Maastricht procedure (Eurostat). Germany: current data according to the Federal Statistical
Treaty definition). Euro area: European Central Bank, regularly updated. Member Office and Bundesbank calculations. states excluding Germany: latest data publication under the excessive deficit

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
May 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1 The money stock and its counterparts *(a) Euro area 
 
 
€ billion
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2016         Aug 17.3 16.9 27.1 0.4 9.0 − 39.6 7.9 47.5 2.0 − 4.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 7.9
         Sep 41.8 26.6 − 7.3 15.2 19.4 − 17.0 − 69.0 − 52.0 − 22.8 − 12.2 − 0.5 − 19.6 9.4
         Oct 84.9 37.3 5.6 47.6 45.1 − 45.5 153.8 199.3 4.7 − 5.6 − 0.6 − 2.6 13.5
         Nov 105.8 55.8 16.1 50.0 61.9 7.4 − 21.3 − 28.7 0.3 − 7.9 − 0.8 − 1.1 10.1         Dec − 57.7 − 50.3 − 8.3 − 7.3 − 0.6 36.3 − 154.3 − 190.6 − 12.3 0.7 − 1.0 − 13.7 1.8
2017         Jan 131.5 43.9 31.3 87.6 69.7 − 12.9 233.5 246.4 − 14.1 − 10.0 − 0.2 − 3.7 − 0.2
         Feb 46.0 30.8 4.0 15.2 35.3 − 45.9 53.1 99.0 13.6 − 6.0 − 0.5 − 3.3 23.3         Mar 151.5 92.7 25.3 58.8 62.6 − 8.8 − 51.7 − 43.0 − 13.9 1.6 − 0.5 − 22.2 7.2
         Apr 54.8 24.7 20.2 30.1 27.6 − 39.0 77.8 116.9 − 22.6 − 12.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 9.0
         May 48.4 23.8 16.3 24.6 35.1 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.7 15.7 − 7.7 − 2.4 16.6 9.2         June 24.1 29.4 0.4 − 5.3 − 5.3 58.5 − 108.2 − 166.6 − 4.5 − 13.6 − 0.1 − 6.7 15.9
         July 7.2 0.1 15.3 7.0 9.4 6.4 105.2 98.8 − 5.6 − 7.8 − 0.9 − 1.5 4.6
         Aug 11.9 − 20.5 − 15.0 32.4 38.4 − 27.9 − 2.5 25.4 6.3 − 5.9 − 0.8 − 2.7 15.8         Sep 55.1 43.4 − 13.8 11.7 17.1 6.5 − 35.1 − 41.7 − 23.9 − 12.0 − 0.9 − 30.6 19.6
         Oct 64.8 53.1 − 9.4 11.7 11.4 − 71.1 88.4 159.5 − 31.1 − 27.2 − 0.6 − 7.9 4.6
         Nov 127.1 98.7 22.1 28.4 34.7 18.6 − 1.0 − 19.6 3.5 4.5 − 0.8 − 2.5 2.3         Dec − 106.8 − 88.4 − 8.7 − 18.4 − 8.8 15.6 − 153.1 − 168.8 − 5.6 11.5 − 0.6 − 5.7 − 10.8
2018         Jan 120.5 79.5 22.4 41.0 27.8 − 43.8 152.9 196.7 9.7 − 9.0 − 0.1 20.4 − 1.5
         Feb 7.4 3.3 3.4 4.1 20.2 − 10.9 47.0 57.9 − 18.1 0.4 − 0.5 − 12.6 − 5.4         Mar 64.6 58.7 0.2 5.9 8.2 78.1 − 64.9 − 143.0 13.2 − 6.9 − 0.4 1.3 19.2
  
  
(b) German contribution
 
I Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II Net claims on III Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro-area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro- maturity notice of of over Capital
of which of which euro-area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2016         Aug 11.1 8.9 1.5 2.2 4.0 − 16.5 2.5 19.0 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.8 3.9 0.6
         Sep 24.6 13.2 3.4 11.4 12.6 − 37.2 − 11.1 26.1 − 7.2 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 6.2 0.9
         Oct 21.5 11.8 2.6 9.6 6.5 − 3.2 42.4 45.7 7.1 2.2 − 0.8 5.8 − 0.2
         Nov 28.1 18.4 4.4 9.7 14.4 − 22.4 − 25.7 − 3.3 9.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 9.6 0.8         Dec − 10.1 − 8.1 0.4 − 2.1 8.4 19.6 − 9.5 − 29.1 − 2.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 2.9 2.7
2017         Jan 23.6 15.0 2.3 8.6 8.5 − 24.4 31.8 56.2 9.8 − 3.1 − 0.7 15.9 − 2.3
         Feb 17.3 12.5 3.9 4.9 5.5 − 30.2 7.5 37.8 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.8         Mar 18.2 12.7 1.8 5.5 9.5 − 3.6 6.3 9.9 2.7 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 1.3 5.5
         Apr 14.9 7.8 − 1.5 7.1 5.4 − 19.0 − 7.3 11.6 9.3 − 3.5 − 0.5 1.3 11.9
         May 13.8 13.3 3.5 0.6 7.9 7.1 − 13.0 − 20.1 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 1.8 1.4         June 11.8 11.5 6.2 0.4 2.6 22.7 16.2 − 6.4 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.4 2.8 5.6
         July 18.1 12.8 1.8 5.3 3.5 − 10.3 − 23.0 − 12.7 − 4.0 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.5
         Aug 13.6 10.2 − 0.6 3.4 8.3 14.7 − 13.8 − 28.5 4.5 0.1 − 0.8 3.5 1.7         Sep 17.8 14.1 − 1.8 3.7 8.0 − 22.3 9.2 31.5 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.3 2.3
         Oct 15.9 8.6 0.4 7.3 6.5 6.1 − 11.4 − 17.5 − 11.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 9.5 − 0.1
         Nov 27.2 16.7 6.4 10.5 11.2 23.1 − 2.6 − 25.7 2.6 3.3 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.1         Dec − 5.4 − 3.5 4.3 − 1.8 1.0 − 48.9 − 8.1 40.8 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 1.9 5.3
2018         Jan 19.1 21.3 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.3 10.1 28.1 18.0 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 14.2 − 5.6
         Feb 5.1 10.7 − 1.7 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 20.7 11.6 32.4 − 5.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 2.9         Mar 7.2 9.6 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 0.6 8.2 − 5.1 − 13.3 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 4.0 2.1
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, p
30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
May 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
(a) Euro area 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 54.7 41.3 − − 10.9 − 8.9 − 5.1 − 3.5 − 1.6 − 4.5 0.7 2.4 0.6 − 2.5 2016          Aug 
2.7 42.6 − 2.4 18.3 23.7 2.2 21.5 1.4 − 6.7 − 4.8 − 1.8 − 5.9          Sep 
− 3.0 7.0 − 30.7 14.4 50.2 3.2 47.0 − 29.6 − 6.2 − 16.9 18.0 2.1          Oct 
5.1 20.4 − 87.4 82.7 95.0 1.2 93.7 − 10.3 − 1.9 − 2.2 7.0 1.2          Nov 
− 48.3 − 12.4 − 51.6 72.1 89.8 16.1 73.7 − 24.1 6.4 4.4 − 6.0 − 7.3          Dec 
62.7 41.7 − 28.3 6.7 − 6.5 − 11.9 5.5 3.5 9.7 − 17.4 11.6 − 0.9 2017          Jan 
− 17.4 − 25.9 − 29.8 30.9 31.3 3.0 28.3 − 2.0 1.6 − 8.6 − 4.2 6.5          Feb 
24.2 25.6 − 106.8 92.4 92.8 4.3 88.5 − 5.6 5.2 14.8 12.0 − 0.6          Mar 
− 5.4 − 9.2 − 53.0 72.3 101.8 6.8 95.1 − 31.2 1.7 − 5.9 − 4.3 − 16.8          Apr 
13.4 − 12.9 − 31.9 30.2 42.0 0.5 41.6 − 20.9 9.1 − 11.7 − 4.7 5.1          May20.4 21.9 − 44.8 74.0 82.1 9.5 72.6 − 10.5 2.3 − 16.6 − 20.6 − 0.2          June
− 7.7 − 17.2 − 44.1 31.7 36.0 5.7 30.4 − 6.2 1.8 − 24.1 13.6 − 3.1          July
− 18.3 − 59.8 − 55.8 45.9 31.3 − 2.0 33.3 8.1 6.4 2.6 9.1 − 5.5          Aug 
41.2 24.0 − 20.3 23.3 47.6 0.6 47.0 − 21.3 − 3.0 7.0 − 4.1 10.3          Sep 
− 43.5 54.6 − 13.7 13.3 23.6 2.9 20.7 − 7.6 − 2.8 19.8 8.9 − 10.6          Oct 
− 8.8 72.6 − 78.4 73.1 81.7 0.9 80.8 − 7.7 − 0.9 17.2 − 3.8 1.2          Nov − 21.5 − 85.1 − 20.9 62.5 65.1 16.1 49.1 − 6.7 4.1 − 31.6 − 26.5 − 7.2          Dec 
41.3 21.7 − 4.0 − 2.4 − 19.8 − 15.2 − 4.6 5.6 11.7 − 7.5 19.0 − 15.7 2018          Jan 
13.5 9.9 − − 8.9 − 9.3 5.0 0.3 4.7 − 17.1 2.8 − 4.8 − 11.1 8.2          Feb 13.9 48.6 − 67.0 64.7 60.4 8.7 51.7 − 2.2 6.5 7.7 − 3.4 9.3          Mar 
 
 
 (b) German contribution 
 
V Other factors VI Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10 
of which Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
8.8 − 22.3 2.3 − 0.8 6.2 11.3 − 1.6 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.4 2016          Aug 
8.6 − 21.2 4.7 − 0.6 7.2 3.0 5.5 − 0.6 − 0.3 0.0 − 0.5          Sep 
− 8.8 18.6 3.2 − 0.5 1.4 12.0 − 10.2 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.8          Oct 
6.9 − 48.2 1.9 0.3 37.8 36.2 3.3 0.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 1.7          Nov 
− 13.6 30.4 3.3 2.4 − 4.8 − 4.9 − 1.5 2.7 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1          Dec 
− 12.6 − 27.2 1.1 − 2.7 29.2 16.9 8.9 0.7 2.6 − 0.1 0.2 2017          Jan 
− 4.2 − 18.9 1.7 1.2 11.6 13.6 − 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 0.0          Feb 
14.2 − 2.7 1.8 1.1 0.5 2.4 3.5 − 1.4 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.0          Mar 
− 6.7 − 8.9 3.3 1.6 2.3 10.3 − 7.1 − 0.0 0.9 − 0.0 − 1.8          Apr 
7.7 − 8.7 2.9 − 0.7 19.2 18.3 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 0.8          May7.1 0.7 4.7 0.9 20.7 20.6 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.1 0.6          June
2.5 14.8 2.1 2.1 − 5.6 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.4 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6          July
7.4 5.1 3.7 − 1.3 11.2 14.7 − 2.9 − 0.3 0.1 0.2 − 0.5          Aug 9.6 − 14.2 3.5 − 0.3 5.9 5.6 0.8 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 0.3          Sep 
− 14.2 43.1 2.1 0.8 4.5 14.3 − 9.3 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5          Oct 
6.2 8.7 1.2 − 0.0 32.7 33.8 − 1.7 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.2          Nov 
10.0 − 58.0 3.8 2.0 − 8.8 − 10.1 0.4 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.8          Dec 
− 24.3 35.5 − 0.0 − 2.8 13.1 11.5 2.4 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 2018          Jan 
9.2 − 21.2 2.0 − 0.3 1.7 5.2 − 4.4 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 0.7          Feb 8.3 0.7 6.9 − 1.5 3.4 − 0.5 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.9 0.2 − 0.8          Mar 
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro-area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
May 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
AssetsLending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro-area Otheryear/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  
2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2016         Feb 26,749.7 16,774.6 12,771.6 10,700.6 1,313.1 757.8 4,003.0 1,118.6 2,884.4 5,228.2 4,746.9
         Mar 26,407.2 16,825.5 12,776.4 10,709.9 1,312.1 754.4 4,049.1 1,117.9 2,931.3 5,030.7 4,551.1
         Apr 26,557.8 16,909.0 12,815.8 10,721.4 1,325.7 768.7 4,093.2 1,127.9 2,965.3 5,173.9 4,474.8
         May 26,807.3 16,993.9 12,842.6 10,733.4 1,341.4 767.8 4,151.4 1,121.7 3,029.6 5,270.0 4,543.4         June 27,073.1 17,041.4 12,829.3 10,732.4 1,344.2 752.7 4,212.1 1,110.6 3,101.4 5,278.2 4,753.5
         July 27,135.2 17,093.7 12,852.6 10,737.7 1,359.7 755.3 4,241.1 1,111.6 3,129.5 5,326.7 4,714.8
         Aug 27,038.0 17,105.7 12,866.5 10,723.2 1,365.1 778.2 4,239.1 1,102.9 3,136.2 5,321.4 4,610.8         Sep 26,973.5 17,147.5 12,892.6 10,756.8 1,359.3 776.5 4,255.0 1,098.8 3,156.2 5,266.4 4,559.5
         Oct 27,051.8 17,202.6 12,923.2 10,785.2 1,363.1 775.0 4,279.4 1,101.0 3,178.4 5,422.4 4,426.7
         Nov 27,160.7 17,295.1 12,983.5 10,830.2 1,383.3 770.0 4,311.6 1,088.9 3,222.7 5,451.6 4,414.0         Dec 26,716.3 17,273.4 12,964.2 10,810.8 1,372.2 781.2 4,309.2 1,079.4 3,229.7 5,208.1 4,234.9
2017         Jan 26,797.3 17,356.6 12,995.7 10,815.8 1,393.4 786.4 4,360.9 1,097.4 3,263.6 5,377.4 4,063.4
         Feb 27,059.3 17,417.6 13,033.6 10,846.1 1,398.4 789.0 4,384.1 1,076.2 3,307.8 5,497.8 4,143.9         Mar 27,011.4 17,549.9 13,115.9 10,902.3 1,423.7 789.9 4,434.0 1,072.8 3,361.2 5,418.0 4,043.5
         Apr 27,100.4 17,595.0 13,130.7 10,897.8 1,429.8 803.0 4,464.3 1,075.4 3,388.9 5,450.3 4,055.1
         May 27,016.5 17,632.5 13,145.4 10,895.9 1,451.1 798.3 4,487.1 1,062.4 3,424.7 5,360.7 4,023.3         June 26,697.1 17,611.1 13,132.8 10,895.2 1,441.3 796.3 4,478.3 1,063.0 3,415.2 5,195.9 3,890.1
         July 26,650.2 17,604.1 13,118.8 10,866.0 1,460.1 792.6 4,485.3 1,060.3 3,425.1 5,228.0 3,818.1
         Aug 26,683.3 17,610.3 13,087.2 10,853.1 1,444.2 789.9 4,523.2 1,054.5 3,468.6 5,198.8 3,874.1         Sep 26,561.5 17,655.1 13,130.0 10,905.6 1,433.2 791.2 4,525.1 1,045.9 3,479.2 5,170.9 3,735.5
         Oct 26,761.0 17,733.1 13,189.5 10,968.4 1,422.8 798.3 4,543.6 1,046.1 3,497.5 5,292.8 3,735.2
         Nov 26,791.1 17,846.3 13,272.2 11,037.6 1,430.8 803.8 4,574.1 1,038.2 3,535.9 5,247.3 3,697.5         Dec 26,329.9 17,711.7 13,170.9 10,946.5 1,425.5 798.9 4,540.8 1,028.5 3,512.3 5,064.7 3,553.5
2018         Jan 26,334.7 17,819.2 13,241.2 10,994.5 1,445.1 801.5 4,578.0 1,041.1 3,536.9 5,252.8 3,262.7
         Feb 26,301.2 17,824.5 13,243.5 10,996.8 1,456.6 790.1 4,581.1 1,024.8 3,556.3 5,342.4 3,134.3         Mar 26,293.6 17,881.1 13,280.6 11,034.6 1,466.1 780.0 4,600.5 1,022.4 3,578.1 5,257.6 3,154.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2016         Feb 6,155.3 3,874.9 3,014.0 2,607.0 151.1 255.9 860.9 362.0 498.9 1,209.7 1,070.8
         Mar 6,060.6 3,885.5 3,015.6 2,607.8 151.8 256.0 869.9 361.6 508.3 1,163.7 1,011.4
         Apr 6,050.2 3,908.3 3,026.3 2,617.8 152.2 256.3 882.1 366.1 515.9 1,181.7 960.2
         May 6,091.2 3,934.7 3,043.0 2,629.7 153.3 260.0 891.7 362.8 528.9 1,187.1 969.4         June 6,221.2 3,939.7 3,042.5 2,629.1 152.9 260.5 897.2 357.3 540.0 1,221.3 1,060.1
         July 6,245.6 3,968.5 3,054.3 2,639.3 155.3 259.7 914.2 360.3 553.8 1,228.3 1,048.8
         Aug 6,218.9 3,977.8 3,062.7 2,646.2 155.3 261.2 915.1 358.5 556.6 1,226.9 1,014.2         Sep 6,202.1 4,001.8 3,075.1 2,655.3 157.6 262.1 926.8 357.2 569.5 1,215.0 985.4
         Oct 6,208.1 4,019.0 3,087.3 2,664.9 161.9 260.5 931.7 360.3 571.4 1,260.2 928.9
         Nov 6,186.1 4,046.1 3,107.1 2,680.4 165.0 261.7 939.0 355.5 583.5 1,243.2 896.8         Dec 6,131.1 4,037.0 3,099.2 2,671.7 164.0 263.6 937.8 345.2 592.6 1,234.7 859.4
2017         Jan 6,131.6 4,054.1 3,112.0 2,682.7 165.0 264.3 942.1 345.2 596.8 1,260.2 817.4
         Feb 6,196.5 4,075.7 3,124.9 2,691.3 168.1 265.5 950.8 344.6 606.2 1,281.9 839.0         Mar 6,176.3 4,089.6 3,136.8 2,701.2 169.6 266.0 952.8 340.6 612.3 1,281.0 805.7
         Apr 6,174.4 4,103.1 3,143.3 2,709.1 170.4 263.9 959.8 342.3 617.5 1,264.2 807.1
         May 6,160.2 4,114.5 3,157.3 2,719.6 172.6 265.0 957.2 332.2 624.9 1,234.6 811.2         June 6,106.3 4,120.6 3,165.9 2,722.5 173.2 270.2 954.7 330.8 623.9 1,238.6 747.1
         July 6,069.0 4,135.9 3,176.7 2,731.5 175.2 269.9 959.2 332.6 626.7 1,201.4 731.7
         Aug 6,084.5 4,152.3 3,186.3 2,741.6 174.3 270.3 966.1 327.8 638.3 1,185.1 747.2         Sep 6,076.7 4,167.7 3,200.9 2,757.6 174.3 269.1 966.8 323.2 643.6 1,194.6 714.3
         Oct 6,082.0 4,185.9 3,210.4 2,766.1 174.6 269.8 975.4 324.0 651.4 1,188.5 707.7
         Nov 6,088.7 4,211.0 3,227.4 2,777.0 178.7 271.6 983.6 321.5 662.1 1,177.2 700.5         Dec 6,051.1 4,202.2 3,222.8 2,768.6 180.4 273.8 979.4 318.5 660.9 1,163.4 685.4
2018         Jan 6,074.8 4,214.9 3,242.3 2,786.5 181.6 274.2 972.5 317.0 655.6 1,176.4 683.5
         Feb 6,051.9 4,220.1 3,253.3 2,799.4 183.1 270.8 966.8 311.4 655.4 1,195.1 636.8         Mar 6,053.6 4,228.1 3,260.9 2,809.5 183.1 268.4 967.2 309.7 657.5 1,184.4 641.1
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p
12  )
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
May 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,038.9 11,621.1 10,871.9 10,976.1 5,385.2 967.8 340.6 2,085.3 2,124.1 73.1 2016          Feb 
1,042.5 11,686.5 10,916.7 11,007.2 5,418.9 973.3 339.8 2,076.3 2,126.7 72.3          Mar 
1,047.1 11,715.7 10,978.1 11,072.9 5,504.4 963.0 337.5 2,071.0 2,126.5 70.5          Apr 
1,049.3 11,766.9 11,005.9 11,092.6 5,545.2 945.2 331.9 2,066.3 2,134.0 70.0          May1,057.7 11,829.3 11,001.4 11,089.4 5,565.3 944.9 330.2 2,046.5 2,133.1 69.3          June
1,067.8 11,849.6 11,053.7 11,133.7 5,615.1 952.1 325.6 2,039.3 2,132.9 68.8          July
1,064.3 11,783.5 11,037.8 11,120.8 5,611.4 952.6 320.7 2,034.0 2,134.1 68.1          Aug 1,066.5 11,788.9 11,032.4 11,130.6 5,637.1 960.1 315.0 2,021.8 2,129.2 67.4          Sep 
1,069.7 11,797.5 11,047.9 11,134.7 5,680.7 936.8 307.6 2,018.8 2,123.8 67.2          Oct 
1,071.0 11,882.2 11,107.7 11,212.3 5,780.1 926.7 303.3 2,013.9 2,121.8 66.4          Nov 1,087.1 11,929.4 11,211.4 11,321.3 5,826.7 911.5 294.0 2,050.9 2,172.7 65.6          Dec 
1,075.1 11,985.2 11,191.6 11,306.4 5,824.0 914.4 286.6 2,034.3 2,182.1 65.0 2017          Jan 
1,078.1 11,994.1 11,210.5 11,330.1 5,849.1 919.5 284.5 2,028.8 2,183.6 64.6          Feb 1,082.4 12,103.6 11,279.9 11,422.6 5,945.0 911.0 285.3 2,029.0 2,188.3 64.1          Mar 
1,089.2 12,141.4 11,323.4 11,456.5 6,022.2 886.9 278.6 2,015.2 2,190.1 63.7          Apr 
1,089.7 12,151.7 11,338.9 11,444.1 6,044.4 861.0 273.0 2,004.8 2,199.0 62.0          May1,099.1 12,213.6 11,383.5 11,483.1 6,113.1 854.2 265.6 1,986.8 2,201.6 61.9          June
1,104.7 12,209.8 11,393.0 11,476.5 6,123.8 848.8 262.8 1,976.5 2,206.2 58.4          July
1,102.7 12,226.8 11,422.8 11,505.1 6,146.9 857.8 260.6 1,969.6 2,212.6 57.7          Aug 1,103.3 12,271.6 11,432.3 11,519.7 6,196.9 843.3 256.3 1,956.5 2,210.0 56.8          Sep 
1,106.2 12,217.2 11,420.3 11,507.4 6,217.3 846.5 250.8 1,929.3 2,207.3 56.2          Oct 
1,107.1 12,249.3 11,471.5 11,544.7 6,291.5 832.2 246.3 1,912.4 2,206.7 55.5          Nov 1,123.2 12,285.9 11,543.3 11,618.0 6,349.5 834.7 242.5 1,925.2 2,211.3 54.9          Dec 
1,108.0 12,317.1 11,527.1 11,609.1 6,341.2 840.5 237.0 1,913.5 2,221.0 55.8 2018          Jan 
1,108.3 12,329.4 11,524.5 11,603.1 6,345.0 831.2 232.7 1,915.6 2,223.5 55.1          Feb 1,117.0 12,389.4 11,576.5 11,656.8 6,405.0 833.7 226.2 1,907.4 2,229.7 54.7          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
242.7 3,412.8 3,319.7 3,197.4 1,747.9 172.1 35.8 645.5 536.7 59.4 2016          Feb 
243.3 3,428.4 3,315.7 3,188.8 1,735.7 176.5 37.5 644.9 535.9 58.3          Mar 
244.2 3,429.1 3,334.3 3,208.5 1,759.1 178.5 38.3 640.3 535.1 57.2          Apr 
243.7 3,469.8 3,356.2 3,222.9 1,779.2 175.2 37.3 640.6 534.4 56.2          May245.2 3,481.5 3,352.9 3,218.7 1,779.1 173.1 38.3 638.8 533.9 55.4          June
247.4 3,464.1 3,368.1 3,233.1 1,793.5 174.7 38.2 638.3 533.8 54.6          July
246.5 3,480.0 3,376.0 3,238.3 1,803.0 173.4 38.2 636.2 533.8 53.8          Aug 245.9 3,494.5 3,380.7 3,247.0 1,807.9 179.4 38.3 635.0 533.3 53.1          Sep 
245.4 3,489.6 3,386.4 3,254.0 1,821.1 172.1 37.8 637.3 533.5 52.3          Oct 
245.7 3,536.5 3,424.0 3,288.1 1,857.7 171.0 37.4 636.6 533.7 51.7          Nov 248.1 3,517.1 3,419.8 3,284.1 1,851.0 171.5 38.4 635.6 536.3 51.3          Dec 
245.4 3,526.3 3,439.3 3,306.3 1,873.8 174.0 38.7 632.1 537.1 50.6 2017          Jan 
246.6 3,532.6 3,448.3 3,313.4 1,881.5 175.3 38.8 630.0 537.9 50.0          Feb 247.7 3,549.3 3,449.2 3,318.1 1,886.4 177.4 39.9 628.4 536.5 49.5          Mar 
249.3 3,540.9 3,447.5 3,317.0 1,895.9 170.7 40.0 624.7 536.6 49.0          Apr 
248.6 3,566.1 3,465.8 3,327.4 1,910.5 167.5 40.2 624.1 536.4 48.7          May249.5 3,590.5 3,482.0 3,339.9 1,928.7 165.5 40.3 621.4 535.7 48.3          June
251.6 3,583.1 3,472.8 3,333.0 1,927.8 162.6 40.3 619.5 537.9 44.9          July
250.4 3,600.7 3,483.1 3,338.6 1,938.3 159.0 40.3 619.3 537.5 44.1          Aug 250.1 3,616.3 3,486.8 3,345.9 1,945.0 162.3 39.6 617.9 537.5 43.5          Sep 
250.9 3,606.4 3,490.8 3,352.9 1,958.5 158.8 38.6 616.2 538.0 42.7          Oct 
250.9 3,646.8 3,521.5 3,383.7 1,990.6 157.1 37.4 618.2 538.3 42.1          Nov 252.9 3,647.9 3,515.8 3,378.5 1,976.2 162.0 37.7 620.4 540.7 41.5          Dec 
250.1 3,632.5 3,522.3 3,390.7 1,994.6 161.5 36.4 616.5 539.5 42.2 2018          Jan 
249.8 3,642.4 3,523.0 3,388.4 1,995.9 160.2 35.3 615.5 540.0 41.5          Feb 248.3 3,652.2 3,524.1 3,389.7 1,998.2 164.6 34.3 612.1 539.4 41.0          Mar 
of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eu rosystem
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“ ).5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
May 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2 Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) (cont’d) *
  
 
Liabilities (cont’d)Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which market of which
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2016         Feb 301.0 344.0 162.6 98.1 14.4 39.9 24.0 5.1 339.1 335.1 484.2 2,288.0 1,597.6
         Mar 333.3 345.9 159.5 102.0 15.1 40.8 23.6 5.0 332.3 329.1 471.7 2,271.4 1,590.3
         Apr 297.6 345.2 161.9 97.2 15.4 42.2 23.5 4.9 327.9 323.1 489.1 2,275.8 1,586.3
         May 317.7 356.6 167.0 102.1 15.5 43.1 24.0 4.9 318.7 312.8 489.2 2,284.5 1,575.9         June 378.3 361.6 171.3 102.4 15.9 43.7 23.5 4.8 321.3 318.0 479.7 2,281.8 1,569.3
         July 349.2 366.7 174.1 101.6 18.2 43.8 24.2 4.8 298.6 297.4 494.8 2,258.2 1,543.7
         Aug 294.6 368.1 175.7 100.8 18.7 44.3 23.8 4.9 301.0 299.9 495.5 2,253.2 1,534.5         Sep 297.4 361.0 170.5 99.5 19.4 44.4 22.3 5.0 286.5 285.7 493.7 2,227.1 1,517.1
         Oct 295.3 367.4 182.2 94.3 19.9 44.5 21.3 5.3 266.4 265.7 511.7 2,226.0 1,503.3
         Nov 300.4 369.6 178.7 98.8 21.1 44.2 21.6 5.2 264.5 263.8 518.8 2,244.1 1,506.1         Dec 253.0 355.1 168.6 93.9 21.5 43.3 22.6 5.1 268.9 268.2 512.8 2,230.4 1,502.6
2017         Jan 316.7 362.0 169.5 99.5 21.3 43.4 22.9 5.5 250.1 249.5 524.3 2,209.7 1,487.5
         Feb 299.9 364.1 175.0 96.2 20.2 44.1 23.1 5.4 241.7 241.0 520.1 2,221.0 1,493.4         Mar 324.0 357.0 165.4 96.5 21.5 44.6 23.6 5.4 256.5 255.8 532.1 2,194.0 1,480.5
         Apr 318.6 366.2 176.4 92.4 23.7 44.7 23.5 5.5 250.4 249.7 527.8 2,164.9 1,466.2
         May 332.1 375.5 181.6 94.5 25.3 45.2 24.2 4.7 238.5 237.8 523.0 2,171.8 1,490.1         June 352.5 378.0 181.2 95.7 26.6 45.8 24.0 4.7 221.7 221.0 502.3 2,154.7 1,478.3
         July 345.0 388.3 191.0 95.2 26.7 46.2 24.4 4.8 197.4 196.8 516.0 2,134.2 1,471.5
         Aug 326.7 395.0 197.1 94.8 27.8 46.2 24.4 4.7 199.6 198.9 525.1 2,119.1 1,465.2         Sep 362.5 389.5 193.2 91.9 28.1 47.5 24.1 4.7 206.6 205.9 520.9 2,098.6 1,448.2
         Oct 318.9 390.9 197.9 87.6 28.3 48.3 24.1 4.7 226.5 225.8 529.8 2,086.3 1,431.2
         Nov 310.2 394.4 197.6 89.5 29.8 49.0 23.8 4.6 243.4 242.8 526.1 2,099.7 1,446.4         Dec 288.8 379.1 191.1 81.5 31.5 46.8 23.5 4.6 211.7 211.2 499.7 2,081.4 1,437.3
2018         Jan 330.0 378.1 186.2 84.3 31.1 47.5 24.1 5.0 203.8 203.3 518.7 2,071.3 1,440.2
         Feb 343.6 382.7 191.4 83.5 30.4 47.8 24.7 4.8 199.3 198.8 507.5 2,077.7 1,434.9         Mar 357.4 375.1 181.3 85.8 29.5 48.6 25.0 4.8 207.0 206.4 504.0 2,083.0 1,440.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2016         Feb 28.9 186.5 59.1 79.7 10.5 33.7 3.1 0.5 4.2 3.7 3.6 527.9 250.2
         Mar 49.3 190.2 57.4 84.1 10.8 34.3 3.1 0.5 3.2 2.0 3.4 518.7 250.5
         Apr 31.9 188.7 58.2 80.3 10.9 35.6 3.2 0.5 3.7 2.4 3.0 521.8 249.1
         May 50.6 196.3 60.4 84.9 11.1 36.2 3.3 0.5 3.5 2.4 2.5 530.9 244.9         June 63.6 199.2 62.2 85.0 11.5 36.6 3.3 0.5 2.5 2.3 2.6 523.0 241.2
         July 31.9 199.1 59.9 85.2 13.3 36.8 3.3 0.5 3.4 3.2 2.4 524.2 241.2
         Aug 40.6 201.0 61.7 84.6 13.6 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 524.4 241.5         Sep 49.3 198.3 59.7 83.5 14.0 37.2 3.4 0.5 2.9 2.9 2.4 516.7 240.8
         Oct 40.5 195.1 58.8 80.4 14.9 37.2 3.4 0.5 3.2 3.2 2.3 526.0 242.2
         Nov 47.4 201.0 59.5 84.2 16.1 37.3 3.3 0.6 3.0 3.0 2.3 542.1 251.4         Dec 33.8 199.1 61.6 80.5 16.6 36.6 3.3 0.6 2.2 2.2 2.3 541.3 250.6
2017         Jan 21.2 198.8 55.1 86.6 16.4 36.9 3.2 0.6 4.8 4.8 2.2 553.4 261.4
         Feb 17.5 201.8 61.5 83.2 15.7 37.7 3.1 0.6 4.5 4.5 2.2 556.7 262.6         Mar 31.6 199.5 58.7 82.5 16.5 38.2 3.1 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.1 551.8 263.6
         Apr 25.0 198.9 59.0 79.4 18.8 38.2 3.0 0.6 3.5 3.5 2.1 546.7 264.9
         May 32.7 206.1 61.6 81.6 20.6 38.7 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 542.6 263.2         June 39.8 210.9 63.4 82.6 22.0 39.3 3.0 0.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 542.7 266.0
         July 42.3 207.8 60.3 81.5 22.6 39.8 3.0 0.7 3.3 3.3 2.1 534.5 264.9
         Aug 49.7 212.4 64.0 81.0 23.6 40.1 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.4 2.3 534.4 267.8         Sep 59.5 210.9 63.2 78.5 24.3 41.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.3 529.1 264.0
         Oct 45.3 208.2 64.4 73.5 24.7 41.9 3.0 0.7 2.3 2.3 2.0 521.8 252.3
         Nov 51.7 211.4 65.5 73.0 26.2 43.1 2.9 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 518.3 251.1         Dec 61.7 207.7 69.3 66.3 27.8 40.6 2.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.7 512.7 256.4
2018         Jan 37.4 204.4 61.6 70.3 27.5 41.4 2.8 0.8 4.3 4.3 1.7 518.8 262.8
         Feb 46.7 207.4 66.3 69.2 26.8 41.5 3.0 0.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 522.7 263.8         Mar 55.0 207.6 63.2 72.7 25.8 42.3 3.0 0.6 2.9 2.9 2.2 523.7 265.6
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8including DM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
p 10    )9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
May 2018
II Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (From 2002, German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which Monetary
Intra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro-area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
33.4 54.2 2,200.4 3,912.2 2,610.0 − 98.5 4,554.8 − 6,688.4 10,278.4 10,942.5 7,013.8 122.8 2016          Feb 
37.2 51.9 2,182.3 3,724.8 2,592.5 − 94.3 4,379.8 − 6,721.6 10,322.7 10,968.4 6,969.1 121.3          Mar 
41.7 50.0 2,184.2 3,912.4 2,604.4 − 99.6 4,284.9 − 6,815.4 10,399.2 11,070.5 6,977.3 122.7          Apr 
39.9 49.2 2,195.4 4,018.4 2,600.9 − 84.0 4,363.3 − 6,867.6 10,440.8 11,110.7 6,980.5 126.6          May49.8 47.2 2,184.8 3,941.0 2,664.9 − 62.8 4,560.1 − 6,901.6 10,472.1 11,131.7 7,014.1 127.7          June
54.6 47.8 2,155.8 4,071.9 2,678.7 − 105.4 4,521.1 − 6,967.7 10,543.0 11,225.5 6,991.2 131.5          July
53.9 46.2 2,153.1 4,113.9 2,676.2 − 85.1 4,435.5 − 6,962.0 10,533.4 11,214.3 6,980.4 131.4          Aug 48.7 46.1 2,132.3 4,069.0 2,698.3 − 45.1 4,388.5 − 6,984.6 10,550.9 11,216.3 6,969.2 131.3          Sep 
53.5 43.6 2,129.0 4,278.6 2,683.3 − 28.3 4,246.7 − 7,043.6 10,568.0 11,250.0 6,948.0 131.8          Oct 
54.6 42.9 2,146.6 4,317.8 2,662.6 − 55.5 4,255.2 − 7,145.6 10,659.4 11,345.5 6,939.0 136.4          Nov 48.1 42.0 2,140.3 4,039.0 2,654.2 − 41.8 4,036.2 − 7,193.7 10,734.0 11,399.6 6,959.4 135.4          Dec 
44.2 45.8 2,119.7 4,244.7 2,646.5 − 14.7 3,876.5 − 7,183.2 10,734.5 11,422.2 6,914.4 139.1 2017          Jan 
49.4 47.2 2,124.4 4,375.4 2,696.6 − 20.4 3,952.6 − 7,218.0 10,769.6 11,456.5 6,964.0 140.1          Feb 48.5 47.2 2,098.3 4,315.5 2,677.0 − 3.3 3,853.6 − 7,308.6 10,859.0 11,560.0 6,918.4 140.0          Mar 
35.2 43.8 2,085.9 4,398.8 2,663.2 1.0 3,863.6 − 7,405.9 10,925.1 11,606.7 6,878.1 142.1          Apr 
42.2 42.8 2,086.9 4,332.9 2,659.6 3.1 3,846.2 − 7,436.8 10,937.6 11,621.5 6,863.1 145.0          May42.5 42.1 2,070.2 4,134.0 2,631.4 10.0 3,730.3 − 7,515.0 11,006.5 11,660.7 6,800.7 145.5          June
39.6 40.5 2,054.1 4,179.2 2,616.4 9.6 3,682.9 − 7,543.6 11,031.6 11,696.8 6,756.4 148.0          July
35.2 40.2 2,043.8 4,177.2 2,647.6 − 0.7 3,685.8 − 7,571.5 11,073.1 11,748.6 6,769.6 148.5          Aug 43.6 39.9 2,015.0 4,154.7 2,651.2 17.2 3,537.4 − 7,619.9 11,097.3 11,767.6 6,731.8 150.4          Sep 
36.0 37.1 2,013.2 4,339.4 2,666.1 13.3 3,576.2 − 7,646.5 11,114.8 11,785.8 6,717.8 148.7          Oct 
40.8 37.4 2,021.5 4,289.3 2,658.3 45.6 3,572.3 − 7,724.4 11,175.9 11,855.9 6,701.3 151.3          Nov 35.8 35.4 2,010.1 4,097.5 2,706.2 28.8 3,295.6 − 7,787.0 11,234.8 11,873.4 6,747.9 146.0          Dec 
24.5 29.9 2,016.9 4,415.5 2,689.7 − 42.1 3,052.7 − 7,760.7 11,221.5 11,865.1 6,728.4 148.1 2018          Jan 
34.9 28.5 2,014.2 4,506.4 2,682.5 − 27.5 2,917.6 − 7,769.8 11,218.2 11,863.3 6,720.1 147.5          Feb 43.7 28.2 2,011.0 4,353.1 2,693.8 − 4.3 2,950.7 − 7,828.6 11,280.6 11,927.1 6,720.4 147.3          Mar 
 German contribution ( € billion) 
25.5 11.8 490.7 739.6 574.8 − 790.7 1,683.0 297.7 1,807.0 2,644.8 2,689.9 1,804.6 − 2016          Feb 
24.0 10.9 483.8 699.0 569.9 − 784.5 1,622.4 299.8 1,793.1 2,641.1 2,682.7 1,791.6 −          Mar 
23.9 11.7 486.1 753.1 575.6 − 803.0 1,566.8 300.9 1,817.3 2,663.6 2,705.9 1,795.3 −          Apr 
22.8 12.3 495.8 758.5 571.4 − 823.1 1,577.5 303.9 1,839.6 2,685.7 2,726.9 1,800.7 −          May23.8 11.8 487.5 783.3 592.6 − 834.3 1,670.0 308.0 1,841.3 2,686.4 2,727.1 1,811.5 −          June
30.5 12.6 481.1 807.8 595.1 − 824.9 1,673.4 311.7 1,853.4 2,702.0 2,750.9 1,806.5 −          July
27.4 12.5 484.5 826.1 589.2 − 846.9 1,640.6 314.1 1,864.6 2,711.7 2,757.1 1,801.3 −          Aug 26.4 12.9 477.4 851.2 594.2 − 876.5 1,616.7 318.8 1,867.6 2,719.5 2,764.2 1,797.3 −          Sep 
25.3 13.4 487.3 899.9 585.7 − 863.2 1,564.6 322.0 1,879.9 2,721.9 2,766.1 1,800.2 −          Oct 
22.7 14.6 504.7 905.9 578.4 − 918.6 1,536.5 323.9 1,917.2 2,762.9 2,805.6 1,809.3 −          Nov 23.1 14.2 504.0 878.8 580.3 − 897.1 1,506.3 327.3 1,912.6 2,759.2 2,801.0 1,808.4 −          Dec 
22.8 14.4 516.2 930.2 575.5 − 926.5 1,465.7 328.3 1,928.9 2,784.9 2,829.2 1,811.9 − 2017          Jan 
22.2 15.2 519.2 972.2 587.9 − 944.3 1,484.8 330.1 1,943.0 2,797.0 2,841.1 1,825.3 −          Feb 19.5 15.9 516.4 979.6 586.5 − 957.7 1,462.2 331.9 1,945.1 2,801.0 2,841.1 1,819.5 −          Mar 
17.7 16.9 512.1 985.8 597.9 − 965.5 1,463.1 335.2 1,954.8 2,803.4 2,843.5 1,822.6 −          Apr 
18.4 16.8 507.4 957.7 595.0 − 967.6 1,461.9 338.1 1,972.1 2,821.5 2,861.2 1,814.4 −          May19.3 16.4 507.0 946.6 591.5 − 981.1 1,412.1 342.8 1,992.1 2,841.2 2,880.9 1,808.1 −          June
18.8 16.2 499.5 926.1 589.1 − 975.5 1,406.4 345.0 1,988.1 2,835.9 2,876.2 1,793.6 −          July
18.5 15.8 500.0 894.5 597.2 − 970.2 1,422.2 348.6 2,002.3 2,846.8 2,886.8 1,801.4 −          Aug 19.3 15.4 494.4 927.7 594.2 − 982.9 1,387.5 352.1 2,008.2 2,853.5 2,893.0 1,792.0 −          Sep 
18.6 15.7 487.5 913.6 596.3 − 946.7 1,386.3 354.2 2,023.0 2,859.6 2,898.2 1,785.4 −          Oct 
18.5 15.8 484.0 883.4 593.7 − 940.3 1,382.0 355.5 2,056.1 2,890.9 2,929.9 1,781.9 −          Nov 17.7 14.8 480.2 921.3 668.6 − 999.6 1,295.2 359.3 2,045.5 2,882.9 2,920.4 1,852.1 −          Dec 
16.0 14.2 488.5 931.6 656.8 − 974.7 1,303.7 359.3 2,056.2 2,894.2 2,930.5 1,846.2 − 2018          Jan 
16.7 14.3 491.6 968.4 653.3 − 1,003.8 1,263.2 361.3 2,062.1 2,896.6 2,933.5 1,844.1 −          Feb 16.3 13.9 493.5 953.3 657.7 − 1,016.5 1,278.2 368.2 2,061.3 2,901.2 2,936.4 1,847.3 −          Mar 
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to 3 months (excluding central government s’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to 2 years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of over 2
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the years and at agreed notice of over 3 months, debt securities with maturiti es of over 2
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to 2 years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
May 2018
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2015         Oct 619.1 70.2 462.1 0.1 643.2 152.8 0.0 1 052.4 95.2 28.9 465.3 1 670.5
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 612.2 66.1 459.3 0.0 730.7 173.1 0.0 1 056.5 93.5 51.5 493.8 1 723.4
2016         Jan 611.6 71.6 466.9 0.2 811.8 196.6 0.0 1 072.8 82.5 53.2 557.1 1 826.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 607.8 62.9 461.7 0.1 907.6 230.5 0.0 1 063.4 115.6 73.9 556.5 1 850.4
         Apr 627.3 58.1 460.8 0.2 1 000.1 262.0 0.0 1 069.3 147.4 97.7 570.0 1 901.3
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 640.3 53.9 456.3 0.2 1 105.3 309.0 0.0 1 076.6 123.9 122.8 623.8 2 009.4
         July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1 227.1 323.1 0.0 1 087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2 067.7
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1 339.7 355.1 0.0 1 096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2 200.2
         Oct 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1 447.0 387.3 0.0 1 094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2 259.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1 570.2 439.4 0.0 1 103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2 366.3
2017         Jan 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1 670.8 434.4 0.0 1 119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2 472.6
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1 787.5 479.2 0.0 1 110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2 550.9
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 678.6 18.5 707.4 0.3 1 905.3 550.0 0.0 1 118.4 182.0 378.8 1 081.1 2 749.4
         June 683.1 13.7 767.4 0.2 1 995.0 593.7 0.0 1 126.0 163.6 397.4 1 178.7 2 898.5
         July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2 076.1 595.3 0.0 1 136.3 229.8 379.4 1 169.2 2 900.8
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 639.0 5.5 768.6 0.3 2 150.2 611.4 0.0 1 142.5 181.8 385.1 1 242.7 2 996.7
         Oct 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2 239.2 648.1 0.0 1 142.8 218.3 383.9 1 253.3 3 044.2
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 634.5 3.0 763.7 0.2 2 333.5 682.5 0.0 1 146.6 188.5 407.6 1 309.7 3 138.8
2018         Jan 635.7 2.9 760.6 0.2 2 398.2 689.2 0.0 1 158.2 188.1 487.0 1 275.2 3 122.5
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar 630.9 1.5 760.5 0.0 2 435.5 686.3 0.0 1 148.2 203.6 474.9 1 315.6 3 150.1
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2015         Oct 148.4 2.8 40.8 0.0 138.2 40.8 0.0 248.8 5.2 − 115.9 151.2 440.9
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 146.1 3.2 43.3 0.0 156.3 56.1 0.0 249.1 9.3 − 116.3 150.7 455.9
2016         Jan 144.8 3.6 48.4 0.1 174.0 50.0 0.0 252.4 18.0 − 124.0 174.4 476.8
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 143.7 1.9 46.3 0.0 193.9 59.8 0.0 250.4 26.1 − 113.3 162.9 473.1
         Apr 152.2 3.1 45.0 0.0 214.1 67.6 0.0 252.1 37.3 − 105.1 162.4 482.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 156.4 3.3 45.3 0.0 237.2 87.3 0.0 254.7 41.1 − 127.2 186.5 528.4
         July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
         Oct 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2017         Jan 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 164.4 1.0 86.0 0.1 412.4 181.4 0.0 264.1 29.7 − 185.3 374.0 819.5
         June 165.8 0.3 95.0 0.0 431.8 181.2 0.0 266.2 32.4 − 204.9 418.0 865.4
         July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
         Aug . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep 155.2 0.3 94.9 0.0 463.2 165.5 0.0 269.9 52.4 − 192.6 418.5 853.9
         Oct 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
         Nov . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec 154.2 0.5 94.8 0.0 501.4 187.5 0.0 270.3 56.0 − 218.6 455.8 913.6
2018         Jan 155.5 0.9 93.3 0.0 514.7 204.4 0.0 272.8 54.9 − 192.2 424.5 901.7
         Feb . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar 151.5 0.6 93.4 0.0 522.9 207.9 0.0 271.0 56.8 − 221.3 453.9 932.8
         Apr . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro-area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s securities purchase programmes. 4From Aug. 2009, includes
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of liquidity absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchang e swap operations.
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 5From 2002, euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the na-
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following tional central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circu lation. In ac-
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a cordance with the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem fo r the issue of
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No euro banknotes, 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulatio n are

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
May 2018
II  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 8.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 92.4 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 2.9 + 31.8 + 10.8 + 36.9 + 38.7 2015          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 6.9 − 4.1 − 2.8 + 0.0 + 87.5 + 20.3 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 1.7 + 22.6 + 28.5 + 52.9          Dec 
− 0.6 + 5.5 + 7.6 + 0.1 + 81.1 + 23.5 + 0.0 + 16.3 − 11.0 + 1.7 + 63.3 + 103.1 2016          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 3.8 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 0.1 + 95.8 + 33.9 + 0.0 − 9.4 + 33.1 + 20.7 − 0.6 + 23.9          Mar 
+ 19.5 − 4.8 − 0.9 + 0.1 + 92.5 + 31.5 + 0.0 + 5.9 + 31.8 + 23.8 + 13.5 + 50.9          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 13.0 − 4.2 − 4.5 + 0.0 + 105.2 + 47.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 23.5 + 25.1 + 53.8 + 108.1          June
+ 25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5          Sep 
+ 2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9          Dec 
− 12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2017          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
+ 16.2 − 10.5 + 153.1 + 0.0 + 117.8 + 70.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 21.7 + 56.6 + 120.2 + 198.5          May
+ 4.5 − 4.8 + 60.0 − 0.1 + 89.7 + 43.7 + 0.0 + 7.6 − 18.4 + 18.6 + 97.6 + 149.1          June
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 17.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 74.1 + 16.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 48.0 + 5.7 + 73.5 + 95.9          Sep 
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 94.3 + 34.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 29.8 + 23.7 + 56.4 + 94.6          Dec 
+ 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 64.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 11.6 − 0.4 + 79.4 − 34.5 − 16.3 2018          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 37.3 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 10.0 + 15.5 − 12.1 + 40.4 + 27.6          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 19.1 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.4 + 15.4 + 13.2 2015          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 2.3 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 18.1 + 15.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 4.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 15.0          Dec 
− 1.3 + 0.5 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 17.7 − 6.0 + 0.0 + 3.3 + 8.7 − 7.6 + 23.7 + 21.0 2016          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 1.0 − 1.7 − 2.1 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 9.8 + 0.0 − 2.1 + 8.1 + 10.7 − 11.5 − 3.8          Mar 
+ 8.4 + 1.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 20.3 + 7.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 11.3 + 8.2 − 0.4 + 9.0          Apr 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 4.3 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 23.1 + 19.7 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 3.8 − 22.1 + 24.1 + 46.3          June
+ 6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0          Sep 
+ 0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6          Dec 
− 4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2017          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
+ 4.9 + 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.0 + 25.9 + 27.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 6.6 − 15.6 + 33.0 + 62.5          May
+ 1.5 − 0.7 + 9.0 − 0.1 + 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.6 − 19.6 + 44.0 + 45.9          June
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug 
− 4.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 15.4 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 9.0 + 5.8 + 2.1          Sep 
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2          Oct 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov 
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 16.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 9.9 − 21.0 + 33.1 + 50.4          Dec 
+ 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 13.3 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.1 + 26.4 − 31.3 − 11.9 2018          Jan 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb 
− 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.2 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 1.9 − 29.1 + 29.4 + 31.1          Mar 
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr 
allocated on a monthly basis to the ECB. The counterpart of this adjustment is “Other factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statemen to f
banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with the Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the percentage of the euro banknotes in factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
circulation that corresponds to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference “deposit facility”, “banknotes in circulation” and “credit i nstitutions’ current account
between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the holdings”. euro banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
May 2018
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1 Assets *
  
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claimsexternal loans residents with banks, arising from
On Gold and other denominated security the creditreporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility underdate assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2017 Oct                  6 4,337.7 379.0 295.9 73.0 222.8 33.4 16.9 16.9 −
                              13 4,371.6 379.0 297.2 73.0 224.2 32.1 16.7 16.7 −
                              20 4,363.4 379.0 297.4 73.0 224.4 32.8 17.3 17.3 −
                              27 4,371.2 379.0 295.5 72.9 222.5 34.6 15.5 15.5 −
         Nov                  3 4,373.2 379.0 296.4 72.9 223.5 33.9 15.0 15.0 −
                              10 4,387.7 379.0 297.4 72.7 224.6 32.4 14.8 14.8 −
                              17 4,411.9 379.0 297.6 72.2 225.3 34.6 15.7 15.7 −
                              24 4,427.5 379.0 298.3 72.2 226.1 33.0 15.8 15.8 −
         Dec                  1 4,440.8 379.0 299.9 72.3 227.5 32.9 16.0 16.0 −
                                8 4,456.6 379.0 300.5 72.3 228.2 33.1 16.2 16.2 −
                              15 4,471.9 379.0 299.9 72.1 227.8 31.8 17.7 17.7 −
                              22 4,487.3 379.0 300.6 70.7 230.0 39.4 16.5 16.5 −
                              29 4,471.7 376.5 296.2 70.2 226.0 38.1 19.4 19.4 −
2018 Jan                  5 4,466.0 376.3 294.6 70.2 224.4 38.6 16.1 16.1 −
                              12 4,472.7 376.3 295.5 70.2 225.3 28.9 14.5 14.5 −
                              19 4,484.0 376.3 297.6 70.2 227.4 29.9 15.8 15.8 −
                              26 4,493.1 376.3 296.4 70.1 226.3 29.1 15.7 15.7 −
2018 Feb                  2 4,491.2 376.3 295.9 70.0 225.9 32.7 16.1 16.1 −
                                9 4,493.7 376.3 297.1 69.9 227.3 32.5 16.8 16.8 −
                              16 4,504.8 376.3 296.8 69.9 226.9 34.7 17.4 17.4 −
                              23 4,511.5 376.3 296.2 69.9 226.3 35.4 17.4 17.4 −
         Mar                  2 4,519.4 376.3 297.1 69.9 227.2 34.5 16.6 16.6 −
                                9 4,530.1 376.3 299.6 69.9 229.7 32.5 18.7 18.7 −
                              16 4,532.6 376.3 300.2 69.8 230.4 29.6 17.8 17.8 −
                              23 4,539.1 376.3 304.6 69.8 234.7 26.5 18.5 18.5 −
                              30 4,529.6 374.1 299.6 69.3 230.3 26.6 17.7 17.7 −
         Apr                  6 4,531.5 374.1 297.2 69.3 227.9 25.7 17.1 17.1 −
                              13 4,548.2 374.1 294.8 69.3 225.5 29.5 17.7 17.7 −
                              20 4,544.0 374.1 294.9 69.3 225.6 28.9 15.4 15.4 −
                              27 4,554.3 374.1 296.2 69.4 226.8 28.6 18.8 18.8 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2017 Oct                  6 1 631.2 118.2 51.9 19.6 32.3 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
                              13 1 600.3 118.2 52.7 19.6 33.1 0.0 2.7 2.7 −
                              20 1 608.3 118.2 53.4 19.6 33.9 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
                              27 1 620.3 118.2 53.6 19.5 34.0 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
         Nov                  3 1 625.1 118.2 52.8 19.5 33.3 0.0 2.1 2.1 −
                              10 1 637.2 118.2 53.1 19.4 33.7 0.0 1.6 1.6 −
                              17 1 661.7 118.2 53.3 19.3 34.0 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
                              24 1 655.7 118.2 52.7 19.3 33.4 0.0 2.3 2.3 −
         Dec                  1 1 658.7 118.2 52.4 19.3 33.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 −
                                8 1 676.5 118.2 51.8 19.3 32.6 0.0 2.2 2.2 −
                              15 1 676.3 118.2 51.5 19.1 32.4 0.0 3.0 3.0 −
                              22 1 721.8 118.2 50.3 18.4 31.9 7.2 1.4 1.4 −
                              29 1 727.7 117.3 49.5 18.3 31.2 7.2 4.4 4.4 −
2018 Jan                  5 1 690.6 117.3 49.6 18.3 31.3 7.2 1.5 1.5 −
                              12 1 673.4 117.3 49.6 18.3 31.3 0.1 1.4 1.4 −
                              19 1 682.7 117.3 50.0 18.3 31.7 0.1 1.8 1.8 −
                              26 1 653.8 117.3 49.5 18.2 31.3 0.1 2.0 2.0 −
2018 Feb                  2 1 710.7 117.3 49.5 18.2 31.3 0.0 2.3 2.3 −
                                9 1 712.9 117.3 49.5 18.1 31.4 0.0 2.2 2.2 −
                              16 1 731.0 117.3 49.8 18.1 31.6 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
                              23 1 712.4 117.3 50.2 18.1 32.0 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
         Mar                  2 1 738.6 117.3 49.9 18.1 31.8 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
                                9 1 720.8 117.3 49.3 18.1 31.2 0.0 3.4 3.4 −
                              16 1 713.8 117.3 49.1 18.1 31.0 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
                              23 1 725.0 117.3 49.8 18.1 31.6 − 0.0 2.1 2.1 −
                              30 1 756.2 116.6 49.2 18.0 31.2 0.0 1.5 1.5 −
         Apr                  6 1 717.4 116.6 48.9 18.0 30.8 0.0 1.5 1.5 −
                              13 1 712.7 116.6 49.6 18.0 31.6 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
                              20 1 681.8 116.6 49.0 18.0 31.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 −
                              27 1 706.5 116.6 48.6 18.0 30.6 0.0 2.7 2.7 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The bal ance sheet
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrume nts are valued at the

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
May 2018
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for governmentfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    Onopera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
767.5 3.2 764.1 − − 0.2 − 54.9 2 521.9 2 238.9 283.0 25.7 242.5 2017 Oct                  6
785.5 21.3 764.1 − − 0.1 − 55.0 2 537.6 2 254.4 283.2 25.7 242.7                               13
768.2 3.8 764.1 − − 0.3 − 56.7 2 547.4 2 265.1 282.3 25.7 238.9                               20
769.4 5.3 763.7 − − 0.3 − 55.4 2 560.0 2 278.4 281.6 25.7 236.2                               27
766.9 3.0 763.7 − − 0.2 − 52.6 2 568.1 2 287.7 280.4 25.7 235.7          Nov                  3
766.5 2.7 763.7 − − 0.1 − 52.7 2 583.9 2 303.2 280.7 25.1 235.9                               10
766.8 2.8 763.7 − − 0.2 − 56.7 2 599.0 2 318.3 280.7 25.1 237.4                               17
767.1 3.0 763.7 − − 0.4 − 55.6 2 614.0 2 333.4 280.6 25.1 239.6                               24
768.9 5.0 763.7 − − 0.2 − 50.7 2 627.3 2 347.3 279.9 25.1 241.1          Dec                  1
766.1 2.3 763.7 − − 0.1 − 52.2 2 643.1 2 364.8 278.3 25.1 241.3                                 8
765.7 1.9 763.7 − − 0.1 − 54.9 2 655.8 2 380.3 275.5 25.1 241.9                               15
764.3 3.4 760.6 − − 0.3 − 43.1 2 668.3 2 393.3 275.0 25.1 250.9                               22
764.3 3.4 760.6 − − 0.3 − 37.6 2 660.7 2 386.0 274.7 25.0 254.0                               29
763.6 2.9 760.6 − − 0.1 − 35.2 2 662.4 2 388.9 273.5 25.0 254.2 2018 Jan                  5
763.7 3.0 760.6 − − 0.1 − 46.2 2 672.9 2 399.0 273.9 25.0 249.7                               12
763.3 2.4 760.6 − − 0.2 − 47.7 2 679.3 2 406.6 272.7 25.0 249.1                               19
762.8 2.2 760.6 − − 0.1 − 49.5 2 688.7 2 415.3 273.4 25.0 249.5                               26
762.6 1.9 760.7 − − 0.0 − 51.5 2 685.3 2 416.1 269.1 25.0 245.7 2018 Feb                  2
762.2 1.6 760.7 − − 0.0 − 45.5 2 694.9 2 425.2 269.7 25.0 243.3                                 9
762.1 1.3 760.7 − − 0.1 − 47.0 2 703.0 2 433.3 269.7 25.0 242.6                               16
762.2 1.5 760.7 − − 0.0 − 48.5 2 708.4 2 438.4 270.0 25.0 242.2                               23
762.0 1.7 760.3 − − 0.0 − 49.1 2 715.6 2 445.2 270.4 25.0 243.1          Mar                  2
761.4 1.1 760.3 − − − − 49.0 2 725.1 2 454.6 270.5 25.0 242.7                                 9
761.3 1.0 760.3 − − − − 48.7 2 731.2 2 461.0 270.2 25.0 242.6                               16
761.9 1.5 760.3 − − 0.1 − 50.2 2 738.0 2 468.6 269.4 25.0 238.1                               23
761.9 2.4 759.3 − − 0.2 − 48.5 2 732.7 2 464.6 268.1 24.9 243.5                               30
761.6 2.3 759.3 − − − − 44.9 2 742.4 2 474.5 268.0 24.9 243.5          Apr                  6
761.5 1.7 759.3 − 0.0 0.6 − 47.4 2 753.7 2 486.3 267.4 24.9 244.4                               13
761.0 1.6 759.3 − − 0.1 − 48.7 2 751.5 2 485.6 265.9 24.9 244.5                               20
761.9 2.8 759.1 − − 0.0 − 50.0 2 760.8 2 496.6 264.2 24.9 239.1                               27
 Deutsche Bundesbank
95.1 0.2 94.8 − − − − 4.5 481.0 481.0 − 4.4 873.7 2017 Oct                  6
95.1 0.3 94.8 − − 0.0 − 3.6 483.4 483.4 − 4.4 840.1                               13
95.3 0.4 94.8 − − − − 3.1 486.3 486.3 − 4.4 844.5                               20
95.2 0.3 94.8 − − 0.0 − 3.5 489.4 489.4 − 4.4 854.0                               27
95.1 0.3 94.8 − − − − 3.9 491.8 491.8 − 4.4 856.8          Nov                  3
95.1 0.3 94.8 − − − − 3.0 494.9 494.9 − 4.4 866.8                               10
95.1 0.3 94.8 − − − − 2.8 498.6 498.6 − 4.4 887.3                               17
95.1 0.3 94.8 − − 0.0 − 3.1 501.7 501.7 − 4.4 878.1                               24
96.3 1.4 94.8 − − − − 2.8 504.4 504.4 − 4.4 878.1          Dec                  1
95.3 0.5 94.8 − − − − 2.9 508.0 508.0 − 4.4 893.6                                 8
95.1 0.3 94.8 − − − − 3.8 510.8 510.8 − 4.4 889.5                               15
94.3 1.0 93.3 − − 0.0 − 3.8 513.7 513.7 − 4.4 928.3                               22
94.3 1.0 93.3 − − − − 0.5 512.1 512.1 − 4.4 937.9                               29
94.2 0.9 93.3 − − − − 1.8 512.7 512.7 − 4.4 901.9 2018 Jan                  5
94.3 1.0 93.3 − − 0.0 − 3.5 515.1 515.1 − 4.4 887.8                               12
94.0 0.7 93.3 − − 0.0 − 3.5 516.8 516.8 − 4.4 894.9                               19
94.1 0.8 93.3 − − − − 3.7 517.7 517.7 − 4.4 865.0                               26
94.0 0.6 93.4 − − 0.0 − 3.3 518.5 518.5 − 4.4 921.4 2018 Feb                  2
93.8 0.5 93.4 − − − − 3.8 521.6 521.6 − 4.4 920.0                                 9
93.8 0.5 93.4 − − − − 3.4 522.7 522.7 − 4.4 937.4                               16
94.0 0.6 93.4 − − − − 3.7 522.7 522.7 − 4.4 918.2                               23
94.2 0.8 93.4 − − − − 3.9 524.9 524.9 − 4.4 942.8          Mar                  2
93.8 0.5 93.4 − − − − 4.3 526.8 526.8 − 4.4 921.3                                 9
93.8 0.4 93.4 − − 0.0 − 4.4 527.3 527.3 − 4.4 915.6                               16
93.9 0.5 93.4 − − 0.0 − 3.9 529.7 529.7 − 4.4 923.8                               23
94.7 1.2 93.3 − − 0.1 − 5.1 529.0 529.0 − 4.4 955.7                               30
94.6 1.3 93.3 − − − − 4.4 531.2 531.2 − 4.4 915.7          Apr                  6
94.2 0.9 93.3 − − 0.0 − 4.5 532.5 532.5 − 4.4 908.3                               13
94.2 0.9 93.3 − − 0.0 − 3.9 530.3 530.3 − 4.4 882.4                               20
95.2 2.0 93.2 − − − − 3.8 533.2 533.2 − 4.4 901.9                               27
 
end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB.  

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
May 2018
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2 Liabilities *
  
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro-(covering Fine- area creditthe tuning Deposits institutions Debt
On Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Otherdate liabilities lation  
1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 3
 
2017 Oct                  6 4,337.7 1,144.9 1,920.2 1,257.3 662.9 − − 0.0 9.2 − 321.4 200.2 121.2
                              13 4,371.6 1,145.2 1,942.5 1,283.7 658.8 − − 0.0 8.1 − 333.7 210.4 123.3
                              20 4,363.4 1,143.0 1,913.7 1,261.7 652.0 − − 0.0 6.8 − 357.1 233.5 123.6
                              27 4,371.2 1,145.3 1,950.4 1,312.1 638.3 − − 0.0 8.3 − 327.6 205.1 122.5
         Nov                  3 4,373.2 1,147.3 1,982.6 1,312.0 670.6 − − 0.0 6.4 − 279.8 158.6 121.2
                              10 4,387.7 1,143.2 1,982.6 1,303.4 679.0 − − 0.2 8.6 − 296.3 174.6 121.7
                              17 4,411.9 1,141.3 1,972.6 1,274.8 697.8 − − 0.0 7.5 − 337.3 208.6 128.7
                              24 4,427.5 1,140.0 1,972.9 1,270.4 702.4 − − 0.0 6.5 − 360.2 232.0 128.1
         Dec                  1 4,440.8 1,146.7 2,034.8 1,340.0 694.9 − − 0.0 6.5 − 292.9 170.3 122.5
                                8 4,456.6 1,153.6 2,029.1 1,334.8 694.3 − − 0.0 11.8 − 287.0 165.3 121.8
                              15 4,471.9 1,157.0 1,984.9 1,319.6 665.2 − − 0.0 12.9 − 321.3 197.1 124.2
                              22 4,487.3 1,168.2 1,942.8 1,266.5 676.2 − − 0.0 19.5 − 295.8 177.5 118.3
                              29 4,471.7 1,170.7 1,881.6 1,185.8 695.8 − − 0.0 21.0 − 287.6 168.5 119.2
2018 Jan                  5 4,466.0 1,162.6 1,962.0 1,262.5 699.4 − − 0.0 11.8 − 280.1 163.7 116.4
                              12 4,472.7 1,154.9 1,995.2 1,291.5 703.5 − − 0.2 8.6 − 298.9 183.1 115.8
                              19 4,484.0 1,149.5 1,987.8 1,294.8 692.9 − − 0.1 11.7 − 317.0 198.7 118.3
                              26 4,493.1 1,146.4 1,998.1 1,316.7 681.2 − − 0.2 11.1 − 349.8 230.6 119.2
2018 Feb                  2 4,491.2 1,148.9 2,021.1 1,330.9 690.2 − − 0.0 12.0 − 296.1 173.1 123.0
                                9 4,493.7 1,149.5 2,023.5 1,329.4 694.0 − − 0.2 12.4 − 303.6 184.0 119.6
                              16 4,504.8 1,147.9 1,986.8 1,294.5 692.2 − − 0.0 12.3 − 342.2 219.5 122.6
                              23 4,511.5 1,146.0 1,958.5 1,280.8 677.6 − − 0.1 11.4 − 374.3 250.2 124.1
         Mar                  2 4,519.4 1,149.7 2,009.8 1,347.2 662.5 − − 0.1 12.2 − 316.2 190.4 125.8
                                9 4,530.1 1,150.2 2,021.6 1,337.3 684.1 − − 0.2 13.9 − 315.6 189.1 126.5
                              16 4,532.6 1,150.1 1,959.5 1,295.8 663.5 − − 0.2 12.8 − 369.4 241.2 128.2
                              23 4,539.1 1,154.2 1,925.7 1,263.9 661.8 − − 0.0 14.7 − 405.0 275.7 129.4
                              30 4,529.6 1,164.2 1,883.4 1,236.2 647.2 − − 0.1 19.7 − 363.8 237.8 126.0
         Apr                  6 4,531.5 1,161.8 1,989.2 1,298.6 690.4 − − 0.2 12.4 − 355.5 229.6 125.9
                              13 4,548.2 1,159.9 1,994.3 1,311.4 682.9 − − 0.0 8.9 − 370.1 244.3 125.8
                              20 4,544.0 1,159.4 1,973.4 1,293.3 680.0 − − 0.0 10.7 − 383.8 265.2 118.6
                              27 4,554.3 1,165.2 1,983.7 1,342.2 641.3 − − 0.1 8.6 − 377.1 254.4 122.6
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2017 Oct                  6 1 631.2 269.0 616.0 436.3 179.7 − − 0.0 4.1 − 115.9 54.2 61.7
                              13 1 600.3 269.1 587.3 421.9 165.5 − − 0.0 3.3 − 117.8 55.9 61.9
                              20 1 608.3 269.0 586.6 428.5 158.2 − − 0.0 2.3 − 129.4 71.7 57.6
                              27 1 620.3 271.5 601.3 442.1 159.2 − − 0.0 3.8 − 125.6 68.6 57.1
         Nov                  3 1 625.1 269.5 624.1 457.1 167.1 − − 0.0 2.7 − 91.9 36.3 55.6
                              10 1 637.2 268.8 629.2 448.9 180.3 − − 0.0 4.1 − 101.0 45.0 56.0
                              17 1 661.7 268.7 628.6 442.1 186.5 − − 0.0 3.3 − 134.9 73.3 61.6
                              24 1 655.7 268.9 636.8 449.5 187.3 − − 0.0 2.7 − 127.2 65.5 61.6
         Dec                  1 1 658.7 270.0 669.9 466.2 203.7 − − 0.0 2.8 − 101.8 47.0 54.8
                                8 1 676.5 272.6 675.7 468.2 207.4 − − 0.0 4.3 − 100.5 48.3 52.2
                              15 1 676.3 275.1 625.0 451.2 173.8 − − 0.0 2.8 − 131.6 78.9 52.7
                              22 1 721.8 278.8 633.4 442.2 191.2 − − 0.0 2.9 − 122.2 70.2 51.9
                              29 1 727.7 275.4 609.8 392.8 217.0 − − 0.0 2.7 − 118.8 67.0 51.8
2018 Jan                  5 1 690.6 272.3 637.6 426.7 210.9 − − 0.0 3.3 − 94.7 43.6 51.0
                              12 1 673.4 270.9 629.4 420.4 209.1 − − 0.0 3.5 − 95.1 44.3 50.8
                              19 1 682.7 269.9 633.1 426.1 207.0 − − 0.0 5.4 − 99.1 46.7 52.4
                              26 1 653.8 269.4 629.9 419.6 210.3 − − 0.0 4.2 − 102.3 50.5 51.8
2018 Feb                  2 1 710.7 270.7 668.3 448.7 219.6 − − 0.0 6.0 − 99.6 45.1 54.5
                                9 1 712.9 271.7 672.8 458.8 214.0 − − 0.0 5.8 − 101.9 51.6 50.3
                              16 1 731.0 271.4 660.4 454.3 206.1 − − 0.0 5.5 − 127.5 73.9 53.6
                              23 1 712.4 271.3 638.5 442.8 195.7 − − 0.0 5.9 − 124.5 67.4 57.1
         Mar                  2 1 738.6 270.9 680.2 464.7 215.5 − − 0.0 6.0 − 104.5 46.6 57.8
                                9 1 720.8 271.7 657.2 460.4 196.8 − − 0.0 6.8 − 111.3 52.6 58.6
                              16 1 713.8 272.0 620.5 433.8 186.8 − − 0.0 6.2 − 137.6 75.4 62.2
                              23 1 725.0 276.6 626.2 437.0 189.3 − − 0.0 5.8 − 136.5 73.9 62.6
                              30 1 756.2 273.8 633.1 442.4 190.6 − − 0.0 8.2 − 114.5 55.9 58.6
         Apr                  6 1 717.4 272.8 645.7 454.5 191.2 − − 0.0 6.7 − 113.9 55.5 58.4
                              13 1 712.7 273.0 638.7 444.8 193.9 − − 0.0 4.1 − 116.8 58.1 58.7
                              20 1 681.8 273.1 617.5 426.4 191.0 − − 0.0 6.1 − 107.2 54.8 52.3
                              27 1 706.5 275.6 634.6 447.9 186.7 − − 0.0 3.1 − 110.1 57.8 52.3
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial market rates at the end of the quarter. 1According to the accounting regime chosen
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the by the Eurosystem on the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the tot al value
national central banks of the euro area member states (NCBs). The balance sheet of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an “Intra-Euros ystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
May 2018
III Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to  area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    Ondenominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    reporting credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
1 accounts reserves    date liabilities  2 
Eurosystem 3
 
177.8 9.0 10.8 10.8 − 55.6 221.5 − 364.9 102.3 2017 Oct                  6
176.5 8.6 11.4 11.4 − 55.6 222.7 − 364.9 102.3                               13
175.1 8.9 12.4 12.4 − 55.6 223.5 − 364.9 102.3                               20
171.6 9.5 11.3 11.3 − 55.6 224.3 − 364.9 102.3                               27
186.8 9.8 10.9 10.9 − 55.6 226.5 − 364.9 102.3          Nov                  3
186.4 8.2 11.8 11.8 − 55.6 227.7 − 364.9 102.3                               10
174.4 10.1 11.6 11.6 − 55.6 234.3 − 364.9 102.3                               17
170.2 8.7 11.2 11.2 − 55.6 235.0 − 364.9 102.3                               24
185.5 9.2 11.4 11.4 − 55.6 230.9 − 364.9 102.3          Dec                  1
198.2 8.5 12.8 12.8 − 55.6 232.7 − 364.9 102.3                                 8
219.5 7.5 12.0 12.0 − 55.6 233.9 − 364.9 102.3                               15
286.1 6.5 11.9 11.9 − 55.6 233.6 − 364.9 102.3                               22
354.6 3.8 11.3 11.3 − 55.2 225.5 − 358.0 102.3                               29
291.1 3.9 11.4 11.4 − 55.2 227.7 − 357.9 102.3 2018 Jan                  5
253.3 5.3 11.2 11.2 − 55.2 230.2 − 357.9 102.1                               12
252.1 7.0 12.1 12.1 − 55.2 231.6 − 357.9 102.2                               19
220.8 5.4 11.5 11.5 − 55.2 234.6 − 357.9 102.2                               26
239.1 8.4 11.9 11.9 − 55.2 237.9 − 357.9 102.7 2018 Feb                  2
237.9 7.5 12.7 12.7 − 55.2 230.8 − 357.9 102.7                                 9
245.8 8.6 12.9 12.9 − 55.2 232.7 − 357.9 102.6                               16
251.9 9.0 12.4 12.4 − 55.2 232.5 − 357.9 102.6                               23
260.4 8.5 12.7 12.7 − 55.2 234.1 − 357.9 102.7          Mar                  2
258.1 9.8 11.6 11.6 − 55.2 233.6 − 357.9 102.7                                 9
270.4 7.7 11.4 11.4 − 55.2 235.7 − 357.9 102.7                               16
266.5 7.3 12.9 12.9 − 55.2 236.1 − 357.9 103.5                               23
339.8 5.1 12.3 12.3 − 54.9 231.3 − 351.2 104.0                               30
258.6 6.3 11.7 11.7 − 54.9 225.4 − 351.2 104.3          Apr                  6
257.3 6.8 12.4 12.4 − 54.9 228.0 − 351.2 104.3                               13
257.1 7.6 11.1 11.1 − 54.9 230.5 − 351.2 104.4                               20
262.7 8.6 10.9 10.9 − 54.9 227.1 − 351.2 104.4                               27
 Deutsche Bundesbank
110.8 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.4 27.1 352.1 114.6 5.6 2017 Oct                  6
107.0 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 14.4 27.1 352.1 114.6 5.6                               13
104.6 0.0 2.7 2.7 − 14.4 27.2 352.1 114.6 5.6                               20
101.4 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 14.4 27.2 352.1 114.6 5.6                               27
118.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 − 14.4 27.6 354.2 114.6 5.6          Nov                  3
115.2 0.0 2.5 2.5 − 14.4 27.6 354.2 114.6 5.6                               10
107.0 0.0 2.8 2.8 − 14.4 27.6 354.2 114.6 5.6                               17
101.4 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 14.4 27.7 354.2 114.6 5.6                               24
94.5 0.0 2.0 2.0 − 14.4 27.7 355.5 114.6 5.6          Dec                  1
104.1 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 14.4 27.8 355.5 114.6 5.6                                 8
122.4 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.4 27.8 355.5 114.6 5.6                               15
165.4 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.4 28.1 355.5 114.6 5.6                               22
199.8 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.3 27.9 359.3 113.1 5.6                               29
161.5 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.3 28.0 359.3 113.1 5.6 2018 Jan                  5
152.9 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.3 28.0 359.3 113.1 5.6                               12
153.0 0.0 1.6 1.6 − 14.3 28.4 359.3 113.1 5.6                               19
126.1 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 14.3 28.1 359.7 113.1 5.6                               26
144.5 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.3 28.3 359.3 113.1 5.6 2018 Feb                  2
139.0 0.0 1.2 1.2 − 14.3 28.3 359.3 113.1 5.6                                 9
144.2 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.3 28.4 359.3 113.1 5.6                               16
149.6 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 14.3 28.6 359.3 113.1 5.6                               23
154.3 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 14.3 26.8 361.3 113.1 5.7          Mar                  2
151.9 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.3 26.8 361.3 113.1 5.7                                 9
155.3 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.3 27.0 361.3 113.1 5.7                               16
157.1 0.0 1.3 1.3 − 14.3 27.0 361.3 113.1 5.7                               23
198.2 0.0 1.8 1.8 − 14.2 27.0 368.2 111.5 5.7                               30
150.0 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.2 27.2 368.2 111.5 5.7          Apr                  6
151.1 0.0 2.2 2.2 − 14.2 27.2 368.2 111.5 5.7                               13
149.5 0.0 1.5 1.5 − 14.2 27.3 368.2 111.5 5.7                               20
155.2 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.2 27.3 368.2 111.5 5.7                               27
 
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92 % of the value of the euro banknote in circu- notes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounti ng regime and
lation is also allocated to the NCBs on a monthly basis, and each NCB shows in its the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as anbalance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued which corresponds to its “Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue“. 2For the Deutsche
paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the value of the euro bank- Bundesbank: including DM banknotes still in circulation . 3 Source: ECB. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other member states to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.02017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2016         June 7,920.6 19.3 2,072.8 1,592.2 1,292.9 299.3 480.6 338.2 142.4 3,745.9 3,321.4 2,759.7 2,473.7
         July 7,942.1 19.7 2,086.0 1,604.7 1,308.1 296.6 481.2 341.4 139.8 3,758.8 3,333.6 2,766.6 2,479.7
         Aug 7,908.5 19.7 2,086.1 1,611.7 1,317.0 294.7 474.4 336.0 138.5 3,758.4 3,335.4 2,774.3 2,486.3         Sep 7,863.9 21.0 2,074.5 1,636.4 1,343.9 292.5 438.2 300.7 137.5 3,766.0 3,343.0 2,785.6 2,497.3
         Oct 7,868.7 22.8 2,079.5 1,641.2 1,349.4 291.8 438.3 301.6 136.7 3,773.0 3,349.9 2,793.6 2,502.5
         Nov 7,911.6 22.9 2,154.7 1,712.1 1,421.7 290.5 442.6 306.3 136.2 3,785.7 3,361.6 2,810.0 2,518.4         Dec 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017         Jan 7,889.3 24.6 2,210.1 1,777.0 1,490.7 286.3 433.1 299.8 133.3 3,769.9 3,347.6 2,813.5 2,519.3
         Feb 7,944.8 23.9 2,225.4 1,783.3 1,497.9 285.4 442.1 307.6 134.5 3,774.5 3,347.6 2,819.5 2,525.6         Mar 7,926.1 23.6 2,237.5 1,797.8 1,513.2 284.6 439.7 306.9 132.7 3,776.8 3,351.3 2,828.1 2,533.8
         Apr 7,954.6 24.7 2,276.6 1,847.6 1,563.1 284.6 428.9 298.2 130.8 3,780.1 3,357.1 2,836.6 2,541.1
         May 7,947.0 25.6 2,286.5 1,864.4 1,579.4 285.0 422.1 290.1 132.0 3,782.1 3,360.7 2,847.3 2,552.6         June 7,849.7 27.3 2,245.7 1,830.9 1,548.9 282.1 414.8 284.2 130.6 3,780.7 3,364.7 2,859.4 2,559.7
         July 7,818.7 26.6 2,258.5 1,840.3 1,560.2 280.0 418.2 289.0 129.2 3,787.1 3,370.5 2,867.1 2,567.3
         Aug 7,807.7 27.5 2,243.1 1,828.2 1,553.7 274.5 415.0 286.9 128.0 3,792.2 3,377.0 2,876.6 2,576.3         Sep 7,811.3 28.4 2,262.7 1,847.3 1,578.3 269.0 415.4 288.4 127.0 3,799.4 3,385.3 2,890.2 2,589.5
         Oct 7,825.7 28.4 2,285.3 1,873.3 1,604.0 269.2 412.1 285.1 127.0 3,804.7 3,393.5 2,899.1 2,598.2
         Nov 7,849.9 28.0 2,312.8 1,901.5 1,633.0 268.5 411.3 285.5 125.8 3,818.1 3,411.2 2,919.0 2,612.6         Dec 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018         Jan 7,817.2 29.2 2,296.1 1,891.0 1,624.5 266.5 405.1 280.3 124.9 3,813.9 3,407.5 2,930.5 2,622.5
         Feb 7,790.8 29.6 2,298.1 1,892.3 1,627.0 265.2 405.9 280.6 125.2 3,814.1 3,406.5 2,938.1 2,633.4         Mar 7,746.6 35.1 2,254.6 1,852.5 1,585.4 267.2 402.1 274.9 127.2 3,814.9 3,410.7 2,946.8 2,644.4
 Changes 3
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.72011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.72012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.82013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.62014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.02017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2016         July 23.5 0.4 13.1 12.4 15.2 − 2.8 0.7 3.4 − 2.7 14.5 13.4 8.2 7.3
         Aug − 31.5 − 0.0 0.4 7.1 9.0 − 1.9 − 6.7 − 5.3 − 1.4 0.2 2.1 8.0 6.8         Sep − 42.7 1.3 − 11.3 24.9 26.9 − 2.0 − 36.3 − 35.2 − 1.1 8.3 8.3 11.7 11.4
         Oct − 0.5 1.8 4.8 5.2 5.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 0.5 − 0.9 6.5 7.1 7.9 5.2
         Nov 25.9 0.1 72.2 69.4 71.4 − 2.0 2.8 3.4 − 0.5 11.6 11.3 15.8 15.2         Dec − 121.7 3.1 − 53.6 − 41.3 − 37.8 − 3.5 − 12.3 − 11.7 − 0.6 − 23.1 − 17.0 − 4.4 − 6.1
2017         Jan 108.8 − 1.4 110.7 107.1 107.1 0.0 3.5 5.7 − 2.2 9.4 4.6 9.3 8.5
         Feb 47.4 − 0.7 14.0 5.6 6.8 − 1.2 8.4 7.1 1.2 4.3 0.3 6.3 6.5         Mar − 13.0 − 0.3 13.1 14.9 15.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 3.2 4.3 9.0 8.9
         Apr 40.0 1.1 41.0 50.7 50.5 0.2 − 9.7 − 7.8 − 1.9 4.7 6.8 9.4 8.2
         May 8.8 0.9 12.6 18.0 17.1 0.9 − 5.4 − 6.8 1.4 4.0 4.6 9.0 9.9         June − 85.4 1.7 − 38.0 − 31.5 − 29.2 − 2.3 − 6.5 − 5.2 − 1.4 0.5 5.3 13.2 8.0
         July − 14.3 − 0.7 14.5 10.5 12.2 − 1.7 4.0 5.2 − 1.2 8.6 7.1 8.9 8.6
         Aug − 4.7 0.9 − 14.3 − 11.6 − 6.3 − 5.3 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.2 5.6 6.8 9.9 9.3         Sep 4.8 0.9 21.8 21.5 26.0 − 4.5 0.3 1.2 − 0.9 6.9 7.1 12.0 13.5
         Oct 8.6 0.1 21.9 25.5 25.4 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.7 0.1 4.6 8.0 8.6 8.6
         Nov 33.4 − 0.4 28.9 28.8 29.4 − 0.6 0.0 1.2 − 1.1 14.8 18.7 19.0 13.5         Dec − 126.4 4.1 − 90.1 − 74.7 − 72.0 − 2.7 − 15.4 − 15.0 − 0.4 − 15.2 − 10.0 0.1 − 2.4
2018         Jan 124.2 − 2.9 82.2 70.9 68.7 2.2 11.3 11.5 − 0.2 14.7 8.2 12.4 13.0
         Feb 6.3 0.3 0.5 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.7 7.7 10.7         Mar − 41.7 5.5 − 43.4 − 39.7 − 41.7 2.0 − 3.7 − 5.6 1.9 2.2 5.2 9.8 12.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro-area
to non-banks in other member states residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which Secur- of which Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
286.0 561.8 323.9 237.9 424.4 281.2 155.2 143.2 28.9 114.3 1,036.4 774.7 1,046.2 2016          June
286.8 567.0 327.0 240.0 425.2 284.2 159.3 141.0 28.9 112.1 1,041.7 785.1 1,036.0          July
288.0 561.0 324.9 236.1 423.1 283.3 159.7 139.8 29.1 110.7 1,042.6 786.2 1,001.7          Aug 288.3 557.5 323.0 234.5 422.9 282.2 157.8 140.7 29.8 110.9 1,030.5 774.4 971.9          Sep 
291.0 556.4 326.3 230.0 423.0 284.6 162.1 138.5 29.5 108.9 1,077.9 823.1 915.5          Oct 
291.6 551.6 321.9 229.7 424.1 285.9 161.9 138.3 29.2 109.1 1,065.1 811.1 883.2          Nov 293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1          Dec 
294.2 534.1 312.2 221.9 422.4 284.6 163.1 137.7 28.6 109.2 1,080.8 826.0 803.9 2017          Jan 
294.0 528.0 311.6 216.5 427.0 289.4 165.6 137.6 28.6 109.0 1,095.4 843.6 825.5          Feb 294.3 523.2 307.1 216.1 425.5 290.8 167.2 134.7 29.0 105.7 1,097.1 847.5 791.1          Mar 
295.5 520.5 307.9 212.6 423.0 287.1 167.8 135.8 29.9 105.9 1,080.7 832.2 792.5          Apr 
294.6 513.4 298.9 214.6 421.4 288.5 166.8 132.9 28.9 103.9 1,056.3 808.0 796.5          May299.7 505.4 296.4 208.9 416.0 283.4 162.6 132.6 29.9 102.6 1,064.9 817.0 731.1          June
299.8 503.4 298.3 205.1 416.6 285.0 164.1 131.7 29.9 101.8 1,028.5 780.9 717.9          July
300.4 500.4 293.4 207.0 415.2 283.8 165.2 131.4 30.0 101.4 1,011.0 765.3 733.9          Aug 300.7 495.1 289.0 206.1 414.1 283.0 167.9 131.1 29.8 101.3 1,021.2 776.3 699.6          Sep 
301.0 494.4 289.2 205.3 411.2 281.6 167.7 129.6 30.4 99.2 1,014.2 768.9 693.0          Oct 
306.4 492.2 287.3 205.0 406.8 276.8 164.2 130.0 29.8 100.2 1,005.3 759.4 685.6          Nov 308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9          Dec 
308.0 477.0 282.8 194.2 406.4 278.6 163.9 127.8 29.7 98.0 1,009.1 758.2 668.9 2018          Jan 
304.7 468.4 277.4 191.0 407.6 280.5 165.9 127.1 29.6 97.5 1,026.5 775.9 622.5          Feb 302.4 463.9 275.5 188.4 404.1 278.3 164.9 125.9 29.8 96.1 1,016.8 763.8 625.3          Mar 
Changes 3
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
0.8 5.3 3.1 2.2 1.0 3.2 4.4 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.1 6.7 11.9 − 11.1 2016          July
1.2 − 5.9 − 2.0 − 3.9 − 1.9 − 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.2 − 1.5 2.3 2.4 − 34.3          Aug 0.3 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 1.6 0.0 − 0.8 − 1.7 0.8 0.6 0.1 − 10.8 − 10.5 − 30.3          Sep 
2.8 − 0.9 3.5 − 4.3 − 0.6 1.9 4.0 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 2.2 42.7 44.1 − 56.4          Oct 
0.6 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 0.4 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 0.1 − 25.7 − 24.1 − 32.3          Nov 1.7 − 12.6 − 9.7 − 2.9 − 6.0 − 4.4 − 2.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 9.4 − 11.4 − 38.8          Dec 
0.8 − 4.7 0.0 − 4.8 4.9 3.7 4.2 1.2 0.1 1.1 30.4 31.0 − 40.2 2017          Jan 
− 0.2 − 6.1 − 0.6 − 5.4 4.0 4.2 2.1 − 0.2 0.0 − 0.2 8.2 11.7 21.6          Feb 
0.2 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 1.2 1.7 2.1 − 2.9 0.4 − 3.3 5.5 7.5 − 34.5          Mar 
1.2 − 2.6 0.8 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 3.3 1.1 1.2 0.9 0.3 − 8.2 − 7.4 1.4          Apr 
− 0.8 − 4.4 − 6.4 2.0 − 0.6 2.3 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 12.7 − 13.1 4.0          May
5.2 − 7.9 − 2.3 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 3.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.3 15.6 15.3 − 65.2          June
0.3 − 1.7 2.0 − 3.7 1.4 2.4 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 24.4 − 24.9 − 12.3          July
0.6 − 3.0 − 4.9 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.9 − 11.3 16.0          Aug 
− 1.5 − 4.9 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 8.3 9.0 − 33.1          Sep 
0.1 − 0.7 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.2 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 6.6          Oct 
5.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 4.3 − 3.1 0.4 − 0.6 1.0 − 2.5 − 3.6 − 7.3          Nov 2.5 − 10.1 − 2.8 − 7.2 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 5.4 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.3 − 9.5 − 16.9          Dec 
− 0.6 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 6.5 7.7 6.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.2 29.4 24.6 0.7 2018          Jan 
− 3.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 − 3.3 1.0 1.7 1.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 10.6 11.1 − 5.4          Feb − 2.2 − 4.6 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 3.0 − 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.2 0.2 − 1.4 − 8.8 − 11.4 2.8          Mar 
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
1 Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
  Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which of which
sheet home member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country states Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.22017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2016         June 7,920.6 1,241.7 1,039.1 202.6 3,350.9 3,250.2 1,718.1 942.1 290.9 590.0 534.5 89.4 44.9
         July 7,942.1 1,226.7 1,023.7 203.0 3,362.7 3,267.1 1,733.1 945.0 295.2 589.1 534.5 85.5 40.7
         Aug 7,908.5 1,211.5 1,016.5 195.0 3,369.5 3,274.0 1,744.5 941.2 292.8 588.4 534.6 85.5 40.4         Sep 7,863.9 1,194.8 1,029.1 165.7 3,372.1 3,274.9 1,743.8 944.0 297.4 587.1 534.0 88.0 41.4
         Oct 7,868.7 1,186.8 1,025.4 161.3 3,378.8 3,286.5 1,763.9 936.0 288.5 586.6 534.3 83.7 37.1
         Nov 7,911.6 1,205.6 1,042.2 163.4 3,420.0 3,320.5 1,795.0 939.3 292.8 586.1 534.4 89.8 43.4         Dec 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017         Jan 7,889.3 1,237.0 1,053.4 183.6 3,433.4 3,337.5 1,807.5 941.6 300.1 588.4 537.7 88.4 42.2
         Feb 7,944.8 1,245.6 1,055.3 190.3 3,435.3 3,336.9 1,812.7 935.8 295.0 588.5 538.3 89.6 41.7         Mar 7,926.1 1,259.8 1,077.3 182.5 3,433.9 3,334.5 1,813.5 934.4 296.4 586.6 537.0 91.2 39.6
         Apr 7,954.6 1,254.1 1,075.4 178.8 3,452.0 3,352.3 1,840.8 925.4 290.7 586.2 536.9 91.2 41.7
         May 7,947.0 1,259.3 1,079.9 179.4 3,463.2 3,360.6 1,848.6 926.4 292.7 585.7 536.8 93.5 44.2         June 7,849.7 1,235.2 1,054.2 181.0 3,477.7 3,362.0 1,865.6 911.8 290.3 584.6 536.2 107.1 44.8
         July 7,818.7 1,239.8 1,062.3 177.5 3,470.9 3,353.4 1,862.3 907.6 287.9 583.4 538.2 107.5 45.8
         Aug 7,807.7 1,243.3 1,065.8 177.4 3,486.1 3,368.4 1,880.5 905.5 285.7 582.4 537.9 108.3 47.5         Sep 7,811.3 1,256.2 1,071.9 184.3 3,494.8 3,371.4 1,886.8 902.8 284.3 581.8 537.9 114.7 50.7
         Oct 7,825.7 1,272.0 1,081.9 190.1 3,505.8 3,388.0 1,912.7 893.9 277.3 581.5 538.4 109.2 46.3
         Nov 7,849.9 1,275.5 1,081.0 194.5 3,542.9 3,417.4 1,939.9 896.5 276.9 581.0 538.6 113.6 52.1         Dec 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018         Jan 7,817.2 1,249.4 1,060.8 188.6 3,539.8 3,419.1 1,944.5 892.2 276.8 582.4 539.7 110.6 46.4
         Feb 7,790.8 1,246.9 1,058.2 188.8 3,536.8 3,416.5 1,945.4 888.9 273.3 582.1 540.4 109.7 47.1         Mar 7,746.6 1,238.1 1,057.5 180.6 3,537.7 3,413.3 1,944.0 888.1 274.8 581.2 539.9 115.3 48.7
 Changes 4
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.22011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.52012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.42013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.32014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.92017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2016         July 23.5 − 14.9 − 15.4 0.5 11.9 17.1 15.1 2.9 4.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 4.2
         Aug − 31.5 − 15.0 − 7.1 − 7.9 7.0 7.0 11.5 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 0.7 0.1 0.1 − 0.3         Sep − 42.7 − 16.5 12.7 − 29.2 2.7 1.0 − 0.6 2.9 4.6 − 1.2 − 0.5 2.5 1.1
         Oct − 0.5 − 8.4 − 3.7 − 4.7 6.2 11.2 19.8 − 8.1 − 8.9 − 0.6 0.2 − 4.3 − 4.4
         Nov 25.9 17.3 15.9 1.4 39.7 32.7 30.1 3.0 4.0 − 0.4 0.1 5.8 6.1         Dec − 121.7 − 0.9 − 9.3 8.4 − 9.0 − 2.2 − 0.4 − 4.1 − 1.3 2.3 2.7 − 5.7 − 6.2
2017         Jan 108.8 32.8 20.7 12.1 23.0 19.7 13.3 6.4 9.1 − 0.0 0.7 4.4 5.1
         Feb 47.4 7.6 1.6 6.1 1.2 − 0.7 4.7 − 5.5 − 4.8 0.1 0.7 1.1 − 0.5         Mar − 13.0 14.8 22.2 − 7.4 − 1.0 − 2.1 1.1 − 1.3 1.5 − 1.9 − 1.4 1.6 − 2.1
         Apr 40.0 − 4.4 − 1.3 − 3.1 19.1 18.7 27.8 − 8.7 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.2 2.2
         May 8.8 6.7 5.3 1.5 12.7 9.5 8.7 1.3 2.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.5 2.6         June − 85.4 − 22.2 − 24.3 2.1 15.3 11.1 17.5 − 5.4 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 0.7 4.7 0.7
         July − 14.3 5.3 8.9 − 3.5 − 5.3 − 7.4 − 2.4 − 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.4 0.7 1.1
         Aug − 4.7 4.1 3.8 0.3 15.8 15.5 18.5 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 1.7         Sep 4.8 3.0 − 3.8 6.7 8.4 2.9 6.1 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.6 0.0 6.4 3.2
         Oct 8.6 15.2 9.8 5.5 10.3 16.0 25.5 − 9.1 − 7.1 − 0.3 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.4
         Nov 33.4 4.6 − 0.3 4.9 37.9 30.2 27.9 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 0.2 4.6 5.9         Dec − 126.4 − 36.9 − 27.7 − 9.2 − 13.1 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 4.6 − 2.6 1.9 2.4 − 4.9 − 9.6
2018         Jan 124.2 17.6 13.1 4.5 12.2 9.1 8.7 0.9 3.2 − 0.5 0.2 2.4 4.0
         Feb 6.3 − 3.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.5 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 0.2 0.4 − 1.1 0.7         Mar − 41.7 − 8.9 − 0.7 − 8.2 0.9 − 3.1 − 1.4 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 5.6 1.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other member states  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which from Money of which Liabilities
domestic market with to non- repos with
of which of which central non-banks fund euro- Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 201663.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
41.3 17.1 3.2 2.7 11.3 8.8 2.5 2.7 1,023.9 50.0 618.1 587.3 1,093.4 2016          June
41.6 16.2 3.2 2.7 10.1 8.1 3.4 2.5 1,021.8 56.6 656.1 578.1 1,090.9          July
42.0 17.0 3.2 2.7 10.0 7.9 3.2 2.4 1,020.1 52.7 663.4 581.9 1,056.4          Aug 43.4 17.9 3.1 2.7 9.2 8.1 2.9 2.5 1,011.1 51.9 655.7 596.9 1,028.0          Sep 
43.6 16.6 3.1 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.2 2.4 1,019.6 50.7 710.2 594.9 972.9          Oct 
43.4 16.0 3.1 2.6 9.7 8.2 3.0 2.4 1,035.2 48.4 711.7 591.2 942.6          Nov 43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3          Dec 
43.2 15.6 3.0 2.6 7.5 6.9 4.8 2.3 1,043.2 47.5 716.8 585.0 866.9 2017          Jan 
44.8 18.0 3.0 2.6 8.8 7.7 4.5 2.3 1,050.8 48.0 734.1 588.5 883.7          Feb 48.6 19.9 3.0 2.6 8.3 7.9 2.6 2.2 1,045.7 45.9 730.2 594.1 857.6          Mar 
46.6 18.3 3.0 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.5 2.2 1,042.1 43.9 749.0 598.3 853.4          Apr 
46.4 17.2 3.0 2.6 9.1 7.8 2.4 2.1 1,042.5 44.6 724.9 603.2 849.4          May59.3 20.1 3.0 2.6 8.6 7.9 1.8 2.2 1,039.2 44.8 689.8 610.2 793.5          June
58.8 19.1 3.0 2.6 10.0 7.9 3.3 2.2 1,029.2 43.9 684.2 606.2 782.9          July
57.8 18.3 3.0 2.6 9.4 7.9 3.4 2.4 1,024.7 42.6 643.1 608.1 796.7          Aug 61.0 20.5 2.9 2.6 8.7 8.0 2.6 2.4 1,015.2 42.2 669.5 612.4 758.2          Sep 
59.9 18.3 2.9 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.3 2.2 1,008.9 40.7 667.9 612.7 753.9          Oct 
58.6 16.7 2.9 2.6 11.8 8.3 2.6 2.2 1,004.7 40.1 664.4 609.8 747.9          Nov 63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8          Dec 
61.3 18.9 2.9 2.6 10.0 8.9 4.3 2.1 1,002.6 35.4 682.4 666.5 670.0 2018          Jan 
59.7 18.2 2.9 2.6 10.7 8.8 3.8 2.1 1,006.3 36.0 690.3 678.6 625.9          Feb 63.8 22.6 2.9 2.6 9.1 8.3 2.9 2.3 1,014.2 35.5 641.0 674.8 635.6          Mar 
Changes 4
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.7 0.9 − 0.2 − 1.2 6.6 38.6 − 8.9 − 2.7 2016          July
0.4 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 3.8 7.9 6.6 − 36.6          Aug 1.5 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 0.3 0.0 − 8.1 − 0.8 − 7.0 12.0 − 25.5          Sep 
0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 5.3 − 1.3 52.6 − 2.9 − 53.5          Oct 
− 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.6 − 0.2 0.1 7.3 − 2.6 − 5.1 − 6.2 − 27.0          Nov 
0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 6.8 − 1.3 − 69.7 − 0.2 − 34.3          Dec 
− 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.0 2.6 − 0.1 17.9 0.5 76.7 − 5.1 − 38.9 2017          Jan 
1.6 2.3 0.0 0.0 0.8 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 3.4 0.3 14.4 2.4 18.7          Feb 3.7 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 0.3 − 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.8 − 2.0 − 2.2 6.2 − 26.1          Mar 
− 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.0 1.4 − 1.8 22.7 5.6 − 5.3          Apr 
− 0.1 − 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 7.8 0.9 − 18.5 7.0 − 5.7          May
4.0 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 0.1 1.0 0.3 − 31.9 8.9 − 56.0          June
− 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 10.6          July
− 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 39.0 2.7 13.0          Aug 
3.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.7 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.5 25.3 4.7 − 25.6          Sep 
− 1.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.6          Oct 
− 1.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 0.3 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 7.1          Nov 
4.7 3.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 2.3 − 59.2 5.6 − 16.1          Dec 
− 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 15.8 − 2.2 84.0 − 17.5 11.0 2018          Jan 
− 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 5.0 10.8 − 1.0          Feb 
4.1 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 0.2 7.4 − 1.1 − 49.3 − 3.3 12.1          Mar 
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
2 Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
  
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which of which 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2017         Oct 1,639 7,871.8 526.4 2,375.2 1,900.0 472.3 4,066.0 351.5 2,993.2 0.5 713.6 113.0 791.2
         Nov 1,634 7,895.7 508.7 2,410.5 1,936.0 472.2 4,080.2 351.9 3,002.4 0.5 717.8 113.0 783.3         Dec 1,631 7,755.3 447.7 2,371.3 1,901.6 468.4 4,056.5 333.6 3,002.4 0.6 715.0 112.6 767.1
2018         Jan 1,627 7,861.7 500.8 2,407.1 1,934.0 470.6 4,074.4 353.7 3,001.5 0.6 712.2 112.5 766.8
         Feb 1,627 7,836.4 513.0 2,408.7 1,936.1 469.6 4,080.8 357.4 3,012.0 0.5 703.6 112.5 721.5         Mar 1,627 7,792.0 494.0 2,382.8 1,903.2 476.5 4,078.8 360.8 3,014.7 0.5 695.3 112.7 723.6
Commercial banks 6
2018         Feb 264 3,160.4 344.1 1,007.4 929.9 76.9 1,254.1 203.2 826.7 0.4 220.5 50.6 504.2
         Mar 264 3,101.4 311.2 984.4 905.5 78.2 1,248.0 203.6 827.6 0.4 213.9 50.9 507.0
   Big banks 7
2018         Feb 4 1,694.1 165.5 519.4 489.3 30.2 499.9 112.5 293.1 0.1 92.0 44.4 464.9
         Mar 4 1,658.7 144.8 504.0 472.6 31.4 497.4 111.9 293.8 0.1 90.3 44.7 467.8
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2018         Feb 153 1,038.2 95.7 248.8 204.7 43.8 657.4 62.8 476.4 0.2 117.1 5.3 31.0
         Mar 152 1,033.9 88.3 254.0 209.7 44.1 655.2 63.0 477.3 0.2 113.9 5.4 31.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2018         Feb 107 428.1 83.0 239.2 235.9 2.9 96.8 27.9 57.2 0.1 11.4 0.8 8.4
         Mar 108 408.8 78.0 226.4 223.2 2.8 95.3 28.7 56.5 0.1 9.8 0.8 8.2
Landesbanken
2018         Feb 8 898.6 53.9 280.9 213.2 66.7 463.6 52.3 340.6 0.1 69.5 9.9 90.2
         Mar 8 894.2 58.7 274.5 204.3 69.5 462.1 53.4 339.3 0.0 67.2 9.9 89.1
Savings banks
2018         Feb 386 1,201.0 39.0 174.2 61.6 112.6 955.7 48.3 749.4 0.0 158.0 14.1 17.9
         Mar 386 1,201.9 37.8 173.2 59.8 113.3 959.1 49.1 751.6 0.0 158.3 14.1 17.7
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2018         Feb 917 893.0 19.9 165.0 59.3 105.1 672.5 32.7 529.5 0.0 110.2 16.8 18.8
         Mar 917 895.3 18.4 166.2 59.9 105.6 674.7 33.3 531.0 0.0 110.3 16.9 19.1
Mortgage banks
2018         Feb 13 225.4 2.6 31.7 20.9 10.8 184.6 3.0 157.6 − 24.0 0.1 6.3
         Mar 13 224.9 3.2 31.8 21.0 10.8 183.7 3.0 157.5 − 23.2 0.1 6.2
Building and loan associations
2018         Feb 20 231.0 1.6 56.8 40.9 16.0 167.7 1.2 141.1 . 25.4 0.3 4.6
         Mar 20 232.0 1.6 57.0 40.8 16.2 168.5 1.2 142.0 . 25.4 0.3 4.5
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2018         Feb 19 1,227.1 51.9 692.6 610.4 81.6 382.5 16.8 267.1 − 95.9 20.6 79.6
         Mar 19 1,242.2 63.2 695.8 611.9 82.9 382.7 17.3 265.8 − 97.1 20.5 80.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2018         Feb 142 1,138.1 144.4 413.8 374.6 38.6 489.9 75.1 309.9 0.3 102.5 4.1 85.9
         Mar 143 1,109.5 128.1 403.4 364.2 38.6 487.3 76.6 310.1 0.4 98.7 4.1 86.5
  of which:  Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2018         Feb 35 710.0 61.5 174.6 138.7 35.7 393.1 47.2 252.7 0.2 91.2 3.3 77.5
         Mar 35 700.7 50.0 177.0 141.0 35.8 392.0 47.9 253.6 0.2 88.9 3.3 78.3
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets meaning of section 340e (3) sentence 1 of the German Commerci al Code (Handels-
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with section 35 (1) No 1a of the C redit Institution
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung de r Kreditinstitute)
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010 reporting
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in the Statis tical Supplement
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, in Tables I. 1 to I.3. 2For building and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which of which published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item Bearer capital,
for for of which debt Liabilities funds for
up to and more arising At three Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,768.6 556.3 1,212.2 3,679.3 2,049.1 294.0 694.0 78.4 589.0 545.1 53.1 1,110.1 511.2 802.6 2017          Oct 
1,774.0 554.7 1,219.3 3,711.1 2,084.5 287.5 698.0 74.5 588.5 545.2 52.6 1,103.1 511.2 796.4          Nov 1,707.1 500.3 1,206.8 3,662.1 2,050.4 269.1 700.3 46.0 590.3 547.6 52.0 1,097.0 511.1 777.9          Dec 
1,772.0 566.8 1,205.1 3,703.9 2,079.8 287.2 697.6 75.0 589.9 546.3 49.4 1,090.7 510.5 784.6 2018          Jan 
1,772.3 551.4 1,220.9 3,705.4 2,084.4 288.9 695.3 84.4 589.6 546.9 47.2 1,107.4 511.5 739.9          Feb 1,724.9 504.2 1,220.7 3,694.7 2,074.3 294.2 691.0 71.1 588.6 546.4 46.7 1,112.0 512.7 747.7          Mar 
Commercial banks 6
884.9 406.9 478.0 1,489.0 924.4 169.6 274.2 66.0 101.0 93.5 19.7 159.0 180.0 447.5 2018          Feb 
835.2 353.6 481.6 1,470.8 915.9 163.9 270.8 54.4 100.7 93.3 19.4 160.2 180.1 455.2          Mar 
Big banks 7
420.8 165.6 255.2 646.7 386.9 104.4 89.6 65.8 61.5 60.3 4.3 122.1 103.8 400.6 2018          Feb 
394.7 141.5 253.2 627.8 374.1 99.1 88.9 54.3 61.4 60.2 4.3 122.9 103.8 409.5          Mar 
Regional banks and other commercial banks
213.1 67.0 146.1 684.2 429.3 41.2 159.1 0.1 39.3 32.9 15.4 36.7 68.0 36.3 2018          Feb 
206.5 56.4 150.1 687.3 434.0 42.6 156.5 0.0 39.2 32.9 15.1 37.0 68.1 35.0          Mar 
Branches of foreign banks
251.1 174.4 76.7 158.1 108.2 24.1 25.5 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.2 8.2 10.6 2018          Feb 
234.0 155.7 78.3 155.6 107.7 22.2 25.5 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.3 8.2 10.7          Mar 
Landesbanken
258.9 62.3 196.6 295.6 132.1 58.7 91.6 14.8 12.5 12.3 0.7 196.5 51.1 96.4 2018          Feb 
257.0 61.3 195.6 296.1 129.8 62.1 90.9 11.6 12.5 12.3 0.7 196.3 51.4 93.5          Mar 
Savings banks
131.9 5.0 127.0 902.8 563.4 14.6 15.1 − 290.1 264.8 19.6 14.4 108.2 43.7 2018          Feb 
132.4 6.2 126.2 902.6 563.7 14.7 15.2 − 289.7 264.7 19.4 14.2 108.3 44.4          Mar 
 
Credit cooperatives
 
114.4 1.4 113.0 662.7 423.9 33.3 14.4 − 185.5 175.9 5.6 9.4 74.5 32.0 2018          Feb 
115.3 1.9 113.4 663.6 424.3 34.5 14.1 − 185.2 175.7 5.5 8.9 74.6 32.9          Mar 
Mortgage banks
44.4 2.9 41.5 80.0 3.0 3.9 73.1 − − − . 84.5 8.9 7.6 2018          Feb 
44.0 2.9 41.1 79.2 3.2 3.7 72.3 − − − . 85.9 8.8 7.1          Mar 
Building and loan associations
26.7 4.1 22.6 178.9 3.3 1.4 173.5 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 3.1 11.0 11.4 2018          Feb 
26.9 4.1 22.8 179.3 3.4 1.4 173.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 3.1 11.6 11.1          Mar 
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
311.1 68.8 242.3 96.5 34.3 7.3 53.4 3.6 − − . 640.5 77.7 101.2 2018          Feb 
314.2 74.2 240.0 103.2 33.9 13.9 53.8 5.1 − − . 643.4 77.9 103.5          Mar 
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
424.9 250.5 174.3 550.8 383.5 55.6 83.6 9.8 21.1 20.6 7.1 22.8 49.5 90.0 2018          Feb 
399.6 221.9 177.7 548.5 383.8 54.5 82.2 10.9 20.9 20.5 7.0 23.3 50.2 87.8          Mar 
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
173.8 76.2 97.6 392.8 275.3 31.5 58.1 9.8 20.8 20.4 7.1 22.6 41.4 79.4 2018          Feb 
165.6 66.2 99.4 392.9 276.1 32.4 56.7 10.9 20.7 20.3 7.0 23.0 42.0 77.1          Mar 
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerisc he Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking  categories. 
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
3 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro-area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  
1 
End of year or month *
 
2008 17.4 102.6 1,861.7 1,298.1 0.0 55.7 507.8 2.0 3,071.1 2,698.9 1.2 3.1 367.92009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.82017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2016         Oct 22.6 258.7 1,360.3 1,090.2 0.0 1.4 268.7 1.7 3,281.0 2,828.6 0.2 1.6 450.6
         Nov 22.6 291.7 1,397.6 1,128.8 0.0 1.1 267.6 1.7 3,293.1 2,840.0 0.2 1.3 451.6         Dec 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017         Jan 24.3 346.9 1,407.0 1,142.5 0.0 1.0 263.5 1.7 3,277.7 2,831.2 0.3 0.8 445.4
         Feb 23.6 346.6 1,413.8 1,150.2 0.0 1.1 262.5 1.8 3,279.0 2,836.8 0.3 0.8 441.1         Mar 23.4 352.1 1,423.3 1,160.4 0.0 1.3 261.6 1.7 3,283.0 2,840.6 0.3 1.0 441.1
         Apr 24.4 400.2 1,424.8 1,161.7 0.0 1.1 262.0 1.7 3,288.9 2,848.6 0.3 1.1 438.9
         May 25.4 426.0 1,415.5 1,152.3 0.0 1.1 262.1 1.7 3,292.9 2,851.3 0.2 1.8 439.6         June 27.0 417.8 1,391.1 1,130.4 0.0 1.2 259.4 1.7 3,296.8 2,855.9 0.2 1.1 439.6
         July 26.4 420.0 1,398.0 1,139.4 0.0 1.4 257.2 1.7 3,302.5 2,865.2 0.3 1.0 436.0
         Aug 27.3 421.3 1,384.2 1,131.4 0.0 1.4 251.3 1.7 3,308.9 2,869.4 0.2 0.8 438.5         Sep 28.1 409.2 1,416.1 1,168.3 0.0 1.3 246.5 1.7 3,317.6 2,878.2 0.3 0.7 438.4
         Oct 28.1 472.7 1,378.5 1,130.6 0.0 0.9 247.0 1.7 3,326.1 2,887.0 0.3 0.8 438.0
         Nov 27.7 457.1 1,422.2 1,175.1 0.0 0.8 246.3 1.8 3,343.7 2,899.6 0.2 1.2 442.6         Dec 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018         Jan 29.0 448.1 1,421.7 1,176.0 0.0 0.7 245.1 2.5 3,339.3 2,904.9 0.3 1.0 433.1
         Feb 29.3 460.7 1,409.5 1,165.3 0.0 0.8 243.3 2.9 3,338.3 2,910.6 0.2 1.2 426.4         Mar 34.8 440.8 1,389.5 1,143.5 0.0 0.9 245.2 3.2 3,342.5 2,919.6 0.3 0.9 421.8
Changes *
2009 − 0.5 − 23.6 − 147.2 − 157.3 − 0.0 − 24.1 + 34.3 + 0.2 + 25.7 − 11.2 − 0.4 + 1.4 + 35.9
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.92012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.72013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.82014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.92017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2016         Oct + 1.8 + 12.7 − 7.3 − 6.6 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 7.0 + 8.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.7
         Nov + 0.1 + 33.0 + 37.3 + 38.7 − − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.0 + 12.1 + 11.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 1.0         Dec + 3.1 − 7.7 − 32.7 − 29.0 − − 0.3 − 3.3 + 0.3 − 19.0 − 16.4 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.8
2017         Jan − 1.4 + 62.9 + 42.1 + 42.6 − + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.3 + 3.3 + 7.3 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.4
         Feb − 0.7 − 0.3 + 6.8 + 7.7 − + 0.1 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 5.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2         Mar − 0.3 + 5.5 + 9.5 + 10.2 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
         Apr + 1.1 + 48.1 + 1.7 + 1.3 − − + 0.4 − 0.0 + 5.9 + 8.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.3
         May + 0.9 + 25.8 − 9.4 − 9.5 − − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 2.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.7         June + 1.7 − 8.2 − 23.5 − 20.9 − + 0.1 − 2.7 − 0.0 + 4.0 + 4.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0
         July − 0.7 + 2.2 + 6.9 + 9.0 − + 0.2 − 2.2 − + 5.6 + 9.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
         Aug + 0.9 + 1.3 − 13.8 − 8.0 − + 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.6         Sep + 0.8 − 12.1 + 34.1 + 38.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.5
         Oct + 0.1 + 63.5 − 37.6 − 37.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
         Nov − 0.4 − 15.6 + 43.7 + 44.4 − − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 17.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.6         Dec + 4.1 − 64.6 − 10.3 − 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.1
2018         Jan − 2.9 + 55.6 + 13.7 + 12.1 − + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 11.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 4.4
         Feb + 0.3 + 12.7 − 12.3 − 10.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 6.7         Mar + 5.5 − 20.0 − 19.9 − 21.9 − + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 4.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt securities,
revisions which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer debt securities; including
marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy operations

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
item banks Sight Time Redis- item Sight Time Savings Bank item Equalisa-
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 47.2 111.2 1,582.5 138.5 1,444.0 0.0 41.6 2,781.4 834.6 1,276.1 535.2 135.4 32.3 2008− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
− 19.1 89.7 1,025.1 137.1 887.9 0.0 5.7 3,294.7 1,768.0 888.8 586.6 51.3 28.6 2016          Oct 
− 19.1 89.3 1,041.1 145.9 895.1 0.0 5.6 3,328.9 1,799.3 892.5 586.2 50.9 28.6          Nov − 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8          Dec 
− 20.3 90.8 1,052.6 136.9 915.6 0.1 5.5 3,346.3 1,812.5 895.8 588.5 49.5 30.6 2017          Jan 
− 20.3 89.4 1,054.6 141.4 913.1 0.0 5.6 3,345.5 1,816.6 891.4 588.5 49.0 30.5          Feb − 20.1 89.1 1,077.0 137.4 939.6 0.0 5.5 3,342.8 1,817.0 890.9 586.7 48.2 30.4          Mar 
− 20.1 88.8 1,074.8 140.7 934.2 0.0 5.5 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 586.2 47.8 30.3          Apr 
− 20.0 88.7 1,079.5 142.0 937.5 − 5.5 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 585.7 47.0 30.4          May− 19.7 88.4 1,053.9 125.6 928.3 0.0 5.5 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 584.7 46.6 29.8          June
− 19.6 88.5 1,061.7 125.0 936.6 0.0 5.4 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 583.5 46.0 29.9          July
− 19.6 88.9 1,065.1 121.2 943.9 0.0 5.4 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 582.4 45.4 30.0          Aug − 19.5 88.1 1,071.5 120.2 951.3 0.0 5.3 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 581.8 45.3 30.0          Sep 
− 19.4 87.9 1,081.0 122.8 958.2 0.0 5.3 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 581.5 44.8 29.9          Oct 
− 19.4 88.1 1,079.8 125.9 953.9 0.0 5.3 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 581.0 44.3 30.1          Nov − 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0          Dec 
− 18.9 88.2 1,060.1 116.0 944.1 0.0 5.0 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 582.4 42.9 30.4 2018          Jan 
− 19.0 88.5 1,056.6 110.3 946.4 0.0 5.0 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 582.2 42.3 30.9          Feb − 18.9 88.5 1,056.3 118.6 937.7 0.0 5.0 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 581.3 41.8 31.5          Mar 
Changes *
− − 4.2 + 0.7 − 225.4 − 9.7 − 215.7 − 0.0 − 5.7 + 59.7 + 211.4 − 179.3 + 59.3 − 31.6 − 0.9 2009
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017
− − 0.2 + 0.1 − 3.2 + 1.5 − 4.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 11.0 + 20.0 − 7.9 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 2016          Oct 
− − 0.0 − 0.4 + 16.0 + 8.8 + 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 34.2 + 31.3 + 3.7 − 0.4 − 0.4 −          Nov − + 0.0 + 1.6 − 8.2 − 16.4 + 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 2.8 + 2.3 − 0.5 + 0.2          Dec 
− + 1.2 − 0.2 + 19.7 + 7.4 + 12.3 − − 0.1 + 19.6 + 14.4 + 6.2 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.0 2017          Jan 
− − 0.1 − 1.4 + 2.0 + 4.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 4.1 − 4.5 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1          Feb − − 0.1 − 0.3 + 22.4 − 4.1 + 26.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.4 − 0.5 − 1.9 − 0.7 − 0.1          Mar 
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 2.2 + 3.3 − 5.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1          Apr 
− − 0.0 − 0.0 + 4.6 + 1.3 + 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0          May− − 0.4 + 0.0 − 24.6 − 16.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6          June
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.8 − 0.5 + 8.3 − − 0.0 − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2          July
− − 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 − 3.9 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Aug − − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.3 − − 0.1 + 4.3 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1          Sep 
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 − + 0.0 + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0          Oct 
− − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 3.1 − 4.2 − + 0.0 + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1          Nov − − 0.3 + 0.5 − 27.3 − 15.0 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1          Dec 
− − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 5.2 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 2018          Jan 
− − 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.5 − 5.8 + 2.3 − + 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5          Feb − − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 8.3 − 8.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5          Mar 
with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes outstanding. 6Since savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities arising from
the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, including deposits non-negotiable bearer debt securities. under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding deposits under

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
4 Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro-area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper item and paper Securities Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2008 0.3 1,446.6 1,131.6 767.2 364.3 15.6 299.5 1.9 908.4 528.9 151.4 377.5 12.9 366.62009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.62017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2016         Oct 0.3 1,089.3 850.4 571.3 279.0 2.1 236.8 1.0 758.1 454.5 102.9 351.6 4.2 299.3
         Nov 0.3 1,074.3 837.9 541.7 296.2 1.7 234.7 1.0 765.2 459.4 103.6 355.9 5.5 300.3         Dec 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017         Jan 0.3 1,069.4 836.4 537.3 299.0 0.8 232.2 1.7 772.9 468.4 109.0 359.4 5.3 299.1
         Feb 0.3 1,088.4 854.7 552.1 302.6 1.3 232.5 1.7 782.0 474.4 110.6 363.8 6.2 301.3         Mar 0.3 1,086.7 854.7 548.7 306.0 1.9 230.0 1.7 777.5 475.7 110.9 364.9 4.1 297.7
         Apr 0.3 1,063.7 833.7 529.7 304.0 1.9 228.0 1.7 774.4 477.4 114.5 362.9 4.8 292.2
         May 0.3 1,037.5 804.3 506.9 297.4 2.2 231.0 1.9 771.7 475.9 112.3 363.6 5.1 290.8         June 0.3 1,043.5 812.2 515.4 296.8 2.3 229.0 1.9 756.2 461.8 102.5 359.3 6.3 288.1
         July 0.3 1,018.5 788.2 493.2 295.0 2.3 227.9 2.1 751.5 458.0 102.6 355.4 6.1 287.4
         Aug 0.2 1,000.5 772.3 478.4 293.9 2.2 226.0 2.1 743.9 454.3 104.0 350.3 6.0 283.6         Sep 0.3 1,007.0 780.1 484.7 295.4 1.9 225.1 2.1 743.3 457.8 107.9 349.9 6.7 278.8
         Oct 0.3 996.7 769.4 473.5 295.9 1.9 225.3 2.1 739.9 457.9 104.8 353.1 6.5 275.6
         Nov 0.3 988.3 761.0 467.6 293.4 1.4 225.9 2.2 736.5 454.9 105.5 349.3 6.4 275.2         Dec 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018         Jan 0.3 985.4 758.1 466.7 291.4 1.8 225.5 2.2 735.1 450.6 105.6 345.0 5.5 279.1
         Feb 0.3 999.3 770.8 477.7 293.1 2.1 226.3 2.3 742.5 459.1 111.5 347.7 6.2 277.2         Mar 0.3 993.3 759.8 469.7 290.0 2.2 231.3 2.4 736.2 456.1 108.7 347.4 6.5 273.6
Changes *
2009 − 0.0 − 170.0 − 141.3 − 122.5 − 18.8 − 10.3 − 18.4 − 0.2 − 72.8 − 43.8 − 31.7 − 12.1 − 3.3 − 25.7
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.62012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.52013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.62014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.52017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2016         Oct − 0.0 + 38.4 + 40.6 + 34.1 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 + 5.4 + 9.0 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.1
         Nov + 0.0 − 25.6 − 22.6 − 35.0 + 12.3 − 0.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1         Dec + 0.0 − 20.7 − 19.9 − 23.1 + 3.2 − 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 10.7 − 9.1 − 13.4 + 4.3 − 0.5 − 1.2
2017         Jan + 0.0 + 18.9 + 21.1 + 19.8 + 1.3 + 0.3 − 2.5 + 0.0 + 19.9 + 19.5 + 19.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1
         Feb − 0.0 + 14.0 + 13.5 + 12.3 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 0.9 + 1.8         Mar − 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.0 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 0.4 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 2.7 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 4.7
         Apr + 0.0 − 16.1 − 14.2 − 15.4 + 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 4.9
         May − 0.0 − 17.3 − 20.9 − 18.6 − 2.3 + 0.3 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 2.8 + 3.0 − 0.3 + 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.6         June − 0.0 + 11.0 + 12.7 + 10.9 + 1.9 + 0.1 − 1.9 + 0.0 − 12.8 − 11.8 − 9.3 − 2.5 + 1.2 − 2.2
         July − 0.0 − 16.8 − 16.1 − 18.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1
         Aug − 0.0 − 19.5 − 17.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 3.5         Sep + 0.1 + 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 3.5
         Oct + 0.0 − 13.4 − 13.6 − 12.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.4 + 2.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
         Nov − 0.0 − 3.2 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.1         Dec − 0.0 − 21.1 − 19.6 − 25.1 + 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 11.1 − 11.9 + 0.8 − 2.2 + 2.5
2018         Jan + 0.0 + 30.6 + 28.8 + 29.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 15.8 + 12.3 + 12.8 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 2.3
         Feb − 0.0 + 8.4 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3         Mar − 0.0 − 3.1 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 3.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.   
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent   revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked.      
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item and and item and item
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
25.5 45.1 703.3 218.1 485.1 362.3 122.9 0.3 286.1 92.2 193.9 95.1 98.8 2.5 200832.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
13.2 28.8 692.7 398.6 294.1 211.9 82.2 0.0 266.3 146.2 120.1 72.0 48.1 0.7 2016          Oct 
13.2 28.9 703.9 416.7 287.2 203.2 84.0 0.0 266.2 138.3 128.0 79.1 48.9 0.7          Nov 13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7          Dec 
13.0 28.4 746.1 452.6 293.5 206.4 87.1 0.0 246.7 125.6 121.1 71.1 50.0 0.7 2017          Jan 
13.0 24.8 765.2 480.7 284.5 197.4 87.1 0.0 254.0 129.5 124.5 74.8 49.7 0.7          Feb 12.9 24.7 768.8 488.1 280.7 192.1 88.6 0.0 237.6 113.7 124.0 72.2 51.8 0.7          Mar 
12.9 24.8 751.4 429.4 322.0 234.2 87.7 0.0 271.9 132.3 139.7 89.0 50.6 0.7          Apr 
12.8 24.6 732.4 464.0 268.4 181.8 86.5 0.0 269.4 134.1 135.3 85.0 50.3 0.6          May12.5 24.4 720.3 463.2 257.1 170.1 87.0 0.0 259.9 123.7 136.1 75.7 60.4 0.6          June
12.5 24.4 692.4 441.0 251.4 165.5 85.9 0.0 282.5 137.7 144.8 84.4 60.5 0.6          July
12.4 24.4 648.0 389.2 258.9 174.0 84.9 0.0 286.0 133.1 152.9 92.5 60.4 0.5          Aug 12.4 24.8 691.5 430.5 261.0 176.6 84.3 0.0 279.1 133.5 145.7 84.3 61.4 0.5          Sep 
12.3 24.8 687.6 433.6 254.0 169.4 84.7 0.0 282.8 132.3 150.5 87.9 62.6 0.4          Oct 
12.4 24.7 694.2 428.8 265.4 179.7 85.7 0.0 284.4 140.6 143.8 81.7 62.1 0.4          Nov 12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3          Dec 
12.0 24.2 711.8 450.8 261.0 172.7 88.3 0.0 275.0 130.5 144.6 82.2 62.3 0.3 2018          Jan 
12.1 23.7 715.7 441.2 274.5 185.5 89.0 0.0 279.6 134.8 144.8 85.5 59.3 0.3          Feb 12.2 24.0 668.6 385.6 283.0 196.4 86.5 0.0 272.9 126.3 146.6 87.8 58.8 0.3          Mar 
Changes *
− 3.2 + 0.1 − 81.4 − 2.1 − 79.3 − 57.5 − 21.7 − 0.2 − 33.5 − 13.3 − 20.1 − 17.0 − 3.1 − 0.6 2009
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
+ 0.1 − 0.6 + 11.1 + 31.7 − 20.5 − 20.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 32.5 + 21.4 + 11.2 + 9.8 + 1.3 + 0.1 2016          Oct 
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.9 + 15.8 − 10.9 − 12.0 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 2.2 − 9.0 + 6.9 + 6.4 + 0.4 + 0.0          Nov − 0.1 − 0.3 − 9.2 − 42.7 + 33.5 + 30.2 + 3.3 − 0.0 − 60.5 − 38.2 − 22.3 − 24.1 + 1.8 + 0.0          Dec 
− 0.0 − 0.2 + 52.9 + 79.0 − 26.1 − 26.2 + 0.1 − + 41.2 + 25.6 + 15.6 + 16.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2017          Jan 
− 0.1 − 3.6 + 15.9 + 26.6 − 10.7 − 10.3 − 0.4 − + 6.6 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.0          Feb − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.5 + 8.3 − 2.8 − 4.5 + 1.7 − − 15.9 − 15.7 − 0.2 − 2.4 + 2.2 − 0.0          Mar 
− 0.0 + 0.1 − 12.8 − 56.2 + 43.4 + 43.7 − 0.4 − + 34.4 + 18.2 + 16.2 + 17.1 − 0.9 −          Apr 
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 13.8 + 36.5 − 50.3 − 49.8 − 0.5 − − 0.9 + 2.4 − 3.3 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0          May− 0.3 − 0.2 − 9.0 + 0.6 − 9.6 − 10.5 + 0.9 − − 17.8 − 10.0 − 7.8 − 9.0 + 1.2 − 0.0          June
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.9 − 19.7 − 4.2 − 3.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 24.0 + 14.4 + 9.6 + 9.3 + 0.3 − 0.0          July
− 0.1 + 0.0 − 42.9 − 51.2 + 8.3 + 9.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.6 − 4.0 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1          Aug − 0.0 + 0.4 + 42.4 + 41.0 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.7 − − 7.2 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 8.4 + 0.9 + 0.0          Sep 
− 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 2.4 − 8.3 − 8.3 + 0.0 − + 3.0 − 1.4 + 4.4 + 3.4 + 1.1 − 0.1          Oct 
+ 0.1 − 0.0 + 9.4 − 3.6 + 13.0 + 11.6 + 1.4 − + 2.3 + 8.6 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 0.0          Nov − 0.3 − 0.4 − 33.3 − 38.4 + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.5 − − 42.5 − 31.0 − 11.6 − 13.4 + 1.8 − 0.1          Dec 
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 57.4 + 63.5 − 6.1 − 5.0 − 1.1 − + 35.0 + 21.4 + 13.6 + 14.4 − 0.8 − 0.0 2018          Jan 
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 10.9 + 12.0 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 4.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 − 3.2 + 0.0          Feb + 0.1 + 0.3 − 45.8 − 55.0 + 9.1 + 11.5 − 2.3 − − 6.4 − 8.3 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
5 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2008 3,071.1 2,700.1 373.0 337.5 335.3 2.2 35.5 34.5 1.0 2,698.1 2,257.82009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.02017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2016         Oct 3,281.0 2,828.8 269.7 212.6 212.0 0.6 57.1 56.1 1.0 3,011.3 2,512.3
         Nov 3,293.1 2,840.2 268.0 216.3 215.8 0.5 51.7 51.0 0.8 3,025.0 2,525.5         Dec 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017         Jan 3,277.7 2,831.5 252.1 208.6 208.0 0.6 43.5 43.3 0.2 3,025.6 2,535.3
         Feb 3,279.0 2,837.1 252.8 209.7 209.1 0.7 43.1 42.9 0.1 3,026.2 2,541.5         Mar 3,283.0 2,840.9 252.7 212.6 211.8 0.8 40.0 39.8 0.2 3,030.4 2,547.5
         Apr 3,288.9 2,849.0 253.7 210.6 209.8 0.8 43.1 42.8 0.3 3,035.2 2,558.1
         May 3,292.9 2,851.5 249.3 211.0 210.0 0.9 38.4 37.5 0.8 3,043.5 2,568.8         June 3,296.8 2,856.1 251.1 214.1 213.5 0.6 37.0 36.5 0.5 3,045.7 2,577.7
         July 3,302.5 2,865.5 249.4 210.2 209.5 0.7 39.2 38.8 0.3 3,053.1 2,589.2
         Aug 3,308.9 2,869.6 242.8 207.6 207.0 0.6 35.2 35.0 0.2 3,066.1 2,601.2         Sep 3,317.6 2,878.5 246.2 214.1 213.5 0.6 32.2 32.0 0.2 3,071.3 2,608.7
         Oct 3,326.1 2,887.3 248.0 215.3 214.7 0.6 32.7 32.6 0.2 3,078.1 2,616.7
         Nov 3,343.7 2,899.8 248.0 215.4 214.9 0.5 32.6 31.9 0.7 3,095.6 2,636.3         Dec 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018         Jan 3,339.3 2,905.2 249.7 217.4 216.8 0.6 32.3 31.9 0.4 3,089.6 2,645.2
         Feb 3,338.3 2,910.8 247.6 219.8 219.3 0.6 27.8 27.1 0.6 3,090.7 2,650.4         Mar 3,342.5 2,919.9 253.4 225.6 224.9 0.7 27.8 27.6 0.2 3,089.1 2,653.3
Changes *
2009 + 25.7 − 11.6 − 26.1 − 31.5 − 30.0 − 1.5 + 5.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 51.8 + 36.6
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.42012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.92013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.62014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.82017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2016         Oct + 7.0 + 8.6 + 1.1 − 1.5 − 1.6 + 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 9.4
         Nov + 12.1 + 11.4 − 1.7 + 3.7 + 3.8 − 0.1 − 5.4 − 5.2 − 0.2 + 13.7 + 13.0         Dec − 19.0 − 16.2 − 19.0 − 10.1 − 9.9 − 0.2 − 8.9 − 8.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 3.8
2017         Jan + 3.3 + 7.3 + 3.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 5.3
         Feb + 1.4 + 5.6 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.6 + 6.2         Mar + 3.9 + 3.7 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 4.1 + 5.9
         Apr + 5.9 + 8.1 + 1.0 − 2.0 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 3.0 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 10.6
         May + 3.9 + 2.5 − 4.0 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 4.7 − 5.2 + 0.5 + 8.0 + 7.8         June + 4.0 + 4.6 + 1.9 + 3.3 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.1 + 8.8
         July + 5.6 + 9.4 − 1.8 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 11.4
         Aug + 6.4 + 4.1 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 13.0 + 12.0         Sep + 7.3 + 8.9 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 6.5 − 0.0 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.8
         Oct + 8.6 + 8.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 8.0
         Nov + 17.7 + 12.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 17.6 + 17.8         Dec − 11.1 − 5.5 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 4.7 + 3.6
2018         Jan + 6.9 + 11.0 + 8.0 + 6.5 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.7
         Feb − 1.0 + 5.5 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 − 4.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 5.0         Mar + 4.2 + 9.2 + 5.8 + 5.8 + 5.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.5 − 1.6 + 2.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of equalisation claims
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the exchange of
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item Equal- item
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,022.0 222.0 1,800.0 235.8 42.8 440.3 308.2 29.7 278.5 132.1 − 4.5 20082,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 2017
2,290.5 261.5 2,029.0 221.8 17.3 498.9 270.2 24.4 245.7 228.8 − 1.8 2016          Oct 
2,302.5 264.0 2,038.5 223.0 17.3 499.5 270.9 24.3 246.6 228.6 − 1.8          Nov 2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8          Dec 
2,311.3 264.5 2,046.8 224.0 18.6 490.3 268.9 24.2 244.7 221.4 − 1.7 2017          Jan 
2,316.5 263.2 2,053.3 225.1 18.5 484.7 268.6 25.0 243.7 216.1 − 1.7          Feb 2,322.0 264.4 2,057.6 225.5 18.4 482.9 267.3 24.6 242.7 215.6 − 1.7          Mar 
2,331.2 265.4 2,065.9 226.8 18.4 477.2 265.1 23.6 241.5 212.0 − 1.7          Apr 
2,342.6 266.2 2,076.4 226.2 18.3 474.8 261.3 23.4 238.0 213.4 − 1.7          May2,346.1 267.4 2,078.7 231.6 18.0 468.0 260.0 23.0 237.0 208.1 − 1.6          June
2,357.7 268.3 2,089.4 231.5 18.0 463.9 259.4 23.1 236.3 204.5 − 1.6          July
2,369.2 269.4 2,099.8 232.0 18.0 464.9 258.4 22.9 235.5 206.5 − 1.6          Aug 2,376.0 269.6 2,106.3 232.7 17.9 462.7 257.0 22.4 234.6 205.7 − 1.6          Sep 
2,383.4 270.9 2,112.5 233.2 17.8 461.4 256.6 22.7 234.0 204.8 − 1.6          Oct 
2,397.7 274.4 2,123.3 238.6 17.8 459.3 255.4 22.8 232.6 204.0 − 1.6          Nov 2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7          Dec 
2,405.7 274.8 2,130.8 239.5 17.4 444.4 250.9 22.0 228.9 193.6 − 1.5 2018          Jan 
2,414.1 275.1 2,139.0 236.3 17.5 440.3 250.3 21.9 228.4 190.1 − 1.5          Feb 2,419.5 275.2 2,144.2 233.8 17.4 435.8 247.9 22.1 225.8 188.0 − 1.6          Mar 
Changes *
+ 23.5 + 17.3 + 6.3 + 13.1 − 3.9 + 15.2 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 10.2 + 22.8 − − 0.2 2009
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017
+ 6.8 + 0.5 + 6.2 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 3.6 + 0.7 − 0.9 + 1.7 − 4.3 − − 0.0 2016          Oct 
+ 11.9 + 2.4 + 9.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0          Nov + 3.4 − 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 2.3 − − 0.0          Dec 
+ 4.8 + 0.3 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 1.3 − 5.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.8 − 5.0 − − 0.0 2017          Jan 
+ 5.1 − 1.3 + 6.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.0 − 5.3 − − 0.0          Feb + 5.5 + 1.2 + 4.3 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.4 − − 0.0          Mar 
+ 9.3 + 1.0 + 8.3 + 1.3 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 2.2 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 3.6 − − 0.0          Apr 
+ 8.5 + 0.8 + 7.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.4 − − 0.0          May+ 3.4 + 1.2 + 2.2 + 5.4 − 0.3 − 6.7 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 5.4 − − 0.1          June
+ 11.4 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − + 0.0          July
+ 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 2.0 − − 0.0          Aug + 6.6 + 0.2 + 6.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − − 0.0          Sep 
+ 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.9 − − 0.0          Oct 
+ 12.4 + 3.5 + 9.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.8 − −          Nov + 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 8.3 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 − + 0.1          Dec 
+ 5.7 + 1.6 + 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.9 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 3.4 − − 0.1 2018          Jan 
+ 8.2 + 0.3 + 8.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5 − − 0.0          Feb + 5.4 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 2.1 − + 0.0          Mar 

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
6 Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
 
Whole-sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2016 2,512.0 1,259.7 1,276.6 1,016.5 260.1 1,347.5 354.1 125.1 104.7 62.2 128.2 50.6 57.0 139.7
2017         Mar 2,533.8 1,267.0 1,283.2 1,022.4 260.8 1,364.4 356.6 129.4 105.2 66.9 131.5 50.5 55.9 141.0
         June 2,559.7 1,280.1 1,297.8 1,033.7 264.1 1,377.8 360.9 131.5 108.3 65.7 130.8 51.0 54.7 141.5         Sep 2,589.5 1,296.7 1,315.7 1,046.9 268.8 1,392.7 366.5 131.8 109.7 67.1 133.3 50.9 53.0 146.0         Dec 2,610.1 1,304.3 1,326.6 1,053.0 273.6 1,403.1 368.5 131.3 112.6 67.3 133.3 50.2 51.5 147.9
2018         Mar 2,644.4 1,317.5 1,337.7 1,061.3 276.4 1,429.4 373.3 136.0 115.2 69.4 137.5 50.1 51.2 151.4
 Short-term lending
2016 205.5 − 6.9 − 6.9 174.3 3.7 29.7 4.4 11.8 43.2 3.6 4.4 29.32017         Mar 211.8 − 6.9 − 6.9 181.3 3.7 33.6 4.5 13.6 44.8 3.8 4.2 28.6
         June 213.6 − 6.7 − 6.7 183.3 3.5 34.7 4.7 13.7 43.3 4.0 4.6 28.1         Sep 213.5 − 6.5 − 6.5 183.5 3.6 33.8 4.0 14.0 45.2 3.9 4.3 28.1         Dec 210.6 − 6.5 − 6.5 180.8 3.6 32.3 4.0 13.6 45.2 3.4 4.0 27.4
2018         Mar 224.9 − 6.8 − 6.8 195.3 3.8 36.6 5.0 14.9 48.4 3.5 4.2 29.1
 Medium-term lending
2016 264.1 − 34.5 − 34.5 186.4 13.5 23.6 5.5 10.5 17.2 4.5 11.2 41.82017         Mar 264.4 − 34.0 − 34.0 186.8 13.4 23.3 4.9 11.4 17.9 4.4 10.8 43.0
         June 267.4 − 33.8 − 33.8 188.7 13.3 23.3 5.0 10.9 18.2 4.4 10.7 44.3         Sep 269.6 − 33.9 − 33.9 190.2 13.6 23.1 5.1 11.2 18.2 4.4 10.4 45.6         Dec 273.5 − 34.0 − 34.0 193.1 14.0 23.6 5.1 11.3 18.2 4.3 10.3 46.7
2018         Mar 275.2 − 34.0 − 34.0 194.0 14.3 23.3 5.0 11.7 18.6 4.2 10.4 47.0
 Long-term lending
2016 2,042.4 1,259.7 1,235.1 1,016.5 218.6 986.8 336.9 71.8 94.8 39.9 67.7 42.5 41.4 68.62017         Mar 2,057.6 1,267.0 1,242.4 1,022.4 220.0 996.2 339.6 72.5 95.8 41.9 68.7 42.3 40.9 69.4
         June 2,078.7 1,280.1 1,257.3 1,033.7 223.6 1,005.8 344.0 73.5 98.6 41.1 69.3 42.6 39.4 69.2         Sep 2,106.3 1,296.7 1,275.3 1,046.9 228.3 1,018.9 349.3 74.9 100.5 41.9 69.9 42.6 38.3 72.2         Dec 2,125.9 1,304.3 1,286.1 1,053.0 233.1 1,029.2 351.0 75.4 103.5 42.4 70.0 42.4 37.2 73.8
2018         Mar 2,144.2 1,317.5 1,296.9 1,061.3 235.6 1,040.2 355.1 76.1 105.2 42.8 70.4 42.3 36.7 75.3
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2017         Q1 + 21.7 + 7.3 + 6.6 + 5.8 + 0.7 + 16.8 + 2.6 + 4.3 + 0.5 + 2.0 + 3.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.2
         Q2 + 23.3 + 12.7 + 13.8 + 11.2 + 2.6 + 11.1 + 4.1 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.4         Q3 + 29.5 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 14.5 + 5.7 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.0         Q4 + 18.7 + 9.7 + 12.7 + 7.8 + 4.9 + 8.9 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.5 + 1.5
2018         Q1 + 33.6 + 10.5 + 10.5 + 7.9 + 2.6 + 25.9 + 4.6 + 4.7 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.4
 Short-term lending
2017         Q1 + 6.3 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 7.0 + 0.0 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.7
         Q2 + 2.1 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.4         Q3 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0         Q4 − 2.8 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.8
2018         Q1 + 14.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 14.5 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.7
 Medium-term lending
2017         Q1 + 0.2 − − 0.6 − − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 1.1
         Q2 + 3.0 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.3         Q3 + 2.4 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 1.5 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.3         Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.1
2018         Q1 + 2.0 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
 Long-term lending
2017         Q1 + 15.1 + 7.3 + 7.2 + 5.8 + 1.4 + 9.4 + 2.6 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.8
         Q2 + 18.2 + 12.7 + 14.0 + 11.2 + 2.9 + 6.9 + 4.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.5         Q3 + 27.2 + 15.3 + 17.8 + 12.6 + 5.2 + 12.8 + 5.4 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.2 + 0.7         Q4 + 17.6 + 9.7 + 12.6 + 7.8 + 4.8 + 8.7 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.1
2018         Q1 + 17.4 + 10.5 + 10.2 + 7.9 + 2.3 + 10.3 + 4.0 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical alterations have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which will appear in the following Monthly Report,

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which of which
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
680.0 204.7 36.3 181.6 401.3 46.0 1,150.1 919.0 231.2 163.3 9.2 14.4 3.6 2016
684.0 206.2 38.8 179.7 403.8 46.3 1,154.8 922.9 231.9 165.5 9.2 14.6 3.7 2017          Mar 
694.3 209.8 39.6 183.6 408.2 48.5 1,167.3 933.2 234.2 168.0 8.9 14.5 3.8          June700.9 211.2 41.1 185.7 410.4 48.3 1,182.2 945.4 236.7 170.4 8.9 14.6 3.7          Sep 709.0 214.9 42.3 186.4 411.2 47.7 1,192.3 954.3 237.9 171.6 8.6 14.8 3.7          Dec 
718.8 217.2 44.1 188.5 414.3 48.2 1,200.1 960.7 239.3 173.5 8.4 14.9 3.7 2018          Mar 
Short-term lending
47.9 8.4 5.7 10.2 23.9 5.1 30.6 3.2 27.4 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 201648.2 8.4 6.6 9.1 24.5 5.7 29.8 3.2 26.7 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 2017          Mar 
50.1 9.0 6.5 9.7 24.5 5.7 29.7 3.1 26.6 1.8 8.9 0.5 0.0          June50.2 9.6 6.7 10.0 23.7 5.5 29.4 2.9 26.5 1.7 8.9 0.5 0.0          Sep 50.9 10.1 6.8 10.3 23.3 5.0 29.3 2.9 26.4 1.6 8.6 0.5 0.0          Dec 
53.5 10.2 7.9 10.7 23.7 5.8 29.0 3.0 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.6 − 2018          Mar 
Medium-term lending
72.1 11.1 8.2 19.3 32.9 3.6 77.3 21.1 56.2 51.0 − 0.5 0.0 201671.1 11.3 8.6 17.8 32.7 3.6 77.1 20.6 56.5 51.7 − 0.5 0.0 2017          Mar 
72.1 11.5 8.8 18.6 32.8 3.6 78.1 20.5 57.7 52.9 − 0.5 0.0          June72.2 11.9 9.1 18.3 32.9 3.6 78.9 20.2 58.6 54.0 − 0.5 0.0          Sep 73.5 12.1 9.3 18.3 32.7 3.6 79.9 20.0 59.9 55.2 − 0.6 0.0          Dec 
73.9 12.6 9.3 18.3 32.8 3.4 80.7 19.6 61.0 56.5 − 0.5 0.0 2018          Mar 
Long-term lending
560.0 185.2 22.4 152.2 344.5 37.3 1,042.3 894.7 147.6 110.5 − 13.3 3.5 2016564.7 186.5 23.6 152.7 346.5 37.1 1,047.9 899.2 148.8 112.1 − 13.4 3.7 2017          Mar 
572.2 189.2 24.3 155.3 350.8 39.2 1,059.4 909.6 149.9 113.3 − 13.5 3.7          June578.5 189.8 25.3 157.4 353.8 39.3 1,073.8 922.3 151.6 114.8 − 13.6 3.7          Sep 584.6 192.6 26.2 157.8 355.3 39.2 1,083.1 931.4 151.6 114.8 − 13.7 3.7          Dec 
591.3 194.5 26.9 159.4 357.9 39.1 1,090.4 938.1 152.2 115.5 − 13.7 3.7 2018          Mar 
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 6.8 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 4.1 + 0.8 + 2.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 10.5 + 3.5 + 0.8 + 4.0 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 12.2 + 9.7 + 2.6 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1          Q2+ 8.9 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 2.2 − 0.1 + 14.9 + 12.1 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 8.5 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 9.8 + 8.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
+ 11.0 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 2.9 + 3.5 + 0.5 + 7.5 + 5.8 + 1.7 + 2.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2018          Q1
Short-term lending
+ 1.0 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 2.2 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.8 − − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2018          Q1
Medium-term lending
− 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 1.3 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 1.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3+ 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2018          Q1
Long-term lending
+ 6.2 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 5.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.6 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2017          Q1
+ 7.4 + 2.7 + 0.7 + 2.4 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 11.3 + 9.8 + 1.4 + 1.6 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 8.6 + 2.0 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.6 − + 0.2 − 0.0          Q3+ 6.5 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 7.6 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 7.0 + 6.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2018          Q1
are not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors. 
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2015 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 243.0 655.4 37.3 618.1 596.5 56.1 29.3 20.5 0.52016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.92017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2017         Apr 3,360.3 1,844.4 881.9 229.2 652.6 50.3 602.3 586.2 47.8 30.3 17.3 0.8
         May 3,368.4 1,852.2 883.4 229.3 654.1 52.3 601.8 585.7 47.0 30.4 17.1 0.4         June 3,370.3 1,869.2 869.8 226.4 643.4 53.5 589.9 584.7 46.6 29.8 16.9 0.9
         July 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 223.2 642.8 54.1 588.6 583.5 46.0 29.9 16.7 0.7
         Aug 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 220.0 644.4 55.2 589.2 582.4 45.4 30.0 16.7 0.7         Sep 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 218.7 643.2 55.3 587.9 581.8 45.3 30.0 15.8 1.8
         Oct 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 212.7 640.7 54.5 586.2 581.5 44.8 29.9 15.7 1.1
         Nov 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 212.4 645.0 55.3 589.7 581.0 44.3 30.1 15.1 1.6         Dec 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2018         Jan 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 211.5 642.6 55.8 586.8 582.4 42.9 30.4 16.1 1.4
         Feb 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 209.9 641.8 54.4 587.4 582.2 42.3 30.9 15.9 1.1         Mar 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 212.9 637.8 52.6 585.2 581.3 41.8 31.5 15.8 0.6
Changes*
2016 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 8.9 + 2.0 + 10.2 − 8.2 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.32017 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 24.7 − 2.8 + 10.1 − 12.8 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.8
2017         Apr + 17.5 + 27.3 − 9.0 − 8.5 − 0.5 + 2.5 − 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 8.1 + 7.8 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 2.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4         June + 10.9 + 17.0 − 4.6 − 2.9 − 1.7 + 1.2 − 2.9 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.4
         July − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 3.2 − 0.6 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Aug + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 3.2 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 0.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0         Sep + 4.3 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 1.1
         Oct + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 0.8 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.6
         Nov + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.3 + 4.2 + 0.8 + 3.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.4         Dec − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 − 4.8 + 0.6 + 2.0 − 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.0
2018         Jan + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 + 3.9 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Feb − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3         Mar − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 + 3.0 − 3.9 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.5
Domestic government End of year or month*
2015 197.4 57.6 132.6 87.7 44.9 10.2 34.7 3.7 3.5 27.9 2.7 0.5
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2017         Apr 203.1 59.1 135.6 77.9 57.7 18.7 39.0 3.6 4.7 26.7 2.5 −
         May 209.7 61.1 140.3 80.4 59.9 20.4 39.5 3.7 4.6 26.4 2.5 −         June 209.9 58.1 143.5 81.8 61.8 21.8 40.0 3.7 4.7 25.8 2.4 −
         July 207.2 55.6 143.2 80.4 62.8 22.4 40.4 3.7 4.7 25.8 2.4 −
         Aug 213.6 61.2 144.2 79.9 64.3 23.4 40.8 3.7 4.5 25.9 2.5 −         Sep 210.5 58.8 143.4 77.5 66.0 24.1 41.9 3.7 4.5 25.9 2.3 −
         Oct 207.6 60.0 139.5 72.6 67.0 24.4 42.6 3.7 4.4 25.8 2.3 0.0
         Nov 211.1 61.1 142.2 72.3 69.9 25.8 44.1 3.6 4.2 25.8 2.3 0.0         Dec 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018         Jan 202.1 55.0 139.0 69.6 69.4 27.0 42.4 3.7 4.4 26.1 2.4 −
         Feb 204.3 58.8 137.5 68.7 68.7 26.2 42.5 3.7 4.4 26.1 2.4 −         Mar 205.9 57.2 140.6 72.2 68.4 25.2 43.2 3.7 4.4 26.0 2.3 −
Changes*
2016 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 2.0 − 6.7 + 8.7 + 6.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.52017 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 2.4 − 14.1 + 11.7 + 10.7 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3
+ 0.0
2017         Apr − 1.0 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 3.5 + 2.4 + 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         May + 6.7 + 1.9 + 4.7 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −         June − 0.1 − 3.0 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 −
         July − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.4 − + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Aug + 6.4 + 5.6 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −         Sep − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.5 − 2.7 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −
         Oct − 3.5 + 1.1 − 4.5 − 5.0 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov + 4.1 + 1.6 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Dec − 11.1 − 2.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.6 − 4.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
2018         Jan + 0.4 − 3.9 + 4.3 + 3.8 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 −
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −         Mar + 1.6 − 1.6 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
7 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2015 3,027.3 1,616.1 765.8 155.3 610.5 27.1 583.5 592.7 52.6 1.4 17.8 −2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.92017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.6
2017         Apr 3,157.2 1,785.2 746.3 151.4 594.9 31.6 563.3 582.6 43.1 3.7 14.8 0.8
         May 3,158.7 1,791.1 743.1 148.9 594.2 31.9 562.4 582.0 42.4 4.0 14.6 0.4         June 3,160.3 1,811.1 726.2 144.6 581.6 31.7 549.9 581.0 41.9 3.9 14.5 0.9
         July 3,154.3 1,810.5 722.7 142.8 580.0 31.8 548.2 579.8 41.3 4.1 14.3 0.7
         Aug 3,162.8 1,823.0 720.2 140.1 580.1 31.8 548.3 578.7 40.9 4.1 14.2 0.7         Sep 3,170.2 1,832.9 718.5 141.2 577.2 31.2 546.1 578.1 40.8 4.1 13.5 1.8
         Oct 3,188.8 1,856.9 713.8 140.1 573.7 30.1 543.5 577.8 40.3 4.1 13.4 1.1
         Nov 3,215.7 1,882.9 715.3 140.1 575.2 29.5 545.6 577.5 40.1 4.3 12.8 1.6         Dec 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.6
2018         Jan 3,226.8 1,894.3 715.1 142.0 573.2 28.7 544.5 578.8 38.6 4.4 13.8 1.4
         Feb 3,221.5 1,890.8 714.2 141.1 573.0 28.2 544.9 578.5 38.0 4.9 13.6 1.1         Mar 3,215.8 1,890.8 710.1 140.7 569.4 27.4 542.1 577.6 37.4 5.5 13.5 0.6
Changes*
2016 + 101.7 + 124.2 − 8.9 − 2.2 − 6.7 + 3.8 − 10.5 − 8.0 − 5.7 + 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.92017 + 104.1 + 141.3 − 25.1 − 10.6 − 14.4 − 0.7 − 13.8 − 5.3 − 6.7 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.8
2017         Apr + 18.4 + 27.0 − 7.8 − 5.0 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         May + 1.4 + 5.9 − 3.2 − 2.5 − 0.7 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.4         June + 11.0 + 19.9 − 7.5 − 4.2 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
         July − 5.9 − 0.7 − 3.4 − 1.9 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1
         Aug + 8.6 + 12.6 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Sep + 8.1 + 9.9 − 1.0 + 1.4 − 2.4 − 0.6 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1
         Oct + 19.2 + 23.9 − 4.0 − 1.0 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.7
         Nov + 26.2 + 25.6 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.4         Dec + 5.2 − 0.9 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.9 + 1.8 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 0.1
2018         Jan + 7.2 + 11.8 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Feb − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3         Mar − 5.6 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 0.8 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5
of which:  Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2015 1,029.8 502.8 506.5 99.8 406.7 14.4 392.3 7.1 13.3 1.3 14.0 −
2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.92017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.6
2017         Apr 1,035.4 530.1 485.4 97.5 387.9 18.6 369.2 6.9 13.0 2.8 12.1 0.8
         May 1,033.4 531.1 482.6 95.8 386.8 18.8 368.1 6.8 12.9 2.9 12.0 0.4         June 1,032.3 545.0 467.6 92.9 374.7 18.8 355.9 6.8 12.9 2.8 11.9 0.9
         July 1,022.6 537.7 465.4 91.5 373.9 19.1 354.8 6.8 12.8 2.8 11.8 0.7
         Aug 1,026.6 543.9 463.2 89.1 374.1 19.2 354.8 6.8 12.7 2.8 11.7 0.7         Sep 1,028.0 546.3 462.0 90.9 371.1 18.7 352.4 6.9 12.9 2.8 11.0 1.8
         Oct 1,038.4 561.0 457.7 90.0 367.7 17.8 349.8 6.9 12.9 2.8 10.9 1.1
         Nov 1,047.0 567.1 459.8 90.6 369.3 17.3 352.0 6.9 13.1 2.9 10.4 1.6         Dec 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.6
2018         Jan 1,051.4 573.9 458.0 93.6 364.4 16.0 348.4 6.9 12.6 2.6 11.4 1.4
         Feb 1,036.8 560.8 456.5 92.5 364.0 15.5 348.6 7.0 12.5 2.7 11.2 1.1         Mar 1,026.9 555.0 452.5 92.1 360.5 14.9 345.6 7.0 12.4 2.8 11.1 0.6
Changes*
2016 + 4.6 + 15.9 − 11.2 − 1.2 − 10.1 + 3.2 − 13.2 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 0.92017 + 19.5 + 40.2 − 20.0 − 4.7 − 15.4 − 0.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.8
2017         Apr + 0.9 + 7.3 − 6.6 − 3.8 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1
         May − 2.0 + 1.0 − 2.7 − 1.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 0.4         June + 8.3 + 14.0 − 5.7 − 2.9 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4
         July − 9.7 − 7.4 − 2.2 − 1.5 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − − 0.2 − 0.1
         Aug + 4.2 + 6.2 − 2.0 − 2.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0         Sep + 2.1 + 2.4 − 0.6 + 2.0 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.1
         Oct + 11.0 + 14.7 − 3.7 − 0.8 − 2.9 − 0.8 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 0.1 − 0.7
         Nov + 7.9 + 5.7 + 2.1 + 0.5 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4         Dec − 5.7 − 8.2 + 3.0 + 2.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.1
2018         Jan + 11.5 + 14.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Feb − 14.5 − 13.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3         Mar − 9.9 − 5.9 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.5
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
8 Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2015 1,997.5 1,113.3 1,081.2 188.9 748.6 143.7 32.1 259.3 246.2 24.9 179.8 41.62016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.52017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2017         Oct 2,150.4 1,295.9 1,260.1 221.4 884.8 153.9 35.7 256.1 241.6 23.6 181.4 36.6
         Nov 2,168.7 1,315.8 1,280.3 222.9 902.2 155.2 35.5 255.4 241.4 23.4 181.4 36.7         Dec 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2018         Jan 2,175.4 1,320.4 1,284.1 226.0 903.3 154.8 36.3 257.1 243.3 22.9 183.3 37.1
         Feb 2,184.7 1,330.0 1,293.1 226.1 911.8 155.2 36.9 257.7 243.8 22.7 183.9 37.3         Mar 2,189.0 1,335.8 1,298.8 223.3 920.1 155.4 37.0 257.6 243.7 22.1 184.3 37.2
Changes*
2016 + 97.1 + 108.4 + 105.3 + 17.5 + 78.7 + 9.0 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.32017 + 84.7 + 101.1 + 99.8 + 17.5 + 77.8 + 4.5 + 1.3 − 5.0 − 5.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 1.3
2017         Oct + 8.3 + 9.2 + 9.4 + 5.4 + 4.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov + 18.3 + 19.9 + 20.2 + 1.5 + 17.4 + 1.3 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1         Dec + 10.9 + 7.4 + 6.3 + 0.5 + 5.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 2.1 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.5
2018         Jan − 4.3 − 2.7 − 2.6 + 2.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.1
         Feb + 9.3 + 9.6 + 9.0 + 0.1 + 8.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.2         Mar + 4.3 + 5.8 + 5.7 − 2.8 + 8.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are no t specially
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from registered debt
 
  
9 Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2015 197.4 9.6 3.1 3.9 2.6 0.1 14.1 44.3 13.2 13.7 16.5 0.9 13.52016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.22017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2017         Oct 207.6 7.9 4.0 1.3 2.4 0.1 13.2 46.9 11.8 16.1 17.7 1.2 12.6
         Nov 211.1 8.3 4.2 1.3 2.7 0.1 13.2 44.8 12.0 13.9 17.7 1.3 12.6         Dec 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2018         Jan 202.1 8.9 4.6 1.2 2.9 0.1 12.9 40.1 10.3 13.9 14.6 1.3 13.1
         Feb 204.3 8.8 4.4 1.4 2.9 0.1 12.9 40.3 10.3 14.2 14.6 1.3 13.1         Mar 205.9 8.3 4.1 1.3 2.8 0.1 12.9 45.6 11.3 18.8 14.2 1.2 13.1
Changes*
2016 + 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.1 − 1.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.32017 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 − 0.5
2017         Oct − 3.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Nov + 4.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0         Dec − 11.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 3.4 + 0.1 + 0.1
2018         Jan + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb + 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Mar + 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 4.6 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”Ent erprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, east German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
of which liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.1 55.5 203.9 12.7 191.1 585.6 576.6 9.0 39.2 0.0 3.8 − 201513.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 201614.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 2017
14.6 50.1 206.0 12.3 193.7 571.0 563.0 8.0 27.5 1.3 2.5 − 2017          Oct 
14.0 49.5 205.9 12.2 193.6 570.5 562.8 7.8 27.0 1.4 2.4 −          Nov 14.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 −          Dec 
13.8 48.3 208.8 12.7 196.1 571.9 564.0 7.8 26.0 1.8 2.4 − 2018          Jan 
13.8 48.7 209.0 12.7 196.3 571.5 563.8 7.7 25.5 2.2 2.4 −          Feb 13.9 48.6 209.0 12.5 196.5 570.5 562.8 7.7 25.1 2.6 2.4 −          Mar 
Changes*
+ 0.6 − 1.0 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 2.7 − 7.9 − 7.3 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 2016+ 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 2017
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2017          Oct 
− 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 −          Nov − 0.0 − 0.5 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 2.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 −          Dec 
− 0.2 − 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 2018          Jan 
+ 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 −          Feb + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.0 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 −          Mar 
securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-note securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item to and for more and bank item
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
52.4 29.2 9.6 8.3 5.2 0.4 91.2 12.1 60.5 17.5 1.1 − 201556.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 201661.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 2017
54.1 27.0 8.7 12.8 5.7 0.0 98.8 17.2 46.4 34.1 1.1 − 2017          Oct 
57.0 30.0 9.1 12.5 5.4 0.0 101.0 14.9 47.9 37.0 1.0 −          Nov 61.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 −          Dec 
54.0 26.2 8.3 14.0 5.5 0.0 99.2 14.0 46.1 38.0 1.1 − 2018          Jan 
57.4 29.6 8.3 14.1 5.5 0.0 97.8 14.6 44.8 37.2 1.2 −          Feb 55.4 27.6 7.9 14.2 5.6 0.0 96.6 14.2 44.1 37.2 1.1 −          Mar 
Changes*
+ 3.7 + 2.4 − 0.8 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 2.4 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 7.7 + 0.2 − 2016+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 11.8 +11.6 − 0.4 − 2017
− 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − + 1.1 + 2.2 − 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 2017          Oct 
+ 3.5 + 3.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − + 2.1 − 2.2 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 0.1 −          Nov + 3.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 7.1 − 5.4 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 −          Dec 
− 7.6 − 7.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.3 + 4.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 2018          Jan 
+ 3.5 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 −          Feb − 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar 
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV Banks
 
10 Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds  3  , sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at three months’ at more than three Memo
notice months’ notice item of which
Interest With
of which of which of which credited maturities
Special Special At three on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2015 605.4 596.5 534.6 379.7 61.9 48.0 8.9 7.4 4.4 64.9 56.1 41.0 8.72016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.72017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2017         Nov 588.5 581.0 538.6 349.8 42.4 31.2 7.5 6.5 0.2 52.6 44.3 31.9 8.3
         Dec 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 1.2 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2018         Jan 589.9 582.4 539.8 346.2 42.7 31.2 7.4 6.5 0.2 49.4 42.9 30.9 6.5
         Feb 589.6 582.2 540.5 343.9 41.7 30.7 7.4 6.5 0.1 47.2 42.3 30.5 4.9         Mar 588.6 581.3 540.0 342.7 41.3 30.3 7.3 6.4 0.1 46.7 41.8 30.3 4.9
Changes*
2016 − 8.8 − 7.9 + 2.5 − 18.4 − 10.4 − 10.3 − 0.9 − 0.5 . − 5.0 − 5.0 − 4.7 − 0.02017 − 6.2 − 5.6 + 1.5 − 13.1 − 7.1 − 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 . − 7.2 − 6.7 − 4.4 − 0.5
2017         Nov − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0
         Dec + 1.8 + 1.9 + 2.4 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.1
2018         Jan − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.1
         Feb − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.6         Mar − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 1.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which exceeds the
The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable
revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially bearer debt securities. marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are classified
 
  
11 Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year of which and including 2 years
with
Certifi- of which of which non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2015 1,075.7 189.2 30.2 384.1 88.7 109.8 2.1 28.4 5.7 937.5 0.3 0.2 31.9 0.52016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.52017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2017         Nov 1,072.3 148.0 25.9 377.3 84.9 103.4 5.0 35.1 6.7 933.8 0.3 0.2 30.7 0.5
         Dec 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2018         Jan 1,060.2 143.6 24.4 355.1 76.5 92.3 4.2 31.2 6.8 936.7 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
         Feb 1,076.8 143.7 26.1 371.5 86.2 104.0 4.4 33.2 7.3 939.6 0.3 0.2 30.6 0.5         Mar 1,081.8 146.2 25.8 367.5 83.6 100.6 4.3 32.6 7.1 948.6 0.3 0.2 30.2 0.5
Changes*
2016 + 22.1 − 12.0 − 2.1 + 23.0 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 8.8 + 0.1 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 − 0.02017 − 30.8 − 29.7 − 2.1 − 36.7 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 − 22.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0
2017         Nov − 6.7 − 1.6 − 2.1 − 5.9 − 1.2 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 −
         Dec − 5.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 6.9 + 5.0 + 4.0 − 0.9 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 7.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
2018         Jan − 6.3 − 3.6 − 1.7 − 15.2 − 13.3 − 15.1 + 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.4 + 10.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Feb + 16.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 16.3 + 9.7 + 11.6 + 0.2 + 2.0 + 0.4 + 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 −         Mar + 5.0 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 4.0 − 2.6 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 9.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote*; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro-area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities respectively money
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not market paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign bearer debt securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10,
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV  Banks
  
12 Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- item ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2016 20 218.8 43.6 0.0 16.6 13.8 98.6 18.1 23.4 2.5 21.4 163.8 5.5 2.0 10.2 89.2
2017 20 229.2 41.8 0.0 15.8 12.3 104.4 24.8 25.1 2.6 23.0 168.6 9.5 3.0 11.0 83.6
2018         Jan 20 230.2 42.4 0.0 15.9 12.3 104.7 25.0 25.2 2.6 23.7 169.2 9.4 3.0 11.0 6.3
         Feb 20 231.0 42.4 0.0 16.0 12.2 104.9 25.2 25.4 2.6 24.0 169.6 9.3 3.1 11.0 6.6         Mar 20 232.0 42.5 0.0 16.2 12.1 105.7 25.3 25.4 2.6 24.3 170.0 9.4 3.1 11.6 7.2
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         Jan 12 161.1 26.5 − 6.9 9.2 81.2 22.0 11.6 1.7 21.6 110.3 9.1 3.0 7.4 4.0
         Feb 12 161.6 26.6 − 6.9 9.2 81.3 22.0 11.7 1.7 21.8 110.5 9.0 3.1 7.4 4.2         Mar 12 162.3 26.6 − 7.1 9.1 82.0 22.0 11.6 1.7 22.0 110.7 9.1 3.1 8.0 4.4
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         Jan 8 69.1 15.9 0.0 9.0 3.0 23.5 3.0 13.6 0.9 2.1 58.9 0.3 − 3.6 2.4
         Feb 8 69.5 15.8 0.0 9.0 3.0 23.5 3.2 13.8 0.9 2.2 59.1 0.3 − 3.6 2.4         Mar 8 69.7 15.9 0.0 9.1 3.0 23.7 3.3 13.8 0.9 2.3 59.3 0.2 − 3.6 2.8
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited interim deposits of which of which
on under Applied Applied and of
which of Memo Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which item paid into
savings savings and which interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2016 27.5 2.2 7.6 46.8 27.4 40.9 17.2 4.4 4.9 3.7 18.8 16.3 8.0 8.0 7.2 0.2
2017 26.7 2.3 7.6 45.3 26.0 39.6 16.4 4.1 4.5 3.4 18.7 16.4 7.4 7.1 6.2 0.2
2018         Jan 2.5 0.0 0.6 3.8 2.2 3.2 1.3 0.4 0.4 0.3 1.5 16.6 7.5 0.5 0.0
         Feb 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.9 2.1 2.9 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.3 17.2 7.6 0.5 0.0         Mar 2.3 0.0 0.7 3.9 2.0 3.3 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.7 17.5 7.6 0.5 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         Jan 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.6 2.4 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.2 12.1 4.5 0.4 0.0
         Feb 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.3 2.3 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.1 12.3 4.4 0.4 0.0         Mar 1.5 0.0 0.4 2.7 1.2 2.5 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.3 12.5 4.3 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2018         Jan 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.5 3.0 0.1 0.0
         Feb 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.8 0.6 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.2 0.1 0.0         Mar 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.8 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.0 3.3 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV  Banks
  
13 Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in thesubsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  
7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.02016 51 191 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.32017 52 187 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2017         May 51 192 1,894.2 629.7 616.8 215.1 401.8 12.8 565.5 478.3 13.2 465.1 87.2 699.0 459.0
         June 51 192 1,828.5 589.4 576.9 212.5 364.4 12.5 565.1 475.9 13.3 462.5 89.2 674.1 434.1
         July 51 192 1,787.7 564.8 552.6 199.5 353.1 12.1 546.9 463.7 13.3 450.4 83.1 676.1 438.4
         Aug 51 191 1,752.1 537.7 526.1 171.1 355.0 11.6 545.3 461.7 13.2 448.5 83.7 669.1 432.2         Sep 51 190 1,746.8 549.5 537.6 176.8 360.8 11.9 568.1 481.8 13.5 468.3 86.3 629.2 408.3
         Oct 51 187 1,788.9 579.0 567.0 185.8 381.1 12.1 558.7 477.1 13.5 463.6 81.5 651.2 418.3
         Nov 51 187 1,712.1 516.9 505.0 187.2 317.9 11.9 562.5 481.7 13.6 468.1 80.9 632.7 416.0         Dec 52 187 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2018         Jan 50 184 1,741.4 508.5 496.7 201.0 295.7 11.8 536.6 454.7 13.2 441.5 81.9 696.3 444.0
         Feb 50 183 1,670.4 510.1 497.5 210.0 287.5 12.5 526.2 450.5 12.7 437.8 75.7 634.1 413.4
Changes *
2016 + 0 − 7 + 29.1 + 49.3 + 52.9 + 43.7 + 9.2 − 3.5 − 56.4 − 24.6 + 0.5 − 25.1 − 31.8 + 24.9 − 14.8
2017 + 1 − 4 − 216.7 − 52.5 − 49.4 − 7.9 − 41.5 − 3.1 − 10.9 − 10.0 − 1.4 − 8.6 − 0.9 − 74.6 − 60.4
2017         June − − − 64.4 − 34.7 − 34.4 − 2.5 − 31.9 − 0.2 + 5.1 + 2.5 + 0.1 + 2.3 + 2.6 − 23.6 − 21.9
         July − − − 39.1 − 16.8 − 16.7 − 13.0 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 9.6 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 4.5 − 5.1 + 3.7 + 8.9
         Aug − − 1 − 34.9 − 24.2 − 23.7 − 28.4 + 4.7 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 1.3 + 1.2 − 6.3 − 4.3         Sep − − 1 − 5.5 + 10.6 + 10.3 + 5.6 + 4.6 + 0.3 + 20.5 + 18.6 + 0.3 + 18.3 + 1.9 − 40.0 − 25.1
         Oct − − 3 + 41.1 + 25.6 + 25.5 + 9.1 + 16.5 + 0.1 − 13.6 − 8.4 + 0.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 + 21.0 + 7.9
         Nov − − − 75.5 − 56.8 − 56.7 + 1.3 − 58.0 − 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.3 + 0.1 + 9.2 − 0.2 − 17.3 + 0.3         Dec + 1 − − 63.5 − 20.0 − 18.0 + 9.9 − 27.9 − 2.0 − 29.8 − 35.0 − 0.5 − 34.5 + 5.2 − 6.7 − 11.1
2018         Jan − 2 − 3 + 95.9 + 22.3 + 20.2 + 4.0 + 16.2 + 2.1 + 17.0 + 19.5 + 0.1 + 19.4 − 2.5 + 73.5 + 46.4
         Feb − − 1 − 72.6 − 2.9 − 3.6 + 9.0 − 12.6 + 0.7 − 16.0 − 9.2 − 0.5 − 8.8 − 6.7 − 63.8 − 33.9
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2017         May 20 53 295.9 72.1 64.6 26.7 38.0 7.5 157.0 128.3 23.0 105.3 28.7 66.8 −
         June 20 51 285.2 72.4 65.2 27.0 38.2 7.2 155.5 126.6 22.9 103.7 28.9 57.2 −
         July 20 53 280.7 79.2 72.5 26.6 45.9 6.8 147.0 119.2 22.7 96.5 27.8 54.5 −
         Aug 20 52 279.0 74.8 67.8 28.8 39.0 6.9 153.1 125.7 23.0 102.7 27.5 51.1 −         Sep 20 52 284.6 77.0 70.2 30.2 39.9 6.8 155.2 127.1 23.0 104.1 28.1 52.4 −
         Oct 20 50 276.9 73.1 66.7 27.8 38.9 6.4 145.5 118.2 22.9 95.3 27.3 58.3 −
         Nov 20 50 277.3 74.1 67.5 27.8 39.7 6.6 145.5 117.9 22.6 95.3 27.6 57.7 −         Dec 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2018         Jan 20 50 274.8 71.5 64.6 25.6 39.0 6.9 146.3 119.8 22.2 97.6 26.5 56.9 −
         Feb 20 50 273.9 73.0 66.4 26.6 39.8 6.6 147.0 120.3 22.7 97.7 26.6 53.9 −
Changes *
2016 − 4 − 5 − 56.8 − 45.9 − 42.6 − 28.7 − 13.9 − 3.3 − 22.7 − 22.1 + 0.4 − 22.4 − 0.6 + 11.8 −2017 − − 3 − 33.3 − 4.9 − 2.4 + 3.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 8.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 20.2 −
2017         June − − 2 − 9.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 9.6 −
         July − + 2 − 2.0 + 8.3 + 8.5 − 0.4 + 8.9 − 0.2 − 7.6 − 6.5 − 0.2 − 6.3 − 1.1 − 2.7 −
         Aug − − 1 − 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.2 + 2.3 − 6.4 + 0.2 + 6.4 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 6.5 − 0.3 − 3.4 −         Sep − − + 5.2 + 2.0 + 2.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 1.4 −
         Oct − − 2 − 8.4 − 4.3 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 − 0.5 − 10.0 − 9.2 − 0.1 − 9.1 − 0.8 + 5.9 −
         Nov − − + 1.5 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 −         Dec − − + 0.1 − 3.1 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 4.3 + 4.5 − 0.4 + 4.8 − 0.2 − 1.0 −
2018         Jan − − + 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.6 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.8 + 0.3 −
         Feb − − − 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 3.0 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
May 2018
IV  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of whichpaper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 20151,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 20161,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
1,178.6 830.8 406.4 424.4 347.8 15.5 12.3 3.2 332.2 100.5 50.7 564.3 458.6 2017          May
1,151.2 801.4 424.5 377.0 349.7 14.9 11.6 3.3 334.9 93.4 50.3 533.6 429.5          June
1,105.0 780.2 399.6 380.6 324.7 14.4 11.6 2.8 310.4 97.0 49.8 536.0 434.9          July
1,075.3 739.6 372.0 367.5 335.7 13.8 11.1 2.8 321.8 98.3 49.7 528.9 431.3          Aug 1,094.2 760.6 385.6 375.0 333.6 14.3 11.4 2.9 319.3 95.6 49.2 507.7 401.6          Sep 
1,127.3 768.4 379.7 388.7 358.9 14.1 11.4 2.7 344.8 98.4 49.8 513.3 412.8          Oct 
1,051.4 695.8 352.4 343.4 355.6 16.0 13.1 2.8 339.6 95.1 49.4 516.2 412.2          Nov 1,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2          Dec 
1,040.4 688.7 379.5 309.2 351.8 15.6 14.0 1.6 336.2 109.6 51.4 539.9 442.8 2018          Jan 
1,013.9 653.6 383.8 269.8 360.3 14.9 13.2 1.6 345.4 105.7 51.4 499.5 413.3          Feb 
Changes *
+ 66.8 + 76.8 + 65.6 + 11.2 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 29.6 + 1.2 − 18.1 − 17.3 2016− 97.3 − 80.7 − 52.1 − 28.6 − 16.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 17.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 86.5 − 58.1 2017
− 21.7 − 23.8 + 18.1 − 41.8 + 2.1 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 2.8 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 30.6 − 25.8 2017          June
− 38.5 − 13.8 − 24.8 + 11.1 − 24.8 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 24.3 + 5.3 − 0.5 + 2.3 + 10.2          July
− 26.8 − 37.9 − 27.6 − 10.2 + 11.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 11.6 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 7.1 − 1.7          Aug + 18.1 + 20.2 + 13.6 + 6.6 − 2.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 2.6 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 21.2 − 30.7          Sep 
+ 29.1 + 3.9 − 6.0 + 9.8 + 25.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 25.4 + 1.9 + 0.5 + 5.6 + 9.0          Oct 
− 70.5 − 67.4 − 27.3 − 40.1 − 3.1 + 1.9 + 1.8 + 0.1 − 5.0 − 2.2 − 0.3 + 2.9 + 2.2          Nov − 47.9 − 10.3 + 20.4 − 30.6 − 37.7 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.9 − 37.7 + 2.8 + 2.5 − 17.6 − 10.8          Dec 
+ 48.2 + 13.9 + 6.7 + 7.2 + 34.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 34.6 + 15.0 − 0.5 + 41.4 + 49.2 2018          Jan 
− 31.1 − 39.4 + 4.4 − 43.8 + 8.3 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 5.6 − 0.0 − 40.4 − 32.9          Feb 
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017
224.9 114.1 55.8 58.3 110.8 13.4 7.7 5.7 97.4 13.7 23.5 33.7 − 2017          May
216.3 105.1 53.8 51.3 111.2 13.4 7.6 5.8 97.8 13.1 23.0 32.8 −          June
213.2 104.2 55.0 49.2 109.0 13.9 8.0 5.9 95.1 13.0 23.0 31.5 −          July
211.8 103.9 56.6 47.3 108.0 13.4 7.7 5.7 94.6 13.0 23.1 31.1 −          Aug 217.0 105.9 58.1 47.9 111.1 12.6 7.1 5.6 98.5 12.9 23.2 31.5 −          Sep 
208.6 99.9 53.3 46.7 108.7 11.7 5.9 5.8 97.0 12.9 23.1 32.3 −          Oct 
207.8 98.1 53.3 44.8 109.7 11.9 6.1 5.8 97.8 12.9 23.1 33.6 −          Nov 207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 −          Dec 
206.0 96.1 50.3 45.8 110.0 12.1 6.3 5.9 97.8 13.0 24.0 31.7 − 2018          Jan 
205.2 94.1 50.6 43.6 111.1 12.0 6.2 5.8 99.1 13.8 23.6 31.3 −          Feb 
Changes *
− 46.2 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 12.7 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 2.9 − 11.9 − 0.8 − 2.5 − 7.3 − 2016− 32.8 − 33.7 − 22.0 − 11.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2017
− 7.7 − 8.4 − 2.0 − 6.4 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 2017          June
− 1.7 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 1.5 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 −          July
− 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 −          Aug + 4.9 + 1.9 + 1.5 + 0.4 + 3.0 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 3.7 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 −          Sep 
− 9.0 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 1.6 − 2.7 − 1.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 −          Oct 
− 0.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 1.6 −          Nov − 0.1 − 1.4 − 3.5 + 2.0 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 1.1 −          Dec 
+ 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 2018          Jan 
− 1.7 − 2.4 + 0.3 − 2.7 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.8 −          Feb 
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote  1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
May 2018
V Minimum reserves
 
1 Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2011 10,376.3 207.5 207.0 212.3 5.3 0.0
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.02013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.02014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.02015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.02016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.02017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018         Mar  
p 12,481.1 124.8 124.4 1,295.3 1,170.9 ...
         Apr . . . . . .         May  
p ... ... 123.8 ... ... ...
 
2 Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro-area reserve base
Reserve base  2 in per cent Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2011 2,666,422 25.7 53,328 53,145 54,460 1,315 1
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 12013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 22014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 02016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 02017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018         Mar 3,490,341 28.0 34,903 34,746 440,920 406,174 1
         Apr . . . . . . .         May  
p 3,467,454 ... 34,675 34,517 ... ... ...
 
(a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2011 10,459 8,992 3,078 18,253 9,437 601 2,324
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,2632014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,3122015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,5782016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,8592017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018         Mar 6,393 5,770 3,299 11,275 6,323 107 1,579
         Apr . . . . . . .         May 6,188 5,773 3,118 11,301 6,364 104 1,669
 
(b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro-area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro-area countries
2011 1,609,904 3,298 354,235 596,833 102,153
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,4532013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,1592014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,1462016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,7762017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018         Mar 2,365,021 2,770 436,143 581,215 105,190
         Apr . . . . .         May 2,365,915 1,509 406,083 580,598 113,347
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it was
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5 (2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4 (1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
May 2018
VI Interest rates
 
1 ECB interest rates 2 Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code  1 
2005 Dec                  6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan                1 2.57 2009 Jan                1 1.62
         July               13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar                  8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dez                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug                  9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct                11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan                1 0.12
         Dec                13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan                1 1.14
2013 May                 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan                1 −0.13
2007 Mar                14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan                1 1.21
2014 June               11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan                1 −0.63
2008 July                 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct                  8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan                1 1.37
         Oct                  9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan                1 −0.83
         Nov                12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec                10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July               1 3.19
2009 Jan                21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00
         Mar                11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan                1 3.32
         Apr                  8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3 Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2018 Apr                18 1,637 1,637 0.0 0−−−7
         Apr                25 2,801 2,801 0.0 0−−−8
         May                 3 2,562 2,562 0.0 0−−−6
         May                 9 2,003 2,003 0.0 0−−−7
         May               16 2,006 2,006 0.0 0−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2018 Feb                  1 2,518 2,518 2 0 . 0 0−−− 8 4
         Mar                  1 2,810 2,810 2 ... − − − 91
         Mar                29 2,359 2,359 2 ... − − − 91
         Apr                26 2,281 2,281 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4 Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR  2 
Monthlyaverage EONIA  
1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2017         Oct − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.18
         Nov − 0.35 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19         Dec − 0.34 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19
2018         Jan − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19
         Feb − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19         Mar − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19
         Apr − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.33 − 0.27 − 0.22 − 0.19
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor 4 January 1999 on the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 metho d and
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA rate published via Reuters. 2Euro Interbank Offered Rate: unweighted average rate
and the EURIBOR rate. 1Euro OverNight Index Average: weighted average overnight calculated by Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method.  
rate for interbank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
May 2018
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
(a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ depositswith an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2017         Mar 0.34 73,460 1.44 218,575 0.09 84,520 1.49 19,649
         Apr 0.33 72,221 1.42 218,122 0.09 82,082 1.44 20,074
         May 0.33 71,503 1.41 217,847 0.08 82,646 1.41 20,471         June 0.33 69,952 1.40 217,154 0.08 80,018 1.35 20,770
         July 0.32 69,365 1.39 216,115 0.08 78,396 1.31 21,529
         Aug 0.31 69,014 1.37 215,909 0.09 78,517 1.30 22,146         Sep 0.31 67,904 1.36 215,817 0.08 77,405 1.25 22,356
         Oct 0.30 67,393 1.35 215,503 0.08 76,092 1.18 23,093
         Nov 0.30 66,679 1.34 215,034 0.08 77,669 1.12 24,421         Dec 0.29 66,585 1.34 216,841 0.06 78,428 1.07 25,136
2018         Jan 0.29 66,589 1.32 216,681 0.05 78,112 1.05 26,055
         Feb 0.28 65,984 1.31 216,585 0.04 75,362 1.03 26,887         Mar 0.27 65,081 1.30 216,572 0.05 72,727 1.01 26,648
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans for consumption and other purposes to households  4, 5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2017         Mar 2.47 4,286 2.07 26,208 2.91 1,099,530 7.32 50,294 4.01 83,834 4.09 310,342
         Apr 2.45 4,241 2.05 26,175 2.88 1,104,580 7.10 49,177 3.99 84,077 4.08 309,887
         May 2.44 4,304 2.04 26,188 2.85 1,108,805 7.13 49,165 3.96 84,813 4.06 311,334         June 2.44 4,200 2.03 26,206 2.83 1,115,307 7.17 50,307 3.95 85,111 4.04 310,769
         July 2.46 4,076 2.01 26,017 2.80 1,120,699 7.15 49,247 3.93 85,513 4.03 311,617
         Aug 2.45 4,035 2.00 25,937 2.77 1,125,823 7.17 48,525 3.92 85,972 4.01 313,025         Sep 2.42 3,934 2.00 25,996 2.75 1,131,500 7.12 49,521 3.91 86,239 4.00 312,467
         Oct 2.38 4,208 1.99 25,925 2.73 1,135,284 7.14 48,762 3.89 86,683 3.98 312,869
         Nov 2.44 3,898 1.98 25,924 2.71 1,139,714 7.00 48,352 3.87 87,393 3.96 312,973         Dec 2.44 3,851 1.97 25,850 2.68 1,143,333 6.98 48,885 3.87 87,210 3.95 311,861
2018         Jan 2.33 3,906 1.96 25,566 2.66 1,144,088 7.07 48,461 3.85 87,632 3.93 312,287
         Feb 2.31 3,869 1.95 25,474 2.65 1,147,522 7.07 48,468 3.84 87,842 3.92 312,671         Mar 2.31 3,964 1.94 25,452 2.62 1,152,827 7.02 49,143 3.82 88,519 3.91 312,472
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2017         Mar 2.54 130,479 1.98 133,300 2.39 638,362
         Apr 2.51 130,949 1.98 133,720 2.37 642,920
         May 2.45 131,174 1.97 134,474 2.35 649,087         June 2.51 132,255 1.95 134,974 2.33 645,396
         July 2.45 131,691 1.95 135,710 2.31 650,498
         Aug 2.44 130,333 1.94 136,527 2.30 654,312         Sep 2.45 135,493 1.93 135,872 2.28 654,806
         Oct 2.39 136,523 1.92 136,647 2.26 657,911
         Nov 2.42 137,523 1.91 138,041 2.25 664,018         Dec 2.47 133,105 1.90 137,708 2.22 664,374
2018         Jan 2.34 141,326 1.88 138,344 2.20 668,281
         Feb 2.39 142,819 1.88 138,735 2.19 672,403         Mar 2.39 145,656 1.87 139,810 2.18 672,260
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from calculated either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate rates. Both calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of not any other related charges which may occur for enquiries, admin istration,
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and nonfinancial corporations preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole monthly balance sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase,
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial including building and home improvements; including loans granted b y building and
corporations include all enterprises other than insurance companies, banks and other loan associations and interim credits as well as transmitted l oans granted by the
financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provi- reporting agents in their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for
sional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not consumption are defined as loans granted for the purpose of personal u se in the
specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found consumption of goods and services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans
on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics / Money and capital markets / Interest rates are loans granted for other purposes such as business, debt conso lidation, education
and yields / Interest rates on deposits and loans). oThe statistics on outstanding etc. 6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 p 
47   ). 
amounts are collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
May 2018
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice of  8 
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
2017         Mar 0.05 1,233,631 0.26 4,918 0.51 676 0.69 820 0.21 536,136 0.31 49,493
         Apr 0.05 1,253,497 0.19 4,926 0.37 729 0.63 741 0.21 536,260 0.31 49,013
         May 0.05 1,258,521 0.20 4,724 0.43 719 0.87 726 0.21 536,046 0.30 48,646         June 0.04 1,264,791 0.22 4,078 0.27 947 0.73 633 0.21 535,416 0.30 48,253
         July 0.04 1,271,823 0.17 5,276 0.31 653 0.70 617 0.20 537,553 0.31 44,902
         Aug 0.03 1,278,289 0.14 5,198 0.41 492 0.65 716 0.19 537,173 0.30 44,119         Sep 0.03 1,285,601 0.15 3,992 0.31 598 0.65 636 0.19 537,108 0.30 43,509
         Oct 0.03 1,294,797 0.18 3,750 0.28 800 0.65 696 0.19 537,700 0.28 42,721
         Nov 0.03 1,314,663 0.17 4,022 0.39 696 0.72 747 0.18 537,935 0.27 42,074         Dec 0.03 1,322,096 0.13 4,043 0.35 880 0.59 627 0.18 540,332 0.28 41,475
2018         Jan 0.03 1,319,368 0.19 4,348 0.31 866 0.71 780 0.18 539,145 0.28 42,193
         Feb 0.03 1,328,779 0.26 4,181 0.31 652 0.80 737 0.17 539,604 0.27 41,465         Mar 0.02 1,334,710 0.30 3,995 0.38 470 0.74 765 0.17 539,077 0.27 41,021
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2017         Mar − 0.01 395,640 − 0.09 12,614 0.19 450 0.79 309
         Apr − 0.01 397,203 − 0.07 9,275 0.08 899 0.33 1,039
         May − 0.01 401,652 − 0.05 10,212 0.13 912 0.30 837         June − 0.02 415,078 − 0.14 14,661 0.07 525 0.24 586
         July − 0.01 402,113 − 0.09 11,516 0.19 859 0.26 1,382
         Aug − 0.02 409,698 − 0.04 9,710 0.21 185 0.52 666         Sep − 0.02 414,461 − 0.08 10,040 0.09 351 0.37 704
         Oct − 0.02 425,806 − 0.10 9,134 0.04 412 0.26 1,456
         Nov − 0.02 428,784 − 0.08 9,337 0.09 897 0.22 1,237         Dec − 0.02 425,477 − 0.07 13,102 0.09 351 0.28 1,477
2018         Jan − 0.02 429,587 − 0.07 11,368 0.01 520 0.30 1,271
         Feb − 0.02 419,428 − 0.09 8,751 0.11 186 0.32 932         Mar − 0.02 418,683 − 0.08 10,133 0.13 347 0.31 427
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for consumption with an initial rate fixation of  4 
Total of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa % pa € million % pa € million % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million
2017         Mar 5.62 5.60 9,849 6.88 1,761 6.12 341 4.15 4,041 6.64 5,467
         Apr 5.66 5.65 8,222 6.91 1,544 6.17 287 4.32 3,415 6.61 4,520
         May 5.89 5.87 9,372 7.22 1,814 6.41 337 4.49 3,846 6.87 5,189         June 5.90 5.88 8,683 7.24 1,685 6.28 308 4.49 3,574 6.89 4,801
         July 5.99 5.97 8,940 7.32 1,872 6.22 299 4.57 3,561 6.95 5,080
         Aug 5.88 5.86 8,827 7.20 1,724 6.51 312 4.54 3,703 6.84 4,812         Sep 5.67 5.65 8,212 7.11 1,465 6.09 305 4.31 3,579 6.72 4,328
         Oct 5.67 5.65 8,338 7.07 1,495 6.06 302 4.30 3,758 6.81 4,278
         Nov 5.63 5.61 8,216 7.10 1,410 6.09 306 4.31 3,827 6.80 4,083         Dec 5.39 5.37 6,701 6.83 1,004 5.81 297 4.15 3,315 6.63 3,089
2018         Jan 5.85 5.83 9,288 7.26 1,729 6.04 328 4.32 3,860 6.96 5,100
         Feb 5.70 5.68 8,315 7.09 1,451 6.15 258 4.28 3,497 6.72 4,560         Mar 5.43 5.42 9,567 7.03 1,735 5.91 291 4.09 4,277 6.53 4,999
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p
44  .+In the case of deposits with an agreed business at the end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average
maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt, new rates of interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form
business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corpor- the underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
ations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premia. 9Excluding overdrafts. 10An-
rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. In the case of nual percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges w hich may
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the docum ents, guarantees and
credit card debt, new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts credit insurance. for the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
May 2018
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)Loans for other purposes to households with an initial rate fxation of  
5 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and
Total renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
Loans to households
2017         Mar 2.01 7,097 1.88 2,130 1.80 3,237 2.72 1,032 1.99 2,828
         Apr 2.00 6,030 1.86 2,229 1.75 2,826 2.67 853 2.05 2,351
         May 2.02 5,890 1.81 1,930 1.83 2,535 2.61 941 1.99 2,414         June 2.06 5,933 1.89 1,852 1.95 2,722 2.73 859 1.93 2,352
         July 1.96 6,388 1.75 2,282 1.76 2,873 2.48 964 1.99 2,551
         Aug 1.99 5,667 1.74 1,625 1.81 2,171 2.66 814 1.92 2,682         Sep 1.99 5,275 1.80 1,455 1.79 2,341 2.60 804 1.99 2,130
         Oct 2.08 5,682 1.91 1,915 1.91 2,646 2.64 854 2.07 2,182
         Nov 1.98 5,587 1.84 1,569 1.76 2,471 2.63 873 1.96 2,243         Dec 2.00 6,193 1.80 1,624 1.80 2,705 2.76 958 1.92 2,530
2018         Jan 2.01 6,017 1.94 2,035 1.85 2,693 2.62 888 1.97 2,436
         Feb 1.97 5,062 1.77 1,470 1.77 2,161 2.50 753 1.99 2,148         Mar 2.03 5,871 1.86 1,427 1.77 2,436 2.58 942 2.08 2,493
of which: loans to sole proprietors
2017         Mar 2.11 4,783 . . 2.01 2,120 2.84 767 1.93 1,896
         Apr 2.09 4,280 . . 1.95 1,931 2.77 670 1.97 1,679
         May 2.12 4,033 . . 2.04 1,667 2.84 689 1.92 1,677         June 2.15 4,197 . . 2.13 1,964 2.84 681 1.88 1,552
         July 2.06 4,142 . . 1.89 1,917 2.82 688 1.94 1,537
         Aug 2.08 3,640 . . 1.95 1,445 2.79 629 1.92 1,566         Sep 2.04 3,411 . . 1.84 1,436 2.81 598 1.90 1,377
         Oct 2.13 3,707 . . 1.98 1,694 2.82 628 2.00 1,385
         Nov 2.07 3,725 . . 1.94 1,592 2.80 662 1.88 1,471         Dec 2.09 4,266 . . 2.00 1,822 2.83 753 1.85 1,691
2018         Jan 2.07 4,146 . . 1.99 1,817 2.72 679 1.89 1,650
         Feb 2.07 3,412 . . 2.01 1,390 2.61 564 1.93 1,458         Mar 2.07 4,103 . . 1.87 1,645 2.65 741 2.02 1,717
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans with an initial rate fixation of  3 
of which floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and Total
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) renegotiated loans  9 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2017         Mar 1.87 1.82 22,196 1.86 4,945 2.08 2,428 1.69 1,932 1.67 7,609 1.89 10,227
         Apr 1.91 1.85 18,087 1.89 4,620 2.10 2,001 1.73 1,672 1.71 6,456 1.92 7,958
         May 1.88 1.83 20,484 1.92 4,136 2.17 2,288 1.77 1,731 1.66 7,308 1.88 9,157         June 1.87 1.82 19,294 1.92 3,767 2.02 2,265 1.70 1,541 1.68 6,573 1.89 8,915
         July 1.88 1.82 20,405 1.88 4,612 2.04 2,389 1.68 1,726 1.66 7,420 1.92 8,870
         Aug 1.94 1.87 20,228 2.00 3,743 2.05 2,340 1.89 1,888 1.67 7,199 1.98 8,801         Sep 1.92 1.86 17,363 1.91 3,289 2.04 2,025 1.71 1,571 1.71 5,950 1.96 7,817
         Oct 1.90 1.85 18,128 1.90 3,955 2.08 2,134 1.70 1,634 1.68 6,611 1.96 7,749
         Nov 1.90 1.84 18,793 1.89 3,525 2.04 2,170 1.72 1,640 1.68 6,550 1.94 8,433         Dec 1.86 1.79 17,473 1.87 3,242 2.04 2,150 1.69 1,553 1.65 6,084 1.86 7,686
2018         Jan 1.88 1.82 19,643 1.90 4,529 2.03 2,354 1.69 1,798 1.65 6,864 1.92 8,627
         Feb 1.90 1.84 18,839 1.95 3,687 2.07 2,090 1.73 1,624 1.68 6,400 1.92 8,725         Mar 1.94 1.89 20,581 1.95 3,981 2.05 2,256 1.74 1,762 1.74 7,047 1.98 9,516
of which: collateralised loans 11
2017         Mar . 1.72 9,905 . . 1.96 855 1.53 939 1.59 3,565 1.82 4,546
         Apr . 1.75 8,413 . . 1.98 795 1.53 838 1.60 3,204 1.89 3,576
         May . 1.73 9,110 . . 2.09 843 1.59 900 1.58 3,370 1.81 3,997         June . 1.72 8,374 . . 1.87 865 1.53 726 1.61 3,030 1.82 3,753
         July . 1.72 9,062 . . 1.84 896 1.53 891 1.60 3,529 1.84 3,746
         Aug . 1.79 8,461 . . 1.96 821 1.87 996 1.59 3,204 1.92 3,440         Sep . 1.78 7,701 . . 1.97 711 1.53 797 1.63 2,707 1.92 3,486
         Oct . 1.77 8,217 . . 1.97 780 1.53 782 1.62 3,095 1.92 3,560
         Nov . 1.76 8,464 . . 1.93 771 1.53 796 1.60 3,031 1.90 3,866         Dec . 1.69 7,644 . . 1.97 685 1.51 740 1.57 2,733 1.77 3,486
2018         Jan . 1.75 9,069 . . 2.00 837 1.57 946 1.59 3,283 1.88 4,003
         Feb . 1.76 8,579 . . 2.02 702 1.53 803 1.61 2,946 1.86 4,128         Mar . 1.81 9,154 . . 1.96 831 1.61 871 1.67 3,271 1.94 4,181
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p
44  . For footnotes +, 7 to 10, see p 45  . For   
footnote 11, see p 47   .  

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
May 2018
VI Interest rates
 
5 Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
(b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which of which
Revolving loans  12 Revolving loans  12 
and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 Extended and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 
credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 credit card debt credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million % pa € million
2017         Mar 8.66 40,215 8.61 32,949 15.13 4,273 3.67 65,990 3.68 65,698
         Apr 8.50 38,972 8.49 31,353 15.13 4,295 3.64 65,154 3.66 64,865
         May 8.46 39,394 8.50 31,647 15.13 4,259 3.53 65,353 3.54 65,067         June 8.44 40,606 8.47 32,739 15.13 4,328 3.59 67,282 3.61 66,992
         July 8.45 39,300 8.46 31,374 15.11 4,423 3.52 65,979 3.54 65,695
         Aug 8.48 38,663 8.47 30,914 15.12 4,364 3.48 66,012 3.49 65,718         Sep 8.44 39,630 8.48 31,635 15.09 4,393 3.52 67,886 3.54 67,559
         Oct 8.47 39,133 8.48 31,101 15.10 4,493 3.41 67,481 3.42 67,162
         Nov 8.30 38,672 8.35 30,489 15.11 4,386 3.45 67,793 3.46 67,457         Dec 8.21 39,538 8.35 31,187 14.94 4,303 3.47 65,936 3.49 65,625
2018         Jan 8.33 39,136 8.38 31,128 14.92 4,369 3.36 68,733 3.37 68,418
         Feb 8.36 39,233 8.39 31,380 14.92 4,334 3.40 70,798 3.42 70,488         Mar 8.31 39,818 8.36 31,844 14.87 4,340 3.41 71,713 3.43 71,381
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which Loans up to €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  15 Loans over €1 million with an initial rate fixation of  15 
renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa % pa € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2017         Mar 1.50 71,530 1.60 22,647 2.51 9,245 2.59 1,733 1.85 1,665 1.20 45,163 1.41 2,977 1.67 10,747
         Apr 1.43 57,323 1.46 19,903 2.44 7,699 2.54 1,493 1.81 1,371 1.14 38,649 1.41 2,188 1.67 5,923
         May 1.35 65,177 1.53 18,706 2.54 8,000 2.58 1,661 1.82 1,423 0.99 41,638 1.55 3,072 1.58 9,383         June 1.41 71,950 1.50 21,083 2.51 8,904 2.57 1,681 1.84 1,442 1.13 46,903 1.08 3,655 1.61 9,365
         July 1.39 67,430 1.48 20,770 2.42 8,497 2.57 1,583 1.87 1,403 1.08 43,495 1.28 3,021 1.61 9,431
         Aug 1.38 59,046 1.52 13,769 2.39 7,401 2.58 1,441 1.82 1,335 1.08 37,547 1.38 2,627 1.57 8,695         Sep 1.38 66,182 1.52 19,843 2.50 8,124 2.60 1,446 1.86 1,236 1.08 43,731 1.24 2,419 1.63 9,226
         Oct 1.35 66,679 1.47 19,173 2.48 8,209 2.59 1,490 1.81 1,214 1.05 45,005 1.25 2,354 1.59 8,407
         Nov 1.40 63,110 1.49 16,676 2.50 8,257 2.57 1,582 1.87 1,423 1.09 41,581 1.32 2,565 1.58 7,702         Dec 1.43 78,501 1.52 21,693 2.45 8,207 2.55 1,862 1.82 1,628 1.15 49,208 1.51 5,166 1.63 12,430
2018         Jan 1.22 69,664 1.49 18,190 2.48 8,321 2.53 1,607 1.92 1,361 0.89 50,613 1.72 2,238 1.55 5,524
         Feb 1.32 53,831 1.48 13,339 2.47 7,501 2.57 1,390 1.97 1,123 0.94 36,050 1.43 1,794 1.68 5,973         Mar 1.42 69,106 1.52 18,706 2.48 8,966 2.52 1,744 1.93 1,470 1.09 44,948 1.50 3,379 1.73 8,599
of which: collateralised loans 11
2017         Mar 1.48 11,857 . . 1.87 643 2.52 166 1.72 493 1.37 7,040 1.30 519 1.60 2,996
         Apr 1.42 8,360 . . 1.81 570 2.23 164 1.69 413 1.29 5,640 1.59 299 1.62 1,274
         May 1.61 8,671 . . 2.06 545 2.54 191 1.70 401 1.45 4,558 2.04 646 1.63 2,330         June 1.55 11,011 . . 1.85 632 2.60 150 1.75 444 1.44 6,484 1.64 625 1.66 2,676
         July 1.52 9,023 . . 1.78 661 2.46 155 1.77 415 1.34 5,050 1.74 464 1.68 2,278
         Aug 1.47 9,188 . . 1.99 480 2.39 153 1.69 431 1.30 4,961 1.94 560 1.50 2,603         Sep 1.52 9,811 . . 1.83 535 2.50 132 1.77 351 1.41 5,743 1.64 370 1.62 2,680
         Oct 1.46 9,398 . . 1.90 557 2.61 131 1.77 349 1.25 5,480 2.19 304 1.64 2,577
         Nov 1.60 8,531 . . 1.95 545 2.41 147 1.74 414 1.40 5,212 2.68 423 1.74 1,790         Dec 1.59 13,235 . . 1.92 627 2.65 167 1.75 426 1.44 7,644 2.33 1,098 1.56 3,273
2018         Jan 1.53 7,387 . . 1.92 627 2.36 148 1.90 426 1.32 4,529 1.93 357 1.73 1,300
         Feb 1.55 6,461 . . 1.96 428 2.77 134 1.79 324 1.30 3,638 1.54 457 1.88 1,480         Mar 1.62 11,119 . . 1.92 608 2.47 161 1.78 396 1.44 6,583 1.68 1,010 1.93 2,361
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p 45  .11For (d) there is no obligation of regular repayment of funds. 13Overdrafts are defined as
the purposes of the interest rate statistis, a loan is considered to be secured if debit balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
collateral (among others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed betw een customers and the
at leat the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or bank. 14Including convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is
assigned. 12Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without payment transactions effectuated with the card during one billing cycle and the date
giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and at which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle becom e due. 15The
decrease as funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; amount category refers to the single loan transaction conside red as new business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
May 2018
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1 Assets
  
 € billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and funds Financial technical Non-financial Remainingyear/quarter Total deposits  
2 securities Loans  3 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
 
2013 1,742.1 386.3 262.0 257.1 211.1 462.3 6.0 59.8 46.4 51.02014 1,892.0 371.6 321.0 271.4 215.9 542.3 6.4 63.9 49.3 50.22015 1,954.1 344.4 344.7 278.9 228.7 578.3 4.5 71.9 51.8 50.8
2016         Q1 2,007.8 343.6 374.1 280.2 230.0 596.3 5.2 73.7 53.1 51.7
         Q2 2,034.6 336.1 395.8 281.9 229.6 607.7 4.8 73.5 53.2 52.0
2016         Q3  
1 2,219.9 383.5 397.0 389.6 280.8 605.0 5.3 47.3 31.8 79.7
         Q4 2,186.1 361.5 370.9 374.6 308.6 620.1 3.3 44.1 32.4 70.6
2017         Q1 2,189.3 347.1 391.7 364.9 298.5 631.6 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
         Q2 2,177.9 335.5 392.3 362.3 302.3 641.2 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6         Q3 2,187.4 322.2 399.0 367.8 305.2 649.6 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.3         Q4 2,210.1 310.6 401.1 349.4 332.8 671.0 2.8 48.5 34.3 59.6
Life insurance
2013 956.9 247.8 131.4 148.7 31.5 329.1 3.0 17.7 28.3 19.52014 1,044.1 237.2 161.2 153.4 32.3 390.3 3.2 17.8 29.7 19.12015 1,063.7 219.7 169.8 158.0 34.9 414.6 2.2 16.3 30.7 17.4
2016         Q1 1,095.7 219.1 187.0 159.2 35.3 428.0 2.5 15.6 31.9 17.2
         Q2 1,116.7 214.5 201.7 160.7 35.6 438.0 2.4 14.9 32.0 16.9
2016         Q3  
1 1,247.0 246.6 204.2 243.2 47.5 437.3 4.1 11.3 19.1 33.8
         Q4 1,194.2 231.3 182.7 223.0 50.7 453.8 2.1 9.6 19.1 21.9
2017         Q1 1,170.4 217.6 196.1 215.1 38.6 458.6 1.8 8.2 19.1 15.3
         Q2 1,172.7 209.4 199.6 215.3 39.3 464.7 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3         Q3 1,177.4 201.0 203.3 218.0 39.0 471.2 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0         Q4 1,192.1 191.8 203.2 222.2 41.6 487.0 1.8 8.5 19.9 16.0
Non-life insurance
2013 448.1 126.0 70.9 51.1 42.8 105.9 1.6 25.1 12.7 12.02014 486.4 122.8 89.4 53.9 44.3 122.5 1.8 26.5 13.7 11.52015 511.0 113.9 97.6 55.6 48.5 134.8 1.3 32.9 14.5 11.9
2016         Q1 527.6 113.2 108.2 55.5 49.6 140.6 1.5 32.8 14.5 11.8
         Q2 532.8 109.4 113.6 55.8 49.3 144.5 1.4 32.8 14.4 11.7
2016         Q3  
1 592.3 125.0 101.7 94.0 50.9 153.9 0.5 28.7 8.7 29.0
         Q4 583.3 118.9 98.5 91.8 56.8 152.0 0.5 26.8 9.0 29.0
2017         Q1 606.5 118.0 105.8 91.4 56.9 156.8 0.3 34.0 9.1 34.2
         Q2 603.3 114.5 107.1 90.6 58.5 159.9 0.4 33.2 9.1 30.1         Q3 602.5 109.5 109.2 92.3 58.5 162.6 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4         Q4 606.0 108.5 111.4 81.8 68.9 165.5 0.4 31.7 9.7 28.1
Reinsurance  4 
2013 337.1 13.3 59.0 57.4 136.8 27.2 1.4 17.1 5.4 19.5
2014 361.4 12.4 69.7 64.1 139.2 29.5 1.4 19.6 5.9 19.62015 379.4 10.8 77.3 65.3 145.4 28.9 1.1 22.7 6.5 21.4
2016         Q1 376.0 11.2 78.5 64.0 145.1 27.3 1.1 20.4 6.4 21.9
         Q2 373.7 11.9 79.8 62.8 144.8 25.8 1.0 18.8 6.4 22.4
2016         Q3  
1 380.7 12.0 91.0 52.5 182.4 13.8 0.8 7.3 4.0 16.9
         Q4 408.6 11.3 89.7 59.7 201.0 14.3 0.7 7.7 4.3 19.7
2017         Q1 412.5 11.5 89.9 58.4 203.0 16.2 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
         Q2 401.9 11.6 85.6 56.4 204.4 16.6 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2         Q3 407.5 11.7 86.4 57.4 207.7 15.9 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9         Q4 412.1 10.2 86.5 45.5 222.3 18.5 0.7 8.3 4.7 15.5
Pension funds  5 
2013 494.6 154.3 42.5 27.6 13.0 216.2 − 4.4 25.1 11.7
2014 552.5 151.7 57.1 29.1 16.7 247.8 − 4.9 27.8 17.42015 579.5 145.5 60.2 28.8 19.1 268.5 − 5.4 31.5 20.4
2016         Q1 588.8 143.1 66.0 29.0 19.4 273.4 − 5.5 31.9 20.5
         Q2 601.7 142.7 69.1 29.2 20.0 281.9 − 5.5 32.5 20.7         Q3 611.6 144.4 69.2 29.3 20.1 289.0 − 5.6 33.2 20.9         Q4 613.5 144.7 67.8 29.8 20.6 288.9 − 5.7 34.5 21.4
2017         Q1 619.9 146.2 66.1 30.3 21.2 293.9 − 5.8 34.9 21.6
         Q2 623.7 143.7 69.0 30.7 21.4 295.3 − 6.8 35.3 21.5         Q3 632.5 141.8 70.7 30.8 21.7 303.3 − 6.9 35.5 21.8         Q4 647.0 141.3 75.3 31.2 22.4 310.1 − 7.0 37.3 22.3
1Data as of 2016 Q3 are based on Solvency II supervisory data, valuation of listed se- ed on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans and
curities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB’s securities database. Up registered Pfandbriefe. 4Not including the reinsurance business conducted by pri-
to and including 2016 Q2 data are based on Solvency I supervisory data from the Fed- mary insurers, which is included there. 5The term “pension funds“ refers to the insti-
eral Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin), supplemented by estimates and own calcu- tutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Ac counts. Pension funds
lations. 2Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension sch emes for the
bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 3Including deposits retain- self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
May 2018
VII Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2 Liabilities
  
 € billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life /
Debt Claims on
End of securities Shares and pension funds Financial Remainingyear/quarter Total issued Loans  
2 other equity Total reserves  3 Non-life  4 derivatives liabilities Net worth  7 
Insurance corporations
 
2013 1,742.1 16.9 77.7 188.7 1,340.7 1,061.4 279.3 0.0 68.8 49.22014 1,892.0 17.3 84.3 193.0 1,411.6 1,113.8 297.8 0.0 70.5 115.32015 1,954.1 18.3 91.7 214.8 1,474.7 1,160.6 314.1 0.0 70.2 84.4
2016         Q1 2,007.8 17.7 92.9 220.4 1,501.0 1,179.8 321.2 0.0 71.5 104.3
         Q2 2,034.6 17.6 93.0 191.1 1,508.4 1,188.4 320.1 0.0 71.6 152.9
2016         Q3  
1 2,219.9 30.7 73.7 383.0 1,579.4 1,396.9 182.5 1.5 151.5 −
         Q4 2,186.1 30.7 70.3 441.0 1,494.4 1,313.3 181.1 2.3 147.4 −
2017         Q1 2,189.3 30.5 57.2 448.5 1,511.7 1,309.5 202.2 1.8 139.5 −
         Q2 2,177.9 28.6 57.0 450.7 1,505.2 1,308.4 196.8 2.1 134.3 −         Q3 2,187.4 28.5 58.4 455.4 1,512.8 1,317.1 195.7 2.3 130.1 −         Q4 2,210.1 28.2 62.6 461.7 1,522.3 1,334.0 188.3 2.2 133.2 −
Life insurance
2013 956.9 0.0 23.8 20.2 853.2 839.4 13.8 0.0 34.1 25.62014 1,044.1 0.0 24.7 21.6 891.8 877.4 14.4 0.0 32.8 73.32015 1,063.7 0.0 24.5 24.6 926.0 911.0 15.0 0.0 30.9 57.7
2016         Q1 1,095.7 0.0 26.0 23.6 938.7 923.4 15.2 0.0 30.7 76.8
         Q2 1,116.7 0.0 27.8 22.3 943.1 927.8 15.3 0.0 30.2 93.3
2016         Q3  
1 1,247.0 3.8 25.9 96.0 1,066.2 1,066.2 − 0.7 54.4 −
         Q4 1,194.2 4.1 25.0 116.3 993.7 993.7 − 1.2 53.9 −
2017         Q1 1,170.4 4.1 12.5 116.3 991.7 991.7 − 0.9 44.8 −
         Q2 1,172.7 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.5 989.5 − 1.0 46.2 −         Q3 1,177.4 4.1 12.3 121.5 993.9 993.9 − 1.1 44.5 −         Q4 1,192.1 4.1 12.8 122.4 1,006.2 1,006.2 − 1.1 45.5 −
Non-life insurance
2013 448.1 0.0 9.2 55.9 351.6 222.0 129.6 0.0 15.3 16.12014 486.4 0.0 10.5 58.2 369.8 236.5 133.4 0.0 15.6 32.32015 511.0 0.0 14.2 63.7 390.5 249.6 140.9 0.0 17.1 25.5
2016         Q1 527.6 0.0 14.6 62.0 399.6 253.8 145.9 0.0 17.5 33.9
         Q2 532.8 0.0 14.5 57.7 401.6 256.8 144.9 0.0 17.2 41.9
2016         Q3  
1 592.3 0.9 6.6 120.0 407.4 310.1 97.3 0.0 57.3 −
         Q4 583.3 1.1 6.3 130.4 390.1 300.5 89.7 0.2 55.3 −
2017         Q1 606.5 1.1 7.3 134.0 408.9 300.8 108.2 0.1 55.0 −
         Q2 603.3 1.1 6.8 135.6 406.7 302.4 104.2 0.1 53.0 −         Q3 602.5 1.1 6.9 137.3 406.6 305.7 100.9 0.1 50.6 −         Q4 606.0 1.1 6.7 138.3 406.3 310.0 96.3 0.1 53.5 −
Reinsurance  5 
2013 337.1 16.9 44.7 112.7 135.9 − 135.9 0.0 19.4 7.5
2014 361.4 17.3 49.1 113.3 150.0 − 150.0 0.0 22.1 9.62015 379.4 18.3 53.0 124.8 158.2 − 158.2 0.0 22.2 2.8
2016         Q1 376.0 17.7 52.5 118.3 157.3 − 157.3 0.0 22.5 7.7
         Q2 373.7 17.6 51.7 111.2 156.6 − 156.6 0.0 22.9 13.6
2016         Q3  
1 380.7 26.0 41.3 167.0 105.8 20.5 85.3 0.8 39.8 −
         Q4 408.6 25.5 39.0 194.3 110.5 19.1 91.4 0.9 38.3 −
2017         Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
         Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −         Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.8 1.1 35.0 −         Q4 412.1 23.1 43.1 201.0 109.7 17.7 92.0 1.0 34.3 −
Pension funds  6 
2013 494.6 − 4.2 8.9 453.4 452.9 0.5 − 2.9 25.3
2014 552.5 − 4.7 9.7 492.1 491.6 0.5 − 1.8 44.22015 579.5 − 4.9 11.3 518.3 517.9 0.4 − 6.1 38.9
2016         Q1 588.8 − 5.0 11.4 522.7 522.2 0.5 − 5.8 44.1
         Q2 601.7 − 5.0 10.0 529.6 529.1 0.5 − 5.8 51.3         Q3 611.6 − 5.1 10.3 535.2 535.2 − − 5.8 55.3         Q4 613.5 − 5.2 11.3 544.7 544.7 − − 6.0 46.4
2017         Q1 619.9 − 5.2 11.9 552.4 552.4 − − 6.0 44.3
         Q2 623.7 − 6.1 11.6 554.3 554.3 − − 6.2 45.5         Q3 632.5 − 6.3 11.6 561.5 561.5 − − 3.5 49.7         Q4 647.0 − 6.4 12.0 574.2 574.2 − − 3.5 50.8
1Data as of 2016 Q3 are based on Solvency II supervisory data. Up to and including ESA 1995. 4As of 2016 Q3 insurance technical reserves “non-life“ pursuant to Solven-
2016 Q2 data are based on Solvency I supervisory data from the Federal Financial Su- cy II. Up to and including 2016 Q2 unearned premiums and reserves f or outstanding
pervisory Authority (BaFin), supplemented by estimates and own calculations. 2Includ- claims pursuant to ESA 1995. 5Not including the reinsurance business conducted by
ing deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note primary insurers, which is included there. 6The term “pension funds“ refers to the in-
loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 3As of 2016 Q3 insurance technical reserves “life“ stitutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pension
pursuant to Solvency II taking account of transitional measures. Up to and including funds thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational p ension schemes
2016 Q2: Long-term net equity of households in life insurance (including ageing provi- for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included .7Own funds corre-
sions of health insurance schemes and premium reserves of accident insurance spond to the sum of net worth and the liability item „Shares and other equity“. 
schemes with guaranteed premium refund) and pension fund reserves pursuant to

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
May 2018
VIII Capital market
 
1 Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
  
€ million
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign includingtotal Bank Corporate debt debt buildingpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities ities  
3 Total 4 Bundesbank sectors  6 residents  7 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  5 
2006 242,006 102,379 40,995 8,943 52,446 139,627 125,423 68,893 . 56,530 116,583
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,5602008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,2542009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,5262012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,5802013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,646 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,3802014 64,774 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,409 − 12,124 − 11,951 74,484 14,366
2015 32,609 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 68,620 119,379 − 66,330 121,164 64,546 − 86,770
2016 72,270 27,429 19,177 18,265 − 10,012 44,840 174,162 − 58,012 187,500 44,674 − 101,8942017 54,930 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,368 145,410 − 71,454 161,012 55,852 − 90,477
2017         May 39,221 28,463 10,800 1,096 16,567 10,759 14,678 3,906 12,751 − 1,979 24,543
         June 3,424 − 1,090 2,876 − 5,769 1,802 4,514 10,686 − 11,745 12,871 9,560 − 7,262
         July − 7,748 − 17,251 − 7,196 8,174 − 18,228 9,503 9,578 − 6,471 11,565 4,484 − 17,325
         Aug 13,342 12,771 − 1,814 − 1,581 16,166 571 6,897 − 8,730 9,902 5,725 6,445         Sep − 13,756 − 18,254 − 8,577 − 3,456 − 6,221 4,497 1,838 − 8,357 12,865 − 2,670 − 15,594
         Oct − 12,129 − 10,152 − 9,775 − 2,760 2,383 − 1,977 9,642 − 4,841 12,199 2,284 − 21,771
         Nov 28,537 22,066 893 6,338 14,835 6,471 25,664 3,359 13,355 8,950 2,873         Dec − 20,490 − 18,944 − 5,802 − 952 − 12,190 − 1,546 3,495 − 12,058 10,057 5,496 − 23,985
2018         Jan 14,802 − 2,330 1,183 530 − 4,043 17,132 19,710 1,164 6,138 12,408 − 4,908
         Feb 5,636 5,264 12,736 2,054 − 9,526 372 1,898 − 5,017 5,725 1,190 3,738         Mar 25,149 17,065 11,318 820 4,927 8,084 18,981 1,951 7,268 9,762 6,168
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total 10 tutions  5 Other sectors  11 residents  12 
2006 26,276 9,061 17,214 7,528 11,323 − 3,795 18,748
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,2992008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,1942009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,9712012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 6562013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,8512014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 − 449
2015 40,488 7,668 32,820 30,568 − 5,421 35,989 9,920
2016 33,491 4,409 29,082 31,261 − 5,143 36,404 2,2302017 48,645 15,570 33,075 47,482 7,031 40,451 1,163
2017         May 3,715 107 3,608 2,423 475 1,948 1,292
         June − 5,765 920 − 6,685 − 1,372 5,220 − 6,592 − 4,393
         July 2,889 509 2,380 4,140 − 690 4,830 − 1,251
         Aug 2,276 155 2,121 4,782 − 603 5,385 − 2,506         Sep 5,766 1,482 4,284 4,296 − 1,738 6,034 1,470
         Oct 2,242 572 1,670 − 535 735 − 1,270 2,777
         Nov 3,310 110 3,200 4,121 1,198 2,923 − 811         Dec 13,617 484 13,133 15,596 2,898 12,698 − 1,979
2018         Jan 7,746 153 7,593 9,297 867 8,430 − 1,551
         Feb 15,184 1,122 14,062 15,596 − 3,709 19,305 − 412         Mar − 426 1,023 − 1,449 − 6,736 − 3,672 − 3,064 6,310
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own values. 8Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices.
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 9Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  
3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction residents;  transaction  values. 10Domestic and foreign shares. 11Residual; also
values. 4Domestic and foreign debt securities. 5Book values; statistically adjusted. including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
6Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic 12Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
mutual funds. Up to end-2008, data comprise Deutsche Bundesbank. 7Net pur- non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
chases or net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
May 2018
 VIII Capital market
 
2 Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
 
 
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 
 
Debt securities
Corporate issued by special
Mortgage Public purpose credit Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe institutions debt securities (non-MFIs)  2 debt securities
Gross sales  3 
2006 925,863 622,055 24,483 99,628 139,193 358,750 29,975 273,834
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,043 262,8722008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,9742009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,423
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,654 563,731
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,615 592,3762012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,259 574,5292013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,8912014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,676 400,700
2016 
4 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,370 416,110
2017 4 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,289 362,333
2017         Aug 83,236 47,675 2,476 20 36,804 8,374 1,462 34,100
         Sep 80,958 48,059 1,940 76 34,328 11,716 3,712 29,186
         Oct 91,104 50,410 2,420 1,150 34,514 12,326 5,299 35,396
         Nov 84,080 37,055 1,823 340 22,871 12,021 11,681 35,345         Dec  
4 59,026 33,899 1,727 1,727 17,999 12,446 6,113 19,014
2018         Jan 92,293 59,191 3,459 1,002 42,821 11,910 3,144 29,958
         Feb 96,820 59,349 3,387 564 43,208 12,189 3,434 34,036         Mar 100,288 58,524 3,781 1,229 44,183 9,331 6,202 35,561
of which:  Debt securities with maturities of more than four years  5 
2006 337,969 190,836 17,267 47,814 47,000 78,756 14,422 132,711
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,6592008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,4072009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,4312012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,8882013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,7652014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 
4 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017 4 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2017         Aug 24,629 10,217 2,245 20 5,283 2,670 521 13,890
         Sep 26,426 13,324 1,395 24 8,649 3,256 2,765 10,337
         Oct 31,980 14,680 2,129 1,145 7,480 3,926 2,837 14,463
         Nov 35,497 12,555 1,528 320 6,294 4,413 8,990 13,952         Dec  
4 18,711 8,098 420 1,607 2,704 3,368 4,821 5,791
2018         Jan 37,248 26,777 2,697 967 19,026 4,087 1,626 8,845
         Feb 27,037 11,485 2,917 254 4,196 4,118 2,194 13,358         Mar 40,145 18,509 3,400 1,080 11,579 2,450 4,095 17,542
Net sales  6 
2006 129,423 58,336 − 12,811 − 20,150 44,890 46,410 15,605 55,482
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,0932008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,3022009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,2892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,2982013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,4792014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 
4 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017 4 2,669 5,954 6,389 − 4,697 18,788 − 14,525 6,828 − 10,114
2017         Aug 13,424 − 1,646 975 − 94 2,334 − 4,861 − 934 16,004
         Sep − 11,050 − 6,065 − 749 − 1,959 779 − 4,137 − 1,796 − 3,189
         Oct − 1,501 179 1,342 229 − 1,165 − 227 − 1,952 272
         Nov 22,681 − 24 444 123 − 1,471 880 6,842 15,863         Dec  
4 − 28,202 − 16,824 − 1,367 − 329 − 7,519 − 7,609 − 469 − 10,909
2018         Jan − 8,981 3,064 1,643 − 998 3,302 − 883 21 − 12,067
         Feb 1,784 10,154 544 143 10,663 − 1,196 1,225 − 9,596         Mar 14,572 9,345 2,792 751 8,127 − 2,326 − 428 5,655
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement 2 Capital initial sales of newly issued securities. 4 Sectoral reclassification of debt
market statistics on p 21 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2Including securities. 5Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 6Gross sales less
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3Gross sales means only redemptions. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
May 2018
VIII Capital market
 
3 Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Bank debt securities
 
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special purpose Other bank bonds Publicin years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2006 3,044,145 1,809,899 144,397 499,525 368,476 797,502 99,545 1,134,701
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,7942008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,0972009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201
1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,2262012 3,285,422
1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,1382014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 
1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017 1 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 302,543 1,617,244
2017         Sep 3,097,730 1,187,589 140,854 57,980 662,975 325,780 2 298,123 1,612,018
         Oct 3,096,229 1,187,768 142,196 58,210 661,809 325,553 296,171 1,612,290
         Nov 3,118,910 1,187,744 142,640 58,333 660,338 326,433 303,012 1,628,153         Dec 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004
1 651,211 1 320,432 302,543 1,617,244
2018         Jan 3,081,726 1,173,984 142,916 57,006 654,514 319,549 302,565 1,605,177
         Feb 3,083,510 1,184,139 143,460 57,149 665,177 318,354 303,790 1,595,582         Mar 3,098,082 1,193,483 146,252 57,900 673,304 316,027 303,362 1,601,237
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-March 2018 
996,513 456,435 40,949 23,631 286,879 104,978 58,325 481,750    less than 2
640,669 267,339 36,133 11,768 148,035 71,405 52,736 320,594 2 to less than 4
472,162 179,973 28,483 7,867 99,584 44,040 40,158 252,031 4 to less than 6
307,085 115,251 21,266 7,046 58,353 28,584 29,743 162,092 6 to less than 8
253,798 84,820 15,137 4,212 40,988 24,483 16,231 152,747 8 to less than 10
123,187 38,474 3,219 1,776 20,195 13,284 24,834 59,879 10 to less than 15
79,909 18,104 273 1,153 12,777 3,901 6,297 55,508 15 to less than 20
224,761 33,089 793 448 6,494 25,353 75,036 116,635 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount
reclassification of debt securities. 2Increase due to change in issuers’ country of outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
residence. 3Calculated from month under review until final maturity for debt
 
 
4 Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item
Share circulationat market values(market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims of shares, and of capital level at endend of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  
1 bonus shares real assets etc of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2006 163,764 695 2,670 3,347 604 954 − 1,868 − 1,256 − 3,761 1,279,638
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,9302008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,2142012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,1882013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,6582014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,3972017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 − − 457 − 661 − 1,615 1,933,733
2017         Sep 179,448 241 165 18 119 − − 13 − 7 − 41 1,888,218
         Oct 179,294 − 154 230 0 121 − − 1 − 1 − 504 1,957,699
         Nov 179,426 132 109 −−−0 5 8 − 3 5 1,947,204
         Dec 178,828 − 598 128 − 1 − − 140 − 363 − 224 1,933,733
2018         Jan 178,752 − 75 102 −1−0 − 1 1 8 − 6 1 1,981,815
         Feb 179,778 1,026 1,094 7 19 − 0 − 28 − 66 1,887,325         Mar 180,086 308 553 2 42−0 − 2 3 9 − 3 1 1,874,136
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and the Deutsche
out of company profits. 2All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
May 2018
 VIII Capital market
 
5 Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual
maturity of maturity of Corporate German German
9 and more than 9 bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
including and including (non- index share price index € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1000
2005 3.1 3.2 3.2 3.4 3.1 3.5 3.7 120.92 101.09 335.59 5,408.26
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.922007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.062017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2017         Nov 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.8 1.6 141.23 109.62 597.74 13,023.98
         Dec 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.8 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018         Jan 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.9 1.8 139.19 107.24 608.72 13,189.48
         Feb 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.7 0.7 1.2 2.1 139.24 107.33 577.02 12,435.85         Mar 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.7 1.0 2.1 140.36 108.53 561.97 12,096.73
         Apr 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.6 1.0 2.3 139.85 108.02 579.61 12,612.11
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of ding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly fig ures are calculated
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual f igures are
securities, etc. debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero-coupon bonds, the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
floating-rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Group Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts outstan- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6 Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which
Sales of which of which
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2007 55,778 13,436 − 7,872 − 4,839 − 12,848 6,840 21,307 42,342 51,309 − 229 4,240 51,538 38,102 4,469
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0362012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4382013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,709
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,522 144,075 819 − 1,745 143,256 44,266 − 3,841
2015 181,888 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,750 174,529 7,362 494 167,167 35,257 7,3572016 155,511 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 36,142 162,429 2,877 − 3,172 159,552 39,315 − 6,9192017 142,669 94,921 29,560 − 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 47,747 146,108 4,938 1,048 141,170 46,700 − 3,441
2017         Sep 6,145 3,246 3,996 31 2,849 709 − 750 2,899 6,370 102 − 224 6,268 3,123 − 225
         Oct 18,187 10,973 906 − 285 501 322 10,068 7,213 17,170 414 − 176 16,756 7,389 1,016
         Nov 10,536 8,591 2,614 11 2,316 256 5,978 1,945 15,290 − 43 − 285 15,333 2,230 − 4,755         Dec 15,285 9,757 1,665 − 7 585 774 8,092 5,528 14,441 − 656 53 15,097 5,475 844
2018         Jan 24,773 15,003 6,014 − 5 4,152 756 8,989 9,771 23,890 876 713 23,014 9,058 883
         Feb 7,429 8,628 1,860 − 22 955 520 6,768 − 1,199 7,439 − 92 − 1,141 7,531 − 58 − 10         Mar 8,780 8,718 − 937 222 − 1,923 493 9,656 62 11,447 813 − 239 10,634 301 − 2,667
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
May 2018
IX Financial accounts
  
1 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2016 2017 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 30.93 40.40 48.54 23.37 − 0.57 6.96 19.02 − 0.75 23.30
Debt securities − 1.20 − 3.40 − 5.66 0.13 − 0.98 − 0.95 − 0.65 − 1.05 − 3.02
short-term debt securities − 0.84 − 0.58 − 2.26 − 0.03 − 0.83 0.23 − 1.89 − 0.26 − 0.34long-term debt securities − 0.36 − 2.81 − 3.40 0.15 − 0.15 − 1.18 1.24 − 0.78 − 2.67
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 0.64 − 2.68 − 2.80 − 0.06 − 0.54 − 0.54 − 0.04 − 1.07 − 1.16
Non-financial corporations − 0.80 0.67 − 0.56 − 0.00 0.15 0.85 − 0.72 − 0.56 − 0.14Financial corporations 1.86 − 2.53 − 0.41 − 0.54 − 0.49 − 0.35 0.67 − 0.14 − 0.59General government − 0.42 − 0.82 − 1.82 0.47 − 0.20 − 1.03 0.01 − 0.37 − 0.43
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 1.83 − 0.72 − 2.85 0.19 − 0.44 − 0.41 − 0.61 0.02 − 1.86
Loans 27.14 9.96 39.45 − 0.96 20.17 25.43 5.50 2.73 5.79
short-term loans 34.68 2.59 20.00 − 5.77 18.33 14.28 − 0.61 − 0.45 6.79long-term loans − 7.54 7.38 19.45 4.80 1.83 11.15 6.11 3.18 − 1.00
Memo item
to domestic sectors 6.25 − 4.75 18.10 − 4.16 7.55 9.04 − 0.01 − 1.43 10.49
Non-financial corporations 1.26 − 11.78 9.53 − 4.40 6.12 0.23 2.88 − 0.28 6.70Financial corporations 4.80 6.89 8.27 0.20 1.39 8.74 − 2.97 − 1.22 3.72General government 0.18 0.15 0.29 0.04 0.04 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07
to the rest of the world 20.89 14.71 21.36 3.20 12.62 16.38 5.52 4.16 − 4.70
Equity and investment fund shares 54.82 75.44 50.24 9.25 47.92 17.16 − 0.56 15.96 17.68
Equity 38.43 69.61 41.68 5.17 45.87 18.40 1.62 13.70 7.96
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 10.40 22.91 − 3.82 6.73 20.70 − 4.34 − 2.05 1.91 0.65
Non-financial corporations − 8.04 22.59 − 3.76 6.83 20.62 − 4.25 − 2.26 1.96 0.80Financial corporations − 2.36 0.31 − 0.06 − 0.11 0.08 − 0.09 0.21 − 0.04 − 0.14
Listed shares of the rest of the world 4.95 12.69 7.40 0.90 8.56 1.68 10.53 − 5.34 0.53
Other equity  
1 43.88 34.02 38.10 − 2.45 16.61 21.05 − 6.85 17.12 6.78
Investment fund shares 16.40 5.83 8.56 4.08 2.05 − 1.24 − 2.18 2.26 9.72
Money market fund shares 0.21 0.36 − 0.46 − 0.03 0.79 − 0.28 0.00 − 1.07 0.89Non-MMF investment fund shares 16.19 5.47 9.02 4.10 1.26 − 0.96 − 2.19 3.34 8.83
Insurance technical reserves 2.94 1.12 1.00 0.30 0.31 0.06 0.50 0.43 0.02Financial derivatives − 1.42 22.74 25.11 6.52 6.53 4.76 7.03 8.04 5.29Other accounts receivable 41.69 − 6.05 102.91 − 3.25 − 7.45 77.45 − 18.60 25.89 18.18
Total 154.90 140.21 261.60 35.35 65.92 130.86 12.24 51.26 67.24
External financing
Debt securities 7.78 23.71 8.56 2.88 5.82 7.57 − 0.52 0.96 0.55
short-term securities 1.96 − 0.15 0.60 − 0.57 − 1.79 5.47 − 0.42 − 2.62 − 1.83
long-term securities 5.82 23.85 7.95 3.45 7.61 2.11 − 0.10 3.58 2.37
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.70 10.83 7.08 1.57 3.08 3.31 1.24 0.78 1.75
Non-financial corporations − 0.80 0.67 − 0.56 − 0.00 0.15 0.85 − 0.72 − 0.56 − 0.14Financial corporations 2.05 10.07 9.08 1.54 2.99 3.18 2.08 1.50 2.32General government 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 − 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.00Households 0.42 0.08 − 1.45 0.01 − 0.06 − 0.71 − 0.14 − 0.16 − 0.43
Debt securities of the rest of the world 6.08 12.88 1.47 1.31 2.75 4.26 − 1.76 0.18 − 1.21
Loans 54.61 32.67 105.37 16.07 − 10.52 49.54 12.39 20.04 23.39
short-term loans 40.97 0.89 26.05 0.77 − 4.54 11.15 3.21 8.58 3.11long-term loans 13.64 31.78 79.32 15.30 − 5.99 38.39 9.18 11.46 20.29
Memo item
from domestic sectors 23.93 14.40 67.01 9.38 − 4.39 27.19 8.39 11.88 19.55
Non-financial corporations 1.26 − 11.78 9.53 − 4.40 6.12 0.23 2.88 − 0.28 6.70Financial corporations 29.69 23.43 48.60 16.01 − 6.57 20.15 5.61 13.97 8.88General government − 7.03 2.75 8.87 − 2.23 − 3.95 6.81 − 0.10 − 1.80 3.97
from the rest of the world 30.68 18.28 38.35 6.70 − 6.14 22.36 4.00 8.16 3.84
Equity 16.67 11.18 17.86 2.21 2.47 3.23 6.06 5.69 2.88
Listed shares of domestic sectors 7.42 27.31 6.93 4.38 17.00 − 4.55 2.68 3.43 5.36
Non-financial corporations − 8.04 22.59 − 3.76 6.83 20.62 − 4.25 − 2.26 1.96 0.80Financial corporations 11.70 − 2.10 9.53 − 2.25 − 2.12 − 0.78 6.21 0.26 3.83General government 0.11 0.07 0.51 0.01 − 0.02 0.07 0.13 0.16 0.15Households 3.66 6.74 0.65 − 0.22 − 1.48 0.41 − 1.39 1.05 0.59
Quoted shares of the rest of the world − 1.40 − 25.79 − 2.59 − 4.15 − 16.17 4.88 − 1.28 − 1.47 − 4.71
Other equity  
1 10.65 9.66 13.53 1.98 1.64 2.91 4.66 3.74 2.23
Insurance technical reserves 5.60 3.60 3.60 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90 0.90Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 10.81 − 0.13 7.89 8.05 − 7.81 2.60 2.23 3.14 − 0.07
Other accounts payable 23.15 28.84 − 0.28 − 1.92 23.45 28.87 − 25.48 − 7.52 3.85
Total 97.00 99.87 142.99 28.19 14.31 92.72 − 4.43 23.21 31.50
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
May 2018
IX Financial accounts
  
2 Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2016 2017 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 463.1 514.9 556.2 502.6 514.9 517.2 525.5 532.8 556.2
Debt securities 47.8 44.8 38.8 46.0 44.8 43.9 42.8 41.9 38.8
short-term debt securities 6.0 5.5 3.3 6.3 5.5 5.8 3.9 3.6 3.3long-term debt securities 41.7 39.3 35.6 39.6 39.3 38.1 39.0 38.3 35.6
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 20.8 18.2 21.4 20.8 20.3 20.2 19.3 18.2
Non-financial corporations 3.6 4.4 3.9 4.3 4.4 5.3 4.6 4.1 3.9Financial corporations 14.5 12.0 11.7 12.5 12.0 11.6 12.3 12.3 11.7General government 5.2 4.4 2.5 4.6 4.4 3.4 3.3 3.0 2.5
Debt securities of the rest of the world 24.4 24.0 20.7 24.5 24.0 23.6 22.7 22.6 20.7
Loans 511.5 523.0 556.2 498.2 523.0 548.4 550.3 551.3 556.2
short-term loans 409.4 414.3 431.1 394.7 414.3 428.5 426.1 424.7 431.1long-term loans 102.1 108.7 125.1 103.4 108.7 119.9 124.2 126.5 125.1
Memo item
to domestic sectors 335.7 331.0 349.1 323.4 331.0 340.0 340.0 338.6 349.1
Non-financial corporations 233.3 221.6 231.1 215.4 221.6 221.8 224.7 224.4 231.1Financial corporations 95.9 102.8 111.0 101.4 102.8 111.5 108.5 107.3 111.0General government 6.5 6.6 6.9 6.6 6.6 6.7 6.8 6.9 6.9
to the rest of the world 175.8 192.0 207.1 174.8 192.0 208.4 210.3 212.7 207.1
Equity and investment fund shares 1,856.2 1,901.3 2,045.6 1,785.0 1,901.3 1,982.9 1,970.9 2,001.5 2,045.6
Equity 1,704.3 1,741.4 1,875.5 1,626.7 1,741.4 1,822.1 1,812.7 1,840.2 1,875.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors 273.0 292.3 332.2 265.1 292.3 304.1 304.1 322.7 332.2
Non-financial corporations 266.6 286.2 325.3 259.3 286.2 298.6 297.9 315.9 325.3Financial corporations 6.3 6.1 6.8 5.8 6.1 5.5 6.2 6.9 6.8
Listed shares of the rest of the world 35.2 49.2 53.5 39.9 49.2 53.3 61.4 52.7 53.5
Other equity  
1 1,396.1 1,399.9 1,489.9 1,321.7 1,399.9 1,464.8 1,447.2 1,464.7 1,489.9
Investment fund shares 151.9 159.9 170.1 158.2 159.9 160.8 158.2 161.4 170.1
Money market fund shares 1.4 1.9 1.5 1.0 1.9 1.7 1.7 0.6 1.5Non-MMF investment fund shares 150.6 158.0 168.6 157.2 158.0 159.1 156.4 160.7 168.6
Insurance technical reserves 48.8 50.2 51.4 49.7 50.2 50.5 50.8 51.1 51.4Financial derivatives 42.7 60.1 53.5 58.8 60.1 56.5 55.7 56.0 53.5Other accounts receivable 927.6 960.3 1,031.7 927.5 960.3 1,044.5 993.0 1,042.5 1,031.7
Total 3,897.8 4,054.6 4,333.4 3,867.7 4,054.6 4,243.9 4,189.0 4,277.0 4,333.4
Liabilities
Debt securities 156.8 183.8 210.6 183.0 183.8 189.7 188.1 210.2 210.6
short-term securities 3.0 2.9 3.4 4.7 2.9 8.3 7.9 5.3 3.4
long-term securities 153.7 180.9 207.2 178.3 180.9 181.4 180.2 205.0 207.2
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 58.7 72.2 82.8 71.3 72.2 74.8 75.4 80.0 82.8
Non-financial corporations 3.6 4.4 3.9 4.3 4.4 5.3 4.6 4.1 3.9Financial corporations 40.0 51.9 64.3 50.9 51.9 54.4 55.9 61.0 64.3General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1Households 15.0 15.7 14.4 15.9 15.7 15.0 14.8 14.8 14.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 98.1 111.7 127.8 111.8 111.7 114.9 112.7 130.2 127.8
Loans 1,449.4 1,478.9 1,571.2 1,486.8 1,478.9 1,527.3 1,534.8 1,551.0 1,571.2
short-term loans 535.0 538.9 559.4 542.0 538.9 549.8 550.0 557.4 559.4long-term loans 914.4 940.1 1,011.8 944.8 940.1 977.5 984.8 993.6 1,011.8
Memo item
from domestic sectors 1,117.0 1,126.5 1,187.9 1,130.9 1,126.5 1,152.8 1,160.3 1,170.2 1,187.9
Non-financial corporations 233.3 221.6 231.1 215.4 221.6 221.8 224.7 224.4 231.1Financial corporations 832.3 852.3 895.4 858.4 852.3 872.6 876.4 887.8 895.4General government 51.4 52.7 61.4 57.0 52.7 58.4 59.2 58.0 61.4
from the rest of the world 332.4 352.4 383.3 355.9 352.4 374.5 374.6 380.8 383.3
Equity 2,675.7 2,753.4 3,034.5 2,668.1 2,753.4 2,875.0 2,896.4 2,981.4 3,034.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors 626.4 664.0 756.6 616.9 664.0 696.5 697.8 737.6 756.6
Non-financial corporations 266.6 286.2 325.3 259.3 286.2 298.6 297.9 315.9 325.3Financial corporations 150.1 154.7 180.2 147.8 154.7 161.3 166.4 173.4 180.2General government 43.4 44.4 51.8 40.8 44.4 47.0 46.7 51.0 51.8Households 166.2 178.7 199.2 168.9 178.7 189.7 186.8 197.4 199.2
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 756.3 803.7 925.3 782.2 803.7 865.4 879.1 906.1 925.3
Other equity  
1 1,293.0 1,285.7 1,352.6 1,269.1 1,285.7 1,313.0 1,319.5 1,337.7 1,352.6
Insurance technical reserves 255.9 259.5 263.1 258.6 259.5 260.4 261.3 262.2 263.1Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 42.0 38.2 26.9 50.4 38.2 35.4 32.7 31.3 26.9
Other accounts payable 1,007.8 1,043.1 1,047.8 1,003.0 1,043.1 1,074.1 1,019.6 1,047.8 1,047.8
Total 5,587.6 5,756.9 6,154.0 5,649.9 5,756.9 5,961.8 5,932.9 6,084.0 6,154.0
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
May 2018
IX Financial accounts
  
3 Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2016 2017 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 96.67 114.98 103.59 24.75 52.40 12.35 30.16 18.03 43.05
Currency 25.51 21.30 17.15 7.11 6.32 3.63 5.57 2.46 5.49Deposits 71.16 93.68 86.45 17.63 46.09 8.72 24.59 15.58 37.57
Transferable deposits 100.96 105.26 99.72 23.41 46.52 13.26 29.95 20.65 35.86Time deposits − 9.22 1.28 − 4.03 − 1.73 0.02 − 1.59 − 2.32 − 2.47 2.34Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) − 20.58 − 12.87 − 9.24 − 4.05 − 0.45 − 2.96 − 3.04 − 2.61 − 0.64
Debt securities − 18.40 − 12.80 − 8.17 − 3.27 − 3.32 − 1.36 − 1.49 − 2.28 − 3.04
short-term debt securities 0.75 − 0.16 − 0.21 0.08 0.31 0.37 0.18 − 0.34 − 0.42
long-term debt securities − 19.15 − 12.63 − 7.96 − 3.35 − 3.62 − 1.72 − 1.67 − 1.94 − 2.63
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 10.06 − 4.14 − 5.12 − 1.81 − 1.65 0.01 − 0.67 − 1.88 − 2.58
Non-financial corporations 0.36 − 0.01 − 1.43 0.03 − 0.10 − 0.66 − 0.22 − 0.14 − 0.40Financial corporations − 7.42 − 2.48 − 2.70 − 1.36 − 1.37 1.01 − 0.17 − 1.55 − 1.99General government − 2.99 − 1.65 − 0.99 − 0.49 − 0.18 − 0.33 − 0.28 − 0.18 − 0.19
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 8.34 − 8.66 − 3.05 − 1.46 − 1.67 − 1.37 − 0.82 − 0.41 − 0.46
Equity and investment fund shares 47.95 45.78 54.89 10.81 4.54 12.11 12.32 14.08 16.38
Equity 16.62 21.65 14.46 3.86 − 0.90 3.40 2.21 5.11 3.74
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 4.17 9.37 0.90 0.29 − 3.03 0.15 − 0.18 0.89 0.04
Non-financial corporations 3.88 6.09 0.54 − 0.26 − 1.70 0.48 − 1.42 1.01 0.47
Financial corporations 0.28 3.28 0.36 0.55 − 1.33 − 0.33 1.24 − 0.12 − 0.43
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 8.00 6.94 9.46 2.47 1.69 2.25 1.69 2.94 2.58Other equity  
1 4.45 5.35 4.10 1.10 0.44 1.00 0.70 1.28 1.12
Investment fund shares 31.34 24.13 40.43 6.95 5.44 8.70 10.11 8.97 12.65
Money market fund shares − 0.57 − 0.53 − 0.28 0.10 − 0.17 − 0.22 0.04 − 0.16 0.05
Non-MMF investment fund shares 31.90 24.66 40.71 6.85 5.61 8.92 10.08 9.12 12.59
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 20.09 19.58 11.38 3.79 8.01 2.85 2.87 2.82 2.83
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 31.69 24.82 30.62 5.64 5.65 13.34 10.72 4.94 1.63
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 30.85 20.63 29.44 5.40 1.63 7.64 4.32 7.06 10.42
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  
2 − 17.31 − 12.41 − 11.12 − 3.83 − 22.13 15.17 − 6.16 2.89 − 23.02
Total 191.54 200.58 210.63 43.28 46.78 62.10 52.73 47.54 48.26
  External financing
Loans 38.20 47.23 55.44 15.98 9.44 7.86 16.60 18.53 12.45
short-term loans − 3.17 − 4.31 − 2.19 − 0.93 − 2.05 − 0.35 − 0.34 − 1.09 − 0.40
long-term loans 41.36 51.53 57.63 16.92 11.49 8.22 16.94 19.62 12.85
Memo item
Mortage loans 35.63 41.69 47.30 14.30 11.00 6.08 13.28 15.80 12.15Consumer loans 5.44 9.78 11.25 2.86 0.88 2.41 3.25 3.41 2.19Entrepreneurial loans − 2.88 − 4.24 − 3.11 − 1.17 − 2.44 − 0.62 0.07 − 0.68 − 1.89
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 39.35 42.87 49.99 15.74 8.08 7.10 15.54 16.93 10.42Loans from other financial institutions − 1.16 4.36 5.45 0.25 1.37 0.77 1.06 1.60 2.03Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00Other accounts payable − 1.14 − 0.73 0.19 − 0.13 − 0.45 0.12 0.07 0.02 − 0.01
Total 37.06 46.50 55.63 15.85 9.00 7.98 16.67 18.54 12.45
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
May 2018
IX Financial accounts
  
4 Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End-of-year level, end-of-quarter level; € billion
2016 2017 
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,094.8 2,208.9 2,311.3 2,157.6 2,208.9 2,221.9 2,252.1 2,270.1 2,311.3
Currency 153.2 174.5 191.6 168.2 174.5 178.1 183.7 186.2 191.6
Deposits 1,941.6 2,034.4 2,119.6 1,989.5 2,034.4 2,043.8 2,068.4 2,084.0 2,119.6
Transferable deposits 1,082.4 1,188.0 1,287.7 1,141.5 1,188.0 1,201.2 1,231.2 1,251.8 1,287.7
Time deposits 246.8 248.7 245.4 248.7 248.7 247.9 245.6 243.1 245.4
Savings deposits
(including savings certifikates) 612.4 597.7 586.5 599.3 597.7 594.7 591.7 589.1 586.5
Debt securities 139.8 127.4 120.5 130.6 127.4 126.7 125.4 123.6 120.5
short-term debt securities 2.9 2.7 2.5 2.4 2.7 3.1 3.2 2.9 2.5
long-term debt securities 136.9 124.7 118.0 128.3 124.7 123.6 122.2 120.7 118.0
Memo item
Debt securities of domestic sectors 89.4 85.6 82.5 87.1 85.6 86.1 86.2 85.1 82.5
Non-financial corporations 13.4 13.9 12.5 14.1 13.9 13.3 13.0 12.9 12.5Financial corporations 69.5 66.7 66.1 67.8 66.7 68.2 68.9 68.1 66.1General government 6.5 5.0 3.9 5.2 5.0 4.6 4.3 4.1 3.9
Debt securities of the rest of the world 50.3 41.8 37.9 43.5 41.8 40.6 39.3 38.5 37.9
Equity and investment fund shares 1,040.7 1,107.9 1,218.2 1,068.8 1,107.9 1,155.7 1,158.4 1,193.2 1,218.2
Equity 555.9 590.0 642.1 563.7 590.0 614.8 611.2 632.5 642.1
Listed Shares of domestic sectors 188.9 200.8 226.4 187.9 200.8 213.0 211.1 223.7 226.4
Non-financial corporations 158.7 169.8 190.3 160.6 169.8 180.4 177.5 188.4 190.3
Financial corporations 30.3 31.0 36.1 27.3 31.0 32.6 33.6 35.4 36.1
Quoted shares of the rest of the world 74.8 86.8 101.0 80.7 86.8 93.1 92.7 96.5 101.0
Other equity  
1 292.2 302.5 314.7 295.1 302.5 308.7 307.4 312.2 314.7
Investment fund shares 484.8 517.8 576.2 505.1 517.8 540.9 547.2 560.7 576.2
Money market fund shares 3.4 2.8 2.7 3.0 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.6 2.7
Non-MMF investment fund shares 481.4 515.0 573.5 502.1 515.0 538.2 544.4 558.1 573.5
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 324.3 339.9 351.2 332.8 339.9 342.7 345.6 348.4 351.2
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 919.5 947.8 978.9 941.4 947.8 961.3 972.1 977.1 978.9
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 786.6 814.4 843.9 802.6 814.4 822.1 826.4 833.4 843.9
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 37.1 32.6 33.4 34.1 32.6 32.8 33.2 33.3 33.4
Total 5,342.8 5,578.8 5,857.4 5,468.0 5,578.8 5,663.2 5,713.1 5,779.2 5,857.4
  Liabilities
Loans 1,606.6 1,654.5 1,711.6 1,645.0 1,654.5 1,662.3 1,680.2 1,698.8 1,711.6
short-term loans 60.9 56.6 54.4 58.6 56.6 56.3 55.9 54.8 54.4
long-term loans 1,545.8 1,597.8 1,657.1 1,586.3 1,597.8 1,606.1 1,624.3 1,643.9 1,657.1
Memo item
Mortage loans 1,153.8 1,195.6 1,247.1 1,184.6 1,195.6 1,201.7 1,218.0 1,234.4 1,247.1Consumer loans 191.9 201.8 211.8 200.9 201.8 204.2 207.4 210.6 211.8Entrepreneurial loans 260.9 257.0 252.7 259.5 257.0 256.4 254.8 253.8 252.7
Memo item
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,514.9 1,558.3 1,610.0 1,550.2 1,558.3 1,565.4 1,582.3 1,599.2 1,610.0Loans from other financial institutions 91.8 96.1 101.6 94.8 96.1 96.9 98.0 99.6 101.6Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.1 14.9 15.0 16.0 14.9 16.0 15.6 15.8 15.0
Total 1,621.7 1,669.4 1,726.6 1,661.0 1,669.4 1,678.3 1,695.8 1,714.5 1,726.6
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
1 General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion as a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2011 − 25.9 − 29.4 − 11.4 − 0.3 + 15.3 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.6
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.72013 − 4.0 − 7.4 − 2.5 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.22014 
p + 9.5 + 8.7 − 1.1 − 1.2 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
2015 p + 19.4 + 9.7 + 3.8 + 3.1 + 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 25.7 + 7.4 + 4.9 + 5.2 + 8.2 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 pe + 36.6 + 1.1 + 16.2 + 8.8 + 10.5 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3
2016         H1  p + 17.5 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 1.9 + 6.6 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.4
         H2  p + 8.1 + 2.4 + 0.8 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1
2017         H1  pe + 19.6 − 1.4 + 8.2 + 5.8 + 7.0 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.4
         H2  pe + 17.0 + 2.5 + 8.0 + 2.9 + 3.6 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.2
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2011 2,125.1 1,344.1 653.8 143.5 1.3 78.6 49.7 24.2 5.3 0.0
2012 2,202.3 1,387.9 683.6 147.5 1.2 79.8 50.3 24.8 5.3 0.02013 2,190.5 1,390.4 665.6 150.6 1.3 77.5 49.2 23.5 5.3 0.02014 
p 2,192.0 1,396.5 660.1 152.0 1.4 74.7 47.6 22.5 5.2 0.0
2015 p 2,161.8 1,372.6 656.5 152.2 1.4 71.0 45.1 21.6 5.0 0.0
2016 p 2,145.5 1,366.8 639.5 153.4 1.1 68.2 43.5 20.3 4.9 0.0
2017 p 2,092.6 1,351.6 612.1 147.2 0.8 64.1 41.4 18.8 4.5 0.0
2016         Q1  p 2,170.2 1,382.5 649.6 154.4 1.2 70.8 45.1 21.2 5.0 0.0
         Q2  p 2,173.6 1,391.1 646.1 154.0 1.1 70.1 44.8 20.8 5.0 0.0
         Q3  p 2,167.0 1,381.1 646.5 154.8 1.0 69.4 44.2 20.7 5.0 0.0
         Q4  p 2,145.5 1,366.8 639.5 153.4 1.1 68.2 43.5 20.3 4.9 0.0
2017         Q1  p 2,118.2 1,351.0 629.0 152.0 1.2 66.7 42.5 19.8 4.8 0.0
         Q2  p 2,112.5 1,353.6 622.2 151.4 0.9 66.1 42.3 19.5 4.7 0.0
         Q3  p 2,105.6 1,353.0 620.1 149.7 0.8 65.2 41.9 19.2 4.6 0.0
         Q4  p 2,092.6 1,351.6 612.1 147.2 0.8 64.1 41.4 18.8 4.5 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus February 2018. 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. Results as at preceding quarters. 
 
 
2 General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2011 1,182.7 598.8 442.3 141.7 1,208.6 633.9 208.6 124.1 61.4 67.5 113.1 − 25.9 1,045.6
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.72013 1,259.0 651.0 465.0 143.0 1,263.0 666.4 217.8 133.0 60.1 55.5 130.2 − 4.0 1,120.32014 
p 1,308.3 674.1 482.0 152.3 1,298.8 691.0 224.0 137.4 60.0 51.2 135.2 + 9.5 1,160.7
2015 p 1,354.3 704.3 500.8 149.2 1,334.9 722.3 229.2 142.2 64.2 46.4 130.6 + 19.4 1,212.2
2016 p 1,414.2 739.0 523.8 151.5 1,388.6 754.9 236.5 150.0 66.8 41.6 138.8 + 25.7 1,269.6
2017 pe 1,474.6 773.3 548.1 153.2 1,438.0 783.5 246.5 155.3 70.3 38.9 143.5 + 36.6 1,328.3
as a percentage of GDP
2011 43.8 22.2 16.4 5.2 44.7 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.3 2.5 4.2 − 1.0 38.7
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.32013 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.1 39.62014 
p 44.6 23.0 16.4 5.2 44.3 23.6 7.6 4.7 2.0 1.7 4.6 + 0.3 39.6
2015 p 44.5 23.1 16.5 4.9 43.9 23.7 7.5 4.7 2.1 1.5 4.3 + 0.6 39.8
2016 p 45.0 23.5 16.7 4.8 44.2 24.0 7.5 4.8 2.1 1.3 4.4 + 0.8 40.4
2017 pe 45.2 23.7 16.8 4.7 44.1 24.0 7.6 4.8 2.2 1.2 4.4 + 1.1 40.7
Percentage growth rates
2011 + 6.5 + 7.7 + 3.8 + 10.7 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 2.5 + 5.1 + 3.3 + 5.7 − 19.2 . + 6.0
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.62013 + 3.1 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 3.2 + 2.6 + 5.1 − 2.2 − 12.0 + 15.4 . + 3.42014 
p + 3.9 + 3.6 + 3.6 + 6.4 + 2.8 + 3.7 + 2.9 + 3.3 − 0.3 − 7.7 + 3.9 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.5 + 4.5 + 3.9 − 2.0 + 2.8 + 4.5 + 2.3 + 3.5 + 7.0 − 9.3 − 3.4 . + 4.4
2016 p + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 1.6 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 3.2 + 5.5 + 4.1 − 10.4 + 6.2 . + 4.7
2017 pe + 4.3 + 4.7 + 4.6 + 1.1 + 3.6 + 3.8 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 6.4 + 3.4 . + 4.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. Results as from banks to the Single Resolution Fund established at the European level. 
at February 2018. 1Taxes and social contributions plus customs duties and levies

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
3 General government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which of which 3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit / Rev- Expend- Deficit /
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2011 689.6 573.4 22.8 711.6 194.3 301.3 56.8 38.5 13.7 − 22.0 526.3 511.2 + 15.1 1,104.2 1,111.1 − 6.9
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 + 17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.3 1,236.7 + 8.6
2015 p 829.5 673.3 10.4 804.1 244.1 302.6 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,300.8 1,273.4 + 27.4
2016 p 862.1 705.8 9.0 843.3 251.3 320.5 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 18.8 601.5 594.6 + 6.9 1,354.7 1,329.0 + 25.7
2015         Q1  p 196.0 160.9 2.4 198.8 58.5 80.5 18.4 7.7 2.5 − 2.8 137.3 142.8 − 5.4 307.6 315.8 − 8.2
         Q2  p 208.4 167.7 1.5 185.2 59.5 72.8 7.2 9.1 3.0 + 23.1 142.4 142.3 + 0.1 325.0 301.8 + 23.2
         Q3  p 202.8 166.5 3.8 198.0 62.3 71.3 16.6 11.6 3.4 + 4.7 141.2 143.4 − 2.1 318.1 315.5 + 2.6
         Q4  p 221.5 178.2 2.6 219.3 63.4 77.4 7.3 17.3 3.5 + 2.2 152.7 145.3 + 7.4 348.4 338.8 + 9.6
2016         Q1  p 205.7 169.9 1.4 206.5 60.2 81.5 17.7 8.4 2.2 − 0.8 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 321.8 326.2 − 4.5
         Q2  p 216.7 176.6 2.4 194.1 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 338.5 314.2 + 24.3
         Q3  p 207.1 169.3 2.9 210.9 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 328.2 333.4 − 5.2
         Q4  p 233.1 189.2 2.1 232.3 68.0 82.3 7.7 17.2 4.8 + 0.9 160.1 152.2 + 7.8 365.8 357.1 + 8.7
2017         Q1  p 215.6 180.4 0.9 200.9 63.1 80.9 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 14.6 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 337.5 327.7 + 9.8
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.7 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.8 + 13.4
         Q3  p 292.6 180.4 3.5 221.0 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 71.6 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 419.1 348.4 + 70.6
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012, also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans gran ted.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4 Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per government’s financial statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit / surplus
2011 307.1 324.9 − 17.7 286.5 295.9 − 9.4 183.9 184.9 − 1.0
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.6 384.9 + 12.6 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2015         Q1  p 74.4 81.6 − 7.1 84.2 84.5 − 0.3 46.3 52.1 − 5.8
         Q2  p 86.5 72.6 + 13.9 87.0 83.6 + 3.4 58.1 53.4 + 4.7
         Q3  p 85.9 89.0 − 3.2 87.8 84.2 + 3.6 57.5 56.3 + 1.2
         Q4  p 91.5 83.4 + 8.1 94.1 96.8 − 2.8 69.0 65.9 + 3.0
2016         Q1  p 81.1 82.7 − 1.6 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
         Q2  p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
         Q3  p 85.2 88.2 − 3.0 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
         Q4  p 90.9 93.9 − 3.0 104.3 104.4 − 0.0 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
2017         Q1  p 88.2 83.3 + 4.8 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.1 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
         Q3  p 88.6 93.1 − 4.6 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
         Q4  p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.6 108.3 − 3.7 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city-states Berlin, Bremen and ing years, Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
5 Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2011 573,352 496,738 276,598 195,676 24,464 76,570 + 43 28,615
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,4982013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,7752014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,390
2016         Q1 170,358 144,841 74,113 61,972 8,755 17,121 + 8,396 6,488
         Q2 176,879 152,042 82,184 64,684 5,175 25,169 − 332 6,512         Q3 169,374 145,700 76,638 61,573 7,489 23,839 − 165 7,584         Q4 189,186 164,382 83,919 72,608 7,855 32,518 − 7,714 7,253
2017         Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
         Q2 177,090 149,915 76,391 66,605 6,918 27,631 − 456 6,825         Q3 180,407 155,250 82,576 66,718 5,957 25,517 − 361 7,467         Q4 195,537 170,139 92,507 71,019 6,613 34,060 − 8,662 6,493
2018         Q1 ... 159,974 83,369 69,413 7,191 ... ... 6,398
2017         Mar . 61,899 33,033 26,960 1,905 . . 2,202
2018         Mar . 62,868 32,928 27,419 2,521 . . 2,133
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city-states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the federal budget. 2Custom footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6 Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2011 527,255 213,534 139,749 31,996 15,634 26,155 190,033 138,957 51,076 6,888 99,133 13,095 4,571 30,517
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,8222013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,0402014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2016         Q1 154,892 70,790 42,583 14,569 8,433 5,204 54,408 42,268 12,141 173 22,553 5,673 1,294 10,051
         Q2 162,096 74,489 45,311 12,943 7,329 8,905 52,705 40,195 12,510 1,957 25,783 5,952 1,210 10,054         Q3 155,524 68,137 44,656 11,898 5,546 6,037 53,906 40,877 13,029 2,046 24,857 5,263 1,316 9,824         Q4 175,797 78,076 52,275 14,422 6,134 5,245 56,071 42,593 13,478 3,656 31,247 5,454 1,293 11,415
2017         Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
         Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121         Q3 165,923 75,218 47,253 12,720 6,034 9,211 56,481 42,571 13,911 2,214 25,114 5,580 1,315 10,673         Q4 182,288 82,077 54,707 14,873 6,843 5,654 58,128 43,846 14,282 3,868 31,587 5,384 1,243 12,149
2018         Q1 172,110 81,712 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
2017         Mar 66,757 39,134 14,126 14,991 7,827 2,189 15,925 11,557 4,368 12 9,137 2,156 393 4,858
2018         Mar 67,995 40,329 15,022 15,369 8,160 1,779 16,034 11,596 4,438 21 9,091 2,069 452 5,127
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2017: 50.7:46.6:2.7. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2017: 22.6:77.4. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
7 Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2011 40,036 12,781 14,414 10,755 8,422 7,247 2,149 3,329 6,366 4,246 1,420 1,064 52,984 40,424 11,674
2012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,0172013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2016         Q1 4,620 3,979 2,722 5,946 2,489 1,685 565 547 3,217 1,668 451 336 15,639 12,090 3,121
         Q2 9,860 4,470 4,139 2,269 2,366 1,515 473 691 2,952 2,283 451 267 16,740 12,635 3,715         Q3 10,149 3,938 3,010 2,510 2,198 1,641 499 911 3,050 1,501 446 266 15,896 11,699 3,794         Q4 15,461 4,468 4,315 2,038 1,899 1,728 532 806 3,189 1,554 460 251 17,045 13,679 3,024
2017         Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
         Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 − 5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 18,113 13,881 3,832         Q3 10,497 4,144 3,867 2,669 2,132 1,628 502 −324 3,394 1,497 417 273 16,698 12,443 3,824         Q4 15,622 4,677 4,261 2,070 1,906 1,786 538 727 3,257 1,438 456 233 17,118 13,670 3,082
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 ... ... ...
2017         Mar 3,072 2,162 1,235 723 920 722 125 178 1,161 647 150 199 . . .
2018         Mar 3,150 2,227 1,103 735 958 594 142 184 1,222 492 155 199 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8 German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which of which
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2011 254,968 177,424 76,200 250,241 212,602 15,015 + 4,727 24,965 22,241 2,519 88 117 4,379
2012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,3152013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 
p 299,134 211,411 86,875 298,927 255,601 18,022 + 207 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2015         Q1 65,923 45,653 20,025 68,435 58,671 4,125 − 2,512 34,084 31,583 2,262 148 92 4,255
         Q2 68,700 48,483 19,945 68,443 58,390 4,113 + 257 34,319 31,797 2,276 152 93 4,254         Q3 67,538 47,280 20,006 70,165 59,931 4,228 − 2,627 32,246 29,722 2,276 156 92 4,259         Q4 73,393 53,096 19,971 70,326 59,963 4,233 + 3,067 35,574 32,794 2,506 158 117 4,242
2016         Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213         Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115         Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
9 Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit
of which of which offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2011 37,563 25,433 37 8,046 37,524 13,776 1,324 8,369 4,510 683 5,090 + 40 −
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2015         Q1 8,209 6,969 310 − 8,599 4,267 387 1,586 . 165 1,287 − 390 −
         Q2 8,758 7,467 326 − 7,856 3,758 214 1,591 . 172 1,318 + 902 −         Q3 8,573 7,285 329 − 7,319 3,501 82 1,455 . 164 1,368 + 1,254 −         Q4 9,619 8,220 367 − 7,665 3,320 87 1,662 . 152 1,624 + 1,954 −
2016         Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −         Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −         Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other statutory social security funds, ex-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- cluding administrative expenditure within the framework of t he basic allowance for
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to job seekers. 
 
 
10 Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which of which
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2011 189,049 170,875 15,300 179,599 58,501 28,939 29,056 11,651 11,193 8,529 9,488 + 9,450
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,0252013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,8672014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 
p 233,618 216,221 14,500 230,947 72,285 37,411 38,970 14,113 14,736 12,276 10,929 + 2,671
2015         Q1 50,407 46,846 2,875 53,255 17,532 8,554 8,961 3,379 3,216 2,935 2,360 − 2,848
         Q2 51,850 48,371 2,875 53,351 17,157 8,661 8,976 3,385 3,376 2,730 2,433 − 1,501         Q3 51,888 48,472 2,875 52,884 16,899 8,621 8,808 3,262 3,398 2,732 2,508 − 996         Q4 55,872 52,085 2,875 54,124 16,553 8,773 8,998 3,449 3,618 2,834 3,102 + 1,747
2016         Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615         Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517         Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298         Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415         Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, ie after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social insurance funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2018
X Public finances in Germany
 
11 Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which
Contributions to
of which Non-cash In-patient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2011 22,294 22,145 21,962 3,002 9,700 4,735 881 1,034 + 331
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 952013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 
p 36,101 36,043 38,525 4,495 12,999 9,994 1,529 1,601 − 2,424
2015         Q1 7,252 7,228 6,906 906 2,655 1,571 236 333 + 346
         Q2 7,611 7,592 7,139 902 2,666 1,591 239 311 + 472         Q3 7,626 7,609 7,390 930 2,701 1,613 239 326 + 236         Q4 8,198 8,180 7,571 966 2,722 1,682 240 295 + 626
2016         Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259         Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147         Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400         Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999         Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12 Central government: borrowing in the 13 General government: debt by creditor*
market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which of which
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (End of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2011 + 264,572 + 5,890 − 4,876 − 9,036 2011 2,125,099 11,785 605,907 206,631 53,974 1,246,801
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,202,307 12,126 629,513 199,132 60,140 1,301,3972013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,190,496 12,438 639,922 190,555 43,969 1,303,6122014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,192,004 12,774 610,509 190,130 44,915 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,161,775 85,952 597,515 186,661 44,977 1,246,670
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,145,473 205,391 574,727 179,755 41,352 1,144,2482017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017  
p 2,092,643 319,159 522,427 175,618 39,207 1,036,232
2015         Q1 + 52,024 − 3,086 + 4,710 − 7,612 2015          Q1 2,198,049 20,802 619,047 189,048 44,414 1,324,738
         Q2 + 36,214 − 5,404 − 12,133 + 6,930          Q2 2,163,452 42,807 599,029 187,280 44,792 1,289,545         Q3 + 46,877 − 1,967 − 806 − 1,091          Q3 2,165,441 63,558 604,195 188,165 44,785 1,264,738         Q4 + 32,541 − 5,929 + 2,344 − 142          Q4 2,161,775 85,952 597,515 186,661 44,977 1,246,670
2016         Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1 2,170,197 108,746 612,193 183,160 41,334 1,224,764
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2 2,173,554 142,139 600,804 181,372 39,529 1,209,709         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864          Q3 2,166,995 172,567 587,282 179,359 38,827 1,188,959         Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333          Q4 2,145,473 205,391 574,727 179,755 41,352 1,144,248
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1  
p 2,118,194 239,495 559,898 178,219 39,505 1,101,077
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2  p 2,112,479 265,130 546,493 176,810 38,785 1,085,262
         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941          Q3  p 2,105,556 290,214 533,924 176,646 39,130 1,065,643
         Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95          Q4  p 2,092,643 319,159 522,427 175,618 39,207 1,036,232
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(End of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) sub-sectors sub-sectors
General government
2011 2,125,099 10,429 116,289 1,345,967 194,442 457,972 . .
2012 2,202,307 9,742 106,945 1,441,406 149,015 495,199 . .2013 2,190,496 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 124,821 498,547 . .2014 2,192,004 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 120,540 485,202 . .
2015         Q1 2,198,049 10,652 77,601 1,491,918 137,777 480,102 . .
         Q2 2,163,452 10,546 73,874 1,492,759 109,759 476,514 . .         Q3 2,165,441 10,727 71,482 1,497,360 111,735 474,136 . .         Q4 2,161,775 14,303 65,676 1,499,119 109,509 473,167 . .
2016         Q1 2,170,197 11,976 69,372 1,491,147 129,934 467,768 . .
         Q2 2,173,554 12,181 76,710 1,485,055 136,482 463,126 . .         Q3 2,166,995 15,370 77,249 1,491,981 123,297 459,098 . .         Q4 2,145,473 15,845 69,715 1,484,384 115,296 460,233 . .
2017         Q1  
p 2,118,194 12,891 60,701 1,479,170 112,664 452,768 . .
         Q2  p 2,112,479 15,196 54,196 1,487,366 107,319 448,403 . .
         Q3  p 2,105,556 16,161 47,938 1,490,072 105,907 445,478 . .
         Q4  p 2,092,643 14,651 48,002 1,485,792 103,045 441,154 . .
Central government
2011 1,344,082 10,429 104,121 1,017,210 138,112 74,210 1,908 11,382
2012 1,387,857 9,742 88,372 1,088,796 88,311 112,636 1,465 11,3542013 1,390,440 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,897 122,926 2,696 10,3032014 1,396,496 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,315 123,829 1,202 12,833
2015         Q1 1,397,998 10,652 60,213 1,136,442 67,501 123,190 3,490 14,566
         Q2 1,380,556 10,546 59,283 1,141,784 45,327 123,616 3,359 10,879         Q3 1,374,737 10,727 52,289 1,142,896 44,812 124,014 3,411 11,436         Q4 1,372,626 14,303 49,512 1,139,060 45,149 124,601 2,932 13,577
2016         Q1 1,382,491 11,976 49,030 1,138,068 58,260 125,156 2,853 10,025
         Q2 1,391,145 12,181 59,399 1,129,888 65,048 124,629 2,803 11,367         Q3 1,381,065 15,370 61,408 1,134,336 46,711 123,240 2,634 9,042         Q4 1,366,847 15,845 55,208 1,124,451 49,898 121,446 2,238 8,478
2017         Q1  
p 1,350,991 12,891 45,509 1,124,436 47,983 120,172 2,381 7,522
         Q2  p 1,353,598 15,196 40,224 1,132,692 44,606 120,880 2,348 8,244
         Q3  p 1,352,969 16,161 34,215 1,136,879 45,181 120,534 2,342 10,320
         Q4  p 1,351,622 14,651 36,296 1,132,623 47,743 120,310 2,666 10,761
State government
2011 653,834 − 12,404 330,924 11,015 299,492 12,246 3,174
2012 683,613 − 18,802 355,756 12,314 296,742 13,197 2,9682013 665,560 − 6,847 360,706 11,573 286,433 12,141 2,6552014 660,076 − 8,391 361,916 19,003 270,766 14,825 2,297
2015         Q1 668,579 − 17,391 357,929 23,267 269,991 16,462 4,715
         Q2 647,822 − 14,595 353,507 15,592 264,129 12,909 4,731         Q3 655,486 − 19,197 357,262 18,788 260,240 13,577 4,841         Q4 656,454 − 16,169 362,376 18,510 259,399 15,867 4,218
2016         Q1 649,631 − 20,347 355,304 21,563 252,416 12,358 4,230
         Q2 646,105 − 17,318 357,069 23,455 248,263 13,860 4,061         Q3 646,514 − 15,848 359,618 26,149 244,899 11,685 3,871         Q4 639,506 − 14,515 361,996 16,331 246,664 11,408 3,376
2017         Q1  
p 628,977 − 15,201 356,818 15,433 241,525 10,582 3,501
         Q2  p 622,217 − 13,981 356,896 14,990 236,349 11,285 3,518
         Q3  p 620,065 − 13,731 355,606 16,519 234,209 13,573 3,476
         Q4  p 612,117 − 11,716 355,628 16,168 228,605 14,411 3,631
Local government
2011 143,510 − − 381 46,550 96,579 3,504 360
2012 147,452 − − 423 49,417 97,612 3,124 8022013 150,569 − − 646 49,973 99,950 2,523 5302014 151,987 − − 1,297 50,969 99,721 1,959 734
2015         Q1 152,384 − − 1,597 52,521 98,266 2,325 538
         Q2 152,232 − − 1,847 51,857 98,528 2,281 512         Q3 153,088 − − 1,997 52,438 98,653 2,343 477         Q4 152,227 − − 2,047 51,578 98,602 2,143 463
2016         Q1 154,423 − − 2,076 52,566 99,781 2,348 476
         Q2 154,034 − − 2,453 51,964 99,617 2,216 503         Q3 154,832 − − 2,455 52,116 100,261 2,123 527         Q4 153,441 − − 2,404 50,302 100,735 1,819 566
2017         Q1  
p 152,037 − − 2,645 49,692 99,700 1,998 558
         Q2  p 151,430 − − 2,672 49,061 99,696 2,028 566
         Q3  p 149,654 − − 2,687 47,752 99,214 1,967 689
         Q4  p 147,220 − − 2,960 43,710 100,549 2,031 692
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2018
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(End of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) sub-sectors sub-sectors
Social security funds
2011 1,331 − − − 237 1,094 − 2,743
2012 1,171 − − − 195 976 − 2,6612013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,8722014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,122
2015         Q1 1,365 − − − 329 1,036 − 2,457
         Q2 1,391 − − − 355 1,036 − 2,428         Q3 1,460 − − − 450 1,010 − 2,578         Q4 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,685
2016         Q1 1,211 − − − 458 753 − 2,828
         Q2 1,147 − − − 443 704 − 2,948         Q3 1,025 − − − 334 691 − 3,002         Q4 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2017         Q1  
p 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,380
         Q2  p 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,333
         Q3  p 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,396
         Q4  p 792 − − − 247 545 − 4,025
Sources: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government sub-sectors also comprise securiti es holdings purchased
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- on the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships claims and debt between different government sub-sectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which  3 of which  3
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(End of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 Day Bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 984,256 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,997
2008 1,016,364 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 75,1442009 1,082,644 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,592
2010 1,334,021 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 239,112
2011 1,344,082 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 212,3222012 1,387,857 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,9472013 1,390,440 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,8222014 1,396,496 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 178,144
2015 1,372,626 14,303 1,070 1,188,572 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,750
2016 1,366,847 15,845 1,010 1,179,659 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,3432017 
p 1,351,622 14,651 966 1,168,919 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 168,053
2015         Q1 1,397,998 10,652 1,155 1,196,655 653,801 235,849 52,507 14,583 4,211 102,203 26,495 2,271 190,691
         Q2 1,380,556 10,546 1,133 1,201,068 664,278 228,755 56,437 14,543 5,626 101,090 27,535 2,031 168,943         Q3 1,374,737 10,727 1,106 1,195,185 655,574 242,085 58,192 14,528 5,308 98,087 24,157 1,677 168,825         Q4 1,372,626 14,303 1,070 1,188,572 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,750
2016         Q1 1,382,491 11,976 1,051 1,187,099 666,565 225,678 61,893 14,603 4,395 98,232 20,526 1,205 183,417
         Q2 1,391,145 12,181 1,033 1,189,287 675,794 220,840 49,675 14,550 3,099 99,417 28,369 1,108 189,677         Q3 1,381,065 15,370 1,021 1,195,744 664,034 231,375 50,869 14,570 3,097 102,053 30,626 922 169,950         Q4 1,366,847 15,845 1,010 1,179,659 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,343
2017         Q1  
p 1,350,991 12,891 995 1,169,945 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 168,155
         Q2  p 1,353,598 15,196 986 1,172,916 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,486
         Q3  p 1,352,969 16,161 977 1,171,094 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,715
         Q4  p 1,351,622 14,651 966 1,168,919 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 168,053
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, (ESA) 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all extra- the Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
budgetary units in addition to core central government, including govern- cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
ment-owned bad bank ”FMS Wertmanagement“ and liabilities attributed to central ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
government from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
May 2018
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
1 Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
    
  
  2016   2017
  2015   2016   2017   2015   2016   2017   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2010=100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I Origin of domestic product
Production sector(excluding construction) 112.8 114.9 117.9 2.2 1.9 2.7 4.5 1.2 0.6 4.5 − 0.3 2.8 3.9Construction 102.9 104.9 107.1 0.0 1.9 2.1 5.3 1.7 − 0.4 5.7 0.1 1.6 1.6Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 108.5 111.1 114.3 0.7 2.4 2.9 4.2 1.6 2.5 4.7 2.0 2.9 2.1Information and communication 128.5 132.0 137.2 2.6 2.7 3.9 2.7 3.5 1.6 4.4 3.5 3.7 4.2Financial and insuranceactivities 104.3 107.4 107.2 − 0.7 3.0 − 0.3 3.7 4.1 2.3 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.1Real estate activities 103.3 103.9 105.2 0.2 0.6 1.3 0.9 0.4 0.5 1.4 0.6 1.5 1.6Business services  
1 108.1 110.0 112.9 1.9 1.8 2.6 3.1 1.7 1.5 3.7 0.7 2.9 2.9
Public services, education andhealth 105.3 107.7 109.9 2.2 2.2 2.1 2.6 2.3 2.4 2.6 1.9 2.2 1.7Other services 99.3 100.2 101.3 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.9 1.2 1.0 2.5 − 0.0 1.0 0.7
Gross value added 108.3 110.4 112.9 1.5 1.9 2.3 3.3 1.7 1.4 3.5 0.8 2.4 2.5Gross domestic product  
2 108.6 110.7 113.1 1.7 1.9 2.2 3.3 1.7 1.3 3.4 1.0 2.2 2.3
 II Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 106.1 108.3 110.4 1.7 2.1 1.9 2.9 1.7 1.7 2.3 2.1 2.0 1.2
Government consumption 108.0 111.9 113.7 2.9 3.7 1.6 4.3 3.4 3.0 1.7 1.4 1.6 1.6Machinery and equipment 111.1 113.4 118.0 3.9 2.2 4.0 6.4 1.4 − 2.6 3.6 1.7 4.5 6.0Premises 108.3 111.3 114.2 − 1.4 2.7 2.7 5.4 2.1 0.4 5.6 1.4 2.8 1.3Other investment  
4 117.3 123.8 128.0 5.5 5.5 3.5 6.8 6.1 2.6 3.9 3.4 3.2 3.4
Changes in inventories  5, 6 . . . − 0.3 − 0.2 0.1 − 0.7 0.2 0.4 − 0.1 0.4 0.2 − 0.1
Domestic demand 106.1 108.7 111.1 1.6 2.4 2.2 3.2 2.4 1.9 2.5 2.3 2.4 1.7
Net exports  6 . . . 0.2 − 0.3 0.2 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 1.1 − 1.1 0.0 0.8
Exports 124.7 128.0 133.9 5.2 2.6 4.7 4.9 1.3 2.6 7.0 1.3 4.9 5.6Imports 120.5 125.2 131.6 5.6 3.9 5.1 5.1 2.8 4.3 5.4 4.5 5.8 4.8
Gross domestic product  
2 108.6 110.7 113.1 1.7 1.9 2.2 3.3 1.7 1.3 3.4 1.0 2.2 2.3
At  current  prices  ( € billion)
III Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,630.5 1,674.4 1,735.0 2.3 2.7 3.6 3.2 2.2 2.8 4.2 3.8 3.7 2.9
Government consumption 587.1 615.4 638.7 4.1 4.8 3.8 5.4 4.5 4.1 3.5 3.4 3.9 4.2Machinery and equipment 200.8 205.8 214.6 4.7 2.5 4.3 6.7 1.7 − 2.3 3.8 2.0 4.8 6.3Premises 291.0 304.5 322.7 0.4 4.6 6.0 7.3 4.1 2.5 8.4 4.5 6.2 5.1Other investment  
4 112.5 119.7 125.4 7.0 6.4 4.8 7.4 6.9 3.7 4.9 4.8 4.7 4.7
Changes in inventories  5 − 21.5 − 26.4 − 21.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,800.3 2,893.4 3,015.0 2.6 3.3 4.2 3.9 3.2 3.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 3.6
Net exports 243.3 250.6 248.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,426.7 1,450.0 1,542.1 6.4 1.6 6.3 3.1 − 0.0 2.3 8.7 3.5 6.4 6.9Imports 1,183.4 1,199.4 1,293.7 4.1 1.4 7.9 1.0 0.2 3.9 9.6 8.0 7.5 6.5
Gross domestic product  
2 3,043.7 3,144.1 3,263.4 3.8 3.3 3.8 4.7 2.9 2.5 4.3 2.6 4.3 4.0
IV Prices (2010=100)
Private consumption 106.2 106.9 108.7 0.6 0.6 1.7 0.3 0.5 1.1 1.8 1.6 1.7 1.6Gross domestic product 108.7 110.1 111.8 2.0 1.3 1.5 1.3 1.2 1.2 0.9 1.6 2.0 1.7Terms of trade 102.1 103.7 102.7 2.7 1.5 − 1.0 2.2 1.3 0.2 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.4
V Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,542.3 1,600.3 1,669.9 3.9 3.8 4.3 3.4 3.7 3.9 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.2Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 722.6 737.7 764.5 3.8 2.1 3.6 9.5 − 0.2 − 1.2 4.0 − 1.0 6.3 5.1
National income 2,264.9 2,338.0 2,434.4 3.8 3.2 4.1 5.2 2.3 2.5 4.2 2.7 5.1 4.5
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,099.8 3,197.2 3,323.5 3.7 3.1 3.9 4.7 2.4 2.5 4.1 2.9 4.6 4.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2018. 1Professional, stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
May 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
2 Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015=100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.60 29.44 36.96 2.28 10.92 10.27 9.95 12.73 14.14
Period
2014 98.8 101.9 95.2 99.3 99.9 98.8 97.5 100.1 99.7 99.0 100.0 99.8
2015 99.8 99.6 100.1 99.7 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.8 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.6
2016 101.6 105.3 98.7 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.7 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.12017
r 104.9 108.7 98.8 104.8 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.3
 
2017         Q1 r 98.9 84.8 104.5 100.9 102.2 100.0 106.1 99.4 103.3 102.3 95.8 105.0
         Q2 r 104.4 111.1 93.8 104.1 105.4 104.0 105.6 100.4 107.0 104.6 101.8 106.0
         Q3 r 106.5 116.6 92.4 105.8 107.4 104.7 106.3 105.2 107.8 109.5 103.0 105.2
         Q4 r 110.0 122.3 104.6 108.2 104.6 111.3 109.6 107.1 106.7 111.6 115.9 104.8
2018         Q1 x 102.6 87.8 103.7 105.1 106.0 104.3 109.0 104.6 106.9 107.8 100.3 109.9
 
2017         Mar r 109.6 105.7 102.6 110.8 110.0 112.3 114.4 107.0 112.4 111.9 109.6 115.1
         Apr r 103.2 109.3 95.4 102.7 105.2 101.7 105.8 98.7 105.5 103.0 97.5 107.1
         May r 103.0 109.5 94.8 102.5 104.3 101.7 103.1 100.4 106.5 102.0 98.7 104.5
         June r 107.1 114.6 91.3 107.1 106.8 108.7 108.0 102.0 109.1 108.9 109.1 106.4
         July 2,r 106.7 119.2 91.3 105.8 108.6 104.1 101.6 104.6 108.6 109.2 101.8 103.9
         Aug 2,r 101.2 112.3 93.0 99.9 103.5 96.4 98.2 102.6 102.2 104.3 94.9 95.7
         Sep r 111.5 118.4 93.0 111.8 110.2 113.7 119.0 108.4 112.5 115.0 112.4 116.1
         Oct r 109.6 120.9 103.0 108.1 109.8 106.4 114.1 108.2 112.0 109.6 103.1 108.2
         Nov r 116.0 123.4 104.3 115.6 111.6 119.3 117.7 113.2 115.0 117.4 115.9 122.4
         Dec r 104.3 122.7 106.6 100.9 92.4 108.2 97.1 99.8 93.2 107.9 128.6 83.8
2018         Jan x 95.8 75.5 104.9 98.6 102.5 94.0 103.1 102.7 101.1 102.0 88.4 99.6
         Feb x 98.9 83.3 99.9 101.5 102.7 100.9 105.7 99.2 104.6 104.3 97.6 105.5
         Mar x,p 113.1 104.7 106.2 115.2 112.8 118.0 118.2 111.9 115.0 117.2 115.0 124.5
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2014 + 1.5 + 2.9 − 3.8 + 2.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 + 0.4 + 1.5 + 2.9 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 4.1
2015 + 1.0 − 2.3 + 5.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.8 + 5.7 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.52017
r + 3.2 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.1 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.1
 
2017         Q1 r + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.9 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 2.0 + 3.6 + 1.5 + 0.0
         Q2 r + 3.4 + 5.2 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 3.4 + 3.3 + 4.7 + 1.4 + 4.0 + 5.9 + 4.3 + 2.1
         Q3 r + 4.1 + 3.2 − 1.8 + 4.8 + 5.2 + 4.8 + 6.1 + 2.9 + 6.3 + 6.7 + 4.7 + 5.0
         Q4 r + 4.7 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 5.3 + 6.3 + 5.4 + 3.1 + 3.2 + 5.9 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 5.7
2018         Q1 x + 3.8 + 3.6 − 0.8 + 4.2 + 3.7 + 4.3 + 2.8 + 5.2 + 3.5 + 5.4 + 4.7 + 4.6
 
2017         Mar r + 1.9 + 3.2 − 2.2 + 1.9 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 2.7 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 4.1 + 0.1 + 1.3
         Apr r + 3.0 + 6.2 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 3.6 + 1.9 + 4.1 + 0.3 + 2.9 + 6.6 + 3.2 − 0.2
         May r + 4.7 + 5.2 + 2.9 + 4.7 + 3.4 + 6.4 + 9.7 + 1.9 + 5.9 + 7.3 + 6.5 + 7.6
         June r + 2.7 + 4.2 + 3.3 + 2.4 + 3.3 + 1.9 + 0.8 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 4.1 + 3.3 − 0.7
         July 2,r + 3.9 + 2.8 − 2.7 + 4.8 + 5.4 + 4.3 + 5.3 + 3.7 + 6.8 + 8.0 + 5.5 + 1.8
         Aug 2,r + 4.4 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 5.3 + 5.7 + 7.4 + 2.2 + 6.1 + 6.9 + 3.3 + 9.4
         Sep r + 4.0 + 3.9 − 2.6 + 4.5 + 5.0 + 4.5 + 5.6 + 2.9 + 6.1 + 5.4 + 5.3 + 4.6
         Oct r + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 2.0 + 4.4 + 0.6 + 2.3 + 0.7 + 5.0 + 3.5 + 3.8 − 2.7
         Nov r + 5.7 + 3.7 − 0.7 + 6.5 + 6.8 + 7.1 + 4.8 + 4.2 + 4.9 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 11.8
         Dec r + 6.3 + 2.9 + 0.7 + 7.7 + 7.9 + 8.6 + 2.1 + 4.9 + 8.1 + 11.5 + 12.1 + 9.1
2018         Jan x + 6.2 + 17.1 − 5.6 + 5.9 + 5.1 + 6.2 + 4.1 + 7.2 + 4.4 + 6.4 + 6.3 + 5.6
         Feb x + 2.2 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 2.7 + 3.6 + 1.8 + 0.9 + 4.0 + 3.9 + 5.2 + 3.1 − 0.2
         Mar x,p + 3.2 − 0.9 + 3.5 + 4.0 + 2.5 + 5.1 + 3.3 + 4.6 + 2.3 + 4.7 + 4.9 + 8.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, dates. xProvisional; estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical
see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to Office to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey and th e Quarterly Survey in
II.12. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of the specialised construction industry, respectively. 
the production sector in the base year 2015. 2Influenced by a change in holiday

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
May 2018
XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
3 Orders received by industry *
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2015=100 change 2015=100 change 2015=100 change 2015=100 change 2015=100 change 2015=100 change
Total
2013 95.2 + 2.4 100.0 − 0.9 92.6 + 4.6 92.5 + 2.0 95.2 + 2.4 91.7 + 2.0
2014 97.8 + 2.7 100.6 + 0.6 96.2 + 3.9 96.8 + 4.6 95.8 + 0.6 97.1 + 5.9
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.8
2016 100.8 + 1.0 98.9 − 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.0 − 0.82017 108.6 + 7.7 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.8 + 5.2 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2017         Mar 117.2 + 5.8 116.4 + 10.4 118.6 + 3.4 110.5 + 4.3 126.5 + 14.7 105.2 + 0.8
         Apr 106.7 + 8.0 108.0 + 6.3 106.5 + 9.3 102.1 + 6.6 111.2 + 0.8 99.2 + 9.0
         May 103.8 + 6.5 106.5 + 8.3 102.4 + 5.6 101.6 + 4.7 110.3 + 17.2 98.6 + 0.7         June 110.7 + 7.4 110.9 + 11.0 111.4 + 5.4 104.0 + 4.8 117.6 + 13.6 99.5 + 1.6
         July 105.8 + 6.3 108.8 + 9.9 103.8 + 4.4 107.8 + 5.0 108.8 + 5.4 107.4 + 4.8
         Aug 99.0 + 9.8 104.9 + 16.6 94.1 + 5.6 107.9 + 8.2 115.3 + 21.2 105.5 + 4.1         Sep 110.3 + 11.0 108.9 + 11.8 111.8 + 11.4 107.0 + 6.2 126.2 + 13.3 100.7 + 3.5
         Oct 112.9 + 9.0 113.6 + 11.5 112.9 + 7.9 109.7 + 6.3 127.9 + 5.3 103.7 + 6.7
         Nov 114.8 + 10.9 118.2 + 13.8 113.1 + 9.5 111.4 + 8.1 129.8 + 17.0 105.4 + 4.8         Dec 115.2 + 9.1 103.4 + 14.0 125.2 + 7.2 94.5 + 4.2 108.6 + 12.2 89.8 + 1.4
2018         Jan 110.9 + 9.9 115.7 + 10.5 107.9 + 9.7 111.3 + 8.8 112.6 + 5.2 110.8 + 10.0
         Feb 110.3 + 4.1 110.9 + 2.3 110.1 + 5.9 108.7 − 1.4 112.2 + 3.1 107.6 − 2.8         Mar 
p 121.9 + 4.0 121.7 + 4.6 123.1 + 3.8 113.0 + 2.3 122.2 − 3.4 110.0 + 4.6
From the domestic market
2013 97.0 + 0.5 102.8 − 1.3 92.3 + 2.1 95.2 + 1.2 100.4 + 0.9 93.4 + 1.3
2014 98.1 + 1.1 101.7 − 1.1 95.2 + 3.1 97.1 + 2.0 100.4 + 0.0 96.0 + 2.8
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.9 + 2.2 98.0 − 1.8 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.8 101.7 + 3.8 108.7 + 5.4 99.3 + 3.1
2017         Mar 114.8 + 5.7 112.7 + 9.3 118.0 + 3.4 105.3 + 1.7 116.1 + 1.8 101.6 + 1.7
         Apr 110.1 + 9.4 105.8 + 2.7 116.2 + 16.7 93.3 − 0.9 101.9 − 1.5 90.4 − 0.6
         May 101.3 + 4.0 103.7 + 7.5 100.0 + 1.8 96.5 − 0.6 98.7 + 6.4 95.7 − 2.8         June 108.7 + 7.8 105.5 + 7.7 112.8 + 8.4 99.9 + 4.8 107.2 + 8.6 97.4 + 3.4
         July 107.2 + 9.3 108.2 + 10.0 106.7 + 9.4 104.9 + 4.8 102.3 + 1.5 105.8 + 6.0
         Aug 101.2 + 9.3 107.0 + 16.6 95.4 + 3.1 106.3 + 8.9 110.9 + 12.5 104.8 + 7.7         Sep 107.5 + 10.7 105.9 + 13.0 109.4 + 9.7 104.5 + 5.9 121.1 + 7.1 98.9 + 5.4
         Oct 111.0 + 7.7 112.3 + 10.7 110.2 + 5.2 108.7 + 7.1 128.7 + 8.9 101.9 + 6.3
         Nov 112.7 + 9.3 114.1 + 10.9 111.7 + 7.9 111.6 + 10.0 123.1 + 10.5 107.7 + 9.7         Dec 101.3 + 1.5 98.4 + 12.7 106.1 − 5.8 86.2
+ 0.0 89.0 + 2.4 85.2 − 0.9
2018         Jan 107.8 + 8.8 113.4 + 11.0 104.0 + 7.5 101.8 + 4.0 103.1 + 0.4 101.3 + 5.2
         Feb 105.6 − 3.5 108.1 − 0.9 103.5 − 6.2 105.3 + 0.5 109.5 + 7.1 103.9 − 1.7         Mar 
p 119.7 + 4.3 119.7 + 6.2 121.4 + 2.9 108.2 + 2.8 119.9 + 3.3 104.3 + 2.7
From abroad
2013 93.9 + 3.9 97.1 − 0.4 92.8 + 6.2 90.5 + 2.7 91.0 + 3.6 90.4 + 2.5
2014 97.5 + 3.8 99.5 + 2.5 96.7 + 4.2 96.5 + 6.6 92.0 + 1.1 97.9 + 8.3
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.4 + 0.6 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.1 + 7.3 101.1 + 1.32017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.5 109.0 + 7.0 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.7 104.4 + 3.3
2017         Mar 119.1 + 6.0 120.4 + 11.6 119.0 + 3.5 114.5 + 6.3 134.8 + 25.7 107.9
+ 0.0
         Apr 104.2 + 7.0 110.4 + 10.3 100.7 + 4.8 109.0 + 12.3 118.6 + 2.4 105.9 + 16.2
         May 105.7 + 8.4 109.6 + 9.3 103.8 + 7.9 105.5 + 8.9 119.6 + 25.6 100.9 + 3.5         June 112.2 + 7.0 116.8 + 14.6 110.6 + 3.8 107.2 + 4.8 125.9 + 17.3 101.1 + 0.4
         July 104.8 + 4.2 109.5 + 9.9 102.0 + 1.4 110.1 + 5.1 114.1 + 8.5 108.7 + 3.9
         Aug 97.3 + 10.1 102.7 + 16.7 93.3 + 7.1 109.2 + 7.7 118.8 + 28.9 106.1 + 1.6         Sep 112.5 + 11.2 112.1 + 10.6 113.2 + 12.2 109.0 + 6.4 130.3 + 18.5 102.1 + 2.1
         Oct 114.4 + 10.1 115.0 + 12.3 114.6 + 9.7 110.5 + 5.7 127.3 + 2.6 105.1 + 7.0
         Nov 116.4 + 12.1 122.7 + 16.9 113.9 + 10.5 111.3 + 6.6 135.2 + 22.4 103.6 + 1.2         Dec 125.7 + 14.3 108.8 + 15.3 136.7 + 14.6 100.9 + 7.2 124.3 + 18.7 93.3 + 3.0
2018         Jan 113.3 + 10.9 118.2 + 10.1 110.3 + 11.0 118.6 + 12.2 120.3 + 8.9 118.0 + 13.4
         Feb 113.9 + 10.2 113.9 + 5.9 114.1 + 13.9 111.4 − 2.6 114.3 + 0.2 110.4 − 3.6         Mar 
p 123.5 + 3.7 123.8 + 2.8 124.1 + 4.3 116.7 + 1.9 124.0 − 8.0 114.4 + 6.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex- Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business statistics,

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
May 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
4 Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100 2010 = 100
2014 118.5 − 0.6 127.2 + 0.6 146.6 + 4.3 126.8 − 0.9 90.6 − 3.5 109.9 − 1.8 121.8 − 0.1 104.1 − 3.3
2015 124.2 + 4.8 133.6 + 5.0 165.4 + 12.8 124.3 − 2.0 98.5 + 8.7 114.8 + 4.5 122.6 + 0.7 109.3 + 5.0
2016 142.2 + 14.5 153.8 + 15.1 193.5 + 17.0 143.0 + 15.0 107.5 + 9.1 130.8 + 13.9 137.1 + 11.8 127.0 + 16.22017 152.2 + 7.0 164.6 + 7.0 203.9 + 5.4 153.5 + 7.3 120.3 + 11.9 139.8 + 6.9 147.1 + 7.3 136.7 + 7.6
 
2017         Feb 130.3 + 8.0 144.3 + 14.6 176.0 + 11.6 139.1 + 20.5 97.4 + 2.9 116.2 + 0.7 127.4 + 16.3 114.8 − 2.0
         Mar 179.0 + 8.7 190.4 + 13.1 243.7 + 7.2 172.2 + 17.5 139.7 + 19.4 167.6 + 4.2 165.1 + 10.1 167.3 + 8.3
         Apr 165.2 + 9.4 170.5 + 9.8 204.5 + 4.5 166.7 + 17.1 114.7 + 0.6 160.0 + 9.1 154.0 + 9.7 160.9 + 11.8
         May 155.4 − 1.3 162.5 − 7.7 202.2 − 3.5 143.0 − 17.7 142.1 + 20.8 148.4 + 7.0 138.5 − 11.2 154.0 + 11.7         June 173.3 + 5.0 188.1 + 3.9 238.5 + 6.9 164.4 − 5.9 159.2 + 36.3 158.5 + 6.2 156.1 − 3.3 164.6 + 13.0
         July 164.0 + 7.4 167.7 + 2.5 203.9 + 4.6 159.6 + 0.7 120.4 + 2.6 160.4 + 13.2 155.2 + 7.7 157.1 + 8.8
         Aug 145.3 + 4.6 152.9 + 2.9 184.8 + 0.4 142.3 + 0.5 121.5 + 22.0 137.7 + 6.6 138.9 + 4.9 135.9 + 6.6         Sep 151.8 + 5.1 163.7 + 1.3 200.0 − 11.3 148.2 + 11.3 138.3 + 15.0 140.0 + 9.9 144.9 + 11.7 139.5 + 9.8
         Oct 141.2 − 2.8 152.7 − 2.7 203.3 + 4.6 131.0 − 11.5 117.8 + 6.8 129.8 − 2.8 132.5 − 8.6 125.3 − 0.6
         Nov 140.7 + 10.7 158.1 + 13.2 188.6 − 0.4 157.1 + 29.0 101.3 + 6.5 123.2 + 7.6 152.9 + 22.9 108.9 + 3.9         Dec 166.7 + 27.0 199.5 + 32.8 247.1 + 43.2 196.0 + 27.4 116.3 + 21.9 133.9 + 19.1 174.7 + 23.9 126.2 + 20.4
2018         Jan 123.8 + 9.1 135.6 + 8.5 170.0 + 10.0 129.5 + 5.7 86.0 + 15.6 112.1 + 9.8 130.3 + 4.7 98.7 + 14.9
         Feb 154.2 + 18.3 157.6 + 9.2 186.6 + 6.0 154.8 + 11.3 108.7 + 11.6 150.8 + 29.8 167.1 + 31.2 127.9 + 11.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; values method, version 0.2.8. 1Excluding housing construction orders. 2Including road
exclusive of value-added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement construction. Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA
 
 
5 Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of whichin stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current At prices in
prices year 2010  3) At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2014 96.5 + 1.6 96.4 + 1.2 97.3 + 2.1 99.9 + 1.8 99.2 − 0.8 97.7 − 0.3 95.0 + 7.1 83.3 + 1.8
2015 4 100.1 + 3.7 4 100.1 + 3.8 100.2 + 3.0 100.2 + 0.3 100.2 + 1.0 100.3 + 2.7 100.0 + 5.3 4 100.0 + 20.0
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.1 + 2.0 101.7 + 1.5 101.0 + 0.8 99.9 − 0.3 101.6 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.82017
5 107.5 + 4.9 105.1 + 2.9 105.6 + 3.8 108.2 + 7.1 106.4 + 6.5 103.5 + 1.9 107.8 + 3.8 120.5 + 9.7
 
2017         Mar 109.4 + 6.8 106.9 + 4.6 106.1 + 4.4 109.2 + 17.7 103.2 + 8.5 112.7 + 4.5 109.1 + 3.0 119.1 + 5.7
         Apr 107.0 + 5.2 104.4 + 3.4 107.5 + 6.1 109.1 + 2.9 93.4 + 8.5 108.8 + 1.6 105.9 + 4.1 114.3 + 16.3
         May 106.6 + 4.7 104.1 + 2.9 106.2 + 3.5 105.6 + 2.7 89.0 + 7.1 106.6 + 1.3 106.6 + 5.2 113.9 + 10.4         June 105.1 + 5.7 103.2 + 4.0 104.8 + 4.0 105.3 + 8.4 95.1 + 6.5 102.4 + 3.4 106.1 + 5.9 111.5 + 11.1
         July 107.2 + 4.5 105.7 + 2.8 107.2 + 3.7 105.2 + 2.8 102.2 + 10.2 104.2 + 2.6 109.4 + 2.9 112.2 + 13.2
         Aug 102.9 + 3.8 101.2 + 1.9 103.4 + 2.7 99.0 + 6.5 97.7 + 9.8 98.0 + 0.9 104.6 + 3.7 110.7 + 9.4         Sep 106.1 + 7.4 103.2 + 5.3 102.5 + 5.1 124.9 + 27.6 102.1 + 10.4 99.8 + 3.5 105.6 + 3.1 116.7 + 12.1
         Oct 110.5 + 2.5 107.2 + 0.8 105.7 + 2.3 121.9 − 3.8 110.9 + 4.0 109.8 + 1.8 108.8 + 2.2 122.1 + 2.8
         Nov 115.1 + 6.1 111.5 + 4.2 108.0 + 4.7 117.6 + 9.8 121.3 + 5.6 111.1 + 3.3 112.9 + 4.0 150.3 + 13.3         Dec 129.7 + 4.4 125.8 + 2.8 125.8 + 4.8 131.9 + 6.4 157.6 − 0.6 111.4 + 0.3 123.9 + 5.4 153.8 + 7.5
2018         Jan 100.1 + 3.7 97.6 + 2.3 98.7 + 3.8 91.2 + 3.5 109.2 − 2.7 91.2 + 4.1 107.1 + 5.3 119.1 + 4.1
         Feb 96.5 + 2.6 93.8 + 1.2 98.0 + 3.5 81.8 + 1.7 92.6 + 0.1 89.1 − 0.4 103.8 + 4.3 108.7 + 1.5         Mar 109.8 + 0.4 105.9 − 0.9 109.1 + 2.8 103.2 − 5.5 103.3 + 0.1 107.1 − 5.0 110.2 + 1.0 125.8 + 5.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value-added integration of a larger online retail sales based enterprise that founded a business
tax;  For explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement Seasonally adjusted business establishment in Germany in May 2015. 5As of January 2017, figures are provision-
statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. al, in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months due to esti-
1Including stalls and markets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3Values at current mates for missing reports. 
prices deflated with retail price indices in 2010 weights. 4As of May 2015,

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
May 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
6 Labour market * 
  
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Solely
jobs
Services exempt Recipients
excluding from of insured
Produc- temporary social unem- Unem- Temporary
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically ployment ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total benefits ment cies,  4,6 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4,5 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2013 42,319 + 0.6 29,713 + 1.3 8,783 19,958 743 5,017 191 77 2,950 970 6.9 457
2014 42,672 + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,069 + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,638 + 1.3 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 6552017
r 44,271 r + 1.5 7 32,230 7 + 2.3 7 9,146 7 21,976 7 868 7 4,743 ... 7 24 2,533 8 855 5.7 731
2015         Q1 42,517 + 0.7 30,360 + 1.8 8,833 20,551 756 4,863 310 51 2,993 1,011 6.9 515
         Q2 42,998 + 0.8 30,671 + 2.0 8,895 20,740 792 4,863 61 47 2,772 822 6.3 560         Q3 43,286 + 1.0 30,928 + 2.1 8,974 20,865 840 4,868 47 33 2,759 827 6.3 595         Q4 43,476 + 1.2 31,333 + 2.3 9,049 21,204 837 4,829 101 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2016         Q1 43,096 + 1.4 31,077 + 2.4 8,929 21,131 793 4,785 312 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 43,557 + 1.3 31,350 + 2.2 8,988 21,298 820 4,823 59 47 2,674 782 6.1 653         Q3 43,832 + 1.3 31,593 + 2.1 9,056 21,431 858 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682         Q4 44,066 + 1.4 32,014 + 2.2 9,137 21,770 866 4,781 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017         Q1
r 43,738 r + 1.5 31,790 + 2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734 8 987 6.2 671
         Q2 r 44,200 r + 1.5 32,064 + 2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 9 5.6 717
         Q3 r 44,483 r + 1.5 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763
         Q4 r 44,663 r + 1.4 7 32,742 7 + 2.3 7 9,260 7 22,341 7 900 7 4,716 ... 7 14 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1 10 44,347 10 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,525 909 5.7 760
2014         Dec 42,813 + 0.8 30,398 + 1.7 8,864 20,565 753 5,012 204 39 2,764 867 6.4 498
2015         Jan 42,444 + 0.7 30,276 + 1.8 8,815 20,498 747 4,846 327 50 3,032 1,043 7.0 485
         Feb 42,470 + 0.7 30,342 + 1.9 8,818 20,546 756 4,821 352 52 3,017 1,034 6.9 519         Mar 42,638 + 0.8 30,528 + 2.0 8,865 20,651 777 4,829 251 50 2,932 955 6.8 542         Apr 42,832 + 0.8 30,645 + 1.9 8,895 20,723 784 4,850 67 54 2,843 868 6.5 552         May 43,013 + 0.8 30,718 + 2.0 8,901 20,776 794 4,875 57 44 2,762 815 6.3 557         June 43,150 + 0.9 30,771 + 2.0 8,915 20,788 819 4,902 59 45 2,711 782 6.2 572         July 43,190 + 0.9 30,744 + 2.1 8,934 20,724 840 4,908 49 35 2,773 830 6.3 589         Aug 43,245 + 1.0 30,988 + 2.2 8,993 20,901 846 4,841 40 26 2,796 851 6.4 597         Sep 43,422 + 1.0 31,333 + 2.2 9,076 21,153 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600         Oct 43,508 + 1.0 31,368 + 2.3 9,068 21,206 846 4,814 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612         Nov 43,545 + 1.2 31,389 + 2.5 9,060 21,247 842 4,846 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610         Dec 43,374 + 1.3 31,150 + 2.5 8,964 21,167 798 4,843 177 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016         Jan 43,005 + 1.3 30,983 + 2.3 8,906 21,073 784 4,774 343 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb 43,059 + 1.4 31,069 + 2.4 8,923 21,127 793 4,769 343 50 2,911 947 6.6 614         Mar 43,224 + 1.4 31,209 + 2.2 8,954 21,217 804 4,782 252 52 2,845 888 6.5 635         Apr 43,388 + 1.3 31,314 + 2.2 8,983 21,279 809 4,806 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640         May 43,577 + 1.3 31,410 + 2.3 9,000 21,337 826 4,838 57 45 2,664 774 6.0 655         June 43,707 + 1.3 31,443 + 2.2 9,010 21,339 846 4,865 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665         July 43,689 + 1.2 31,378 + 2.1 9,007 21,273 853 4,863 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674         Aug 43,807 + 1.3 31,675 + 2.2 9,076 21,486 865 4,802 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685         Sep 43,999 + 1.3 32,007 + 2.2 9,157 21,729 869 4,768 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687         Oct 44,086 + 1.3 32,045 + 2.2 9,154 21,773 871 4,767 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691         Nov 44,131 + 1.3 32,069 + 2.2 9,147 21,807 876 4,794 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681         Dec 43,982 + 1.4 31,848 + 2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan 
r 43,654 r + 1.5 31,707 + 2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777 8 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb r 43,702 r + 1.5 31,774 + 2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
         Mar r 43,857 r + 1.5 31,930 + 2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr r 44,030 r + 1.5 32,013 + 2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
         May r 44,209 r + 1.5 32,131 + 2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 9 5.6 714
         June r 44,360 r + 1.5 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July r 44,379 r + 1.6 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
         Aug r 44,449 r + 1.5 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765
         Sep r 44,622 r + 1.4 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
         Oct r 44,687 r + 1.4 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
         Nov r 44,727 r + 1.4 7 32,791 7 + 2.3 7 9,272 7 22,365 7 915 7 4,728 ... 7 15 2,368 772 5.3 772
         Dec r 44,574 r + 1.3 7 32,585 7 + 2.3 7 9,196 7 22,301 7 866 7 4,736 ... 7 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan r 44,275 r + 1.4 7 32,483 7 + 2.4 7 9,186 7 22,235 7 840 7 4,656 ... 7 13 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb r 44,312 r + 1.4 7 32,546 7 + 2.4 7 9,221 7 22,260 7 839 7 4,648 ... 7 12 2,546 927 5.7 764
         Mar 10 44,455 10 + 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,458 859 5.5 778
         Apr ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,384 796 5.3 784
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and social contributions, by a maximum of 0.5 % for persons solely in jobs exempt from
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- social contributions, and by a maximum of 33.9 % for cyclically induced short-time
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: work. 8From January 2017, persons receiving additional income assistance
end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same time) shall be
total civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social Security Code (SGB
and seasonal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7Unadjusted figures estimated by III). 9From May 2017 calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 10Initial
the Federal Employment Agency. In 2015 and 2016, the estimated values for Ger- preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. many deviated from the final data by a maximum of 1.1 % for employees subject to

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
May 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
7 Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  6 
prices ofindustrial
of which
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy struction the prices  of price index
(national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial Housing
Total Food  2 Energy  3 Services rents  4 concept) index market  5 Exports Imports Energy  7 products  5 goods materials  8 
Period 2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2013 99.1 97.4 98.7 109.8 97.4 97.3 105.7 107.9 106.9 120.7 104.3 105.9 160.2 117.6
2014 99.9 98.8 99.2 107.5 98.8 98.8 106.6 109.7 105.8 111.1 104.0 103.6 142.8 108.3
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 111.3 103.9 106.9 104.9 100.9 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.2 101.2 107.4 113.4 102.1 r 106.6 104.0 97.8 83.2 98.4
2017 102.1 104.0 102.3 97.5 102.5 102.9 109.3 117.0 104.8 9 115.1 105.9 101.5 99.6 107.1
 
2016         June 100.3 101.0 100.7 96.2 100.9 101.1 107.3 102.1 106.4 103.9 97.8 87.9 98.9
         July 100.7 101.3 100.0 95.1 102.2 101.2 107.6 102.3 110.0 104.1 97.9 84.4 100.2
         Aug 100.6 100.9 100.3 94.3 102.3 101.4 107.6 113.7 102.2 106.7 104.0 97.7 83.9 98.6         Sep 100.6 101.2 101.5 94.9 101.4 101.5 107.7 102.0
r 104.7 104.0 97.8 83.9 97.0
         Oct 100.8 101.2 102.0 96.2 101.2 101.7 107.9 102.7 r 108.8 104.3 98.7 96.2 99.8
         Nov 100.8 102.0 102.0 95.2 101.1 101.8 108.0 114.1 103.0 r 111.3 104.8 99.4 95.4 108.5
         Dec 101.8 102.6 101.6 97.3 102.8 102.0 108.8 103.4 r 113.1 105.2 101.3 106.6 114.0
2017         Jan 101.0 103.2 100.7 98.2 101.0 102.2 108.1 104.1 114.8 105.8 102.2 108.9 115.9
         Feb 101.7 104.6 101.0 98.4 101.9 102.3 108.8 115.5 104.3 116.2 106.0 102.9 110.2 118.9         Mar 101.8 103.4 102.6 97.5 102.0 102.4 109.0 104.3 117.6 106.0 102.4 99.7 116.4
         Apr 101.8 103.4 102.7 98.3 101.5 102.6 109.0 104.7 119.9 106.2 102.3 100.4 110.1
         May 101.6 103.5 102.7 96.9 101.5 102.8 108.8 116.6 104.5 120.9 106.0 101.3 93.1 104.2         June 101.8 103.6 102.0 96.1 102.5 102.9 109.0 104.5 121.3 105.8 100.2 85.7 100.4
         July 102.2 103.8 101.4 95.9 103.8 103.0 109.4 104.7 120.2 105.7 99.8 86.5 102.9
         Aug 102.4 103.8 101.8 96.3 103.8 103.1 109.5 117.5 104.9 121.2 105.6 99.8 90.1 103.3         Sep 102.4 104.1 102.9 97.5 102.8 103.2 109.6 105.2
9 115.9 105.8 100.7 96.3 102.8
         Oct 102.3 104.8 103.2 97.4 102.2 103.3 109.6 105.5 114.3 105.9 101.3 101.6 102.7
         Nov 102.6 104.8 103.2 98.7 102.6 103.5 109.9 118.4 105.6 114.7 106.1 102.1 110.3 103.8         Dec 103.4 105.5 102.8 98.5 104.2 103.6 110.6 105.8 114.3 106.2 102.4 113.7 103.6
2018         Jan 102.4 106.2 101.8 98.9 102.4 103.9 109.8 106.3 110.5 106.5 102.9 115.9 105.4
         Feb 102.9 106.2 102.2 98.5 103.3 104.0 110.3 120.4 106.2 110.0 106.5 102.3 108.7 106.0         Mar 103.3 106.4 103.2 97.9 103.7 104.1 110.7 106.3 111.4 106.7 102.3 109.5 104.9
         Apr 103.2 106.8 103.4 99.5 102.7 104.3 110.7 ... ... ... ... 116.7 106.1
Annual percentage change  
  
2013 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 8.6
2014 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.7 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 1.8 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.6 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.7 r − 0.3 − 0.9 − 3.1 − 16.8 − 1.6
2017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.2 + 2.6 9 + 8.0 + 1.8 + 3.8 + 19.7 + 8.8
 
2016         June + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 6.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.2 + 0.9 − 1.3 − 4.6 − 22.4 − 4.4
         July + 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.9 − 7.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 5.3 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 20.4 − 1.4
         Aug + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 − 5.9 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 2.0 − 1.6 + 4.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 8.3 + 2.7         Sep + 0.5 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 3.6 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.7 − 1.4
r − 2.5 − 0.6 − 1.8 − 7.6 + 3.1
         Oct + 0.7 + 0.8 + 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.4 r − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 5.0 + 6.9
         Nov + 0.7 + 1.5 + 1.0 − 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 2.1 + 0.1 r + 3.4 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 6.5 + 17.0
         Dec + 1.7 + 2.4 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 1.0 r + 5.4 + 1.1 + 3.5 + 37.5 + 27.5
2017         Jan + 1.9 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 5.9 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.4 + 7.5 + 1.8 + 6.0 + 68.8 + 31.4
         Feb + 2.2 + 3.8 + 1.1 + 7.2 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 2.7 + 3.1 + 9.6 + 2.5 + 7.4 + 72.2 + 34.2         Mar + 1.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 3.1 + 10.3 + 2.3 + 6.1 + 37.9 + 24.4
         Apr + 2.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 3.4 + 13.2 + 2.6 + 6.1 + 33.7 + 15.3
         May + 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.8 + 14.1 + 2.2 + 4.1 + 12.7 + 7.2         June + 1.5 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.4 + 14.0 + 1.8 + 2.5 − 2.5 + 1.5
         July + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 9.3 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.7
         Aug + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 13.6 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 7.4 + 4.8         Sep + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.1
9 + 10.7 + 1.7 + 3.0 + 14.8 + 6.0
         Oct + 1.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 5.1 + 1.5 + 2.6 + 5.6 + 2.9
         Nov + 1.8 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.7 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.8 + 2.5 + 3.1 + 1.2 + 2.7 + 15.6 − 4.3         Dec + 1.6 + 2.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 1.1 + 6.7 − 9.1
2018         Jan + 1.4 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 − 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 6.4 − 9.1
         Feb + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 1.8 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.4 − 10.8         Mar + 1.5 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 5.3 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.8 − 9.9
         Apr + 1.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.6 ... ... ... ... + 16.2 − 3.6
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on transport fuels and lubricants. 4Net rents. 5Excluding value-added tax. 6For the
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw euro area, in euro. 7Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas. 8Food, beverages and to-
Materials: HWWI. 1Differences from the official figures are due to rounding. 2Inclu- bacco as well as industrial raw materials. 9From September 2017 onwards, provisio-
ding alcoholic beverages and tobacco. 3Electricity, gas and other fuels as well as nal figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
May 2018
XI Economic conditions in Germany
  
8 Households’ income *
    
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age
€ billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.62012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.32013 1,167.4 3.0 778.3 2.8 388.1 0.1 1,166.4 1.9 1,717.2 1.3 153.7 − 2.5 8.92014 1,212.7 3.9 806.9 3.7 398.4 2.6 1,205.2 3.3 1,759.8 2.5 166.6 8.4 9.5
2015 1,260.8 4.0 836.6 3.7 417.0 4.7 1,253.7 4.0 1,804.0 2.5 173.5 4.2 9.6
2016 1,311.5 4.0 869.1 3.9 430.1 3.1 1,299.2 3.6 1,854.1 2.8 179.7 3.5 9.72017 1,370.3 4.5 905.9 4.2 444.1 3.2 1,349.9 3.9 1,924.8 3.8 189.8 5.6 9.9
2016         Q3 323.3 3.9 218.6 3.6 108.8 4.2 327.4 3.8 461.8 2.2 37.7 2.0 8.2
         Q4 363.1 4.1 240.4 3.8 106.9 3.0 347.4 3.6 472.4 2.9 39.9 4.4 8.5
2017         Q1 319.3 4.5 211.7 4.6 112.9 4.2 324.6 4.4 477.5 4.5 62.4 6.7 13.1
         Q2 333.9 4.5 215.9 4.0 109.9 3.7 325.8 3.9 479.9 3.7 44.8 2.9 9.3         Q3 338.5 4.7 228.9 4.7 111.7 2.6 340.6 4.0 480.2 4.0 40.2 6.7 8.4         Q4 378.6 4.3 249.3 3.7 109.6 2.4 358.9 3.3 487.2 3.1 42.3 6.0 8.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2018. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9 Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages 1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change 2010=100 change
2010 100.0 1.6 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.7 100.0 1.8 100.0 2.5
2011 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.42012 104.4 2.7 104.4 2.6 104.7 2.8 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.72013 107.0 2.4 106.9 2.4 107.3 2.5 107.2 2.4 108.4 2.12014 110.1 2.9 109.9 2.8 110.1 2.7 110.1 2.7 111.4 2.8
2015 112.6 2.3 112.4 2.2 112.6 2.3 112.7 2.3 114.5 2.8
2016 114.9 2.1 114.7 2.1 115.0 2.1 115.2 2.2 117.3 2.42017 117.4 2.1 117.1 2.1 117.5 2.2 117.8 2.3 120.5 2.7
2016         Q4 128.0 2.2 127.8 2.2 128.2 2.2 116.1 2.3 128.4 2.5
2017         Q1 109.1 2.6 108.8 2.5 109.1 2.5 116.8 2.5 113.7 2.8
         Q2 110.1 2.1 109.9 2.1 110.2 2.4 117.6 2.4 117.8 2.8         Q3 120.0 2.1 119.7 2.0 120.1 2.0 118.3 2.1 118.7 2.9         Q4 130.4 1.9 130.1 1.8 130.5 1.9 118.6 2.1 131.7 2.5
2018         Q1 111.6 2.3 111.3 2.3 111.4 2.1 119.3 2.2 . .
2017         Sep 110.5 2.1 110.2 2.1 110.6 2.1 118.4 2.1 . .
         Oct 111.0 2.1 110.7 2.0 111.1 2.0 118.5 2.1 . .
         Nov 167.8 1.6 167.4 1.6 168.0 1.6 118.7 2.2 . .         Dec 112.5 2.0 112.2 2.0 112.6 2.1 118.6 2.1 . .
2018         Jan 111.2 2.0 110.9 2.0 111.3 2.2 119.2 2.2 . .
         Feb 111.3 2.1 111.0 2.1 111.3 2.0 119.2 2.0 . .         Mar 112.3 2.8 112.0 2.8 111.7 2.2 119.7 2.3 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such February 2018. as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13
thmonthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
May 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
10 Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
  
End-of-year/end-of-half data
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which of which Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which
Non- Trade of which
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2013 1,902.1 1,171.1 385.0 485.2 232.4 731.0 187.5 175.8 136.5 569.5 1,332.6 706.0 379.8 626.6 191.0 163.0
2014 2,078.8 1,284.1 431.0 520.3 249.6 794.7 203.1 187.3 132.4 582.9 1,495.9 812.0 426.8 683.9 207.2 175.82015 2,225.6 1,394.0 470.7 564.7 273.1 831.6 215.5 190.5 136.0 633.3 1,592.3 860.4 465.3 731.9 222.7 180.32016 2,370.4 1,479.3 493.0 594.9 289.7 891.1 226.8 218.0 151.9 675.5 1,694.8 888.5 481.9 806.3 249.0 192.8
2015         H2 2,225.6 1,394.0 470.7 564.7 273.1 831.6 215.5 190.5 136.0 633.3 1,592.3 860.4 465.3 731.9 222.7 180.3
2016         H1 2,255.6 1,380.4 462.4 549.3 272.0 875.2 226.6 195.1 140.4 607.1 1,648.5 894.8 464.6 753.7 243.8 174.9
         H2 2,370.4 1,479.3 493.0 594.9 289.7 891.1 226.8 218.0 151.9 675.5 1,694.8 888.5 481.9 806.3 249.0 192.8
2017         H1 
p 2,387.4 1,472.0 501.7 582.8 289.4 915.4 238.2 220.7 151.8 705.0 1,682.4 886.8 497.2 795.6 246.2 194.9
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 61.6 20.2 25.5 12.2 38.4 9.9 9.2 7.2 29.9 70.1 37.1 20.0 32.9 10.0 8.6
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.0 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.5 32.9 10.0 8.52015 100.0 62.6 21.2 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.12016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.5 71.5 37.5 20.3 34.0 10.5 8.1
2015         H2 100.0 62.6 21.2 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.5 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.1
2016         H1 100.0 61.2 20.5 24.4 12.1 38.8 10.0 8.7 6.2 26.9 73.1 39.7 20.6 33.4 10.8 7.8
         H2 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.1 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.5 71.5 37.5 20.3 34.0 10.5 8.1
2017         H1 
p 100.0 61.7 21.0 24.4 12.1 38.3 10.0 9.2 6.4 29.5 70.5 37.2 20.8 33.3 10.3 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2013 1,523.6 908.2 257.2 384.6 215.6 615.4 171.2 136.1 104.1 450.9 1,072.6 560.4 282.8 512.2 170.2 114.92014 1,655.6 989.4 276.5 411.9 236.0 666.2 185.7 140.3 98.9 451.4 1,204.2 644.0 318.6 560.2 185.6 122.42015 1,781.1 1,076.8 304.0 446.3 259.0 704.3 198.8 147.0 104.3 485.0 1,296.1 689.4 353.1 606.7 198.3 127.52016 1,908.6 1,145.8 322.1 472.9 270.8 762.8 209.7 169.9 115.4 514.1 1,394.5 714.8 369.4 679.7 223.1 140.9
2015         H2 1,781.1 1,076.8 304.0 446.3 259.0 704.3 198.8 147.0 104.3 485.0 1,296.1 689.4 353.1 606.7 198.3 127.5
2016         H1 1,817.3 1,058.7 296.6 432.0 254.2 758.6 210.0 149.8 112.2 465.7 1,351.6 717.4 350.9 634.3 219.2 129.9
         H2 1,908.6 1,145.8 322.1 472.9 270.8 762.8 209.7 169.9 115.4 514.1 1,394.5 714.8 369.4 679.7 223.1 140.9
2017         H1 
p 1,921.2 1,136.9 324.7 463.5 273.1 784.3 224.2 171.9 125.3 550.0 1,371.2 708.2 378.1 663.0 224.3 153.1
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 59.6 16.9 25.2 14.2 40.4 11.2 8.9 6.8 29.6 70.4 36.8 18.6 33.6 11.2 7.5
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.2 33.8 11.2 7.42015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.1 7.22016 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.4
2015         H2 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.6 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.8 34.1 11.1 7.2
2016         H1 100.0 58.3 16.3 23.8 14.0 41.7 11.6 8.3 6.2 25.6 74.4 39.5 19.3 34.9 12.1 7.2
         H2 100.0 60.0 16.9 24.8 14.2 40.0 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.4
2017         H1 
p 100.0 59.2 16.9 24.1 14.2 40.8 11.7 9.0 6.5 28.6 71.4 36.9 19.7 34.5 11.7 8.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2013 378.5 262.9 127.8 100.6 16.8 115.6 16.3 39.7 32.3 118.6 260.0 145.6 97.0 114.3 20.8 48.12014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.42015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.72016 461.8 333.5 170.9 122.0 18.9 128.3 17.1 48.1 36.5 161.4 300.4 173.7 112.6 126.6 26.0 51.9
2015         H2 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2016         H1 438.3 321.7 165.8 117.3 17.8 116.6 16.6 45.3 28.2 141.4 296.9 177.4 113.6 119.4 24.7 45.0
         H2 461.8 333.5 170.9 122.0 18.9 128.3 17.1 48.1 36.5 161.4 300.4 173.7 112.6 126.6 26.0 51.9
2017         H1 
p 466.2 335.1 177.0 119.3 16.3 131.1 14.0 48.8 26.6 155.1 311.1 178.6 119.2 132.6 21.9 41.8
as a percentage of total assets
2013 100.0 69.5 33.8 26.6 4.5 30.5 4.3 10.5 8.5 31.3 68.7 38.5 25.6 30.2 5.5 12.7
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.62015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.92016 100.0 72.2 37.0 26.4 4.1 27.8 3.7 10.4 7.9 35.0 65.0 37.6 24.4 27.4 5.6 11.2
2015         H2 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016         H1 100.0 73.4 37.8 26.8 4.1 26.6 3.8 10.3 6.4 32.3 67.7 40.5 25.9 27.3 5.6 10.3
         H2 100.0 72.2 37.0 26.4 4.1 27.8 3.7 10.4 7.9 35.0 65.0 37.6 24.4 27.4 5.6 11.2
2017         H1 
p 100.0 71.9 38.0 25.6 3.5 28.1 3.0 10.5 5.7 33.3 66.7 38.3 25.6 28.4 4.7 9.0
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
May 2018
 XI Economic conditions in Germany
 
11 Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
  
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
change in change in
Annual Annual per- Annual per-change change centage change centage
Period in %  
4 in % 4 % points  4 % % % in %  4 % points  4 %%% € billion  3 € billion  3 € billion  3 
Total
2009 1,158.5 − 10.7 135.6 − 16.9 11.7 − 0.9 3.9 9.4 15.7 55.9 − 29.3 4.8 − 1.3 − 0.2 4.9 9.3
2010 1,320.9 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.6 98.3 66.6 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.9 12.1
2011 1,414.3 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.5 11.0 17.4 93.8 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.02012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 − 0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 1.9 6.1 11.02013 1,541.0 − 0.6 187.1 − 2.8 12.1 − 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.3 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 10.92014 1,565.6 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.7 10.3 17.2 109.3 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,635.3 6.9 196.1 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.8 91.6 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.6 11.3
2016 1,626.0 − 0.4 214.8 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.6 11.4 17.9 112.0 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.5 6.7 12.0
2012         H2 782.1 5.2 95.4 2.6 12.2 − 0.3 4.8 11.1 18.0 39.9 − 19.2 5.1 − 1.4 1.4 6.9 11.9
2013         H1 762.7 − 0.2 93.4 − 3.6 12.2 − 0.4 3.4 9.3 16.5 53.8 − 7.6 7.1 − 0.6 0.6 4.9 10.7
         H2 780.0 − 1.1 93.8 − 2.0 12.0 − 0.1 5.4 10.8 19.2 45.7 25.5 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.2 12.1
2014         H1 757.2 − 0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.7 9.5 16.0 57.8 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
         H2 808.7 2.9 101.5 5.2 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2015         H1 815.2 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 4.8 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.2 − 0.5 1.1 5.8 10.9
         H2 831.3 5.1 93.5 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.7 − 36.7 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.1 11.7
2016         H1 782.7 − 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 5.9 10.4 17.7 65.6 2.9 8.4 0.4 1.6 6.4 11.3
         H2 843.3 1.1 103.0 9.9 12.2 1.0 6.7 11.9 19.0 46.3 21.0 5.5 0.8 2.9 7.5 12.5
2017         H1 
p 844.9 7.1 125.8 14.3 14.9 0.9 5.7 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.2 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
Groups with a focus on the production sector  5 
 
2009 837.7 − 11.8 94.9 − 20.6 11.3 − 1.3 2.5 9.0 14.0 40.0 − 32.6 4.8 − 1.5 − 1.4 4.3 8.8
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.4 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.0
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.1 6.8 11.52012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.8 6.1 9.82013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.7 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 4.4 10.3 15.5 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.3 5.7 10.02014 1,197.3 1.0 147.9 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.1 9.6 15.3 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,282.4 7.0 143.9 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.1 10.4 15.5 65.1 − 20.3 5.1 − 1.8 1.8 6.5 10.0
2016 1,267.1 − 1.0 156.4 6.0 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.5 16.0 80.5 4.4 6.4 0.3 2.7 6.3 10.4
2012         H2 593.9 6.1 67.5 5.3 11.4 − 0.1 4.4 10.5 15.9 34.9 0.2 5.9 − 0.3 0.6 6.2 10.2
2013         H1 588.8 − 0.1 71.7 − 4.8 12.2 − 0.6 3.1 9.3 15.0 43.1 − 10.9 7.3 − 0.9 0.6 5.3 9.7
         H2 591.7 − 1.4 67.1 − 0.3 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.4 15.8 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 10.9
2014         H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.2 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.0 46.2 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.4 9.6
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.7 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 15.8 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.7
2015         H1 636.4 8.7 80.1 7.8 12.6 − 0.1 5.1 10.0 15.4 48.7 4.8 7.7 − 0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 646.6 5.3 63.8 − 13.4 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.5 16.4 − 52.4 2.5 − 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.3
2016         H1 611.2 − 2.6 83.9 1.3 13.7 0.5 6.6 10.5 15.7 50.7 − 6.5 8.3 − 0.3 2.8 6.4 9.9
         H2 655.9 0.5 72.5 11.9 11.1 1.1 6.1 11.2 16.0 29.8 34.8 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.5
2017         H1 
p 678.6 7.4 98.4 18.4 14.5 1.4 5.9 9.9 16.0 63.9 36.9 9.4 2.0 2.2 5.8 10.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2009 320.8 − 7.4 40.7 − 4.9 12.7 0.3 4.6 10.7 20.6 16.0 − 16.5 5.0 − 0.5 1.7 5.7 12.6
2010 340.2 5.8 45.1 9.0 13.3 0.4 6.0 11.2 19.7 22.6 47.0 6.7 1.8 3.4 6.0 12.8
2011 335.3 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 6.0 10.4 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.2 13.82012 359.1 2.8 48.0 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.22013 362.0 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.4 13.4 − 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.4 5.9 12.52014 368.3 1.1 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.1 6.0 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.2 4.8 14.8 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.4 58.3 14.6 16.3 1.8 6.8 13.5 25.1 31.5 24.7 8.8 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2012         H2 188.3 2.3 27.9 − 4.0 14.8 − 1.0 5.3 11.4 24.2 5.1 − 73.2 2.7 − 5.2 3.2 7.7 15.3
2013         H1 173.9 − 0.5 21.7 1.1 12.5 0.2 3.9 8.1 19.2 10.7 12.8 6.2 0.7 0.9 4.6 12.8
         H2 188.2 0.2 26.7 − 6.7 14.2 − 1.1 5.6 11.4 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.4 13.5
2014         H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.7 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.7 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.5 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.5 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.7 10.8 16.1 0.9 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 187.5 3.6 30.5 4.6 16.3 0.2 7.4 13.5 24.3 16.5 2.7 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 8.9 17.1
2017         H1 
p 166.3 5.8 27.5 0.3 16.5 − 0.8 5.4 11.0 21.3 14.7 − 0.1 8.8 − 0.5 1.4 5.8 14.7
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt return on sales. 3Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statemen t statistics, p 3.
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. 4Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in the Statistical Supplement
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
May 2018
XII External sector
 
1 Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2017 2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec Jan Feb  p
Current account + 339,804 + 388,042 + 387,557 + 63,439 + 128,295 + 133,213 + 50,244 + 12,598 + 22,735A
1 Goods
Exports 2,138,202 2,130,057 2,283,085 565,841 563,975 594,543 187,805 182,837 183,247
Imports 1,779,019 1,754,756 1,937,775 476,796 470,857 495,317 155,595 173,030 159,360
Balance + 359,184 + 375,300 + 345,310 + 89,045 + 93,118 + 99,226 + 32,210 + 9,807 + 23,886
2 Services
Receipts 771,662 784,711 847,793 208,334 225,109 223,223 80,670 65,787 62,424
Expenditure 708,219 745,202 753,136 188,706 188,871 195,987 68,969 60,748 55,954
Balance + 63,444 + 39,509 + 94,656 + 19,628 + 36,237 + 27,235 + 11,701 + 5,038 + 6,470
3 Primary income
Receipts 654,888 637,064 664,841 169,916 162,745 177,627 73,059 46,670 45,757
Expenditure 598,912 524,924 573,098 179,510 130,711 138,488 56,640 37,281 37,618
Balance + 55,975 + 112,142 + 91,743 − 9,594 + 32,034 + 39,139 + 16,419 + 9,389 + 8,139
4 Secondary income
Receipts 112,149 105,041 108,220 29,340 25,554 29,039 12,561 7,359 7,595
Expenditure 250,950 243,952 252,374 64,980 58,647 61,428 22,647 18,996 23,355
Balance − 138,799 − 138,910 − 144,153 − 35,640 − 33,094 − 32,388 − 10,086 − 11,636 − 15,761
Capital account − 11,548 + 1,035 − 20,096 − 11,005 − 1,240 + 2,361 + 1,255 + 1,061 + 481B
Financial account (Increase: +) + 267,248 + 347,103 + 429,146 + 76,884 + 126,863 + 178,995 + 88,817 + 14,940 + 14,586C
1 Direct investment + 248,833 + 169,006 + 50,839 + 16,923 − 6,769 + 50,833 + 13,583 + 26,199 + 4,860
By resident units abroad +1,075,532 + 425,381 + 135,522 + 32,419 − 153,105 + 74,415 − 12,775 + 37,357 + 29,822
By non-resident units in the euro area + 826,697 + 256,376 + 84,686 + 15,496 − 146,335 + 23,583 − 26,357 + 11,159 + 24,962
2 Portfolio investment + 71,869 + 499,308 + 328,193 + 21,443 + 134,426 + 75,223 + 13,028 + 21,196 + 42,301
By resident units abroad + 386,724 + 394,649 + 638,227 + 171,964 + 188,234 + 102,270 + 9,710 + 87,882 + 26,550
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 11,280 + 21,350 + 176,556 + 57,596 + 57,759 + 37,279 − 10,736 + 51,091 − 521
Long-term debt securities + 367,161 + 365,565 + 396,703 + 127,353 + 112,099 + 55,236 − 2,188 + 40,590 + 19,597
Short-term debt securities + 8,281 + 7,735 + 64,968 − 12,985 + 18,375 + 9,755 + 22,634 − 3,799 + 7,473
By non-resident units in the euro area + 314,853 − 104,655 + 310,035 + 150,522 + 53,807 + 27,047 − 3,318 + 66,686 − 15,751
Equity and
Investment fund shares + 207,409 + 98,539 + 476,418 + 171,052 + 101,989 + 129,642 + 53,551 + 27,818 − 8,066
Long-term debt securities + 141,691 − 258,262 − 164,362 − 21,965 − 48,190 − 53,283 − 33,899 + 21,493 − 13,660
Short-term debt securities − 34,248 + 55,067 − 2,023 + 1,433 + 7 − 49,311 − 22,970 + 17,375 + 5,975
3 Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 87,029 + 17,694 + 18,573 − 548 − 10,321 + 5,987 + 3,099 + 641 + 3
4 Other investment − 151,157 − 354,604 + 32,859 + 40,513 + 8,983 + 45,086 + 60,730 − 35,378 − 32,457
Eurosystem − 25,393 − 151,292 − 172,184 − 8,922 − 10,057 − 123,423 − 159,993 + 106,330 − 28,536
General government + 18,920 + 9,063 + 17,312 − 4,219 − 4,400 + 23,745 + 21,368 + 5,838 − 4,003
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 123,682 − 149,026 + 124,452 + 19,829 + 20,687 + 107,027 + 189,472 − 133,594 + 10,260
Enterprises and households − 21,004 − 63,350 + 63,276 + 33,825 + 2,753 + 37,737 + 9,883 − 13,952 − 10,177
5 Reserve assets + 10,671 + 15,700 − 1,315 − 1,445 + 544 + 1,866 − 1,624 + 2,282 − 121
Net errors and omissions − 61,007 − 41,975 + 61,685 + 24,450 − 192 + 43,421 + 37,318 + 1,282 − 8,629D
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the Balance of Payments  
Manual in the 6th edition of the International Monetary Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
May 2018
XII External sector
 
2 Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: + / net borrowing: -)
Goods (fob/fob)  1 
of which
Supple-mentary Balance of of which Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  
2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2003 + 31,347 + 130,021 − 2,105 − 48,708 − 18,920 − 31,047 + 5,920 + 47,559 − 445 + 10,292
2004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,7482005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,9602006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,5112007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,130
2008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,088
2009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,6832010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,3512011 + 165,078 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 31,574 + 68,235 − 35,010 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 44,6392012 + 193,590 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 64,858 − 38,894 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 41,759
2013 + 190,092 + 212,662 − 3,663 − 41,376 + 62,444 − 43,639 − 563 + 225,360 + 838 + 35,831
2014 + 218,959 + 228,185 − 5,741 − 24,491 + 56,549 − 41,283 + 2,936 + 240,116 − 2,564 + 18,2212015 + 271,394 + 261,135 − 2,565 − 16,918 + 67,222 − 40,044 + 534 + 239,418 − 2,213 − 32,5112016 + 268,811 + 267,999 − 1,845 − 19,948 + 60,639 − 39,879 + 3,468 + 257,693 + 1,686 − 14,5862017 + 262,475 + 265,361 + 1,256 − 16,124 + 67,357 − 54,120 − 254 + 275,748 − 1,269 + 13,527
2015         Q2 + 60,960 + 68,693 − 1,742 − 2,547 + 825 − 6,011 + 1,407 + 70,734 − 465 + 8,366
         Q3 + 71,126 + 67,467 + 1,030 − 10,243 + 20,490 − 6,587 + 778 + 68,865 − 1,455 − 3,039         Q4 + 78,169 + 64,632 − 435 − 2,394 + 26,238 − 10,307 − 2,004 + 68,701 − 272 − 7,464
2016         Q1 + 66,588 + 63,353 + 566 − 3,043 + 19,599 − 13,320 − 205 + 40,617 + 1,228 − 25,766
         Q2 + 69,819 + 76,770 − 54 − 3,707 + 125 − 3,370 + 1,009 + 62,621 + 761 − 8,207         Q3 + 61,051 + 66,795 − 346 − 11,309 + 16,175 − 10,610 + 307 + 59,558 − 261 − 1,801         Q4 + 71,353 + 61,082 − 2,012 − 1,889 + 24,740 − 12,579 + 2,356 + 94,897 − 43 + 21,188
2017         Q1 + 67,955 + 65,985 + 2,402 − 2,545 + 21,296 − 16,781 + 616 + 67,316 − 360 − 1,255
         Q2 + 55,068 + 67,141 − 187 − 3,290 + 3,058 − 11,841 − 727 + 72,061 + 385 + 17,721         Q3 + 64,201 + 68,051 − 113 − 10,737 + 17,922 − 11,035 + 904 + 54,979 + 152 − 10,125         Q4 + 75,251 + 64,184 − 846 + 448 + 25,082 − 14,463 − 1,047 + 81,392 − 1,446 + 7,187
2018         Q1  
p + 71,072 + 66,103 − 895 − 733 + 19,916 − 14,214 + 113 + 60,430 + 699 − 10,755
2015         Oct + 23,432 + 23,888 + 154 − 4,576 + 7,177 − 3,058 − 57 + 23,304 + 154 − 71
         Nov + 26,547 + 22,480 − 11 − 555 + 7,448 − 2,826 + 214 + 22,559 − 548 − 4,203         Dec + 28,190 + 18,264 − 578 + 2,736 + 11,613 − 4,423 − 2,161 + 22,839 + 123 − 3,190
2016         Jan + 15,865 + 14,208 + 71 − 1,413 + 5,307 − 2,238 − 19 − 1,987 − 186 − 17,833
         Feb + 20,854 + 21,911 + 619 − 84 + 6,519 − 7,491 + 545 + 21,103 + 1,478 − 296         Mar + 29,869 + 27,234 − 124 − 1,546 + 7,772 − 3,591 − 731 + 21,501 − 64 − 7,638
         Apr + 28,952 + 27,797 − 179 − 661 + 3,533 − 1,718 + 1,303 + 26,217 + 696 − 4,039
         May + 17,745 + 23,050 + 409 − 838 − 3,921 − 546 + 277 + 14,290 + 776 − 3,733         June + 23,122 + 25,923 − 284 − 2,209 + 513 − 1,106 − 571 + 22,115 − 711 − 435
         July + 18,927 + 20,453 + 413 − 3,461 + 5,372 − 3,437 − 103 + 17,363 + 342 − 1,460
         Aug + 17,632 + 20,933 − 435 − 4,807 + 6,016 − 4,510 − 101 + 17,217 + 93 − 314         Sep + 24,492 + 25,409 − 324 − 3,042 + 4,788 − 2,662 + 511 + 24,977 − 695 − 26
         Oct + 19,777 + 20,598 + 294 − 3,425 + 6,117 − 3,513 − 117 + 28,457 − 145 + 8,797
         Nov + 25,394 + 23,647 − 347 − 255 + 6,949 − 4,948 − 69 + 22,295 + 140 − 3,031         Dec + 26,182 + 16,837 − 1,959 + 1,790 + 11,675 − 4,119 + 2,541 + 44,145 − 38 + 15,422
2017         Jan + 11,873 + 15,705 + 171 − 989 + 6,851 − 9,693 − 145 + 7,119 − 124 − 4,610
         Feb + 23,363 + 22,275 + 1,022 − 559 + 6,280 − 4,634 + 291 + 14,387 − 216 − 9,267         Mar + 32,718 + 28,004 + 1,209 − 997 + 8,165 − 2,453 + 470 + 45,810 − 21 + 12,621
         Apr + 16,680 + 19,682 + 21 − 518 + 5,852 − 8,336 − 321 + 21,216 − 2 + 4,858
         May + 15,378 + 22,995 − 968 − 1,449 − 5,295 − 872 + 85 + 11,773 − 47 − 3,690         June + 23,010 + 24,464 + 760 − 1,323 + 2,501 − 2,632 − 491 + 39,072 + 434 + 16,553
         July + 19,191 + 21,046 + 679 − 3,594 + 6,159 − 4,420 + 525 + 14,479 + 463 − 5,237
         Aug + 18,475 + 21,530 − 765 − 4,737 + 5,158 − 3,476 + 174 + 8,062 − 912 − 10,588         Sep + 26,535 + 25,475 − 27 − 2,407 + 6,605 − 3,139 + 204 + 32,438 + 602 + 5,699
         Oct + 19,638 + 20,764 + 393 − 3,429 + 6,527 − 4,224 − 206 + 14,393 + 1,176 − 5,040
         Nov + 26,880 + 25,047 − 587 + 225 + 6,868 − 5,260 − 536 + 28,218 − 270 + 1,875         Dec + 28,733 + 18,373 − 652 + 3,652 + 11,687 − 4,979 − 305 + 38,781 − 2,353 + 10,352
2018         Jan + 20,332 + 18,332 − 1,171 − 549 + 7,601 − 5,052 + 489 + 26,034 − 121 + 5,212
         Feb + 21,665 + 20,926 + 351 + 710 + 5,419 − 5,390 + 19 + 18,057 + 583 − 3,627         Mar  
p + 29,075 + 26,845 − 74 − 894 + 6,896 − 3,772 − 395 + 16,340 + 236 − 12,340
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions, resulting from the difference between the balance on the fina ncial
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. account and the balances on the current account and the capital  account. 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
May 2018
 XII External sector
 
 3 Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
 by country and group of countries *
 
 € million
 2017  2018
Group of countries/country  2015  2016  2017 Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,193,555 1,203,833 1,278,935 108,005 116,330 100,539 107,112 104,755 116,060
Imports 949,245 954,917 1,034,490 89,195 92,774 82,500 89,807 86,272 90,873Balance + 244,310 + 248,916 + 244,444 + 18,809 + 23,556 + 18,039 + 17,305 + 18,483 + 25,187
I Exports 803,425 818,644 872,443 74,971 79,262 66,546 74,734 73,342 ...European countries
Imports 653,782 657,753 707,878 61,446 63,947 56,834 60,077 60,012 ...Balance + 149,643 + 160,891 + 164,566 + 13,525 + 15,315 + 9,712 + 14,657 + 13,330 ...
Exports 692,493 705,548 749,696 64,550 67,871 57,806 64,906 63,262 ... 1 EU member states (28)
Imports 543,334 551,344 590,537 51,640 53,350 47,203 49,719 49,880 ...Balance + 149,159 + 154,204 + 159,159 + 12,910 + 14,521 + 10,603 + 15,188 + 13,382 ...
Euro-area (19) Exports 434,075 441,092 471,672 40,503 43,039 36,928 41,142 40,203 ...
countries Imports 356,643 358,848 381,556 33,289 34,155 30,825 32,198 32,559 ...
Balance + 77,432 + 82,244 + 90,116 + 7,214 + 8,884 + 6,104 + 8,944 + 7,644 ...
of which
Austria Exports 58,217 59,778 62,823 5,495 5,807 4,785 5,214 5,134 ...
Imports 37,250 38,543 41,152 3,553 3,685 3,193 3,379 3,479 ...Balance + 20,967 + 21,235 + 21,671 + 1,942 + 2,121 + 1,592 + 1,835 + 1,655 ...
Belgium and Exports 46,196 46,931 50,064 4,126 4,454 3,879 4,235 4,254 ...
Luxembourg Imports 40,116 40,960 44,084 3,656 3,870 3,315 4,244 3,724 ...
Balance + 6,079 + 5,971 + 5,980 + 470 + 584 + 564 − 9 + 530 ...
France Exports 102,762 101,106 105,256 8,953 9,659 7,919 9,257 8,424 ...
Imports 66,819 65,651 64,126 5,947 5,687 4,935 5,113 5,347 ...Balance + 35,943 + 35,454 + 41,131 + 3,006 + 3,971 + 2,984 + 4,144 + 3,077 ...
Italy Exports 57,987 61,265 65,474 5,666 6,062 5,043 5,805 5,802 ...
Imports 49,038 51,737 55,904 4,968 4,988 4,625 4,662 4,952 ...Balance + 8,949 + 9,528 + 9,570 + 697 + 1,074 + 418 + 1,142 + 850 ...
Netherlands Exports 79,191 78,433 85,771 7,459 7,581 7,386 7,577 7,562 ...
Imports 87,889 83,142 91,265 7,845 8,245 7,932 8,029 8,101 ...Balance − 8,697 − 4,709 − 5,494 − 386 − 664 − 547 − 452 − 539 ...
Spain Exports 38,715 40,497 43,058 3,630 4,029 3,165 3,817 3,713 ...
Imports 26,442 27,870 31,649 2,656 2,899 2,534 2,652 2,661 ...Balance + 12,273 + 12,627 + 11,408 + 974 + 1,130 + 631 + 1,165 + 1,052 ...
Other EU member Exports 258,417 264,456 278,024 24,047 24,832 20,877 23,764 23,059 ...
states Imports 186,691 192,496 208,981 18,351 19,195 16,378 17,520 17,320 ...
Balance + 71,727 + 71,960 + 69,042 + 5,696 + 5,637 + 4,499 + 6,244 + 5,739 ...
of which
United Exports 89,018 85,939 84,374 7,004 7,310 5,944 7,147 6,932 ...Kingdom Imports 38,414 35,654 37,075 3,243 3,255 2,855 2,968 2,811 ...
Balance + 50,604 + 50,285 + 47,299 + 3,761 + 4,056 + 3,089 + 4,179 + 4,121 ...
Exports 110,932 113,096 122,748 10,421 11,391 8,741 9,828 10,080 ... 2 Other European
Imports 110,448 106,409 117,341 9,806 10,597 9,632 10,359 10,132 ... countries
Balance + 484 + 6,687 + 5,407 + 616 + 794 − 891 − 531 − 53 ...
of which
Switzerland Exports 49,070 50,161 53,988 4,565 4,942 3,744 4,549 4,360 ...
Imports 42,089 43,896 45,760 3,556 4,206 3,384 3,659 3,686 ...Balance + 6,981 + 6,265 + 8,228 + 1,009 + 737 + 360 + 890 + 674 ...
II Exports 387,398 382,486 403,419 32,763 36,815 33,829 32,137 31,162 ...Non-European
Imports 295,461 297,164 326,591 27,750 28,826 25,645 29,556 26,088 ... countries
Balance + 91,936 + 85,322 + 76,828 + 5,014 + 7,990 + 8,184 + 2,581 + 5,074 ...
Exports 23,897 24,434 25,561 2,179 1,890 1,780 1,712 1,693 ... 1 Africa
Imports 18,307 16,675 20,388 1,733 1,804 1,700 1,713 1,651 ...Balance + 5,590 + 7,759 + 5,173 + 446 + 86 + 80 − 1 + 41 ...
Exports 156,982 147,542 154,343 12,640 14,106 12,555 12,092 12,229 ... 2 America
Imports 85,582 83,499 89,394 7,495 8,031 7,091 7,371 7,122 ...Balance + 71,400 + 64,043 + 64,949 + 5,145 + 6,075 + 5,464 + 4,720 + 5,107 ...
of which
Exports 113,733 106,822 111,511 9,173 10,340 9,045 8,585 8,663 ... United States
Imports 60,217 57,968 61,114 5,131 5,401 4,787 5,139 4,933 ...Balance + 53,516 + 48,855 + 50,397 + 4,042 + 4,939 + 4,259 + 3,446 + 3,730 ...
Exports 196,297 200,158 212,184 17,001 19,736 18,496 17,122 16,266 ... 3 Asia
Imports 188,621 193,979 212,953 18,269 18,714 16,638 20,188 17,021 ...Balance + 7,676 + 6,179 − 769 − 1,268 + 1,021 + 1,857 − 3,066 − 755 ...
of which
Middle East Exports 39,518 36,659 33,169 2,500 3,186 2,792 2,082 2,290 ...
Imports 7,330 6,581 6,950 489 680 516 609 592 ...Balance + 32,188 + 30,079 + 26,218 + 2,011 + 2,506 + 2,276 + 1,473 + 1,698 ...
Japan Exports 16,968 18,307 19,530 1,558 1,651 1,605 1,608 1,530 ...
Imports 20,180 21,922 22,881 1,887 1,960 1,698 2,084 1,874 ...Balance − 3,213 − 3,615 − 3,350 − 328 − 309 − 94 − 477 − 343 ...
Exports 71,284 76,046 86,184 7,032 8,064 7,739 7,330 6,924 ... People‘s Republic
Imports 91,930 94,172 100,573 8,825 9,488 8,155 10,054 7,722 ... of China  
2 
Balance − 20,646 − 18,126 − 14,389 − 1,793 − 1,423 − 416 − 2,724 − 799 ...
Exports 51,510 51,921 53,435 4,438 4,705 4,327 4,585 4,034 ... New industrial countries
Imports 42,478 42,966 50,865 4,486 3,915 3,866 4,457 4,009 ... and emerging markets
Balance + 9,032 + 8,955 + 2,570 − 48 + 791 + 461 + 128 + 25 ... of Asia  3 
Exports 10,221 10,352 11,331 943 1,083 999 1,211 974 ... 4 Oceania and
Imports 2,951 3,011 3,855 253 276 216 284 293 ... polar regions
Balance + 7,271 + 7,341 + 7,475 + 690 + 807 + 782 + 927 + 681 ...
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (fob) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(cif) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Kore a, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
May 2018
XII External sector
 
4 Services and Primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
  
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  
2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2013 − 41,376 − 9,881 − 37,713 + 8,056 + 3,656 − 870 − 5,518 + 3,073 + 541 + 60,681 + 1,223
2014 − 24,491 − 6,902 − 37,653 + 7,002 + 3,549 + 2,666 − 702 + 2,971 + 1,184 + 54,473 + 8912015 − 16,918 − 5,258 − 36,595 + 9,583 + 4,831 + 4,052 − 2,483 + 3,160 + 1,521 + 66,048 − 3472016 − 19,948 − 6,185 − 38,247 + 9,856 + 6,203 + 3,224 − 3,004 + 3,094 + 750 + 60,943 − 1,0542017 − 16,124 − 4,047 − 38,832 + 10,683 + 6,494 + 3,252 − 1,686 + 2,092 − 36 + 68,622 − 1,229
2016         Q3 − 11,309 − 1,449 − 15,946 + 2,038 + 1,554 + 523 − 25 + 828 − 469 + 17,826 − 1,182
         Q4 − 1,889 − 1,888 − 7,385 + 3,241 + 2,366 + 1,236 − 1,605 + 596 + 307 + 21,418 + 3,015
2017         Q1 − 2,545 − 1,257 − 5,956 + 2,207 + 1,029 + 377 − 855 + 551 + 589 + 21,868 − 1,162
         Q2 − 3,290 − 407 − 9,179 + 2,655 + 1,538 + 893 − 608 + 625 − 203 + 5,303 − 2,042         Q3 − 10,737 − 1,134 − 16,110 + 2,746 + 1,433 + 512 + 53 + 545 − 620 + 19,690 − 1,148         Q4 + 448 − 1,249 − 7,587 + 3,076 + 2,494 + 1,470 − 277 + 370 + 197 + 21,761 + 3,123
2018         Q1  
p − 733 − 804 − 6,238 + 2,637 + 1,073 + 850 − 326 + 658 + 562 + 20,188 − 834
2017         May − 1,449 − 144 − 3,049 + 958 + 261 + 225 − 393 + 238 − 67 − 3,572 − 1,657
         June − 1,323 − 154 − 4,371 + 789 + 587 + 1,058 + 172 + 139 − 59 + 2,501 + 58
         July − 3,594 − 214 − 4,879 + 892 + 730 − 106 − 576 + 172 − 219 + 6,747 − 369
         Aug − 4,737 − 473 − 6,429 + 1,193 + 435 + 70 − 224 + 244 − 203 + 5,773 − 412         Sep − 2,407 − 447 − 4,801 + 661 + 268 + 548 + 853 + 129 − 199 + 7,170 − 366
         Oct − 3,429 − 453 − 5,365 + 775 + 1,240 − 5 − 272 + 231 + 52 + 6,979 − 504
         Nov + 225 − 400 − 1,641 + 1,353 + 586 + 162 − 367 + 174 + 57 + 7,151 − 340         Dec + 3,652 − 396 − 582 + 948 + 668 + 1,312 + 362 − 35 + 88 + 7,632 + 3,968
2018         Jan − 549 − 301 − 1,649 + 842 + 161 − 365 − 48 + 191 + 188 + 7,806 − 393
         Feb + 710 − 249 − 1,577 + 693 + 762 + 675 − 162 + 218 + 208 + 5,446 − 235         Mar  
p − 894 − 254 − 3,012 + 1,102 + 150 + 539 − 115 + 249 + 165 + 6,937 − 206
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001, the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5 Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6 Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which of which
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which resident and Non-produced
international nonresident Workers’ Capital income, wealth non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2013 − 43,639 − 28,923 − 4,733 + 6,174 − 14,715 − 3,250 − 3,229 − 563 + 1,105 − 1,668
2014 − 41,283 − 28,146 − 6,419 + 8,105 − 13,137 − 3,477 − 3,451 + 2,936 + 2,841 + 952015 − 40,044 − 23,965 − 6,805 + 10,638 − 16,079 − 3,540 − 3,523 + 534 + 2,366 − 1,8322016 − 39,879 − 24,870 − 11,523 + 10,994 − 15,009 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 3,468 + 3,372 + 962017 − 54,120 − 23,689 − 11,496 + 10,584 − 30,431 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 254 + 3,021 − 3,275
2016         Q3 − 10,610 − 6,813 − 2,583 + 1,782 − 3,797 − 1,053 − 1,049 + 307 + 887 − 579
         Q4 − 12,579 − 8,362 − 3,186 + 1,325 − 4,217 − 1,055 − 1,049 + 2,356 + 791 + 1,565
2017         Q1 − 16,781 − 7,604 − 2,995 + 1,796 − 9,176 − 1,158 − 1,153 + 616 + 734 − 118
         Q2 − 11,841 − 1,706 − 1,500 + 6,239 − 10,135 − 1,159 − 1,153 − 727 + 384 − 1,111         Q3 − 11,035 − 5,432 − 1,557 + 1,755 − 5,603 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 904 + 1,531 − 627         Q4 − 14,463 − 8,946 − 5,444 + 794 − 5,517 − 1,159 − 1,153 − 1,047 + 372 − 1,419
2018         Q1  
p − 14,214 − 9,355 − 2,233 + 1,655 − 4,860 − 1,291 − 1,286 + 113 − 533 + 646
2017         May − 872 + 895 − 199 + 3,236 − 1,768 − 387 − 384 + 85 + 202 − 117
         June − 2,632 − 805 − 878 + 2,178 − 1,827 − 387 − 384 − 491 + 250 − 741
         July − 4,420 − 2,562 − 933 + 492 − 1,859 − 386 − 384 + 525 + 703 − 178
         Aug − 3,476 − 1,441 − 395 + 465 − 2,035 − 386 − 384 + 174 + 334 − 160         Sep − 3,139 − 1,430 − 229 + 799 − 1,709 − 386 − 384 + 204 + 494 − 290
         Oct − 4,224 − 2,939 − 1,036 + 108 − 1,285 − 387 − 384 − 206 − 6 − 200
         Nov − 5,260 − 2,807 − 1,685 + 70 − 2,453 − 386 − 384 − 536 + 78 − 614         Dec − 4,979 − 3,201 − 2,723 + 615 − 1,778 − 386 − 384 − 305 + 300 − 605
2018         Jan − 5,052 − 3,518 − 1,332 + 230 − 1,534 − 430 − 429 + 489 + 118 + 371
         Feb − 5,390 − 3,679 − 558 + 814 − 1,712 − 429 − 429 + 19 − 269 + 288         Mar  
p − 3,772 − 2,159 − 343 + 612 − 1,614 − 432 − 429 − 395 − 383 − 12
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
May 2018
XII External sector
 
7 Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2017 2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q3 Q4 Q1  p Jan Feb Mar  p
I Net domestic investment abroad
(Increase: +) + 270,235 + 397,043 + 358,805 + 56,779 + 32,754 + 160,205 + 65,665 + 66,535 + 28,006
1 Direct investment + 116,141 + 82,985 + 111,797 + 20,572 + 27,372 + 39,910 + 7,791 + 15,788 + 16,331
Equity + 75,292 + 70,623 + 71,205 + 16,953 + 22,786 + 32,766 + 8,372 + 16,373 + 8,022
of whichReinvestment of earnings  
1 + 16,804 + 10,867 + 23,779 + 8,291 + 3,009 + 12,048 + 2,748 + 5,101 + 4,198
Debt instruments + 40,849 + 12,362 + 40,592 + 3,620 + 4,585 + 7,144 − 581 − 585 + 8,310
2 Portfolio investment + 124,062 + 98,236 + 105,157 + 30,407 + 23,329 + 42,448 + 33,149 + 3,128 + 6,171
Shares  2 + 19,692 + 17,254 + 14,042 + 5,116 + 5,695 + 8,227 + 6,247 + 3,954 − 1,974
Investment fund shares  3 + 35,750 + 36,142 + 47,747 + 10,718 + 14,687 + 8,633 + 9,771 − 1,199 + 62
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 74,342 + 51,037 + 47,101 + 15,231 + 7,636 + 25,581 + 14,594 + 1,100 + 9,887
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 5,723 − 6,196 − 3,733 − 658 − 4,689 + 7 + 2,537 − 727 − 1,803
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 26,026 + 32,535 + 8,937 + 2,064 + 4,038 + 1,107 − 450 + 2,343 − 786
4. Other investment  7 + 6,219 + 181,602 + 134,183 + 3,584 − 20,539 + 76,041 + 25,295 + 44,693 + 6,053
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 90,288 + 18,627 − 21,008 − 16,029 − 50,588 + 41,059 + 42,030 + 12,458 − 13,429
Long-term − 2,804 + 44,980 + 19,619 − 1,400 + 5,438 − 1,408 − 1,342 + 241 − 307Short-term − 87,484 − 26,353 − 40,627 − 14,629 − 56,026 + 42,467 + 43,372 + 12,217 − 13,122
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 14,618 − 6,248 + 3,708 + 3,174 − 267 + 20,837 + 7,876 + 3,640 + 9,321
Long-term + 19,127 + 1,725 − 3,372 − 818 − 1,290 + 1,946 + 567 + 199 + 1,180Short-term − 33,744 − 7,974 + 7,080 + 3,991 + 1,023 + 18,891 + 7,308 + 3,441 + 8,141
General government − 12,239 − 1,268 − 5,154 − 2,690 + 991 + 563 + 2,629 − 3,155 + 1,088
Long-term − 7,591 − 7,595 − 3,730 − 425 − 489 − 248 + 112 − 70 − 291Short-term − 4,648 + 6,327 − 1,424 − 2,265 + 1,480 + 811 + 2,517 − 3,085 + 1,379
Bundesbank + 123,364 + 170,491 + 156,637 + 19,129 + 29,324 + 13,583 − 27,240 + 31,750 + 9,072
5. Reserve assets − 2,213 + 1,686 − 1,269 + 152 − 1,446 + 699 − 121 + 583 + 236
II Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(Increase: +) + 30,817 + 139,350 + 83,057 + 1,799 − 48,638 + 99,775 + 39,631 + 48,478 + 11,666
1 Direct investment + 48,606 + 51,816 + 69,548 + 21,377 + 12,040 + 20,169 + 3,592 + 11,775 + 4,802
Equity + 10,567 + 11,894 + 24,077 + 6,047 + 10,118 + 3,533 + 53 + 1,957 + 1,523
of whichReinvestment of earnings  
1 − 1,524 + 3,935 + 9,216 + 3,331 + 2,107 + 2,671 + 346 + 1,553 + 772
Debt instruments + 38,039 + 39,921 + 45,471 + 15,330 + 1,922 + 16,636 + 3,539 + 9,817 + 3,280
2 Portfolio investment − 68,808 − 108,471 − 95,045 − 28,130 − 46,598 + 7,505 − 5,574 + 3,296 + 9,783
Shares  2) + 10,605 + 342 − 1,126 − 2,311 − 821 + 4,301 − 1,550 − 432 + 6,283
Investment fund shares  3 + 7,357 − 6,919 − 3,441 + 656 − 2,894 − 1,794 + 883 − 10 − 2,667
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 96,048 − 97,281 − 70,559 − 21,125 − 40,436 + 16,448 + 11,325 − 3,852 + 8,975
Short-termdebt securities  
5 + 9,278 − 4,613 − 19,919 − 5,349 − 2,447 − 11,450 − 16,233 + 7,590 − 2,807
3. Other investment  7 + 51,019 + 196,006 + 108,554 + 8,552 − 14,080 + 72,101 + 41,613 + 33,407 − 2,920
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 41,165 + 86,742 + 17,476 − 3,551 − 67,367 + 45,097 + 92,805 + 4,080 − 51,789
Long-term − 19,535 + 5,774 + 7,541 − 1,325 + 5,550 − 7,418 − 1,827 − 2,848 − 2,743Short-term − 21,630 + 80,968 + 9,935 − 2,226 − 72,917 + 52,515 + 94,632 + 6,929 − 49,046
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 18,920 + 3,716 + 17,557 + 6,933 + 16,752 + 4,551 − 4,637 + 2,737 + 6,451
Long-term + 23,006 + 8,579 + 3,339 + 3,252 − 328 + 1,977 + 1,807 + 664 − 494Short-term − 4,085 − 4,863 + 14,218 + 3,681 + 17,079 + 2,575 − 6,444 + 2,073 + 6,945
General government − 11,105 − 5,309 − 6,313 + 6,057 − 12,219 + 3,061 + 1,777 + 4,063 − 2,780
Long-term − 3,941 − 4,682 − 3,290 + 244 + 170 + 2 + 36 − 36 + 2Short-term − 7,164 − 626 − 3,023 + 5,813 − 12,389 + 3,059 + 1,741 + 4,099 − 2,781
Bundesbank + 84,369 + 110,857 + 79,834 − 886 + 48,754 + 19,392 − 48,333 + 22,527 + 45,198
III Net financial account
(Net lending: + / net borrowing: -) + 239,418 + 257,693 + 275,748 + 54,979 + 81,392 + 60,430 + 26,034 + 18,057 + 16,340
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012, 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
May 2018
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
  
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts positiondrawing within the Portfolio External- Gold and gold position in deposits and (col 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,6702003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,9212016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,7192017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 675,253 467,592
2015         Aug 781,286 162,917 110,012 14,934 5,164 32,807 573,712 561,284 44,657 440,941 340,345
         Sep 774,428 161,922 108,959 14,941 5,191 32,831 567,602 555,174 44,903 462,513 311,915
         Oct 786,694 166,664 112,836 15,126 5,199 33,503 575,246 562,818 44,784 468,506 318,187
         Nov 813,320 163,816 108,820 15,475 5,217 34,303 604,946 592,518 44,558 482,764 330,555         Dec 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016         Jan 807,971 164,656 111,126 15,055 5,197 33,278 599,427 587,000 43,888 473,104 334,867
         Feb 839,336 177,917 122,535 15,109 6,899 33,374 617,434 605,006 43,985 489,464 349,871         Mar 837,375 171,266 117,844 14,730 6,730 31,962 621,617 609,190 44,491 492,119 345,256
         Apr 856,266 175,738 121,562 14,793 6,759 32,623 638,201 625,774 42,327 495,580 360,687
         May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 501,620 383,267         June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 518,491 403,741
         July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 518,946 385,099
         Aug 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 525,347 393,345         Sep 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 549,909 407,951
         Oct 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 543,001 404,717
         Nov 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 552,565 438,543         Dec 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,719
2017         Jan 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 577,969 456,835
         Feb 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,255 451,639         Mar 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,579 451,460
         Apr 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 601,538 487,606
         May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 601,130 497,749         June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 623,941 474,939
         July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 614,300 478,469
         Aug 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 623,104 466,780         Sep 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 622,729 492,470
         Oct 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 605,438 480,477
         Nov 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 582,362 509,470         Dec 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 675,253 467,592
2018         Jan 1,114,634 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,525 882,043 53,165 622,756 491,878
         Feb 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 645,473 502,506         Mar 1,157,102 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 937,348 923,466 53,924 690,609 466,493
         Apr 1,137,942 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 916,858 902,364 54,115 646,502 491,440
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to the respektive country designation), since November 2000 also balances with
December 2000, the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- non-euro area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the issuers within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad.
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001, all end-of-month levels 4See Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p 22. 5Euro opening
are valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
May 2018
XII External sector
 
9 Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2014 835,476 280,176 555,301 365,738 189,562 174,764 14,798 963,495 154,960 808,534 639,186 169,348 102,535 66,8132015 875,758 264,291 611,467 415,697 195,770 181,271 14,499 1,018,333 152,109 866,224 681,923 184,301 112,677 71,6252016 870,375 243,728 626,646 416,534 210,112 195,934 14,179 1,045,869 131,535 914,333 717,688 196,646 124,059 72,5872017 879,462 216,300 663,162 438,824 224,338 210,673 13,666 1,073,004 136,001 937,003 738,896 198,107 129,693 68,413
2017         Oct 887,915 219,737 668,178 450,974 217,204 203,124 14,080 1,056,509 121,789 934,721 738,113 196,608 122,555 74,053
         Nov 895,596 225,367 670,229 448,628 221,601 207,354 14,247 1,071,330 127,385 943,945 746,594 197,351 124,782 72,569         Dec 879,462 216,300 663,162 438,824 224,338 210,673 13,666 1,073,004 136,001 937,003 738,896 198,107 129,693 68,413
2018         Jan 882,690 224,986 657,704 436,357 221,347 207,523 13,824 1,070,728 130,675 940,053 745,611 194,443 124,933 69,509
         Feb 887,933 224,648 663,285 439,284 224,001 210,115 13,886 1,085,830 129,196 956,634 759,351 197,283 127,076 70,207         Mar 904,877 228,806 676,071 441,249 234,822 220,994 13,828 1,095,801 132,897 962,904 758,030 204,874 134,627 70,248
Industrial countries 1
 
2014 735,152 275,277 459,876 330,740 129,136 116,037 13,099 872,950 153,807 719,142 598,249 120,894 85,432 35,4612015 767,018 260,389 506,629 373,705 132,924 119,877 13,047 918,524 147,252 771,272 644,228 127,044 91,130 35,9142016 754,210 239,866 514,344 374,776 139,568 126,889 12,679 943,314 127,540 815,774 682,238 133,536 96,378 37,1582017 761,078 212,247 548,830 396,409 152,422 140,229 12,193 969,214 129,153 840,060 701,848 138,212 104,583 33,629
2017         Oct 771,712 215,632 556,080 408,804 147,276 134,761 12,515 954,526 112,546 841,980 705,013 136,967 100,178 36,790
         Nov 780,165 221,397 558,768 406,516 152,252 139,657 12,594 968,879 118,802 850,077 710,547 139,530 103,354 36,176         Dec 761,078 212,247 548,830 396,409 152,422 140,229 12,193 969,214 129,153 840,060 701,848 138,212 104,583 33,629
2018         Jan 765,019 220,912 544,107 393,460 150,647 138,449 12,198 964,879 121,947 842,932 706,863 136,068 101,612 34,456
         Feb 768,227 220,485 547,742 395,684 152,058 139,792 12,266 981,205 122,026 859,179 721,624 137,555 102,859 34,696         Mar 783,049 224,714 558,335 397,969 160,366 148,160 12,206 983,254 121,587 861,667 719,087 142,580 108,182 34,398
EU member states 1
 
2014 618,804 260,133 358,671 266,920 91,752 81,141 10,611 727,491 139,209 588,282 504,292 83,989 56,842 27,1472015 630,450 242,362 388,088 293,629 94,459 83,964 10,495 751,636 136,375 615,261 530,824 84,437 58,686 25,7512016 611,322 221,947 389,375 292,074 97,300 87,283 10,017 767,040 117,466 649,573 561,444 88,129 61,234 26,8952017 605,152 192,336 412,815 305,890 106,925 97,037 9,889 796,346 112,898 683,448 587,325 96,123 71,906 24,217
2017         Oct 609,634 194,952 414,683 310,322 104,360 94,203 10,158 779,998 100,721 679,277 584,608 94,669 68,381 26,288
         Nov 619,085 200,916 418,169 310,296 107,873 97,628 10,245 790,066 103,019 687,047 589,805 97,242 71,016 26,226         Dec 605,152 192,336 412,815 305,890 106,925 97,037 9,889 796,346 112,898 683,448 587,325 96,123 71,906 24,217
2018         Jan 610,859 200,779 410,080 303,634 106,446 96,482 9,964 794,165 106,244 687,921 593,084 94,837 70,119 24,718
         Feb 614,860 199,991 414,868 306,053 108,815 98,868 9,947 807,915 106,471 701,444 603,847 97,597 72,647 24,949         Mar 623,007 204,048 418,959 305,493 113,466 103,516 9,950 810,676 108,307 702,369 602,651 99,718 74,804 24,914
of which:  Euro-area 2
 
2014 457,077 204,589 252,488 194,201 58,288 52,067 6,221 607,716 107,561 500,155 445,643 54,513 37,580 16,9332015 468,303 195,218 273,085 211,614 61,471 54,892 6,579 605,579 94,369 511,210 458,386 52,824 38,178 14,6462016 449,741 169,681 280,060 215,560 64,500 57,774 6,726 614,469 77,067 537,402 481,462 55,940 41,076 14,8642017 451,112 148,460 302,652 230,442 72,211 64,753 7,458 634,898 74,496 560,402 495,566 64,836 50,038 14,798
2017         Oct 449,504 150,417 299,087 230,136 68,952 61,349 7,603 630,901 65,760 565,141 502,337 62,804 47,417 15,386
         Nov 456,305 152,788 303,518 231,960 71,557 63,876 7,681 638,867 67,515 571,352 506,294 65,058 49,685 15,374         Dec 451,112 148,460 302,652 230,442 72,211 64,753 7,458 634,898 74,496 560,402 495,566 64,836 50,038 14,798
2018         Jan 451,513 155,370 296,143 225,480 70,664 63,141 7,522 634,999 68,044 566,956 505,298 61,658 46,464 15,194
         Feb 448,766 151,624 297,142 225,466 71,676 64,149 7,527 645,319 68,857 576,461 513,162 63,299 47,982 15,317         Mar 457,097 156,599 300,498 225,824 74,674 67,125 7,549 648,259 68,222 580,037 513,762 66,275 50,736 15,539
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2014 100,274 4,849 95,425 34,998 60,427 58,728 1,699 90,545 1,153 89,392 40,937 48,455 17,103 31,3522015 107,753 3,094 104,659 41,992 62,667 61,215 1,452 95,639 886 94,752 37,495 57,257 21,547 35,7112016 114,754 2,616 112,138 41,742 70,396 68,896 1,500 99,412 1,069 98,342 35,250 63,093 27,681 35,4122017 116,755 2,619 114,136 42,373 71,764 70,291 1,472 97,759 1,110 96,650 36,848 59,802 25,110 34,692
2017         Oct 114,564 2,695 111,869 42,126 69,743 68,178 1,565 93,578 1,136 92,441 32,900 59,541 22,340 37,201
         Nov 113,812 2,553 111,259 42,069 69,190 67,537 1,652 94,707 1,138 93,568 35,847 57,721 21,390 36,331         Dec 116,755 2,619 114,136 42,373 71,764 70,291 1,472 97,759 1,110 96,650 36,848 59,802 25,110 34,692
2018         Jan 115,931 2,539 113,391 42,830 70,561 68,935 1,626 97,894 1,091 96,803 38,548 58,256 23,291 34,965
         Feb 117,914 2,632 115,282 43,473 71,809 70,190 1,620 98,249 1,082 97,167 37,527 59,640 24,186 35,454         Mar 119,966 2,509 117,457 43,153 74,304 72,682 1,622 102,080 1,138 100,942 38,743 62,199 26,415 35,783
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
May 2018
XII External sector
 
10 ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
  
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2006 1.6668 1.4237 10.0096 7.4591 146.02 8.0472 9.2544 1.5729 0.68173 1.2556
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.37052008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.10692017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2017         Jan 1.4252 1.4032 7.3189 7.4355 122.14 8.9990 9.5110 1.0714 0.86100 1.0614
         Feb 1.3886 1.3942 7.3143 7.4348 120.17 8.8603 9.4762 1.0660 0.85273 1.0643         Mar 1.4018 1.4306 7.3692 7.4356 120.68 9.0919 9.5279 1.0706 0.86560 1.0685
         Apr 1.4241 1.4408 7.3892 7.4376 118.29 9.1993 9.5941 1.0727 0.84824 1.0723
         May 1.4878 1.5041 7.6130 7.4400 124.09 9.4001 9.7097 1.0904 0.85554 1.1058         June 1.4861 1.4941 7.6459 7.4376 124.58 9.4992 9.7538 1.0874 0.87724 1.1229
         July 1.4772 1.4641 7.7965 7.4366 129.48 9.3988 9.5892 1.1059 0.88617 1.1511
         Aug 1.4919 1.4889 7.8760 7.4379 129.70 9.3201 9.5485 1.1398 0.91121 1.1807         Sep 1.4946 1.4639 7.8257 7.4401 131.92 9.3275 9.5334 1.1470 0.89470 1.1915
         Oct 1.5099 1.4801 7.7890 7.4429 132.76 9.3976 9.6138 1.1546 0.89071 1.1756
         Nov 1.5395 1.4978 7.7723 7.4420 132.39 9.6082 9.8479 1.1640 0.88795 1.1738         Dec 1.5486 1.5108 7.8073 7.4433 133.64 9.8412 9.9370 1.1689 0.88265 1.1836
2018         Jan 1.5340 1.5167 7.8398 7.4455 135.25 9.6464 9.8200 1.1723 0.88331 1.2200
         Feb 1.5684 1.5526 7.8068 7.4457 133.29 9.6712 9.9384 1.1542 0.88396 1.2348         Mar 1.5889 1.5943 7.7982 7.4490 130.86 9.5848 10.1608 1.1685 0.88287 1.2336
         Apr 1.5972 1.5622 7.7347 7.4479 132.16 9.6202 10.3717 1.1890 0.87212 1.2276
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    rates, see Statistical Supplement 5, Exchange rate statistics.    
11 Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of European Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.12602011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.64662014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.7028042015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
May 2018
XII  External sector
 
12  Effective exchange rates of the Euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
1999 Q1=100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the Euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  5 
In real terms In real terms
of which based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selectedconsumer domestic national consumer Euro
 area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 56 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.1 95.9 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.1 85.3 88.0 85.9 91.8 97.3 85.2 90.8 93.0 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.5 86.0 90.6 86.9 91.6 96.4 86.0 90.1 93.0 91.4 90.82002 90.1 90.2 89.5 89.3 95.2 90.5 92.2 95.4 88.4 90.6 93.5 91.9 91.72003 100.7 101.2 100.4 100.4 107.1 101.4 95.5 94.5 97.4 94.7 97.0 96.5 96.72004 104.6 104.9 103.1 103.7 111.7 105.0 95.8 93.2 99.8 94.9 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.4 100.9 101.7 109.6 102.4 94.6 91.9 98.9 92.8 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.3 100.1 100.4 109.6 101.7 93.3 90.3 98.2 91.0 98.5 96.4 95.82007 106.1 106.0 101.8 102.5 113.0 103.6 94.2 89.5 102.0 91.2 100.7 97.8 96.92008 109.3 108.1 103.1 105.7 117.1 105.5 94.3 88.0 105.1 90.2 102.1 97.7 97.02009 110.7 108.8 104.1 110.6 120.2 106.5 94.6 88.8 104.3 90.8 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.1 95.9 102.5 111.6 97.6 92.1 88.5 98.0 87.0 98.7 93.6 91.9
2011 103.3 100.1 93.7 101.0 112.3 97.0 91.7 88.3 97.3 86.2 98.1 92.7 91.32012 97.7 94.8 88.2 94.9 107.2 92.2 89.8 88.2 92.3 83.5 95.8 89.7 88.22013 101.0 97.7 90.9 97.5 111.8 95.0 92.1 88.7 97.6 85.4 98.1 91.4 90.12014 101.4 97.2 91.0 98.5 114.1 95.4 92.8 89.6 97.8 86.1 98.1 91.6 90.7
2015 91.7 87.6 82.8 88.4 105.7 87.0 90.0 90.5 89.2 82.5 94.1 86.4 85.8
2016 94.4 89.5 84.9
p 89.4 109.7 p 88.9 90.9 91.0 90.7 83.9 94.7 87.4 p 87.0
2017 96.6 91.4 85.9 p 90.1 112.0 p 90.0 92.1 91.2 93.5 84.7 96.0 88.6 p 87.8
2015         Apr 89.1 85.3 101.6 83.9 93.4 85.2 84.0
         May 91.0 87.0 81.5 87.1 103.9 85.7 89.6 90.4 88.3 81.9 94.0 86.2 85.1         June 91.7 87.7 105.2 86.7 94.1 86.4 85.6
         July 90.7 86.6 104.2 85.7 93.7 85.8 85.0
         Aug 92.4 88.0 83.2 88.4 107.1 88.0 90.1 90.5 89.5 82.7 94.3 86.7 86.4         Sep 93.2 88.9 108.7 89.2 94.5 87.1 87.1
         Oct 93.0 88.8 108.1 88.7 94.5 87.1 86.8
         Nov 90.5 86.3 83.2 88.0 105.0 86.0 90.2 90.8 89.4 82.8 93.5 85.8 85.3         Dec 91.9 87.5 107.1 87.5 93.7 86.2 85.9
2016         Jan 93.0 88.4 108.9
p 88.6 93.9 86.7 p 86.7
         Feb 94.2 89.3 84.7 p 89.1 110.3 p 89.5 90.8 91.1 90.3 83.8 94.4 87.2 p 87.1
         Mar 93.6 88.8 109.0 p 88.5 94.5 87.0 p 86.7
         Apr 94.4 89.5 109.8 p 89.0 94.9 87.6 p 87.1
         May 94.6 89.9 85.1 p 89.5 110.2 p 89.5 90.9 91.1 90.6 84.1 94.7 87.7 p 87.4
         June 94.4 89.7 109.8 p 89.1 94.5 87.5 p 87.1
         July 94.6 89.8 109.5 p 88.7 94.8 87.6 p 86.9
         Aug 94.9 90.0 85.3 p 89.6 110.0 p 89.0 91.1 91.0 91.1 84.1 95.0 87.6 p 87.0
         Sep 95.1 90.1 110.2 p 89.2 95.1 87.8 p 87.2
         Oct 95.1 90.3 110.0 p 89.0 95.4 87.9 p 87.1
         Nov 94.6 89.6 84.7 p 89.2 109.6 p 88.5 90.8 90.9 90.7 83.8 94.8 87.5 p 86.8
         Dec 93.7 88.9 108.6 p 87.8 94.7 87.3 p 86.5
2017         Jan 93.9 89.1 109.0 p 88.0 94.5 87.1 p 86.4
         Feb 93.4 88.9 83.5 p 88.2 108.1 p 87.4 90.5 90.8 90.0 83.2 94.5 87.1 p 86.2
         Mar 94.0 89.2 108.5 p 87.5 94.7 87.2 p 86.2
         Apr 93.7 89.0 108.2 p 87.2 94.5 87.1 p 86.0
         May 95.6 90.5 84.8 p 89.0 110.5 p 88.8 91.6 91.3 91.9 84.2 95.4 88.0 p 87.0
         June 96.3 91.2 111.4 p 89.6 95.9 88.5 p 87.6
         July 97.6 92.4 113.3 p 91.0 96.6 89.2 p 88.5
         Aug 99.0 93.6 87.7 p 91.7 115.0 p 92.3 93.1 91.4 95.9 85.8 97.2 89.8 p 89.2
         Sep 99.0 93.6 115.0 p 92.2 97.3 89.8 p 89.3
         Oct 98.6 93.1 114.8 p 91.9 97.1 89.5 p 89.0
         Nov 98.5 93.0 87.5 p 91.5 115.0 p 92.0 93.2 91.2 96.4 85.6 97.2 89.5 p 89.0
         Dec 98.8 93.3 115.3 p 92.1 97.5 89.8 p 89.3
2018         Jan 99.4 p 93.9 116.1 p 92.7 97.6 p 89.8 p 89.3
         Feb 99.6 p 93.9 ... ... 117.3 p 93.5 ... ... ... ... 97.7 p 89.9 p 89.5
         Mar 99.7 p 94.1 117.7 p 93.8 p 97.8 p 90.0 p 89.7
         Apr 99.5 p 93.8 117.9 p 93.9 p 97.8 p 89.8 p 89.7
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the lable, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German group EER-19 (see footnote 1) and additional Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, N ew Zealand,
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Tu rkey and
2001, pp  50-53, May 2007, pp  31-35 and August 2017, pp  41-43). For more Venezuela. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from 2001
detailed information on methodology see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyp rus and
(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral including Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, De nmark, Japan,
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Austra- Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the Unit ed States. 5Euro
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, area countries (see footnote 4) and countries belonging to the g roup EER-19. 6Euro
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United area countries and countries belonging to the group EER- 38 (see footnote 2). 
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai-

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2017 see the index attached 
to the January 2018 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
June 2017
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2017 and 2018 and 
an outlook for 2019
– Design and implementation of the European 
fiscal rules
July 2017
– The market for corporate bonds in the low- 
interest- rate  environment
– The development of government interest ex -
penditure in Germany and other euro area 
countries
– Return on private financial assets taking into 
account inflation and taxes– The danger posed to the global economy by 
protectionist  tendencies
– Changes to the MFI interest rate statistics
August 2017
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2017
– Monetary policy indicators at the lower 
bound based on term structure models
– Distributed ledger technologies in payments 
and securities settlement: potential and risks
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2016
– Changes to the investment funds statistics: 
scope enhancements, results and outlook
October 2017
– Global liquidity, foreign exchange reserves 
and exchange rates of emerging market 
economies
– The natural rate of interest
– The supervisory review and evaluation pro -
cess for smaller institutions and proportion -
ality considerations
– The Eurosystem’s new money market statis -
tical reporting – initial results for Germany
– The new ESCB insurance statistics – inte -
grated reporting flow and initial resultsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
85•

November 2017
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2017
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2018 and 2019 and 
an outlook for 2020
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2016
– Mark-ups of firms in selected European 
countries
– The Eurosystem’s financial market infrastruc -
ture – origin and future set- up
January 2018
– The impact of the internationalisation of 
German firms on domestic investment
– The importance of bank profitability and 
bank capital for monetary policy
– Developments in corporate financing in the 
euro area since the financial and economic 
crisis
– Finalising Basel III
February 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2018
– German balance of payments in 2017
– The demand for euro banknotes at the Bun -
desbank
– Contingent convertible bonds: design, regu -
lation, usefulness
April 2018
– Wage growth in Germany: assessment and 
determinants of recent developments
– Germany’s external position: new statistical 
approaches and results since the financial 
crisis 
– Current regulatory developments in the field 
of payments and in the settlement of secur -
ities and derivatives
– Maastricht debt: methodological principles, 
compilation and development  in Germany
May 2018
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20133
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
86•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20182, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification ,  
January 20182
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2011 to 
2016, May 20172
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2015, 
December 20162
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2013 bis 2014 , 
May 20172, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 20132
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20181, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
02/ 2018  
Mixed frequency models with MA components
03/ 2018  
On the cyclical properties of Hamilton‘s regres -
sion filter
04/ 2018  
Financial cycles in euro area economies: a cross- 
country perspective
05/ 2018  
Global liquidity and exchange market pressure 
in emerging market economies
06/ 2018  
Banks’ equity stakes and lending: evidence from 
a tax reform
07/2018  
How far can we forecast? Statistical tests of the 
predictive content
08/2018  
A comprehensive view on risk reporting: evi -
dence from supervisory data
09/2018  
Cheap talk? Financial sanctions and non-financial 
activity
10/2018  
A note on the predictive power of survey data 
in nowcasting euro area GDP
11/2018  
Fiscal regimes and the (non)stationarity of debt
12/2018  
Uncertainty about QE effects when an interest 
rate peg is anticipated
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since 
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
87•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2018  
88•

