Monthly Report
August 2019
Vol. 71  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 16 August 2019.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Progress in the convergence process of the central and eastern European EU Member 
States  .................................................................................................................................  16
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  23
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  24
Developments in the real portfolio returns of households in Germany  ................................  32
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  39
Noteworthy fluctuations in euro exchange rates following the ECB Governing Council’s 
monetary policy meeting in July 2019  .................................................................................  40
Economic conditions in Germany  .........................................................................  49
Dampening special effect in the HICP in July 2019  ..............................................................  57
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  62Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
5

Overview
Economic slowdown due  
to persistent weakness  
in industry
In the second quarter of 2019, the global econ -
omy probably expanded at a slightly slower 
pace than in the preceding quarter. The upturn 
decelerated distinctly in the advanced econ -
omies, in particular. A key reason was that one- 
off factors that had supported growth in the 
first quarter were no longer present. After a 
strong start to the year, the euro area economy 
returned to the weak growth path it had been 
charting previously. Economic growth also 
slowed in the United States, although final do -
mestic demand gained significant momentum. 
In the United Kingdom, real gross domestic 
product (GDP) even contracted. The rate of 
growth in the Chinese economy, which is high 
by international standards, fell slightly.
The pronounced weakness in world trade per -
sisted over the past few months. One reason 
that is frequently cited for this is the trade dis -
pute between the United States and China. Bi -
lateral trade flows did in fact shrink consider -
ably. Perhaps more significant, however, were 
flagging industrial activity and investment even 
in countries not directly affected by the con -
flict. Despite the persistent slowdown in indus -
try, survey results show that business activity in 
the services sector remained relatively robust. 
This is supporting employment growth and 
hence private consumption, as a key pillar of 
the economy. For the pace of global growth to 
pick up sustainably, however, industrial activity 
will need to recover.
Events on the international financial markets in 
the second and third quarters of 2019 were 
heavily shaped by the monetary policy of major 
central banks and more recently by the resur -
gence of the trade dispute between the United 
States and China. Above all, the Eurosystem’s 
communication of monetary policy, which is perceived to be accommodative, and the Fed -
eral Reserve System’s policy rate cut at the end 
of July played a part in falling capital market 
rates around the world. Added to this were 
concerns about a cooldown in world trade and 
global economic activity, which recently led to 
increased demand for government bonds, with 
yields on Federal bonds (Bunds) falling to his -
toric lows. No broad- based “flight to safety” 
was observed, however, as both the interest 
rate spread of euro area government bonds 
and the yield spreads of European corporate 
bonds over Bunds narrowed. On the stock mar -
kets, the intensified trade dispute led to signifi -
cant price falls at the beginning of August. 
These undid, in many places in full, the price 
gains previously recorded since the end of 
March. At the same time, uncertainty about fu -
ture stock market developments rose sharply. 
The indicators derived from the Bundesbank’s 
dividend discount model are not currently sig -
nalling an unusually low or high valuation level 
for either the S&P 500 or the EURO STOXX. On 
the foreign exchange markets, the pound ster -
ling depreciated distinctly against the backdrop 
of the government reshuffle in the United King -
dom and the attendant growing concerns 
about Brexit. The renminbi also became a focus 
for market monitors after temporarily dropping 
to a multi- year low against the US dollar. On a 
weighted average against the currencies of 19 
major trading partners, the euro gained around 
2%, however.
After its monetary policy meetings in June and 
July, the Governing Council of the ECB adjusted 
its forward guidance on key interest rates. The 
Governing Council now expects the key ECB 
interest rates to remain at their present or 
lower levels at least through the first half of 
2020, and in any case for as long as necessary 
to ensure the continued sustained convergence 
of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% 
over the medium term.Global eco -
nomic growth 
somewhat 
slower
World trade and 
global industrial 
activity still 
anaemic
Loosening of 
monetary policy 
and intensifica -
tion of trade 
 disputes shaping 
developments 
on the financial 
marketsMonetary 
 policy: forward 
guidance on key 
interest rates 
adjustedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
6

In addition, the Governing Council decided at 
its June meeting on the interest rate and other 
modalities of the new series of targeted longer- 
term refinancing operations (TLTRO III) an -
nounced in March. The interest rate for each 
operation will initially be set at a level of 10 
basis points above the average rate applied to 
the Eurosystem’s main refinancing operations 
over the life of the respective TLTRO, and where 
benchmark net lending is exceeded the rate 
can be as low as the average interest rate on 
the deposit facility plus 10 basis points.
The broad monetary aggregate M3 experi -
enced considerable inflows in the second quar -
ter as well, continuing its robust growth. Key 
drivers of growth remained loans to the do -
mestic private sector and inflows of funds from 
abroad as the attractiveness of investing in Ger -
many continues to grow for non-  residents. As 
yet, the slowdown in the euro area has not 
dampened credit growth in most countries, but 
according to the current Bank Lending Survey 
(BLS) credit standards and conditions in the 
euro area have been tightened overall in the 
reporting quarter.
Economic output in Germany contracted 
slightly in the second quarter of 2019. Accord -
ing to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash esti -
mate, real GDP was 0.1% down on the quarter 
after seasonal and calendar adjustment. The 
prior- year level was exceeded by 0.4% in 
calendar- adjusted terms. Thus, the underlying 
trend in economic output was still slightly posi -
tive overall in the past four quarters, but signifi -
cantly lower than the increase in potential out -
put. Several factors played a role in the second- 
quarter decline in GDP . First, the downturn in 
industry even intensified slightly on the back of 
decreased foreign demand. A contributing fac -
tor was that the date of Brexit in the United 
Kingdom, initially scheduled for the end of 
March, led to substantial stockpiling in the first 
quarter. Exports to the United Kingdom were 
therefore especially weak in the second quar -
ter. Second, one- off effects that had supported 
economic activity in the first quarter acted as a distinct brake on the still intact domestic ex -
pansionary forces in the second quarter. For in -
stance, construction output dropped off steeply 
after expanding strongly in the first quarter due 
to weather conditions. Meanwhile, demand for 
cars, pent up by delivery bottlenecks last year, 
was largely met in the first quarter and did not 
increase further in the reporting month. This 
curbed private consumption.
The slight decline in economic output in the 
second quarter was fairly broadly spread across 
sectors. Only the retail trade and a number of 
other service industries are likely to have pro -
vided positive momentum. By contrast, sales in 
the construction sector and in the restaurants 
and hotels industry decreased. Wholesale trade 
slid into the downturn afflicting industry. On 
the demand side, too, economic activity saw a 
broad- based weakening. Private consumption 
is not likely to have exceeded the level of the 
strong preceding quarter by much. Exports 
were down substantially. Against this back -
drop, and in light of declining capacity utilisa -
tion and the subdued outlook for manufactur -
ing, businesses probably held back on investing 
in new machinery and equipment. Construc -
tion investment also went into reverse. Govern -
ment consumption may have provided the only 
meaningful boost to economic activity. Aggre -
gate capacity utilisation is still above average, 
despite the decline in the past few quarters.
Although the German economy cooled, bank 
lending to the domestic non- bank sector was 
extremely dynamic in the reporting quarter. 
Among loans to the private sector, lending to 
domestic non-  financial corporations recorded 
the largest net inflows. However, lending to 
households, particularly loans for house pur -
chase, also made a significant contribution to 
the growth in German banks’ lending business. 
According to the bank managers surveyed for 
the BLS, demand rose primarily because finan -
cing needs for fixed capital formation increased 
in the corporate lending segment and borrow -
ers took advantage of the low general interest 
rate level in the loans to households for house Interest rate for 
TLTRO III decided
Robust under -
lying monetary 
dynamics
German econ -
omy contracted 
slightly in 
Q2 2019Economic activ -
ity weak across 
the board
German banks’ 
lending to 
domestic private 
sector lively 
againDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
7

purchase segment. At the same time, the re -
sults of the BLS indicated that lending policy in 
the former segment was made slightly restrict -
ive overall, while it was loosened somewhat in 
the latter segment.
The cyclical weakness present for a year at this 
point also left its mark on the German labour 
market in the second quarter. This was re -
flected by the fact that the rise in employment 
was considerably slower in the reporting period 
than in previous quarters. In particular, this ap -
plies to the number of employees subject to 
social security contributions, which had previ -
ously seen strong growth. In addition, un -
employment did not recede any further. How -
ever, this does not mean that labour market 
conditions are deteriorating, at least for now. 
On the contrary, the situation remains excep -
tionally favourable. The only difference is that it 
did not improve as before and that the outlook 
for the next few months has deteriorated fur -
ther.
In the second quarter, the increase in negoti -
ated wages was noticeably smaller than a 
quarter earlier. Including additional benefits, 
negotiated wages rose by 2.1% on the year in 
the second quarter of 2019, compared with 
2.9% in the first. At an annual growth rate of 
2.4%, the increase in negotiated rates of basic 
pay was likewise down compared with the first 
quarter (3.0%). However, this is unlikely to be a 
reflection of an economic slowdown. In fact, 
the slower pace of growth in negotiated pay 
rates can primarily be attributed to the second 
round of increases under old, long- running col -
lective wage agreements being lower (or even 
non- existent). At the time these agreements 
were concluded, the persistent economic 
downturn had not yet been foreseeable. More -
over, the second quarter included a number of 
months with no pay rise under newly reached 
pay agreements. As in previous quarters, actual 
earnings are likely to have slightly outpaced 
negotiated  wages in the second quarter.Consumer prices recorded a strong and broad- 
based rise in the second quarter. One- third of 
the seasonally adjusted increase in the Har -
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) of 
0.9% on the quarter was attributable to en -
ergy, which became considerably more expen -
sive due to temporarily higher crude oil prices. 
In addition, prices for food, beverages and to -
bacco went up substantially. This was mainly 
on account of tobacco. However, even exclud -
ing energy and food, the upward pressure on 
prices was substantial, especially for services. 
First, the prices for package holidays rose even 
more strongly than the late date of Easter 
might have suggested. Second, prices rose 
considerably in some parts of the services sec -
tor, e.g. maintenance and repair of dwellings 
or hairdressing. This is probably attributable, in 
part, to marked wage increases in these areas. 
The prices of non- energy industrial goods grew 
at a moderate pace, tracking the trajectory of 
earlier stages. Annual consumer price inflation 
rose only moderately on the whole from 1.6% 
to 1.7% as inflation had also been fairly strong 
in the second quarter of 2018. Excluding en -
ergy and food, the figure was 1.5%, up from 
1.4%. In July, prices rose by a further 0.1% in 
seasonally adjusted terms. However, year- on- 
year HICP inflation dropped considerably from 
1.5% to 1.1%. The main reason behind this 
drop was that the recent deceleration of prices 
for package holidays disproportionately damp -
ened core inflation and headline HICP . This is 
down to the way in which weighting adjust -
ments to Germany’s HICP were handled.
The German economy is probably set to remain 
lacklustre in the third quarter of 2019. GDP 
could continue to fall slightly, due mainly to the 
continued downturn in industry. According to 
the data currently available, industrial produc -
tion is expected to further contract perceptibly 
in the ongoing quarter. Enterprises, for ex -
ample, received significantly fewer orders in 
the second quarter than in the already weak 
first quarter. Moreover, ifo institute data indi -
cate that short- term output and export expect -
ations in the manufacturing sector further de -Weak economy 
affecting labour 
market in Q2
Negotiated 
wage growth 
perceptibly 
weaker in Q2Broad- based 
and strong rise 
in consumer 
prices in Q2
German econ -
omy lacklustre 
in Q3 as wellDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
8

teriorated of late. The more domestically-  
oriented sectors have thus far largely been able 
to evade this downward trend and are support -
ing the economy. The boom in the German 
construction sector is likely to persist. Enter -
prises in some service industries, however, were 
less confident about the future of late. Al -
though households’ income prospects remain 
favourable, the economic downturn has now 
also started to affect the labour market. Future 
developments will hinge on how long the 
present economic dichotomy lasts and which 
direction it takes once it dissolves. As things 
currently stand, it is unclear whether exports 
and, by extension, industry will regain their 
footing before the domestic economy becomes 
more severely affected.
The public finances situation in Germany has 
remained favourable. Although the general 
government surplus is likely to fall in the cur -
rent year (2018: 1.7% of GDP), it will probably 
remain significant owing to the favourable 
underlying conditions. The debt ratio is likely to 
decline further and, as the year progresses, 
comply with the ceiling of 60% for the first 
time since 2002.
The reduction of the surplus is mainly attribut -
able to a loosened fiscal policy. The spending 
stance, in particular, is expansionary, which is 
boosting the economy as a whole. The conse -
quences of weaker economic activity on the 
budget have been limited thus far. The labour 
market and private consumption – two com -
ponents which are particularly important for 
public finances  – are likely to show robust 
development  for the year as a whole.
Over the next few years, fiscal policy is set to 
be loosened further. However, barring funda -
mental changes, and based on the current 
macroeconomic projections, the government 
budget is likely to keep running a surplus in the 
medium term. This means that there is still a 
gap to the deficit ceiling and that the debt ratio 
remains on its downward path. In the longer 
term, public finances will increasingly come under demographic pressure. This pressure 
should be taken into account when decisions 
are taken in the future, especially regarding 
strongly affected areas such as pension and 
long- term care insurance.
From today’s perspective, the Federal budget 
developments for this year and next will be 
more favourable than planned, making con -
tinued surpluses possible. As a result, the refu -
gee reserve would not be reduced as planned; 
instead, it would further expand. The Federal 
Government’s medium- term financial plan for 
2021 to 2023 seems ambitious by contrast. It 
envisages a highly moderate spending stance, 
in spite of several additional requirements.
Added to this is the substantial default risk at -
tached to the funds stemming from the solidar -
ity surcharge, the continuation of which, in 
whole or in part, is legally contentious. This risk 
concerns not only the income planned for the 
medium term but might also lead to repayment 
obligations. There are calls – not least because 
of such legal risks  – for the surcharge to be 
abolished completely. Given fiscal leeway in the 
year ahead, it may be worth considering phas -
ing out the surcharge earlier than planned thus 
far. Yet the medium- term leeway is not suffi -
cient for it to be done away with entirely. If 
plans are not intended to be otherwise ad -
justed, what could be done is to revise the 
standard income tax by, for instance, eliminat -
ing exceptions and adjusting rates. In the pro -
cess, the desired tax burden for the various in -
come groups could be made transparent.
The state and local governments, too, are post -
ing high overall surpluses and the outlook is 
currently favourable. However, some local gov -
ernments’ finances are still in distress. Given 
that the state governments are responsible for 
organising local governments’ revenue- sharing 
schemes and providing local government 
budgetary oversight, they are partially respon -
sible for any accumulated legacy debt accruing 
to individual local governments from cash ad -
vances. Together with their local governments, Public finances 
situation 
remains favour -
able this year
Looser fiscal 
policy reducing 
surplus
More fiscal loos -
ening in coming 
years but still 
leeway for nowFederal budget 
has buffer 
 initially but will 
increasingly 
tighten in the 
medium term
Abolish solidarity  
surcharge faster 
and revise 
income tax if 
necessary
Address prob -
lematic develop -
ments at local 
government 
level and 
 reliably avoid 
them in futureDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
9

state governments ought to address these 
issues promptly, reliably preventing new un -
sound developments. Multi- year cash advances 
should be avoided in the future. If local govern -
ments with budgetary shortfalls were only 
allowed to obtain such advances from their re -spective state government, the responsibility 
would lie directly with the state government. If 
these advances were also to be counted to -
wards that state government’s debt brake, this 
would create an added incentive to take effect -
ive countermeasures in a timely manner.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
 developments
In the second quarter of 2019, the global econ -
omy probably expanded at a somewhat slower 
pace than in the preceding quarter. The upturn 
decelerated distinctly in the advanced econ -
omies, in particular. A key reason was that one- 
off factors that had previously been supporting 
growth were no longer present. After a strong 
start to the year, the euro area economy re -
turned to the flat growth path it had been 
charting previously. Economic growth also 
slowed in the United States and Japan, al -
though final domestic demand gained signifi -
cant momentum. In the United Kingdom, real 
gross domestic product (GDP) even contracted. 
The Chinese economy’s growth rate, which is 
high by international standards, recorded a 
slight year- on- year decrease. In other large 
emerging market economies, economic activity 
remained subdued, after slowing down consid -
erably at the beginning of the year.
On account of the weak start to the year in 
some emerging market economies and as a re -
sult of the further intensified trade dispute be -
tween the United States and China,1 the staff 
of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
lowered their projections in July for the group 
of emerging economies markedly for the cur -
rent year and marginally for the following year.2 
These adjustments were also reflected in the 
slight downward revisions of global GDP 
growth in both years. By contrast, IMF staff 
were considerably more pessimistic about the 
dynamics of global trade, especially in the cur -
rent year.Growth in global trade has in fact been fairly 
weak for some time now. According to data 
from the Dutch Centraal Planbureau, the aver -
age monthly volume of international goods 
trade for April/  May remained, after seasonal 
adjustment, ½% below the level of the first 
quarter. There had already been declines in the 
fourth quarter of 2018 and the first quarter of 
2019. One reason that is frequently cited for 
the persistent weakness in global trade is the 
trade dispute between the United States and 
China. Bilateral trade flows indeed decreased 
considerably. Perhaps more significant, how -
ever, were flagging industrial activity and in -
vestment even in countries not directly affected 
by the trade dispute. Overall, global industrial 
output on an average of April and May grew 
only slightly again compared with the level of 
the first quarter.Global eco -
nomic growth 
somewhat 
slower
IMF revises pro -
jections down 
slightly; outlook 
for global trade 
significantly 
more pessimisticGlobal trade still 
anaemic
1 The projections already take account of the increase in 
punitive tariffs on US goods imports from China which 
took effect in May 2019 (and the Chinese retaliatory meas -
ures), but not the additional tariffs recently announced by 
the United States, scheduled to take effect in two batches 
in September and December 2019.
2 See International Monetary Fund (2019).Indicators for the global economy
Sources: IHS Markit, J.P. Morgan and Bundesbank calculations 
based on data produced by IHS Markit, J.P. Morgan and sentix 
GmbH, as well as Standard and Poor's, which are provided by 
IHS Markit.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20194950515253545556Index points, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
9899100101102Long-term average = 100
Bundesbank leading indicator... manufacturing sectorExpansion threshold = 50
Purchasing Managers' Index for ...
... servicesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
11

The leading indicators do not yet appear to 
point to a substantial strengthening of global 
trade. In July, the Purchasing Managers’ Index 
for the global manufacturing sector remained 
entrenched below the expansion threshold. 
The assessment for export orders remained 
particularly pessimistic. Of all industries of the 
manufacturing sector, foreign demand flagged 
especially in the automotive industry.3 The Bun -
desbank leading indicator for the global econ -
omy has been pointing to listless industrial 
activity  for quite some time now.4 Despite the 
persistent slowdown in industry, survey results 
show that business activity in the services sec -
tor has remained relatively robust. This is likely to support employment growth and hence pri -
vate consumption, as a key pillar of economic 
activity. For the pace of global growth to pick 
up, however, industrial activity will need to re -
cover.
With the escalation of the trade dispute be -
tween the United States and China, concerns 
about a weakening of the global demand for 
oil increasingly emerged in the second half of 
May. Against this backdrop, crude oil prices fell 
considerably. Supply- side factors, such as polit -
ical tensions in the Middle East or weather-  
related production stoppages in the United 
States, temporarily contributed to a stabilisa -
tion of prices. Following the announcement of 
new import duties by the United States in early 
August, there was a further marked fall in 
prices. As this report went to press, the spot 
price for a barrel of Brent was around US$58, 
after having traded for just under US$71 as late 
as May. This pushed the price of crude oil down 
by around 17% on the year. According to the 
International Energy Agency’s forecasts, the 
world oil market is likely to be balanced for the 
remainder of the year.5 The extension to exist -
ing production cutbacks recently agreed by 
OPEC and its partners is likely to play a key role 
in this.
In contrast to crude oil prices, prices for indus -
trial commodities and food increased, in some 
cases markedly, between May and July. This 
was driven largely by shortages on the supply 
side, with Australia and Brazil continuing to ex -
perience production losses in iron ore. The har -
vest outlook for cereals as well as luxury and 
semi- luxury food and beverages also deterior -Sentiment in the 
manufacturing 
sector gloomy; 
in the services 
sector, by con -
trast, robustCrude oil price 
trending 
 downwards
Other commod -
ity prices rather 
volatileWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and food
and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 9 August 2019, or 1 to 15 August 2019 for 
crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20193035405060708090100110120Monthly averages, log scale
5060708090100
60708090100US dollar basis,
2012 = 100
Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beverages
3 For a discussion of the current weakness of global de -
mand for passenger cars and its outlook, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2019a).
4 The Bundesbank leading indicator, developed in order to 
identify cyclical turning points in global industrial activity, is 
based on a principal component analysis of global eco -
nomic parameters. The Bundesbank leading indicator’s 
time series is available at: https:// www.bundesbank.de/  
dynamic/ action/ en/ statistics/ time- series- databases/ time- 
series- databases/ 759784/ 759784?listId=www_s3wa_inet_
bbli
5 See International Energy Agency (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
12

ated in some regions. In August, however, 
prices fell across the board. Accordingly, the 
HWWI index for non- energy commodities was 
virtually unchanged from three months earlier.
In line with the significantly reduced crude oil 
prices, inflation also declined somewhat in in -
dustrial countries. Annual consumer price infla -
tion dropped from 1.8% in April to 1.5% in 
June, while core inflation, which strips out 
energy  and food prices, remained at 1.7%. The 
underlying inflationary pressures thus remained 
moderate.
Selected emerging market 
economies
According to official data, annual real GDP 
growth in China in the second quarter deceler -
ated to 6.2%. The gradual slowdown in growth 
which began in the second quarter of 2018 has 
thus continued. Perceptible economic head -
winds for the Chinese economy continued to 
come from the international environment. In 
the past quarter, revenue from the export of 
goods in US dollar terms were down by 1% on 
the year. This was not just attributable to a 
sharp decline in exports to the United States as 
a result of the trade dispute. Exports to other 
economies, too, continued to lose steam owing 
to the subdued global economy. While the 
slowdown in the export business weighed sig -
nificantly on business investment, the upturn in 
private consumption appears to have been ro -
bust. High wage increases and a stable situ -
ation on the labour market are likely to have 
played a major role in this development. In 
addition, income tax was lowered at the end of 
2018. However, distinctly higher food prices 
eroded some of households’ purchasing 
power.6 This is the main reason why the rate of 
inflation as measured by the consumer price 
index (CPI) rose from 1.8% in the first quarter 
to 2.6% in the second quarter.
In India, economic activity in the second quar -
ter, for which there is not yet an official GDP estimate, is not likely to have improved sub -
stantially. In the first quarter of 2019, real an -
nual GDP growth declined rather significantly 
to 5.8%. One major reason for the slowdown 
in growth seems to have been problems in the 
shadow banking sector, which, in India, plays a 
key role in the supply of credit to households 
and small enterprises. Many of these financial 
service providers have encountered refinancing 
difficulties, leading them to cut back their lend -
ing. Consumer price inflation remained moder -
ate by Indian standards in recent months, at 
around 3%. Against that backdrop, the central 
bank maintained the loose monetary policy 
stance it had adopted at the beginning of the 
year.
In Brazil, economic output in the second quar -
ter after seasonal adjustment is likely to have Moderate 
increase in 
 consumer prices 
in industrial 
countries
Slight decline 
in economic 
growth again 
in China
Economic 
 activity in India 
still listlessEconomic growth in selected 
emerging market economies
Source: IHS Markit.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20196420246810
–––+++++Year-on-year percentage change in real GDP
ChinaIndia
Russia
Brazil
6 This was primarily due to the sharp increase in pork 
prices as a result of African swine fever, which has already 
cost China one- quarter of its herd. China is therefore cur -
rently buying pork around the world on a large scale.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
13

increased marginally at best compared with the 
preceding quarter, in which it had contracted 
by 0.2%. This decline was largely attributable 
to production stoppages in the mining sector 
as a result of a dam burst. These losses were 
not yet able to be recouped in the reporting 
period. Furthermore, economic activity in other 
economic sectors, such as in the manufactur -
ing sector, remained very quiet. Consumer 
price inflation in the second quarter remained 
at just over 4% on the year, and was thus in 
line with the central bank’s inflation target. 
Given the lower inflation expectations, the cen -
tral bank cut its policy rate by 50 basis points at 
the end of July to a new all- time low of 6%.
In Russia, the pace of economic growth has 
likewise remained subdued. According to the 
first estimate released by the Russian Federal 
State Statistics Service, real GDP in the second 
quarter rose by 0.9% on the year. The main 
reason for the persistent economic weakness 
was muted domestic demand, as private con -
sumption appears to have once again increased 
only moderately – not least because of the in -
crease in VAT at the beginning of the year. The 
development of business investment was prob -
ably still sluggish, too. The receding export rev -
enues as a result of the distinct fall in oil prices 
compared with the previous year, as well as the 
production cutbacks agreed with OPEC, are 
likely to have played a role here. Consumer 
price inflation waned slightly in the second 
quarter, to 5.0%. Also owing to the gloomy 
economic outlook, the Russian central bank re -
duced its policy rate in June and July, each 
month by 25 basis points, to 7.25%.
United States
According to the first official estimate, season -
ally adjusted real GDP in the United States in -
creased in the second quarter by 0.5% com -
pared with the first quarter. Therefore, as ex -
pected, the fast pace recorded at the start of 
the year could not be maintained. The moder -
ation of growth was largely down to US enter -prises restocking more slowly, along with a set -
back in foreign business. In line with the weak -
ness in world trade, US exports were signifi -
cantly lower again after the marked increase in 
the first quarter, with imports virtually un -
changed. Finally, business investment also 
stalled, with declines in the aviation and mining 
industries contributing to this. By contrast, eco -
nomic activity was temporarily supported by a 
robust expansion in public demand.7 However, 
the material increase in households’ consump -
tion, after two quarters with rather subdued 
growth rates, had an even greater impact. 
Looking ahead, too, the underlying conditions 
for private consumption appear to remain fa -
vourable. A distinct pick- up in the saving ratio 
during the past one and a half years signals 
that households have not yet fully exhausted 
their scope for expenditure, which has also 
been increased through the tax reform.8 In July, 
there was also once again marked growth in 
employment, and the unemployment rate re -
mained close to its 50- year low. In line with the 
high utilisation of the labour market, wage 
growth also picked up again. Annual CPI infla -
tion excluding energy and food also went up 
slightly to 2.2% in the same month. Despite 
the sound economic conditions, the US central 
bank cut its policy rate, pointing to elevated 
downside risks to the economic outlook, by 25 
basis points at the end of July.
Japan
In Japan, the economy remained on a path of 
growth in the second quarter. According to the 
first official estimate, seasonally adjusted real At most, slight 
economic 
growth in Brazil
Russian eco -
nomic activity 
remains 
 subdued
Marked slow -
down in growth 
despite stronger 
final demandEconomic activ -
ity remains quite 
buoyant
7 One reason for this sharp increase was further substantial 
growth in local investment expenditure on road construc -
tion, which had, however, already been reduced again sig -
nificantly in the latter months of the second quarter. In 
addition, public consumption normalised following the end 
of the government shutdown, which had slowed the ex -
pansion of the US economy slightly in the fourth quarter of 
2018 and the first quarter of 2019. See Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2019b).
8 In the most recent annual revision of the national ac -
counts, the household saving ratio was upped markedly at 
the current end. At just over 8%, it now distinctly exceeds 
the 7% mark, around which it had fluctuated in 2017.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
14

GDP rose by 0.4% on the quarter, following a 
buoyant increase of 0.7% in the first quarter. 
The expansion of domestic demand even accel -
erated distinctly, largely on account of a major 
expansion in private consumption. Business in -
vestment was also clearly up, while private 
housing construction lost some of its momen -
tum. In line with the recovery in domestic de -
mand, imports went up following the slump in 
the preceding quarter. By contrast, exports 
stagnated. The labour market situation re -
mained very favourable. The already extremely 
low unemployment rate fell slightly further in 
June. Despite the tight labour market, wage 
growth remained sluggish. Consumer price in -
flation remained correspondingly subdued. In 
June, annual CPI inflation excluding energy and 
food was 0.3%. Against this backdrop, the Jap -
anese central bank maintained its accommoda -
tive stance.
United Kingdom
Economic output in the United Kingdom was 
unable to maintain the level of the previous 
quarter. According to an initial estimate and 
after elimination of the usual seasonal influ -
ences, real GDP fell by 0.2% compared with 
the previous period. This decline was chiefly 
caused by a significantly lower level of output 
in manufacturing, which had still benefited in 
the first quarter from stronger inventory pro -
duction in anticipation of the United Kingdom’s 
exit from the EU, which had originally been 
scheduled for the end of March. Many large 
car manufacturers also brought forward their 
plant shutdowns from the summer to the April 
as a precaution. This pushed motor vehicle pro -
duction in the second quarter well below the 
level of the preceding quarter. Even the particu -
larly economically important services sector, 
which has recorded falling growth rates since 
the end of 2018, no longer provided any dis -
tinct growth stimulus. By contrast, the labour 
market situation remained exceptionally fa -
vourable. At 3.9% after seasonal adjustment, 
the unemployment rate remained virtually un -changed on the quarter. Annual Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) inflation rose 
slightly in the second quarter, to 2%.
Poland
In Poland, economic growth decelerated some -
what in the second quarter after a strong start 
to the year. The economy grew by 0.8% on the 
quarter after seasonal adjustment, following 
1.4% in the preceding period. The year- on- year 
figure of 4.1% remained far above the EU aver -
age of 1.3%, continuing on the path of in -
creased convergence of the past few years (see 
the box on pp. 16 ff.). One of the main reasons 
for the more moderate growth was the decline 
in construction output after a brisk first quarter. 
Another factor was the stagnation in industrial 
production. On the expenditure side, growth 
was borne up by private consumption thanks 
to the persistently favourable labour market 
situation. The second- quarter unemployment 
rate (3.8% after seasonal adjustment) remained 
close to its all- time low level. Annual Consumer 
Price Index (CPI) inflation surged to 2.4% in the 
second quarter. Core inflation excluding energy 
and food also rose considerably to 1.8%. Des -
pite accelerating inflation, the Polish central 
bank left its policy rate unchanged.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The euro area economy grew only slightly in 
the second quarter of 2019. According to Euro -
stat’s flash estimate, real GDP rose by a season -
ally adjusted 0.2% from the preceding quarter, 
which had benefited from one- off factors.9 
Year- on- year growth fell to 1.1% and conse -
quently remained slightly below the estimated 
growth rate of potential output. Thus the 
underlying upward trend, which has remained 
muted since the middle of last year, continued. 
It is being dampened by weak industrial activity Slight decline 
in GDP after 
lively first 
 quarterSlowdown 
in economic 
growth; 
 significant rise 
in consumer 
prices
Only sluggish 
economic 
growth
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
15

Progress in the convergence process of the central and 
eastern European EU Member States
Despite weaker global economic activity, 
growth in the central and eastern European 
EU Member States1 remained lively through-
out the reporting period. The real gross do-
mestic product (GDP) of this group of coun-
tries rose in 2018 by 4.3% following growth 
of 4.8% a year earlier. The slight slowdown 
in economic activity was attributable mainly 
to exports, which distinctly lost steam 
owing to a more diffi   cult external environ-
ment. The relatively fast pace of aggregate 
growth has been maintained in the current 
year to date, too. This may rest on two fac-
tors: robust domestic demand and consid-
erable foreign direct investment (FDI), 
which, for instance, was associated with 
capacity extensions on the part of the Ger-
man automotive industry, amongst other 
things.
Riding the wave of substantial economic 
growth, the region’s labour markets con-
tinued to improve. The unemployment rate 
in many places hit very low levels last year, 
such as 2.2% in the Czech Republic and 
3.9% in Poland. Collectively for the entire 
group of countries, it shrank to 4.3%. Wage 
growth, measured in terms of gross wages 
and salaries per employed person, conse-
quently accelerated to 8.2% in 2018.2 It 
thus considerably outpaced productivity 
growth, which averaged 3.3%.3
Consumer prices, too, picked up recently, 
especially in the non- euro area central and 
eastern European EU Member States. In this 
group of countries, the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) infl  ation rate ac-
celerated to an average of 2.8% in the 
second quarter of 2019. Nonetheless, infl  a-
tion rates remained within the national cen-
tral banks’ target corridors, with the excep-
tion of Romania.4 In those countries that have already introduced the euro, infl  ation 
rose very little, averaging 2.6% over the 
same period.
Surging economic growth in the central 
and eastern European EU Member States 
distinctly reduced the income disparity be-
tween this group and the EU average. 
Measured in terms of per capita GDP , in 
2018 this group of countries attained 46% 
of the EU average, compared to 41% in 
2013. In terms of purchasing power stand-
ards, per capita GDP climbed to 72% of the 
EU average, up from 67% fi  ve years earlier.
These averages, however, mask consider-
able differences within the observed group 
of countries. Whereas the Czech Republic 
and Slovenia, measured in terms of pur-
chasing power standards, are now at 90% 
of the EU mean per capita GDP , and Es-
tonia, Lithuania and Slovakia are at around 
80%, Poland, Hungary and Latvia are at 
around 70%. Croatia and Romania are at 
just over 60%, Bulgaria 50%. Measured in 
terms of per capita GDP in purchasing 
power standards, Romania, followed by 
1 This group of countries comprises fi  ve EU Member 
States that belong to the euro area (Slovenia, Slovakia, 
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania) and six other EU Mem-
ber States (Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, 
Bulgaria and Croatia).
2 The rate of average wage growth is calculated by 
weighting gross wages and salaries per employee (in 
local currency) with the relevant employment shares. 
Romania was factored out of this calculation because, 
at the beginning of 2018, social security contributions 
payable by employers were transferred to the charge 
of employees, which contributed in major ways to the 
annual wage growth of 35%. See National Bank of 
Romania (2018).
3 Average productivity growth is calculated by weight-
ing the growth rates of real GDP per employed person 
in the countries in question with the relevant employ-
ment shares.
4 Based on national consumer price indices, the rates 
of change of which can vary slightly from HICP infl  a-
tion rates.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
16

Latvia and Lithuania, showed the greatest 
progress over the past fi  ve years. The gains 
made over the same period by Slovakia, 
Hungary and Croatia, but also Poland, were 
less pronounced. However, the conver-
gence progress, measured in terms of this 
criterion, did not go into reverse in any of 
the countries under review.
To date, the convergence progress attained 
over the past few years has not been asso-
ciated with any broad- based acceleration of 
macroeconomic imbalances. Public debt to 
GDP ratios fell in all countries under review. 
Almost all countries also saw a drop in their 
respective net external debt to GDP ratio. 
Either current account surpluses were 
achieved or current account defi  cits re-
mained, in the vast majority of cases, within 
tight constraints.5
However, there have recently been signs of 
a cyclical overheating of labour markets. 
Since wage growth has considerably out-
paced productivity gains in all countries 
under review at the current end, unit labour 
costs have risen sharply and competitive-
ness declined. Under the EU procedure on 
the prevention and correction of macroeco-
nomic imbalances, a rise in unit labour costs of at least 9% (euro area Member States) or 
12% (non- euro area EU Member States) 
over a three- year period is assessed as a 
sign of potential imbalances. This was 
noted last year for seven of the countries 
under review.
One of the key factors in the progress made 
by the central and eastern European coun-
tries in convergence is likely to be their in-
creasing integration into the single Euro-
pean market and the global economy. The 
average external openness of this group of 
countries has gone up over the past fi  ve 
years from 59% to 64%.6 This growing 
openness has been fostered by, amongst 
other factors, infrastructure modernisation, 
not least with the help of the EU structural 
and cohesion fund. The stability of the 
underlying framework conditions associ-
ated with EU membership has also encour-
aged extensive foreign direct investment 
5 However, these three countries did manage to 
breach the “indicative thresholds” of the European 
Commission’s macroeconomic imbalance procedure 
for the public debt criterion. Seven countries breached 
it in respect of net external debt and three countries in 
respect of house price increases.
6 Calculated as half the sum of exports and imports of 
goods and services (as defi  ned in the national ac-
counts) as a percentage of GDP .Per capita GDP in central and eastern European EU Member States
As a percentage of mean per capita GDP in the EU, purchasing power adjusted
40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankCzech RepublicSloveniaSlovakiaEstoniaLithuaniaHungaryPolandLatviaCroatiaRomaniaBulgaria
20182013
AverageDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
17

(FDI) and integration into cross- border 
value- added chains.7
Future progress in convergence will also 
hinge on the success of efforts to further 
enhance the quality of institutions. Accord-
ing to the Worldwide Governance Indica-
tors published by the World Bank,8 the 
Czech Republic was the only central and 
eastern European country to outperform 
the EU average in 2017. Other countries 
lagged behind, in some cases by a consider-
able margin, particularly in the areas of 
regulatory quality, rule of law and control of 
corruption. The World Bank’s surveys even 
identifi  ed back- tracking in some areas. Ac-
cording to the Global Competitiveness Re-
port for 2018 prepared by the World Eco-
nomic Forum (WEF), although most central 
and eastern European EU Member States’ 
locational conditions improved slightly, 
none of these countries has caught up to 
the EU average thus far.9
An improvement in the quality of institu-
tions is probably also a prerequisite for in-
creased investment in research and devel-
opment (R&D) in those countries. Accord-
ing to Eurostat, R&D spending in central 
and eastern European countries in 2017, at 
an average of 1.2% of GDP , lagged consid-
erably behind the EU average of 2.0%. Al-
though technological progress can be im-
ported, for instance through FDI, an in-
crease in R&D activity is likely, in most cases, 
to be associated with above- average in-
creases in value added.
In the past few years, the central and east-
ern European EU Member States have con-
tinued to catch up to the rest of the EU in 
terms of economic performance. The bene-
fi  ts of this progress have also been accruing 
to workers on a greater scale thanks to the 
strong wage growth over the past few 
years. Individual countries, especially those in close geographical proximity to the eco-
nomic centres of western Europe, are al-
ready approaching the EU average. Owing 
to robust domestic demand and extensive 
FDI, the deceleration of global trade has 
had little impact on these countries’ eco-
nomic development thus far. Further sub-
stantial convergence progress is likely to 
hinge on maintaining competitiveness and 
enhancing the quality of institutions.
7 See European Central Bank (2018).
8 The World Bank’s “Worldwide Governance Indica-
tors” contain six individual indicators (Voice and Ac-
countability, Political Stability and Absence of Violence, 
Government Effectiveness, Regulatory Quality, Rule of 
Law, and Control of Corruption), from which a simple 
average was computed. The country aggregates were 
calculated via population shares. See also World Bank 
(2019), https://info.worldbank.org/governance/wgi/
#doc
9 The WEF’s Global Competitiveness Index 4.0 as-
sesses locational conditions on the basis of institutions, 
policy measures and other factors that can impact on 
productivity. Cross- country averages were calculated 
based on population shares. For more information, see 
World Economic Forum (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
18

largely caused by external factors. By contrast, 
the more domestically oriented sectors, sup -
ported by marked gains in household incomes 
and favourable financing terms, continued to 
see growth. These driving forces will probably 
bolster economic activity in the months to 
come as well. Though the sentiment indicators 
for the services and construction sectors fell re -
cently in some cases, they are nevertheless still 
pointing to expansion.
Private consumption in the euro area is likely to 
have lost some steam in the second quarter fol -
lowing a strong start to the year. Retail sales, 
after price and seasonal adjustment, were up 
less strongly than in the first quarter, while the 
rise in new motor vehicle registrations also lev -
elled out. However, it should be borne in mind 
that car purchases were made at the start of 
the year which had probably been postponed 
due to supply difficulties. In general, private 
consumption remained resilient.
Gross fixed capital formation was likely up only 
slightly in the second quarter. This growth, 
marginal at best, follows on from an already 
weak start to the year. This was largely due to 
the collapse in investment spending in Ireland, 
however. By contrast, in the rest of the euro 
area gross fixed capital formation increased 
considerably at the beginning of the year. The 
extremely favourable weather conditions in 
several Member States had also played a role in 
this regard, giving construction activity an add -
itional boost. In the second quarter, after sea -
sonal adjustment, this high level of construc -
tion activity is unlikely to have been maintained. 
In any case, construction output fell on an 
average of April and May. Investment in ma -
chinery and equipment appears to have risen 
only marginally in the second quarter. This is 
likely to have been slowed by sluggish indus -
trial activity. In any event, the domestic sales 
achieved by capital goods producers on aver -
age in April and May remained virtually un -
changed.The value of exports to non- euro area countries 
decreased markedly in the second quarter ac -
cording to the foreign trade statistics. This was 
primarily due to a drop in exports to the United 
Kingdom, where inventories had been built up 
prior to the original date planned for its depart -
ure from the EU at the end of March. In add -
ition, exports to Turkey fell once more. Like -
wise, deliveries to China decreased following 
significant growth, whereas exports to the 
United States were up distinctly once again. As 
a result of the recent rebound in export prices, 
the volume of exports to third countries is likely 
to have gone down considerably. The same is Robust upward 
movement in 
private con -
sumption
Marginal growth 
in investment
Exports to third 
countries down 
in valueAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19100103106109112Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, 
log scale
9497100103
9497100103106109112100103106109112
Italy
SpainFranceEuro area
of which:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
19

probably also true of imports. By comparison, 
intra- euro area trade remained more positive.
Industrial production fell markedly in the 
second quarter. The production of intermediate 
goods declined distinctly, while that of capital 
goods contracted significantly. Once again, 
considerably fewer cars rolled off the assembly 
lines. Consistent with the robust level of private 
consumption, the production of consumer 
goods increased further by contrast. Output in 
the services sectors was up again markedly in 
April and May.10 As in the preceding quarters, 
the provision of services in freelance and scien -
tific activities saw especially strong expansion.
In most euro area countries, for which GDP 
data are already available, aggregate growth 
slowed down in the second quarter. In France, 
quarterly real GDP growth fell slightly to 0.2%. 
Although the increase in private consumption 
decreased somewhat, the rise in investment ac -
tivity firmed markedly. However, this was offset by a negative contribution to growth from 
changes to inventories. Exports were up only 
slightly, as in the previous quarter. Likewise, im -
ports rose only marginally after a significant in -
crease at the start of the year. Economic activ -
ity stagnated in Italy after minimal growth at 
the beginning of 2019. Exports in particular are 
likely to have bolstered economic activity once 
again. In any event, Italian goods exports in -
creased distinctly in the second quarter accord -
ing to the foreign trade statistics, especially in 
trade with partner countries in the euro area. 
By contrast, no growth stimulus came from the 
domestic economy. Private consumption is 
likely to have risen only slightly, and investment 
was probably unable to maintain the elevated 
level of the first quarter, in which construction 
activity had benefited from favourable weather 
conditions. The Spanish economy continued to 
see the strongest expansion among the large 
Member States, even though GDP growth 
waned from 0.7% to 0.5%. Investment in ma -
chinery and equipment subsided significantly 
after a substantial increase in the preceding 
quarter. On the other hand, construction in -
vestment continued to grow. Private consump -
tion once again expanded only moderately. Ex -
ports and imports strengthened substantially 
after a sluggish start to the year. GDP growth 
rates also declined in Austria and Belgium, 
while they remained unchanged in the Nether -
lands and Portugal. Economic activity remained 
persistently lively in some eastern Member 
States in particular.
The euro area’s labour market situation con -
tinued to brighten in the second quarter. The 
number of unemployed people fell by 235,000 
compared to the first quarter, after seasonal 
adjustment, and by 1.1 million on the year. 
Consequently, the standardised unemployment 
rate fell to 7.5% by June and thus was only Industrial pro -
duction down; 
services con -
tinue upward 
trajectory
Slowdown wide -
spread across 
Member StatesFurther improve -
ment in labour 
market situationSentiment indicators for the euro area
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20192520151050
–––––Percentage balances of positive and negative responses, 
seasonally adjusted, monthly data
1510505101520
–––++++
Consumer confidenceManufacturing
industryServices sectorBusiness confidence
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
Construction
10 An index for services production in the euro area has 
been published by Eurostat since the start of the year. Due 
to a rather limited dataset, the indicator has so far been 
classed as experimental. See https:// ec.europa.eu/ eurostat/ 
statistics- explained/ index.php/ Services_production_
(volume)_index_overviewDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
20

0.2  percentage point above the cyclical low 
prior to the onset of the global financial and 
economic crisis. According to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate, the number of persons in employ -
ment rose in the second quarter by a seasonally 
adjusted 0.2%. The brisk pace of the preceding 
quarter therefore could not be maintained. Sur -
vey results show that labour shortages in 
manufacturing continued to ease in July, while 
they resurged in the services sector. Wage 
growth, as measured by the year- on- year rate, 
is expected to have remained moderate.
In the second quarter of 2019, consumer prices 
in the euro area were up substantially by 0.5% 
on the quarter after seasonal adjustment, after 
having stagnated in the first quarter. This was 
predominantly due to energy prices which, on 
average in the first quarter, had fallen tempor -
arily in line with crude oil prices before then 
bouncing back in the second quarter. Con -
sumers also had to pay considerably more for 
services in the second quarter, and the late 
date of the Easter holidays played a role in this 
regard. Furthermore, food prices saw a steep 
rise, while the prices of non-  energy industrial 
goods remained largely unchanged. Annual 
headline HICP inflation persisted at 1.4% as en -
ergy and food prices had also increased sharply 
in the second quarter of 2018.
Inflation excluding energy and food rose slightly 
to 1.1%. If the sub- indices for clothing and 
travel, which have been more highly volatile 
since the liberalisation of seasonal sales activ -
ities and changes to statistical reporting and 
therefore frequently obscure the underlying 
price trend, are stripped out,11 there has been a 
slight but relatively constant increase in core in -
flation thus defined from 0.8% to 1.1%. This 
upward trajectory can be seen not only across 
the euro area as a whole but also in all Mem -
ber States apart from Belgium and Italy. The 
rates range from 0.2% in Greece to 1.5% in 
Germany to 2.6% in Latvia.
In July 2019, seasonally adjusted consumer 
prices rose slightly by 0.1% according to Euro -stat’s flash estimate. Food and industrial goods 
excluding energy, in particular, became mark -
edly more expensive, while energy prices eased 
slightly and the prices for services remained 
largely unchanged. As a result, annual HICP in -
flation declined to 1.1% and the rate excluding 
energy and food fell to 0.9%. However, this de -
crease is probably mainly due to a one- off ef -
fect in connection with the statistical treatment 
of prices for package holidays in Germany (see 
the box on pp. 57 ff.).
For the third quarter, there are signs that the 
euro area will continue its path of muted eco -
nomic growth. There is no end in sight yet to 
industry’s slump. Both the Purchasing Man -
agers’ Index for manufacturing and the Euro -
pean Commission’s corresponding sentiment 
indicator declined once again in July. Both re -
mained either within contractionary territory or Sharp increase 
in consumer 
prices due to 
energy and 
 services
Underlying infla -
tion somewhat 
strongerAnnual HICP 
inflation in July 
muted by arith -
metical effects
Growth 
 acceleration 
unlikely in Q3Underlying inflation in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and ECB. 1 Clothing also includes footwear 
(COICOP 03); travel includes package holidays (096), accom-
modation services (112) and passenger transport by air (0733).
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 190.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
–++++++Year-on-year percentage change
00.51.01.52.0Headline HICP
Excluding energy, food,
travel and clothing1
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017) and Deutsche Bun -
desbank (2019d).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
21

below the long- term average. Capacity utilisa -
tion in manufacturing exceeded its longer- term 
average only slightly following a further de -
cline, while incoming orders continued their 
downward trend. More promising signals came 
from domestically oriented sectors, which are 
benefiting from the positive labour market situ -
ation and the favourable financing conditions. 
The sentiment indicators published by the 
European Commission for the construction sec -
tor and consumers remained at a high level 
throughout the reporting period, and the indi -
cator for the services sectors has remained 
above its long- term average. It should also be noted that the importance of manufacturing is 
lower for the euro area as a whole as well as 
for most euro area countries than it is for Ger -
many, and aggregate growth in the euro area is 
consequently less strongly affected by industry 
than it is here. Given that the drivers of the do -
mestic economy are largely intact, GDP is likely 
to pick up in the third quarter as well. That 
said, sentiment in the construction and services 
sectors has also become somewhat gloomier 
recently, indicating the danger that a pro -
tracted stretch of sluggishness in manufactur -
ing could spill over to other sectors of the 
economy.
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), The weak state of the global car market, Monthly Report, May 
2019, pp. 12 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), The macroeconomic effects of the government shutdown in the 
United States, Monthly Report, February 2019, pp. 14 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c), Global and European setting, Monthly Report, May 2019, pp. 10 ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019d), The revision of the sub- index for package holidays and its impact 
on the HICP and core inflation, Monthly Report, March 2019, pp. 8 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The volatility of the traditional core inflation rate in Germany, 
Monthly Report, November 2017, pp. 49 ff.
European Central Bank (2018), Convergence Report, May 2018.
International Energy Agency (2019), Oil Market Report, July 2019.
International Monetary Fund (2019), World Economic Outlook Update: Still Sluggish Global 
Growth, July 2019.
National Bank of Romania (2018), Inflation Report May 2018, p. 26.
World Economic Forum (2018), The Global Competitiveness Report 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
22

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
The Governing Council of the ECB used its 
monetary policy meetings in June and July 2019 
to further adjust its forward guidance on key 
interest rates. The ECB’s main decision- making 
body now expects key interest rates to remain 
at their present or lower levels at least through 
the first half of 2020, and in any case for as 
long as necessary to ensure the continued sus -
tained convergence of inflation to levels below, 
but close to, 2% over the medium term. For -
ward guidance regarding the reinvestment of 
securities acquired as part of the expanded 
asset purchase programme (APP) was left un -
changed at both meetings. Key interest rates 
also remained unadjusted in the period under 
review, meaning that the main refinancing rate 
is still 0%, while the rate on the marginal lend -
ing facility stands at 0.25% and the deposit 
facility  rate at -0.40%.
The Governing Council also used its June ses -
sion to decide on the key parameters, including 
the interest rates charged, for the new series of 
targeted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO III) announced in March 2019. It was 
decided that the interest rate for each oper -
ation will be set at a level of 10 basis points 
above the average rate applied to the Eurosys -
tem’s main refinancing operations (MROs) over 
the life of the respective TLTRO. For banks 
whose eligible net lending exceeds a certain 
benchmark, the rate applied can be as low as 
the average interest rate on the deposit facility 
prevailing over the life of the respective oper -
ation plus 10 basis points.1
The monetary policy decisions taken in June 
aimed to continue providing the degree of 
monetary accommodation necessary for infla -
tion to remain on a sustained path towards 
levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term. The Governing Council took the view that although the data for the first quarter 
were somewhat better than expected, the in -
formation available up to the June meeting in -
dicated that global headwinds were continuing 
to cloud the euro area outlook. Incoming infor -
mation since the June meeting of the Govern -
ing Council likewise indicates that, while fur -
ther employment gains and increasing wages 
continue to underpin the resilience of the 
economy, softening global growth dynamics 
and weak international trade are still weighing 
on the euro area outlook. The prolonged pres -
ence of uncertainties, related to geopolitical 
factors, the rising threat of protectionism, and 
vulnerabilities in emerging markets, is dampen -
ing economic sentiment, notably in the manu -
facturing sector. In this environment, inflation -
ary pressures remain muted and indicators of 
inflation expectations have declined.
Against this backdrop, the Governing Council 
in July signalled its readiness to adjust all of its 
monetary policy instruments, as appropriate, to 
ensure that inflation moves towards its aim in a 
sustained manner. In this context, the Govern -
ing Council tasked the relevant Eurosystem 
Committees with examining options.
The stock of APP assets recognised on the bal -
ance sheet continued to fluctuate slightly dur -
ing the reporting period. This was due to two 
factors: the smoothing over time of reinvest -
ments in line with the technical parameters 
agreed upon in December, and the use of 
amortised cost accounting.2 As at 9  August 
2019, the stock of APP assets held by the Euro -
system came to a total of €2,551 billion (a 
breakdown of these holdings by individual asset 
purchase programme can be found on p. 25).ECB Governing 
Council twice 
adjusts forward 
guidance
ECB Governing 
Council decides 
on further key 
parameters of 
TLTRO III
Measures 
designed to 
ensure sustained 
convergence of 
inflationECB Governing 
Council tasks 
committees with 
examining 
options
Little change in 
securities hold -
ings recognised 
on balance 
sheet
1 Further information on TLTRO III can be found in the 
ECB’s press release of 6 June 2019.
2 In particular, the difference between an asset’s acquisi -
tion and redemption value is amortised over the residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and thus meas -
ured at (amortised) cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
23

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve periods between 17 April 
2019 and 30 July 2019 saw a slight increase 
in euro area liquidity needs stemming from 
autonomous factors (see the table below). 
In the June- July 2019 reserve period, these 
liquidity needs averaged €1,418.6 billion, 
which was €55.3 billion higher than the 
average level in the March- April 2019 
period, the last reserve maintenance period 
prior to the reporting period. Overall, in the 
two periods under review, the sum of the 
autonomous factors fl  uctuated within a 
broad corridor of between €1,296.0 billion 
and €1,480.8 billion. The increase in gov-
ernment deposits with the Eurosystem and 
the higher volume of banknotes in circula-
tion were the main factors behind the add-
itional liquidity needs. Public sector deposits 
stood at €295.9 billion on average in the 
June- July 2019 reserve period, which was 
€25.4 billion higher than the average fi  gure for the March- April 2019 reserve period. 
There was also a corresponding rise in 
banknotes in circulation, with an average of 
€1,240.8 billion in circulation in the June- 
July 2019 reserve period, €25.0 billion 
higher than the average level in the March- 
April 2019 reserve period. Banknotes in cir-
culation thus remain by far the largest 
liquidity- absorbing autonomous factor in 
the Eurosystem (see the chart on p.  25). 
Furthermore, the combined changes of net 
foreign assets and other factors, which are 
considered together as a result of liquidity- 
neutral valuation effects, increased liquidity 
needs by €4.9 billion. In addition to the au-
tonomous factors, the calculated need for 
central bank liquidity also rose as a result of 
the higher minimum reserve requirement, 
which came in €3.0 billion higher at €131.4 
billion in the June- July 2019 reserve period.
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2019
17 April
to
11 June 201912 June
to
30 July 2019
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) – 12.4 – 12.6
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 22.3 – 47.7
3. Net foreign assets 1 + 11.1 + 20.6
4. Other factors 1 –  6.3 – 30.3
Total + 14.7 – 70.0
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  0.2 –  0.9
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  1.7 – 18.5
(c) Other operations –  5.3 – 10.2
2. Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.3 –  0.4
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 17.7 + 31.1
Total + 10.8 +  1.1
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 25.6 – 68.9
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  0.4 –  2.6
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
24

The outstanding tender volume from the 
Eurosystem’s open market operations con-
tinued to decline during the reporting 
period. In the June- July 2019 reserve period, 
the fi  gure averaged around €705 billion, 
which was roughly €21 billion lower than in 
the March- April 2019 period. This decline 
was attributable, in particular, to voluntary 
early repayments on the second series of 
targeted longer- term refi  nancing operations 
(TLTRO II). The TLTRO II repayments made at 
the end of June amounted to a total of 
€25.9 billion, which is more than on previ-
ous dates. The total amount still outstand-
ing on all four TLTRO II operations now 
stands at around €689 billion. But demand 
continued to decline for the regular tender 
operations as well, with the volume of main 
refi  nancing operations in the June- July 2019 
reserve period falling to an average of €4.6 
billion, down €1.1 billion on the March- 
April 2019 reserve period. In addition, the 
outstanding volume of three- month ten-
ders fell to an average of €3.3 billion in the 
June- July 2019 reserve period, down by 
€0.3 billion on the March- April 2019 reserve 
period.
With a share of almost 80% in the period 
under review, the asset purchase pro-
grammes continue to constitute the bulk of 
Eurosystem central bank liquidity provided 
through open market operations. The aver-
age balance sheet holdings of all purchase 
programmes in the June- July 2019 reserve 
period amounted to €2,620 billion, down 
by €16 billion on the March- April 2019 re-
serve period, when average holdings 
amounted to €2,636 billion. This was 
caused by amortisation adjustments, matur-
ities and fl  exibility in terms of reinvestment 
(see the adjacent table). The public sector 
purchase programme (PSPP) accounted for 
80% of holdings of all purchase pro-
grammes. As a result of the reduction in se-
curities holdings and the lower tender vol-ume in the period under review, central 
bank liquidity supplied by means of open 
market operations declined once again, as 
it had in the two preceding periods (see the 
chart on p. 27).
This lower provision of liquidity and the in-
creased liquidity needs stemming from au-
tonomous factors reduced excess liquidity 
in the Eurosystem to an average of €1,775 
billion in the June- July 2019 reserve period, 
which was €95 billion lower than in the 
March- April 2019 reserve period. In the 
intervening April- June 2019 reserve period, 
excess liquidity was still distinctly higher, 
averaging €1,877 billion. All in all, excess li-Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as 
at 9 August 
2019
Active programmes 1
PSPP – 10.1 2,086.9
CBPP3 –  0.9 260.7
CSPP –  0.5 177.2
ABSPP –  0.2 26.3
Completed programmes 
SMP –  7.9 54.9
CBPP1 –  0.6 2.8
CBPP2 –  0.3 3.4
1 Changes due to maturities, reinvestments and amortisa-
tion adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Including  end-
of-quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20191,2501,0007505002500250500750
–––––+++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
25

quidity at the end of the period under re-
view was thus somewhat lower than over 
the course of 2018 and in the ﬁ  rst half of 
2019. From September 2019, the third ser-
ies of targeted longer- term reﬁ  nancing op-
erations (TLTRO III) scheduled to be launched 
that month should per se drive excess li-
quidity levels higher. However, the resulting 
net liquidity effect will depend on the de-
gree to which participating institutions sim-
ultaneously roll over TLTRO II funding when 
making voluntary early repayments.
The very comfortable liquidity conditions 
continued to ensure that overnight euro 
money market rates stayed close to the de-
posit facility rate (see the above chart). 
EONIA, the reference rate for unsecured 
overnight money, averaged -0.37% in the 
June- July 2019 reserve period (previous re-
serve period April- June 2019: -0.36%). At 
an average of €2.6 billion, the underlying 
EONIA turnover in the same reserve period remained low (previous reserve period April- 
June 2019: €2.0 billion). However, on 7 June 
there was an unexpected rise in the EONIA 
rate to -0.25%, though this was a one- off 
effect facilitated by the low trading volume, 
which stood at €0.6 billion.
Secured overnight money, on the other 
hand, mainly traded below the deposit fa-
cility rate in the two reserve periods under 
review. On the GC Pooling platform, over-
night trades in the ECB basket were exe-
cuted at -0.41% on average in the June- July 
2019 reserve period, which was 2 basis 
points higher than in the March- April 2019 
reserve period. Overnight money in the ECB 
EXTended basket, with its larger set of eli-
gible securities, traded at -0.39% on aver-
age in the June- July 2019 reserve period, 
which was also higher than in the March- 
April 2019 reserve period, when the corres-
ponding rate was -0.42%. Aggregate over-
night turnover across both segments in the 
June- July 2019 reserve period amounted to 
an average of €9.9 billion; as such, it ex-
ceeded the March- April 2019 reference 
period level of €9.1 billion, and remained 
clearly above the EONIA turnover.Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankMar. Apr. May June July Aug.
20190.60.50.40.30.20.10
––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
1,6001,8002,000Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance 
period 2EONIA
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended 
basketSTOXX GC Pooling OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
26

Voluntary repayments on the second series of 
targeted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO II) in June were distinctly higher than in 
previous quarters. Eurosystem counterparties 
took up the opportunity to make repayments 
on all four operations on 27 March to the tune 
of around €25.9 billion. The bulk of this 
amount, roughly €21.2 billion, was accounted 
for by repayments on the first operation, whose 
residual maturity dropped below one year in 
June. This left this particular operation less eli -
gible under the liquidity regulations, making it 
less attractive for banks to hold. At present, a 
TLTRO  II volume of around €689 billion is still 
outstanding.
Excess liquidity was down overall, coming in 
roughly €130 billion lower at €1,775 billion as 
this report went to press. Repayments on 
TLTRO II operations played only a minor role in 
this decline, which was driven instead primarily 
by a rise in autonomous factors, notably gov -ernment deposits with the Eurosystem (see the 
box on pp. 24 f.).
As for short- term money market rates, the un -
secured overnight money market rate (EONIA) 
stayed within its previous range, hovering be -
tween -0.36% and -0.37%, while the three-  
month EURIBOR has registered a noticeable 
drop since mid-  June, hitting a new all- time low 
of -0.40% as this report went to press. This de -
cline is likely to have been driven primarily by 
market expectations that the deposit facility 
rate would be reduced later in the year (see the 
next paragraph).3
Money market forward rates fell sharply overall 
during the period under review, just as they 
had done in the preceding months. The yield 
curve has been persistently heavily inverted TLTRO II repay -
ments far higher
Excess liquidity 
down slightlyThree- month 
EURIBOR hits 
new all- time low
Money market 
forward rates 
sharply lowerOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201903006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,0003,300€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO II)
3 Another factor may have been the switch to the new 
hybrid methodology for calculating EURIBOR, which the 
European Money Markets Institute (EMMI), in its capacity 
as the EURIBOR provider, began to gradually roll out in July.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
27

since mid-  June in the short and medium- term 
segments, meaning that forward rates up to 24 
months ahead are languishing far short of the 
current EONIA rate, dipping as low as -0.73% 
at times. The curve has experienced distinct 
volatility of late. However, depending on the 
horizon in question, negative term premia 
might mean that actual expectations of a cut in 
policy rates are in fact weaker than the money 
market forward rates derived from the EONIA 
swap curve would suggest. Recent surveys of 
market participants indicate that a majority 
have strong expectations of a cut in the deposit 
facility rate, which were much less apparent in 
previous months.
Monetary policy communication in the euro 
area and the United States played a notable 
role in determining the path of money market 
forward rates. They declined sharply, for in -
stance, following a speech by the ECB Presi -
dent on 18 June in Sintra hinting at a possible 
further loosening of monetary policy. Similarly, the language which the US Fed chose to use 
ahead of its policy rates decision on 31 July also 
swayed market expectations surrounding fur -
ther monetary policy decisions by the Eurosys -
tem. Furthermore, the state- contingent elem -
ent of the Eurosystem’s forward guidance con -
tinues to have a major bearing on money mar -
ket forward rates, acting to amplify expectations 
of a cut in rates when incoming economic data 
are perceived to be weak.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 registered 
further strong inflows in the second quarter, 
continuing its robust expansion with an annual 
growth rate of 4.5% at the end of June. Major 
forces of growth, as hitherto, were loans to the 
domestic private sector and inflows from 
abroad fuelled by the brisker demand for in -
vestments in Germany among non- residents. 
As yet, the slowdown in euro area activity has 
not dampened credit growth in most countries, 
though the latest Bank Lending Survey (BLS) 
does reveal that credit standards and credit 
terms and conditions for loans to enterprises in 
the euro area were tightened overall in the re -
porting quarter.
As hitherto, monetary growth in the second 
quarter of 2019 was driven primarily by the in -
crease in overnight deposits. Most of the other 
sub- components of M3 also registered inflows 
on balance in the reporting quarter, but these 
were small by comparison with the overnight 
deposits. In a continuation of a long- standing 
trend, households again accounted for by far 
the strongest inflows into the deposits com -
ponent of M3 during the second quarter of the 
year. Amid narrow interest rate spreads for the 
different types of deposit and elevated uncer -
tainty surrounding the economic outlook, ex -
posures with the shortest- possible maturities 
continued to attract the most attention in this 
risk- averse investor group.Monetary policy 
communication 
the main driver 
of forward ratesQ2 2019 sees 
continued 
robust monetary 
growth
Overnight 
deposits again 
main driver of 
M3 growthMoney market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. • Average 
1 to 14 August 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 20190.40.200.20.40.6
––+++
051015Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points% p.a. Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR 1
EONIA 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
28

From the counterpart perspective, loans 
granted to the domestic private sector, ad -
justed for loan sales and securitisation, contrib -
uted most to monetary growth, climbing to an 
annual growth rate of 3.5% at the end of June, 
which was just 1 percentage point short of the 
annual M3 rate. Loans to non- financial corpor -
ations, in particular, bounced back from a 
weaker first quarter to register strong growth 
in the three months under review; the annual 
growth rate for these adjusted loans rose 
slightly to 3.8%. Credit institutions resident in 
Germany and France were mainly responsible 
for the inflows, while institutions in Spain and 
above all Italy recorded net outflows in this 
credit segment.
Bank responses to the BLS confirm that corpor -
ate demand for credit across the euro area as a 
whole increased again on balance in the 
second quarter of 2019 after remaining un -
changed in the first three months of the year 
for the first time since 2015. Major factors driv -
ing aggregate demand were the increased 
financing  needs for fixed investment in many 
Member States and for mergers, acquisitions 
and restructurings. Demand also continued to 
be stimulated by the persistently low general 
level of interest rates. Banks in Spain were 
alone among institutions from the four largest 
euro area countries in reporting a protracted drop in demand. According to the banks sur -
veyed in the BLS, lending standards for loans to 
enterprises for the euro area as a whole were 
tightened for the first time since the end of 
2016. Standards were tightened particularly 
strongly in Italy.
Adjusted for sales and securitisation, loans to 
households continued to record net inflows in 
the second quarter. These inflows were ob -
served both in consumer credit as well as in 
loans for house purchase, which are more sig -
nificant in terms of volume. At 3.3% at the end 
of June, the annual growth rate remained un -
changed on the previous quarter. The highest 
net inflows in this credit segment were ac -
counted for by banks in France and Germany. 
Banks in Italy also made a distinct contribution 
to the increase, while net lending among banks 
in Spain remained subdued.
In particular, the banks in the euro area partici -
pating in the BLS attributed the renewed rise in 
demand for housing loans to the low general 
interest rate level and the positive outlook for 
both the residential property market and its 
price movements. According to the institu -
tions’ responses, demand-  dampening effects 
stemmed from the equity financing of residen -
tial property through the use of savings. Based 
on the survey results, standards for loans for Loans to non- 
financial corpor -
ations register 
strong inflows
Tighter credit 
standards and 
brisker demand 
for loans to 
enterprisesLoans to house -
holds see con -
tinued inflows
Rise in demand 
for loans for 
house purchaseConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q1 2019 Q2 2019
Holdings against central government 2 – 11.1 – 7.8
Monetary aggregate M3 133.9 171.5
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 185.9 143.6
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 3.5 16.7
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 55.5 11.2
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 50.8 53.5
of which:
Capital and reserves 16.6 35.3
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities 34.3 18.2Assets Q1 2019 Q2 2019
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 107.6 122.9
Loans 83.0 110.3
Loans, adjusted 1 78.7 131.9
Securities 24.5 12.6
Credit to general government 
in the euro area – 40.4 – 56.3
Loans –  6.8 –  1.2
Securities – 33.6 – 55.3
Net external assets 111.9 111.4
Other counterparts of M3 –  5.5 39.4
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
29

house purchase in the euro area remained es -
sentially unchanged during the reporting 
period, after having been tightened again in 
the preceding quarter for the first time since 
the beginning of 2016.
In the reporting quarter, the net external asset 
position of the MFI sector again clearly helped 
bolster monetary growth. This was due not 
only to the euro area’s sustained current ac -
count surplus, but also the increasingly positive 
balance of portfolio investment. According to 
the non- seasonally adjusted balance of pay -
ments figures available for April and May, for -
eign investors in particular made net purchases 
of both bonds issued by domestic general gov -
ernment as well as shares and mutal fund 
shares issued by the domestic private sector. By 
contrast, resident investors’ interest in foreign 
debt instruments was markedly lower during 
this period. Against the background of the per -
sistently negative yield spread in the euro area 
vis- à- vis most other economic areas, the re -
duced political uncertainty in the euro area 
compared with the end of 2018 is likely to have 
contributed to the positive financial account 
balance and subsequently to monetary growth.
As in the previous quarter, monetary growth 
was dampened by comparatively large inflows 
of longer-term financial liabilities. These were 
attributable to increases in capital and reserves 
in the MFI sector on the one hand and to a rise 
in longer- term deposits on the other. By con -
trast, longer- term bank debt securities were 
– after very significant inflows in the previous 
quarter – scaled back slightly in net terms. It is 
conceivable that banks’ interest in this form of 
financing, which had grown again in the pre -
ceding quarters, declined as a result of the new 
series of TLTROs announced by the Eurosystem.
In the reporting quarter, securities-based lend -
ing in the MFI sector also had a dampening im -
pact on monetary growth in net terms. Since 
the Euro system ceased its monthly net asset 
purchases at the end of 2018, securities-based 
lending to domestic general government has M3 growth 
 bolstered by 
demand for 
domestic secur -
ities among 
 foreign investors
Restraining 
 influence on M3 
from inflows of 
capital and 
reserves
Securities-based 
lending has 
dampening 
impact on M3 
in net termsMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10
2024
–++M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsYear-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households 5Contribution of components in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage growth
in M3
Percentage
growth 
in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
30

recorded continued net outflows. Furthermore, 
banks recently made slight reductions in their 
holdings of equities and mutual fund shares 
again following the very strong inflows in the 
previous quarter. In the reporting quarter, only 
bonds and debt securities issued by the domes -
tic private sector were acquired by banks on a 
notable scale on balance.
German banks’ deposit and 
lending business with 
 domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers in the second quarter of 2019 was 
again dominated by sustained inflows into 
short- term bank deposits – particularly over -
night deposits. These were mainly accounted 
for by households. Their preference for highly 
liquid forms of investment continued against 
the backdrop of the persistently low interest 
rate level (see the chart on p. 36) and the flat 
yield curve (see the box on pp. 32 ff.). While the 
other money- holding sectors also continued to 
expand their holdings of overnight deposits 
overall in the reporting quarter, the attractive -
ness of this form of deposit is likely to have 
diminished  due to the decline in interest rates 
– including into negative territory – that has 
occurred  over recent years in the corporate 
banking segment. Long- term bank deposits 
were reduced further in net terms. This was 
due to decisions taken by financial corpor -
ations, which generally take greater account of 
yield aspects.4
Banks’ credit business with the domestic non-  
bank sector again saw strong expansion in the 
reporting quarter. This was mainly thanks to 
the sharp growth in lending to the domestic 
private sector. By contrast, loans to general 
government declined once again due to the 
public sector’s low financing needs.
In terms of loans to the private sector, lending 
to domestic non- financial corporations re -
corded the largest net inflows in the reporting quarter. Although economic activity in Ger -
many slowed down, credit dynamics, which 
had been somewhat subdued in the second 
half of 2018, have since briskly picked up pace 
again. The annual growth rate of loans to do -
mestic enterprises, which stood at 5.7% at the 
end of June, almost caught up with the previ -
ous year’s level. With regard to maturities, 
domestic  enterprises continued to show a 
stronger preference for long- term loans, which 
are often used to finance longer- term and gen -
erally higher- volume investment plans. More -German banks’ 
deposit business 
still dominated 
by build- up of 
overnight 
deposits
Strong expan -
sion in credit 
business with 
non- banks
Strong inflows 
to loans to 
 non-financial 
corporations …Loans to the private non-financial sector 
in the euro area*
403020100102030405060
––––++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankExtended by the euro area MFI sector 2
... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–100+10+20+30+40+50
To households 3To non-financial corporations1
4 For background information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
31

Developments in the real portfolio returns of households 
in Germany
Nominal interest rates in Germany are still 
at an all- time low, and the slim nominal re-
turn on bank deposits, the asset class that 
traditionally accounts for a signifi  cant share 
of households’ fi  nancial assets in Germany, 
is attracting particular public attention. The 
nominal remuneration on such assets has 
been hovering close to zero over the past 
few years, meaning that, when viewed in 
isolation, it has been depressing the return 
that households can earn on their aggre-
gate portfolio of fi  nancial assets.
Interest payments are ultimately the only 
source of income a bank deposit can gener-
ate; for other types of fi  nancial asset, such 
as shares, debt securities, investment fund 
shares and claims on insurance corpor-
ations, however, income fl  ows are infl  u-
enced signifi  cantly by price effects. The divi-
dends usually paid by shares and invest-ment funds that invest in equities need to 
be borne in mind, too. Any attempt to cal-
culate households’ real total portfolio re-
turn thus needs to consider not just interest 
payments but these other components as 
well.
This box outlines how returns on the vari-
ous fi  nancial assets held by households and 
the total return have evolved up until the 
fi  rst quarter of 2019. The analysis takes into 
account that the purchasing power of nom-
inal returns fl  uctuates in line with the infl  a-
tion rate. This means that all the returns are 
analysed in real terms.1
The chart below depicts the evolution of 
real returns on the main types of fi  nancial 
Real returns on various types of financial asset held by households in Germany*
504030201001020304050
–––––+++++% p.a., end-of-year / end-of-quarter data
1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Sources: Assekurata, German Insurance Association (Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft) and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * Adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index (CPI). 1 Data on the annual return on investment fund shares are only 
available as from Q4 1995. 2 Data on nominal deposit interest rates are based on the Bundesbank's interest rate statistics until 2002 
and on the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics as from 2003. The period prior to 2003 and the years from 2003 onwards can there-
fore only be compared to a limited degree.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 19–18–15–12–9–6–30+3+6+9+12+15+18+21Enlarged scale
Claims on insurance corporationsInvestment fund shares1Debt securities
Currency and deposits 2Shares1 A detailed account of how real returns are calculated 
can be found in Deutsche Bundesbank (2015).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
32

asset in the portfolio of households in Ger-
many between 1991 and the fi  rst quarter of 
2019.2 For much of that period, currency 
and deposits (which presently account for 
roughly 40%, or the bulk, of fi  nancial 
assets) generally yielded a low real return 
that was relatively immune to volatility. 
While there have also been instances in the 
past when the real return on these fi  nancial 
assets dropped below zero, ever since mid-
2016 it has been mired deep in the red for 
quite some time now. The situation is simi-
lar for debt securities, whose return over 
the past few years has likewise been almost 
consistently negative in real terms, not least 
due to the impact of the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme. As for insurance 
claims, a dwindling infl  ation rate helped the 
real return recover slightly from the historic 
low it recorded in the previous quarter. 
With a lacklustre stock market setting giv-
ing way to rising capital market prices at 
the end of 2018, the fi  rst quarter of 2019 
saw returns on shares and investment fund 
shares put a stop, for now, to the trend de-
cline they had been charting since the be-
ginning of 2017. One likely reason for the 
upbeat equity market performance of the Contributions of individual types of financial asset* to the real total return of households 
in Germany
* Weighted according to share of total financial assets. Adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index (CPI).
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 19–3–2–10+1+2+3Percentage points, end-of-year / end-of-quarter data
Claims on insurance corporationsInvestment fund sharesShares
Debt securities
Currency and deposits
199192 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18420246810
––+++++Real total return 
(% p.a.)Enlarged scale
Contributions to the real total return of households in Germany
642024681012
–––++++++Percentage points, end-of-year / end-of-quarter data
1992 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 19–3–2–10+1+2+3+4
Real total return (% p.a.)Inflation componentPortfolio componentNominal return componentEnlarged scale2 The following is an updated version of the box from 
the August 2018 edition of the Bundesbank’s Monthly 
Report; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
33

fi  rst quarter was the brief uptick in confi  -
dence at that time that it would be possible 
to at least partially resolve the global trade 
disputes. Another was the drop in capital 
market rates, which lowered the discount 
factor, pushing share prices higher.3
The total portfolio return (see the upper 
chart on p. 33) is obtained by weighting the 
returns on the various types of fi  nancial 
asset with their respective share of the total 
portfolio. Thus, calculated according to the 
composition of households’ fi  nancial assets, 
the real total return contracted from 1.2% 
to roughly -2.5% over the course of 2018. It 
did, however, recover strongly at the begin-
ning of 2019 on the back of buoyant secur-
ities prices, settling at a now only margin-
ally negative level of -0.1%. Recent years 
have seen bank deposits, which are import-
ant on account of their volume and whose 
contribution has been below zero ever since 
the end of 2016, dampen the real total re-
turn, which was also reduced signifi  cantly 
by securities returns, above all in the fourth quarter of 2018. Only claims on insurance 
corporations continued to make a small 
positive contribution, increasing marginally 
at the beginning of 2019.
The real total return can be presented not 
just in terms of the different types of fi  nan-
cial asset but also as a stylised breakdown 
by nominal return, portfolio and infl  ation 
component (see the lower chart on p. 33). 
The nominal return component approxi-
mates the extent to which the (given) nom-
inal return path (i.e. interest payments, 
price effects and dividend payouts) of the 
different fi  nancial asset types contributes to 
the total return. It is also assumed here that 
households’ stocks of each type of fi  nancial 
asset remain fi  xed over the course of the 
year. The portfolio component, meanwhile, 
is a rough proxy for moves in the nominal 
total return that can be attributed to 
changes in the composition of the total 
Structure of German households' financial assets
1 Besides other accounts receivable, this also comprises other equity.
Deutsche Bundesbank%, end-of-quarter data
Other depositsClaims on insurance corporations
Investment fund sharesOther1
Debt securities
Shares
Currency and transferable deposits
1991 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1901020304050607080901003 Capital market developments in the fi  rst quarter of 
2019 are outlined in Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
34

over, unlike in the preceding quarters, the de -
mand amongst enterprises for shorter- term 
loans also saw distinct growth on balance.
The current developments in loans to non-  
financial corporations are likely to reflect a 
number of influencing factors: less export-  
oriented enterprises continued to benefit from 
the comparatively stable economic situation in 
the domestic sectors and, in particular, from 
consumer spending, which remained intact. 
Furthermore, the exceptionally low interest 
rates – which again fell slightly further overall in 
the reporting quarter – bolstered demand for 
bank loans amongst enterprises.
The results of the latest BLS provide evidence of 
further factors influencing these developments. 
In the opinion of bank managers, as in the pre -
vious rounds of the survey, the upturn in de -
mand was driven primarily by an increase in 
financing  needs for fixed investment in the cor -
porate lending segment. However, financing needs for refinancing, debt restructuring and 
renegotiation also contributed to the rise in de -
mand once again.
At the same time, the most recent results from 
the BLS indicate that banks adjusted their lend -
ing policies for loans to enterprises to be more 
restrictive for the second time in succession: 
both credit standards and credit terms and 
conditions were marginally tightened overall 
during the reporting period. In essence, the in -
stitutions justified the tightening of their lend -
ing policies on the basis of the poorer credit 
risk assessment as well as higher equity costs.
Loans to households also made a significant 
contribution to the growth of German banks’ 
lending business. The decisive factor here was 
housing loans, which grew roughly as briskly as 
they had in the preceding quarter. On balance, 
their annual growth rate rose again slightly to 
4.8%. But consumer credit also built upon its 
dynamic growth from the previous year. Along -… due to, 
amongst other 
factors, excep -
tionally low 
interest rates …
… and the rise 
in financing 
needs for fixed 
investmentSlightly restrict -
ive lending pol -
icies for loans 
to enterprises
Persistently high 
demand among 
households, 
especially for 
housing 
loans …portfolio of fi  nancial assets. Lastly, the infl  a-
tion component stands for the contribution 
of the infl  ation rate (measured by the con-
sumer price index, CPI).
Our analysis found that the nominal return 
component was generally the key deter-
minant of the real total return throughout 
the reporting period. For the most part, its 
contribution has been positive over the past 
few years. It did, however, weaken signifi  -
cantly during the course of 2018, largely as 
a result of a muted capital market back-
drop. This coincided with a persistently 
negative contribution by the infl  ation com-
ponent, given that the CPI has been hover-
ing at positive rates of between 1.3% and 
2.0% since 2017. By and large, the portfolio 
component contributed little to the evolu-
tion of the total return. Overall, then, the 
aggregate drop in the nominal return com-
ponent over the course of 2018, combined 
with the contribution of infl  ation, left the 
real total return well below zero at the end of the year. In the fi  rst quarter of 2019, by 
contrast, the nominal return made a signifi  -
cantly stronger, positive contribution, 
largely thanks to price gains in equity and 
bond markets, which almost offset the im-
pact of the infl  ation component.
Changes in the composition of the fi  nancial 
assets portfolio can be triggered either by 
active portfolio shifts or by valuation effects 
(particularly in the case of securities). 
Viewed in its entirety, the composition of 
the fi  nancial assets portfolio has seen little 
change over the past years, despite fl  uctu-
ations in the return (see the chart on p. 34 
for further details). This corroborates the 
observation that the search for yield is not a 
major priority for households as a whole.4
4 More details on possible portfolio shifts by the 
money- holding sectors in Germany can be found in 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
35

side the persistently favourable income and 
asset situation in this sector, the ongoing high 
demand for bank loans among households was 
also bolstered by decidedly low financing costs.
The banks surveyed within the context of the 
BLS reported that they had marginally loosened 
their credit standards in the area of private 
housing loans. However, following a period of 
easing credit terms and conditions that began 
at the start of 2017, terms and conditions were 
slightly tightened again for the first time. In the 
area of consumer credit and other lending, 
credit standards remained unchanged while 
credit terms and conditions were marginally 
loosened again in the reporting quarter.
In the July survey, the German banks respond -
ing to the BLS reported that the refinancing 
situation had improved somewhat on the pre -
vious quarter against the background of the 
situation in the financial markets. In the wake 
of the new regulatory and supervisory activ -
ities,5 they continued to strengthen their cap -
ital position in the first half of 2019, notably by 
retaining profits. At the same time, the regula -
tory and supervisory activities in the first half of 
the year, when taken in isolation, led to a tight -
ening of credit standards, especially for hous -
ing loans. However, these measures had no ef -
fect on margins.
Based on the responses of the banks surveyed, 
the NPL ratio6 had no impact on the changes 
to their lending policies in the first half of the 
year. For the next six months, however, the 
banks expect the NPL ratio to have a tightening 
effect on credit standards and terms and condi -
tions for loans to enterprises for the first time.… with uneven 
adjustments to 
lending policies 
overall
Regulatory and 
supervisory 
activities, when 
viewed in isol -
ation, leading to 
tightened credit 
standards …
… but impact 
of NPL ratio is 
neutralInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations accor-
ding  to  the  harmonised  MFI  interest  rate  statistics  (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 201901234% p.a., monthly data
0123Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2019
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 43.1 36.9
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 10.0 – 7.6
over 2 years – 9.4 – 2.1
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 3.9 1.1
over 3 months – 0.1 1.4
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 4.1 – 1.8
Securities – 1.8 – 3.1
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 34.5 40.8
of which: to households 3 18.2 18.5
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 12.4 20.9
Securities – 0.8 – 0.2
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, 
adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, 
households and general government excluding central govern-
ment. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including 
non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Non- fi  nancial cor-
porations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 These include the capital requirements set forth in CRR/ 
CRD IV and the requirements resulting from the compre -
hensive assessment.
6 Percentage share of the stock of non- performing loans 
(gross) in the gross carrying amount of loans.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
36

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until 
May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 
2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is 
calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 3 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit 
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the num-
ber of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: differ-
ence between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the  number of respondents 
reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q3 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 20191.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 190.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
30030
–+
603003060
––++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
37

List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), The current 
economic situation in Germany, Monthly Re -
port, May 2019, pp. 5-72.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), Acquisition of 
financial assets and the search for yield in Ger -
many, Monthly Report, May 2019, pp. 31-34.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Developments in 
the real portfolio returns of households in Ger -
many, Monthly Report, August 2018, pp. 32-
34.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), German house -
holds’ saving and investment behaviour in light 
of the low- interest- rate environment, Monthly 
Report, October 2015, pp. 13-31.
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
3210123456
–––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2Up to 1 year
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal percentage 
growth rateLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal percentage 
growth rateMaturity contributions in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
38

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Events on the international financial markets in 
the second and third quarters of 2019 were 
heavily shaped by the monetary policy of major 
central banks and more recently by the resur -
gence of the trade dispute between the United 
States and China. Above all, the Eurosystem’s 
communication of monetary policy, which is 
perceived to be accommodative, and the Fed -
eral Reserve System’s policy rate cut at the end 
of July played a part in falling capital market 
rates around the world. Added to this were 
concerns about a cooldown in world trade and 
global economic activity, which recently led to 
increased demand for government bonds. This 
saw, amongst other things, yields on Federal 
bonds (Bunds) fall to historic lows. No broad-  
based “flight to safety” was observed, how -
ever, as both the interest rate spread of euro 
area government bonds and the yield spreads 
of European corporate bonds over Bunds nar -
rowed.
On the stock markets, the intensified trade dis -
pute led to significant price falls at the begin -
ning of August. These undid, in many places in 
full, the price gains previously recorded since 
the end of March. At the same time, uncer -
tainty about future stock market developments 
rose sharply. On the foreign exchange markets, 
the pound sterling depreciated distinctly 
against the backdrop of the government re -
shuffle in the United Kingdom and the atten -
dant growing concerns about Brexit. The Chi -
nese renminbi also became a focus for market 
monitors after temporarily dropping to a multi- 
year low against the US dollar. On a weighted 
average against the currencies of 19 major 
trading partners, the euro gained around 2%, 
however.Exchange rates
As in the first quarter of 2019, the EUR/ USD ex -
change rate continued to fluctuate to a rela -
tively minor extent as the year progressed. In 
May, it hovered within a narrow corridor 
around a rate of US$1.12. Neither unexpected 
economic data nor political events such as the 
European parliamentary elections led to any 
lasting exchange rate changes. The market saw 
more movement in June, however. An intensifi -
cation of the trade dispute between China and 
the United States plus unexpectedly weak US 
labour market figures resulted in broad- based 
weakness for the US dollar during the first half 
of June. Moreover, the euro was bolstered by 
the monetary policy communication around 
the June meeting of the ECB’s Governing Coun -
cil, which was felt by financial market actors to 
be less accommodative than expected. A tem -
porary countermovement was observed in the 
middle of the month, as expectations of an 
interest rate cut in the United States were 
dampened by strong retail and industry figures 
and, in a speech in Sintra, ECB President Draghi 
floated the prospect of a more expansionary 
monetary policy stance should the economic 
conditions in the euro area fail to improve. 
With the Fed likewise communicating a poten -
tial loosening of its monetary policy following 
its monetary policy meeting, the US dollar later 
went on to face renewed pressure from the US 
central bank, in particular. As a result, the euro 
traded at US$1.14 for a time.
On the back of the resumption of negotiations 
between the United States and China plus ro -
bust US labour market figures, the mood on 
the foreign exchange markets turned against 
the euro in July. Furthermore, over the remain -
der of the month, the still subdued economic 
outlook in the euro area as a whole weighed 
on the single currency. The US dollar received 
an additional boost after representatives of the 
US Congress and the government reached Financial mar -
kets shaped by 
monetary policy 
and trade 
 conflictsEuro slightly 
down against 
US dollarDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
39

Noteworthy ﬂ  uctuations in euro exchange rates following 
the ECB Governing Council’s monetary policy meeting 
in July 2019
Intraday movements of exchange rates and 
other fi  nancial market variables are often use-
ful when assessing the quantitative effect of 
individual announcements or publications 
(“events”).1 The monetary policy communica-
tion after the ECB Governing Council’s meet-
ing on 25 July 2019 is an interesting case in 
point.2 The fi  rst communication took place 
– as usual – at 1:45 p.m. in the form of a press 
release, informing the general public of the 
main decisions taken by the Governing Coun-
cil. Within a few minutes, the euro depreci-
ated in net terms against the US dollar, pound 
sterling and the yen, for example. Contrary to some market players’ expectations, the Gov-
erning Council did not cut the deposit facility 
rate, triggering an initial but very short- lived 
appreciation of the euro. However, the gen-
eral tone of the press release indicated a more 
expansionary monetary policy stance com-
pared to the previous meeting. It stressed, 
amongst other things, the Governing Coun-
cil’s willingness to act “in line with its commit-
ment to symmetry in the infl  ation aim”, which 
could, as indicated by the press release itself, 
make additional accommodative monetary 
policy measures necessary.
The second communication began – as after 
each monetary policy meeting – at 2:30 p.m. 
when the President of the ECB gave his intro-
ductory statement and subsequently an-
swered questions from journalists. Over the 
duration of the press conference, the euro ap-
preciated against all three currencies men-
tioned above. President Draghi cited low infl  a-
tion expectations, softening economic growth 
dynamics and geopolitical factors as drivers of 
additional accommodative measures that the 
ECB Governing Council may adopt going for-
ward. However, he estimated that the risk of 
a recession in the euro area was compara-
tively low, not least due to the continued ro-
bust situation on the labour market. Further-
more, as the information on the future mon-
etary policy stance was still very general, in-
vestors revised their conclusions from the 
press release and, on balance, the euro picked 
up notably against the pound sterling and the 
yen. Recovery against the US dollar was not 
as pronounced due to a countermovement 
stemming from the simultaneous publication 
of surprisingly positive economic data for the 
United States. These noteworthy intraday fl  uc-
tuations in euro exchange rates are not cap-
tured by the reference rates.
1 For a detailed analysis of the effects of monetary 
policy announcements by the ECB on fi  nancial market 
variables, see Kerssenfi  scher (2019).
2 The ECB fi  xes its reference rates every day at 2:15 
p.m. On days when the Governing Council’s monetary 
policy decisions are announced, this therefore occurs 
in the time window between the press release and the 
press conference. This may, as in the present case, re-
sult in a less representative reference rate for the day.Euro exchange rates on the day of the 
ECB Governing Council’s meeting of 
25 July 2019
Source: Refinitiv. 1 An increase indicates an appreciation of the 
euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank6 8 10 121.1101.1111.1121.1131.1141.1151.1161.1171.1181.119Minute data, log scale
US$
0.8890.8900.8910.8920.8930.8940.8950.896
120.0120.2120.4120.6120.8121.0121.2121.4... US dollar1
... pound sterling1
... yen1against the ...Press release Press conference
£
¥
10 8 6 4 2
a.m. p.m.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
40

agreement on a fiscal package for the next two 
years, which has now been adopted and which 
suspends the debt ceiling for the same period, 
thus averting the threat of shutdowns to fed -
eral authorities. At the beginning of August, 
the euro ended up falling to a two- year low 
against the US dollar after the Fed’s monetary 
policy meeting culminated in a decision to 
lower the interest rate by 25 basis points, but it 
gave relatively little away as to future interest 
rate moves. The euro rebounded again re -
cently, trading at US$1.12, which was 0.8% 
lower than at the end of the first quarter.
In the reporting period, the euro exhibited a 
gradual appreciation against the pound ster -
ling, which was due, in large part, to the 
mounting probability of the United Kingdom 
exiting the EU without a deal. The expectation 
that this could indeed happen firmed up even 
more when Prime Minister Theresa May an -
nounced at the end of May that she was step -
ping down as leader of the Conservative Party 
and also, with effect from 24  July, as Prime 
Minister, and the most likely candidates to suc -
ceed her rejected parts of the negotiated with -
drawal deal. This all meant that even unexpect -
edly positive economic figures for the labour 
market and the retail sector in the United King -
dom were unable to strengthen the pound 
sterling with any permanency. Following Boris 
Johnson’s election as the leader of the Conser -
vative Party and his then becoming Prime Min -
ister, the pound sterling’s slide picked up speed 
at the end of July. A contributing factor here 
was the EU’s repeated rejection of the United 
Kingdom’s fresh demands to reopen negoti -
ations, which, in the eyes of investors, further 
upped the chances of a no- deal Brexit. In add -
ition, the news of a GDP contraction in the 
second quarter in the United Kingdom served 
to weaken the pound sterling. As a conse -
quence, the euro reached its highest level 
against the pound sterling in two years. The 
end of the reporting period saw the euro trad -
ing at £0.92, recording a gain of 7.0% since the 
end of March.As expectations of interest rate cuts in the euro 
area abounded, the euro was marked by a 
downward trend against the yen, partly as a 
result of increasingly negative interest rate 
spreads. Over the reporting period, short- term 
fluctuations in the EUR/ JPY exchange rate could 
often be ascribed to economic and political sig -
nals that influenced investors’ risk aversion. For 
example, when global risk aversion increases, 
this tends to trigger net capital inflows in coun -
tries like Japan, in part due to the unwinding of 
currency carry trades, which, taken in isolation, 
strengthens the value of the yen. During May 
and at the beginning of August, the euro there -
fore depreciated against the yen, especially as Euro appreciates 
against pound 
sterling …
… but depreci -
ates against yenExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries. An increase indicates an appreciation 
of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankA MJ JASON D JF M A MJ JAS
2018 20191.101.151.201.25
115120125130135140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105Daily data, log scale
¥US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange rate:
€1 = US$1.1789 1
... yen
Launch exchange rate: €1 = ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange rate: €1 = £0.71111
Nominal effective exchange rate2
Q1 1999 = 100
Launch exchange rate: 103.12 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
41

the rhetoric in the trade dispute between China 
and the United States intensified on both sides. 
For a time, the euro was trading at its lowest 
against the yen in over two years. In June, 
however, the global investors’ risk assessment 
temporarily relaxed again somewhat and, with 
the exception of slight fluctuations, the EUR/ JPY 
rate moved sideways. At the end of the period 
under review, the euro stood at ¥118, which 
was 4.9% lower than at the beginning of the 
second quarter of 2019.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro appreci -
ated by 1.8% compared to the beginning of 
the second quarter. In addition to its appreci -
ation against the pound sterling, the single cur -
rency also posted gains against, in particular, 
the Korean won (6.0%), the Chinese renminbi 
(4.1%), the Norwegian krone (3.7%) and the 
Swedish krona (3.2%). Factors including sub -
dued economic prospects and an expansionary 
domestic monetary policy weighed on the last 
of these, helping the euro to reach its highest 
point against the Swedish krona in ten years in 
mid- May. Against the Norwegian krone, the 
euro even reached a record high for a time. By 
contrast, the single currency reached its lowest 
point in around two years against the Swiss 
franc (-2.8%) and the Canadian dollar (-1.1%). 
Looking beyond the group of 19 partner cur -
rencies, the euro’s appreciation against the Ar -
gentine peso following the country’s presiden -
tial primaries (38.4%) plus the single currency’s 
fluctuations against the Turkish lira (-1.8% on 
balance) were particularly marked develop -
ments. In mid- May, the euro was still trading 
briefly at TRY 6.97, but the tentative easing of 
strained relations with the United States served 
to mitigate concerns surrounding possible 
sanctions against Turkey, which put the lira on 
a path to a broad- based recovery. At the end of 
the reporting period, the euro was trading at 
TRY 6.23.Securities markets and 
 portfolio investment
Bond market
Yields on government bonds in the major cur -
rency areas declined from the end of March, in 
some cases markedly. In the United States, 
yields on ten- year US Treasuries fell by 89 basis 
points to 1.5% from the end of the first quar -
ter. Over the reporting period, a particular con -
tributing factor here was communication per -
ceived as accommodative from the Fed. The 
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) then 
did indeed decide when it met at the end of 
July to lower the target corridor for the federal 
funds rate to 2% to 2.25%. This was the Fed’s 
first rate cut in over ten years. In explaining its 
decision, the Fed cited international develop -
ments that were weighing on the US economy 
as well as dampened inflationary pressure. Prior 
to the meeting, market participants had largely 
felt that a somewhat looser monetary policy in 
general and a rate cut in July specifically were 
on the cards. This was reflected in the very flat 
US yield curve and the fed funds futures rate.1 
Lower term premiums, in particular, also played 
a part in the decline in long- term yields.
The yield on ten- year Bunds dropped by 57 
basis points to -0.7% from the end of the first 
quarter. In the market, economic indicators 
that fell short of market expectations and de -
clining inflation expectations fed expectations 
of further accommodation in monetary policy. 
The fall in yields persisted after the ECB Gov -
erning Council confirmed in principle the possi -
bility of further monetary policy easing at its 
July meeting. Most recently, yields were being 
placed under pressure by the international in -
fluences mentioned above. On balance, the 
yield spread between ten- year US and German 
government bonds narrowed by 25 basis points 
to 224 basis points.Euro somewhat 
stronger in 
effective termsYields down on 
both sides of 
Atlantic
Yield on 
 ten-year Bunds 
also down
1 Measured in terms of the difference between ten- year 
and two- year yields, the spread of the US yield curve was 
negative at last count.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
42

The yield curve derived from yields on Federal 
securities became flatter from the end of the 
first quarter. Measured in terms of the differ -
ence between ten- year and two- year yields, 
the spread stood at 23 basis points at last 
count, meaning that the yield curve was, for a 
time, flatter than it had been in over ten years. 
The flattening was the product of a strong de -
cline in medium to long- term yields. Bonds 
with a residual maturity of over three years hit 
historic lows in the reporting period. The de -
cline in yields is due, in particular, to lower term 
premiums. The implicit short-  term interest ex -
pectations contained in the yield curve for 
Bunds likewise decreased as of the end of 
March, albeit only slightly.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP-  weighted average) narrowed 
distinctly compared to the end of March (-27 
basis points to 82 basis points). In light of the 
even lower interest rate on safe bonds, Euro -
pean bonds with higher yields were a more at -
tractive prospect for market participants 
(“search for yield”). In addition, political uncer -
tainties in some countries initially took a back 
seat: the European Commission chose not to 
launch an excessive deficit procedure against 
Italy after the Italian government passed fur -
ther measures to curb new debt. At last count, 
while the yield spread was widening again 
against the backdrop of the government crisis 
in Italy, it was still 52 basis points below the 
end- March level at 205 basis points. Greece 
saw a change of government following parlia -
mentary elections. The new government an -
nounced a package of comprehensive reforms 
and tax cuts. In addition, Greece made another 
successful foray into the capital market, issuing 
a seven- year bond, after having placed two 
long- term bonds in the first quarter. The yield 
spread of Greek bonds fell by 108 basis points 
to 273 basis points.
Compared to the end of March, yields on ten- 
year UK bonds (gilts) were down by 59 basis 
points to 0.4%. The Bank of England main -tained its monetary policy stance. It empha -
sised that a gradual tightening might only be -
come necessary following an orderly exit from 
the EU. Ten- year Japanese sovereign bonds 
were yielding 15 basis points lower than at the 
end of March, at -0.24%. Yields thus remain at 
the lower end of the broader corridor specified German yield 
curve very flat
Yield spreads 
over German 
Bunds consider -
ably narrower
Yields down in 
United Kingdom 
and JapanBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20190.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–––+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
Germany
JapanEuro areaUnited States United
Kingdom
Yield curve in the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest 
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 101.00.80.60.40.20
–––––
Residual maturity in years15 August 201929 March 2019% p.a.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
43

by the Bank of Japan as part of its yield curve 
control programme.
Five- year forward inflation rates five years 
ahead reached a low of 1.1% in the euro area 
in mid-  June before rebounding slightly. On bal -
ance, however, they were still lower than the 
level prevailing at the end of March (1.2%, or 
-12 basis points) as this report went to press. 
But the indicator is currently giving a distorted 
impression of long-  term inflation expectations 
on account of also containing negative liquidity 
and inflation risk premia. These risk premia are 
the reason for the gap between market- based 
indicators and higher survey- based inflation ex -
pectations. Compared to the end of March, 
however, the long- term (six to ten- year) infla -
tion expectations for the euro area collected by 
Consensus Economics also slipped slightly to 
1.8%. For Germany, they remained broadly un -
changed at 1.6%.
Yields on European corporate bonds declined 
sharply during the period under review. Bonds 
issued by BBB- rated financial corporations with 
a residual maturity of between seven and ten 
years were yielding 1.3% as this report went to 
press, down 92 basis points on the end of 
March. Yields on non- financial corporate bonds 
of equivalent maturity fell by 85 basis points to 
0.7%. Around two- thirds of this drop in yields 
is attributable to the decline in risk- free interest 
rates. Yield spreads over Bunds likewise de -
creased significantly, by 31 basis points for fi -
nancial corporations and by 25 basis points for 
non- financial corporations. Yield spreads are 
thus currently far below their respective five-  
year averages. All in all, financing conditions 
for European corporations in the bond market 
are highly favourable.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
amounted to €324 billion in the second quar -
ter. It thus lagged markedly behind the volume 
of issuance in the first quarter (€377½ billion). 
After deducting redemptions and taking ac -
count of changes in issuers’ holdings of their 
own bonds, the resulting figure of €22 billion Forward infla -
tion rate and 
survey- based 
inflation expect -
ations down
Corporate bond 
yields down 
 significantly
High net sales in 
bond marketSpreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Bunds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20190100200300400500600700800Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland
FranceGreece
Portugal
Yield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBOXX indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20190100200300400500600
100200300400High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB financial corporations 2
BBB non-financial corporations 2By rating categoryBasis points, daily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
44

shows that significantly fewer debt securities 
were issued than in the previous quarter (€52½ 
billion). In addition, foreign borrowers placed 
debt securities worth €15½ billion in the Ger -
man market. Thus, funds totalling €37½ billion 
net were raised in the German bond market in 
the reporting period.
German credit institutions increased their cap -
ital market debt by €11 billion net in the second 
quarter. Some €10 billion worth of debt secur -
ities issued by specialised credit institutions and 
€4½ billion worth of mortgage Pfandbriefe 
were placed in the market. By contrast, credit 
institutions redeemed public Pfandbriefe, the 
outstanding volume of which has been in de -
cline for years, to the tune of €3 billion.
Between April and June, the public sector re -
deemed own- debt securities worth €4 billion 
net. This figure includes issues by resolution 
agencies set up for German banks, which are 
ascribed to the public sector for statistical pur -
poses. In particular, capital market borrowing 
at the state government level was trimmed by 
€3 billion during this period. By contrast, cen -
tral government issued ten- year and 30- year 
bonds for €11 billion and €4½ billion, respect -
ively. This contrasted with net redemptions of 
Federal notes (Bobls) and Treasury discount 
paper (Bubills) (€6½ billion and €3 billion, re -
spectively). Two- year Federal Treasury notes 
worth €1 billion net were issued.
Domestic enterprises took advantage of the 
favourable   financing environment and issued 
debt securities worth €15 billion net in the 
quarter under review, up significantly on the 
previous quarter (€6 billion). Overall, these 
were chiefly bonds with maturities of more 
than one year. Non- financial corporations in -
creased their market debt by €4 billion.
In the domestic bond market, all sectors added 
debt securities to their portfolios in the second 
quarter of 2019. Domestic non- banks were the 
main buyers, increasing their holdings of debt 
securities by €15 billion. They invested largely in foreign paper. The Bundesbank also expanded 
its bond portfolio by €3½ billion. Foreign in -
vestors and German credit institutions acquired 
debt securities worth €13 billion and €6 billion 
net, respectively.
Equity market
In the wake of the latest escalation of the trade 
dispute between the United States and China, 
the international equity markets surrendered 
most, if not all, of the interim gains they had 
made. After trade negotiations between the 
two countries were resumed at the end of 
June, criticism regarding the status of negoti -
ations was raised as early as mid-  July. This was 
followed by a significant decline in equity prices 
in early August, when the United States an -
nounced further tariffs on Chinese imports and 
the RMB/ USD exchange rate then fell to its 
lowest level in 11 years. Given the heightened 
uncertainty surrounding the global trade and Rise in credit 
institutions’ cap -
ital market debt
Net public 
 sector issuance
Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Purchases of 
debt securitiesEquity markets 
hit by trade 
 conflictInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2018 2019
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 16.7 16.6 24.5
Credit institutions – 11.1 7.0 5.8
of which:
Foreign debt securities –  3.1 7.4 7.7
Deutsche Bundesbank 19.2 – 8.1 3.6
Other sectors 8.6 17.7 15.0
of which:
Domestic debt securities 3.7 – 2.6 6.3
Non-residents – 18.5 61.0 13.1
Shares
Residents 26.2 7.4 12.7
Credit institutions 0.9 – 1.4 0.5
of which:
Domestic shares 0.6 – 0.6 0.4
Non-banks 25.3 8.8 12.2
of which:
Domestic shares 6.0 6.5 2.8
Non-residents 4.4 – 4.1 – 1.5
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 12.9 20.0 12.8
Investment in retail funds 4.1 3.1 4.7
of which:
Equity funds –  1.6 – 0.4 – 0.6
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
45

economic outlook, analysts revised their earn -
ings expectations for European and US corpor -
ations slightly downwards. The fact that the 
renewed escalation of the trade conflict did not 
result in a greater fall in equity prices is not 
least thanks to globally declining interest rates, 
which are increasing the present value of future  
dividends.
On balance, equity prices in most countries 
were, on account of sharp fluctuations, slightly 
below levels observed at the end of March as 
this report went to press. Only the US S&P 500 
racked up gains, climbing by 0.5% net. It was 
boosted, inter alia, by the labour market figures 
published in early July, which exceeded most 
analysts’ expectations. Despite the government 
reshuffle in the United Kingdom and the on -
going Brexit uncertainty, the British FTSE All-  
Share index fell, on balance, to a slightly lesser 
extent than the European EURO STOXX index 
(-2.8% compared with -3.3%). At -4.6%, the 
decline of the German CDAX was even greater, while the Japanese Nikkei 225 was down by 
-3.8% at the end of the reporting period. The 
indicators derived from the Bundesbank’s divi -
dend discount model are not currently signal -
ling an unusually low or high valuation level for 
either the S&P 500 or the EURO STOXX.
Bank shares’ performance fell far short of the 
total market’s performance, with US bank 
shares down by -2.1%, British bank shares by 
-10.2% and euro area bank shares by as much 
as -16.9%. The main reasons for this are the 
flatter yield curve and concerns that the low 
interest rate environment will become en -
trenched. Both of these factors are putting 
pressure on banks’ profitability prospects.
Price uncertainty in the equity markets, as 
measured by implied volatility, was at an almost 
unprecedented low for a long time during the 
period under review. However, the aforemen -
tioned escalation of the trade conflict between 
the United States and China translated into a 
surge in price uncertainty.
In the second quarter of 2019, domestic enter -
prises placed new shares worth €2 billion net in 
the German equity market, which is on par 
with the first three months of the year. The 
outstanding volume of foreign shares in the 
German market also rose over the same period, 
by €9½ billion. On balance, equities were pur -
chased mainly by domestic non- banks (€12 bil -
lion), as well as by domestic credit institutions 
(€½ billion). By contrast, foreign portfolio in -
vestors lowered their equity holdings by €1½ 
billion.2
Mutual funds
Domestic investment companies recorded in -
flows of €17½ billion in the three- month period 
from April to June, after raising funds totalling 
€23 billion in the first quarter. The fresh funds 
mainly accrued to specialised funds reserved Recent months 
marked by con -
siderable price 
falls and surge 
in volatilityBank shares still 
underperforming 
total market
Equity market 
funding
Sales and 
 purchases of 
mutual fund 
sharesEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cal-
culated using the prices of index options. For the euro area, 
calculated using options on the EURO STOXX 50.
Deutsche BundesbankLin scale
Implied volatility1Daily data
%Beginning of 2017 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
90100110120130140
10203040
2017 2018 2019Euro area (EURO STOXX)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
Euro area (VSTOXX)
United States (VIX)
2 For further details, see “Direct investment” on p. 47.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
46

for institutional investors (€13 billion). Of the 
various asset classes, mixed securities funds 
(€10 billion) and open- end real estate funds (€5 
billion) were the chief sellers of new fund 
shares, as were, albeit to a lesser extent, funds 
of funds (€1½ billion) and bond funds (€½ bil -
lion). Conversely, equity funds were forced to 
redeem fund shares in the amount of €1 bil -
lion. Foreign funds operating in the German 
market attracted fresh funds totalling €8 billion 
net in the second quarter. Domestic non- banks 
were the main buyers, adding fund shares 
worth €27½ billion to their portfolios. On bal -
ance, their focus was predominantly on Ger -
man paper. Foreign investors scaled back their 
fund portfolios in Germany by €1 billion net. 
Domestic credit institutions disposed of fund 
shares worth €1 billion in the quarter under re -
view.
Direct investment
As with portfolio investment, direct investment 
saw net capital exports in the second quarter 
of 2019. While outflows in portfolio investment 
amounted to €16 billion net, they totalled €4½ 
billion for direct investment.
Firms domiciled in Germany recorded outflows 
of €31½ billion between April and June, after 
€44 billion in the previous quarter. German 
firms boosted their equity capital abroad by 
€31 billion, of which just under half took the 
form of reinvested earnings. Compared with 
this, their lending to affiliated enterprises 
abroad was low, at €½ billion net. Here, small 
outflows of funds from financial credits were 
matched by inflows of funds from trade credits. 
The main destinations for German outward dir -
ect investment were the United States, Italy 
and Ireland.
In the second quarter of 2019, inward direct 
investment in Germany by foreign enterprises 
amounted to €27 billion net (preceding quar -
ter: €9 billion). They increased their equity cap -
ital by €3 billion, of which half was attributable Low capital 
exports in direct 
investment
Capital outflows 
as a result of 
transactions by 
domestic enter -
prises
Rise in inward 
direct invest -
ment in 
 GermanyMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2018 2019
Q2 Q1 Q2p
I. Current account + 60.6 +  66.7 + 59.7 
1. Goods 1 + 60.1 +  59.9 + 58.8 
2. Services 2 –  2.8 –   2.3 –  4.2 
3. Primary income +  8.5 +  25.7 + 11.3 
4. Secondary income –  5.2 –  16.6 –  6.2 
II. Capital account –  2.6 +   1.4 –  0.5 
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 56.8 +  59.4 + 30.4 
1. Direct investment + 35.6 +  35.3 +  4.7 
Domestic investment 
abroad + 58.3 +  44.2 + 31.6 
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 22.6 +   9.0 + 26.9 
2. Portfolio investment + 23.5 –  16.7 + 16.1 
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities +  5.6 +  36.5 + 26.7 
Shares 3 –  2.2 +   0.5 +  3.0 
Investment fund shares 4+  4.5 +  10.7 +  8.2 
of which:
Money market fund 
shares +  0.2 –   2.3 +  2.2 
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 +  3.8 +  18.0 + 17.3 
of which:
Denominated in euro 6 +  5.2 +  16.0 + 13.6 
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –  0.5 +   7.3 –  1.8 
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 17.8 +  53.2 + 10.7 
Shares 3 +  3.7 –   4.0 –  1.5 
Investment fund shares –  3.0 –   3.8 –  0.9 
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 – 26.4 +  38.8 + 19.9 
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 8 – 22.0 +  16.2 +  1.3 
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  7.9 +  22.2 –  6.8 
3. Financial derivatives 9 + 10.2 +   6.2 + 11.4 
4. Other investment 10 – 12.1 +  34.8 –  2.2 
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 – 13.2 –  51.5 –  0.4 
Enterprises and 
 households 12 – 25.0 –  15.3 –  5.8 
General government –  4.4 –   5.0 +  0.2 
Bundesbank + 30.5 + 106.7 +  3.9 
5. Reserve assets –  0.4 –   0.1 +  0.4 
IV. Errors and omissions 13 –  1.2 –   8.7 – 28.8 
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 
6 Including outstanding foreign Deutsche Mark bonds. 7 Short- 
term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued 
by the former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce 
and the former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions aris-
ing from options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as em-
ployee stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and 
trade credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the 
Bundesbank. 12 Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- 
fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institutions 
serving households. 13 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting 
from the difference between the balance on the fi  nancial ac-
count and the balances on the current account and the capital 
account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
47

to reinvested earnings. Affiliated enterprises in 
Germany received further funds via intra- group 
loans (€24 billion). The overwhelming majority 
of these took the form of financial credits, 
some of which were reverse investments. Using 
such loans, the non- resident financing subsid -iaries of domestic enterprises typically pass on 
proceeds from the issuance of securities to 
their domestic parent companies. The main 
countries of origin for inward direct investment 
in Germany were Ireland, the Netherlands and 
Luxembourg.
List of references
Kerssenfischer, M. (2019), Information Effects of Euro Area Monetary Policy: New Evidence from 
High- Frequency Futures Data, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper, No 07/ 2019.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
48

Economic conditions in Germany
Macroeconomic situation
Economic output in Germany contracted 
slightly in the second quarter of 2019. Accord -
ing to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash esti -
mate, real gross domestic product (GDP) de -
creased by 0.1% on the previous quarter after 
seasonal and calendar adjustment.1 It was 
0.4% up on the year in calendar-  adjusted 
terms. Thus, the underlying trend of economic 
growth was still slightly positive overall in the 
past four quarters, but significantly lower than 
the increase in potential output. A number of 
factors played a role in the second- quarter de -
cline in GDP . First, the downturn in industry in -
tensified slightly on the back of decreased for -
eign demand. A contributing factor was that 
the date of Brexit in the United Kingdom, ini -
tially scheduled for the end of March, led to 
substantial stockpiling in the first quarter. Ex -
ports to the United Kingdom were therefore 
especially weak in the second quarter. Second, 
one- off effects that had supported economic 
activity in the first quarter put a distinct brake 
on the generally still intact domestic expansion -
ary forces. For instance, construction output 
dropped off steeply after expanding strongly in 
the first quarter due to favourable weather 
conditions. Meanwhile, demand for cars, pent 
up by delivery bottlenecks last year, was largely 
met in the first quarter and did not increase fur -
ther in the reporting quarter. This curbed pri -
vate consumption. Economic activity could de -
cline again slightly in the current quarter. There 
are no signs yet of an end to the downturn in 
industry. This could also gradually start to 
weigh on a number of services sectors.The slight decline in economic output in the 
second quarter was quite broadly spread across 
sectors. Only retail trade and some other ser -
vices sectors are likely to have provided positive 
momentum. By contrast, sales in the construc -
tion sector and in the hotel and restaurant sec -
tor declined. Wholesale trade slid into the 
downturn afflicting industry. On the demand 
side, too, economic activity saw a broad- based 
weakening. Private consumption is likely to 
have only slightly exceeded the level of the 
strong preceding quarter. Exports were down 
substantially. Against this backdrop, and in the 
light of declining capacity utilisation and the 
subdued outlook for manufacturing, businesses 
probably held back on investing in new ma -
chinery and equipment. Construction invest -
ment also went into reverse. Government con -
sumption may have provided the only mean -
ingful boost to economic activity. Aggregate German 
 economy down 
slightly in 
second quarter 
of 2019Economic activ -
ity weak across 
the board
1 The overall economic picture for the previous years 
remained broadly unchanged following the major revision 
of the national accounts conducted at the same time. The 
GDP growth in the already strong year of 2017 was revised 
upwards by 0.3  percentage point to 2.8% in calendar-  
adjusted terms. Furthermore, the underlying cyclical trend 
was somewhat more subdued in the first half of 2018, but 
was stronger in the second half of the year.Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19949698100102104106108
–10+1+2+3+42015 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
49

capacity utilisation is still above average, des -
pite the decline in the past few quarters.
In price- adjusted terms, German exports of 
goods declined substantially in the second 
quarter of 2019. The flow of goods to the euro 
area in value terms, as well as to third countries 
outside the euro area, contracted considerably. 
However, the decline in non- euro area coun -
tries was due mainly to the sharp decline in ex -
ports to the United Kingdom. A significant 
number of purchases were brought forward in 
the run- up to the original Brexit date at the end 
of March, which were missing in the reporting 
period. According to seasonally- adjusted Fed -eral Statistical Office data available up to May, 
demand from the United Kingdom for German 
intermediate and consumer goods suffered 
particularly as a result of this rebound effect. By 
contrast, the exports of goods to other non-  
euro area countries decreased only marginally 
on balance. Exports to the new industrial coun -
tries in Asia, as well as to Japan, fell consider -
ably. There was also a substantial decline in 
business with China. Conversely, deliveries to 
the United States and to South Asian and South 
East Asian emerging economies were sources 
of impetus. German exporters also enjoyed a 
steep rise in demand from Russia. Exports to 
central and eastern European countries re -
mained at the level of the previous quarter. 
Broken down by category of goods, there was 
a particularly strong decline in exports in inter -
mediate goods, followed by capital goods, in 
terms of value. By contrast, consumer goods 
exports saw a considerable increase.
Commercial investment is estimated to have 
weakened distinctly in the second quarter of 
2019 against the backdrop of the ongoing in -
dustrial downturn. The decline in capital utilisa -
tion in the manufacturing sector continued at a 
fast pace. For this reason, capacity extensions 
were less urgent. Other economic indicators 
also point to a decline in enterprises’ willing -
ness to invest. Thus, the value of domestic sales 
of German capital goods producers shrank sub -
stantially across the board. Moreover, the value 
of imported capital goods decreased consider -
ably, although there was significant growth in 
motor vehicle imports. Enterprises appear to 
have continued to invest extensively in their ve -
hicle fleets despite the persistently weak eco -
nomic activity. This is also indicated by the 
number of commercial motor vehicle registra -
tions, which edged down only marginally in the 
second quarter from an elevated level. This fig -
ure had increased significantly in the first quar -
ter; due, not least, to catch- up effects follow -
ing delivery bottlenecks in the second half of 
2018 as a result of a new emissions standard. 
Registration figures for commercial vehicles 
even rose sharply and thus continued the Substantial 
decline in 
exportsPropensity to 
invest likely to 
have diminished 
distinctly90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 1990100110
8590100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 190100 100110
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesof which:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
50

strong upward growth momentum of the past 
months unabated.
Construction investment is likely to have posted 
a steep decline in the second quarter of 2019. 
This is signalled by the turnover figures in the 
construction sector available up to May. On an 
average of April and May, these figures fell 
considerably short of the previous quarter after 
an extremely sharp rise in the first quarter due 
to favourable weather conditions. This turn -
around was particularly marked in public con -
struction investment.
In the second quarter of 2019, private con -
sumption is likely to have only slightly exceeded 
the level of the first quarter. One- off effects 
were a major factor behind the exceptionally 
strong growth in the previous quarter, which 
were no longer felt in the reporting period and 
thus had a dampening effect. Therefore, much 
the same as with enterprises, car purchases that 
had been prevented by the delivery bottlenecks 
last year were made in the first quarter, and the 
elevated level of new car registrations fell again 
in the reporting period. Retail sales, excluding 
motor vehicles, also provided little impetus, 
with sales picking up only slightly in real terms. 
Amongst other things, the decline in sales of 
do- it- yourself (DIY) and home improvement 
goods had a negative impact. Sales increased 
particularly sharply in the previous quarter as a 
result of favourable weather conditions. Fur -
thermore, sales in the hotel and restaurant sec -
tor declined substantially in the second quarter 
after rising considerably in the first quarter. The 
decline in consumers’ purchasing appetite in 
the reporting period is likely attributable in part 
to the fact that the growth- promoting impact 
of expansionary fiscal measures, which came 
into effect at the turn of the year, had probably 
already largely been felt in the first quarter.
German imports of goods declined consider -
ably in the second quarter of 2019 in real 
terms. Amid the weakening industrial activity in 
Germany, imports of intermediate and capital 
goods, in particular, dropped significantly. By contrast, imports of consumer goods con -
tracted only slightly in terms of value. In re -
gional terms, the decline was quite heteroge -
neous. Only marginally fewer goods were im -
ported from the euro area, while the drop in 
imports from non- euro area countries was con -
siderable. However, it is likely that the Brexit ef -
fect described above had an impact on the im -
port flow from non- euro area countries, too. In 
this context, imports from the United Kingdom 
slumped sharply in terms of value after picking 
up substantially in previous months. Excluding 
trade in goods with the United Kingdom, im -
ports from non- euro area countries were mark -
edly less short of the first- quarter figures.
Sectoral trends
The falling trend in industry continued at a 
slightly faster pace in the second quarter of 
2019. Industrial output, strongly dependent on 
export orders, recorded a substantial quarter-  
on- quarter decline in seasonally adjusted terms. 
This means the downturn in this sector has 
been persisting for a year now. The strong ex -
pansion in the manufacture of computers, elec -
tronic and optical products provided impetus in 
the second quarter, and output in other trans -
port equipment also rose considerably. By con -
trast, production declined steeply in the mech -
anical engineering and automotive sectors, 
which account for particularly large shares of 
industrial and construction output. Overall, the 
production of capital goods dropped substan -
tially, but that of intermediate goods saw an 
even sharper decline. Conversely, consumer 
goods output dipped only slightly.
As a result of the ongoing industrial downturn, 
utilisation of existing production capacities 
continued to decrease. According to ifo Insti -
tute data, capacity utilisation of tangible fixed 
assets in manufacturing was down for the 
fourth consecutive time in the second quarter 
of 2019. It therefore reached a level that was 
last recorded over three years ago, correspond -
ing roughly to its long- term average. In a sector Marked fall in 
construction 
investment
Weak private 
consumption in 
second quarter
Imports of 
goods down 
significantlyIndustry still in 
a downturn
Accelerated 
decline in indus -
trial capacity 
utilisationDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
51

breakdown, aggregate capacity utilisation in 
the intermediate and capital goods sector de -
clined most sharply, whereas manufacturers of 
consumer goods saw only a slight decrease.
In the second quarter, construction output was 
likewise down considerably on the previous 
quarter after seasonal adjustment. One factor 
at play here was the strong increase in con -
struction activity over the winter months due to 
the unusually mild weather, after which output 
normalised during the reporting period. The 
decline was mainly due to the drop in finishing 
trades. By contrast, construction output in the 
construction sector showed a further marked 
increase. Both construction and civil engineer -
ing production experienced growth. The con -
struction boom continued in Germany into the 
reporting period despite the overall decline in 
production. According to the ifo Institute, a 
high percentage of enterprises in the construc -
tion sector continued to record production 
hold- ups caused by a lack of skilled labour.Economic output in the services sectors is ex -
pected to have stagnated in the second quarter 
of 2019. Real sales in the retail trade were up 
slightly on the high level of the previous quar -
ter. By contrast, sales in wholesale trade fol -
lowed the weak industrial activity and declined 
steeply in real terms. Moreover, business activ -
ity in the hotel and restaurant sector contracted 
considerably in price- adjusted terms after bene -
fitting from high demand in the first quarter. 
Conversely, the motor vehicle trade reported a 
growth in sales. Furthermore, the activity in the 
other services sectors is expected to have pro -
vided some impetus. This is supported by the 
assessment of the business situation in these 
sectors, which – according to the ifo Institute – 
was still clearly above the long- term average in 
spite of a considerable downward revision.
Labour market
The cyclical weakness that had already per -
sisted for a year also left its mark on the Ger -
man labour market in the second quarter. This 
was reflected by the considerably slower rise in 
employment in the reporting period than in 
previous quarters. In particular, this applies to 
the number of employees subject to social se -
curity contributions, which had previously in -
creased sharply. In addition, unemployment did 
not recede any further. However, this does not 
mean that labour market conditions are 
worsening, at least for now. On the contrary, 
the situation remains exceptionally favourable. 
The only difference is that it did not improve as 
before and that the outlook for the next few 
months has deteriorated further.
In the second quarter, enterprises were consid -
erably more reluctant to recruit than before. 
The seasonally adjusted number of persons in 
work in Germany rose by 50,000, or 0.1%, in 
the reporting quarter. This equates to roughly 
only one- third of the growth in the first quar -
ter. Also, employment growth weakened as the 
reporting period progressed. As a matter of 
principle, these observations also apply to em -Construction 
output signifi -
cantly downProbably no 
change on 
 quarter in 
 services sectors
Weak economy 
affects labour 
market in 
second quarter
Much slower 
growth in 
employmentOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19Industry
95100105110
120
859095100105110115125
Construction1
Main construction2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
52

ment subject to social security contributions, for 
which preliminary data are only available up to 
May 2019 and which had supported the pro -
tracted steep rise in employment growth. Fur -
thermore, the number of self- employed persons 
and persons working exclusively in low- paid 
part- time jobs decreased again.
In the first two months of the reporting quar -
ter, the number of persons in employment sub -
ject to social security contributions was 71,000, 
or 0.2% above the average of the first quarter 
of 2019. The only economic sector in which the 
number of jobs subject to social security contri -
butions significantly decreased, was temporary 
agency employment. The sharp decline con -
tinued that has been persisting for the past 
year and a half in this sector. By contrast, some 
services sectors continued to recruit strongly. 
Alongside the health and social care sector, this 
affected the other business and support ser -
vices (not including temporary agency employ -
ment) as well as the IT sector. However, a more 
cautious recruitment policy can be seen in most 
of the economic sectors. Job growth virtually 
stagnated in the manufacturing sector, which 
has been suffering from the declining demand 
for industrial goods for quite some time. The 
increase in employment in the construction 
sector was also close to zero in seasonally ad -
justed terms. However, the usual second-  
quarter rebound in employment is expected to 
be weaker this year following the mild winter.
It is possible that the weak economic activity 
has already had an impact on immigration to 
Germany. According to the monthly migration 
statistics published by Germany’s Federal Statis -
tical Office, on balance, fewer persons moved 
to Germany from central and east European 
Member States in particular, in the first four 
months of this year.2 These countries form by Manufacturing 
barely recruiting 
at all, whereas 
some services 
sectors recruit -
ing strongly
Net immigration 
to Germany 
down in first 
months of 2019Labour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019July42.042.543.043.544.044.545.045.5
29.530.030.531.031.532.032.533.033.505001,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly
JulyMillion
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Apr.-
May
2 According to the migration statistics published by 
Germany’s Federal Statistical Office available up to April 
2019, Germany’s migration balance with the central and 
eastern European EU11 amounted to 45,000 persons in 
this period. This corresponds to a 35% decline compared 
with the same period in 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
53

far the most significant region of origin for eco -
nomic migration to Germany. Since the citizens 
of these countries enjoy freedom of movement 
of workers, migration decisions can even be 
made or changed at short notice. In contrast, 
for example, immigration from the Western 
Balkans – whose citizens require a certificate 
from the Federal Employment Agency and a 
work visa in advance – increased slightly.
Registered unemployment rose slightly in the 
second quarter after seasonal adjustment. On 
average, 19,000 more people were recorded as 
being unemployed in the reporting period than 
in the preceding quarter. This was the first 
quarterly increase since the end of 2013. 
Rounding meant that the unemployment rate 
remained unchanged at 5.0%. The number of 
unemployed was unchanged on the month in 
July. There was an increase in the number of 
people registered as short- term unemployed 
under the statutory unemployment system, 
probably for cyclical reasons. Averaged over 
the months of the second quarter, some 
20,000 more people were registered as being 
out of work in this area than in the preceding 
three- month period. By contrast, the number 
of unemployed receiving the basic welfare al -
lowance continued to drop. However, a review 
by the Federal Employment Agency in the facil -
ities it runs jointly with the local governments 
(jobcentres) in April 2019 found that the previ -
ously reported declines had probably been 
overstated by 30,000 to 40,000 persons. As a 
consequence, levels were corrected upwards in 
May.3 The number of persons registered as un -
employed receiving the basic welfare allow -
ance therefore hardly fell despite the original 
decline in the quarter- on- quarter comparison.
Unemployment under the statutory unemploy -
ment insurance scheme, which is sensitive to 
cyclical conditions, increased only moderately, 
in part because active labour market policy 
measures were expanded modestly. In particu -
lar, there was a rise in the number of persons 
participating in short- term measures to get 
people into work and integrate them into the job market. To a lesser extent, this is also true 
of government- assisted working arrangements 
and occupational training measures. Short- time 
work for economic reasons continued to play 
only a minor role. The rise that the ifo Institute 
reported at the beginning of July is not yet evi -
dent in the Federal Employment Agency’s data, 
which are available with a greater lag.
Leading labour market indicators paint a mixed 
picture. The deterioration in sentiment in terms 
of recruitment plans continued, primarily in in -
dustry. The ifo employment barometer, which 
inquires about trade and industry recruitment 
plans over the next three months, continued to 
drop sharply for manufacturing. The outlook 
there is now predominantly pessimistic. By con -
trast, positive employment plans continue to 
dominate in the services sectors (except the 
wholesale and retail trade) and in construction. 
Other employment indicators such as the la -
bour market barometer produced by the Insti -
tute for Employment Research (IAB) and the 
Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X job index 
fell perceptibly in the reporting period after a 
period of high stability. Nonetheless, the num -
ber of firms planning to hire new staff still out -
numbers those wishing to downsize their 
workforce. The figure for reported vacancies 
fell slightly as compared to the preceding quar -
ter, but is still very high. Fewer vacancies were 
reported primarily by manufacturing and re -
lated industries such as logistics and business 
and support services, which include temporary 
agency employment. The leading indicator for 
unemployment in the IAB labour market bar -
ometer continued to fall and is in negative ter -
ritory. Unemployment could rise over the next 
three months.More unemploy -
ment in the 
statutory 
unemployment 
insurance 
scheme
More labour 
market policy 
measures, short- 
time working 
still moderateLeading 
 indicators show 
 further deterior -
ation in 
 sentiment
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b) or Federal Employ -
ment Agency at https:// statistik.arbeitsagentur.de/  
Statischer- Content/ Service/ downloads/ Pruefaktion- gE- 
Status- Alo.xlsxDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
54

Wages and prices
In the second quarter, negotiated wages rose 
noticeably more slowly than a quarter earlier. 
Including additional benefits, they were up by 
2.1% on the year in the second quarter of 2019, 
compared with 2.9% in the first quarter. At an 
annual growth rate of 2.2%, the increase in ne -
gotiated rates of basic pay was likewise smaller 
than in the first quarter (3.0%). However, this is 
unlikely to reflect the slowdown in economic 
activity. In actual fact, the slower pace of 
growth in negotiated pay rates can primarily be 
attributed to the fact that the second round of 
incremental increases under old, long- running 
collective wage agreements are lower (or even 
non- existent). At the time they were concluded, 
no one could have foreseen the persistent eco -
nomic downturn. Moreover, the second quar -
ter included a number of months with no pay 
rise, known as “zero months”, under newly 
reached pay agreements. As in previous quar -
ters, actual earnings in the second quarter 
probably slightly outpaced negotiated wages.
Recent wage agreements were primarily con -
cluded in the services sectors. In the retail sec -
tor and in wholesale and foreign trade, for in -
stance, employers and the trade unions agreed 
to lift wages by 2½% and 2¼% respectively in 
annualised terms. Both the commercial bank 
and cooperative bank sectors agreed moderate 
annualised wage increases of 1¼% to 1½%. 
Nonetheless, wage growth in these four indus -
tries was higher than under the preceding 
agreements of 2016 and 2017. The most recent 
collective agreements generally include two-  
step wage increases and run for 24 months or 
more. At the beginning, several “zero months” 
often dampen year- on- year rates. The wage 
demands for the outstanding negotiations in 
this year’s wage round usually amount to 5.5% 
to 6% over a 12- month period, as in last year’s 
round. Wage bargaining is currently upcoming 
in the insurance sector and in the plastic pro -
cessing industry. Another subject of discussion 
is the option for employees to choose individu -ally whether they would prefer more free time 
or a higher rise in wages.
Consumer prices rose strongly and across a 
broad base in the second quarter. A third of the 
overall seasonally adjusted increase in the Har -
monised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) of 
0.9% on the quarter was attributable to signifi -
cantly higher energy prices, which were in turn 
the result of rising crude oil prices. In addition, 
prices for food, beverages and tobacco went 
up perceptibly. This was mainly due to tobacco. 
However, even without energy and food, the 
upward pressure on prices was noteworthy, es -
pecially for services. First, prices for package 
holidays rose even more than the late Easter 
holidays might have suggested. Second, there 
was a considerable rise in prices in some parts 
of the services sector, e.g. maintenance of 
dwellings or hairdressing. This is probably at -
tributable, in part, to marked wage inflation in 
these areas. The prices of non- energy industrial 
goods grew at a moderate pace, following de -Negotiated 
wage growth 
perceptibly 
weaker in the 
second quarter
Recently agreed 
wage increases 
remain higher 
than under pre -
vious collective 
wage agree -
mentsBroad- based 
and strong 
growth in con -
sumer prices in 
the second 
quarter2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201900.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–0.50+0.5+1.0%
Quarterly
Q1Wage drift 1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 The wage 
drift is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual 
earnings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
55

velopments in upstream prices. All in all, annual 
consumer price inflation rose only moderately 
from 1.6% to 1.7%, as headline inflation had 
been fairly strong in the second quarter of 
2018, too. Excluding energy and food, it 
worked out at 1.5%, up from 1.4%.
In July, prices rose further by 0.1% in seasonally 
adjusted terms. While energy prices were virtu -
ally unchanged, food prices were clearly higher. 
Prices for non- energy industrial goods, by con -
trast, rose only slightly, while services prices 
went up moderately. Overall, the annual HICP 
rate was down significantly, however, falling 
from 1.5% to 1.1%. Excluding energy and food, the decline was even slightly more pronounced, 
from 1.5% to 0.9%. Noticeably lower core in -
flation is the result of less lively growth in pack -
age holiday prices. The latter had risen excep -
tionally sharply in June because Whitsuntide 
was late, and have now returned to normal. A 
much more significant factor in the drop in 
core inflation was that lower package holiday 
inflation had a disproportionately dampening 
impact on core inflation and headline HICP . 
This can be attributed to the way in which 
weighting adjustments to the German HICP are 
handled (see also the box on p. 57). However, 
leaving aside not only energy and food but also 
travel services and apparel, where prices are 
also particularly volatile, the annual rate of in -
flation remained unchanged at 1.5%.
Over the next few months, annual inflation is 
likely to remain at its recently somewhat lower 
level. The contributions of both package holi -
days and energy will probably initially continue 
to depress the annual rate. At year- end at the 
latest, the rate of inflation as a whole should 
resume its basic upward trend, however.
Order books and outlook
The German economy will probably remain 
lacklustre in the third quarter of 2019. Total 
output could shrink slightly again, mainly as a 
result of the continued downturn in industry. 
According to the data currently available, in -
dustrial output is expected to contract mark -
edly in the ongoing quarter again. Enterprises, 
for example, received significantly fewer orders 
in the second quarter than in the already weak 
first quarter. Moreover, ifo Institute data show 
that short- term output and export expectations 
in the manufacturing sector deteriorated fur -
ther of late. The more domestically- oriented 
sectors have thus far largely bucked this down -
ward trend and have supported the economy. 
The boom in the German construction sector is 
likely to persist. Enterprises in some services 
sectors were less confident about the future re -
cently, however. Although households’ income Further price 
increases in July, 
but contribution 
of package holi -
days has sharply 
dampening 
effect on annual 
rateInflation rates 
likely to initially 
remain only 
around 1% in 
the near future
German 
 economy set to 
remain lack -
lustre in the 
third quarterExport pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201995100105110
95100105
95100105
0123
+++2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2Producer prices1
%Log scale
July95100105
JulyImport pricesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
56

Dampening special effect in the HICP in July 2019
In July, German infl  ation according to the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP) differed markedly from that meas-
ured by the national Consumer Price Index 
(CPI). Whereas the HICP , which is relevant 
for European monetary policy, rose by 1.1% 
year on year, the CPI saw a much stronger 
increase of 1.7%. It is not unusual for the 
annual rates of change of these two meas-
ures of German consumer price infl  ation to 
differ. One reason are methodological dif-
ferences, for instance in how the underlying 
basket of goods and services is defi  ned, or 
in the index concept used.1 Nonetheless, 
the CPI and HICP evolve very similarly in 
most cases. For example, their year- on- year 
rates had never differed by more than 0.2  percentage point between 2015 and 
2018 at the time of publication.2
The exceptionally large deviation between 
the HICP and the CPI rate reported in July 
results from the package holidays compon-
ent.3 Although this component was un-
changed year on year, it accounted for a 
strong negative contribution of -0.5  per-
centage point to the headline HICP rate. By 
contrast, the contribution of the package 
holidays sub- index to the headline CPI rate 
was virtually zero. The counterintuitive 
negative contribution of package holidays 
to the HICP in July stems from the fact that 
the weight of this component was changed 
discernibly within the weighting scheme, in 
combination with the pronounced intra- 
year fl  uctuations of the series. Actually, the 
HICP weight for package holidays was re-
duced from 4.1% in 2018 to 2.7% in 2019.4 
The CPI share of package holidays, on the 
other hand, has remained at 2.7% since 
2015, the current base year.
In the HICP , which is a chain index, the 
counterintuitive negative effect of package 1 Unlike the HICP , the CPI also covers owner- occupied 
housing and gambling. Moreover, the CPI is a price 
index with a weighting scheme adjusted only at inter-
vals of usually fi  ve years, when a new base year is 
introduced. The HICP , by contrast, is a chain- linked 
Laspeyres- type index; its weights are always updated 
to December of the previous year. As a rule – as with 
the CPI – new information from the Federal Statistical 
Offi   ce’s Sample Survey of Income and Expenditure 
(EVS) is taken into account every fi  ve years. What is 
more, national accounts data are also used, and the 
HICP weights of all components are adjusted annually 
according to their relative price developments. This 
means that goods and services with above- average 
price dynamics are given a higher weight the following 
year.
2 Methodological changes or the inclusion of new 
items in the basket of goods and services can lead to 
substantial deviations. These changes often occur 
when a new CPI base year is introduced, with the CPI 
data being calculated back three to four years to the 
new base year. The HICP is not revised as a matter of 
principle. Moreover, differences in the practices of link-
ing indices with methodological breaks can result in 
marked discrepancies between the HICP and the CPI. 
See, for example, Deutsche Bundesbank (2013).
3 In this context, the Federal Statistical Offi   ce (2019) 
cites in its press release a “special methodological ef-
fect concerning package holidays in the HICP”.
4 At the level of four- digit codes in the ECOICOP (Euro-
pean Classifi  cation of Individual Consumption by Pur-
pose) the weights had previously undergone similarly 
large changes for only four sub- components (rents and 
garments in 2000; gas and heat energy in 2015), 
which show a markedly lower volatility than package 
holiday prices.Comparison of HICP and CPI
10123
–+++
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Difference between CPI and HICP at the time of publication 
(real-time data).
Deutsche Bundesbank–0.30+0.3+0.6
Difference1Year-on-year percentage change
Percentage
pointsCPI
HICPDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
57

holidays in July 2019 can be illustrated as 
the contribution of two opposing price 
movements within the last 12 months. Each 
of these movements refers to December 
2018, through which the price data for 
2018 and 2019 are linked in the HICP .5 
Prices for package holidays, which have 
their seasonal high in the summer months, 
fell considerably between July 2018 and De-
cember 2018. Prices then rebounded by a 
similar magnitude until July 2019. However, 
last year’s decline in prices statistically feeds 
into the annual infl  ation rate with the rela-
tively high HICP weight of 2018 (4.1%), 
whereas the similarly high price increase in 
the current year feeds into the annual infl  a-
tion rate with the lower HICP weight of 
2.7%. On balance, therefore, the negative 
price development of package holidays last 
year outweighs the positive development 
this year, dampening the year- on- year HICP 
rate in July 2019. If, on the other hand, the 
weight for package holidays had remained 
constant in 2018 and 2019, package holi-
days in the HICP – as in the CPI – would 
have accounted for a contribution to the 
July headline rate of close to zero. The HICP 
rate would then have turned out distinctly 
higher.
Counterintuitive growth contributions from 
the HICP sub- index package holidays were 
already being observed at the beginning of 
the year, although they were not as pro-
nounced as in July.6 The statistical one- off 
effect of the HICP sub- index package holi-
days will have an impact on the headline 
rate in the months ahead, too. Negative ef-
5 A sub- component’s contribution to the annual rate 
of the chain- linked HICP can be further broken down 
into a this- year term and a last- year term using the so- 
called Ribe formula. See Chapter 8 in Eurostat (2018).
6 The HICP sub- index package holidays fell by 1.7% in 
January and by 3.5% in February year on year. How-
ever, in those months it made a positive contribution 
of 0.3 and 0.1  percentage point respectively to the 
headline rate.HICP sub-index package holidays and 
changing weight
Source: Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 20197080901001101201301402015 = 100, log scale
HICP weight:
4.1%Dec. 2018July 2019 July 2018
2.7%
Contribution of the sub-index package 
holidays to HICP: counterfactual 
simulation*
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
* The difference of the contributions to the year-on-year rate 
of the headline HICP based on the actual and the counterfac-
tual weight can be interpreted as a bias. 1 Assumption that the 
weight  in  2018  would  already  have  been  equivalent  to  the 
weight  in  2019.  2 Assumption  that  the  index  values  of  the 
HICP  sub-index  package  holidays  from  August  to  December 
2019 are identical to those of the previous year. In the event of 
other index values for these months, the light blue and the 
dark blue columns would each change by the same value; the 
bias is therefore already known until the end of the year.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND
20190.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.30.4
––––––++++
–9–6–30+3+6+9+12Contributions in percentage points (left-hand scale)
Actual weight 2018: 4.1%
Counterfactual weight 2018: 2.7%1
Year-on-year rate package holidays 2
as a percentage (right-hand scale)
Simulation
for year-on-year
rate of 0%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
58

prospects remain favourable, the economic 
downturn has now also started to leave its 
mark on the labour market. Future develop -
ments will depend on how long the present 
economic dichotomy lasts and which direction 
the economy takes once it dissolves. As things 
currently stand, it is unclear whether exports 
and, by extension, industry will pick up before 
the domestic economy is hit any worse.
According to the ifo Institute, sentiment in the 
German economy became much gloomier in 
the period under review. The business climate 
index deteriorated again, having stabilised tem -
porarily during the winter months. The dichot -
omy between the view taken by enterprises in 
industry and those in the services sectors ex -
cluding retail lessened somewhat. On the one 
hand, sentiment in industry remained consider -
ably less favourable than in the economy as a 
whole, and pessimism continued to rise. Here, 
the assessment of business conditions, which 
has been falling for one- and- a- half years, de -teriorated particularly sharply. The business ex -
pectations of industrial enterprises fell com -
paratively little, but are meanwhile well below 
their longer- term average. On the other hand, 
the confidence of enterprises in the wholesale 
trade and in other services sectors fell consider -
ably in the period under review. Sentiment in 
the retail trade, meanwhile, was still able to 
buck the downward trend. This was due, in 
particular, to the assessment of the business 
situation within the industry, which improved 
sharply in recent months and was consequently 
only slightly below the high it reached shortly 
after German reunification. Similarly, optimism 
in the construction sector was unchecked.
German industry continued to suffer from fall -
ing demand in the second quarter of 2019. In -
dustrial new orders were down again signifi -
cantly on the first quarter, in which the orders 
situation had already deteriorated quite con -
siderably. The inflow of orders excluding large 
orders, which are often received at irregular Sentiment 
remains on a 
downward 
 trajectory
Industry con -
tinues to face 
falling demandfects will continue until October, when they 
will gradually subside, giving way to a posi-
tive effect in November. The statistical one- 
off effect will not cease until December 
2019.
To sum up, the large discrepancy between 
the CPI and HICP infl  ation rate in July 2019 
is largely due to a statistical one- off effect 
resulting from the approach taken to revise 
the component package holidays in the 
HICP . When the new base year was intro-
duced for the CPI this year, by way of ex-
ception the offi   cial statistics producers also 
revised package holidays in the HICP back 
to January 2015.7 However, they refrained 
from making a concurrent adjustment to 
the corresponding HICP weight from 2015.8 
For this reason, when using the HICP to as-
sess current infl  ation dynamics in Germany 
and the euro area, it is important to keep in 
mind that all infl  ation rates containing the sub- index package holidays are distorted in 
the current year because of the strong 
weight adjustment for package holidays 
that was not consistent with the revision of 
the index series.9 As a result, annual HICP 
infl  ation excluding energy and food in Ger-
many and the euro area in July was mark-
edly biased downwards, by 0.7 percentage 
point and 0.2 percentage point respectively.
7 See Eurostat (2019) and Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019a).
8 The new HICP sub- index package holidays has a 
completely different seasonal pattern than prior to the 
revision. As a result, the relative price relationship be-
tween the HICP sub- index package holidays and head-
line HICP changed in December of the years 2015 to 
2018. In the case of a chain- linked index with Decem-
ber as the linking month, this relationship plays an im-
portant role in the annual adjustment of the weights. 
It would therefore have been consistent, when revising 
the HICP sub- index package holidays, to revise also its 
weight and all the other weights of the HICP sub- 
indices.
9 For more information on the generally high impact 
of package holiday prices on the German core infl  ation 
rate, see also Deutsche Bundesbank (2017).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
59

intervals and therefore paint a less accurate 
picture of the underlying cyclical trend, fell 
even more sharply. In terms of their geo -
graphic origin, new orders from Germany and 
the euro area were the main reason for the 
overall decline. Weak demand for motor 
vehicles  and machines was striking in these re -
gions.4 Orders from non- euro area countries, 
by contrast, rose sharply overall. However, 
large orders made a particularly large contri -
bution here. Without these large orders, in -
coming orders from these countries did not 
exceed the severely depressed level of the pre -
vious quarter either. Against this backdrop, 
German industrial enterprises’ order books are 
currently emptying rapidly. According to ifo 
Institute  information, the assessment of the 
stock of orders still being processed in manu -
facturing has, for instance, been falling con -
tinuously for more than six months and is now 
below its long- term average. The data on in -
dustrial orders on hand provided by the Fed -
eral Statistical Office point in the same direc -
tion.
The boom in the German construction sector is 
likely to continue. However, construction out -
put is not expected to expand sharply over the 
third quarter given supply- side constraints 
within the industry. During the period under re -
view, equipment utilisation in the main con -
struction industry was only slightly down on its 
peak levels, according to the ifo Institute. 
Skilled labour also remains in very short supply. 
By contrast, demand for construction work is 
still strong. Averaged across April and May 
– the most recent months for which statistics 
are available  – incoming orders in the main 
construction sector went down steeply on the Construction 
boom likely to 
continue in the 
third quarterDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 199095100105110115
–50+5+10
9095100105110115
9095100 100105110
Apr.-
MayApr.-
May
9095100105110115120125130135
505101520
–++++Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scaleLin scale
Year-on-year change1Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1%
Main construction orders
%Total
4 It is not clear whether the poor orders situation in the 
automotive industry has anything to do with a further 
tightening of certification rules. From September 2019, 
additional rules on evaporative emissions (EVAP) set new 
limits for such emissions. Like last year, when a new 
emissions testing procedure was introduced, the 
consequence is likely to be that automotive manufacturers 
will have to carry out more controls in the type approval 
procedure. This could again result in delivery bottlenecks 
for passenger cars fresh from the assembly line. However, 
the problems are unlikely to be as severe as last year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
60

previous quarter after seasonal adjustment. 
They have thus been on the decline since the 
beginning of the year. However, it should be 
noted that construction enterprises reported an 
exceptionally large number of new orders in 
the final quarter of 2018. These included nu -
merous large orders, which come in at irregular 
intervals and have an above-  average range. 
The reach of order backlogs in the main con -
struction sector overall remains at an extremely 
high level, according to ifo Institute surveys.Private consumption looks set to expand more 
strongly again in the third quarter of 2019. The 
labour market is showing first signs of a slow -
down given weak industrial activity, with un -
employment not coming down any further of 
late, and the increase in the number of persons 
in work slowing noticeably. Overall, however, 
consumers’ outlook for the labour market and 
incomes remains very favourable. This is also 
evident in the GfK consumer confidence index, 
which remains high despite a moderate drop.Private con -
sumption likely 
to expand more 
strongly again in 
the third quarter
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), The revision of the sub- index for package holidays and its impact 
on the HICP and core inflation, Monthly Report, March 2019, pp. 8 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), Commentaries, Monthly Report, June 2019, footnote 2, p. 7.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The volatility of the traditional core inflation rate in Germany, 
Monthly Report, November 2017, pp. 49 ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2013), The contribution of the accommodation services sub-  index to ex -
plaining the current deviations between CPI and HICP inflation rates, Monthly Report, April 2013, 
p. 7.
Eurostat (2019), Improved calculation of HICP special aggregates and German package holidays 
methodological change, 22 February 2019.
Eurostat (2018), Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) Methodological Manual, Luxem -
bourg: Publications Office of the European Union, November 2018.
Federal Statistical Office (2019), Consumer prices in July 2019: +1.7% on July 2018; press release 
no 302 of 13 August 2019.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
61

Public finances*
General government budget
Germany’s public finances are currently still in a 
favourable position. Although the general gov -
ernment surplus is likely to fall in the current 
year, it is expected to remain significant on ac -
count of its favourable starting point (2018: 
1.7% of gross domestic product (GDP)). The 
debt ratio stagnated at 61% in the first quarter. 
Over the course of the year, however, it is ex -
pected to decline further, falling below the 
60% ceiling enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty 
for the first time since 2002.
Weaker economic activity is weighing on tax 
revenue growth, especially compared with the 
dynamic development seen in previous years. 
However, wage levels, private consumption 
and employment, which are of particular im -
portance for the government budget, are likely 
to show comparatively robust development 
over the year as a whole. Any negative impact 
on public finances thus appears limited, as 
things currently stand. Reduced spending on 
Landesbanken and lower interest expenditure 
are likely to more or less compensate for ad -
verse cyclical effects.
The fiscal stance is thus largely responsible for 
the declining surplus. Fiscal policy is being loos -
ened and is bolstering macroeconomic devel -
opment. Factors driving this decision include 
additional pension benefits and more funding 
for infrastructure, education and defence. On 
the revenue side, by contrast, burdens and re -
lief appear to be largely balanced, with add -
itional revenue from progressive taxation off -
setting income tax cuts. Social contribution 
rates have remained broadly unchanged over -
all. The return to parity funding of the statutory 
health insurance scheme is relieving pressure 
on households, but weighing on enterprises 
and the government.Over the next few years, fiscal policy is set to 
be loosened further. Consequently, the general 
government surplus will experience a con -
tinued decline. Nevertheless, barring funda -
mental policy changes, the budget is likely to 
remain in positive territory in the medium term 
if the economy as a whole remains stable, in 
line with the baselines of the current projec -
tions. This will place it comfortably within the 
structural general government deficit limit of 
0.5% of GDP . In addition, the debt ratio is set 
to remain on a downward path. In the longer 
term, however, public finances will come under 
increasing pressure as the demographic lull 
ends and the baby boomer generation enters 
retirement. Demographic pressures should be 
taken into account when decisions are made in 
the future, especially in strongly affected areas 
such as the pension and long-term care insur -
ance schemes.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue1
Tax revenue achieved robust growth in the 
second quarter amid weaker macroeconomic 
performance, rising by 4% on the year (see the 
chart and table on pp. 63 and 64). Wage tax 
revenue growth remained dynamic (+6%) as a 
result of the positive development in gross 
wages and salaries. Progressive taxation was Shrinking surplus 
this year
Weaker eco -
nomic activity 
weighing on tax 
revenue growth, 
but bank 
 support funds 
and interest 
expenditure 
lower
Spending stance 
relaxedFurther fiscal 
loosening and 
shrinking surplus 
likely in coming 
years
Robust tax 
 revenue growth 
in Q2
* The section entitled “General government budget” relates  
to data from the national accounts and the Maastricht 
debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed reporting on 
budgetary developments (government finance statistics). 
No data for the second quarter of 2019 are yet available 
for local government or the statutory health and public 
long- term care insurance schemes. These will be analysed 
in the short commentaries in subsequent issues of the 
Monthly Report.
1 Total revenue includes EU shares in German tax revenue. 
The as yet unknown receipts from local government taxes 
are not included in the intra- year results.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
62

offset by tax relief measures, among them the 
Family Relief Act (Familienentlastungsgesetz),  
which is intended, inter alia, to compensate for 
last year’s bracket creep.2 Profit- related taxes 
saw a moderate increase of 2%, having fallen 
in the first quarter, and assessed income tax 
showed dynamic growth. Although corpor -
ation tax declined overall, this was attributable 
to higher reimbursements and lower supple -
mentary payments for previous years, though 
prepayments increased. Non- assessed taxes on 
earnings (primarily investment income tax on 
dividends) climbed steeply. Here, however, de -
ferred dividend payment dates are masking the 
underlying trend, and annual growth rates are 
likely to deteriorate again as the year pro -
gresses. Withholding tax on interest income 
and capital gains continued to decline. Turn -
over tax made a substantial contribution to the 
robust pick-  up in tax revenue; being generally 
quite volatile over the course of the year, it re -
corded an increase of 6%.
According to the official tax estimate from May, 
tax revenue growth of 2½% can be expected 
for 2019 as a whole. Following an increase of 
3% over the first six months, this represents a 
weaker second half of the year. The estimate 
for 2019 as a whole assumes a subdued rate of 
macroeconomic growth. Progressive taxation is 
expected to generate additional revenue, while 
the Family Relief Act and other legislative 
changes are set to have a marked dampening 
effect. Moreover, repayments are anticipated, 
not least in connection with a VAT ruling made 
some time ago. Growth of between 3% and 
3½% per annum is projected for the years 
2020 to 2023. As the estimate is based on cur -
rent legislation, the reduction in the solidarity 
surcharge (by just over 1% of tax revenue) 
planned for 2021 has, notably, not yet been 
factored in.
In June, the Federal Government presented a 
draft reform on local government property tax, 
as the Federal Constitutional Court had deemed 
it to be unconstitutional in its current form. The 
reform concerns, in particular, the rejected valuation method used to calculate the tax. In 
future, the intention is to apply standardised 
approaches in order to converge towards ac -
tual values. In principle, the property tax can be 
viewed as a general charge for local govern -
ment services. As its use is likely to impact on 
land values, it seems wholly reasonable to 
apply a value component. Applying standard -
ised approaches will make it possible to keep 
levy costs within limits. The reform would allow 
the individual federal states to implement their 
own diverging regulations for property tax. 
However, federal state specifics are not yet 
available. On the whole, being reformed in this 
manner, property tax would remain a signifi -
cant and stable source of revenue for local gov -
ernment.
Central government budget
In the second quarter of 2019, the central gov -
ernment budget recorded a surplus of €7½ bil -
lion. Apparently as a result of a special effect 
on interest expenditure, this surplus decreased 
to almost half of its prior- year level. Interest ex -
penditure rose by €6½ billion, although higher Weaker growth 
expected for 
remainder of 
2019, but set to 
be somewhat 
higher in subse -
quent years
Property tax to 
remain a local 
government tax: 
a welcome 
developmentStable result in 
Q2, disregarding 
special effect 
on interest 
expenditureTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20192024681012
–++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
2 The basic income tax allowance and child tax allowances 
were raised and the other income tax brackets shifted to 
the right. Child benefits, which are deducted from cash rev -
enue, were raised on 1 July 2019.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
63

premiums depressed this figure by €½ billion. It 
appears that, in an exception to the rule, the 
interest payments on Bunds due at the begin -
ning of July were recorded in June. After ad -
justing for this, interest expenditure again de -
clined markedly. Spending on grants (particu -
larly to the pension insurance scheme) and on 
staff and other operating expenditure (notably 
military procurement) rose significantly once 
more. Following a slow start to the year, invest -
ment spending climbed steeply. Revenue rose 
by 3½%. Tax revenue increased by €2 billion, 
despite shares in turnover tax revenue being 
transferred to state government. Non- tax re -
ceipts were €1½ billion higher, primarily on ac -
count of the increased and extended heavy 
goods vehicle toll.
In the first half of the year, the result, adjusted 
for the special effect on interest expenditure, 
worsened by €5½ billion. The budget plan 
foresees a deterioration of €16½ billion and a 
deficit of €6 billion for the year as a whole (relative to the actual figure for 2018). By this 
yardstick, recent developments have been very 
favourable and may remain so, as things cur -
rently stand. For instance, interest payments 
are set to be far lower than was anticipated in 
the plans, looking likely to decline significantly 
rather than rise by the estimated €1 billion. As 
in recent years, the outflow of investment 
grants may also be considerably weaker than 
accounted for in the budget. All in all, the cen -
tral government budget could once again end 
the year with a surplus. If this were to be the 
case, the refugee reserve would once again not 
be needed to balance the budget, as was ori -
ginally planned, and could be topped up fur -
ther instead.
At the end of June, the Federal Government 
adopted the draft budget for 2020. Expend -
iture is set to rise by only 1% on the 2019 
budget plan. Considerable increases in specific 
areas are planned here: grants to the pension 
insurance scheme, which are linked to wage For year as a 
whole, develop -
ment far more 
favourable than 
planned; poten -
tial for surplusDraft budget for 
2020 foresees 
moderate 
expenditure 
growth …Tax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2019 1Q2
2018 2019 2018 2019
Year-on-year changeYear- on- 
year 
change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 350.2 360.5 + 10.3 +  3.0 +  2.4 178.1 185.3 + 7.2 +  4.1
of which:
Wage tax 99.5 105.4 +  5.9 +  5.9 +  5.3 51.4 54.4 + 3.0 +  5.9
Profi  t-related taxes 68.6 67.8 –  0.8 –  1.2 –  1.7 34.9 35.7 + 0.8 +  2.2
Assessed income tax 3 32.5 33.5 +  1.0 +  3.1 –  0.4 14.9 16.1 + 1.2 +  7.9
Corporation tax 18.7 17.3 –  1.4 –  7.7 –  2.1 9.3 8.1 – 1.2 – 13.1
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 12.8 14.3 +  1.4 + 11.2 +  4.1 9.3 10.3 + 1.0 + 10.3
Withholding tax on 
interest income  and 
capital  gains 4.5 2.7 –  1.8 – 40.0 – 31.4 1.4 1.3 – 0.2 – 11.1
Turnover taxes 4 115.0 119.5 +  4.5 +  3.9 +  3.4 55.8 59.1 + 3.3 +  5.9
Other 
consumption-related 
taxes 5 42.1 42.3 +  0.2 +  0.5 –  0.4 22.1 22.1 + 0.0 +  0.2
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2019. 2 Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 4 Turnover tax 
and import turnover tax. 5  Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, 
intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
64

growth, will rise most of all, but there will also 
be greater spending in the areas of defence 
and family policy, inter alia. Here, the amounts 
budgeted for parental benefits and additional 
children’s allowance for parents with low in -
comes have increased. The Federal Ministry of 
Family Affairs, Senior Citizens, Women and 
Youth is also contributing to central govern -
ment’s efforts to establish the planned legal 
entitlement to all- day childcare for children of 
primary school age. To this end, a new off-  
budget entity will be funded with half of the €2 
billion stipulated in the coalition agreement. By 
contrast, declining interest expenditure and, 
above all, considerably higher global spending 
cuts will provide relief. A global spending cut 
represents reduced spending across the board 
in budget planning. Accordingly, the intention 
is to avoid fully exhausting expenditure appro -
priations in other areas when implementing the 
budget.
Revenue is expected to dip slightly in 2020. Tax 
revenue is thus set to rise by only €2 billion, 
according to the plans. One contributing factor 
here is that central government will transfer 
turnover tax revenue to the federal states under 
the new financial equalisation scheme. In add -
ition, it will also make a transfer of €1 billion in 
the context of the new Good Childcare Act 
(Gute- Kita- Gesetz) . The promised continued 
contributions towards the refugee costs of 
state governments are not included in the tax 
revenue. However, provision has been made 
for this in the form of a €4 billion global rev -
enue shortfall.
The draft budget foresees a deficit of €9½ bil -
lion in the core budget. In order to achieve a 
balanced budget with no net borrowing, it is 
intended to withdraw €9 billion from the refu -
gee reserve. The debt brake imposes limits on 
the level of structural net borrowing, including 
relevant off- budget entities. The planned level 
stands at €7 billion. This is primarily due to an -
ticipated deficits for the off- budget entities. In 
addition, pressure on the budget will be eased 
slightly by economic growth and financial transactions. This has been factored out of the 
structural analysis, resulting in a higher struc -
tural deficit. The €12 billion ceiling for struc -
tural net borrowing will be significantly under -
shot. However, the structural deficit, which is 
not influenced by withdrawals from the re -
serve, is considerably higher than this.
The Federal Government proposes further loos -
ening fiscal policy in its 2020 draft budget. The 
structural primary balance (excluding interest 
expenditure) should thus fall by €8 billion on 
the year.
Overall, however, the 2020 draft budget ap -
pears to have been drawn up rather conserva -
tively, just as the 2019 budget was. Thus, relief 
on the expenditure side could be significantly 
greater than estimated via global spending 
cuts. Revenue could also develop more favour -
ably. For instance, transfers to the EU budget 
have been cautiously estimated, and, as in pre -
vious years, higher return flows are likely. In the … and slight 
decline in 
 revenue
Relatively high 
structural deficit 
and …… further fiscal 
loosening 
planned
More favourable 
outturn possible 
once againCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
1 Including  interest  burdens  recorded  ahead  of  time  (€7  bil-
lion).
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q45051015
–+++
–50+5+10+15+20
2018
20172017Quarterly figures
2019Cumulated from start of year2019
2018€ billion
11Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
65

absence of any negative surprises, next year’s 
budget outturn could once again be signifi -
cantly better than planned. In view of this lee -
way, it would be possible, for instance, to start 
phasing out the solidarity surcharge soon, 
which has been problematic for a number of 
reasons (for more information on this, see 
p. 67).
In its medium- term fiscal plan up to 2023, the 
Federal Government continues to forgo new 
net borrowing. Significant deficits are planned 
initially, and the refugee reserve will be used up 
by the end of 2022 in order to offset these. 
Annual average expenditure is forecast to in -
crease by less than 1½%. This target appears 
very ambitious; additional spending is likely to 
be necessary. Defence expenditure, amongst 
other things, will once again decrease mark -
edly relative to GDP up to 2023. Here, it is thus 
unclear how Germany will meet its NATO 
spending pledge. Development aid will also de -
cline, despite this meaning that the internation -ally agreed spending level will not be met. Fur -
thermore, the Federal Government has ac -
knowledged that the funds necessary to cush -
ion Germany’s exit from coal power have not 
been fully accounted for. Likewise, the fiscal 
plan does not take into consideration staff 
wage increases after 2021 or the introduction 
of a basic pension. In addition, Germany is un -
likely to reduce its carbon dioxide emissions to 
the level agreed upon within the EU, and the 
estimated compensatory payments it will have 
to make seem low. The planned entitlement to 
all-day childcare for children of primary school 
age is also likely to trigger rather high costs; 
the budgeted total funds of €2 billion would 
therefore only go a short way towards covering 
this. The federal states are already calling for a 
far greater contribution from central govern -
ment.
It was intended to make provision for the par -
tial abolition of the solidarity surcharge and the 
rise in child benefits with global revenue short -Fiscal plan for 
2021 and 
beyond disre -
gards significant 
expenditure 
 burdens
Funds set aside 
for tax measures 
limitedCentral government’s fi  scal planning up to 2023 
and the result as defi  ned in the debt brake rules*
€ billion
ItemActual
2018Target
2019Draft
2020Fiscal plan
2021 2022 2023
Expenditure 1 336.7 356.4 359.8 364.2 370.4 373.7
of which:
Investment 38.1 38.9 40.0 39.8 39.8 39.8
Global spending increases/ cuts – –  1.2 –  4.0 –  3.9 –  3.0 –  1.7
Revenue 1, 2 347.6 350.6 350.3 352.4 365.1 375.4
of which:
Tax revenue 1 322.4 325.5 327.7 334.2 345.5 356.1
Global revenue increases/ shortfalls – –  0.2 –  4.0 – 13.2 – 11.0 – 10.2
Fiscal balance 3 10.9 –  5.8 –  9.5 – 11.8 –  5.3 1.7
Allocations to (–)/withdrawals from (+) reserves 4 – 11.2 5.5 9.2 11.5 5.0 –  2.0
Net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) – – – – – –
Cyclical component 5 6.7 0.7 1.3 –  0.1 –  0.4 0.0
Balance of fi  nancial transactions 0.7 0.7 0.7 1.8 1.9 0.8
Balance of relevant off- budget entities 4.0 –  3.6 –  4.9 . . .
Energy and climate fund 2.9 –  0.7 –  2.5 . . .
Relief fund (2013 fl  ood) –  0.6 –  0.7 –  0.5 . . .
Fund to promote municipal investment –  0.7 –  1.9 –  2.0 . . .
Digitalisation fund 2.4 –  0.2 –  0.9 . . .
Fund for primary school-age childcare provision 6 – – 1.0 . . .
Structural net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) 7 –  3.5 –  5.0 –  7.0 . . .
Memo items:
Ceiling – 11.4 – 11.5 – 11.9 – 12.2 – 12.6 – 13.0
Structural fi  scal balance 7.5 – 10.8 – 16.5 . . .
* For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Key central government budget data in connection with the debt brake, Monthly 
Report, February 2016, pp. 68 f. 1 After deduction of supplementary central government grants, shares of energy tax revenue, compen-
sation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and consolidation/ budgetary recovery assistance to federal states, excluding allocations 
to/ withdrawals from reserves. 2 Excluding coin seigniorage (consistently €0.3 billion). 3 The difference between revenue and expenditure. 
Equals net borrowing/repayment less allocations to/withdrawals from reserves and less coin seigniorage. 4 Includes annual allocations of 
€2 billion to the reserve for demographic challenges as of 2021. 5 Notwithstanding legal requirements, data for all years taken from the 
Federal Government’s 2019 spring forecast. 6 Newly included in the 2020 draft budget. 7 Meaning of structural: plus the balance of 
relevant off- budget entities less the cyclical component and less the balance of fi  nancial  transactions.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
66

falls as of 2021. However, these have been 
scaled back so much compared to the previous 
fiscal plan that, as of 2022, they will no longer 
be sufficient for this purpose. No further provi -
sion has been made to guarantee continued 
central government contributions towards the 
federal states’ refugee costs, either. Nor have 
any funds been put aside to continue offsetting 
bracket creep resulting from inflation in the in -
come tax scale.
On the revenue side, there is also a substantial 
default risk attached to the funds stemming 
from the solidarity surcharge. This risk extends 
beyond planned annual revenue. The President 
of the Federal Court of Auditors, in his capacity 
as Federal Performance Commissioner, notes 
that sizeable repayment obligations may arise. 
This is ultimately due to the concern that the 
continuation of the solidarity surcharge, in 
whole or in part, may be in conflict with consti -
tutional law.3 Germany’s Basic Law stipulates 
that a surtax on income taxes, such as the soli -
darity surcharge, can only be imposed if central 
government has particular financing needs. 
Two factors may make it difficult to justify such 
a need. First, central government has repeat -
edly generated surpluses in recent years and 
allocated them to a de facto discretionary re -
serve. Second, special assistance for infrastruc -
ture reconstruction in eastern Germany – pay -
ments which featured prominently when the 
surcharge was introduced – will be phased out 
by the end of 2019. Yet, the surcharge is not to 
be abolished until 2021, and even then only 
partially. The plan is to introduce an exemption 
limit to ensure that the vast majority of those 
currently paying the surcharge will be com -
pletely exempt. Only a relatively small group of 
people should then be liable to pay the sur -
charge, but the revenue generated should still 
amount to around half of the current volume.
Not least given the risks of continuing the soli -
darity surcharge, there have also been calls to 
do away with the surcharge entirely. This would 
give rise to additional revenue shortfalls com -
pared with the budget planning to date. While there is currently some remaining scope and re -
serves are still available for now, action would 
have to be taken in the medium term. One op -
tion would be to revise regular income tax -
ation, for instance by eliminating exceptions or 
adjusting rates. In the process, the desired tax 
burden for the various income groups could be 
made transparent.
It is difficult to see why the medium- term plans 
from 2021 onwards contain no information 
about the structural result for the debt brake – 
after all, it is the key element of central govern -
ment’s fiscal rule, which is anchored in Germa -
ny’s Basic Law. While the planning for the spe -
cial funds included under the debt brake has 
not yet been completed, it is still possible to at 
least set the deficit ceilings and include them in 
the plans with a view to ensuring compliance 
with the debt brake.
According to data from the Federal Ministry of 
Finance, central government’s off- budget en -
tities recorded a slightly improved surplus of 
€1½ billion in the second quarter of 2019.4 The 
impact of the auction of 5G frequencies has yet 
to filter through to the figures. The auction 
closed in June with bids totalling €6½ billion, 
and payments of close to €6 billion are set to 
fall due this year. These proceeds are ear -
marked for the digitalisation fund to support 
the expansion of the broadband network and 
the procurement of computers for schools. The 
additional revenue from the auction of CO2 cer-
tificates received by the energy and climate 
fund was partially offset by higher expenditure.
As far as the annual result is concerned, central 
government transfers to the energy and cli -
mate fund and the digitalisation fund will 
shrink. However, this should be more than off -
set by auction proceeds of €2 billion. There will Solidarity 
 surcharge: 
shortfalls and 
repayments 
 possible due to 
legal risks
Abolish solidar -
ity surcharge 
faster and revise 
income tax if 
necessaryLack of informa -
tion pertaining 
to debt brake
Central 
 government’s 
off- budget 
entities: slight 
improvement in 
Q2 and …
… prospect 
of somewhat 
higher surplus 
for year as a 
whole
3 See also Federal Performance Commissioner (2019), 
pp. 16 f.
4 As of the current year, central government posts financial 
resources borrowed to refinance its bad bank as affecting 
the balance. These are not taken into account here. The 
results of the restructuring fund were not yet available as 
this report went to press.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
67

also be no repeat of the €1 billion burden re -
sulting from the redemption of an inflation-  
linked central government security. Overall, the 
off- budget entities’ surplus should slightly out -
perform the high level (€6 billion) recorded last 
year.
State government budgets5
In the second quarter of 2019, the state gov -
ernment core budgets posted a surplus of €4 
billion. This represents a significant decline on 
the previous year (€11½ billion). Revenue rose 
by only ½%. While tax revenue continued on 
its clear growth path (+4½%), transfers from 
public administrations suffered a considerable 
fall (-11½%), evidently largely due to the fact 
that these were recorded at a later date. Baden- 
Württemberg received revenue of €½ billion 
stemming from fines on account of the diesel 
scandal; however, in the same quarter of the 
previous year, Lower Saxony also received €1 billion. Expenditure grew by just over 9½%. A 
major factor here was that North Rhine-  West -
phalia brought forward lump- sum payments to 
universities into the second quarter.6 In add -
ition, personnel expenditure – a major expend -
iture item  – rose sharply by 6%. Growth in -
creased temporarily as a result of back- pay-
ments from the March pay agreement as well 
as changes in civil servant remuneration occur -
ring earlier than in the previous year.
In the first half of the year, the surplus thus fell 
significantly by almost €7 billion to €11 billion. 
This deterioration was due, in particular, to spe -
cial intra- year factors that are likely to have 
a  positive effect as the year progresses. The 
payments brought forward in North Rhine-  
Westphalia and the transfers booked at a later 
date will ease the pressure on state govern -
ment budgets going forward. In addition, un -
like last year, no guarantee payments are due 
for HSH Nordbank this year. By contrast, the 
tax estimate foresees a more moderate devel -
opment of tax revenue in the second half of 
the year. All in all, however, the surplus for the 
year as a whole is likely to once again be very 
high.
In the medium term, conditions are set to re -
main positive for state government finances. 
According to the tax estimate, tax receipts 
should continue to develop favourably. Further -
more, central government has confirmed that it 
will continue its contributions towards the fed -
eral states’ refugee costs. Thus, overall, there is 
still leeway in the budget, for instance, to sus -
tainably strengthen those areas, such as educa -
tion and research, that are key for future devel -
opment.
Looking at the local government level, action is 
needed in some areas. While surpluses are high 
overall at this level, too, thanks to the favour -
able underlying conditions, some municipalities Surplus fell sig -
nificantly in Q2, 
mainly due to 
special factorsNo special 
 burdens for 
remainder of 
year, surplus 
may again be 
high
Continued 
favourable out -
look provides 
room for 
 manoeuvre …State government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q463036912
––++++
3691215182124
2018
20172017Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192019
2018€ billion
5 The following data are based, unless other sources are 
stated, on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.
6 The other expenditure that makes up this category was 
€3½ billion higher than in the second quarter of 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
68

are still experiencing financial difficulties. These 
accumulated in the past, in particular, and the 
respective state governments are therefore par -
tially responsible as they organise local govern -
ments’ financial equalisation schemes and pro -
vide local government budgetary oversight. 
They thus have a major responsibility to address 
these issues promptly, and, above all, to stop 
new unsound developments at an early stage. 
Multi- year cash advances should thus be 
avoided in the future. If local authorities with 
budgetary shortfalls were only allowed to ob -
tain such advances from their respective state 
government, the responsibility would lie dir -
ectly with the state government. If these ad -
vances were also to be counted towards that 
state government’s debt brake, this would cre -
ate an additional incentive to take effective 
countermeasures in a timely manner.7
The Stability Council confirmed that the five 
states in receipt of consolidation assistance ad -
hered to the agreed paths for reducing their 
structural deficits in 2018.8 The safety margins 
indicated are, in some cases, low. The struc -
tural budget outturn of several states even 
benefited from the fact that certain grants 
were classified as an acquisition of financial 
assets (financial transactions) and thus did not 
count towards their structural deficits.9 How -
ever, a number of states prevented favourable 
developments from having an impact on their 
outturns by choosing to build up reserves ra -
ther than repay debt, which is high in some 
cases. Overall, the consolidation reports do not 
always demonstrate how well equipped the 
federal states are to deal with the debt brake.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
The German statutory pension insurance 
scheme recorded a surplus of €½ billion in the 
second quarter of 2019. This constituted a 
year- on- year decline of €1½ billion and was 
mainly driven by additional expenditure on “mothers’ pensions”. The expansion has been 
in place since the beginning of the year, but the 
first payments did not occur until the second 
quarter – and thus partly retrospectively. Over -
all, these payments came to just under €2 bil -
lion and thus account for almost half of the 
steep rise (+6½%) in pension expenditure. The … to address, 
inter alia, prob -
lematic develop -
ments at local 
government 
level
Stability Council 
confirms 
required 
 consolidation
Surplus down in 
Q2 due to 
expansion of 
“mothers’ 
 pensions”Finances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary  quarterly  figures  as  the  latter  are  not  revised  sub-
sequently.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201920182017
2018
201720192017 2018 201902468
2017 2018 201902468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
7 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), p. 9.
8 Berlin, Bremen, Saarland, Saxony-  Anhalt and Schleswig- 
Holstein receive consolidation assistance of €800 million 
per year for the budget years 2011 to 2019. To qualify for 
this assistance, the federal states have to eliminate their 
structural deficits by at least reducing them in equal incre -
ments along a steady path by 2020. Central government 
and the state governments as a whole each provide half of 
the financial resources.
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), pp. 68 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
69

pension increase of July 2018 stood at just 
under 3½%; the number of pensions went up 
only slightly. In a separate development, pay -
ments to the statutory health insurance scheme 
soared. Since the beginning of the year, the 
statutory pension insurance scheme has been 
paying half of the supplementary contributions 
of pensioners. Revenue continued to rise sig -
nificantly (+4½%) as a result of the favourable 
employment and wage developments.
In the first half of the year, the result fell by €1 
billion on the previous year. On 1  July 2019, 
pensions rose by 3.2% in western Germany 
and 3.9% in eastern Germany and thus by only a little more than in the previous year. Irre -
spective of this, developments going forward 
are likely to be similar to those from the first 
half of the year. As a result, the outturn is likely 
to be much worse than in the previous year. 
However, a moderate surplus still appears pos -
sible.
In future, the demographic pressure on the 
pension insurance scheme will increase grad -
ually. Immigration may ease this pressure some -
what.10 However, the burdens will increase sig -
nificantly when, as of the mid-2020s, the baby 
boomer generation enters retirement. The 
statutory pension insurance scheme will come 
under additional pressure as of 2030 if the 
statutory retirement age is not raised any fur -
ther then. Up until 2030, the ratio of pension- 
drawing periods to contribution periods is 
broadly stable; however, after that date, it will 
grow again with increasing life expectancy. This 
will be a further factor inflating the ratio of 
pension recipients to contribution payers. To 
ease this burden, the statutory retirement age 
could be tethered to the life expectancy of the 
65+ generation for the post-2030 period.11 
Countries such as Sweden and Denmark are 
pursuing such a strategy already.
Federal Employment Agency
In the second quarter of 2019, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency posted a surplus of €½ bil -
lion in the core budget.12 In year- on- year terms, 
the surplus fell by roughly half. Revenue de -
clined by €1 billion, or 10½%, on the back of 
the contribution rate cut at the beginning of 
the year (by 0.5  percentage point to 2.5%). 
However, the fact that the Federal Employment Result likely to 
be worse for 
year as a whole, 
too, but another 
surplus still 
 possible
Higher 
 retirement age 
could ease 
demographic 
pressure on 
 pension level
Lower surplus 
due to contribu -
tion rate cutFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency *
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201920182017
2017
201920182017 2018 2019–12–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2017 2018 201912963036912
––––++++ Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
10 The new population projection assumes, in particular, a 
slightly higher level of immigration than the previous pro -
jection. See Federal Statistical Office (2019), medium vari -
ant (G2- L2-  W2).
11 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2016), p. 71.
12 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are recorded as expenditure and thus reduce the 
core budget balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
70

Agency did not have to make a special transfer 
of almost €1 billion to the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund this year again eased the strain on its 
finances.
Both per capita earnings and employment con -
tinued to develop favourably. Had the contribu -
tion rate not been cut, the Federal Employment 
Agency’s revenue would have risen by just over 
4½%. By contrast, at almost 6½%, expenditure 
growth (adjusted for the absence of the special 
transfer to the civil servants’ pension fund) was 
even higher. Spending on unemployment bene -
fits was up by 7%. Registered unemployment 
fell further in the second quarter. However, un -
employment in the statutory unemployment 
insurance scheme recorded a perceptible rise 
from a very low level after years in decline. 
Short- time working benefits, which are cur -rently being discussed given the cyclical trend, 
account for only a very small amount of ex -
penditure at present and are down on the pre -
vious year as at last count. Expenditure on ac -
tive labour market policy measures rose by 
4½%. This is likely due to higher costs of voca -
tional training measures.
The impact of cutting the contribution rate will 
be seen in a significantly lower surplus for the 
Federal Employment Agency for the year as a 
whole. The growth in unemployment benefits 
and active labour market measures recorded to 
date is not likely to let up as the year pro -
gresses. However, expenditure should remain 
well below the budget estimates. As a result, 
the surplus for the year as a whole is likely to 
again be much higher than planned (€½ bil -
lion).Higher 
 expenditure on 
unemployment 
benefits
Significantly 
lower surplus for 
year as a whole 
– but probably 
again higher 
than budgeted
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), Commentaries, Monthly Report, July 2019, pp. 8-12.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2019, pp. 58-72.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Public finances, Monthly Report, November 2018, pp. 54-65.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Excursus: longer- term pension developments, Monthly Report, 
 August 2016, pp. 68-77.
Federal Performance Commissioner (2019), Gutachten über den Abbau des Solidaritätszuschlags, 
June 2019.
Federal Statistical Office (2019), Bevölkerung im Wandel: Annahmen und Ergebnisse der 14. koor -
dinierten Bevölkerungsvorausberechnung, June 2019.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
71

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
72

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43 •
2. Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43 •
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
4. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
3•

6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  78 •
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ....................................................  78 •
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
8. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  81 •
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
August 2019
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 EONIA  5,7 EURIBOR  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2017         Oct. 9.5 5.4 5.0 5.0 3.8 2.5 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Nov. 9.1 5.2 4.9 4.9 3.9 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.35 − 0.33 0.9         Dec. 8.8 5.2 4.7 4.7 3.6 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.34 − 0.33 0.9
2018         Jan. 8.8 5.2 4.6 4.5 3.5 2.9 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb. 8.4 4.8 4.2 4.2 3.3 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2         Mar. 7.5 4.3 3.6 3.9 2.8 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Apr. 7.1 4.2 3.8 3.8 2.8 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.37 − 0.33 1.0
         May 7.5 4.6 4.0 4.0 3.3 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 7.4 4.7 4.3 4.1 3.1 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1
         July 7.0 4.4 4.0 3.9 3.4 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.0
         Aug. 6.5 4.0 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.4 − 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1         Sep. 6.9 4.3 3.6 3.6 3.2 3.2 0.0 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2
         Oct. 6.8 4.4 3.8 3.7 2.9 2.9 0.6 − 0.37 − 0.32 1.3
         Nov. 6.7 4.3 3.7 3.9 2.6 2.8 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2         Dec. 6.6 4.3 4.1 3.9 2.8 3.0 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.31 1.1
2019         Jan. 6.2 4.0 3.7 4.0 2.7 2.9 0.8 − 0.37 − 0.31 1.0
         Feb. 6.6 4.5 4.2 4.2 3.0 3.2 1.3 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.9         Mar. 7.5 5.2 4.6 4.5 2.7 3.0 1.3 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
         Apr. 7.4 5.3 4.7 4.7 2.7 3.2 1.1 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
         May 7.2 5.2 4.8 4.7 2.2 2.8 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.7         June 7.2 5.0 4.5 ... 2.3 3.1 2.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 0.4
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.37 − 0.36 0.2
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, overnight index average. 6 Euro interbank offered rate. 7 See also footnotes to Table
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by VI.4, p. 43  .8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2. External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which: Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 EUR 1 = USD ...
2017         Oct. + 38,522 + 27,778 + 24,605 + 14,555 + 54,152 + 1,530 − 42,938 − 2,695 1.1756 98.6 93.1
         Nov. + 39,121 + 33,281 − 5,116 − 58,948 + 24,346 + 1,610 + 21,712 + 6,164 1.1738 98.5 93.1         Dec. + 46,006 + 29,489 + 104,577 + 51,429 − 8,935 + 2,518 + 61,170 − 1,604 1.1836 98.8 93.3
2018         Jan. + 8,881 + 10,354 + 4,616 + 41,911 + 2,085 − 4,354 − 37,226 + 2,201 1.2200 99.4 93.9
         Feb. + 18,586 + 22,067 + 28,042 + 3,299 + 63,969 − 492 − 38,686 − 49 1.2348 99.6 93.9         Mar. + 44,364 + 34,091 + 51,820 + 79,303 − 60,033 − 597 + 23,987 + 9,160 1.2336 99.7 94.2
         Apr. + 31,891 + 23,177 + 6,912 + 30,997 + 22,556 + 13,894 − 56,884 − 3,651 1.2276 99.5 94.0
         May + 9,347 + 22,618 + 20,946 − 3,194 + 51,932 + 15,231 − 45,382 + 2,358 1.1812 98.1 92.8         June + 30,678 + 27,654 + 13,927 − 12,103 − 20,925 + 8,508 + 30,586 + 7,861 1.1678 97.9 92.6
         July + 30,160 + 24,756 − 7,221 − 4,292 + 1,306 + 13,966 − 13,914 − 4,287 1.1686 99.2 93.8
         Aug. + 28,158 + 17,979 + 40,493 − 11,823 + 76,859 + 14,225 − 41,988 + 3,220 1.1549 99.0 93.4         Sep. + 27,028 + 18,879 + 51,985 − 911 − 29,694 + 6,687 + 73,571 + 2,331 1.1659 99.5 93.9
         Oct. + 33,991 + 24,183 − 26,513 + 4,595 − 7,187 + 11,698 − 34,869 − 750 1.1484 98.9 93.4
         Nov. + 30,445 + 27,825 + 37,568 − 47,528 + 13,476 + 16,128 + 52,036 + 3,456 1.1367 98.3 92.9         Dec. + 42,186 + 25,726 + 56,782 − 44,432 + 101,998 + 2,045 − 5,951 + 3,122 1.1384 98.4 92.7
2019         Jan. + 11,379 + 9,694 + 2,614 + 14,789 − 21,599 + 972 + 11,164 − 2,711 1.1416 97.8 92.2
         Feb. + 18,884 + 26,262 + 2,792 + 12,871 − 23,727 − 1,108 + 14,536 + 220 1.1351 97.4 91.7         Mar. + 33,326 + 31,759 + 52,137 + 24,314 − 44,128 + 6,764 + 59,970 + 5,218 1.1302 96.9 91.1
         Apr. + 20,656 + 23,636 − 22,886 − 43,318 + 17,402 + 3,101 − 3,236 + 3,164 1.1238 96.7 p 91.0
         May + 13,315 + 28,897 + 52,993 + 20,701 − 52,494 + 5,259 + 77,815 + 1,713 1.1185 97.4 p 91.4         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1293 97.9 p 91.9
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1218 97.5 p 91.5
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary Tables XII.10 and 12, pp.
82-83   .2Including employee stock options. 3Against the
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 1Monthly averages, see also currencies of the EER-19 group. 4 Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2019
I. Key economic data for the euro area
 
3. General economic indicators
  
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2016 1.9 1.5 2.2 3.5 2.8 1.1 − 0.2 3.7 1.1 2.12017 2.4 1.7 2.5 4.9 3.0 2.3 1.5 8.1 1.7 4.62018 1.9 1.4 1.5 3.9 1.7 1.7 1.9 8.2 0.9 4.8
2018         Q1 2.5 1.5 1.6 3.3 2.1 2.2 2.3 12.1 1.2 4.0
         Q2 2.2 1.5 2.5 3.9 2.1 1.8 1.4 10.4 1.2 5.3         Q3 1.7 1.6 1.1 4.0 1.8 1.7 2.4 7.4 0.5 4.5         Q4 1.2 1.2 0.9 4.3 0.7 1.2 1.6 3.6 0.4 5.2
2019         Q1 1.2 1.3 0.8 4.5 0.9 0.9 0.9 6.3 − 0.3 3.0
         Q2 1.1 ... 0.0 ... ... 1.3 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 2
 Annual percentage change
2016 1.6 4.5 1.2 3.0 4.1 0.6 2.6 1.8 1.9 4.92017 2.9 2.9 3.4 4.3 3.4 2.4 4.1 − 2.2 3.6 8.52018 0.9 1.2 1.0 4.2 3.5 0.2 1.8 − 0.1 0.6 2.0
2018         Q1 3.0 2.7 3.8 4.6 6.2 2.3 0.1 − 2.3 3.4 4.4
         Q2 2.2 1.3 2.8 3.1 2.6 0.4 2.0 4.1 1.7 0.2         Q3 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 3.8 3.2 0.1 2.5 5.9 − 0.3 3.0         Q4 − 1.9 1.1 − 2.3 5.1 2.1 − 1.8 2.6 − 6.4 − 2.4 0.9
2019         Q1 − 0.5 3.5 − 2.7 3.3 0.5 0.5 1.9 2.6 − 0.6 − 0.8
         Q2
e − 1.4 ... p − 5.2 2.7 3.3 1.4 ... p 4.7 − 1.1 1.4
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 As a percentage of full capacity
2016 81.6 80.0 84.6 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 78.3 76.3 72.62017 83.0 81.8 86.6 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 79.5 76.8 74.52018 83.9 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.4
2018         Q2 84.0 81.2 87.8 73.9 84.3 85.9 71.2 76.1 78.1 76.3
         Q3 83.8 79.9 87.8 75.2 84.7 85.9 70.7 74.6 77.9 77.4         Q4 83.6 80.8 87.1 73.0 84.1 85.7 70.9 77.0 77.9 75.9
2019         Q1 83.6 81.5 86.3 75.2 83.2 85.2 70.2 80.3 78.4 77.0
         Q2 82.8 81.3 85.3 73.5 80.8 85.1 71.7 76.9 77.5 76.9         Q3 81.9 81.2 83.9 72.5 81.6 84.0 71.8 74.1 77.0 75.9
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 4
 As a percentage of civilian labour force
2016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 8.4 11.7 9.72017 9.1 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.4 21.5 6.8 11.2 8.72018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 9.1 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.5
2019         Feb. 7.8 5.5 2.9 4.6 6.7 8.7 18.5 5.0 10.4 6.6
         Mar. 7.7 5.5 3.4 4.0 6.7 8.7 18.2 4.7 10.1 6.5
         Apr. 7.6 5.5 3.1 5.0 6.7 8.6 17.6 4.6 10.0 6.4
         May 7.6 5.5 3.1 5.0 6.6 8.6 ... 4.5 9.8 6.4         June 7.5 5.6 3.1 ... 6.6 8.7 ... 4.5 9.7 6.5
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.6 ... ...Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2019
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.12017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.92018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2019         Feb. 1.5 2.0 1.7 1.9 1.3 1.6 0.8 0.7 1.1 2.8
         Mar. 1.4 2.2 1.4 2.2 1.1 1.3 1.0 1.1 1.1 2.7
         Apr. 1.7 2.0 2.1 3.2 1.5 1.5 1.1 1.7 1.1 3.3
         May 1.2 1.7 1.3 3.1 1.3 1.1 0.6 1.0 0.9 3.5         June 1.3 1.3 1.5 2.6 1.1 1.4 0.2 1.1 0.8 3.1
         July
e 1.1 1.2 1.1 2.0 1.0 1.3 0.4 0.5 0.3 3.0
 
 General government financial balance 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2016 − 1.6 − 2.4 0.9 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5 0.5 − 0.7 − 2.5 0.12017 − 1.0 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 2.8 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.62018 − 0.5 − 0.7 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 2.5 1.1 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.0
 
 General government debt 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2016 89.2 106.1 68.5 9.2 63.0 98.0 178.5 73.5 131.4 40.32017 87.1 103.4 64.5 9.2 61.3 98.4 176.2 68.5 131.4 40.02018 85.1 102.0 60.9 8.4 58.9 98.4 181.1 64.8 132.2 35.9
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical are provisional. 1  Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted. 2  Manufacturing,
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations. 3  Manufacturing: quarterly

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2019
I. Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1
 Annual percentage change
2.4 2.4 5.6 2.2 2.0 1.9 3.1 3.1 3.2 4.8 20164.1 1.5 6.8 2.9 2.6 2.8 3.2 4.9 3.0 4.5 20173.5 2.6 6.7 2.6 2.7 2.1 4.1 4.5 2.6 3.9 2018
3.7 3.1 5.1 2.8 3.7 2.1 3.7 4.8 2.8 4.0 2018          Q1
3.8 3.1 6.7 3.0 2.7 2.6 4.5 4.1 2.6 4.0          Q22.6 2.6 7.3 2.5 2.2 2.1 4.6 5.0 2.3 3.8          Q33.8 1.7 7.6 2.2 2.4 1.7 3.6 4.1 2.6 3.8          Q4
4.2 1.6 4.9 1.7 1.5 1.9 3.7 3.2 2.0 3.2 2019          Q1
4.1 ... ... 2.0 1.7 ... 1.9 ... 2.1 ...          Q2
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2.7 0.0 − 7.3 1.3 2.8 2.4 4.7 7.8 1.7 9.1 20166.8 3.8 8.7 1.3 5.5 3.5 3.3 8.4 3.3 7.5 20175.2 − 1.3 1.2 0.6 3.7 0.1 4.4 5.0 0.4 7.1 2018
7.1 1.8 2.1 2.4 5.0 2.2 1.3 8.8 2.9 5.2 2018          Q1
5.2 − 2.1 0.8 1.5 5.1 0.9 5.7 6.9 1.3 10.5          Q22.9 − 2.6 − 2.0 0.1 2.4 − 1.3 6.0 3.5 0.4 6.1          Q35.7 − 2.2 4.1 − 1.6 2.3 − 1.4 4.6 0.8 − 2.9 6.3          Q4
4.8 − 1.5 − 2.1 − 1.2 5.5 − 4.1 6.7 4.4 − 0.2 5.7 2019          Q1
5.3
p − 0.1 p 0.3 p − 1.6 ... − 2.5 3.1 p 3.0 p 1.4 ...          Q2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
75.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 201677.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 201777.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 2018
77.5 82.0 77.6 83.6 88.7 81.4 86.3 86.0 80.3 60.9 2018          Q2
77.2 80.8 83.2 84.4 88.7 82.0 84.0 84.6 79.3 61.8          Q377.4 79.0 79.1 84.0 88.5 81.2 87.6 85.6 78.6 62.5          Q4
77.5 80.1 77.1 84.4 87.0 77.8 88.2 85.2 80.8 61.5 2019          Q1
76.9 79.7 78.2 84.3 87.2 79.4 89.1 84.8 80.4 66.0          Q277.5 80.3 75.9 84.1 86.7 80.1 89.4 83.6 80.8 64.2          Q3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
7.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.1 19.6 13.0 20167.1 5.6 4.0 4.9 5.6 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.3 11.1 20176.2 5.5 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 2018
6.0 5.4 3.5 3.4 4.7 6.5 5.7 4.6 14.2 7.4 2019          Feb.
6.0 5.7 3.4 3.3 4.7 6.5 5.6 4.5 14.2 7.2          Mar.
5.8 5.7 3.5 3.3 4.7 6.6 5.5 4.5 14.2 6.9          Apr.
5.8 5.7 3.5 3.3 4.6 6.6 5.4 4.4 14.1 6.6          May5.7 5.8 3.4 3.4 4.5 6.7 5.4 4.4 14.0 6.5          June
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          JulyDeutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2019
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
 Annual percentage change
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 20163.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 20172.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 2018
2.0 2.1 1.3 2.6 1.4 0.9 2.3 1.3 1.1 0.8 2019          Feb.
2.6 2.4 1.3 2.9 1.7 0.8 2.7 1.6 1.3 1.1          Mar.
2.7 2.2 1.7 3.0 1.7 0.9 2.4 1.8 1.6 1.2          Apr.
2.5 2.2 1.7 2.3 1.7 0.3 2.7 1.6 0.9 0.2          May2.4 1.5 1.8 2.7 1.6 0.7 2.7 1.9 0.6 0.3          June
2.5 1.6 1.8 2.6 ... − 0.7 3.0 2.0 0.6 0.1          July
General government financial balance 5
As a percentage of GDP
0.2 1.9 0.9 0.0 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.3 20160.5 1.4 3.4 1.2 − 0.8 − 3.0 − 0.8 0.0 − 3.1 1.8 20170.7 2.4 2.0 1.5 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 0.7 − 2.5 − 4.8 2018
General government debt 5
As a percentage of GDP
40.0 20.7 55.5 61.9 83.0 129.2 51.8 78.7 99.0 105.5 201639.4 23.0 50.2 57.0 78.2 124.8 50.9 74.1 98.1 95.8 201734.2 21.4 46.0 52.4 73.8 121.5 48.9 70.1 97.1 102.5 2018
data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter. 4Monthly data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5  According to Maastricht Treaty definition. 
data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
August 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2017         Nov. 127.5 98.8 21.8 28.7 34.8 18.4 − 1.0 − 19.4 5.5 4.4 − 0.8 − 1.5 3.4
         Dec. − 107.5 − 89.3 − 8.8 − 18.2 − 8.6 16.9 − 151.8 − 168.7 − 2.0 11.4 − 0.6 − 7.9 − 4.9
2018         Jan. 124.7 83.9 26.4 40.8 27.6 − 43.9 152.4 196.3 11.6 − 8.5 − 0.1 22.0 − 1.8
         Feb. 7.6 3.4 − 0.3 4.2 20.8 − 11.5 46.9 58.3 − 16.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 13.3 − 1.8         Mar. 65.8 60.9 1.5 4.9 6.9 81.5 − 66.0 − 147.6 13.2 − 5.9 − 0.4 1.9 17.6
         Apr. 66.3 65.2 52.5 1.1 − 0.7 − 75.3 42.0 117.3 − 5.5 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.3
         May 122.3 88.1 11.0 34.2 39.9 − 35.5 120.6 156.1 − 4.5 − 7.4 − 0.4 1.2 2.1         June − 5.6 − 23.0 − 22.3 17.3 20.5 77.3 − 67.6 − 144.9 − 8.4 − 4.8 − 0.4 − 7.7 4.6
         July 67.7 66.9 19.9 0.8 3.4 − 25.3 41.6 66.9 10.4 6.1 − 0.6 − 8.3 13.1
         Aug. − 2.2 − 13.6 − 4.8 11.4 22.7 − 27.3 − 1.3 26.0 4.1 − 8.3 − 0.4 1.4 11.4         Sep. 25.3 22.4 − 11.2 2.9 7.1 65.6 − 26.5 − 92.1 23.9 − 12.5 − 0.5 22.3 14.6
         Oct. 11.8 17.5 3.1 − 5.7 − 7.5 − 13.2 72.4 85.6 8.0 − 6.5 − 0.2 3.8 10.9
         Nov. 92.0 91.5 12.1 0.5 2.0 72.9 35.0 − 37.9 3.7 − 4.2 − 1.0 4.0 4.9         Dec. − 89.0 − 69.5 − 21.2 − 19.5 − 21.4 − 0.4 − 162.8 − 162.4 4.5 16.4 0.1 − 7.9 − 4.1
2019         Jan. 126.6 70.2 15.0 56.4 44.9 − 0.2 198.9 199.1 20.0 − 8.8 0.1 26.0 2.7
         Feb. 52.7 42.3 17.3 10.4 24.1 20.0 − 32.6 − 52.6 20.4 0.6 − 0.1 26.0 − 6.1         Mar. 15.7 41.8 2.3 − 26.1 − 26.2 65.2 − 0.3 − 65.6 9.4 − 1.6 0.0 − 6.0 17.0
         Apr. 69.0 90.0 26.9 − 21.0 − 20.6 − 9.7 113.8 123.6 − 18.5 − 5.9 0.2 − 11.7 − 1.0
         May 39.1 36.8 12.8 2.3 3.1 64.5 68.6 4.0 14.0 − 2.6 0.6 7.0 9.1         June − 1.6 18.9 − 14.0 − 20.5 − 19.7 83.1 − 9.7 − 92.8 50.0 18.1 1.1 9.3 21.4
  
  
b) German contribution
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2017         Nov. 27.2 16.7 6.4 10.5 11.2 23.1 − 2.6 − 25.7 2.6 3.3 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.1
         Dec. − 5.4 − 3.5 4.3 − 1.8 1.0 − 48.9 − 8.1 40.8 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 1.9 5.3
2018         Jan. 19.1 21.3 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.3 10.1 28.1 18.0 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 14.2 − 5.6
         Feb. 5.1 10.7 − 1.7 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 20.7 11.6 32.4 − 5.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 2.9         Mar. 7.2 9.7 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.6 7.9 − 5.2 − 13.1 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 4.0 2.2
         Apr. 7.3 7.2 0.9 0.1 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 13.9 − 8.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.1 1.9
         May 19.2 21.2 5.0 − 2.1 2.4 − 10.7 29.8 40.6 − 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 4.1 − 4.6         June 16.7 17.9 2.1 − 1.1 1.3 − 18.2 − 20.4 − 2.1 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 3.1 8.1
         July 12.7 9.7 0.0 2.9 0.9 26.0 − 0.3 − 26.3 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.7 5.9
         Aug. 4.1 5.7 − 8.7 − 1.6 2.8 − 8.5 − 11.6 − 3.1 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 1.7 1.8         Sep. 19.3 18.3 1.8 1.0 4.1 − 4.1 7.9 12.0 12.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 7.6 7.8
         Oct. 7.0 8.7 1.4 − 1.7 − 5.0 34.2 2.8 − 31.4 1.6 0.1 − 0.5 4.1 − 2.0
         Nov. 20.0 18.5 0.9 1.5 2.5 15.1 − 3.7 − 18.8 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 3.0 − 1.4         Dec. − 5.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 33.5 3.6 37.1 − 1.1 0.7 − 0.3 − 9.1 7.5
2019         Jan. 16.3 15.0 0.3 1.3 − 1.3 67.9 21.1 − 46.8 2.1 − 5.7 − 0.5 14.0 − 5.7
         Feb. 12.5 16.4 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 1.4 24.3 − 15.4 − 39.6 6.6 − 0.8 0.1 12.6 − 5.2         Mar. 9.7 17.2 0.1 − 7.5 − 4.8 − 32.1 13.9 46.1 − 4.0 − 3.2 0.2 − 4.4 3.4
         Apr. 7.6 12.7 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 6.1 19.2 14.8 − 4.5 − 6.6 − 2.7 0.2 − 4.0 0.0
         May 19.3 19.8 0.5 − 0.5 1.4 11.8 2.4 − 9.3 9.1 − 1.7 0.6 7.5 2.6         June 25.7 26.5 4.3 − 0.9 1.2 − 7.7 10.6 18.3 10.3 1.5 0.6 2.9 5.4
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report, p.
30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
August 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 a) Euro area 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which: ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl. money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 8.8 71.7 − 77.4 73.2 81.7 0.9 80.7 − 7.6 − 0.8 17.2 − 3.8 0.1 2017          Nov.
− 21.5 − 89.3 − 22.2 63.8 66.3 16.1 50.2 − 6.6 4.1 − 31.8 − 26.5 − 7.1          Dec.
40.9 20.0 − 8.3 − 2.4 − 19.6 − 15.2 − 4.5 5.6 11.7 − 7.8 20.1 − 12.7 2018          Jan.
13.8 10.7 − − 12.0 − 9.0 5.7 0.3 5.4 − 17.4 2.7 − 4.8 − 11.3 4.9          Feb.13.9 49.4 − 70.8 67.4 64.6 8.7 55.9 − 3.5 6.4 8.2 − 1.4 8.3          Mar.
− 19.9 − 32.6 − 49.0 30.0 48.7 4.2 44.4 − 20.7 2.0 − 3.8 11.3 0.8          Apr.
7.1 15.5 − 68.7 93.1 95.8 4.9 90.9 − 10.0 7.2 24.9 − 12.3 − 6.7          May
21.4 − 43.5 − 102.2 108.7 91.1 11.4 79.6 14.2 3.4 − 5.6 − 8.9 4.8          June
7.6 34.1 − − 9.7 − 9.5 − 6.0 6.7 − 12.8 − 8.1 4.6 6.7 10.3 − 7.1          July
2.9 − 41.1 − 4.6 − 1.5 − 0.0 2.9 − 3.0 − 6.7 5.2 3.8 − 1.6 1.2          Aug.
40.6 6.0 − 20.5 45.4 69.3 2.1 67.2 − 20.8 − 3.2 − 10.7 − 19.5 1.0          Sep.
− 38.8 − 5.4 − 34.8 13.3 8.0 1.8 6.3 8.3 − 3.0 − 10.2 23.8 − 2.4          Oct.
7.3 64.7 − 89.3 88.2 97.7 5.3 92.4 − 11.6 2.2 31.5 0.3 − 1.8          Nov.
− 59.9 − 86.8 − 52.7 50.2 49.3 18.0 31.3 − 4.4 5.4 − 14.2 0.6 7.1          Dec.
66.1 66.0 − − 25.7 − 21.5 − 39.0 − 13.1 − 25.9 3.3 14.2 15.6 − 0.2 − 7.8 2019          Jan.
18.6 − 3.3 − 37.0 45.5 39.3 3.2 36.1 − 0.4 6.6 0.2 − 8.4 − 1.2          Feb.
− 20.9 − 29.4 − 121.7 139.5 133.0 6.2 126.9 − 6.2 12.7 − 7.2 − 0.5 − 18.6          Mar.
− 33.8 37.3 − 74.3 55.9 46.9 7.4 39.6 2.4 6.6 22.2 14.2 − 0.2          Apr.
17.8 − 11.8 − 83.6 88.5 87.7 5.1 82.6 − 12.4 13.2 − 7.7 − 7.1 5.9          May26.2 − 67.5 − 72.8 84.8 95.4 7.9 87.4 − 13.9 3.4 − 20.7 − 8.6 − 3.5          June
 
 
  b) German contribution 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  10 
of which: Components of the money stockIntra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl. money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
6.2 8.7 1.2 − 0.0 32.7 33.8 − 1.7 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.2 2017          Nov.
10.0 − 58.0 3.8 2.0 − 8.8 − 10.1 0.4 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.8          Dec.
− 24.3 35.5 − 0.0 − 2.8 13.1 11.5 2.4 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 2018          Jan.
9.2 − 21.2 2.0 − 0.3 1.7 5.2 − 4.4 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 0.7          Feb.8.3 0.6 6.9 − 1.5 3.1 − 0.5 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1          Mar.
− 15.2 14.5 1.3 1.9 5.3 14.7 − 8.6 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr.
11.7 − 42.5 5.4 − 0.1 39.3 38.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.1          May17.7 − 26.3 3.6 2.5 4.8 − 6.4 14.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.1 − 2.6          June
− 21.0 57.8 3.1 2.2 − 0.5 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.6 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.9          July
13.7 − 14.2 5.3 0.5 − 0.4 2.4 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 1.7          Aug.12.2 − 32.9 3.9 − 0.3 23.8 27.3 − 2.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.5          Sep.
− 17.8 43.5 3.8 0.1 13.8 11.1 − 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.0 2.3          Oct.
9.7 − 8.2 2.5 1.0 32.8 38.6 − 4.1 0.5 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.5          Nov.
− 5.4 − 27.6 4.0 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.3 − 3.3 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.8          Dec.
− 18.5 103.9 − 9.6 7.5 − 3.4 − 14.3 9.6 0.3 0.9 0.0 0.0 2019          Jan.
− 2.7 20.3 2.9 0.4 12.5 8.3 3.6 1.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7          Feb.
17.7 − 58.0 2.5 1.2 21.8 20.9 − 1.5 2.2 0.0 − 0.2 0.3          Mar.
− 15.2 33.9 3.9 2.1 14.7 17.9 − 3.7 0.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.6          Apr.
19.0 − 20.1 4.0 0.8 23.0 23.8 0.4 − 0.3 − 1.3 0.1 0.4          May
3.7 − 6.6 3.0 2.1 10.5 10.3 − 1.3 − 0.4 1.7 − 0.0 0.2          June
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
August 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
AssetsLending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro area Otheryear/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  
2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2017         May 27,012.9 17,632.3 13,145.1 10,895.9 1,451.1 798.2 4,487.1 1,062.5 3,424.6 5,357.9 4,022.7
         June 26,689.9 17,610.8 13,132.6 10,895.2 1,441.2 796.1 4,478.3 1,063.1 3,415.2 5,192.9 3,886.2
         July 26,650.3 17,603.7 13,118.4 10,866.0 1,460.0 792.4 4,485.3 1,060.3 3,425.0 5,229.5 3,817.2
         Aug. 26,683.9 17,609.7 13,086.6 10,852.9 1,444.0 789.6 4,523.2 1,054.6 3,468.6 5,199.9 3,874.3         Sep. 26,562.4 17,656.1 13,131.0 10,905.8 1,434.3 790.9 4,525.1 1,046.0 3,479.1 5,171.5 3,734.8
         Oct. 26,760.5 17,733.1 13,189.5 10,968.3 1,423.0 798.2 4,543.6 1,046.2 3,497.4 5,292.7 3,734.6
         Nov. 26,790.2 17,846.3 13,272.1 11,037.5 1,430.9 803.7 4,574.2 1,038.3 3,535.9 5,247.3 3,696.6         Dec. 26,320.8 17,707.9 13,166.9 10,942.4 1,425.5 798.9 4,541.0 1,028.7 3,512.3 5,065.9 3,547.0
2018         Jan. 26,335.6 17,818.8 13,240.9 10,990.5 1,448.8 801.7 4,577.8 1,041.6 3,536.2 5,253.9 3,262.9
         Feb. 26,299.5 17,821.0 13,239.7 10,993.3 1,456.5 790.0 4,581.2 1,025.2 3,556.0 5,342.9 3,135.6         Mar. 26,291.7 17,880.1 13,279.0 11,032.1 1,466.5 780.4 4,601.1 1,023.3 3,577.8 5,257.7 3,154.0
         Apr. 26,515.2 18,032.6 13,432.7 11,127.7 1,490.0 814.9 4,599.9 1,025.1 3,574.8 5,334.9 3,147.6
         May 26,916.0 18,104.0 13,514.0 11,201.8 1,504.5 807.7 4,590.1 1,019.9 3,570.2 5,543.5 3,268.5         June 26,771.9 18,098.7 13,482.1 11,193.5 1,501.6 786.9 4,616.7 1,016.8 3,599.9 5,455.8 3,217.3
         July 26,782.0 18,156.2 13,547.0 11,235.8 1,523.9 787.2 4,609.3 1,012.7 3,596.5 5,466.1 3,159.6
         Aug. 26,815.7 18,127.4 13,530.6 11,227.3 1,523.9 779.3 4,596.8 1,001.7 3,595.1 5,485.0 3,203.4         Sep. 26,769.6 18,147.6 13,539.4 11,248.0 1,509.2 782.1 4,608.3 1,000.7 3,607.5 5,462.0 3,159.9
         Oct. 27,088.7 18,151.6 13,555.2 11,266.4 1,510.8 778.0 4,596.4 1,002.6 3,593.9 5,679.3 3,257.9
         Nov. 27,225.8 18,243.2 13,637.8 11,338.0 1,515.9 783.9 4,605.5 1,001.0 3,604.5 5,704.0 3,278.5         Dec. 26,994.7 18,172.5 13,567.9 11,295.9 1,501.8 770.3 4,604.6 1,002.8 3,601.8 5,563.4 3,258.7
2019         Jan. 27,403.4 18,309.7 13,637.4 11,345.5 1,517.5 774.5 4,672.3 1,015.9 3,656.4 5,783.5 3,310.2
         Feb. 27,441.6 18,354.2 13,683.4 11,368.4 1,528.5 786.5 4,670.8 1,001.2 3,669.6 5,771.2 3,316.2         Mar. 27,740.5 18,397.0 13,735.5 11,413.7 1,526.3 795.6 4,661.5 1,001.3 3,660.2 5,848.8 3,494.7
         Apr. 27,899.8 18,468.2 13,828.5 11,472.9 1,530.1 825.6 4,639.6 1,001.1 3,638.5 5,955.5 3,476.2
         May 28,196.5 18,496.8 13,853.7 11,494.6 1,549.3 809.7 4,643.1 1,000.4 3,642.6 6,039.1 3,660.7         June 28,318.0 18,519.4 13,869.7 11,516.6 1,551.8 801.2 4,649.7 999.8 3,649.9 6,007.7 3,790.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2017         May 6,160.2 4,114.5 3,157.3 2,719.6 172.6 265.0 957.2 332.2 624.9 1,234.6 811.2
         June 6,106.3 4,120.6 3,165.9 2,722.5 173.2 270.2 954.7 330.8 623.9 1,238.6 747.1
         July 6,069.0 4,135.9 3,176.7 2,731.5 175.2 269.9 959.2 332.6 626.7 1,201.4 731.7
         Aug. 6,084.5 4,152.3 3,186.3 2,741.6 174.3 270.3 966.1 327.8 638.3 1,185.1 747.2         Sep. 6,076.7 4,167.7 3,200.9 2,757.6 174.3 269.1 966.8 323.2 643.6 1,194.6 714.3
         Oct. 6,082.0 4,185.9 3,210.4 2,766.1 174.6 269.8 975.4 324.0 651.4 1,188.5 707.7
         Nov. 6,088.7 4,211.0 3,227.4 2,777.0 178.7 271.6 983.6 321.5 662.1 1,177.2 700.5         Dec. 6,051.1 4,202.2 3,222.8 2,768.6 180.4 273.8 979.4 318.5 660.9 1,163.4 685.4
2018         Jan. 6,074.8 4,214.9 3,242.3 2,786.5 181.6 274.2 972.5 317.0 655.6 1,176.4 683.5
         Feb. 6,051.9 4,220.1 3,253.3 2,799.4 183.1 270.8 966.8 311.4 655.4 1,195.1 636.8         Mar. 6,053.7 4,228.1 3,260.9 2,809.5 183.0 268.4 967.2 309.7 657.5 1,184.4 641.2
         Apr. 6,046.4 4,233.3 3,267.7 2,816.0 184.4 267.4 965.6 310.5 655.0 1,178.5 634.6
         May 6,148.1 4,248.4 3,280.8 2,824.1 186.8 269.8 967.6 306.5 661.1 1,226.7 673.0         June 6,120.9 4,264.2 3,297.3 2,838.8 187.5 271.0 966.9 304.3 662.7 1,201.8 654.9
         July 6,089.3 4,274.2 3,307.9 2,849.4 187.0 271.5 966.3 304.9 661.4 1,194.2 620.9
         Aug. 6,121.9 4,279.7 3,313.6 2,863.9 183.8 265.9 966.0 300.5 665.5 1,189.8 652.4         Sep. 6,119.7 4,295.4 3,331.0 2,880.3 184.8 265.9 964.4 297.5 666.9 1,194.5 629.8
         Oct. 6,154.2 4,303.6 3,339.1 2,888.2 185.3 265.6 964.5 300.8 663.7 1,208.1 642.4
         Nov. 6,177.4 4,323.4 3,356.8 2,905.6 188.1 263.0 966.7 299.8 666.9 1,202.7 651.3         Dec. 6,194.1 4,317.4 3,353.6 2,903.7 187.8 262.2 963.7 296.4 667.3 1,208.5 668.2
2019         Jan. 6,252.9 4,333.5 3,366.6 2,917.4 188.8 260.4 966.9 299.2 667.7 1,232.6 686.9
         Feb. 6,243.9 4,343.3 3,382.0 2,932.6 189.2 260.2 961.3 296.6 664.7 1,221.0 679.6         Mar. 6,392.0 4,373.9 3,414.7 2,963.7 189.7 261.3 959.2 293.9 665.3 1,265.4 752.8
         Apr. 6,408.7 4,379.3 3,427.3 2,976.4 189.1 261.9 951.9 294.8 657.1 1,278.2 751.2
         May 6,524.8 4,402.6 3,446.8 2,995.6 190.0 261.1 955.8 293.1 662.8 1,284.5 837.7         June 6,618.1 4,431.8 3,473.3 3,017.1 194.5 261.7 958.5 291.0 667.5 1,294.3 892.0
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on
p.12   ).
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
August 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which: up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,090.2 12,151.7 11,338.9 11,444.1 6,044.1 862.7 272.6 2,003.3 2,199.3 62.0 2017          May
1,099.7 12,214.1 11,384.0 11,483.6 6,113.3 854.2 265.6 1,986.7 2,201.9 61.9          June
1,105.6 12,209.8 11,392.9 11,476.5 6,123.4 848.8 262.8 1,976.5 2,206.6 58.4          July
1,103.3 12,226.5 11,422.5 11,504.8 6,146.4 857.8 260.6 1,969.4 2,213.0 57.7          Aug.1,104.2 12,271.6 11,432.3 11,519.7 6,196.5 843.3 256.2 1,956.5 2,210.4 56.8          Sep.
1,106.2 12,217.1 11,420.3 11,507.4 6,216.9 846.4 250.5 1,929.6 2,207.7 56.2          Oct.
1,107.1 12,249.2 11,471.4 11,544.6 6,291.1 832.2 245.9 1,912.7 2,207.2 55.5          Nov.1,123.2 12,285.7 11,542.3 11,615.7 6,348.4 834.7 242.2 1,925.2 2,210.3 54.9          Dec.
1,108.0 12,318.0 11,527.5 11,608.3 6,347.5 840.6 236.7 1,915.0 2,212.7 55.8 2018          Jan.
1,108.3 12,329.7 11,524.1 11,601.3 6,351.7 831.3 232.1 1,915.9 2,215.2 55.1          Feb.1,117.0 12,393.6 11,580.0 11,659.1 6,416.1 831.5 226.4 1,909.0 2,221.4 54.8          Mar.
1,121.2 12,401.4 11,610.6 11,679.1 6,454.1 817.7 222.3 1,907.2 2,223.4 54.4          Apr.
1,126.1 12,502.5 11,690.4 11,761.7 6,547.6 810.6 217.7 1,900.9 2,230.9 54.0          May1,137.6 12,613.6 11,776.7 11,843.6 6,623.3 821.4 214.9 1,895.2 2,235.1 53.7          June
1,145.3 12,606.0 11,760.4 11,825.6 6,603.5 817.3 212.1 1,899.9 2,239.8 53.1          July
1,148.3 12,595.4 11,753.0 11,802.8 6,593.6 812.2 208.9 1,890.4 2,244.9 52.7          Aug.1,150.4 12,662.1 11,779.9 11,831.4 6,656.8 796.4 205.9 1,877.8 2,242.2 52.3          Sep.
1,152.2 12,639.6 11,788.4 11,848.4 6,668.9 812.9 203.6 1,872.0 2,239.0 52.1          Oct.
1,157.5 12,719.4 11,861.9 11,912.4 6,750.7 801.7 200.7 1,866.8 2,241.3 51.3          Nov.1,175.4 12,713.4 11,926.4 11,989.5 6,799.2 800.9 200.7 1,888.5 2,248.7 51.5          Dec.
1,162.4 12,765.3 11,909.1 11,974.8 6,778.5 798.4 199.3 1,885.1 2,262.1 51.3 2019          Jan.
1,165.5 12,830.5 11,958.0 12,003.9 6,807.0 795.6 196.8 1,885.3 2,268.0 51.2          Feb.1,171.7 12,948.2 12,078.7 12,135.5 6,931.8 786.3 199.6 1,886.0 2,280.4 51.3          Mar.
1,179.1 12,957.4 12,120.7 12,180.6 6,971.5 788.8 201.8 1,879.5 2,287.5 51.5          Apr.
1,184.2 13,058.9 12,198.6 12,257.4 7,050.8 776.1 201.3 1,876.0 2,301.0 52.2          May1,192.1 13,173.7 12,287.8 12,336.0 7,124.9 763.2 198.3 1,892.0 2,304.3 53.2          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
248.6 3,566.1 3,465.8 3,327.4 1,910.5 167.5 40.2 624.1 536.4 48.7 2017          May
249.5 3,590.5 3,482.0 3,339.9 1,928.7 165.5 40.3 621.4 535.7 48.3          June
251.6 3,583.1 3,472.8 3,333.0 1,927.8 162.6 40.3 619.5 537.9 44.9          July
250.4 3,600.7 3,483.1 3,338.6 1,938.3 159.0 40.3 619.3 537.5 44.1          Aug.250.1 3,616.3 3,486.8 3,345.9 1,945.0 162.3 39.6 617.9 537.5 43.5          Sep.
250.9 3,606.4 3,490.8 3,352.9 1,958.5 158.8 38.6 616.2 538.0 42.7          Oct.
250.9 3,646.8 3,521.5 3,383.7 1,990.6 157.1 37.4 618.2 538.3 42.1          Nov.252.9 3,647.9 3,515.8 3,378.5 1,976.2 162.0 37.7 620.4 540.7 41.5          Dec.
250.1 3,632.5 3,522.3 3,390.7 1,994.6 161.5 36.4 616.5 539.5 42.2 2018          Jan.
249.8 3,642.4 3,523.0 3,388.4 1,995.9 160.2 35.3 615.5 540.0 41.5          Feb.248.3 3,652.2 3,524.1 3,389.6 1,998.1 164.6 34.2 612.1 539.4 41.0          Mar.
250.3 3,641.8 3,529.8 3,395.0 2,013.5 157.6 33.6 610.6 539.1 40.6          Apr.
250.2 3,693.8 3,568.4 3,425.0 2,048.0 154.6 33.0 610.2 539.0 40.3          May252.7 3,716.5 3,574.0 3,423.0 2,039.4 165.5 32.6 607.2 538.5 39.8          June
256.0 3,694.1 3,571.0 3,429.7 2,053.1 161.2 32.2 605.8 538.0 39.4          July
256.4 3,703.1 3,568.1 3,417.3 2,051.8 153.7 34.0 601.1 537.7 38.9          Aug.256.1 3,737.2 3,588.3 3,437.1 2,076.9 153.2 33.2 597.4 537.8 38.6          Sep.
256.3 3,730.6 3,595.8 3,453.9 2,092.2 155.1 33.6 596.9 538.0 38.1          Oct.
257.2 3,774.2 3,632.0 3,482.3 2,127.4 149.8 33.2 595.9 538.5 37.4          Nov.260.0 3,766.4 3,629.3 3,481.1 2,120.4 152.5 33.7 596.7 540.6 37.2          Dec.
267.6 3,737.2 3,622.2 3,471.2 2,113.7 154.3 33.5 592.1 540.9 36.7 2019          Jan.
268.0 3,747.2 3,634.2 3,474.2 2,117.5 153.9 33.2 591.0 541.8 36.7          Feb.269.1 3,785.8 3,652.3 3,490.2 2,136.2 152.2 33.0 587.7 544.0 37.1          Mar.
271.3 3,782.3 3,667.4 3,506.4 2,156.4 151.2 32.8 584.8 544.1 37.2          Apr.
272.1 3,824.2 3,689.1 3,523.2 2,176.6 149.4 32.7 582.9 543.7 37.9          May274.2 3,837.8 3,697.9 3,529.0 2,183.2 147.9 32.4 583.7 543.3 38.4          June
volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra -Eurosystem
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability ite ms“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
August 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont’d)
  
 
Liabilities (cont’d)Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  
2 
Money
over of which: market of which:
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund Denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2017         May 332.1 375.5 181.6 94.5 25.3 45.2 24.2 4.7 238.4 237.7 524.9 2,164.7 1,489.4
         June 352.5 378.0 181.2 95.7 26.6 45.8 24.0 4.7 221.7 221.0 504.1 2,147.8 1,477.6
         July 345.0 388.3 191.0 95.2 26.7 46.2 24.4 4.8 197.4 196.8 517.0 2,127.0 1,469.9
         Aug. 326.7 395.0 197.1 94.8 27.8 46.2 24.4 4.7 199.6 198.9 526.4 2,112.1 1,462.7         Sep. 362.5 389.5 193.2 91.9 28.1 47.5 24.1 4.7 206.6 205.9 522.1 2,092.5 1,446.5
         Oct. 318.9 390.9 197.9 87.6 28.3 48.3 24.1 4.7 226.5 225.8 531.3 2,083.4 1,429.2
         Nov. 310.2 394.4 197.6 89.5 29.8 49.0 23.8 4.6 243.4 242.8 527.6 2,096.7 1,444.2         Dec. 289.4 380.5 191.5 81.5 31.5 46.8 24.6 4.6 211.2 210.7 501.2 2,076.2 1,433.0
2018         Jan. 330.3 379.3 186.4 84.3 31.1 47.5 25.1 5.0 203.0 202.5 521.3 2,070.6 1,439.3
         Feb. 344.1 384.3 192.0 83.4 30.4 47.8 25.8 4.8 198.5 198.0 510.0 2,072.8 1,430.6         Mar. 358.1 376.4 181.7 85.8 29.5 48.6 25.9 4.8 206.7 206.1 508.5 2,077.7 1,435.4
         Apr. 338.2 384.1 190.5 84.7 28.4 49.7 26.0 4.7 227.6 227.1 519.7 2,085.5 1,436.6
         May 345.3 395.4 196.6 87.2 29.8 51.0 26.1 4.7 253.0 252.5 507.4 2,097.7 1,439.2         June 366.7 403.3 199.6 91.7 29.9 51.9 25.7 4.7 247.4 246.8 498.2 2,095.1 1,439.0
         July 374.6 405.8 203.3 88.4 30.9 52.8 25.7 4.7 254.0 253.5 508.7 2,075.6 1,432.2
         Aug. 377.4 415.2 208.7 90.6 31.0 54.4 25.9 4.6 257.8 257.3 507.1 2,081.7 1,438.6         Sep. 414.4 416.3 211.2 87.8 32.4 54.8 25.5 4.6 247.2 246.7 487.6 2,109.0 1,457.1
         Oct. 375.6 415.5 213.2 84.0 32.3 55.7 25.8 4.5 237.4 236.9 511.4 2,163.6 1,474.0
         Nov. 383.0 423.9 218.9 85.1 33.6 56.3 25.7 4.3 268.8 268.4 511.7 2,162.4 1,469.4         Dec. 322.4 401.4 203.7 78.6 34.2 56.9 23.8 4.3 254.5 254.2 512.5 2,153.7 1,466.4
2019         Jan. 388.5 402.0 196.7 85.9 34.8 55.8 24.2 4.5 270.1 269.6 513.3 2,171.7 1,479.5
         Feb. 407.2 419.4 207.3 92.1 34.2 56.3 25.1 4.5 270.5 269.7 505.0 2,199.6 1,501.2         Mar. 386.2 426.5 212.0 92.5 35.4 56.7 25.5 4.4 272.8 272.4 506.5 2,178.9 1,483.7
         Apr. 352.4 424.4 212.1 91.2 34.5 56.9 25.3 4.4 295.0 294.5 518.8 2,166.3 1,480.3
         May 370.2 431.3 216.8 94.7 33.4 57.0 25.1 4.3 287.4 286.9 511.7 2,181.9 1,489.2         June 396.3 441.4 224.3 94.6 35.0 57.9 25.2 4.4 266.0 265.7 503.1 2,174.3 1,486.7
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2017         May 32.7 206.1 61.6 81.6 20.6 38.7 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 542.6 263.2
         June 39.8 210.9 63.4 82.6 22.0 39.3 3.0 0.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 542.7 266.0
         July 42.3 207.8 60.3 81.5 22.6 39.8 3.0 0.7 3.3 3.3 2.1 534.5 264.9
         Aug. 49.7 212.4 64.0 81.0 23.6 40.1 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.4 2.3 534.4 267.8         Sep. 59.5 210.9 63.2 78.5 24.3 41.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.3 529.1 264.0
         Oct. 45.3 208.2 64.4 73.5 24.7 41.9 3.0 0.7 2.3 2.3 2.0 521.8 252.3
         Nov. 51.7 211.4 65.5 73.0 26.2 43.1 2.9 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 518.3 251.1         Dec. 61.7 207.7 69.3 66.3 27.8 40.6 2.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.7 512.7 256.4
2018         Jan. 37.4 204.4 61.6 70.3 27.5 41.4 2.8 0.8 4.3 4.3 1.7 518.8 262.8
         Feb. 46.7 207.4 66.3 69.2 26.8 41.5 3.0 0.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 522.7 263.8         Mar. 55.0 207.6 63.2 72.7 25.8 42.3 3.0 0.6 2.9 2.9 2.2 523.5 265.6
         Apr. 39.7 207.0 63.1 72.5 24.4 43.3 3.0 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 524.1 270.0
         May 51.4 217.4 68.6 74.9 25.7 44.5 3.1 0.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 536.8 274.3         June 69.1 224.5 70.7 79.2 25.6 45.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 2.0 531.3 274.8
         July 48.1 216.4 63.4 76.6 26.5 46.2 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.8 1.9 526.6 277.0
         Aug. 61.7 224.1 67.3 78.9 26.4 47.7 3.1 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.9 527.7 282.0         Sep. 73.9 226.2 69.6 76.9 27.8 48.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.9 536.3 287.6
         Oct. 56.1 220.6 66.1 73.9 28.0 48.9 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 1.9 544.5 286.9
         Nov. 65.7 226.3 69.4 74.8 28.7 49.7 3.1 0.7 1.3 1.3 2.2 544.9 290.3         Dec. 60.3 225.0 74.6 67.5 29.3 49.9 3.0 0.6 0.8 0.8 2.2 532.5 283.4
2019         Jan. 41.8 224.2 67.1 74.8 30.0 48.7 3.0 0.6 1.7 1.7 2.2 546.6 294.1
         Feb. 38.8 234.3 71.8 80.3 29.3 49.1 3.1 0.6 2.0 2.0 2.2 560.4 302.9         Mar. 56.4 239.2 75.9 80.0 30.3 49.4 3.1 0.6 11.4 11.4 2.0 557.3 298.2
         Apr. 41.2 234.7 73.6 78.4 29.4 49.6 3.1 0.6 12.5 12.5 1.9 552.8 293.5
         May 60.3 240.7 77.4 81.7 28.3 49.6 3.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 2.0 560.1 300.1         June 64.0 244.8 80.4 81.5 28.9 50.4 3.1 0.5 12.9 12.9 2.0 558.0 301.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
p. 10    ).9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
August 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item:
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (from 2002 German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which: MonetaryIntra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
37.0 40.9 2,086.8 4,337.9 2,658.7 − 0.2 3,846.5 − 7,437.0 10,939.6 11,618.3 6,860.8 145.0 2017          May
37.6 39.8 2,070.4 4,139.0 2,631.0 6.5 3,726.0 − 7,515.8 11,007.6 11,656.5 6,800.5 145.5          June
35.1 38.7 2,053.2 4,184.5 2,615.9 9.4 3,683.8 − 7,544.1 11,032.5 11,692.4 6,755.1 148.0          July
30.6 38.7 2,042.7 4,181.0 2,647.7 − 0.9 3,688.2 − 7,571.6 11,073.6 11,744.4 6,768.5 148.5          Aug.39.4 38.3 2,014.8 4,159.3 2,650.8 17.0 3,538.2 − 7,620.4 11,098.3 11,764.0 6,731.1 150.4          Sep.
33.6 36.4 2,013.4 4,340.8 2,666.0 13.3 3,575.8 − 7,646.1 11,114.4 11,783.8 6,718.2 148.7          Oct.
37.4 36.7 2,022.6 4,290.9 2,657.3 45.9 3,572.1 − 7,724.0 11,175.5 11,852.9 6,701.7 151.3          Nov.32.5 34.8 2,008.9 4,099.4 2,730.9 26.5 3,266.5 − 7,786.3 11,233.9 11,869.9 6,771.4 146.0          Dec.
24.9 28.7 2,017.1 4,416.9 2,714.8 − 43.9 3,026.7 − 7,767.2 11,220.5 11,865.8 6,755.2 148.1 2018          Jan.
32.0 27.2 2,013.6 4,507.8 2,708.1 − 28.7 2,892.9 − 7,777.1 11,217.7 11,861.0 6,745.3 147.5          Feb.39.8 27.1 2,010.8 4,350.1 2,719.4 − 8.1 2,926.9 − 7,840.1 11,282.8 11,928.6 6,747.4 147.5          Mar.
41.3 26.9 2,017.3 4,495.8 2,720.5 10.0 2,933.4 − 7,892.1 11,316.8 11,985.0 6,753.8 148.4          Apr.
35.6 26.7 2,035.3 4,710.5 2,699.6 13.6 3,005.6 − 7,994.8 11,419.6 12,064.8 6,745.5 147.0          May41.4 26.0 2,027.7 4,564.3 2,670.0 31.6 2,914.0 − 8,086.7 11,529.2 12,167.8 6,703.1 150.2          June
33.0 27.1 2,015.5 4,614.5 2,665.2 18.6 2,894.1 − 8,080.7 11,518.8 12,157.1 6,691.2 152.4          July
34.4 27.1 2,020.2 4,651.8 2,661.0 25.8 2,887.0 − 8,082.1 11,519.5 12,164.2 6,683.3 155.5          Aug.37.0 25.1 2,046.9 4,574.1 2,660.3 27.3 2,851.7 − 8,152.5 11,566.6 12,186.0 6,696.6 157.9          Sep.
35.1 26.5 2,102.0 4,706.5 2,705.9 − 2.6 2,974.8 − 8,164.0 11,585.4 12,228.6 6,792.2 153.6          Oct.
37.9 21.9 2,102.6 4,660.5 2,708.5 15.7 3,021.3 − 8,260.7 11,672.4 12,316.6 6,789.8 157.4          Nov.47.9 20.4 2,085.4 4,503.4 2,725.2 14.8 2,941.7 − 8,307.2 11,719.3 12,367.5 6,811.7 154.1          Dec.
36.4 23.8 2,111.6 4,706.8 2,750.6 23.9 3,039.2 − 8,264.8 11,694.2 12,338.8 6,858.8 151.7 2019          Jan.
32.3 25.9 2,141.5 4,672.3 2,738.1 22.9 3,037.1 − 8,305.7 11,742.0 12,377.5 6,876.9 150.4          Feb.15.0 22.5 2,141.4 4,668.4 2,765.9 22.0 3,206.1 − 8,443.1 11,887.3 12,505.1 6,905.8 151.9          Mar.
16.2 21.4 2,128.7 4,790.9 2,760.6 21.1 3,210.6 − 8,489.8 11,943.2 12,577.9 6,881.6 151.5          Apr.
22.7 22.2 2,137.0 4,794.3 2,774.4 31.2 3,372.6 − 8,577.2 12,033.1 12,664.3 6,900.9 149.7          May18.8 20.6 2,134.9 4,658.9 2,835.1 40.9 3,474.0 − 8,669.6 12,114.2 12,731.1 6,977.5 152.2          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
18.4 16.8 507.4 957.7 595.0 − 967.6 1,461.9 338.1 1,972.1 2,821.5 2,861.2 1,814.4 − 2017          May
19.3 16.4 507.0 946.6 591.5 − 981.1 1,412.1 342.8 1,992.1 2,841.2 2,880.9 1,808.1 −          June
18.8 16.2 499.5 926.1 589.1 − 975.5 1,406.4 345.0 1,988.1 2,835.9 2,876.2 1,793.6 −          July
18.5 15.8 500.0 894.5 597.2 − 970.2 1,422.2 348.6 2,002.3 2,846.8 2,886.8 1,801.4 −          Aug.19.3 15.4 494.4 927.7 594.2 − 982.9 1,387.5 352.1 2,008.2 2,853.5 2,893.0 1,792.0 −          Sep.
18.6 15.7 487.5 913.6 596.3 − 946.7 1,386.3 354.2 2,023.0 2,859.6 2,898.2 1,785.4 −          Oct.
18.5 15.8 484.0 883.4 593.7 − 940.3 1,382.0 355.5 2,056.1 2,890.9 2,929.9 1,781.9 −          Nov.17.7 14.8 480.2 921.3 668.6 − 999.6 1,295.2 359.3 2,045.5 2,882.9 2,920.4 1,852.1 −          Dec.
16.0 14.2 488.5 931.6 656.8 − 974.7 1,303.7 359.3 2,056.2 2,894.2 2,930.5 1,846.2 − 2018          Jan.
16.7 14.3 491.6 968.4 653.3 − 1,003.8 1,263.2 361.3 2,062.1 2,896.6 2,933.5 1,844.1 −          Feb.16.0 13.9 493.6 953.5 657.7 − 1,016.5 1,278.1 368.2 2,061.3 2,901.1 2,936.2 1,847.4 −          Mar.
17.5 12.3 494.3 949.7 658.7 − 1,002.9 1,270.5 369.5 2,076.6 2,907.0 2,941.3 1,848.1 −          Apr.
19.0 13.1 504.7 997.9 662.3 − 1,044.2 1,297.9 374.9 2,116.6 2,946.8 2,982.4 1,862.6 −          May17.0 12.5 501.8 996.0 666.2 − 1,070.1 1,277.7 378.5 2,110.1 2,954.5 2,987.3 1,860.9 −          June
16.7 11.9 498.0 967.9 665.4 − 1,019.3 1,250.8 381.6 2,116.5 2,954.1 2,986.4 1,855.4 −          July
18.3 12.0 497.4 966.5 672.6 − 1,024.8 1,273.6 386.9 2,119.1 2,953.0 2,986.4 1,858.4 −          Aug.17.8 11.0 507.4 979.8 670.9 − 1,059.4 1,251.7 390.8 2,146.5 2,978.4 3,010.4 1,863.3 −          Sep.
20.2 11.0 513.2 952.8 676.1 − 1,031.2 1,277.1 394.6 2,158.3 2,990.0 3,025.5 1,873.8 −          Oct.
19.4 10.3 515.2 932.7 675.8 − 1,041.8 1,288.0 397.1 2,196.8 3,024.9 3,058.2 1,874.7 −          Nov.17.7 10.1 504.6 967.9 689.9 − 1,063.4 1,297.9 401.1 2,195.0 3,021.7 3,052.5 1,879.0 −          Dec.
18.2 9.6 518.7 920.7 690.0 − 971.6 1,326.1 391.5 2,180.7 3,017.3 3,049.1 1,886.9 − 2019          Jan.
19.1 8.2 533.2 882.8 684.4 − 966.0 1,330.9 394.4 2,189.4 3,030.9 3,062.3 1,895.1 −          Feb.19.2 8.3 529.8 958.7 695.9 − 1,031.3 1,412.2 396.9 2,212.1 3,054.7 3,095.5 1,900.4 −          Mar.
18.6 8.2 525.9 953.9 692.7 − 985.8 1,398.5 400.8 2,230.0 3,069.0 3,110.2 1,890.7 −          Apr.
18.9 8.4 532.9 944.9 702.5 − 1,016.3 1,496.1 404.8 2,254.0 3,093.0 3,133.5 1,906.3 −          May19.7 7.6 530.7 957.2 720.6 − 1,013.3 1,542.9 407.8 2,263.6 3,100.8 3,143.0 1,924.3 −          June
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to three months (excluding central govern ments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to two years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the over two years and at agreed notice of over three months, debt securities w ith
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two maturities of over two years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
August 2019
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2017         Jan. 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1,670.8 434.4 0.0 1,119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2,472.6
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1,787.5 479.2 0.0 1,110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2,550.9
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 678.6 18.5 707.4 0.3 1,905.3 550.0 0.0 1,118.4 182.0 378.8 1,081.1 2,749.4         June 683.1 13.7 767.4 0.2 1,995.0 593.7 0.0 1,126.0 163.6 397.4 1,178.7 2,898.5
         July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2,076.1 595.3 0.0 1,136.3 229.8 379.4 1,169.2 2,900.8
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 639.0 5.5 768.6 0.3 2,150.2 611.4 0.0 1,142.5 181.8 385.1 1,242.7 2,996.7
         Oct. 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2,239.2 648.1 0.0 1,142.8 218.3 383.9 1,253.3 3,044.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 634.5 3.0 763.7 0.2 2,333.5 682.5 0.0 1,146.6 188.5 407.6 1,309.7 3,138.8
2018         Jan. 635.7 2.9 760.6 0.2 2,398.2 689.2 0.0 1,158.2 188.1 487.0 1,275.2 3,122.5
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 630.9 1.5 760.5 0.0 2,435.5 686.3 0.0 1,148.2 203.6 474.9 1,315.6 3,150.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 627.1 1.9 759.5 0.1 2,476.8 668.0 0.0 1,159.0 247.5 495.6 1,295.3 3,122.3         June 625.2 1.8 757.3 0.1 2,519.9 659.5 0.0 1,170.4 218.0 502.5 1,353.9 3,183.8
         July 635.1 2.1 744.2 0.1 2,558.4 652.2 0.0 1,183.6 263.4 533.8 1,306.9 3,142.6
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 637.5 3.0 739.9 0.1 2,589.7 671.2 0.0 1,192.2 239.1 519.1 1,348.7 3,212.0
         Oct. 625.2 6.9 727.8 0.1 2,622.8 631.8 0.0 1,194.3 283.1 504.4 1,369.0 3,195.1
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 625.1 6.8 726.4 0.1 2,642.3 635.9 0.0 1,202.4 240.2 542.9 1,379.4 3,217.7
2019         Jan. 655.8 7.9 723.8 0.1 2,652.8 640.0 0.0 1,218.8 231.3 618.2 1,332.1 3,190.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 665.5 6.0 723.1 0.1 2,645.8 637.6 0.0 1,209.2 257.3 571.4 1,364.8 3,211.7
         Apr. 678.6 5.7 720.3 0.1 2,635.9 619.6 0.0 1,215.8 270.5 555.6 1,379.0 3,214.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 689.7 5.5 718.6 0.4 2,630.6 601.9 0.0 1,228.2 248.2 561.9 1,404.6 3,234.7
         July 710.3 4.6 700.1 0.0 2,620.4 570.8 0.0 1,240.8 295.9 592.2 1,335.7 3,147.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2017         Jan. 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 164.4 1.0 86.0 0.1 412.4 181.4 0.0 264.1 29.7 − 185.3 374.0 819.5         June 165.8 0.3 95.0 0.0 431.8 181.2 0.0 266.2 32.4 − 204.9 418.0 865.4
         July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 155.2 0.3 94.9 0.0 463.2 165.5 0.0 269.9 52.4 − 192.6 418.5 853.9
         Oct. 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 154.2 0.5 94.8 0.0 501.4 187.5 0.0 270.3 56.0 − 218.6 455.8 913.6
2018         Jan. 155.5 0.9 93.3 0.0 514.7 204.4 0.0 272.8 54.9 − 192.2 424.5 901.7
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 151.5 0.6 93.4 0.0 522.9 207.9 0.0 271.0 56.8 − 221.3 453.9 932.8
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 150.7 1.1 93.3 0.0 530.6 190.8 0.0 273.8 61.1 − 191.3 440.9 905.5         June 150.1 1.1 93.1 0.0 540.6 200.3 0.0 277.4 59.2 − 217.9 466.0 943.6
         July 151.9 0.4 91.8 0.0 547.6 196.8 0.0 280.0 69.4 − 194.1 439.6 916.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 152.1 0.4 91.5 0.0 556.2 192.9 0.0 282.0 65.2 − 178.9 439.0 913.9
         Oct. 148.1 0.5 88.5 0.0 563.5 160.0 0.0 282.6 81.3 − 183.4 460.0 902.6
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 146.9 0.6 88.1 0.0 570.0 148.0 0.0 283.6 69.6 − 185.2 489.5 921.2
2019         Jan. 155.8 1.7 87.6 0.1 570.4 153.1 0.0 293.4 60.5 − 144.9 453.7 900.1
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 158.3 0.6 87.6 0.0 569.5 163.3 0.0 294.3 49.3 − 157.0 466.0 923.7
         Apr. 160.8 0.6 86.7 0.0 563.7 172.5 0.0 296.1 61.2 − 199.4 481.6 950.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 163.6 0.6 86.1 0.0 565.2 166.3 0.0 299.6 58.0 − 213.6 505.3 971.1
         July 169.4 0.7 85.3 0.0 563.1 150.1 0.0 303.0 65.7 − 175.0 474.5 927.7
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
August 2019
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2017          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 16.2 − 10.5 + 153.1 + 0.0 + 117.8 + 70.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 21.7 + 56.6 + 120.2 + 198.5          May
+ 4.5 − 4.8 + 60.0 − 0.1 + 89.7 + 43.7 + 0.0 + 7.6 − 18.4 + 18.6 + 97.6 + 149.1          June
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 17.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 74.1 + 16.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 48.0 + 5.7 + 73.5 + 95.9          Sep.
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 94.3 + 34.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 29.8 + 23.7 + 56.4 + 94.6          Dec.
+ 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 64.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 11.6 − 0.4 + 79.4 − 34.5 − 16.3 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 37.3 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 10.0 + 15.5 − 12.1 + 40.4 + 27.6          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 3.8 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 41.3 − 18.3 + 0.0 + 10.8 + 43.9 + 20.7 − 20.3 − 27.8          May
− 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 43.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 11.4 − 29.5 + 6.9 + 58.6 + 61.5          June
+ 9.9 + 0.3 − 13.1 + 0.0 + 38.5 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 13.2 + 45.4 + 31.3 − 47.0 − 41.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 2.4 + 0.9 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 31.3 + 19.0 + 0.0 + 8.6 − 24.3 − 14.7 + 41.8 + 69.4          Sep.
− 12.3 + 3.9 − 12.1 + 0.0 + 33.1 − 39.4 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 44.0 − 14.7 + 20.3 − 16.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 19.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 − 42.9 + 38.5 + 10.4 + 22.6          Dec.
+ 30.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 16.4 − 8.9 + 75.3 − 47.3 − 26.8 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 9.7 − 1.9 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 9.6 + 26.0 − 46.8 + 32.7 + 20.8          Mar.
+ 13.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 18.0 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 13.2 − 15.8 + 14.2 + 2.7          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 11.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 17.7 + 0.0 + 12.4 − 22.3 + 6.3 + 25.6 + 20.3          June
+ 20.6 − 0.9 − 18.5 − 0.4 − 10.2 − 31.1 + 0.0 + 12.6 + 47.7 + 30.3 − 68.9 − 87.3          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2017          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 4.9 + 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.0 + 25.9 + 27.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 6.6 − 15.6 + 33.0 + 62.5          May
+ 1.5 − 0.7 + 9.0 − 0.1 + 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.6 − 19.6 + 44.0 + 45.9          June
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 4.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 15.4 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 9.0 + 5.8 + 2.1          Sep.
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 16.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 9.9 − 21.0 + 33.1 + 50.4          Dec.
+ 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 13.3 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.1 + 26.4 − 31.3 − 11.9 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.2 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 1.9 − 29.1 + 29.4 + 31.1          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 − 17.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 4.2 + 30.0 − 13.0 − 27.3          May
− 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 10.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 3.6 − 1.8 − 26.6 + 25.1 + 38.1          June
+ 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 10.2 + 23.9 − 26.4 − 27.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 4.2 + 15.2 − 0.6 − 2.5          Sep.
− 4.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 32.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 16.1 − 4.5 + 21.1 − 11.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.6 − 12.0 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 11.7 − 1.8 + 29.5 + 18.5          Dec.
+ 8.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 + 9.7 − 9.2 + 40.2 − 35.9 − 21.1 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 11.2 − 12.0 + 12.3 + 23.6          Mar.
+ 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 12.0 − 42.5 + 15.6 + 26.5          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 6.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.2 − 14.2 + 23.7 + 21.0          June
+ 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 7.6 + 38.6 − 30.7 − 43.5          July
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
August 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
  
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claimsexternal loans residents with banks, arising from
As at Gold and other denominated security the creditreporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility underdate assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2019 Jan.               18 4,705.9 389.8 327.6 76.9 250.7 18.8 18.1 18.1 −
                              25 4,708.9 389.8 327.9 77.0 251.0 20.8 19.0 19.0 −
         Feb.                 1 4,695.5 389.8 326.9 76.9 250.0 21.7 22.3 22.3 −
                                8 4,696.5 389.8 328.2 76.8 251.4 21.3 20.2 20.2 −
                              15 4,702.8 389.8 329.0 76.9 252.1 20.8 23.0 23.0 −
                              22 4,692.1 389.8 328.8 76.9 251.9 20.4 19.1 19.1 −
         Mar.                 1 4,686.3 389.8 327.7 76.9 250.8 20.9 21.8 21.8 −
                                8 4,691.3 389.8 328.5 76.9 251.6 21.0 23.6 23.6 −
                              15 4,680.6 389.8 329.3 76.9 252.4 19.5 19.7 19.7 −
                              22 4,677.0 389.8 331.2 76.8 254.4 19.0 18.6 18.6 −
                              29 4,695.8 402.3 340.2 78.1 262.1 20.2 19.0 19.0 −
         Apr.                 5 4,699.6 402.2 338.7 78.0 260.7 19.6 18.2 18.2 −
                              12 4,701.8 402.2 342.2 80.5 261.7 19.4 16.5 16.5 −
                              19 4,707.9 402.1 343.5 80.5 263.0 19.3 19.6 19.6 −
                              26 4,697.6 402.1 344.6 80.5 264.1 18.5 18.1 18.1 −
2019 May                 3 4,683.9 402.1 344.1 80.5 263.7 19.0 19.3 19.3 −
                              10 4,685.4 402.1 344.1 80.6 263.6 19.3 18.4 18.4 −
                              17 4,684.9 402.1 344.5 80.6 263.9 18.6 16.6 16.6 −
                              24 4,692.6 402.1 345.6 80.6 265.0 20.1 19.4 19.4 −
                              31 4,686.0 402.1 344.8 80.6 264.2 19.2 18.3 18.3 −
         June                 7 4,690.4 402.1 344.8 80.6 264.2 20.1 23.7 23.7 −
                              14 4,681.4 402.1 345.9 80.6 265.3 20.4 20.8 20.8 −
                              21 4,682.7 402.1 344.4 80.5 263.9 20.4 20.8 20.8 −
                              28 4,692.6 431.8 340.4 79.6 260.8 20.4 21.0 21.0 −
         July                 5 4,677.5 431.8 339.0 79.6 259.5 21.0 20.6 20.6 −
                              12 4,684.4 431.9 341.1 79.6 261.6 20.3 20.9 20.9 −
                              19 4,688.2 431.9 345.2 80.5 264.7 20.2 21.6 21.6 −
                              26 4,685.7 431.9 347.0 80.6 266.4 20.5 19.7 19.7 −
         Aug.                 2 4,679.2 431.9 347.7 80.6 267.1 18.8 20.0 20.0 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 Jan.               18 1,772.0 121.4 51.6 19.9 31.8 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
                              25 1,737.6 121.4 52.1 19.9 32.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
         Feb.                 1 1,745.8 121.4 51.9 19.8 32.0 0.0 6.5 6.5 −
                                8 1,753.1 121.4 51.7 19.8 31.9 0.0 4.1 4.1 −
                              15 1,773.9 121.4 51.7 19.9 31.9 0.0 6.5 6.5 −
                              22 1,745.1 121.4 51.6 19.9 31.8 0.0 2.7 2.7 −
         Mar.                 1 1,741.6 121.4 52.0 19.9 32.1 0.0 4.7 4.7 −
                                8 1,742.8 121.4 52.3 19.9 32.4 0.0 6.9 6.9 −
                              15 1,745.6 121.4 52.0 19.9 32.2 0.0 3.2 3.2 −
                              22 1,751.0 121.4 51.7 19.9 31.8 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
                              29 1,812.7 125.3 52.8 20.2 32.6 0.0 2.9 2.9 −
         Apr.                 5 1,774.3 125.3 52.9 20.2 32.7 0.0 2.2 2.2 −
                              12 1,760.4 125.3 53.6 20.9 32.7 0.0 0.9 0.9 −
                              19 1,773.9 125.3 53.3 20.9 32.4 0.0 4.1 4.1 −
                              26 1,787.4 125.3 53.6 20.9 32.7 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
2019 May                 3 1,786.4 125.2 53.5 20.9 32.7 0.0 3.2 3.2 −
                              10 1,772.4 125.2 53.6 20.8 32.8 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
                              17 1,785.1 125.2 53.2 20.8 32.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 −
                              24 1,788.8 125.2 53.4 20.8 32.6 0.0 3.5 3.5 −
                              31 1,813.2 125.2 53.5 20.8 32.7 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
         June                 7 1,805.8 125.2 53.4 20.8 32.6 0.0 6.8 6.8 −
                              14 1,778.2 125.2 53.9 20.8 33.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 −
                              21 1,764.8 125.2 53.3 20.8 32.5 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
                              28 1,818.3 125.2 53.2 20.8 32.4 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
         July                 5 1,751.7 134.5 52.9 20.6 32.3 0.0 2.3 2.3 −
                              12 1,754.5 134.5 53.1 20.6 32.5 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
                              19 1,765.7 134.5 54.1 20.8 33.3 0.0 3.8 3.8 −
                              26 1,736.3 134.5 54.4 20.8 33.6 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
         Aug.                 2 1,756.5 134.5 53.6 20.8 32.8 0.0 2.9 2.9 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrum ents are valued at the
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB. 
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
August 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for governmentfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    As atopera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
730.2 6.3 723.8 − − 0.1 − 35.0 2,898.0 2,651.2 246.8 23.9 264.5 2019 Jan.                18
730.5 6.6 723.8 − − 0.0 − 38.5 2,899.1 2,651.9 247.3 23.9 259.3                               25
730.0 6.6 723.3 − − 0.1 − 35.5 2,890.2 2,644.5 245.7 23.9 255.3          Feb.                  1
728.8 5.4 723.3 − − 0.1 − 33.9 2,892.7 2,646.8 245.9 23.9 257.9                                 8
729.3 5.9 723.3 − − 0.1 − 35.3 2,895.3 2,649.5 245.8 23.9 256.6                               15
729.3 5.9 723.2 − − 0.1 − 35.4 2,891.7 2,646.3 245.4 23.9 253.6                               22
729.1 6.5 722.6 − − − − 32.6 2,879.3 2,639.7 239.6 23.9 261.3          Mar.                  1
728.5 5.8 722.6 − − 0.1 − 37.7 2,883.1 2,643.2 240.0 23.9 255.3                                 8
728.7 6.1 722.6 − − 0.0 − 36.1 2,878.1 2,639.1 239.0 23.9 255.4                               15
728.2 5.6 722.6 − − − − 38.2 2,877.0 2,637.1 239.9 23.9 251.1                               22
725.3 6.1 718.7 − − 0.5 − 39.1 2,868.5 2,629.7 238.8 23.9 257.2                               29
724.1 5.4 718.7 − − − − 40.8 2,873.5 2,634.9 238.6 23.9 258.7          Apr.                  5
724.1 5.3 718.7 − − 0.1 − 39.9 2,873.0 2,634.9 238.1 23.9 260.7                               12
727.8 5.4 718.7 − − 3.7 − 39.0 2,873.6 2,635.8 237.8 23.9 259.1                               19
724.7 6.0 718.6 − − 0.1 − 39.2 2,869.4 2,633.7 235.7 23.9 257.1                               26
724.3 5.7 718.6 − − − − 38.2 2,857.9 2,624.8 233.1 23.9 255.0 2019 May                  3
724.0 5.4 718.6 − − − − 39.5 2,859.5 2,628.1 231.5 23.9 254.5                               10
724.0 5.4 718.6 − − − − 36.7 2,862.1 2,631.2 230.8 23.9 256.5                               17
723.5 4.9 718.6 − − 0.0 − 39.2 2,864.0 2,634.3 229.7 23.9 254.7                               24
724.9 6.1 718.7 − − 0.1 − 37.6 2,858.5 2,628.9 229.7 23.9 256.6                               31
724.0 5.3 718.7 − − − − 36.0 2,859.5 2,630.0 229.6 23.9 256.4          June                  7
724.7 6.0 718.7 − − − − 31.3 2,854.2 2,624.9 229.2 23.9 258.2                               14
724.9 6.2 718.7 − − 0.0 − 42.3 2,852.8 2,625.0 227.9 23.9 251.1                               21
699.1 6.4 692.6 − − 0.0 − 47.6 2,849.1 2,620.3 228.8 23.4 259.9                               28
697.7 5.1 692.6 − − − − 42.0 2,843.6 2,615.6 228.0 23.4 258.3          July                  5
695.6 2.9 692.6 − − − − 40.4 2,846.8 2,619.9 226.9 23.4 264.1                               12
695.5 2.9 692.6 − − − − 39.7 2,841.9 2,616.1 225.8 23.4 268.9                               19
695.6 2.9 692.6 − − 0.0 − 38.7 2,843.4 2,617.9 225.5 23.4 265.6                               26
696.2 3.6 692.6 − − 0.0 − 42.3 2,832.5 2,610.5 221.9 23.4 266.5          Aug.                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
88.4 0.8 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.5 570.2 570.2 − 4.4 927.1 2019 Jan.                18
88.8 1.2 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.7 569.4 569.4 − 4.4 890.8                               25
88.2 0.6 87.6 − − 0.0 − 6.8 569.6 569.6 − 4.4 896.9          Feb.                  1
88.2 0.5 87.6 − − 0.0 − 5.9 570.5 570.5 − 4.4 906.9                                 8
88.2 0.6 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.9 571.4 571.4 − 4.4 922.2                               15
88.2 0.7 87.6 − − 0.0 − 6.3 567.8 567.8 − 4.4 902.6                               22
88.3 0.7 87.6 − − − − 7.3 567.4 567.4 − 4.4 896.0          Mar.                  1
88.1 0.5 87.6 − − − − 7.6 568.6 568.6 − 4.4 893.4                                 8
88.2 0.6 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.0 565.2 565.2 − 4.4 904.1                               15
88.2 0.6 87.6 − − − − 5.9 563.5 563.5 − 4.4 913.7                               22
87.3 0.7 86.2 − − 0.5 − 5.5 562.2 562.2 − 4.4 972.3                               29
86.8 0.6 86.2 − − − − 6.6 564.0 564.0 − 4.4 932.1          Apr.                  5
86.7 0.5 86.2 − − 0.1 − 6.9 560.7 560.7 − 4.4 922.0                               12
86.8 0.7 86.2 − − 0.0 − 7.6 562.1 562.1 − 4.4 930.2                               19
86.9 0.6 86.1 − − 0.1 − 7.5 563.1 563.1 − 4.4 944.7                               26
86.7 0.5 86.1 − − − − 7.4 563.8 563.8 − 4.4 942.2 2019 May                  3
86.7 0.5 86.1 − − − − 6.8 564.8 564.8 − 4.4 929.1                               10
86.8 0.6 86.1 − − − − 6.8 565.5 565.5 − 4.4 942.8                               17
86.7 0.5 86.1 − − 0.0 − 7.1 566.6 566.6 − 4.4 941.7                               24
87.2 1.0 86.1 − − 0.1 − 6.7 567.5 567.5 − 4.4 965.5                               31
86.6 0.5 86.1 − − − − 8.8 568.0 568.0 − 4.4 952.5          June                  7
86.6 0.5 86.1 − − − − 7.3 564.4 564.4 − 4.4 933.3                               14
86.7 0.6 86.1 − − 0.0 − 7.7 565.3 565.3 − 4.4 919.4                               21
85.6 0.7 84.9 − − 0.0 − 7.8 565.7 565.7 − 4.4 973.5                               28
85.5 0.6 84.9 − − − − 6.8 559.5 559.5 − 4.4 905.7          July                  5
85.6 0.7 84.9 − − − − 8.4 561.1 561.1 − 4.4 904.9                               12
85.6 0.6 84.9 − − 0.0 − 9.4 561.7 561.7 − 4.4 912.3                               19
85.8 0.8 84.9 − − 0.0 − 4.9 562.4 562.4 − 4.4 888.3                               26
85.5 0.6 84.9 − − 0.0 − 6.7 562.2 562.2 − 4.4 906.7          Aug.                  2

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
August 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
  
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro(covering Fine- area creditthe tuning Deposits institutions Debt
As at Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Otherdate liabilities lation  
1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 3
 
2019 Jan.               18 4,705.9 1,209.9 1,988.3 1,350.4 637.8 − − 0.1 8.6 − 387.7 258.3 129.4
                              25 4,708.9 1,206.4 1,985.1 1,344.8 640.2 − − 0.1 8.4 − 404.3 281.7 122.6
         Feb.                 1 4,695.5 1,209.2 2,015.1 1,341.9 673.0 − − 0.2 8.5 − 356.3 230.6 125.7
                                8 4,696.5 1,208.3 2,024.9 1,366.2 658.6 − − 0.0 7.6 − 355.0 232.4 122.6
                              15 4,702.8 1,207.9 1,977.1 1,342.2 634.9 − − 0.0 10.0 − 405.0 286.1 118.8
                              22 4,692.1 1,207.2 1,971.1 1,337.0 634.1 − − 0.0 7.9 − 414.3 289.1 125.2
         Mar.                 1 4,686.3 1,212.2 2,021.2 1,380.2 641.0 − − 0.0 7.6 − 361.6 234.2 127.4
                                8 4,691.3 1,213.6 2,044.6 1,412.8 631.8 − − 0.0 9.6 − 349.1 219.4 129.7
                              15 4,680.6 1,213.3 1,995.0 1,403.5 591.5 − − 0.0 6.7 − 398.7 272.3 126.4
                              22 4,677.0 1,212.4 1,971.7 1,351.4 620.2 − − 0.0 7.0 − 429.9 302.3 127.6
                              29 4,695.8 1,216.1 1,948.2 1,348.9 599.2 − − 0.1 5.3 − 389.9 263.7 126.2
         Apr.                 5 4,699.6 1,218.3 2,036.0 1,401.7 634.2 − − 0.0 5.4 − 370.4 244.6 125.8
                              12 4,701.8 1,221.2 2,028.3 1,396.8 631.5 − − 0.0 6.6 − 382.4 253.9 128.5
                              19 4,707.9 1,229.4 1,980.3 1,393.9 586.4 − − 0.0 6.5 − 416.5 285.8 130.7
                              26 4,697.6 1,228.5 1,989.6 1,378.8 610.6 − − 0.1 5.4 − 401.5 271.4 130.1
2019 May                 3 4,683.9 1,229.0 2,037.6 1,403.9 633.7 − − 0.1 5.1 − 325.4 203.1 122.2
                              10 4,685.4 1,226.6 2,041.2 1,435.9 605.3 − − − 5.2 − 328.4 206.8 121.6
                              17 4,684.9 1,225.4 1,986.7 1,393.7 593.1 − − − 4.9 − 389.4 264.0 125.3
                              24 4,692.6 1,224.9 1,967.3 1,396.0 571.3 − − 0.0 6.2 − 428.1 301.8 126.4
                              31 4,686.0 1,231.2 2,014.5 1,388.5 626.0 − − − 6.1 − 364.7 239.7 125.0
         June                 7 4,690.4 1,234.1 2,043.5 1,441.1 602.4 − − 0.0 8.4 − 337.1 210.4 126.7
                              14 4,681.4 1,234.4 2,003.1 1,419.2 583.8 − − 0.0 5.8 − 372.6 241.5 131.1
                              21 4,682.7 1,234.9 1,911.4 1,341.7 569.7 − − 0.0 5.4 − 457.1 325.1 132.0
                              28 4,692.6 1,239.3 1,891.4 1,312.0 579.4 − − 0.0 6.0 − 410.2 278.0 132.2
         July                 5 4,677.5 1,243.1 1,935.4 1,350.4 585.0 − − 0.0 4.5 − 388.1 257.3 130.8
                              12 4,684.4 1,245.1 1,909.2 1,327.2 582.0 − − 0.0 5.9 − 413.6 283.7 129.9
                              19 4,688.2 1,245.2 1,845.2 1,293.5 551.7 − − 0.0 6.9 − 469.1 333.4 135.7
                              26 4,685.7 1,247.1 1,848.7 1,307.3 541.3 − − 0.0 3.8 − 463.7 329.6 134.0
         Aug.                 2 4,679.2 1,252.4 1,916.3 1,349.5 566.8 − − 0.0 4.5 − 380.2 245.4 134.8
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 Jan.               18 1,772.0 292.7 622.7 472.0 150.7 − − 0.0 4.5 − 118.5 60.8 57.7
                              25 1,737.6 292.1 607.5 456.5 150.9 − − 0.0 4.6 − 104.0 55.0 48.9
         Feb.                 1 1,745.8 293.6 625.4 453.2 172.2 − − 0.0 4.6 − 87.6 39.4 48.2
                                8 1,753.1 294.1 634.1 466.7 167.4 − − 0.0 3.7 − 90.3 41.8 48.5
                              15 1,773.9 294.6 624.1 463.0 161.0 − − 0.0 6.6 − 115.1 67.4 47.7
                              22 1,745.1 294.9 619.5 463.2 156.2 − − 0.0 4.5 − 104.3 57.4 47.0
         Mar.                 1 1,741.6 294.5 639.9 470.4 169.4 − − 0.0 4.4 − 88.7 41.3 47.4
                                8 1,742.8 295.0 646.1 477.5 168.6 − − 0.0 5.7 − 89.4 41.4 48.0
                              15 1,745.6 295.4 628.3 470.9 157.3 − − 0.0 3.8 − 120.3 72.5 47.8
                              22 1,751.0 295.7 641.5 475.2 166.3 − − 0.0 4.2 − 119.4 71.2 48.2
                              29 1,812.7 295.2 663.4 481.2 182.2 − − 0.0 2.1 − 109.0 61.8 47.3
         Apr.                 5 1,774.3 296.5 679.7 492.9 186.8 − − 0.0 2.3 − 98.8 50.2 48.6
                              12 1,760.4 298.1 675.4 496.0 179.3 − − 0.0 3.5 − 92.7 44.6 48.1
                              19 1,773.9 301.4 654.9 487.2 167.7 − − 0.0 3.3 − 112.1 62.9 49.2
                              26 1,787.4 301.1 657.4 482.5 174.9 − − 0.0 2.9 − 121.5 72.2 49.3
2019 May                 3 1,786.4 298.4 687.5 504.6 182.8 − − − 2.5 − 82.5 38.7 43.8
                              10 1,772.4 298.5 665.4 499.5 165.9 − − − 2.4 − 90.7 47.4 43.3
                              17 1,785.1 299.0 654.3 498.6 155.7 − − − 2.3 − 116.4 70.8 45.5
                              24 1,788.8 299.8 670.9 520.9 150.0 − − − 3.8 − 112.2 68.7 43.4
                              31 1,813.2 298.8 694.7 518.8 175.9 − − − 3.5 − 102.4 59.8 42.6
         June                 7 1,805.8 300.7 691.1 523.6 167.5 − − − 5.2 − 94.7 53.1 41.6
                              14 1,778.2 301.1 641.0 490.8 150.2 − − − 3.7 − 118.8 76.1 42.7
                              21 1,764.8 301.9 610.9 472.2 138.6 − − 0.0 3.1 − 130.5 88.7 41.8
                              28 1,818.3 300.8 659.5 485.2 174.3 − − 0.0 3.6 − 109.3 65.2 44.1
         July                 5 1,751.7 302.6 638.4 475.1 163.4 − − 0.0 2.2 − 79.5 38.2 41.3
                              12 1,754.5 304.3 621.5 469.4 152.1 − − 0.0 3.4 − 94.7 52.4 42.3
                              19 1,765.7 305.2 613.2 467.5 145.7 − − 0.0 4.3 − 108.8 67.8 41.0
                              26 1,736.3 306.0 594.1 462.6 131.5 − − 0.0 0.9 − 103.8 62.9 40.9
         Aug.                 2 1,756.5 304.8 631.0 474.2 156.8 − − 0.0 1.9 − 85.3 42.7 42.7
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8%
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as anitems for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1In accordance with the accounting value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
August 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to  area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    As atdenominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    reporting credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
1 accounts reserves    date liabilities  2 
Eurosystem 3
 
305.6 5.1 10.2 10.2 − 56.5 253.8 − 376.1 104.3 2019 Jan.                18
296.0 6.0 11.1 11.1 − 56.5 254.7 − 376.1 104.2                               25
298.2 7.2 9.7 9.7 − 56.5 254.6 − 376.1 104.2          Feb.                  1
290.6 7.8 9.9 9.9 − 56.5 255.6 − 376.1 104.2                                 8
291.8 8.0 9.4 9.4 − 56.5 256.8 − 376.1 104.2                               15
279.2 7.6 9.3 9.3 − 56.5 258.1 − 376.1 104.8                               22
270.9 6.6 9.5 9.5 − 56.5 259.1 − 376.1 104.9          Mar.                  1
262.2 6.9 9.8 9.8 − 56.5 258.0 − 376.1 104.9                                 8
255.5 5.6 10.1 10.1 − 56.5 256.9 − 376.1 106.2                               15
245.3 6.3 9.6 9.6 − 56.5 256.0 − 376.1 106.2                               22
302.5 5.6 9.8 9.8 − 57.5 256.6 − 397.5 106.8                               29
239.3 6.2 10.4 10.4 − 57.5 251.7 − 397.3 107.2          Apr.                  5
230.5 5.9 11.7 11.7 − 57.5 253.3 − 397.3 107.2                               12
239.6 7.1 10.9 10.9 − 57.5 255.6 − 397.3 107.2                               19
236.9 6.7 11.5 11.5 − 57.5 255.5 − 397.3 107.2                               26
248.5 5.9 12.2 12.2 − 57.5 258.3 − 397.3 107.2 2019 May                  3
242.7 6.7 12.6 12.6 − 57.5 259.9 − 397.3 107.2                               10
240.5 6.8 11.4 11.4 − 57.5 257.8 − 397.3 107.2                               17
225.9 8.2 11.9 11.9 − 57.5 258.0 − 397.3 107.2                               24
234.8 6.5 11.7 11.7 − 57.5 254.4 − 397.3 107.2                               31
235.1 7.2 11.8 11.8 − 57.5 251.3 − 397.3 107.2          June                  7
232.3 7.8 12.4 12.4 − 57.5 251.0 − 397.3 107.2                               14
237.3 7.5 11.3 11.3 − 57.5 255.7 − 397.3 107.2                               21
277.4 5.4 10.4 10.4 − 56.8 262.8 − 425.7 107.2                               28
241.3 5.8 10.2 10.2 − 56.8 259.4 − 425.7 107.2          July                  5
242.8 6.7 10.7 10.7 − 56.8 260.7 − 425.7 107.2                               12
248.3 8.1 11.7 11.7 − 56.8 264.0 − 425.7 107.2                               19
245.8 10.3 11.4 11.4 − 56.8 265.3 − 425.7 107.2                               26
247.0 10.4 10.5 10.5 − 56.8 268.1 − 425.7 107.2          Aug.                  2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
171.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.7 31.2 391.9 118.5 5.7 2019 Jan.                18
166.4 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.7 31.7 392.0 118.5 5.7                               25
171.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 31.9 391.5 118.5 5.7          Feb.                  1
168.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 31.9 391.5 118.5 5.7                                 8
170.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.7 31.9 391.5 118.5 5.7                               15
159.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.7 32.3 391.5 118.5 5.7                               22
150.6 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 29.8 394.4 118.5 5.7          Mar.                  1
142.8 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.7 29.8 394.4 118.5 5.7                                 8
134.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 30.1 394.4 118.5 5.7                               15
126.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.7 30.2 394.4 118.5 5.7                               22
172.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.9 29.4 396.9 123.1 5.7                               29
126.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 29.5 396.9 123.1 5.7          Apr.                  5
120.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 29.7 396.9 123.1 5.7                               12
131.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 29.9 396.9 123.1 5.7                               19
133.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 30.0 396.9 123.1 5.7                               26
140.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 30.1 400.8 123.1 5.7 2019 May                  3
140.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 30.2 400.8 123.1 5.7                               10
138.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 30.3 400.8 123.1 5.7                               17
127.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 30.4 400.8 123.1 5.7                               24
134.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 30.5 404.8 123.1 5.7                               31
134.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 30.7 404.8 123.1 5.7          June                  7
133.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.9 31.0 404.8 123.1 5.7                               14
138.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.9 31.1 404.8 123.1 5.7                               21
162.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 31.3 407.8 123.1 5.7                               28
136.6 0.0 − − − 14.7 32.1 407.8 132.0 5.7          July                  5
137.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.7 32.1 407.8 132.0 5.7                               12
140.9 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.7 32.1 407.8 132.0 5.7                               19
137.7 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.7 32.2 407.8 132.0 5.7                               26
136.6 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.7 32.5 411.4 132.0 5.7          Aug.                  2
 
basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/li ability related to bank-
banknotes issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note issue“. 2For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DEM banknotes still in circu-
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according lation. 3 Source: ECB. 
to the aforementioned accounting procedure and the value of euro banknotes put

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.72011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.02017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.12018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2017         Sep. 7,811.3 28.4 2,262.7 1,847.3 1,578.3 269.0 415.4 288.4 127.0 3,799.4 3,385.3 2,890.2 2,589.5
         Oct. 7,825.7 28.4 2,285.3 1,873.3 1,604.0 269.2 412.1 285.1 127.0 3,804.7 3,393.5 2,899.1 2,598.2
         Nov. 7,849.9 28.0 2,312.8 1,901.5 1,633.0 268.5 411.3 285.5 125.8 3,818.1 3,411.2 2,919.0 2,612.6         Dec. 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018         Jan. 7,817.2 29.2 2,296.1 1,891.0 1,624.5 266.5 405.1 280.3 124.9 3,813.9 3,407.5 2,930.5 2,622.5
         Feb. 7,790.8 29.6 2,298.1 1,892.3 1,627.0 265.2 405.9 280.6 125.2 3,814.1 3,406.5 2,938.1 2,633.4         Mar. 7,746.6 35.1 2,254.6 1,852.5 1,585.3 267.1 402.1 274.9 127.2 3,814.9 3,410.8 2,946.8 2,644.4
         Apr. 7,781.1 33.8 2,300.8 1,892.1 1,625.1 267.0 408.7 280.6 128.0 3,818.5 3,417.4 2,956.1 2,650.7
         May 7,882.8 35.0 2,314.0 1,900.7 1,630.1 270.6 413.3 284.6 128.6 3,823.8 3,418.9 2,963.0 2,656.6         June 7,804.7 35.0 2,266.6 1,853.0 1,584.7 268.2 413.6 285.5 128.1 3,832.7 3,430.8 2,979.9 2,672.2
         July 7,784.2 34.7 2,276.2 1,852.8 1,585.7 267.1 423.4 295.9 127.5 3,840.0 3,437.3 2,987.0 2,679.3
         Aug. 7,828.0 35.1 2,294.8 1,865.2 1,597.6 267.6 429.6 301.1 128.5 3,840.6 3,431.8 2,987.4 2,690.7         Sep. 7,799.9 35.8 2,267.8 1,846.4 1,577.7 268.7 421.4 291.0 130.4 3,854.6 3,447.2 3,006.3 2,708.5
         Oct. 7,845.2 36.9 2,286.9 1,855.6 1,588.6 267.0 431.4 298.1 133.2 3,858.3 3,447.8 3,009.7 2,711.9
         Nov. 7,881.2 36.8 2,303.5 1,872.8 1,605.2 267.6 430.8 295.9 134.8 3,874.4 3,460.7 3,023.7 2,727.7         Dec. 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 36.7 2,267.3 1,827.4 1,559.5 267.8 439.9 304.8 135.1 3,878.8 3,468.7 3,032.2 2,737.6
         Feb. 7,935.7 36.9 2,304.8 1,862.5 1,591.5 271.1 442.3 304.8 137.5 3,893.1 3,477.0 3,044.8 2,751.0         Mar. 8,121.3 37.0 2,343.5 1,885.9 1,614.7 271.2 457.6 319.3 138.4 3,921.0 3,488.4 3,059.8 2,765.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 38.2 2,354.4 1,893.6 1,625.2 268.5 460.8 321.6 139.1 3,928.3 3,492.4 3,068.0 2,774.1
         May 8,280.9 37.9 2,376.8 1,919.0 1,648.5 270.5 457.8 317.9 139.9 3,944.5 3,509.1 3,085.5 2,790.5         June 8,320.2 37.9 2,332.5 1,869.9 1,600.4 269.5 462.6 321.6 141.0 3,972.1 3,530.1 3,108.2 2,809.7
 Changes 3
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.72012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.82013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.62014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.02017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.12018 101.8 8.5 − 29.2 − 49.7 − 53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2017         Oct. 8.6 0.1 21.9 25.5 25.4 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.7 0.1 4.6 8.0 8.6 8.6
         Nov. 33.4 − 0.4 28.9 28.8 29.4 − 0.6 0.0 1.2 − 1.1 14.8 18.7 19.0 13.5         Dec. − 126.4 4.1 − 90.1 − 74.7 − 72.0 − 2.7 − 15.4 − 15.0 − 0.4 − 15.2 − 10.0 0.1 − 2.4
2018         Jan. 124.2 − 2.9 82.2 70.9 68.7 2.2 11.3 11.5 − 0.2 14.7 8.2 12.4 13.0
         Feb. 6.3 0.3 0.5 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.7 7.7 10.7         Mar. − 37.4 5.5 − 42.9 − 39.5 − 41.4 1.9 − 3.4 − 5.3 2.0 2.7 5.6 10.1 12.3
         Apr. 28.9 − 1.3 45.6 39.7 39.9 − 0.2 5.9 5.1 0.9 4.0 7.1 9.8 6.3
         May 85.0 1.3 12.4 9.1 5.7 3.4 3.4 2.8 0.5 12.9 9.4 15.3 14.3         June − 77.2 − 0.1 − 47.4 − 47.7 − 45.4 − 2.3 0.3 0.9 − 0.5 9.9 12.8 17.9 16.4
         July − 14.4 − 0.3 10.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 10.1 10.7 − 0.6 7.8 6.8 5.9 6.1
         Aug. 41.9 0.4 19.8 13.8 13.0 0.8 5.9 4.9 1.0 0.6 − 5.6 0.4 11.3         Sep. − 30.4 0.8 − 27.3 − 18.9 − 19.9 1.0 − 8.4 − 10.4 1.9 14.2 15.9 19.2 18.2
         Oct. 36.4 1.1 15.0 8.5 10.3 − 1.8 6.5 6.1 0.4 3.8 0.5 3.4 3.2
         Nov. 38.5 − 0.1 17.2 17.6 16.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.0 1.6 16.7 13.4 14.4 16.1         Dec. − 100.0 3.8 − 114.6 − 104.0 − 104.3 0.2 − 10.6 − 10.9 0.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 1.6 − 0.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 − 3.9 79.5 59.2 58.8 0.5 20.3 20.0 0.3 17.0 12.6 10.0 11.4
         Feb. 31.1 0.1 36.8 34.8 31.7 3.0 2.1 − 0.4 2.5 15.5 9.5 13.7 14.5         Mar. 124.6 0.2 32.4 25.5 26.3 − 0.8 6.9 6.5 0.4 12.4 10.7 14.4 14.6
         Apr. 33.9 1.2 10.8 7.7 10.5 − 2.8 3.1 2.4 0.7 7.6 4.4 8.4 8.9
         May 124.6 − 0.3 22.1 25.4 23.2 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.9 0.7 16.3 16.3 17.4 16.2         June 38.9 − 0.0 − 44.1 − 49.0 − 48.2 − 0.8 4.9 3.8 1.1 26.8 20.9 22.7 19.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro area
to non-banks in other Member States residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which: Secur- of which: Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
300.7 495.1 289.0 206.1 414.1 283.0 167.9 131.1 29.8 101.3 1,021.2 776.3 699.6 2017          Sep.
301.0 494.4 289.2 205.3 411.2 281.6 167.7 129.6 30.4 99.2 1,014.2 768.9 693.0          Oct.
306.4 492.2 287.3 205.0 406.8 276.8 164.2 130.0 29.8 100.2 1,005.3 759.4 685.6          Nov.308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9          Dec.
308.0 477.0 282.8 194.2 406.4 278.6 163.9 127.8 29.7 98.0 1,009.1 758.2 668.9 2018          Jan.
304.7 468.4 277.4 191.0 407.6 280.5 165.9 127.1 29.6 97.5 1,026.5 775.9 622.5          Feb.302.4 463.9 275.5 188.4 404.1 278.3 164.9 125.9 29.8 96.1 1,016.8 763.8 625.3          Mar.
305.4 461.2 276.2 185.0 401.2 275.1 165.1 126.0 29.9 96.2 1,009.2 757.3 618.9          Apr.
306.4 455.9 272.3 183.6 404.9 280.2 167.4 124.8 29.8 95.0 1,052.9 799.1 657.1          May307.7 450.8 270.0 180.8 402.0 278.4 166.4 123.6 29.9 93.7 1,032.5 777.4 637.9          June
307.7 450.3 270.8 179.5 402.7 281.2 169.9 121.5 29.7 91.8 1,028.8 770.8 604.5          July
296.8 444.3 266.4 178.0 408.9 286.1 173.1 122.8 29.7 93.1 1,021.0 762.2 636.6          Aug.297.8 440.9 263.4 177.5 407.4 283.7 171.7 123.6 29.6 94.0 1,028.7 770.3 613.1          Sep.
297.8 438.1 265.4 172.7 410.5 287.6 176.1 122.9 31.0 91.9 1,037.4 780.7 625.6          Oct.
296.0 437.0 264.5 172.5 413.7 290.8 177.8 122.9 30.9 92.1 1,032.1 777.3 634.5          Nov.297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2          Dec.
294.6 436.5 265.9 170.6 410.1 291.8 179.6 118.3 28.9 89.5 1,049.5 794.1 670.0 2019          Jan.
293.8 432.2 263.3 168.9 416.1 294.1 181.5 122.0 28.8 93.1 1,037.8 781.6 663.2          Feb.294.1 428.5 260.6 168.0 432.6 311.4 197.8 121.2 28.9 92.4 1,084.1 826.7 735.7          Mar.
293.8 424.5 260.8 163.7 435.9 315.7 202.0 120.2 29.6 90.5 1,099.5 840.3 734.2          Apr.
295.0 423.6 259.2 164.4 435.5 317.7 205.0 117.8 29.4 88.4 1,101.0 839.1 820.6          May298.5 421.9 257.5 164.3 442.0 320.9 207.2 121.1 29.0 92.1 1,103.8 841.9 873.9          June
Changes 3
− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
− 9.8 − 46.2 − 19.1 − 27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 − 11.4 − 1.5 − 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
0.1 − 0.7 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.2 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 6.6 2017          Oct.
5.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 4.3 − 3.1 0.4 − 0.6 1.0 − 2.5 − 3.6 − 7.3          Nov.2.5 − 10.1 − 2.8 − 7.2 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 5.4 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.3 − 9.5 − 16.9          Dec.
− 0.6 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 6.5 7.7 6.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.2 29.4 24.6 0.7 2018          Jan.
− 3.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 − 3.3 1.0 1.7 1.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 10.6 11.1 − 5.4          Feb.− 2.2 − 4.5 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 5.5 − 8.2 2.8          Mar.
3.5 − 2.6 0.7 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 3.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 13.2 − 11.9 − 6.2          Apr.
0.9 − 5.8 − 4.3 − 1.5 3.5 4.6 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 30.9 29.9 27.5          May1.5 − 5.0 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 20.4 − 21.8 − 19.2          June
− 0.2 0.9 2.2 − 1.3 0.9 3.1 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 31.6          July
− 10.9 − 6.0 − 4.5 − 1.5 6.2 4.9 3.1 1.3 0.0 1.2 − 11.0 − 11.5 32.1          Aug.
1.1 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.6 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 5.4 5.9 − 23.5          Sep.
0.2 − 2.9 1.9 − 4.8 3.3 4.5 4.1 − 1.2 1.4 − 2.6 4.0 3.5 12.6          Oct.
− 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 3.3 3.3 1.5 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 − 4.0 − 2.2 8.8          Nov.
1.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 3.5 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.3 − 1.5 3.5 3.5 16.1          Dec.
− 1.4 2.6 2.4 0.2 4.4 5.1 3.2 − 0.8 0.3 − 1.0 16.5 15.8 19.8 2019          Jan.
− 0.8 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 1.7 6.0 2.4 2.2 3.7 − 0.0 3.7 − 14.5 − 15.1 − 6.9          Feb.− 0.2 − 3.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 1.7 3.0 2.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 1.2 16.1 17.2 63.6          Mar.
− 0.4 − 4.0 0.2 − 4.2 3.1 4.2 4.3 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 15.8 14.1 − 1.5          Apr.
1.2 − 1.0 − 1.7 0.7 − 0.1 2.3 3.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 0.0 − 2.8 86.5          May3.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.1 5.9 2.9 2.2 3.0 − 0.4 3.5 3.0 2.8 53.3          June
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home Member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country States Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.32011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.22017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.52018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2017         Sep. 7,811.3 1,256.2 1,071.9 184.3 3,494.8 3,371.4 1,886.8 902.8 284.3 581.8 537.9 114.7 50.7
         Oct. 7,825.7 1,272.0 1,081.9 190.1 3,505.8 3,388.0 1,912.7 893.9 277.3 581.5 538.4 109.2 46.3
         Nov. 7,849.9 1,275.5 1,081.0 194.5 3,542.9 3,417.4 1,939.9 896.5 276.9 581.0 538.6 113.6 52.1         Dec. 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018         Jan. 7,817.2 1,249.4 1,060.8 188.6 3,539.8 3,419.1 1,944.5 892.2 276.8 582.4 539.7 110.6 46.4
         Feb. 7,790.8 1,246.9 1,058.2 188.8 3,536.8 3,416.5 1,945.4 888.9 273.3 582.1 540.4 109.7 47.1         Mar. 7,746.6 1,238.1 1,057.5 180.6 3,537.7 3,413.3 1,944.1 888.1 274.7 581.2 539.9 115.3 48.7
         Apr. 7,781.1 1,233.9 1,053.5 180.4 3,551.3 3,430.7 1,967.4 882.9 270.2 580.4 539.6 108.8 46.7
         May 7,882.8 1,232.4 1,037.1 195.3 3,582.2 3,462.4 1,998.3 884.0 271.4 580.1 539.5 109.4 47.7         June 7,804.7 1,224.7 1,035.7 189.0 3,582.9 3,463.7 1,991.4 893.1 281.1 579.2 539.1 109.0 44.0
         July 7,784.2 1,228.5 1,042.2 186.3 3,584.2 3,462.9 1,997.6 887.1 277.5 578.2 538.6 108.8 44.5
         Aug. 7,828.0 1,229.6 1,043.7 185.9 3,595.2 3,474.5 2,014.0 882.9 276.6 577.6 538.3 106.9 45.1         Sep. 7,799.9 1,220.4 1,034.2 186.2 3,594.0 3,473.8 2,017.5 879.0 273.7 577.3 538.4 108.8 48.2
         Oct. 7,845.2 1,227.0 1,034.3 192.7 3,614.3 3,494.1 2,039.3 877.8 273.4 577.0 538.6 108.8 47.3
         Nov. 7,881.2 1,244.5 1,046.8 197.7 3,646.1 3,527.4 2,074.8 875.8 271.5 576.8 539.1 106.2 47.1         Dec. 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 1,238.4 1,040.5 197.9 3,646.4 3,530.1 2,074.3 877.3 277.3 578.4 541.4 104.9 45.9
         Feb. 7,935.7 1,258.4 1,046.6 211.8 3,658.9 3,544.0 2,083.6 880.9 281.8 579.5 542.4 103.3 44.6         Mar. 8,121.3 1,281.9 1,050.1 231.8 3,676.8 3,554.7 2,095.7 877.1 280.6 582.0 544.7 109.9 51.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 1,298.3 1,061.2 237.0 3,689.3 3,569.8 2,117.1 870.5 276.7 582.2 544.7 105.8 47.5
         May 8,280.9 1,291.2 1,057.1 234.1 3,721.9 3,599.3 2,147.3 869.5 277.3 582.5 544.4 108.1 50.1         June 8,320.2 1,291.9 1,048.2 243.8 3,728.6 3,595.7 2,144.7 868.3 274.7 582.6 544.0 115.9 56.6
 Changes 4
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.52012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.42013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.32014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.92017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.82018 101.8 − 20.1 − 25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 − 18.8 − 6.5 − 4.3 1.2 − 4.3 2.3
2017         Oct. 8.6 15.2 9.8 5.5 10.3 16.0 25.5 − 9.1 − 7.1 − 0.3 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.4
         Nov. 33.4 4.6 − 0.3 4.9 37.9 30.2 27.9 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 0.2 4.6 5.9         Dec. − 126.4 − 36.9 − 27.7 − 9.2 − 13.1 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 4.6 − 2.6 1.9 2.4 − 4.9 − 9.6
2018         Jan. 124.2 17.6 13.1 4.5 12.2 9.1 8.7 0.9 3.2 − 0.5 0.2 2.4 4.0
         Feb. 6.3 − 3.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.5 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 0.2 0.4 − 1.1 0.7         Mar. − 37.4 − 8.3 − 0.5 − 7.9 1.3 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 5.7 1.6
         Apr. 28.9 − 4.5 − 3.8 − 0.6 13.5 17.5 22.8 − 4.6 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 6.6 − 2.0
         May 85.0 − 3.5 − 17.3 13.9 29.2 30.2 29.9 0.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 0.9         June − 77.2 − 7.8 − 1.5 − 6.3 0.7 1.2 − 6.9 9.0 9.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 3.8
         July − 14.4 4.7 7.2 − 2.5 1.8 − 0.4 6.5 − 5.9 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 41.9 2.0 2.6 − 0.6 10.7 11.3 16.1 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.0 0.6         Sep. − 30.4 − 9.6 − 9.7 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 3.6 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 0.0 1.9 3.1
         Oct. 36.4 5.4 − 0.4 5.9 19.1 19.3 21.1 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.0
         Nov. 38.5 17.7 12.6 5.1 32.1 33.5 35.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.1 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.2         Dec. − 100.0 − 30.3 − 24.8 − 5.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 1.3 − 3.1 − 4.2 1.7 2.0 − 1.7 − 2.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 24.8 18.9 6.0 3.6 3.0 − 1.2 4.4 10.1 − 0.2 0.3 0.4 1.0
         Feb. 31.1 19.6 5.6 13.9 12.0 13.3 9.0 3.2 4.1 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 − 1.4         Mar. 124.6 19.3 2.7 16.6 15.7 9.5 11.1 − 4.1 − 1.4 2.5 2.2 5.7 6.3
         Apr. 33.9 16.4 11.2 5.2 12.6 15.1 21.4 − 6.6 − 3.9 0.2 0.1 − 4.1 − 4.3
         May 124.6 − 7.3 − 4.2 − 3.1 32.4 29.5 30.1 − 0.9 0.6 0.3 − 0.3 2.3 2.7         June 38.9 0.8 − 8.8 9.6 6.4 − 3.8 − 2.6 − 1.3 − 2.8 0.2 − 0.4 7.7 6.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which: from Money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- repos with
of which: of which: central non-banks fund euro Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 201049.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 201663.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 201756.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
61.0 20.5 2.9 2.6 8.7 8.0 2.6 2.4 1,015.2 42.2 669.5 612.4 758.2 2017          Sep.
59.9 18.3 2.9 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.3 2.2 1,008.9 40.7 667.9 612.7 753.9          Oct.
58.6 16.7 2.9 2.6 11.8 8.3 2.6 2.2 1,004.7 40.1 664.4 609.8 747.9          Nov.63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8          Dec.
61.3 18.9 2.9 2.6 10.0 8.9 4.3 2.1 1,002.6 35.4 682.4 666.5 670.0 2018          Jan.
59.7 18.2 2.9 2.6 10.7 8.8 3.8 2.1 1,006.3 36.0 690.3 678.6 625.9          Feb.63.8 22.6 2.9 2.6 9.1 8.3 2.9 2.3 1,014.0 35.2 641.0 675.0 635.6          Mar.
59.2 18.0 2.9 2.5 11.7 8.4 2.4 2.2 1,016.6 34.7 672.9 677.3 624.6          Apr.
58.8 16.8 2.9 2.5 10.4 8.8 1.6 2.0 1,031.1 36.4 707.2 679.7 646.6          May62.2 21.7 2.9 2.5 10.2 9.3 1.3 2.1 1,022.2 33.7 670.8 680.2 620.5          June
61.5 19.0 2.9 2.5 12.4 10.0 1.8 2.0 1,016.9 33.1 681.9 682.2 586.7          July
58.9 16.4 2.8 2.5 13.9 10.6 1.2 2.0 1,021.2 35.0 690.5 684.5 603.8          Aug.57.8 17.4 2.8 2.5 11.5 9.2 1.3 2.0 1,034.7 33.9 681.7 687.2 578.7          Sep.
58.6 17.2 2.8 2.5 11.4 9.7 2.4 2.0 1,044.7 36.2 666.9 687.8 600.0          Oct.
56.3 15.0 2.8 2.5 12.5 10.0 1.3 2.4 1,048.3 34.6 643.3 688.1 607.3          Nov.56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7          Dec.
56.2 15.3 2.8 2.5 11.5 10.1 1.7 2.4 1,048.1 32.1 636.9 688.3 640.1 2019          Jan.
55.9 14.9 2.8 2.5 11.7 10.0 2.0 2.3 1,067.9 32.2 621.9 684.9 639.5          Feb.55.4 14.9 2.8 2.5 12.1 10.5 11.4 2.1 1,065.3 32.7 666.8 699.3 717.8          Mar.
55.5 15.0 2.8 2.5 13.7 11.2 12.5 2.0 1,060.0 32.1 698.4 696.3 697.8          Apr.
55.2 14.8 2.8 2.5 14.4 12.0 11.2 2.0 1,071.8 32.4 688.6 703.5 790.6          May56.5 16.1 2.8 2.5 17.0 14.0 12.9 2.0 1,071.1 33.1 676.3 704.9 832.5          June
Changes 4
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
− 6.4 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 2.1 2.1 − 2.6 0.3 30.0 − 5.9 − 36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
− 1.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.6 2017          Oct.
− 1.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 0.3 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 7.1          Nov.
4.7 3.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 2.3 − 59.2 5.6 − 16.1          Dec.
− 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 15.8 − 2.2 84.0 − 17.5 11.0 2018          Jan.
− 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 5.0 10.8 − 1.0          Feb.
4.1 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 0.2 9.4 − 0.8 − 48.1 − 3.0 12.1          Mar.
− 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 28.0 1.7 − 8.4          Apr.
− 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 7.3 1.4 29.3 0.1 23.6          May
3.3 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.4 0.1 − 9.2 − 2.7 − 36.6 0.4 − 24.3          June
− 0.6 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.7 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 0.6 12.3 2.6 − 32.6          July
− 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 2.8 1.9 7.5 2.3 17.3          Aug.− 1.2 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 0.0 11.8 − 1.1 − 10.0 2.2 − 23.7          Sep.
0.8 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.1 5.5 2.2 − 18.1 − 0.7 24.1          Oct.
− 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.5 − 1.0 0.3 4.4 − 1.6 − 23.1 0.5 7.6          Nov.
0.5 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 0.5 − 0.6 0.0 − 12.7 − 2.6 − 66.2 8.0 4.7          Dec.
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.4 0.9 0.0 13.9 0.2 61.2 − 7.3 31.7 2019          Jan.
− 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 17.8 − 0.0 − 16.4 − 4.0 1.9          Feb.− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.6 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 0.4 15.8 11.6 68.4          Mar.
0.1 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 0.8 1.1 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.5 31.6 − 3.0 − 19.4          Apr.
− 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.0 11.8 0.2 − 10.4 7.2 92.3          May
1.2 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.5 2.0 1.7 0.0 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 12.3 3.1 41.4          June
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
  
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2019         Jan. 1,578 7,949.9 497.6 2,378.0 1,894.5 481.4 4,189.6 373.7 3,140.5 0.5 667.9 112.6 772.1
         Feb. 1,579 7,984.1 516.1 2,393.6 1,904.1 487.0 4,195.5 367.4 3,150.9 0.5 670.6 112.8 766.2         Mar. 1,579 8,171.5 521.8 2,473.2 1,982.4 487.8 4,224.1 382.8 3,162.7 0.6 669.3 112.6 839.7
         Apr. 1,578 8,205.5 546.2 2,470.0 1,981.4 485.0 4,236.8 385.1 3,178.3 0.5 665.2 113.2 839.3
         May 1,576 8,331.8 564.0 2,462.3 1,970.6 488.1 4,265.7 395.5 3,196.6 0.4 665.2 113.7 926.0         June 1,572 8,371.8 523.0 2,471.9 1,978.5 489.2 4,283.3 405.3 3,197.4 0.5 672.2 113.5 980.1
Commercial banks 6
2019         May 263 3,458.2 330.2 1,022.8 937.4 85.0 1,367.7 238.8 924.0 0.4 201.1 52.1 685.3
         June 263 3,503.7 312.8 1,032.8 945.4 86.8 1,378.2 245.5 921.1 0.4 208.1 51.9 727.9
   Big banks 7
2019         May 4 2,002.5 105.1 602.7 570.5 32.2 637.2 124.0 405.4 0.1 105.3 45.4 612.0
         June 4 2,032.6 97.5 595.9 561.8 34.1 638.6 126.2 402.6 0.1 107.7 45.4 655.2
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2019         May 151 1,037.2 105.3 236.4 185.7 50.6 624.3 81.3 453.7 0.2 88.2 6.0 65.1
         June 151 1,040.7 99.9 239.9 189.1 50.7 631.1 84.7 452.5 0.2 92.9 5.8 64.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2019         May 108 418.6 119.8 183.7 181.2 2.2 106.2 33.4 64.9 0.0 7.5 0.7 8.2
         June 108 430.4 115.4 197.1 194.5 2.0 108.6 34.6 66.0 0.1 7.5 0.7 8.7
Landesbanken
2019         May 6 826.0 72.3 258.5 197.4 60.1 396.0 49.1 297.7 0.0 46.8 9.3 89.9
         June 6 813.6 48.6 262.9 200.9 60.9 394.5 48.0 296.5 0.0 47.5 9.3 98.3
Savings banks
2019         May 385 1,309.2 53.3 193.3 73.8 119.3 1,027.7 50.8 813.8 0.0 162.9 14.3 20.5
         June 385 1,309.2 53.6 189.4 70.0 119.1 1,032.0 52.6 816.3 0.0 162.9 14.2 20.0
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2019         May 874 951.0 20.6 177.4 69.1 108.0 716.0 34.2 568.4 0.0 113.2 17.4 19.6
         June 871 952.2 21.3 173.9 65.9 107.7 719.4 35.7 570.0 0.0 113.5 17.4 20.2
Mortgage banks
2019         May 11 235.6 5.4 28.4 18.6 9.8 193.4 2.6 170.0 − 20.8 0.2 8.2
         June 10 233.5 4.2 27.6 18.3 9.3 193.4 2.7 170.7 − 20.0 0.2 8.1
Building and loan associations
2019         May 19 236.3 1.1 53.9 37.8 16.2 176.3 1.2 149.5 . 25.6 0.3 4.6
         June 19 236.9 1.0 53.9 37.6 16.3 177.1 1.1 150.3 . 25.6 0.3 4.6
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2019         May 18 1,315.5 81.0 727.9 636.4 89.8 388.6 18.9 273.2 − 94.9 20.2 97.9
         June 18 1,322.8 81.5 731.3 640.4 89.2 388.7 19.7 272.5 − 94.6 20.2 101.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2019         May 143 1,224.7 179.1 388.1 351.3 36.3 533.2 100.6 348.8 0.3 82.4 3.5 120.8
         June 143 1,246.7 173.8 401.1 363.4 37.1 543.7 104.4 349.4 0.3 88.7 3.5 124.6
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2019         May 35 806.1 59.4 204.3 170.1 34.2 427.0 67.1 283.9 0.2 74.9 2.8 112.7
         June 35 816.3 58.5 204.1 168.9 35.1 435.1 69.7 283.3 0.2 81.2 2.8 115.9
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,714.0 520.3 1,193.6 3,809.3 2,212.1 284.4 686.8 70.9 585.4 547.6 40.6 1,143.3 531.3 752.0 2019          Jan.
1,744.9 549.0 1,195.8 3,796.2 2,199.0 285.3 685.5 49.5 586.5 548.7 40.0 1,159.7 533.6 749.8          Feb.1,812.3 586.4 1,225.8 3,824.4 2,215.0 297.4 683.5 53.4 588.9 550.9 39.7 1,169.0 536.1 829.6          Mar.
1,847.9 573.2 1,274.6 3,850.4 2,246.9 295.4 679.6 60.5 589.1 550.9 39.4 1,161.2 536.0 810.0          Apr.
1,840.1 603.9 1,236.2 3,872.7 2,273.4 293.8 677.1 58.1 589.4 550.5 39.1 1,178.2 539.6 901.3          May1,834.1 593.8 1,240.3 3,875.3 2,277.6 290.4 679.1 52.4 589.5 550.1 38.8 1,174.8 544.3 943.3          June
Commercial banks 6
912.6 432.2 480.3 1,567.8 997.6 177.9 273.1 54.0 103.5 95.1 15.9 175.2 197.2 605.3 2019          May
927.9 434.7 493.2 1,566.6 996.8 172.8 277.3 48.5 104.0 94.9 15.7 174.2 197.2 637.7          June
Big banks 7
454.3 192.4 261.9 779.0 469.4 106.0 112.9 44.3 87.0 79.7 3.6 123.2 110.1 535.8 2019          May
460.1 200.7 259.3 769.2 465.1 101.3 111.6 37.5 87.7 79.6 3.5 122.3 110.1 571.0          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
212.2 82.1 130.1 637.2 422.3 49.0 137.5 9.7 16.2 15.2 12.2 51.0 78.1 58.6 2019          May
208.8 77.7 131.1 646.1 425.8 49.0 143.1 11.0 16.1 15.1 12.1 51.0 78.1 56.7          June
Branches of foreign banks
246.1 157.7 88.4 151.7 105.9 22.8 22.7 − 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.9 9.0 10.9 2019          May
259.1 156.3 102.8 151.3 105.9 22.5 22.6 − 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.9 9.1 10.0          June
Landesbanken
264.6 71.9 192.8 239.1 111.3 42.7 77.6 2.4 7.2 7.1 0.3 189.4 40.0 92.8 2019          May
242.8 59.1 183.7 238.6 112.0 41.5 77.6 1.6 7.2 7.0 0.3 192.2 40.0 100.0          June
Savings banks
133.3 3.4 129.9 992.4 651.6 17.3 15.6 − 291.3 269.1 16.5 18.8 118.7 46.0 2019          May
134.1 5.0 129.1 991.5 650.8 18.0 15.4 − 291.0 268.9 16.3 18.6 121.4 43.6          June
 
Credit cooperatives
 
118.1 1.0 117.0 711.5 472.2 33.6 14.0 − 186.9 178.8 4.8 9.8 81.2 30.5 2019          May
118.4 1.5 116.9 711.6 472.0 33.8 14.1 − 186.9 178.9 4.8 10.0 83.2 29.0          June
Mortgage banks
49.7 5.5 44.2 74.0 2.3 3.4 68.3 − − − . 94.6 10.4 6.9 2019          May
50.5 5.7 44.8 72.5 2.3 3.7 66.5 − − − . 93.7 10.2 6.6          June
Building and loan associations
23.0 2.8 20.2 186.3 3.2 2.2 180.4 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 3.1 11.9 11.8 2019          May
23.2 3.0 20.2 186.4 3.2 2.1 180.5 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 3.1 12.0 12.2          June
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
338.8 87.0 251.8 101.5 35.3 16.6 48.1 1.7 − − . 687.2 80.1 107.9 2019          May
337.3 84.8 252.4 108.1 40.4 18.5 47.7 2.3 − − . 682.9 80.3 114.3          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
455.1 246.8 208.2 561.5 405.9 53.7 76.5 11.4 19.8 19.4 5.6 31.1 58.8 118.2 2019          May
468.8 242.3 226.5 568.9 409.0 54.6 80.0 13.4 19.7 19.3 5.5 30.8 58.8 119.5          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
209.0 89.2 119.8 409.8 300.0 30.8 53.8 11.4 19.6 19.2 5.5 30.2 49.7 107.4 2019          May
209.7 86.0 123.7 417.5 303.2 32.0 57.4 13.4 19.5 19.1 5.4 29.8 49.7 109.5          June
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerisc he Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking  categories. 
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  
1 
End of year or month *
 
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.82017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.52018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2018         Jan. 29.0 448.1 1,421.7 1,176.0 0.0 0.7 245.1 2.5 3,339.3 2,904.9 0.3 1.0 433.1
         Feb. 29.3 460.7 1,409.5 1,165.3 0.0 0.8 243.3 2.9 3,338.3 2,910.6 0.2 1.2 426.4         Mar. 34.8 440.7 1,389.5 1,143.5 0.0 0.9 245.2 3.2 3,342.5 2,919.6 0.3 1.0 421.7
         Apr. 33.5 464.4 1,405.8 1,159.9 0.0 0.8 245.1 3.6 3,348.5 2,926.7 0.2 1.6 420.0
         May 34.8 475.7 1,398.4 1,153.4 0.0 1.0 244.1 4.1 3,350.0 2,928.6 0.2 2.3 418.8         June 34.7 437.6 1,388.9 1,146.3 0.0 1.0 241.6 4.5 3,361.8 2,941.9 0.2 1.8 417.7
         July 34.4 456.8 1,369.6 1,128.2 0.0 1.1 240.3 4.8 3,368.0 2,949.9 0.2 2.2 415.6
         Aug. 34.8 455.2 1,383.7 1,141.5 0.0 1.2 241.0 5.3 3,368.5 2,956.8 0.2 1.6 409.9         Sep. 35.6 471.0 1,349.1 1,105.9 0.0 1.3 241.9 5.9 3,384.0 2,971.7 0.2 1.8 410.2
         Oct. 36.6 505.8 1,323.8 1,082.0 0.0 1.4 240.3 6.1 3,384.4 2,977.1 0.2 0.6 406.6
         Nov. 36.5 496.8 1,350.3 1,107.7 0.0 1.3 241.3 6.0 3,397.3 2,992.0 0.2 0.8 404.3         Dec. 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019         Jan. 36.5 451.8 1,346.4 1,106.7 0.0 0.8 238.9 6.1 3,405.3 3,003.3 0.2 1.0 400.8
         Feb. 36.6 471.9 1,361.8 1,118.8 0.0 0.8 242.1 6.1 3,413.6 3,014.0 0.2 0.3 399.0         Mar. 36.8 476.4 1,380.3 1,137.3 0.0 1.0 242.0 6.0 3,425.0 3,026.0 0.3 1.0 397.7
         Apr. 38.0 501.2 1,363.8 1,123.2 0.0 0.8 239.8 6.0 3,428.9 3,034.7 0.2 1.1 393.0
         May 37.7 517.6 1,371.8 1,129.7 0.0 0.8 241.3 5.5 3,445.6 3,049.5 0.2 1.5 394.4         June 37.7 477.9 1,362.5 1,121.2 0.0 1.0 240.3 5.2 3,467.1 3,067.0 0.2 1.3 398.5
Changes *
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.92012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.72013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.82014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.92017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.62018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.2
2018         Jan. − 2.9 + 55.6 + 13.7 + 12.1 − + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 11.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 4.4
         Feb. + 0.3 + 12.7 − 12.3 − 10.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 6.7         Mar. + 5.5 − 20.0 − 19.9 − 21.9 − + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 4.7
         Apr. − 1.3 + 23.6 + 16.8 + 16.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 6.4 + 7.1 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.3
         May + 1.3 + 11.4 − 5.8 − 4.9 − + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 10.4 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.2         June − 0.1 − 38.1 − 9.5 − 7.1 − + 0.0 − 2.4 + 0.4 + 11.8 + 13.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
         July − 0.3 + 19.3 − 19.3 − 18.1 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 6.2 + 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.1
         Aug. + 0.4 − 1.6 + 15.6 + 14.8 − + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 7.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.8         Sep. + 0.8 + 16.0 − 34.6 − 35.7 − + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 15.5 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
         Oct. + 1.1 + 34.7 − 25.4 − 23.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.6
         Nov. − 0.1 − 9.0 + 26.6 + 25.7 − − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 12.9 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.2         Dec. + 3.9 − 80.6 − 26.9 − 24.0 − − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5
2019         Jan. − 3.9 + 35.6 + 23.0 + 23.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.8 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 3.1
         Feb. + 0.1 + 20.1 + 15.3 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 8.3 + 10.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.7         Mar. + 0.2 + 3.8 + 22.0 + 22.7 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 12.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.8
         Apr. + 1.2 + 24.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.7
         May − 0.3 + 16.4 + 8.0 + 6.5 − − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 16.7 + 14.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.5         June − 0.0 − 39.7 − 9.2 − 8.4 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 21.5 + 17.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 4.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
− 18.9 88.2 1,060.1 116.0 944.1 0.0 5.0 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 582.4 42.9 30.4 2018          Jan.
− 19.0 88.5 1,056.6 110.3 946.4 0.0 5.0 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 582.2 42.3 30.9          Feb.− 18.9 88.5 1,056.3 118.6 937.7 0.0 5.0 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 581.3 41.8 31.5          Mar.
− 18.8 89.2 1,052.8 118.2 934.6 0.0 5.0 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 580.5 41.3 31.9          Apr.
− 18.8 93.8 1,035.9 107.1 928.9 0.0 5.0 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 580.2 40.9 32.4          May− 18.7 94.0 1,034.3 122.0 912.2 0.0 4.9 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 579.3 40.6 32.6          June
− 18.5 94.4 1,041.4 118.8 922.6 0.0 4.9 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 578.2 40.0 32.8          July
− 18.4 88.0 1,042.8 117.3 925.5 0.0 4.8 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 577.6 39.5 33.1          Aug.− 18.3 87.9 1,033.4 117.1 916.2 0.0 4.8 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 577.3 39.1 33.9          Sep.
− 17.9 87.9 1,032.9 111.3 921.6 0.0 4.8 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 577.0 38.6 33.7          Oct.
− 17.9 87.7 1,045.8 115.5 930.3 0.0 4.7 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 576.9 37.9 33.7          Nov.− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9          Dec.
− 17.8 90.8 1,039.4 114.9 924.6 0.0 4.7 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 578.5 36.7 33.8 2019          Jan.
− 17.8 90.8 1,045.6 118.2 927.4 0.0 4.7 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 579.5 36.1 34.0          Feb.− 17.6 90.9 1,049.4 122.3 927.1 0.0 4.7 3,565.3 2,101.1 846.4 582.0 35.8 33.9          Mar.
− 17.5 90.7 1,060.8 131.5 929.3 0.0 4.6 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 582.3 35.4 33.9          Apr.
− 17.5 91.2 1,056.4 121.5 934.9 0.0 4.6 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 582.5 35.2 33.7          May− 17.5 90.9 1,046.9 122.5 924.4 0.0 4.6 3,609.7 2,150.7 841.4 582.7 34.9 33.4          June
Changes *
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018
− − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 5.2 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 2018          Jan.
− − 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.5 − 5.8 + 2.3 − + 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5          Feb.− − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 8.3 − 8.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5          Mar.
− − 0.1 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 4.6 − 16.9 − 11.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5          May− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 15.0 − 16.6 − − 0.1 + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3          June
− − 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.7 − 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2          July
− + 0.0 − 6.0 + 2.8 − 1.5 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5          Aug.− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 9.3 − − 0.0 − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6          Sep.
− − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2          Oct.
− − 0.0 − 0.2 + 13.0 + 4.2 + 8.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 3.2 − 24.9 − 8.9 − 16.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2          Dec.
− − 0.2 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 9.4 + 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2019          Jan.
− − − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Feb.− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.4 + 12.0 − 3.8 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Mar.
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 9.2 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.3 − 10.0 + 5.7 − + 0.0 + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          May− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.3 + 1.2 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.9 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium marketbanknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesand Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.62017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.52018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2018         Jan. 0.3 985.4 758.1 466.7 291.4 1.8 225.5 2.2 735.1 450.6 105.6 345.0 5.5 279.1
         Feb. 0.3 999.3 770.8 477.7 293.1 2.1 226.3 2.3 742.5 459.1 111.5 347.7 6.2 277.2         Mar. 0.3 993.3 759.8 469.7 290.0 2.2 231.3 2.4 736.2 456.1 108.7 347.4 6.5 273.6
         Apr. 0.3 1,003.7 769.6 478.3 291.3 2.3 231.8 2.4 730.1 453.9 105.2 348.7 6.8 269.4
         May 0.3 1,030.6 796.6 501.0 295.6 2.3 231.7 2.5 749.9 470.2 112.9 357.2 5.3 274.4         June 0.3 1,027.1 792.4 501.1 291.2 2.3 232.4 2.5 732.4 454.6 97.7 356.9 5.9 271.8
         July 0.2 1,031.9 795.4 502.7 292.7 2.3 234.2 2.6 740.4 464.1 103.9 360.2 6.1 270.2
         Aug. 0.2 1,027.9 789.8 496.9 292.9 2.3 235.8 2.6 748.7 469.5 107.6 362.0 6.5 272.7         Sep. 0.3 1,028.7 787.7 496.7 291.1 2.3 238.6 2.7 742.5 464.0 102.4 361.6 5.3 273.2
         Oct. 0.3 1,013.0 772.7 492.7 280.0 2.1 238.1 2.8 772.5 495.4 115.8 379.6 6.0 271.1
         Nov. 0.3 1,007.9 765.4 491.4 274.0 1.5 241.0 2.9 776.4 500.3 117.6 382.7 5.9 270.2         Dec. 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019         Jan. 0.2 1,031.6 787.8 518.2 269.6 1.3 242.5 3.1 784.3 511.1 119.4 391.8 6.0 267.2
         Feb. 0.2 1,031.8 785.3 511.5 273.7 1.7 244.8 3.2 782.0 504.5 110.6 393.9 5.9 271.5         Mar. 0.2 1,092.9 845.1 565.9 279.2 2.0 245.8 3.2 799.2 519.8 122.8 397.0 7.8 271.6
         Apr. 0.2 1,106.2 858.3 579.0 279.3 2.8 245.2 3.3 807.9 529.0 130.3 398.7 6.6 272.2
         May 0.2 1,090.6 840.9 564.1 276.8 2.8 246.8 3.6 820.1 542.9 140.2 402.7 6.4 270.8         June 0.2 1,109.3 857.3 578.3 279.0 3.1 248.9 3.8 816.2 535.9 135.8 400.1 6.6 273.6
Changes *
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.02011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.62012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.52013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.62014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.52017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.42018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.7
2018         Jan. + 0.0 + 30.6 + 28.8 + 29.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 15.8 + 12.3 + 12.8 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 2.3
         Feb. − 0.0 + 8.4 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3         Mar. − 0.0 − 3.1 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 3.4
         Apr. + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 4.3
         May − 0.0 + 16.9 + 17.3 + 17.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 14.7 + 12.1 + 7.0 + 5.1 − 1.5 + 4.2         June + 0.0 − 4.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 17.4 − 15.4 − 15.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
         July − 0.0 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 10.4 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 0.1 − 1.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 6.4 − 7.9 − 7.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 7.3 + 4.7 + 3.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3         Sep. + 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 − 7.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 − 1.3 − 1.1 + 0.3
         Oct. − 0.0 − 7.7 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 14.8 + 10.5 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
         Nov. + 0.0 − 4.9 − 6.5 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0         Dec. − 0.0 + 8.0 + 8.2 + 13.2 − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 9.5 − 17.4 + 7.9 − 2.0 − 2.0
2019         Jan. − 0.0 + 17.6 + 16.1 + 14.5 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 22.2 + 21.4 + 19.4 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.9
         Feb. + 0.0 − 1.8 − 4.4 − 7.7 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 8.3 − 9.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 4.2         Mar. + 0.0 + 28.2 + 27.8 + 24.7 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 2.5 − 3.4 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 2.0
         Apr. + 0.0 + 13.7 + 13.5 + 13.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.6 + 7.7 + 1.9 − 1.1 + 0.7
         May − 0.0 − 17.6 − 19.4 − 16.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 12.1 + 13.9 + 10.0 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 1.6         June + 0.0 + 23.8 + 21.3 + 15.8 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
12.0 24.2 711.8 450.8 261.0 172.7 88.3 0.0 275.0 130.5 144.6 82.2 62.3 0.3 2018          Jan.
12.1 23.7 715.7 441.2 274.5 185.5 89.0 0.0 279.6 134.8 144.8 85.5 59.3 0.3          Feb.12.2 24.0 668.6 385.6 283.0 196.4 86.5 0.0 272.9 126.3 146.6 87.8 58.8 0.3          Mar.
12.3 23.6 685.3 410.6 274.7 188.3 86.4 0.0 282.6 138.4 144.2 85.2 59.0 0.3          Apr.
12.2 23.7 730.1 452.6 277.4 188.0 89.4 0.0 285.8 140.5 145.4 86.9 58.5 0.3          May12.1 23.7 713.1 432.8 280.3 187.1 93.1 0.0 259.1 123.3 135.8 78.9 56.9 0.3          June
11.9 23.0 708.4 420.2 288.2 197.2 91.0 0.0 273.1 129.4 143.7 84.1 59.6 0.3          July
11.9 23.1 709.8 404.3 305.5 217.7 87.8 0.0 278.8 129.5 149.2 90.1 59.1 0.3          Aug.11.8 22.4 711.7 426.7 285.0 197.3 87.7 0.0 269.3 133.2 136.1 79.2 56.9 0.1          Sep.
11.8 22.5 702.4 413.6 288.9 200.1 88.8 0.0 271.0 129.8 141.2 82.8 58.4 0.1          Oct.
11.8 22.3 693.6 410.5 283.1 194.4 88.7 0.0 258.1 132.6 125.5 67.7 57.8 0.2          Nov.11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1          Dec.
11.7 21.5 674.5 405.5 269.1 182.9 86.1 0.0 268.4 132.7 135.8 77.9 57.9 0.1 2019          Jan.
11.8 21.7 699.2 430.9 268.3 181.1 87.3 0.0 241.7 110.2 131.5 73.6 57.8 0.1          Feb.13.0 21.5 762.8 464.1 298.7 209.1 89.6 1.3 259.1 113.8 145.3 87.7 57.6 0.1          Mar.
13.0 22.3 787.1 441.7 345.4 255.0 90.4 1.3 268.4 124.2 144.2 86.9 57.3 0.1          Apr.
13.0 22.3 783.6 482.4 301.2 210.0 91.2 1.3 261.3 120.7 140.6 83.6 57.0 0.1          May12.8 22.3 787.2 471.3 315.9 225.1 90.7 1.3 265.6 126.9 138.8 81.8 56.9 0.1          June
Changes *
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 57.4 + 63.5 − 6.1 − 5.0 − 1.1 − + 35.0 + 21.4 + 13.6 + 14.4 − 0.8 − 0.0 2018          Jan.
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 10.9 + 12.0 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 4.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 − 3.2 + 0.0          Feb.+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 45.8 − 55.0 + 9.1 + 11.5 − 2.3 − − 6.4 − 8.3 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Mar.
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.1 + 22.9 − 9.8 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.9 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 39.7 + 40.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 2.3 − + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − − 17.3 − 19.9 + 2.7 − 1.0 + 3.7 − − 26.8 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 8.0 − 1.6 −          June
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 12.2 + 9.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − + 13.9 + 6.3 + 7.6 + 5.4 + 2.2 −          July
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 16.4 + 16.3 + 20.0 − 3.7 − + 5.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Aug.− 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 22.1 − 21.2 − 20.9 − 0.3 − − 9.8 + 3.6 − 13.3 − 11.2 − 2.2 − 0.2          Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 12.5 − 14.5 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − + 0.7 − 3.8 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 0.0          Oct.
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 2.8 − 5.4 − 5.4 − 0.0 − − 12.7 + 2.9 − 15.6 − 15.0 − 0.6 + 0.0          Nov.+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 49.1 − 40.2 − 8.9 − 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 22.3 − 4.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 31.6 + 34.9 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 0.7 − + 36.9 + 22.5 + 14.5 + 14.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2019          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 24.8 − 1.2 − 2.2 + 1.0 − − 27.2 − 22.6 − 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Feb.+ 1.3 − 0.2 + 32.9 + 22.7 + 10.2 + 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 1.6 + 3.5 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.8 + 24.4 − 22.2 + 46.6 + 45.9 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 10.4 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 −          Apr.
− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2 + 40.4 − 44.6 − 45.3 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 7.2 − 7.9 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.0 + 7.2 − 9.6 + 16.8 + 14.6 + 2.2 − + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.02017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.02018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2018         Jan. 3,339.3 2,905.2 249.7 217.4 216.8 0.6 32.3 31.9 0.4 3,089.6 2,645.2
         Feb. 3,338.3 2,910.8 247.6 219.8 219.3 0.6 27.8 27.1 0.6 3,090.7 2,650.4         Mar. 3,342.5 2,919.9 253.5 225.6 224.9 0.7 27.9 27.6 0.2 3,089.0 2,653.3
         Apr. 3,348.5 2,926.9 254.0 223.0 222.1 0.9 31.0 30.3 0.7 3,094.5 2,664.6
         May 3,350.0 2,928.9 254.5 226.6 225.4 1.2 27.9 26.8 1.1 3,095.5 2,667.7         June 3,361.8 2,942.2 257.0 229.8 228.9 0.9 27.2 26.3 0.9 3,104.7 2,681.4
         July 3,368.0 2,950.1 256.7 225.4 224.7 0.7 31.3 29.8 1.5 3,111.3 2,692.5
         Aug. 3,368.5 2,957.0 250.5 223.9 223.1 0.8 26.6 25.7 0.9 3,118.0 2,700.6         Sep. 3,384.0 2,971.9 255.9 232.3 231.6 0.7 23.6 22.5 1.1 3,128.1 2,711.1
         Oct. 3,384.4 2,977.3 252.6 228.0 227.4 0.6 24.6 24.7 − 0.1 3,131.8 2,718.7
         Nov. 3,397.3 2,992.2 251.7 227.9 227.4 0.5 23.9 23.6 0.3 3,145.6 2,732.7         Dec. 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019         Jan. 3,405.3 3,003.5 255.8 230.8 230.3 0.5 25.0 24.5 0.5 3,149.4 2,738.4
         Feb. 3,413.6 3,014.2 257.6 235.4 234.9 0.5 22.2 22.4 − 0.2 3,156.0 2,746.4         Mar. 3,425.0 3,026.3 261.6 241.0 240.4 0.6 20.6 20.2 0.4 3,163.4 2,755.8
         Apr. 3,428.9 3,034.9 256.3 235.0 234.3 0.7 21.4 21.0 0.4 3,172.6 2,769.9
         May 3,445.6 3,049.7 257.3 236.6 235.7 0.9 20.7 20.1 0.6 3,188.3 2,785.8         June 3,467.1 3,067.2 271.3 249.9 249.3 0.6 21.4 20.7 0.7 3,195.8 2,795.3
Changes *
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.92011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.42012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.92013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.62014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.82017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.42018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2018         Jan. + 6.9 + 11.0 + 8.0 + 6.5 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.7
         Feb. − 1.0 + 5.5 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 − 4.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 5.0         Mar. + 4.2 + 9.2 + 5.9 + 5.8 + 5.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.9
         Apr. + 6.4 + 7.0 + 0.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 11.7
         May + 10.4 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 9.9 + 12.4         June + 11.8 + 13.3 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 9.3 + 13.6
         July + 6.2 + 7.9 − 0.3 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 9.9
         Aug. + 0.7 + 7.1 − 6.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 4.7 − 4.1 − 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.2         Sep. + 15.5 + 14.9 + 5.6 + 8.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.3 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 10.3
         Oct. + 0.5 + 5.3 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 2.2 − 1.1 + 5.2 + 9.1
         Nov. + 12.9 + 14.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 13.8 + 14.0         Dec. − 2.9 − 1.8 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 10.8 + 13.1 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 5.6
         Feb. + 8.3 + 10.7 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 6.5 + 8.0         Mar. + 10.9 + 12.0 + 4.1 + 5.7 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.8
         Apr. + 3.8 + 8.5 − 4.7 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 13.4
         May + 16.7 + 14.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.7 + 16.0         June + 21.5 + 17.6 + 14.0 + 13.3 + 13.6 − 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.5
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 2018
2,405.7 274.8 2,130.8 239.5 17.4 444.4 250.9 22.0 228.9 193.6 − 1.5 2018          Jan.
2,414.1 275.1 2,139.0 236.3 17.5 440.3 250.3 21.9 228.4 190.1 − 1.5          Feb.2,419.5 275.2 2,144.2 233.8 17.4 435.8 247.9 22.1 225.8 187.9 − 1.6          Mar.
2,428.6 277.1 2,151.5 236.0 17.3 430.0 245.9 21.9 224.1 184.0 − 1.5          Apr.
2,431.2 270.8 2,160.4 236.6 17.3 427.7 245.5 21.9 223.6 182.2 − 1.5          May2,443.3 275.3 2,168.0 238.1 17.2 423.4 243.7 21.0 222.7 179.7 − 1.5          June
2,454.6 277.7 2,176.9 237.9 17.0 418.7 241.0 20.3 220.8 177.7 − 1.5          July
2,467.5 279.3 2,188.2 233.1 17.0 417.4 240.6 21.1 219.5 176.8 − 1.3          Aug.2,476.9 280.1 2,196.8 234.1 16.9 417.1 241.0 20.5 220.5 176.1 − 1.3          Sep.
2,484.5 279.7 2,204.9 234.1 16.6 413.1 240.7 20.2 220.5 172.5 − 1.3          Oct.
2,500.3 284.2 2,216.1 232.4 16.6 412.9 240.9 20.0 220.9 171.9 − 1.3          Nov.2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4          Dec.
2,507.3 283.1 2,224.2 231.1 16.5 411.1 241.4 19.3 222.0 169.7 − 1.3 2019          Jan.
2,516.1 284.2 2,231.9 230.3 16.5 409.6 240.8 18.9 221.9 168.7 − 1.3          Feb.2,525.3 286.6 2,238.7 230.5 16.3 407.6 240.4 18.7 221.7 167.2 − 1.3          Mar.
2,539.8 291.3 2,248.5 230.0 16.2 402.7 239.8 18.4 221.4 162.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,554.8 293.7 2,261.1 231.0 16.3 402.5 239.1 18.2 220.9 163.4 − 1.3          May2,560.4 294.3 2,266.2 234.9 16.2 400.5 236.9 17.9 218.9 163.7 − 1.3          June
Changes *
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018
+ 5.7 + 1.6 + 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.9 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 3.4 − − 0.1 2018          Jan.
+ 8.2 + 0.3 + 8.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5 − − 0.0          Feb.+ 5.4 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 2.2 − + 0.0          Mar.
+ 9.1 + 1.8 + 7.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 3.9 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 11.8 + 2.6 + 9.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.8 − + 0.0          May+ 12.1 + 4.5 + 7.6 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 2.6 − − 0.1          June
+ 10.1 + 2.5 + 7.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.9 − − 0.0          July
+ 13.1 + 1.6 + 11.5 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.9 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 9.2 + 0.5 + 8.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 9.2 + 1.0 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 15.8 + 4.6 + 11.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Nov.− 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 − + 0.2          Dec.
+ 8.0 + 0.5 + 7.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 − − 0.2 2019          Jan.
+ 8.7 + 1.1 + 7.6 − 0.7 − − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.0 − −          Feb.+ 9.1 + 2.1 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.5 − + 0.0          Mar.
+ 13.9 + 4.5 + 9.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 15.0 + 2.4 + 12.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − − 0.0          May+ 5.7 + 0.6 + 5.1 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.2 − − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2017 2,610.1 1,304.3 1,326.6 1,053.0 273.6 1,403.1 368.5 131.3 112.6 67.3 133.3 50.2 51.5 147.9
2018         June 2,672.2 1,333.8 1,357.5 1,074.2 283.3 1,445.5 380.1 139.2 114.2 71.9 136.5 50.5 51.0 152.8
         Sep. 2,708.5 1,349.5 1,377.7 1,086.8 290.9 1,476.9 389.6 140.5 115.9 73.0 138.8 53.5 50.8 157.0         Dec. 2,727.0 1,382.2 1,391.2 1,116.4 274.8 1,483.6 392.7 139.3 116.5 71.9 138.7 53.2 50.6 157.3
2019         Mar. 2,765.7 1,437.3 1,404.9 1,152.3 252.6 1,513.5 398.4 144.4 117.8 74.0 141.0 53.6 50.1 160.5
         June 2,809.7 1,469.6 1,427.8 1,182.8 244.9 1,539.9 405.2 150.3 120.5 76.2 140.6 54.4 50.5 161.5
 Short-term lending
2017 210.6 − 6.5 − 6.5 180.8 3.6 32.3 4.0 13.6 45.2 3.4 4.0 27.42018         June 228.9 − 7.1 − 7.1 199.2 4.0 36.7 4.8 16.6 47.3 3.9 4.2 28.5
         Sep. 231.6 − 7.4 − 7.4 201.9 4.3 37.3 4.2 16.6 48.7 4.2 4.0 29.4         Dec. 227.6 − 7.2 − 7.2 195.9 4.1 35.5 4.9 14.7 48.3 3.7 4.9 28.0
2019         Mar. 240.4 − 7.7 − 7.7 210.1 4.5 39.5 6.2 15.8 49.6 4.0 5.0 29.7
         June 249.3 − 8.0 − 8.0 217.4 4.6 42.9 7.2 16.5 48.6 4.7 5.2 29.3
 Medium-term lending
2017 273.5 − 34.0 − 34.0 193.1 14.0 23.6 5.1 11.3 18.2 4.3 10.3 46.72018         June 275.3 − 34.7 − 34.7 195.1 15.0 25.5 4.4 11.8 18.2 4.2 10.4 47.5
         Sep. 280.1 − 35.6 − 35.6 199.4 15.6 24.9 4.4 12.2 18.3 4.4 11.1 48.0         Dec. 282.6 − 35.4 − 35.4 202.5 15.4 24.9 4.5 12.5 19.0 4.5 10.6 49.0
2019         Mar. 286.6 − 35.1 − 35.1 206.0 15.4 25.4 4.5 12.9 19.3 4.5 10.4 49.1
         June 294.3 − 36.0 − 36.0 212.6 16.1 26.1 5.2 13.5 19.5 4.5 10.4 49.0
 Long-term lending
2017 2,125.9 1,304.3 1,286.1 1,053.0 233.1 1,029.2 351.0 75.4 103.5 42.4 70.0 42.4 37.2 73.82018         June 2,168.0 1,333.8 1,315.7 1,074.2 241.5 1,051.1 361.1 77.0 105.0 43.5 71.0 42.4 36.4 76.8
         Sep. 2,196.9 1,349.5 1,334.6 1,086.8 247.8 1,075.6 369.7 78.4 107.4 44.2 71.8 44.9 35.7 79.6         Dec. 2,216.8 1,382.2 1,348.6 1,116.4 232.2 1,085.2 373.2 78.9 107.2 44.7 71.4 45.0 35.1 80.3
2019         Mar. 2,238.7 1,437.3 1,362.1 1,152.3 209.8 1,097.4 378.5 79.5 107.2 45.3 72.1 45.0 34.6 81.7
         June 2,266.2 1,469.6 1,383.8 1,182.8 200.9 1,109.9 384.5 81.3 108.0 46.2 72.5 45.3 34.9 83.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2018         Q2 + 37.0 + 15.4 + 17.8 + 11.8 + 6.0 + 23.1 + 6.6 + 4.1 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.6
         Q3 + 35.2 + 12.9 + 19.4 + 11.1 + 8.3 + 19.3 + 6.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 2.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 4.1         Q4 + 18.5 + 10.8 + 15.2 + 8.9 + 6.2 + 6.8 + 4.8 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
2019         Q1 + 38.7 + 15.1 + 13.5 + 11.4 + 2.1 + 29.8 + 5.5 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 4.9
         Q2 + 43.9 + 16.3 + 20.1 + 13.5 + 6.7 + 27.0 + 6.9 + 5.9 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.9
 Short-term lending
2018         Q2 + 4.0 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6
         Q3 + 2.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.9         Q4 − 5.5 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.4
2019         Q1 + 12.9 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 14.3 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 3.5
         Q2 + 9.4 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 7.8 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4
 Medium-term lending
2018         Q2 + 8.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 7.3 + 0.6 + 3.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6
         Q3 + 4.6 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.5         Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9
2019         Q1 + 3.7 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Q2 + 7.4 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1
 Long-term lending
2018         Q2 + 24.1 + 15.4 + 16.9 + 11.8 + 5.1 + 11.7 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6
         Q3 + 27.8 + 12.9 + 18.2 + 11.1 + 7.1 + 13.5 + 5.3 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 2.7         Q4 + 20.1 + 10.8 + 14.7 + 8.9 + 5.8 + 9.6 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5
2019         Q1 + 22.0 + 15.1 + 13.3 + 11.4 + 1.9 + 12.3 + 5.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.5
         Q2 + 27.1 + 16.3 + 18.9 + 13.5 + 5.5 + 12.8 + 6.1 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.4
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
709.0 214.9 42.3 186.4 411.2 47.7 1,192.3 954.3 237.9 171.6 8.6 14.8 3.7 2017
729.3 221.8 47.3 190.7 415.5 48.3 1,211.8 973.7 238.1 173.0 8.4 14.9 3.8 2018          June
747.4 231.0 48.2 194.9 430.6 48.6 1,216.6 984.4 232.2 172.2 8.4 15.0 3.7          Sep.756.0 237.0 47.3 196.9 432.6 48.0 1,228.4 994.8 233.7 172.9 8.3 15.0 3.7          Dec.
772.0 242.9 48.7 197.6 436.3 48.6 1,237.2 1,002.7 234.4 173.7 8.0 15.1 3.8 2019          Mar.
786.0 247.4 51.6 199.5 441.1 48.6 1,254.6 1,018.8 235.9 175.6 8.0 15.2 3.8          June
Short-term lending
50.9 10.1 6.8 10.3 23.3 5.0 29.3 2.9 26.4 1.6 8.6 0.5 0.0 201757.2 10.7 10.2 10.6 23.5 5.7 29.2 3.1 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.5 − 2018          June
57.4 11.6 10.3 10.2 24.0 5.7 29.2 3.2 26.0 1.5 8.4 0.5 0.0          Sep.55.9 12.0 8.1 10.4 24.0 5.2 31.2 3.1 28.2 1.5 8.3 0.5 −          Dec.
60.1 12.1 9.3 10.4 24.4 5.8 29.8 3.2 26.5 1.5 8.0 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
63.1 12.5 10.2 10.7 24.6 5.6 31.3 3.4 28.0 1.9 8.0 0.5 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
73.5 12.1 9.3 18.3 32.7 3.6 79.9 20.0 59.9 55.2 − 0.6 0.0 201773.0 13.0 9.7 19.2 31.0 3.4 79.6 19.7 59.9 55.4 − 0.5 0.0 2018          June
76.2 14.0 9.8 20.0 31.7 3.5 80.1 20.0 60.2 55.8 − 0.5 0.1          Sep.77.5 14.8 9.9 21.3 31.5 3.5 79.6 19.9 59.7 56.4 − 0.5 0.1          Dec.
80.0 15.4 9.6 21.8 31.7 3.5 80.1 19.6 60.5 57.2 − 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
84.4 16.6 11.0 22.4 32.2 3.6 81.2 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          June
Long-term lending
584.6 192.6 26.2 157.8 355.3 39.2 1,083.1 931.4 151.6 114.8 − 13.7 3.7 2017599.1 198.1 27.4 160.9 361.1 39.2 1,103.0 950.9 152.1 116.0 − 13.9 3.7 2018          June
613.8 205.3 28.0 164.7 374.9 39.5 1,107.2 961.2 146.0 114.9 − 14.0 3.7          Sep.622.6 210.2 29.2 165.3 377.2 39.3 1,117.6 971.8 145.8 115.0 − 14.0 3.7          Dec.
631.9 215.4 29.8 165.4 380.3 39.3 1,127.2 979.9 147.4 115.1 − 14.1 3.7 2019          Mar.
638.6 218.3 30.3 166.4 384.3 39.4 1,142.0 995.5 146.5 115.8 − 14.2 3.8          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 14.5 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 14.0 + 11.1 + 2.8 + 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 2018          Q2
+ 9.6 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.4 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 8.4 + 6.1 − 1.1 + 2.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 11.7 + 10.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 14.1 + 4.6 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.6 + 8.8 + 8.0 + 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 15.6 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 1.9 + 4.3 − 0.1 + 16.9 + 13.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 3.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2018          Q2
− 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3− 1.8 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 3.6 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 3.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2018          Q2
+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3+ 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.5 − + 0.0 −          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 4.3 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.8 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 7.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 12.3 + 11.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2018          Q2
+ 6.9 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 14.2 + 13.0 + 1.2 + 1.7 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 8.9 + 5.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 10.4 + 10.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 9.3 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 9.7 + 8.2 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 7.8 + 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 12.8 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.92017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.62018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2018         July 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 218.3 634.0 52.0 582.1 578.2 40.0 32.8 14.9 1.5
         Aug. 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 215.1 632.8 53.8 579.0 577.6 39.5 33.1 14.9 0.5         Sep. 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 210.9 633.0 54.7 578.3 577.3 39.1 33.9 14.8 0.3
         Oct. 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 210.3 633.4 55.1 578.3 577.0 38.6 33.7 14.9 0.7
         Nov. 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 208.1 635.0 55.8 579.2 576.9 37.9 33.7 14.9 0.4         Dec. 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2019         Jan. 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 212.7 633.6 57.1 576.4 578.5 36.7 33.8 14.9 0.8
         Feb. 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 217.9 632.2 56.2 576.0 579.5 36.1 34.0 15.1 0.6         Mar. 3,565.3 2,101.1 846.4 215.8 630.5 57.0 573.5 582.0 35.8 33.9 15.2 0.2
         Apr. 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 214.7 626.9 56.0 570.9 582.3 35.4 33.9 15.2 2.6
         May 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 216.3 624.7 54.9 569.8 582.5 35.2 33.7 15.2 1.6         June 3,609.7 2,150.7 841.4 214.7 626.7 55.4 571.4 582.7 34.9 33.4 15.1 2.2
Changes*
2017 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 24.7 − 2.8 + 10.1 − 12.8 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.82018 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 3.5 − 7.3 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 1.4 − 1.2
2018         July + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 2.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.8
         Aug. + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 3.2 − 1.1 + 1.9 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 1.0         Sep. − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Nov. + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3         Dec. + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 − 4.7 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 + 9.3 − 4.6 + 0.3 − 4.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 5.2 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 10.4 + 12.0 − 3.8 − 2.1 − 1.7 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr. + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 − 1.1 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 1.6 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.0         June − 1.9 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6
Domestic government End of year or month*
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2018         July 214.9 57.0 149.9 77.3 72.6 25.8 46.8 3.8 4.3 25.7 2.2 0.7
         Aug. 223.9 62.7 153.2 79.1 74.0 25.7 48.3 3.8 4.3 25.7 2.2 −         Sep. 221.1 60.4 152.7 76.9 75.9 27.1 48.8 3.8 4.3 25.6 2.2 −
         Oct. 216.5 57.5 151.1 73.8 77.3 27.3 50.0 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
         Nov. 224.6 62.6 154.0 74.8 79.1 27.9 51.2 3.8 4.2 25.3 2.2 −         Dec. 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019         Jan. 221.7 59.2 154.7 74.8 79.8 29.2 50.6 3.7 4.2 25.2 2.2 −
         Feb. 230.4 63.0 159.5 80.1 79.4 28.4 51.0 3.8 4.1 25.2 2.2 −         Mar. 232.2 64.0 160.3 79.8 80.5 29.3 51.2 3.8 4.1 25.1 2.2 −
         Apr. 229.6 62.3 159.5 79.7 79.8 28.4 51.4 3.7 4.1 25.0 2.2 1.4
         May 238.8 68.9 162.0 83.0 79.0 27.3 51.7 3.7 4.1 25.0 2.2 1.4         June 240.5 68.3 164.4 84.1 80.3 28.0 52.3 3.7 4.2 24.8 2.2 2.0
Changes*
2017 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 2.4 − 14.1 + 11.7 + 10.7 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0
2018 + 16.9 + 3.6 + 13.5 + 2.0 + 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2018         July − 6.4 − 6.3 − 0.1 − 2.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7
         Aug. + 9.1 + 5.7 + 3.3 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7         Sep. − 2.9 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 2.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Oct. − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.7 − 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Nov. + 8.1 + 5.1 + 3.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Dec. − 5.7 + 0.1 − 5.7 − 6.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
2019         Jan. + 2.7 − 3.5 + 6.3 + 6.9 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb. + 8.7 + 3.8 + 4.9 + 5.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −         Mar. + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
         Apr. − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
         May + 9.1 + 6.6 + 2.5 + 3.3 − 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0         June + 1.3 − 0.8 + 2.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.92017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.62018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.5
2018         July 3,258.2 1,945.7 702.4 141.0 561.4 26.1 535.3 574.5 35.7 7.0 12.8 0.8
         Aug. 3,261.1 1,957.3 694.7 135.9 558.8 28.1 530.7 573.8 35.3 7.4 12.7 0.5         Sep. 3,261.8 1,962.1 691.2 134.1 557.1 27.6 529.5 573.5 34.8 8.2 12.6 0.3
         Oct. 3,287.5 1,987.2 692.6 136.5 556.1 27.8 528.3 573.3 34.4 8.4 12.7 0.7
         Nov. 3,312.8 2,017.0 689.1 133.3 555.8 27.8 528.0 573.1 33.7 8.4 12.7 0.4         Dec. 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.5
2019         Jan. 3,319.1 2,020.2 691.6 137.9 553.7 27.9 525.8 574.8 32.5 8.7 12.7 0.8
         Feb. 3,324.1 2,025.8 690.6 137.8 552.8 27.8 525.0 575.8 31.9 8.8 12.9 0.6         Mar. 3,333.1 2,037.1 686.0 136.0 550.0 27.7 522.3 578.3 31.7 8.8 13.0 0.2
         Apr. 3,352.4 2,060.4 682.1 135.1 547.1 27.5 519.5 578.5 31.3 8.9 13.0 1.1
         May 3,372.6 2,083.8 679.0 133.3 545.7 27.6 518.1 578.8 31.0 8.7 13.0 0.2         June 3,369.2 2,082.4 677.0 130.5 546.5 27.4 519.1 579.0 30.7 8.6 12.9 0.2
Changes*
2017 + 104.1 + 141.3 − 25.1 − 10.6 − 14.4 − 0.7 − 13.8 − 5.3 − 6.7 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.82018 + 100.8 + 135.7 − 24.3 − 5.5 − 18.8 − 1.3 − 17.5 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 4.1 − 1.3 − 1.2
2018         July + 6.6 + 12.4 − 4.2 − 0.8 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. + 2.8 + 11.6 − 7.7 − 5.1 − 2.6 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4         Sep. + 1.0 + 5.2 − 3.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 25.8 + 25.1 + 1.5 + 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Nov. + 25.3 + 29.8 − 3.6 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3         Dec. + 5.9 + 0.8 + 3.9 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 0.5 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 4.9 + 5.6 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 8.6 + 10.9 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr. + 19.3 + 23.3 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 20.2 + 23.3 − 3.1 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9         June − 3.1 − 1.2 − 1.9 − 2.9 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.92017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.62018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.5
2018         July 1,033.0 569.8 444.0 91.5 352.5 14.0 338.5 7.2 12.1 2.6 10.4 0.8
         Aug. 1,028.5 573.1 436.2 86.3 349.9 16.3 333.6 7.2 12.0 2.5 10.3 0.5         Sep. 1,021.9 570.3 432.5 84.5 348.0 16.0 332.0 7.2 11.9 2.6 10.3 0.3
         Oct. 1,039.7 586.7 434.0 86.6 347.4 16.4 331.0 7.1 11.8 2.6 10.3 0.7
         Nov. 1,040.8 590.9 431.3 84.2 347.1 16.5 330.6 7.1 11.6 2.6 10.3 0.4         Dec. 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.5
2019         Jan. 1,036.9 587.8 430.7 88.3 342.4 16.9 325.5 7.0 11.4 2.6 10.2 0.8
         Feb. 1,026.7 579.2 429.1 88.2 340.9 16.7 324.2 7.0 11.4 2.7 10.4 0.6         Mar. 1,028.2 585.5 424.2 86.2 338.0 16.6 321.4 7.1 11.4 2.6 10.5 0.2
         Apr. 1,035.7 596.5 420.7 85.6 335.1 16.5 318.6 7.1 11.4 2.6 10.5 1.1
         May 1,043.1 606.9 417.7 84.7 333.0 16.6 316.4 7.1 11.3 2.6 10.5 0.2         June 1,030.2 595.8 416.0 82.1 334.0 16.6 317.4 7.1 11.3 2.6 10.4 0.2
Changes*
2017 + 19.5 + 40.2 − 20.0 − 4.7 − 15.4 − 0.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.82018 − 3.2 + 25.1 − 27.2 − 5.9 − 21.3 + 0.3 − 21.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.2
2018         July + 2.7 + 7.4 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. − 4.5 + 3.4 − 7.8 − 5.2 − 2.6 + 2.3 − 4.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4         Sep. − 6.5 − 2.7 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 17.8 + 16.4 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Nov. + 1.1 + 4.1 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3         Dec. − 5.4 − 6.6 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 1.6 + 3.9 − 2.2 + 2.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. − 10.3 − 8.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 1.1 + 5.9 − 4.9 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr. + 7.4 + 11.0 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 7.5 + 10.4 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9         June − 12.7 − 10.9 − 1.7 − 2.8 + 1.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.52017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.12018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
2019         Jan. 2,282.2 1,432.4 1,395.7 251.2 988.1 156.4 36.6 260.9 247.2 21.4 188.8 37.0
         Feb. 2,297.4 1,446.6 1,408.9 252.6 999.8 156.5 37.7 261.5 247.7 21.5 189.3 36.9         Mar. 2,304.9 1,451.6 1,413.3 247.7 1,008.9 156.8 38.3 261.9 248.2 21.6 189.7 36.9
         Apr. 2,316.7 1,463.9 1,425.9 253.6 1,015.6 156.8 37.9 261.4 247.8 21.6 189.5 36.7
         May 2,329.6 1,476.9 1,437.9 255.8 1,024.3 157.8 38.9 261.3 247.6 21.5 189.4 36.7         June 2,339.0 1,486.6 1,447.7 252.7 1,036.8 158.2 38.9 261.0 247.5 21.6 189.2 36.7
Changes*
2017 + 84.7 + 101.1 + 99.8 + 17.5 + 77.8 + 4.5 + 1.3 − 5.0 − 5.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 1.32018 + 104.0 + 110.5 + 109.7 + 20.3 + 83.1 + 6.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 5.8 − 0.3
2019         Jan. − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.8 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3
         Feb. + 15.2 + 14.2 + 13.2 + 1.4 + 10.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.1         Mar. + 7.5 + 5.0 + 4.4 − 4.4 + 8.8 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0
         Apr. + 11.8 + 12.3 + 12.6 + 5.9 + 6.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2
         May + 12.7 + 13.0 + 12.0 + 2.3 + 8.6 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0         June + 9.5 + 9.8 + 9.8 − 3.2 + 12.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.22017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.72018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
2019         Jan. 221.7 10.1 4.8 1.2 4.1 0.1 12.2 43.3 12.1 18.4 11.7 1.2 12.9
         Feb. 230.4 10.0 5.0 1.0 4.0 0.1 12.2 49.9 12.7 24.0 12.1 1.2 13.0         Mar. 232.2 10.5 5.6 1.0 3.8 0.1 12.2 55.2 14.0 27.5 12.6 1.1 12.9
         Apr. 229.6 11.2 5.0 2.3 3.9 0.1 12.2 54.3 13.0 27.2 12.9 1.1 12.8
         May 238.8 12.0 5.5 2.3 4.2 0.1 12.1 54.8 13.6 27.1 13.0 1.1 12.9         June 240.5 14.0 6.1 3.6 4.2 0.1 11.9 57.8 15.1 28.5 13.1 1.1 12.9
Changes*
2017 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 − 0.52018 + 16.9 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.5
2019         Jan. + 2.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.2 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb. + 8.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 6.4 + 0.7 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0         Mar. + 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.3 + 1.2 + 3.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Apr. − 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 9.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0         June + 1.3 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 201614.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 201713.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 2018
13.8 49.6 211.3 11.1 200.3 567.8 560.5 7.3 21.1 6.0 2.4 − 2019          Jan.
13.8 49.6 211.9 11.1 200.8 568.7 561.5 7.3 20.6 6.1 2.4 −          Feb.13.7 49.8 212.1 11.1 201.0 571.2 563.7 7.5 20.2 6.2 2.5 −          Mar.
13.6 49.4 212.0 11.1 200.9 571.4 563.9 7.5 20.0 6.2 2.5 −          Apr.
13.7 48.6 212.7 11.0 201.7 571.7 564.2 7.5 19.7 6.1 2.5 −          May13.5 48.5 212.5 10.8 201.7 571.9 564.4 7.5 19.5 6.0 2.5 −          June
Changes*
+ 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 2017− 0.2 + 0.4 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.2 − 4.5 − 3.9 − 0.6 − 5.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 2018
+ 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2019          Jan.
− 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Feb.− 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Mar.
− 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Apr.
− 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          May− 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          June
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
56.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 201661.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 201765.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 2018
57.7 28.0 9.2 14.9 5.6 0.0 110.6 14.4 46.1 49.1 1.0 − 2019          Jan.
61.6 31.5 9.6 14.9 5.7 0.0 108.8 13.7 45.6 48.5 1.0 −          Feb.60.3 30.4 9.5 14.8 5.6 0.0 106.2 14.0 41.8 49.2 1.0 −          Mar.
59.1 29.7 9.2 14.6 5.6 0.0 105.0 14.6 40.9 48.5 1.0 −          Apr.
64.1 34.3 9.6 14.6 5.7 0.0 107.9 15.5 44.0 47.3 1.0 −          May61.7 31.8 9.8 14.5 5.6 0.0 107.0 15.3 42.2 48.5 1.0 −          June
Changes*
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 11.8 +11.6 − 0.4 − 2017+ 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 +10.8 − 0.1 − 2018
− 7.8 − 7.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.7 + 4.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 2019          Jan.
+ 3.9 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 −          Feb.− 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.8 + 0.0 −          Mar.
− 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 −          Apr.
+ 5.2 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 2.8 + 0.9 + 3.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 −          May− 2.8 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At 3 on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.72017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.22018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
2019         Feb. 586.5 579.5 542.5 329.9 37.1 27.0 7.0 6.2 0.1 40.0 36.1 26.9 3.9
         Mar. 588.9 582.0 544.7 330.4 37.3 27.3 6.9 6.2 0.1 39.7 35.8 26.7 3.9
         Apr. 589.1 582.3 544.8 329.5 37.5 27.5 6.9 6.1 0.1 39.4 35.4 26.6 4.0
         May 589.4 582.5 544.4 326.9 38.1 28.1 6.9 6.1 0.1 39.1 35.2 26.4 3.9         June 589.5 582.7 544.0 326.5 38.6 28.6 6.8 6.1 0.1 38.8 34.9 26.2 3.9
Changes*
2017 − 6.2 − 5.6 + 1.5 − 13.1 − 7.1 − 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 . − 7.2 − 6.7 − 4.4 − 0.52018 − 4.7 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 9.1 − 6.5 − 3.6 − 2.6
2019         Feb. + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.0
         Mar. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Apr. + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1
         May + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0         June + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
  
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiablerate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  
1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.52017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.52018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
2019         Feb. 1,128.7 139.1 30.4 359.7 81.8 103.0 3.1 21.0 5.5 1,004.7 0.8 0.1 30.9 0.4
         Mar. 1,139.1 139.4 31.9 374.4 92.4 115.6 2.9 20.8 5.4 1,002.7 0.7 0.1 29.9 0.7
         Apr. 1,131.3 136.5 30.8 371.9 86.4 108.6 2.9 24.8 5.4 997.9 1.0 0.7 29.9 0.7
         May 1,147.8 136.0 31.8 377.6 91.1 113.7 2.9 25.0 5.4 1,009.1 0.9 0.6 30.4 0.4         June 1,144.6 132.9 31.6 370.9 91.2 113.6 2.8 23.1 4.8 1,007.9 1.2 0.7 30.1 0.4
Changes*
2017 − 30.8 − 29.7 − 2.1 − 36.7 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 − 22.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.02018 + 33.6 − 7.8 + 1.5 − 14.3 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 10.5 − 0.3 + 45.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
2019         Feb. + 16.3 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 19.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −
         Mar. + 10.4 + 0.3 + 1.5 + 14.7 + 10.6 + 12.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1
         Apr. − 7.8 − 2.9 − 1.1 − 2.4 − 6.1 − 7.0 − 0.0 + 4.0 − 0.0 − 4.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.0 −
         May + 16.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 + 5.6 + 4.7 + 5.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 11.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.3         June − 3.7 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 6.6 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2017 20 229.2 41.8 0.0 15.8 12.3 104.4 24.8 25.1 2.6 23.0 168.6 9.5 3.0 11.0 83.6
2018 20 233.4 39.4 0.0 15.7 11.9 110.2 25.7 25.8 2.8 20.4 174.3 10.0 3.3 11.7 86.6
2019         Apr. 20 235.7 39.5 0.0 16.2 11.8 111.9 26.2 25.6 2.9 21.0 175.7 10.0 3.2 11.9 7.4
         May 19 236.3 38.9 0.0 16.2 11.8 112.5 26.4 25.6 2.9 20.1 176.4 10.0 3.1 11.9 7.9         June 19 236.9 38.5 0.0 16.3 11.7 113.3 26.4 25.6 2.9 20.3 176.6 9.8 3.1 12.0 7.2
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Apr. 12 163.6 23.8 − 6.8 8.9 86.9 22.4 11.5 1.7 19.2 113.9 9.7 3.2 8.3 4.6
         May 11 163.6 23.1 − 6.7 8.8 87.4 22.4 11.4 1.7 18.3 114.4 9.6 3.1 8.3 4.8         June 11 164.2 22.9 − 6.8 8.8 88.0 22.4 11.5 1.7 18.4 114.5 9.6 3.1 8.3 4.5
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Apr. 8 72.2 15.7 0.0 9.4 3.0 25.0 3.8 14.2 1.1 1.8 61.8 0.3 − 3.7 2.7
         May 8 72.6 15.9 0.0 9.5 2.9 25.2 4.0 14.1 1.1 1.9 62.0 0.4 − 3.7 3.1         June 8 72.7 15.7 0.0 9.5 3.0 25.3 4.0 14.2 1.1 1.9 62.0 0.3 − 3.7 2.7
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2017 26.7 2.3 7.6 45.3 26.0 39.6 16.4 4.1 4.5 3.4 18.7 16.4 7.4 7.1 6.2 0.2
2018 27.0 2.1 7.4 45.2 25.1 40.2 15.9 4.3 4.8 3.7 19.5 16.6 6.8 6.6 5.5 0.2
2019         Apr. 2.2 0.0 0.7 4.7 2.8 3.9 1.6 0.4 0.5 0.4 1.8 17.6 7.2 0.7 0.0
         May 2.6 0.0 0.7 4.1 2.0 3.5 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.8 17.8 7.2 0.6 0.0         June 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.9 2.2 3.5 1.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.8 17.7 7.2 0.5 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Apr. 1.4 0.0 0.4 3.3 1.8 3.0 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.4 12.2 3.8 0.6 0.0
         May 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.3 2.6 0.9 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.5 12.4 3.7 0.5 0.0         June 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.5 2.6 1.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.4 12.4 3.7 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Apr. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.5 1.0 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.3 3.4 0.1 0.0
         May 1.0 0.0 0.4 1.1 0.7 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.4 3.5 0.1 0.0         June 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.3 3.5 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV.  Banks
  
13.  Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which:
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in thesubsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  
7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2016 51 192 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.32017 52 188 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.92018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2018         Aug. 48 182 1,501.4 450.4 438.8 183.2 255.6 11.6 524.4 442.6 22.5 420.1 81.8 526.6 328.2
         Sep. 48 183 1,494.1 452.1 441.2 185.4 255.8 10.8 541.6 456.5 21.9 434.7 85.1 500.5 318.4
         Oct. 49 184 1,487.3 439.9 428.6 205.9 222.7 11.3 535.8 448.0 20.3 427.8 87.8 511.6 336.0
         Nov. 49 184 1,456.1 454.1 443.4 206.9 236.5 10.8 519.7 433.1 20.7 412.4 86.6 482.2 313.7         Dec. 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019         Jan. 50 184 1,451.6 419.4 408.0 190.8 217.2 11.4 541.3 453.3 19.8 433.5 88.0 491.0 309.4
         Feb. 50 186 1,457.9 426.1 413.9 203.7 210.2 12.2 562.1 472.2 19.2 453.1 89.9 469.6 290.3         Mar. 53 196 1,498.2 446.3 434.3 214.6 219.7 11.9 572.3 480.1 19.3 460.8 92.1 479.7 305.2
         Apr. 53 199 1,517.6 449.4 433.3 212.3 221.1 16.0 565.8 477.7 18.9 458.8 88.1 502.4 313.7
         May 52 198 1,573.6 442.1 425.4 213.1 212.3 16.7 575.5 483.3 19.5 463.9 92.1 556.0 383.3
Changes *
2017 + 1 − 4 − 216.7 − 52.5 − 49.4 − 7.9 − 41.5 − 3.1 − 10.9 − 10.0 − 1.4 − 8.6 − 0.9 − 74.6 − 60.42018 − 3 − 5 − 250.2 −101.0 −102.0 − 5.0 − 97.0 + 1.0 − 24.8 − 27.1 + 7.0 − 34.1 + 2.4 − 148.2 − 102.6
2018         Sep. − + 1 − 7.7 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 15.3 + 12.3 − 0.6 + 12.9 + 3.0 − 26.6 − 10.6
         Oct. + 1 + 1 − 8.5 − 16.3 − 16.7 + 20.5 − 37.2 + 0.4 − 12.1 − 14.1 − 1.6 − 12.5 + 1.9 + 9.5 + 15.0
         Nov. − − − 30.9 + 14.9 + 15.4 + 1.0 + 14.4 − 0.5 − 14.9 − 13.8 + 0.5 − 14.3 − 1.1 − 29.1 − 21.8         Dec. − − 1 − 54.5 − 49.4 − 49.7 − 14.8 − 34.9 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 0.7 − 3.3 + 2.8 − 1.3 − 3.9
2019         Jan. + 1 + 1 + 50.5 + 15.5 + 15.2 − 1.3 + 16.5 + 0.3 + 24.1 + 25.4 − 0.2 + 25.6 − 1.3 + 10.5 + 0.4
         Feb. − + 2 + 5.8 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 12.8 − 8.0 + 0.8 + 18.5 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 17.7 + 1.4 − 21.7 − 20.0         Mar. + 3 + 10 + 40.4 + 18.1 + 18.4 + 11.0 + 7.5 − 0.4 + 5.4 + 3.7 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 10.0 + 13.3
         Apr.
+ 0 + 3 + 19.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 22.7 + 8.4
         May − 1 − 1 + 55.6 − 8.0 − 8.7 + 0.8 − 9.5 + 0.7 + 8.9 + 4.7 + 0.6 + 4.2 + 4.1 + 53.2 + 69.2
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 −
2018         Aug. 19 47 245.8 56.7 50.6 21.1 29.5 6.1 137.9 113.2 13.4 99.8 24.7 51.1 −
         Sep. 18 46 244.8 55.2 49.4 19.8 29.6 5.8 138.8 114.5 13.7 100.8 24.4 50.8 −
         Oct. 17 45 243.8 52.1 46.2 19.5 26.7 5.9 139.3 114.2 13.5 100.7 25.1 52.4 −
         Nov. 17 45 239.8 51.0 45.0 20.4 24.7 6.0 136.8 110.8 13.6 97.2 26.1 52.0 −         Dec. 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 −
2019         Jan. 16 42 234.8 49.0 42.8 18.1 24.6 6.2 135.4 109.4 13.9 95.4 26.0 50.5 −
         Feb. 16 42 236.0 50.6 44.6 19.0 25.6 5.9 134.3 108.5 13.9 94.6 25.8 51.2 −         Mar. 16 42 246.1 53.9 48.3 19.2 29.1 5.6 141.2 114.2 13.8 100.5 27.0 51.1 −
         Apr. 17 43 245.6 53.9 48.5 19.9 28.6 5.4 142.6 116.0 14.0 102.0 26.6 49.1 −
         May 17 43 245.4 54.3 48.9 19.1 29.8 5.4 145.4 119.0 14.4 104.7 26.3 45.7 −
Changes *
2017 − − 3 − 33.3 − 4.9 − 2.4 + 3.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 8.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 20.2 −2018 − 3 − 7 − 42.2 − 20.9 − 19.9 − 4.9 − 15.1 − 1.0 − 14.2 − 11.6 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 7.0 −
2018         Sep. − 1 − 1 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.4 −
         Oct. − 1 − 1 − 2.1 − 3.8 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 1.6 −
         Nov. − − − 3.8 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 1.0 − 0.4 −         Dec. − − 2 − 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 2.4 −
2019         Jan. − 1 − 1 − 2.2 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 1.3 + 0.8 −
         Feb. − − + 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.7 −         Mar. − − + 6.0 + 2.8 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 − 0.5 + 6.5 + 5.3 − 0.1 + 5.4 + 1.2 − 3.3 −
         Apr. + 1 + 1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 2.0 −
         May − − − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.4 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
August 2019
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of which:paper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 20161,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
957.3 651.9 404.6 247.4 305.3 10.4 8.8 1.5 295.0 108.1 53.2 382.8 325.2 2018          Aug.
964.0 648.5 417.8 230.7 315.4 10.8 9.3 1.5 304.6 101.5 53.5 375.2 313.0          Sep.
938.4 608.2 400.9 207.3 330.2 8.8 7.3 1.5 321.4 100.2 53.9 394.7 330.9          Oct.
931.9 611.9 392.8 219.1 319.9 13.1 11.3 1.8 306.8 101.4 53.8 369.0 307.1          Nov.897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6          Dec.
928.8 622.0 420.2 201.8 306.7 9.5 7.7 1.7 297.3 93.9 54.0 375.0 304.6 2019          Jan.
952.3 635.2 419.8 215.4 317.1 11.8 9.9 1.8 305.4 97.2 54.2 354.1 287.1          Feb.981.9 664.9 448.7 216.2 317.1 11.4 9.7 1.8 305.6 98.2 53.7 364.4 302.3          Mar.
994.1 675.5 467.6 207.9 318.6 10.8 8.4 2.4 307.9 100.2 54.0 369.3 303.1          Apr.
989.9 667.6 450.7 216.9 322.2 10.7 8.4 2.2 311.6 103.2 54.3 426.2 380.3          May
Changes *
− 97.3 − 80.7 − 52.1 − 28.6 − 16.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 17.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 86.5 − 58.1 2017− 113.1 − 84.7 + 56.0 −140.8 − 28.3 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 23.8 − 9.4 + 2.0 − 139.7 − 105.7 2018
+ 5.7 − 4.3 + 13.2 − 17.6 + 10.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 7.1 + 0.4 − 7.7 − 13.1 2018          Sep.
− 29.3 − 43.9 − 16.9 − 26.9 + 14.6 − 2.0 − 2.0 − + 16.6 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 19.5 + 15.0          Oct.
− 5.9 + 4.3 − 8.0 + 12.3 − 10.2 + 4.3 + 4.0 + 0.3 − 14.5 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 25.7 − 23.3          Nov.− 33.9 − 4.0 + 36.0 − 40.0 − 29.9 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 28.2 − 9.8 + 0.1 − 10.1 − 3.7          Dec.
+ 31.7 + 14.9 − 8.6 + 23.5 + 16.8 − 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 18.7 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 16.1 + 2.0 2019          Jan.
+ 22.7 + 12.4 − 0.4 + 12.8 + 10.3 + 2.3 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 8.0 + 3.0 + 0.2 − 20.9 − 17.5          Feb.+ 27.3 + 27.4 + 28.8 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 10.3 + 15.3          Mar.
+ 12.2 + 10.6 + 18.9 − 8.4 + 1.6 − 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 0.8          Apr.
− 5.1 − 8.6 − 16.9 + 8.3 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 56.9 + 77.2          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 − 2018
181.4 78.7 40.2 38.5 102.8 9.5 5.6 3.8 93.3 12.7 22.9 28.7 − 2018          Aug.
178.9 75.0 37.8 37.3 103.9 10.1 6.1 3.9 93.8 13.9 22.8 29.2 −          Sep.
175.5 73.4 36.5 36.8 102.1 9.6 6.0 3.6 92.6 14.1 22.8 31.3 −          Oct.
172.2 72.6 35.7 37.0 99.5 9.1 5.5 3.6 90.4 13.7 22.5 31.4 −          Nov.171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 −          Dec.
168.3 70.9 35.5 35.4 97.4 7.0 4.3 2.7 90.4 16.1 21.8 28.7 − 2019          Jan.
168.3 69.6 35.4 34.2 98.7 7.9 5.2 2.7 90.8 16.1 21.8 29.8 −          Feb.174.4 75.1 37.8 37.3 99.3 7.5 4.8 2.7 91.7 16.5 21.8 33.4 −          Mar.
173.1 75.7 36.4 39.3 97.5 7.6 4.9 2.7 89.9 16.6 22.2 33.6 −          Apr.
172.7 74.8 36.0 38.8 97.9 7.4 4.6 2.8 90.5 16.5 22.3 33.9 −          May
Changes *
− 32.8 − 33.7 − 22.0 − 11.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2017− 37.4 − 25.8 − 13.7 − 12.0 − 11.7 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 8.8 + 1.3 − 1.8 − 4.3 − 2018
− 2.8 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2018          Sep.
− 4.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.9 −          Oct.
− 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 −          Nov.− 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.4 −          Dec.
− 3.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.1 − 2.1 − − 0.4 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 2019          Jan.
− 0.3 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 −          Feb.+ 5.6 + 5.3 + 2.4 + 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar.
− 1.3 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 −          Apr.
− 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
August 2019
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.02014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.02015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.02016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.02017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.02018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019         May . . . . . .
         June  
p 13,184.5 131.8 131.4 1,335.7 1,204.3 0.0
         July  p 13,243.3 132.4 132.0 ... ... ...
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 22014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 02016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 02017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 22018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019         May . . . . . . .
         June  
p 3,687,704 28.0 36,877 36,724 474,546 437,822 0
         July  p 3,713,540 28.0 37,135 36,983 ... ... ...
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,2632014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,3122015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,5782016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,8592017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,6992018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019         May . . . . . . .
         June 7,768 5,379 3,038 11,866 6,789 91 1,793         July 7,722 5,427 2,955 12,035 6,856 100 1,888
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,1592014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,1462016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,7762017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,8942018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019         May . . . . .
         June 2,551,214 1,569 438,879 582,485 113,552         July 2,577,215 1,050 434,473 582,830 117,972
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
August 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
1. ECB interest rates 2. Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code  1 
2005 Dec.                 6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr.                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan.                1 2.57 2009 Jan.                1 1.62
         July               13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar.                 8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov.                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dec.                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan.                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug.                 9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct.               11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan.                1 0.12
         Dec.               13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan.                1 1.14
2013 May                 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan.                1 −0.13
2007 Mar.               14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov.                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan.                1 1.21
2014 June               11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan.                1 −0.63
2008 July                 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep.                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct.                 8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan.                1 1.37
         Oct.                 9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec.                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan.                1 −0.83
         Nov.               12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec.               10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar.                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan.                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July               1 3.19
2009 Jan.               21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00
         Mar.               11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan.                1 3.32
         Apr.                 8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2019 July               17 2,892 2,892 0.0 0−−−7
         July               24 2,913 2,913 0.0 0−−−7
         July               31 3,601 3,601 0.0 0−−−7
         Aug.                 7 3,384 3,384 0.0 0−−−7
         Aug.               14 2,990 2,990 0.0 0−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2019 May               30 1,399 1,399 2 ... − − − 91
         June               27 966 966 2 ... − − − 91
         Aug.                 1 790 790 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4. Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR  2 
Monthlyaverage EONIA  
1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2019         Jan. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.24 − 0.12
         Feb. − 0.37 − 0.37 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.23 − 0.11         Mar. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.23 − 0.11
         Apr. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.23 − 0.11
         May − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.24 − 0.13         June − 0.36 − 0.40 − 0.38 − 0.33 − 0.28 − 0.19
         July − 0.37 − 0.40 − 0.40 − 0.36 − 0.35 − 0.28
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published v ia
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the Reuters. 2Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by
EURIBOR. 1Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for inter- Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
bank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
August 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ depositswith an agreed maturity ofup to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         June 0.26 64,554 1.27 216,143 0.03 68,825 0.94 26,966
         July 0.26 64,623 1.26 215,907 0.03 67,013 0.93 26,859
         Aug. 0.25 64,215 1.25 216,126 0.03 67,659 0.92 27,206         Sep. 0.24 63,849 1.25 216,273 0.03 66,871 0.90 27,188
         Oct. 0.24 63,652 1.24 215,766 0.04 66,681 0.89 27,535
         Nov. 0.24 62,369 1.23 215,502 0.03 68,118 0.88 28,176         Dec. 0.23 63,057 1.23 217,570 0.01 68,323 0.87 28,597
2019         Jan. 0.23 62,837 1.21 217,168 0.01 68,701 0.86 28,839
         Feb. 0.23 62,576 1.20 217,250 0.01 69,389 0.85 28,815         Mar. 0.23 62,652 1.20 217,159 0.02 67,395 0.85 29,229
         Apr. 0.22 62,253 1.19 216,952 0.02 67,114 0.84 28,899
         May 0.21 60,966 1.18 217,558 0.03 66,325 0.83 28,799         June 0.22 60,652 1.17 217,383 0.03 63,711 0.83 28,547
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2018         June 2.27 4,139 1.92 25,721 2.56 1,169,692 7.03 48,827 3.74 85,404 3.88 311,756
         July 2.27 4,217 1.90 25,586 2.54 1,174,210 7.00 48,360 3.75 85,994 3.86 312,593
         Aug. 2.28 4,215 1.89 25,643 2.52 1,180,809 7.00 48,053 3.75 86,634 3.85 313,801         Sep. 2.27 4,306 1.89 26,196 2.50 1,186,420 7.00 49,160 3.74 86,205 3.85 313,297
         Oct. 2.25 4,311 1.87 26,171 2.48 1,191,048 7.17 50,033 3.54 85,254 3.83 313,604
         Nov. 2.25 4,299 1.87 26,265 2.46 1,196,579 7.01 49,658 3.53 85,715 3.83 314,344         Dec. 2.27 4,242 1.86 26,203 2.44 1,199,525 7.10 51,196 3.53 85,387 3.81 312,896
2019         Jan. 2.27 4,379 1.85 25,867 2.42 1,200,982 7.19 49,709 3.52 85,499 3.79 314,143
         Feb. 2.28 4,300 1.85 25,861 2.41 1,204,756 7.17 49,608 3.51 85,678 3.78 314,960         Mar. 2.27 4,424 1.85 25,905 2.39 1,210,350 7.16 49,935 3.50 86,453 3.78 314,929
         Apr. 2.26 4,418 1.79 25,875 2.37 1,218,785 7.04 50,058 3.49 86,872 3.77 313,007
         May 2.26 4,534 1.79 26,212 2.35 1,224,628 7.13 49,275 3.49 87,410 3.76 314,341         June 2.23 4,575 1.78 26,445 2.33 1,230,368 7.11 51,282 3.49 87,504 3.76 314,059
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         June 2.29 149,189 1.76 140,052 2.13 680,131
         July 2.20 148,897 1.74 142,697 2.12 684,893
         Aug. 2.22 148,026 1.74 144,021 2.11 688,709         Sep. 2.22 150,891 1.74 144,942 2.10 691,969
         Oct. 2.21 147,714 1.73 147,743 2.08 696,222
         Nov. 2.20 148,399 1.72 151,603 2.07 702,286         Dec. 2.24 146,721 1.72 150,727 2.06 703,722
2019         Jan. 2.22 151,176 1.70 152,824 2.04 707,410
         Feb. 2.22 154,912 1.70 154,061 2.03 712,194         Mar. 2.21 159,432 1.69 155,413 2.02 713,389
         Apr. 2.20 157,460 1.66 159,372 2.00 716,684
         May 2.14 159,767 1.67 162,699 1.99 722,437         June 2.14 167,472 1.66 164,253 1.98 722,646
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined eff ective rates. Both
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans bu t not any
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administrat ion, preparation of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan a ssociations
corporations include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the re porting agents in
other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and
specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education, e tc.6Including overdrafts
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 on p. 
47   ). 
are collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
August 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8  of
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2018         June 0.02 1,370,363 0.30 4,294 0.51 597 0.66 737 0.16 538,165 0.26 39,811
         July 0.02 1,375,299 0.27 5,005 0.40 626 0.63 693 0.16 537,703 0.26 39,331
         Aug. 0.01 1,383,683 0.30 5,135 0.43 516 0.67 677 0.15 537,459 0.26 38,903         Sep. 0.01 1,391,356 0.31 4,831 0.40 476 0.64 645 0.15 537,477 0.25 38,579
         Oct. 0.01 1,399,998 0.28 4,853 0.38 772 0.70 803 0.15 537,728 0.25 38,051
         Nov. 0.02 1,425,632 0.30 4,599 0.39 752 0.65 752 0.15 538,222 0.25 37,420         Dec. 0.02 1,432,861 0.28 5,439 0.26 642 0.65 702 0.14 540,271 0.25 37,155
2019         Jan. 0.02 1,432,335 0.28 6,375 0.44 603 0.69 1,074 0.14 540,608 0.24 36,693
         Feb. 0.02 1,446,689 0.29 5,693 0.45 619 0.68 1,032 0.13 541,529 0.24 36,726         Mar. 0.01 1,451,707 0.29 5,595 0.34 837 0.73 978 0.13 543,711 0.25 37,036
         Apr. 0.01 1,464,110 0.29 5,357 0.33 485 0.72 868 0.14 543,806 0.25 37,197
         May 0.01 1,477,188 0.13 4,250 0.52 665 0.67 737 0.13 543,432 0.26 37,857         June 0.01 1,487,230 0.10 3,429 0.44 330 0.68 713 0.13 543,047 0.27 38,409
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         June − 0.03 424,633 − 0.10 11,185 0.06 240 0.23 447
         July − 0.02 429,934 − 0.13 11,466 0.08 354 0.29 754
         Aug. − 0.02 436,893 − 0.06 10,147 0.07 303 0.46 723         Sep. − 0.02 433,078 − 0.10 9,835 0.07 347 0.23 375
         Oct. − 0.03 445,427 − 0.07 12,291 0.17 518 0.66 891
         Nov. − 0.03 448,301 − 0.08 12,192 0.13 376 0.78 1,035         Dec. − 0.03 445,954 − 0.07 15,012 0.14 308 0.55 1,109
2019         Jan. − 0.03 443,971 0.01 16,527 0.08 549 0.40 545
         Feb. − 0.03 439,934 0.02 15,774 0.11 277 0.31 238         Mar. − 0.03 443,524 0.01 15,807 0.07 389 0.65 299
         Apr. − 0.03 451,668 0.01 14,136 0.09 374 0.34 278
         May − 0.03 460,120 − 0.03 12,080 0.23 641 0.40 311         June − 0.03 448,300 − 0.09 10,189 0.19 421 0.25 190
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million
2018         June 5.87 5.85 9,052 7.39 1,870 6.25 279 4.39 3,737 6.92 5,036
         July 6.02 6.00 9,543 7.42 2,140 6.64 312 4.57 3,715 6.93 5,516
         Aug. 6.08 6.02 9,242 7.44 1,938 7.95 395 4.59 3,702 6.91 5,145         Sep. 5.96 5.91 8,166 7.33 1,629 8.14 372 4.41 3,239 6.79 4,555
         Oct. 6.06 5.99 8,915 7.34 1,797 7.68 421 4.60 3,527 6.83 4,967
         Nov. 5.84 5.83 8,668 7.19 1,694 7.21 489 4.40 3,599 6.80 4,580         Dec. 5.80 5.81 6,514 7.04 1,133 7.58 518 4.45 2,820 6.72 3,176
2019         Jan. 5.98 5.98 9,985 7.13 2,196 8.08 544 4.53 3,696 6.72 5,745
         Feb. 5.80 5.83 9,354 6.98 1,934 7.98 486 4.44 3,556 6.55 5,312         Mar. 5.73 5.72 9,868 6.88 1,765 8.48 528 4.25 3,929 6.52 5,411
         Apr. 5.83 5.76 9,830 6.86 1,767 8.44 504 4.36 3,762 6.47 5,564
         May 5.86 5.80 9,893 6.79 1,839 8.80 428 4.46 3,770 6.45 5,695         June 6.06 5.98 8,345 7.01 1,554 9.23 425 4.52 3,222 6.68 4,698
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  .+For deposits with an agreed maturity and all means that all outstanding deposit and lending business at the end of the month has
loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business covers to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of inter est.7Estimated. The
all new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the bank. volume of new business is extrapolated to form the underlying tota l using a
The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates of all new grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including
agreements concluded during the reporting month. For overnight deposits, deposits fidelity and growth premiums. 9Excluding overdrafts. 10Annual percentage rate of
redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business charge, which contains other related charges which may occur fo r enquiries,
is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the sake of simplicity. This administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
August 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)Loans to households for other purposes  
5  with an initial rate fixation of
of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
Loans to households
2018         June 2.06 6,370 1.93 1,713 1.87 2,607 2.58 903 2.07 2,860
         July 2.06 6,380 1.88 2,123 1.94 2,532 2.35 910 2.08 2,938
         Aug. 2.07 5,365 1.83 1,452 1.99 2,124 2.51 756 2.00 2,485         Sep. 2.08 4,952 1.76 1,425 1.98 2,265 2.51 634 2.05 2,053
         Oct. 2.11 5,549 1.84 1,952 2.01 2,413 2.48 810 2.08 2,326
         Nov. 1.96 5,394 1.75 1,743 1.76 2,263 2.51 720 1.98 2,411         Dec. 1.89 5,777 1.79 1,716 1.76 2,554 2.42 717 1.87 2,506
2019         Jan. 1.96 5,889 1.84 2,160 1.81 2,541 2.39 860 1.96 2,488
         Feb. 1.99 4,707 1.78 1,409 1.82 2,095 2.59 661 1.96 1,951         Mar. 1.90 5,598 1.77 1,515 1.68 2,497 2.51 772 1.92 2,329
         Apr. 2.01 5,684 1.88 1,734 2.01 2,214 2.46 815 1.86 2,655
         May 1.90 5,259 1.75 1,397 1.79 2,312 2.44 813 1.82 2,134         June 1.80 5,098 1.80 1,128 1.69 2,120 2.32 731 1.73 2,247
of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2018         June 2.07 4,528 . . 1.92 1,869 2.58 692 2.02 1,967
         July 2.13 4,266 . . 2.09 1,755 2.46 647 2.05 1,864
         Aug. 2.13 3,553 . . 2.12 1,431 2.56 563 1.98 1,559         Sep. 2.04 3,403 . . 1.91 1,586 2.52 491 2.02 1,326
         Oct. 2.11 3,858 . . 2.04 1,691 2.49 597 2.04 1,570
         Nov. 1.96 3,869 . . 1.81 1,526 2.50 561 1.93 1,782         Dec. 1.96 4,139 . . 1.94 1,777 2.42 546 1.83 1,816
2019         Jan. 2.00 4,236 . . 1.94 1,774 2.46 640 1.89 1,822
         Feb. 2.02 3,331 . . 1.94 1,502 2.61 504 1.89 1,325         Mar. 1.99 3,895 . . 1.95 1,539 2.53 580 1.86 1,776
         Apr. 2.04 3,962 . . 2.09 1,654 2.46 619 1.83 1,689
         May 1.95 3,864 . . 1.91 1,705 2.54 593 1.76 1,566         June 1.90 3,540 . . 1.94 1,397 2.43 515 1.70 1,628
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans  3  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) Renegotiated loans  9 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2018         June 1.95 1.90 21,464 1.98 4,691 2.07 3,226 1.76 1,882 1.75 6,771 1.97 9,585
         July 1.94 1.88 22,177 1.94 4,907 2.16 2,675 1.74 1,994 1.73 7,666 1.95 9,842
         Aug. 1.93 1.87 20,493 1.96 3,401 2.13 2,337 1.70 1,753 1.71 6,974 1.97 9,429         Sep. 1.92 1.86 17,864 1.96 3,046 2.11 1,973 1.71 1,544 1.69 5,923 1.94 8,424
         Oct. 1.91 1.86 21,275 1.94 4,124 2.08 2,443 1.68 1,884 1.71 7,669 1.97 9,279
         Nov. 1.94 1.88 20,357 1.94 3,423 2.02 2,313 1.74 1,779 1.72 6,738 1.98 9,527         Dec. 1.90 1.85 17,630 1.89 3,168 2.02 2,113 1.71 1,519 1.70 6,088 1.94 7,910
2019         Jan. 1.92 1.86 20,907 1.93 4,619 2.09 2,475 1.69 1,962 1.70 7,080 1.95 9,390
         Feb. 1.84 1.78 19,352 1.84 3,469 2.04 2,163 1.65 1,749 1.63 6,344 1.85 9,095         Mar. 1.80 1.74 21,335 1.83 3,606 2.04 2,413 1.64 1,755 1.59 6,884 1.79 10,283
         Apr. 1.72 1.67 23,105 1.76 4,326 2.04 2,570 1.48 2,074 1.53 7,760 1.72 10,701
         May 1.68 1.63 22,629 1.74 3,609 2.00 2,560 1.50 2,030 1.46 7,324 1.67 10,715         June 1.63 1.57 20,164 1.65 3,245 1.98 2,280 1.44 1,695 1.41 6,429 1.61 9,760
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2018         June . 1.83 9,040 . . 2.00 1,087 1.61 901 1.71 3,025 1.94 4,027
         July . 1.83 9,622 . . 2.06 914 1.60 960 1.69 3,575 1.94 4,173
         Aug. . 1.82 8,424 . . 2.02 807 1.54 792 1.65 2,911 1.96 3,914         Sep. . 1.82 7,495 . . 2.13 664 1.51 715 1.65 2,604 1.95 3,512
         Oct. . 1.81 9,201 . . 1.98 880 1.51 846 1.67 3,351 1.96 4,124
         Nov. . 1.83 8,504 . . 1.95 750 1.53 771 1.67 2,910 1.98 4,073         Dec. . 1.79 7,242 . . 2.02 694 1.49 670 1.64 2,592 1.93 3,286
2019         Jan. . 1.81 9,238 . . 2.04 922 1.50 948 1.65 3,196 1.96 4,172
         Feb. . 1.72 8,040 . . 2.07 682 1.45 859 1.56 2,709 1.84 3,790         Mar. . 1.68 8,615 . . 2.06 732 1.43 768 1.51 2,924 1.77 4,191
         Apr. . 1.63 9,886 . . 2.02 933 1.40 986 1.47 3,469 1.71 4,498
         May . 1.56 9,434 . . 1.90 945 1.30 879 1.39 3,118 1.65 4,492         June . 1.52 8,277 . . 1.98 820 1.28 744 1.35 2,732 1.59 3,981
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . For   
footnote 11, see p. 47   .  

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
August 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12 Revolving loans  12 
and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 Extended and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 
Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 credit card debt Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         June 8.26 39,717 8.34 31,627 14.77 4,370 3.30 74,485 3.32 74,136
         July 8.19 39,373 8.29 31,035 14.74 4,430 3.25 73,268 3.26 72,921
         Aug. 8.20 39,040 8.27 30,862 14.73 4,390 3.21 72,775 3.23 72,415         Sep. 8.18 40,096 8.27 31,781 14.79 4,421 3.18 76,148 3.19 75,723
         Oct. 8.16 39,591 8.24 31,353 14.79 4,366 3.13 74,312 3.15 73,892
         Nov. 7.88 40,395 7.93 31,901 14.77 4,429 3.11 74,306 3.13 73,881         Dec. 7.86 41,799 7.96 32,782 14.75 4,585 3.14 73,787 3.16 73,380
2019         Jan. 8.01 40,499 7.96 32,586 14.78 4,389 3.09 76,006 3.10 75,622
         Feb. 7.99 40,394 7.99 32,324 14.76 4,384 3.09 78,104 3.10 77,717         Mar. 7.98 40,531 7.97 32,533 14.75 4,355 3.06 80,843 3.07 80,447
         Apr. 7.78 40,783 7.93 31,833 14.75 4,416 3.04 78,782 3.06 78,390
         May 7.90 39,977 7.92 31,720 14.76 4,369 2.98 78,903 2.99 78,496         June 7.86 41,430 7.92 32,848 14.77 4,421 2.92 84,632 2.94 84,230
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of
Renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2018         June 1.31 84,383 1.42 24,657 2.24 11,612 2.44 1,531 1.97 1,470 0.97 55,948 1.64 3,981 1.73 9,841
         July 1.19 81,709 1.41 22,096 2.09 10,235 2.41 1,466 1.93 1,578 0.85 55,149 1.53 3,956 1.74 9,325
         Aug. 1.18 66,072 1.41 16,124 2.05 9,274 2.44 1,316 1.86 1,311 0.85 44,950 1.73 2,130 1.64 7,091         Sep. 1.26 76,448 1.40 22,010 2.04 9,668 2.49 1,315 1.94 1,180 0.98 53,010 1.78 3,023 1.66 8,252
         Oct. 1.28 78,085 1.39 21,850 2.04 10,699 2.50 1,580 1.92 1,403 0.98 52,918 1.64 3,158 1.72 8,327
         Nov. 1.27 74,844 1.47 18,178 2.05 9,884 2.46 1,578 1.91 1,400 0.96 50,045 1.80 3,422 1.63 8,515         Dec. 1.29 96,525 1.46 25,307 2.06 10,205 2.40 1,480 1.85 1,434 1.02 62,907 1.72 5,156 1.60 15,343
2019         Jan. 1.24 74,566 1.42 20,900 2.01 10,992 2.43 1,491 1.94 1,376 0.96 50,703 1.46 2,676 1.58 7,328
         Feb. 1.25 65,642 1.46 16,418 2.04 9,918 2.51 1,338 1.86 1,136 0.97 43,885 1.37 3,016 1.56 6,349         Mar. 1.29 77,548 1.41 22,154 2.05 11,060 2.56 1,534 1.85 1,391 1.05 52,989 1.49 2,834 1.43 7,740
         Apr. 1.21 81,708 1.38 21,675 2.10 10,283 2.46 1,606 1.76 1,464 0.95 55,315 1.26 3,354 1.44 9,686
         May 1.19 75,507 1.38 19,256 2.12 9,981 2.52 1,587 1.76 1,374 0.91 51,534 1.45 3,207 1.40 7,824         June 1.18 84,402 1.29 25,413 2.08 10,650 2.51 1,408 1.65 1,312 0.94 58,546 1.21 3,409 1.40 9,077
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2018         June 1.68 12,565 . . 1.88 647 2.60 182 1.82 380 1.42 7,324 2.60 1,202 1.83 2,830
         July 1.55 9,982 . . 1.95 707 2.74 155 1.81 468 1.25 5,263 1.81 1,205 1.85 2,184
         Aug. 1.56 7,174 . . 2.10 507 2.74 151 1.76 302 1.32 4,296 2.50 348 1.68 1,570         Sep. 1.56 10,319 . . 1.89 576 2.57 124 1.83 309 1.33 6,391 2.52 646 1.79 2,273
         Oct. 1.55 9,237 . . 1.96 640 2.64 138 1.84 376 1.32 5,296 1.77 627 1.80 2,160
         Nov. 1.61 9,181 . . 1.96 528 2.64 140 1.79 379 1.41 5,283 2.15 824 1.72 2,027         Dec. 1.50 16,695 . . 1.90 607 2.55 122 1.68 411 1.37 8,845 2.04 1,266 1.51 5,444
2019         Jan. 1.42 9,732 . . 1.83 630 2.46 149 1.84 429 1.20 5,503 1.90 464 1.57 2,557
         Feb. 1.42 7,982 . . 1.90 485 2.59 151 1.70 323 1.23 4,383 1.46 648 1.56 1,992         Mar. 1.49 11,158 . . 1.87 508 2.65 144 1.78 388 1.40 7,357 1.71 520 1.53 2,241
         Apr. 1.39 10,596 . . 1.81 620 2.43 162 1.60 417 1.25 5,977 1.95 533 1.41 2,887
         May
x . x . . . 1.94 565 x . x . 1.58 381 1.50 6,363 2.17 355 1.49 2,156
         June 1.47 10,382 . . 1.80 493 2.86 126 1.55 326 1.41 6,222 1.31 448 1.51 2,767
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . debit balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
11For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between custome rs and the
if collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) bank. 14Including convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is
in at least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period betweenassigned. 12Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the payment transactions effected with the card during one billing cycle and the date at
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become due. 15The amount
giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.
decrease as funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; xDominated by the business of one or two banks. Therefore, the value cannot be
(d) there is no obligation of regular repayment of funds. 13Overdrafts are defined as published because of confidentiality. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
August 2019
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1. Assets *
  
 € billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and fund Financial technical Non-financial Remainingyear/quarter Total deposits  
1 securities Loans  2 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
 
2016         Q3 2,219.9 378.7 397.3 387.3 280.2 613.9 5.3 46.1 31.4 79.9
         Q4 2,189.4 361.5 371.0 374.6 308.6 623.2 3.3 44.1 32.4 70.6
2017         Q1 2,189.7 355.4 377.5 367.7 297.7 635.8 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
         Q2 2,178.4 344.0 378.9 365.2 302.0 643.8 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6         Q3 2,188.1 331.2 386.1 371.0 305.6 650.5 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.4         Q4 2,212.2 320.9 387.0 354.3 336.1 671.3 2.9 48.2 34.3 57.3
2018         Q1 2,217.9 344.3 394.6 327.1 343.3 663.1 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.5
         Q2 2,226.3 347.5 400.2 320.1 347.1 668.0 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6         Q3 2,224.8 327.3 401.2 328.7 350.5 675.0 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6         Q4 2,213.4 318.2 400.4 330.4 349.8 665.8 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019         Q1 2,349.8 332.1 431.7 329.3 389.4 706.7 2.6 59.5 37.1 61.6
Life insurance
2016         Q3 1,247.0 242.9 203.0 241.2 47.0 445.8 4.0 10.2 18.7 34.0
         Q4 1,197.3 231.3 182.7 223.0 50.7 456.9 2.1 9.6 19.1 21.9
2017         Q1 1,170.5 223.8 185.3 217.2 37.2 462.6 1.8 8.2 19.1 15.3
         Q2 1,172.8 215.7 189.5 217.6 38.6 467.1 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3         Q3 1,177.5 207.6 193.6 220.6 38.4 472.5 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0         Q4 1,193.2 199.2 192.4 226.1 41.4 487.8 1.8 8.6 20.0 16.0
2018         Q1 1,187.6 213.0 199.0 207.0 43.1 480.9 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
         Q2 1,195.2 216.2 202.0 201.1 46.3 486.1 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2         Q3 1,194.1 201.0 202.2 209.8 47.4 491.2 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4         Q4 1,185.3 194.5 200.1 208.5 50.4 484.7 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019         Q1 1,236.2 202.6 213.2 205.6 52.7 515.6 1.6 10.4 20.2 14.1
Non-life insurance
2016         Q3 592.3 123.8 103.2 93.6 50.8 154.4 0.5 28.5 8.6 28.8
         Q4 583.5 118.9 98.6 91.8 56.8 152.0 0.5 26.8 9.0 29.0
2017         Q1 606.7 120.3 102.5 92.1 56.9 157.3 0.3 34.1 9.1 34.2
         Q2 603.7 116.8 103.9 91.2 58.5 160.4 0.4 33.3 9.1 30.1         Q3 603.1 111.9 106.2 92.9 58.6 162.9 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4         Q4 606.7 111.6 108.1 82.2 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.4 9.7 26.5
2018         Q1 623.1 120.1 112.5 75.1 72.3 166.9 0.3 34.6 9.8 31.4
         Q2 621.6 120.0 115.3 72.9 73.4 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0         Q3 618.0 116.2 115.6 72.9 74.4 168.8 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1         Q4 616.2 113.7 117.4 73.7 73.9 167.5 0.2 33.4 10.8 25.5
2019         Q1 655.4 119.2 128.0 74.2 75.7 177.1 0.3 38.3 11.1 31.6
Reinsurance  3 
2016         Q3 380.7 12.0 91.0 52.5 182.3 13.8 0.8 7.3 4.0 17.0
         Q4 408.6 11.3 89.7 59.7 201.0 14.3 0.7 7.7 4.3 19.7
2017         Q1 412.5 11.4 89.8 58.4 203.6 15.9 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
         Q2 401.9 11.6 85.5 56.5 204.8 16.3 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2         Q3 407.5 11.7 86.3 57.5 208.6 15.1 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9         Q4 412.3 10.2 86.5 45.9 223.9 17.6 0.7 8.2 4.7 14.7
2018         Q1 407.2 11.2 83.1 45.0 227.8 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
         Q2 409.5 11.3 82.9 46.1 227.4 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4         Q3 412.7 10.0 83.4 46.0 228.7 14.9 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1         Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019         Q1 458.3 10.2 90.5 49.5 260.9 14.0 0.7 10.8 5.8 15.9
Pension funds  4 
2016         Q3 608.0 107.7 63.5 29.3 19.1 326.2 − 6.3 35.4 20.5
         Q4 609.6 106.4 61.1 29.7 19.9 328.1 − 6.7 37.0 20.8
2017         Q1 617.0 103.4 60.3 30.1 20.3 337.7 − 6.7 37.5 20.9
         Q2 624.5 102.7 60.6 30.3 20.7 344.3 − 6.8 38.1 21.1         Q3 633.7 100.6 61.7 30.3 21.2 353.1 − 7.0 38.6 21.3         Q4 645.5 96.0 63.5 30.6 21.6 364.5 − 7.1 40.3 21.8
2018         Q1 646.8 94.8 63.1 31.0 22.0 366.1 − 7.2 40.6 21.9
         Q2 652.7 95.2 62.8 31.5 22.9 369.9 − 7.3 41.1 22.1         Q3 656.4 92.0 62.6 31.6 23.3 376.3 − 7.3 41.5 21.9         Q4 663.0 91.4 63.4 32.0 23.5 380.3 − 7.4 42.6 22.3
2019         Q1 680.4 89.4 67.6 32.1 24.2 393.2 − 7.5 43.6 22.8
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- ed on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower s’ note loans and
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- registered Pfandbriefe. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by pri-
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. *Valuation of list- mary insurers, which is included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the insti-
ed securities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB’s securities data- tutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Accou nts. Pension funds
base. 1Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension sch emes for the
bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Including deposits retain- self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
August 2019
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2. Liabilities
  
 € billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life/
Debt claims on
End of securities Shares and pension fund Financial Remainingyear/quarter Total issued Loans  
1 other equity Total reserves  2 Non-life derivatives liabilities Net worth  5 
Insurance corporations
 
2016         Q3 2,219.9 30.7 73.7 383.0 1,579.4 1,396.9 182.5 1.5 151.5 −
         Q4 2,189.4 30.7 70.3 441.0 1,494.4 1,313.3 181.1 2.3 150.7 −
2017         Q1 2,189.7 30.5 57.2 448.6 1,511.9 1,309.6 202.3 1.8 139.6 −
         Q2 2,178.4 28.6 57.0 450.8 1,505.5 1,308.5 197.0 2.1 134.3 −         Q3 2,188.1 28.5 58.4 455.6 1,513.1 1,317.2 195.9 2.3 130.2 −         Q4 2,212.2 28.3 62.6 466.0 1,521.6 1,334.2 187.4 2.2 131.6 −
2018         Q1 2,217.9 28.0 61.9 460.5 1,538.9 1,333.5 205.4 1.5 127.1 −
         Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 457.1 1,553.3 1,347.6 205.7 1.9 122.3 −         Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.6 1,545.0 1,343.7 201.4 2.0 122.5 −         Q4 2,213.4 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.3 1,332.4 197.8 1.6 124.6 −
2019         Q1 2,349.8 31.6 68.3 488.8 1,623.4 1,401.2 222.2 1.5 136.2 −
Life insurance
2016         Q3 1,247.0 3.8 25.9 96.0 1,066.2 1,066.2 − 0.7 54.4 −
         Q4 1,197.3 4.1 25.0 116.3 993.7 993.7 − 1.2 56.9 −
2017         Q1 1,170.5 4.1 12.5 116.3 991.8 991.8 − 0.9 44.8 −
         Q2 1,172.8 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.6 989.6 − 1.0 46.2 −         Q3 1,177.5 4.1 12.3 121.5 994.0 994.0 − 1.1 44.5 −         Q4 1,193.2 4.1 12.8 122.2 1,007.1 1,007.1 − 1.1 45.9 −
2018         Q1 1,187.6 4.0 13.3 119.8 1,007.0 1,007.0 − 0.7 42.7 −
         Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.6 1,017.0 1,017.0 − 0.8 40.8 −         Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.2 1,013.3 1,013.3 − 0.9 42.0 −         Q4 1,185.3 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.7 1,000.7 − 0.5 42.2 −
2019         Q1 1,236.2 4.1 14.3 120.5 1,056.0 1,056.0 − 0.4 40.9 −
Non-life insurance
2016         Q3 592.3 0.9 6.6 120.0 407.4 310.1 97.3 0.0 57.3 −
         Q4 583.5 1.1 6.3 130.4 390.1 300.5 89.7 0.2 55.4 −
2017         Q1 606.7 1.1 7.3 134.1 409.0 300.8 108.2 0.1 55.1 −
         Q2 603.7 1.1 6.8 135.7 406.8 302.5 104.3 0.1 53.1 −         Q3 603.1 1.1 6.9 137.5 406.8 305.8 101.1 0.1 50.7 −         Q4 606.7 1.1 6.7 141.2 405.7 309.7 96.0 0.1 51.9 −
2018         Q1 623.1 1.1 7.7 141.4 422.8 311.1 111.7 0.0 50.0 −
         Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 −         Q3 618.0 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 −         Q4 616.2 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.6 315.5 101.0 0.0 50.0 −
2019         Q1 655.4 1.1 9.3 144.5 449.6 329.5 120.1 0.0 50.9 −
Reinsurance  3 
2016         Q3 380.7 26.0 41.3 167.0 105.8 20.5 85.3 0.8 39.8 −
         Q4 408.6 25.5 39.0 194.3 110.5 19.1 91.4 0.9 38.3 −
2017         Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
         Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −         Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.9 1.1 35.0 −         Q4 412.3 23.1 43.1 202.6 108.8 17.4 91.4 1.0 33.8 −
2018         Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 −
         Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 −         Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 −         Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 −
2019         Q1 458.3 26.5 44.6 223.8 117.9 15.7 102.2 1.1 44.4 −
Pension funds  4 
2016         Q3 608.0 − 6.4 6.7 536.0 536.0 − − 3.3 55.6
         Q4 609.6 − 6.8 6.9 546.0 546.0 − − 2.4 47.5
2017         Q1 617.0 − 6.9 7.0 552.9 552.9 − − 2.5 47.8
         Q2 624.5 − 6.9 7.1 558.7 558.7 − − 2.5 49.4         Q3 633.7 − 6.9 7.2 565.2 565.2 − − 2.5 51.9         Q4 645.5 − 7.1 7.4 576.1 576.1 − − 2.5 52.4
2018         Q1 646.8 − 7.2 7.4 579.5 579.5 − − 2.6 50.0
         Q2 652.7 − 7.3 7.5 585.7 585.7 − − 2.6 49.6         Q3 656.4 − 7.4 7.7 587.7 587.7 − − 2.6 51.0         Q4 663.0 − 7.6 7.8 597.2 597.2 − − 2.6 47.8
2019         Q1 680.4 − 7.7 7.9 606.0 606.0 − − 2.7 56.0
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- tor. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “pension
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. 1Including depo- funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company
sits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-emp loyed. Social se-
and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Insurance technical reserves “life“ taking account of curity funds are not included. 5Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and
transitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the “non-life insurance“ sec- the liability item “Shares and other equity“. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
August 2019
VIII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
  
€ million
Debt securities
Sales PurchasesDomestic debt securities  
1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign includingtotal Bank Corporate debt debt buildingpur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities ities  
3 Total 4 Bundesbank sectors  6 residents  7 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  5 
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,9382011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,5252012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,5812013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,379
2014 64,775 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 − 12,124 − 11,951 74,484 14,366
2015 33,024 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 − 66,330 121,164 61,657 − 83,4712016 69,745 27,429 19,177 18,265 − 10,012 42,316 164,603 − 58,012 187,500 35,113 − 94,8562017 53,710 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 42,147 141,177 − 71,454 161,012 51,620 − 87,4702018 56,664 16,630 33,251 12,433 − 29,055 40,034 102,442 − 24,417 67,328 59,529 − 45,778
2018         Aug. 16,191 10,891 2,640 − 3,890 12,142 5,300 10,923 − 1,567 4,562 7,928 5,267
         Sep. 19,809 11,015 8,990 − 84 2,109 8,794 19,310 5,189 7,652 6,470 499
         Oct. 2,853 7,812 10,652 4,521 − 7,361 − 4,959 − 1,962 − 8,161 3,659 2,540 4,815
         Nov. 18,500 13,260 6,849 − 693 7,104 5,240 11,009 3,159 3,945 3,904 7,492         Dec. − 39,633 − 31,356 − 9,339 − 2,127 − 19,890 − 8,277 − 106 − 6,873 3,343 3,424 − 39,527
2019         Jan. 34,314 20,326 8,377 1,319 10,630 13,988 9,297 1,486 − 1,700 9,511 25,018
         Feb. 25,646 13,718 16,833 2,035 − 5,150 11,928 12,638 7,239 − 1,984 7,383 13,008         Mar. 17,631 18,264 4,492 2,581 11,191 − 633 − 5,323 − 1,709 − 4,425 811 22,954
         Apr. − 13,949 − 18,294 − 8,318 5,092 − 15,069 4,345 − 3,081 − 8,015 1,283 3,651 − 10,868
         May 44,585 42,665 20,104 1,599 20,962 1,920 16,191 4,099 4,010 8,082 28,395         June 6,951 − 2,297 − 913 8,375 − 9,757 9,248 11,369 9,743 − 1,663 3,289 − 4,418
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  
8 shares  9 Total 10 tutions  5 Other sectors  11 residents  12 
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,1952009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,9712012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 6562013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,8512014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 − 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 − 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 31,881 4,409 27,472 30,525 − 5,143 35,668 1,3562017 50,410 15,570 34,840 48,773 7,031 41,742 1,6372018 61,212 16,188 45,024 50,020 − 11,184 61,204 11,192
2018         Aug. 4,698 193 4,505 6,240 473 5,767 − 1,542
         Sep. − 484 225 − 709 − 2,392 − 2,837 445 1,908
         Oct. − 13,611 1,227 − 14,838 − 16,477 − 1,242 − 15,235 2,866
         Nov. − 3,032 227 − 3,259 − 3,854 − 1,544 − 2,310 822         Dec. 11,300 482 10,818 13,017 − 637 13,654 − 1,717
2019         Jan. 4,206 671 3,535 5,804 − 55 5,859 − 1,598
         Feb. 634 122 512 1,500 − 436 1,936 − 866         Mar. − 1,529 948 − 2,477 138 − 867 1,005 − 1,667
         Apr. 5,466 243 5,223 6,315 − 360 6,675 − 849
         May 4,650 1,061 3,589 5,996 1,182 4,814 − 1,346         June 1,106 475 631 397 − 295 692 709
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own 8Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices. 9Net pur-
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. chases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  re sidents;  
3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction transaction  values. 10Domestic and foreign shares. 11Residual; also including
values. 4Domestic and foreign debt securities. 5Book values; statistically adjusted. purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 12Net
6Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct in vestment) by
mutual funds. Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank. 7Net purchases or non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values. provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
August 2019
VIII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
  
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 
 
Debt securities
Corporate issued by special-
Mortgage Public purpose Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe debt securities (non-MFIs)  2 debt securities credit institutions
Gross sales
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,044 262,873
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,9742009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,421
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,3752012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,5302013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,8922014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
2016 
3 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
2017 3 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2018         Nov. 92,380 53,292 3,214 39 39,121 10,918 5,917 33,171
         Dec. 54,388 28,723 2,215 151 19,140 7,217 11,345 14,320
2019         Jan. 127,454 77,489 6,215 3,057 58,545 9,672 5,380 44,585
         Feb. 123,547 81,698 5,742 1,909 57,017 17,030 5,091 36,758         Mar. 116,190 65,908 1,768 741 50,411 12,988 7,155 43,128
         Apr. 100,795 64,464 2,078 92 53,880 8,414 6,941 29,390
         May 115,749 71,690 7,035 15 53,641 10,998 5,146 38,914         June 88,671 50,607 1,469 37 38,478 10,623 13,573 24,491
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four  years 4
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,6592008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,4072009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,4312012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,8882013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,7652014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 
3 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017 3 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2018         Nov. 32,905 15,498 2,686 39 9,850 2,924 5,015 12,391
         Dec. 16,845 5,192 1,542 20 1,905 1,725 8,650 3,003
2019         Jan. 46,309 24,508 5,786 750 15,779 2,194 4,264 17,538
         Feb. 42,078 23,849 3,661 1,726 13,196 5,266 3,505 14,723         Mar. 38,161 11,772 1,637 685 4,153 5,296 4,995 21,394
         Apr. 25,789 9,141 1,255 92 4,760 3,035 4,194 12,454
         May 34,546 17,220 3,914 15 8,131 5,160 2,831 14,495         June 30,682 11,412 1,015 35 7,578 2,784 11,093 8,177
Net sales 5
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,0932008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,3022009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,2892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,2982013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,4792014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 
3 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017 3 2,669 5,954 6,389 − 4,697 18,788 − 14,525 6,828 − 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 − 6,564 18,850 − 5,453 9,738 − 33,630
2018         Nov. 13,993 3,367 1,184 − 662 1,476 1,370 − 574 11,200
         Dec. − 30,192 − 11,122 966 − 1,558 − 7,164 − 3,366 − 593 − 18,478
2019         Jan. 10,398 8,587 4,184 1,318 6,820 − 3,735 735 1,075
         Feb. 16,523 17,671 2,937 0 9,033 5,702 2,320 − 3,468         Mar. 13,397 3,874 − 910 − 280 5,369 − 306 1,676 7,847
         Apr. − 14,225 − 6,856 987 − 1,177 − 5,347 − 1,319 4,151 − 11,521
         May 39,075 19,156 4,826 − 1,099 13,377 2,052 317 19,601         June − 933 − 116 − 608 − 1,193 1,497 188 8,975 − 9,792
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Supplemen t 2 − Capital of debt securities. 4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 5 Gross
market statistics on pp. 23 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2 Including sales less redemptions. 
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3 Sectoral reclassification

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
August 2019
VIII. Capital market
 
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
  
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
 End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special-purpose Other bank bonds Publicin years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,0972009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201
1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,2262012 3,285,422
1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,1382014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 
1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017 1 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2018         Nov. 3,121,495 1,205,282 160,121 52,996 677,226 314,938 314,120 1,602,093
         Dec. 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 311,572 313,527 1,583,616
2019         Jan. 3,101,701 1,202,748 165,272 52,757 676,882 307,837 314,262 1,584,691
         Feb. 3,118,224 1,220,419 168,209 52,757 685,915 313,538 316,582 1,581,223         Mar. 3,131,621 1,224,293 167,299 52,477 691,284 313,232 318,258 1,589,070
         Apr. 3,117,396 1,217,437 168,287 51,300 685,937 311,913 322,409 1,577,550
         May
2 3,154,821 1,236,593 173,113 50,201 699,314 313,965 2 321,076 1,597,151
         June 3,153,887 1,236,477 172,505 49,008 700,811 314,153 330,051 1,587,359
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-June 2019 
1,000,605 454,704 45,916 15,900 287,774 105,114 63,194 482,706     less than  2
663,706 281,877 43,930 11,585 159,671 66,692 51,769 330,060 2 to less than  4
477,465 215,705 37,021 7,546 120,473 50,666 49,123 212,635 4 to less than  6
297,230 116,525 21,731 7,385 53,932 33,476 29,322 151,384 6 to less than  8
247,376 83,252 15,685 4,446 44,238 18,884 18,973 145,151 8 to less than 10
125,404 33,861 5,607 527 14,126 13,600 27,128 64,415 10 to less than 15
88,347 20,719 1,782 1,373 14,076 3,489 10,338 57,289 15 to less than 20
253,754 29,833 834 248 6,520 22,231 80,202 143,718 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for
reclassification of debt securities. 2Adjustments due to change of domicile of debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
issuers. 3Calculated from month under review until final maturity for debt securities
 
 
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
  
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulationat market values(market capita- cash 
payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims of shares, and of capital level at endend of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  
1 bonus shares real assets etc. of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,6222009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,2142012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,1882013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,6582014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,3972017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 − − 457 − 661 − 1,615 1,933,7332018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 − − 1,055 − 1,111 − 946 1,634,155
2018         Nov. 180,307 − 123 106 1 93−00 − 2 5 2 1,729,978
         Dec. 180,187 − 120 317 22 6 − − 13 − 423 − 29 1,634,155
2019         Jan. 180,090 − 97 223 − − − − 2 − 8 − 310 1,726,959
         Feb. 180,116 26 116 −−−− − 3 7 − 5 2 1,755,552
         Mar. 180,706 590 929 179 − − − 486 2 − 34 1,722,937
         Apr. 180,744 38 127 21 19 − − 29 − 9 − 90 1,833,023
         May 180,763 19 46 112 0 − − 45 − 60 − 34 1,696,088         June 180,375 − 389 420 84 8 − 22 − 59 − 864 1,784,783
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and Deutsche
out of company profits. 2All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
August 2019
 VIII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Corporate German German With a residual With a residual
maturity of bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share maturity of more
9 to (non- index share price index than 9 years and € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total up to 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1,000
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.062017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.642018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019         Feb. 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.8 3.0 142.06 109.52 517.62 11,515.64
         Mar. 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.6 2.7 143.19 111.35 516.84 11,526.04
         Apr. 0.1 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.3 0.5 2.6 142.69 110.72 552.28 12,344.08
         May 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 0.4 2.6 144.20 112.36 510.79 11,726.84         June − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 144.73 113.54 535.23 12,398.80
         July − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 0.2 2.4 145.43 113.94 528.16 12,189.04
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of standing of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthl y figures are calcula-
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt ted on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annu al figures
securities and similar, debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero coupon are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts out- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which:
Sales of which: of which:
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0352012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4372013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 − 1,745 143,256 44,266 − 3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,8712016 157,068 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,698 163,998 2,877 − 3,172 161,121 40,870 − 6,9312017 145,017 94,921 29,560 − 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 50,096 147,006 4,938 1,048 142,068 49,048 − 1,9912018 122,353 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 18,660 128,170 2,979 − 2,306 125,191 20,966 − 5,821
2018         Dec. 17,639 16,880 − 1,797 6 − 2,620 511 18,676 759 17,176 − 697 − 574 17,873 1,333 462
2019         Jan. 11,660 7,739 1,569 56 43 1,336 6,170 3,921 12,727 − 1,334 423 14,061 3,498 − 1,067
         Feb. 12,476 8,702 1,188 − 107 127 965 7,514 3,774 14,478 692 1,228 13,786 2,546 − 2,002         Mar. 9,647 6,647 302 − 283 − 29 624 6,345 3,000 10,378 698 595 9,680 2,405 − 732
         Apr. 12,448 9,524 1,305 − 47 437 919 8,219 2,923 12,749 1,090 830 11,659 2,093 − 301
         May 2,417 3,715 1,386 3 449 979 2,329 − 1,298 3,744 − 2,014 − 2,357 5,758 1,059 − 1,327         June 10,836 4,257 2,040 10 790 1,164 2,218 6,579 10,140 − 150 − 505 10,290 7,084 696
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
August 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2017 2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 36.84 47.85 28.48 25.57 − 15.60 − 0.16 12.09 32.14 − 15.17
Debt securities − 3.40 − 5.65 5.10 − 3.01 0.65 0.55 1.46 2.44 0.65
Short-term debt securities − 0.58 − 2.26 1.00 − 0.34 − 0.12 − 0.02 0.38 0.77 0.41
Long-term debt securities − 2.81 − 3.39 4.10 − 2.67 0.77 0.57 1.09 1.68 0.25
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 2.68 − 2.80 1.45 − 1.15 0.11 0.47 − 0.02 0.89 0.62
Non-financial corporations 0.67 − 0.56 0.51 − 0.14 − 0.01 0.32 − 0.13 0.33 0.74Financial corporations − 2.53 − 0.41 1.18 − 0.59 0.19 0.31 0.08 0.61 − 0.10General government − 0.82 − 1.82 − 0.25 − 0.43 − 0.07 − 0.15 0.03 − 0.05 − 0.03
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 0.72 − 2.85 3.66 − 1.86 0.54 0.08 1.48 1.56 0.04
Loans 18.11 52.64 − 23.47 1.67 − 2.46 − 9.92 − 0.59 − 10.51 10.88
Short-term loans 18.80 28.74 4.73 4.31 5.71 − 4.96 − 0.62 4.59 13.72
Long-term loans − 0.70 23.90 − 28.19 − 2.63 − 8.17 − 4.96 0.03 − 15.09 − 2.85
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 0.67 21.78 − 3.15 7.47 − 0.75 − 3.75 4.64 − 3.29 − 0.46
Non-financial corporations − 4.78 15.23 − 9.64 4.18 − 2.41 − 4.52 2.50 − 5.20 − 2.47Financial corporations 5.25 6.26 6.29 3.22 1.60 0.72 2.10 1.87 2.01General government 0.20 0.29 0.20 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.00
Loans to the rest of the world 17.44 30.86 − 20.32 − 5.80 − 1.71 − 6.17 − 5.23 − 7.22 11.34
Equity and investment fund shares 91.82 58.61 115.70 19.13 29.99 38.16 42.44 5.12 4.60
Equity 85.99 50.05 114.03 9.42 26.47 37.18 42.34 8.04 1.84
Listed shares of domestic sectors 22.91 − 3.82 18.82 0.65 21.74 − 2.70 − 1.34 1.12 1.82
Non-financial corporations 22.59 − 3.76 18.27 0.80 21.64 − 2.90 − 1.38 0.91 1.84Financial corporations 0.31 − 0.06 0.55 − 0.14 0.10 0.20 0.04 0.21 − 0.02
Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.84 7.16 2.12 0.42 0.80 16.15 − 15.14 0.32 0.29
Other equity  
1 52.25 46.71 93.09 8.35 3.93 23.73 58.82 6.61 − 0.28
Investment fund shares 5.83 8.55 1.67 9.71 3.52 0.98 0.10 − 2.93 2.76
Money market fund shares 0.36 − 0.46 − 0.53 0.89 − 0.63 − 0.03 − 0.14 0.27 − 0.03Non-MMF investment fund shares 5.47 9.01 2.21 8.83 4.15 1.01 0.24 − 3.19 2.79
Insurance technical reserves 1.15 3.92 4.68 0.51 0.96 1.36 1.33 1.04 0.99Financial derivatives 22.74 12.68 − 5.09 2.86 2.57 − 2.68 − 4.36 − 0.61 2.50Other accounts receivable 7.36 163.84 4.85 33.36 33.28 8.93 − 0.86 − 36.49 26.75
Total 174.62 333.88 130.26 80.08 49.38 36.24 51.51 − 6.86 31.19
External financing
Debt securities 23.71 8.56 7.08 0.55 2.79 2.36 0.90 1.03 5.77
Short-term securities − 0.15 0.60 4.08 − 1.83 2.54 1.48 0.38 − 0.32 1.23
Long-term securities 23.85 7.95 3.00 2.37 0.24 0.89 0.53 1.35 4.54
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 10.82 7.13 3.80 1.83 2.48 1.65 − 0.94 0.61 3.95
Non-financial corporations 0.67 − 0.56 0.51 − 0.14 − 0.01 0.32 − 0.13 0.33 0.74Financial corporations 10.06 9.13 3.27 2.39 2.19 1.38 − 0.54 0.24 2.32General government 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.01 − 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.69Households 0.08 − 1.45 0.01 − 0.42 0.29 − 0.05 − 0.27 0.04 0.20
Debt securities of the rest of the world 12.89 1.42 3.28 − 1.28 0.31 0.71 1.84 0.42 1.82
Loans 41.74 97.41 136.17 14.83 40.15 46.92 37.86 11.25 15.18
Short-term loans 14.98 21.51 69.62 − 6.31 26.97 22.86 23.49 − 3.71 13.52
Long-term loans 26.76 75.91 66.56 21.14 13.18 24.06 14.37 14.95 1.66
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 20.78 55.94 78.80 10.82 27.94 19.87 28.03 2.95 10.76
Non-financial corporations − 4.78 15.23 − 9.64 4.18 − 2.41 − 4.52 2.50 − 5.20 − 2.47Financial corporations 22.35 40.62 84.82 4.12 30.50 23.61 24.40 6.31 19.05General government 3.22 0.09 3.61 2.52 − 0.15 0.78 1.13 1.85 − 5.81
Loans from the rest of the world 20.95 41.47 57.38 4.01 12.21 27.05 9.83 8.29 4.41
Equity 16.09 13.41 14.80 − 2.67 2.40 11.38 − 1.03 2.06 3.76
Listed shares of domestic sectors 27.35 8.53 73.29 5.75 20.00 4.49 5.21 43.60 4.48
Non-financial corporations 22.59 − 3.76 18.27 0.80 21.64 − 2.90 − 1.38 0.91 1.84Financial corporations − 2.06 11.14 46.76 4.22 − 5.05 4.52 4.11 43.19 − 0.24General government 0.07 0.51 0.53 0.15 0.16 0.15 0.09 0.13 − 0.04Households 6.74 0.65 7.72 0.59 3.26 2.71 2.38 − 0.63 2.92
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 25.83 − 4.20 − 32.01 − 5.10 8.73 6.18 − 4.82 − 42.09 − 4.24
Other equity  
1 14.57 9.07 − 26.47 − 3.32 − 26.33 0.71 − 1.42 0.56 3.52
Insurance technical reserves 3.60 7.25 7.25 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 0.13 3.69 − 4.19 − 2.12 1.50 3.27 − 0.06 − 8.90 4.86
Other accounts payable 37.62 57.05 22.26 15.71 18.30 19.82 5.60 − 21.46 17.90
Total 122.62 187.37 183.37 28.11 66.95 85.55 45.08 − 14.21 49.28
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
August 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2017 2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 516.9 559.6 575.8 559.6 528.4 540.4 541.9 575.8 541.5
Debt securities 44.8 38.8 43.1 38.8 39.2 39.7 41.0 43.1 44.4
Short-term debt securities 5.5 3.3 4.2 3.3 3.1 3.1 3.5 4.2 4.7
Long-term debt securities 39.3 35.6 38.8 35.6 36.0 36.6 37.5 38.8 39.7
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 20.8 18.2 19.2 18.2 18.2 18.7 18.6 19.2 20.1
Non-financial corporations 4.4 3.9 4.3 3.9 3.8 4.1 4.0 4.3 5.1Financial corporations 12.0 11.7 12.7 11.7 11.9 12.2 12.3 12.7 12.8General government 4.4 2.5 2.3 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2
Debt securities of the rest of the world 24.0 20.7 23.8 20.7 21.0 21.1 22.5 23.8 24.2
Loans 546.2 590.7 567.7 590.7 586.9 578.5 577.9 567.7 585.3
Short-term loans 450.7 475.0 480.2 475.0 480.1 476.0 475.5 480.2 500.2
Long-term loans 95.5 115.8 87.4 115.8 106.9 102.5 102.4 87.4 85.1
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 351.2 373.0 369.9 373.0 372.3 368.5 373.2 369.9 369.4
Non-financial corporations 282.6 297.8 288.2 297.8 295.4 290.9 293.4 288.2 285.7Financial corporations 62.0 68.2 74.5 68.2 69.8 70.5 72.6 74.5 76.5General government 6.7 7.0 7.2 7.0 7.1 7.1 7.2 7.2 7.2
Loans to the rest of the world 195.0 217.7 197.8 217.7 214.6 210.0 204.7 197.8 215.9
Equity and investment fund shares 2,029.0 2,175.4 2,140.0 2,175.4 2,172.4 2,219.8 2,252.8 2,140.0 2,228.5
Equity 1,869.1 2,005.3 1,975.7 2,005.3 2,001.5 2,047.0 2,079.0 1,975.7 2,054.2
Listed shares of domestic sectors 292.3 332.2 302.6 332.2 349.4 338.5 338.3 302.6 318.3
Non-financial corporations 286.2 325.3 296.0 325.3 342.2 330.9 330.4 296.0 311.3Financial corporations 6.1 6.8 6.6 6.8 7.1 7.6 7.9 6.6 7.0
Listed shares of the rest of the world 44.4 48.5 46.3 48.5 49.3 64.8 49.7 46.3 49.9
Other equity  
1 1,532.4 1,624.7 1,626.9 1,624.7 1,602.8 1,643.7 1,690.9 1,626.9 1,686.0
Investment fund shares 159.9 170.1 164.3 170.1 170.9 172.8 173.9 164.3 174.3
Money market fund shares 1.9 1.5 1.0 1.5 0.9 0.9 0.7 1.0 0.9Non-MMF investment fund shares 158.0 168.6 163.3 168.6 170.0 172.0 173.1 163.3 173.4
Insurance technical reserves 50.2 54.2 59.0 54.2 55.4 56.6 57.8 59.0 60.3Financial derivatives 60.1 49.3 43.7 49.3 48.7 42.8 41.4 43.7 49.2Other accounts receivable 969.1 1,081.0 1,111.0 1,081.0 1,137.2 1,146.3 1,145.7 1,111.0 1,156.9
Total 4,216.4 4,549.1 4,540.2 4,549.1 4,568.2 4,624.3 4,658.6 4,540.2 4,666.0
Liabilities
Debt securities 183.8 210.6 187.8 210.6 185.4 189.0 185.8 187.8 196.4
Short-term securities 2.9 3.4 6.1 3.4 5.9 7.4 6.5 6.1 7.4
Long-term securities 180.9 207.2 181.6 207.2 179.4 181.6 179.2 181.6 189.1
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 72.1 82.8 78.9 82.8 79.6 80.1 78.9 78.9 84.8
Non-financial corporations 4.4 3.9 4.3 3.9 3.8 4.1 4.0 4.3 5.1Financial corporations 51.9 64.3 60.6 64.3 61.2 61.5 60.6 60.6 64.6General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.8Households 15.7 14.4 13.9 14.4 14.4 14.3 14.1 13.9 14.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 111.7 127.8 108.9 127.8 105.8 108.9 106.9 108.9 111.7
Loans 1,514.1 1,610.8 1,736.3 1,610.8 1,648.0 1,693.2 1,725.4 1,736.3 1,758.5
Short-term loans 598.0 624.1 688.9 624.1 650.1 674.1 692.7 688.9 705.7
Long-term loans 916.1 986.8 1,047.3 986.8 997.9 1,019.1 1,032.7 1,047.3 1,052.8
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 1,160.2 1,211.4 1,282.8 1,211.4 1,237.4 1,253.3 1,280.3 1,282.8 1,288.9
Non-financial corporations 282.6 297.8 288.2 297.8 295.4 290.9 293.4 288.2 285.7Financial corporations 817.2 854.2 932.6 854.2 883.0 903.0 926.6 932.6 946.9General government 60.4 59.5 62.0 59.5 59.0 59.5 60.4 62.0 56.4
Loans from the rest of the world 353.9 399.4 453.5 399.4 410.6 439.9 445.1 453.5 469.6
Equity 2,785.3 3,062.0 2,684.8 3,062.0 2,957.4 2,978.5 2,942.3 2,684.8 2,779.6
Listed shares of domestic sectors 654.2 748.2 683.9 748.2 737.4 726.8 733.2 683.9 733.3
Non-financial corporations 286.2 325.3 296.0 325.3 342.2 330.9 330.4 296.0 311.3Financial corporations 144.8 171.8 180.2 171.8 155.4 156.3 160.2 180.2 193.2General government 44.4 51.8 48.7 51.8 48.7 49.0 52.1 48.7 54.1Households 178.7 199.2 159.0 199.2 191.1 190.7 190.5 159.0 174.7
Listed shares of the rest of the world 813.6 933.6 740.2 933.6 889.8 915.2 882.3 740.2 760.2
Other equity  
1 1,317.6 1,380.1 1,260.7 1,380.1 1,330.2 1,336.5 1,326.8 1,260.7 1,286.0
Insurance technical reserves 259.5 266.7 274.0 266.7 268.6 270.4 272.2 274.0 275.8Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 38.2 26.9 23.3 26.9 26.7 28.2 30.1 23.3 29.7
Other accounts payable 1,056.5 1,099.4 1,148.2 1,099.4 1,125.4 1,144.9 1,153.1 1,148.2 1,177.2
Total 5,837.4 6,276.4 6,054.3 6,276.4 6,211.4 6,304.2 6,308.9 6,054.3 6,217.2
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
August 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2017 2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 114.85 106.17 140.05 41.37 14.00 40.39 27.30 58.36 38.71
Currency 21.18 19.73 32.27 3.81 3.67 7.57 7.05 13.98 17.70
Deposits 93.68 86.45 107.78 37.57 10.33 32.83 20.24 44.38 21.01
Transferable deposits 105.26 99.72 109.62 35.86 12.14 33.90 21.35 42.23 17.20Time deposits 1.28 − 4.03 6.79 2.34 1.15 1.99 1.43 2.23 1.86Savings deposits(including savings certificates) − 12.87 − 9.24 − 8.63 − 0.64 − 2.95 − 3.06 − 2.53 − 0.08 1.95
Debt securities − 12.80 − 8.14 1.81 − 3.01 − 1.00 0.52 1.71 0.58 0.52
Short-term debt securities − 0.16 − 0.20 − 0.13 − 0.41 − 0.37 − 0.01 − 0.02 0.26 − 0.22
Long-term debt securities − 12.63 − 7.93 1.94 − 2.60 − 0.63 0.53 1.72 0.32 0.74
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 4.14 − 5.09 2.29 − 2.56 − 0.01 0.16 1.18 0.96 0.71
Non-financial corporations − 0.01 − 1.43 − 0.09 − 0.40 0.08 − 0.23 − 0.12 0.19 0.22Financial corporations − 2.48 − 2.68 2.83 − 1.97 0.07 0.61 1.36 0.79 0.58General government − 1.65 − 0.99 − 0.46 − 0.19 − 0.17 − 0.22 − 0.06 − 0.02 − 0.09
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 8.66 − 3.05 − 0.48 − 0.45 − 0.98 0.36 0.53 − 0.38 − 0.19
Equity and investment fund shares 45.78 55.13 39.42 16.62 17.73 8.06 11.79 1.84 11.41
Equity 21.65 14.69 18.92 3.97 7.35 2.79 7.01 1.76 6.76
Listed shares of domestic sectors 9.37 0.90 9.47 0.04 4.27 2.55 2.63 0.02 4.29
Non-financial corporations 6.09 0.54 6.33 0.47 3.12 1.63 2.27 − 0.69 2.52Financial corporations 3.28 0.36 3.14 − 0.43 1.15 0.92 0.37 0.70 1.78
Listed shares of the rest of the world 6.93 9.65 4.41 2.77 1.47 − 0.83 2.82 0.95 0.93
Other equity  
1 5.35 4.13 5.04 1.15 1.61 1.07 1.57 0.79 1.54
Investment fund shares 24.13 40.44 20.51 12.65 10.38 5.27 4.77 0.08 4.65
Money market fund shares − 0.53 − 0.28 − 0.33 0.05 − 0.40 − 0.03 − 0.06 0.16 − 0.12Non-MMF investment fund shares 24.66 40.72 20.84 12.60 10.79 5.29 4.83 − 0.07 4.77
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 15.58 20.23 16.93 7.75 4.22 4.24 4.21 4.26 4.37
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 24.79 37.68 32.64 8.20 11.79 8.20 7.46 5.19 9.42
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 32.58 30.84 21.91 3.49 4.30 4.84 4.51 8.26 5.81
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  
2 − 19.49 − 30.79 − 17.39 − 25.36 19.03 − 9.88 − 6.03 − 20.51 16.27
Total 201.31 211.12 235.38 49.06 70.09 56.37 50.94 57.98 86.52
  External financing
Loans 47.46 55.55 68.46 12.45 10.81 20.12 22.48 15.05 15.90
Short-term loans − 4.31 − 2.19 2.44 − 0.40 − 0.02 0.11 1.83 0.53 0.47
Long-term loans 51.76 57.74 66.02 12.85 10.83 20.01 20.66 14.52 15.43
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 41.92 47.41 57.47 12.15 9.00 15.79 19.58 13.11 9.10Consumer loans 9.78 11.25 11.14 2.19 1.78 4.34 2.36 2.67 6.15Entrepreneurial loans − 4.24 − 3.11 − 0.14 − 1.89 0.04 − 0.01 0.55 − 0.73 0.65
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 42.87 49.99 61.72 10.42 11.00 17.65 19.41 13.67 12.51Loans from other financial institutions 4.59 5.57 6.74 2.03 − 0.19 2.47 3.07 1.38 3.39Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable − 0.23 0.53 0.07 0.34 0.22 0.01 − 0.05 − 0.11 0.42
Total 47.23 56.09 68.53 12.79 11.03 20.13 22.43 14.94 16.32
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
August 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2017 2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,208.7 2,313.7 2,455.5 2,313.7 2,327.7 2,368.1 2,397.1 2,455.5 2,494.2
Currency 174.4 194.1 226.3 194.1 197.8 205.3 212.3 226.3 244.0
Deposits 2,034.4 2,119.6 2,229.2 2,119.6 2,130.0 2,162.8 2,184.8 2,229.2 2,250.2
Transferable deposits 1,188.0 1,287.7 1,397.1 1,287.7 1,299.8 1,333.7 1,354.9 1,397.1 1,414.3Time deposits 248.7 245.4 252.4 245.4 246.6 248.6 250.2 252.4 254.3Savings deposits(including savings certificates) 597.7 586.5 579.7 586.5 583.6 580.5 579.8 579.7 581.6
Debt securities 127.4 120.5 115.7 120.5 117.7 118.1 119.3 115.7 119.4
Short-term debt securities 2.7 2.5 2.1 2.5 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.1 1.9
Long-term debt securities 124.7 118.0 113.6 118.0 115.6 116.0 117.3 113.6 117.5
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 85.6 82.5 79.9 82.5 81.2 81.4 82.5 79.9 83.1
Non-financial corporations 13.9 12.5 12.1 12.5 12.4 12.1 12.1 12.1 12.4Financial corporations 66.7 66.1 64.4 66.1 65.1 65.7 67.0 64.4 67.3General government 5.0 3.9 3.4 3.9 3.7 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 41.8 37.9 35.9 37.9 36.4 36.7 36.9 35.9 36.3
Equity and investment fund shares 1,105.7 1,215.8 1,138.9 1,215.8 1,196.1 1,214.9 1,239.8 1,138.9 1,229.3
Equity 587.9 639.7 583.2 639.7 624.0 628.5 644.2 583.2 632.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors 200.8 226.4 183.0 226.4 217.3 214.2 217.2 183.0 202.6
Non-financial corporations 169.8 190.3 151.0 190.3 182.5 180.8 180.8 151.0 166.0Financial corporations 31.0 36.1 32.0 36.1 34.8 33.4 36.5 32.0 36.6
Listed shares of the rest of the world 86.8 101.0 98.2 101.0 97.7 102.9 111.4 98.2 114.2
Other equity  
1 300.3 312.3 302.0 312.3 309.0 311.5 315.6 302.0 315.7
Investment fund shares 517.8 576.2 555.7 576.2 572.1 586.3 595.7 555.7 596.9
Money market fund shares 2.8 2.7 2.3 2.7 2.3 2.3 2.1 2.3 2.2Non-MMF investment fund shares 515.0 573.5 553.4 573.5 569.8 584.1 593.5 553.4 594.7
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 339.9 360.1 377.0 360.1 364.3 368.6 372.8 377.0 381.4
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 947.8 991.4 1,025.6 991.4 1,003.6 1,012.2 1,020.1 1,025.6 1,035.1
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 819.2 849.8 871.7 849.8 854.1 859.0 863.5 871.7 877.6
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 32.6 31.1 31.5 31.1 31.5 31.8 31.8 31.5 32.5
Total 5,581.4 5,882.5 6,016.0 5,882.5 5,895.1 5,972.6 6,044.4 6,016.0 6,169.5
  Liabilities
Loans 1,654.7 1,711.9 1,775.9 1,711.9 1,722.6 1,737.9 1,760.8 1,775.9 1,791.6
Short-term loans 56.6 54.4 58.1 54.4 54.4 54.5 56.3 58.1 58.5
Long-term loans 1,598.1 1,657.5 1,717.7 1,657.5 1,668.2 1,683.4 1,704.5 1,717.7 1,733.1
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 1,195.8 1,247.4 1,308.1 1,247.4 1,257.4 1,275.0 1,295.0 1,308.1 1,317.1Consumer loans 201.8 211.8 218.1 211.8 212.8 213.4 215.5 218.1 224.1Entrepreneurial loans 257.0 252.7 249.7 252.7 252.5 249.5 250.4 249.7 250.4
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,558.3 1,610.0 1,667.2 1,610.0 1,620.9 1,633.7 1,653.5 1,667.2 1,679.6Loans from other financial institutions 96.4 101.9 108.7 101.9 101.8 104.2 107.3 108.7 112.1Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.4 16.3 16.2 16.3 17.6 17.2 17.4 16.2 17.5
Total 1,670.1 1,728.3 1,792.1 1,728.3 1,740.3 1,755.1 1,778.2 1,792.1 1,809.1
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 − 4.0 − 7.4 − 2.5 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.22014 + 16.7 + 13.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
2015 p + 23.9 + 14.7 + 2.2 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 28.7 + 11.5 + 4.2 + 4.8 + 8.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 34.0 + 6.1 + 8.3 + 9.5 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
2018 pe + 57.3 + 18.3 + 10.2 + 13.8 + 15.0 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4
2017         H1  p + 19.8 + 1.5 + 5.1 + 6.2 + 7.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4
         H2  p + 14.2 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2
2018         H1  pe + 48.1 + 17.3 + 14.4 + 7.4 + 9.0 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  pe + 9.2 + 1.0 − 4.2 + 6.4 + 6.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2012 2,225.2 1,387.9 684.1 169.8 1.2 80.7 50.3 24.8 6.2 0.0
2013 2,210.7 1,390.4 663.5 172.9 1.3 78.2 49.2 23.5 6.1 0.02014 2,212.3 1,396.5 657.8 174.5 1.4 75.3 47.5 22.4 5.9 0.0
2015 p 2,182.0 1,372.6 654.5 174.4 1.4 71.6 45.0 21.5 5.7 0.0
2016 p 2,165.9 1,366.8 637.5 175.8 1.1 68.5 43.3 20.2 5.6 0.0
2017 p 2,115.4 1,351.3 610.5 171.7 0.8 64.5 41.2 18.6 5.2 0.0
2018 p 2,063.2 1,323.0 595.5 162.6 0.7 60.9 39.1 17.6 4.8 0.0
2017         Q1  p 2,140.2 1,351.0 628.1 174.7 1.2 67.0 42.3 19.7 5.5 0.0
         Q2  p 2,133.9 1,353.6 620.5 174.6 0.9 66.4 42.1 19.3 5.4 0.0
         Q3  p 2,127.5 1,353.0 618.5 173.1 0.8 65.5 41.7 19.1 5.3 0.0
         Q4  p 2,115.4 1,351.3 610.5 171.7 0.8 64.5 41.2 18.6 5.2 0.0
2018         Q1  p 2,092.5 1,338.6 599.8 171.2 1.0 63.4 40.5 18.2 5.2 0.0
         Q2  p 2,076.9 1,329.3 595.9 169.8 0.9 62.2 39.8 17.9 5.1 0.0
         Q3  p 2,077.1 1,335.5 594.8 164.5 0.8 61.8 39.7 17.7 4.9 0.0
         Q4  p 2,063.2 1,323.0 595.5 162.6 0.7 60.9 39.1 17.6 4.8 0.0
2019         Q1  p 2,077.7 1,325.1 607.7 164.3 0.7 61.0 38.9 17.8 4.8 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 1,259.0 651.0 465.0 143.0 1,263.0 666.4 217.8 133.0 60.1 55.5 130.2 − 4.0 1,120.32014 1,308.5 673.6 482.0 153.0 1,291.8 691.1 224.4 137.7 60.1 47.0 131.6 + 16.7 1,160.2
2015 p 1,356.5 704.2 500.8 151.5 1,332.6 721.7 229.8 143.8 64.1 42.3 130.9 + 23.9 1,212.0
2016 p 1,415.5 738.7 523.9 152.9 1,386.8 755.2 237.8 150.1 68.2 37.4 138.0 + 28.7 1,269.5
2017 p 1,473.8 772.5 548.6 152.8 1,439.8 784.5 246.7 156.3 72.4 33.8 146.1 + 34.0 1,327.9
2018 pe 1,544.9 807.9 571.6 165.4 1,487.6 806.2 256.0 163.0 78.6 31.3 152.4 + 57.3 1,386.5
As a percentage of GDP
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.3
2013 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.1 39.62014 44.5 22.9 16.4 5.2 44.0 23.5 7.6 4.7 2.0 1.6 4.5 + 0.6 39.5
2015 p 44.5 23.1 16.4 5.0 43.7 23.7 7.5 4.7 2.1 1.4 4.3 + 0.8 39.8
2016 p 44.8 23.4 16.6 4.8 43.9 23.9 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.2 4.4 + 0.9 40.2
2017 p 45.0 23.6 16.7 4.7 43.9 23.9 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.0 4.5 + 1.0 40.5
2018 pe 45.6 23.9 16.9 4.9 43.9 23.8 7.6 4.8 2.3 0.9 4.5 + 1.7 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.6
2013 + 3.1 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 3.2 + 2.6 + 5.1 − 2.2 − 12.0 + 15.4 . + 3.42014 + 3.9 + 3.5 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.3 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 15.4 + 1.1 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.7 + 4.5 + 3.9 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 6.6 − 9.9 − 0.6 . + 4.5
2016 p + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 0.9 + 4.1 + 4.6 + 3.5 + 4.4 + 6.5 − 11.7 + 5.5 . + 4.7
2017 p + 4.1 + 4.6 + 4.7 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 3.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 6.2 − 9.5 + 5.9 . + 4.6
2018 pe + 4.8 + 4.6 + 4.2 + 8.3 + 3.3 + 2.8 + 3.7 + 4.3 + 8.5 − 7.4 + 4.3 . + 4.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 + 17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 949.3 776.3 6.2 905.5 272.3 337.8 39.2 55.8 16.0 + 43.8 656.3 642.2 + 14.1 1,488.5 1,430.6 + 57.9
2016         Q1  p 206.1 169.9 1.4 205.5 60.0 81.2 17.7 8.4 2.2 + 0.6 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 322.2 325.3 − 3.0
         Q2  p 216.7 176.6 2.4 194.1 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 338.5 314.2 + 24.3
         Q3  p 207.1 169.3 2.9 210.9 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 328.2 333.4 − 5.2
         Q4  p 232.6 189.2 2.1 233.2 68.1 82.6 7.7 17.2 4.8 − 0.6 160.1 152.2 + 7.8 365.3 358.1 + 7.2
2017         Q1  p 216.0 180.4 0.9 199.6 62.9 80.3 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 16.4 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 338.0 326.4 + 11.6
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.6 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.7 + 13.4
         Q3  p 219.6 180.4 3.5 215.9 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 3.8 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 346.1 343.2 + 2.8
         Q4  p 243.8 196.3 2.1 244.4 69.8 84.7 6.9 19.2 4.1 − 0.6 168.2 158.0 + 10.2 383.4 373.8 + 9.6
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
         Q4  p 255.2 203.9 2.2 262.1 73.1 89.7 6.2 20.3 9.6 − 6.9 174.6 163.4 + 11.2 400.7 396.4 + 4.3
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 230.4 71.0 88.5 11.5 10.1 3.3 + 10.5 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 366.8 + 7.5
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 421.2 400.5 + 20.7 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2016         Q1  p 81.1 82.2 − 1.1 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
         Q2  p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
         Q3  p 85.2 88.6 − 3.5 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
         Q4  p 90.9 93.9 − 3.0 104.3 104.4 − 0.0 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
2017         Q1  p 88.2 82.9 + 5.3 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.0 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
         Q3  p 88.6 93.6 − 5.0 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
         Q4  p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.7 109.2 − 4.5 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 113.4 118.5 − 5.1 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 99.4 + 6.2 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,7752014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,3682018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2017         Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
         Q2 177,090 149,915 76,391 66,605 6,918 27,631 − 456 6,825         Q3 180,407 155,250 82,576 66,718 5,957 25,517 − 361 7,467         Q4 195,537 170,139 92,507 71,019 6,613 34,060 − 8,662 6,471
2018         Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
         Q2 194,715 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 29,064 − 540 6,592         Q3 189,015 161,683 84,952 69,414 7,317 27,579 − 248 7,579         Q4 203,128 177,157 92,363 76,459 8,335 35,492 − 9,521 6,206
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 ... 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 ... ... 6,179
2018         June . 70,195 37,802 30,695 1,698 . . 2,197
2019         June . 74,879 39,147 33,117 2,615 . . 2,060
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,0402014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,1412018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2017         Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
         Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121         Q3 165,923 75,218 47,253 12,720 6,034 9,211 56,481 42,571 13,911 2,214 25,114 5,580 1,315 10,673         Q4 182,288 82,077 54,707 14,873 6,843 5,654 58,128 43,846 14,282 3,868 31,587 5,384 1,243 12,149
2018         Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
         Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912         Q3 173,202 78,105 50,368 12,683 7,192 7,862 59,169 43,951 15,218 2,315 26,424 5,797 1,391 11,519         Q4 190,161 86,001 58,409 15,204 7,513 4,876 60,581 44,994 15,587 4,257 31,936 6,109 1,276 13,004
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770
2018         June 75,555 44,503 18,212 13,143 8,035 5,112 18,901 13,986 4,915 3 9,758 2,007 382 5,360
2019         June 80,665 48,733 19,498 14,250 8,166 6,819 19,906 14,946 4,960 1 9,678 1,848 499 5,786
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2018: 49.6:47.2:3.2. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2018: 22.7:77.3. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,017
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2017         Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
         Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 − 5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 18,113 13,881 3,832         Q3 10,497 4,144 3,867 2,669 2,132 1,628 502 −324 3,394 1,497 417 273 16,698 12,443 3,824         Q4 15,622 4,677 4,261 2,070 1,906 1,786 538 727 3,257 1,438 456 233 17,118 13,670 3,082
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
         Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 18,827 14,548 3,853         Q3 10,423 4,353 3,886 2,752 2,128 1,677 531 674 3,592 1,463 464 278 18,128 13,764 3,919         Q4 15,436 4,860 4,543 2,197 1,956 1,650 545 749 3,645 1,752 481 231 17,224 13,713 3,140
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 ... 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 . ... ...
2018         June 3,608 2,575 1,054 674 820 674 142 210 1,097 652 160 98 . . .
2019         June 3,589 2,723 904 712 766 588 178 217 1,100 513 148 87 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,097 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,315
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,008
2016         Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213         Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115         Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −
2016         Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −         Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −         Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,8672014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,0412018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,654
2016         Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615         Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517         Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298         Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415         Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 
p 37,949 37,886 41,265 4,778 12,951 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,315
2016         Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259         Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147         Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400         Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999         Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,202 3,251 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,229 3,251 2,835 561 384 − 510
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 1,198 3,232 2,833 547 437 + 396
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which: of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,225,204 12,126 652,393 199,132 60,157 1,301,397
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,210,739 12,438 660,140 190,555 43,994 1,303,6122014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,212,280 12,774 630,752 190,130 44,949 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,181,972 85,952 617,681 186,661 45,028 1,246,650
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,165,891 205,391 594,765 179,755 41,737 1,144,2432017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017  
p 2,115,397 319,159 547,973 175,617 38,678 1,033,970
2018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018  p 2,063,172 364,731 493,533 181,077 39,043 984,788
2016         Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1 2,190,308 108,746 632,259 183,160 41,396 1,224,747
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2 2,193,776 142,139 620,966 181,372 39,602 1,209,696         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864          Q3 2,187,329 172,567 607,540 179,359 38,912 1,188,950         Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333          Q4 2,165,891 205,391 594,765 179,755 41,737 1,144,243
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1  
p 2,140,165 239,495 581,651 178,219 39,561 1,101,239
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2  p 2,133,921 265,130 567,962 176,810 39,008 1,085,011
         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941          Q3  p 2,127,477 290,214 555,881 176,646 39,276 1,065,460
         Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95          Q4  p 2,115,397 319,159 547,973 175,617 38,678 1,033,970
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1  p 2,092,470 329,387 525,588 176,495 37,574 1,023,426
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2  p 2,076,933 344,279 509,060 179,856 36,929 1,006,809
         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3  p 2,077,122 356,899 497,343 180,464 37,203 1,005,212
         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4  p 2,063,172 364,731 493,533 181,077 39,043 984,788
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1  p 2,077,658 359,884 495,439 179,512 37,627 1,005,195
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2012 2,225,204 9,742 106,945 1,441,406 124,389 542,722 . .
2013 2,210,739 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 100,646 542,966 . .2014 2,212,280 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,945 530,073 . .2015 2,181,972 14,303 65,676 1,499,098 85,232 517,662 . .
2016         Q1 2,190,308 11,976 69,372 1,491,129 104,397 513,434 . .
         Q2 2,193,776 12,181 76,710 1,485,041 111,107 508,737 . .         Q3 2,187,329 15,370 77,249 1,491,971 98,090 504,648 . .         Q4 2,165,891 15,845 69,715 1,484,378 91,406 504,547 . .
2017         Q1  
p 2,140,165 12,891 60,798 1,479,234 89,209 498,033 . .
         Q2  p 2,133,921 15,196 54,362 1,486,948 83,649 493,767 . .
         Q3  p 2,127,477 16,161 48,197 1,489,630 82,844 490,645 . .
         Q4  p 2,115,397 14,651 48,789 1,484,691 82,876 484,390 . .
2018         Q1  p 2,092,470 12,472 48,449 1,479,750 70,445 481,354 . .
         Q2  p 2,076,933 12,636 54,968 1,466,057 66,345 476,927 . .
         Q3  p 2,077,122 15,607 60,047 1,466,370 63,884 471,215 . .
         Q4  p 2,063,172 14,833 52,674 1,456,412 71,008 468,245 . .
2019         Q1  p 2,077,658 15,635 64,295 1,461,244 68,610 467,874 . .
Central government
2012 1,387,857 9,742 88,372 1,088,796 88,311 112,636 1,465 11,354
2013 1,390,440 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,970 122,852 2,696 10,3032014 1,396,496 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,756 1,202 12,8332015 1,372,604 14,303 49,512 1,139,039 45,256 124,494 2,932 13,577
2016         Q1 1,382,473 11,976 49,030 1,138,051 58,381 125,035 2,853 10,025
         Q2 1,391,131 12,181 59,399 1,129,874 65,168 124,508 2,803 11,367         Q3 1,381,054 15,370 61,408 1,134,326 46,832 123,117 2,634 9,042         Q4 1,366,840 15,845 55,208 1,124,445 50,004 121,338 2,238 8,478
2017         Q1  
p 1,350,988 12,891 45,510 1,124,430 48,082 120,075 2,465 7,469
         Q2  p 1,353,600 15,196 40,225 1,132,686 44,682 120,811 2,547 8,136
         Q3  p 1,352,975 16,161 34,216 1,136,873 45,235 120,490 2,674 10,160
         Q4  p 1,351,290 14,651 36,297 1,132,542 47,758 120,041 2,935 10,603
2018         Q1  p 1,338,606 12,472 35,921 1,133,358 37,206 119,650 2,953 9,862
         Q2  p 1,329,320 12,636 42,883 1,120,469 34,038 119,293 2,662 10,643
         Q3  p 1,335,479 15,607 46,608 1,119,011 35,617 118,637 2,492 10,185
         Q4  p 1,322,995 14,833 42,237 1,107,646 41,057 117,222 2,468 9,917
2019         Q1  p 1,325,052 15,635 50,024 1,103,040 38,989 117,365 2,460 11,427
State government
2012 684,123 − 18,802 355,756 12,314 297,252 13,197 2,968
2013 663,514 − 6,847 360,706 11,862 284,099 12,141 2,6552014 657,812 − 8,391 361,916 19,182 268,323 14,825 2,2972015 654,484 − 16,169 362,376 18,707 257,232 15,867 4,218
2016         Q1 647,567 − 20,347 355,304 21,563 250,352 12,358 4,230
         Q2 644,144 − 17,318 357,069 23,456 246,301 13,860 4,061         Q3 644,655 − 15,848 359,618 26,149 243,040 11,685 3,871         Q4 637,534 − 14,515 361,996 16,116 244,907 11,408 3,376
2017         Q1  
p 628,149 − 15,308 356,832 15,938 240,071 10,407 3,527
         Q2  p 620,539 − 14,167 356,647 14,792 234,933 11,180 3,578
         Q3  p 618,534 − 14,021 355,342 16,358 232,813 13,313 3,581
         Q4  p 610,473 − 12,543 354,941 15,154 227,835 14,325 3,609
2018         Q1  p 599,752 − 12,583 349,945 13,307 223,916 13,305 3,740
         Q2  p 595,914 − 12,144 349,086 13,648 221,036 14,387 3,754
         Q3  p 594,816 − 13,499 350,782 11,107 219,427 13,967 3,666
         Q4  p 595,496 − 10,499 352,351 15,127 217,520 14,344 3,272
2019         Q1  p 607,708 − 14,335 362,029 15,809 215,535 15,498 3,679
Local government
2012 169,839 − − 423 24,791 144,625 3,124 802
2013 172,858 − − 646 25,435 146,777 2,523 5302014 174,527 − − 1,297 26,121 147,109 1,959 7342015 174,415 − − 2,047 26,998 145,370 2,143 463
2016         Q1 176,617 − − 2,076 26,908 147,633 2,348 476
         Q2 176,233 − − 2,453 26,469 147,312 2,216 503         Q3 177,037 − − 2,455 26,788 147,794 2,123 527         Q4 175,839 − − 2,404 26,521 146,914 1,819 566
2017         Q1  
p 174,709 − − 2,645 25,561 146,503 1,959 610
         Q2  p 174,565 − − 2,672 25,370 146,523 1,950 644
         Q3  p 173,054 − − 2,687 24,581 145,786 1,851 664
         Q4  p 171,702 − − 2,947 24,101 144,654 1,600 714
2018         Q1  p 171,159 − − 2,427 22,887 145,846 1,765 719
         Q2  p 169,777 − − 2,561 22,551 144,665 1,912 724
         Q3  p 164,544 − − 2,703 20,604 141,236 2,049 757
         Q4  p 162,623 − − 2,914 18,823 140,887 1,804 770
2019         Q1  p 164,333 − − 2,961 19,197 142,175 2,185 785
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2012 1,171 − − − 195 976 − 2,661
2013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,8722014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,1222015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,685
2016         Q1 1,211 − − − 458 753 − 2,828
         Q2 1,147 − − − 443 704 − 2,948         Q3 1,025 − − − 334 691 − 3,002         Q4 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2017         Q1  
p 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,226
         Q2  p 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,318
         Q3  p 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,433
         Q4  p 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2018         Q1  p 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,702
         Q2  p 883 − − − 383 500 − 3,840
         Q3  p 790 − − − 400 390 − 3,900
         Q4  p 674 − − − 372 302 − 4,659
2019         Q1  p 707 − − − 437 270 − 4,253
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 984,256 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,997
2008 1,016,364 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 75,1442009 1,082,644 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,592
2010 1,334,021 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 239,112
2011 1,344,082 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 212,3222012 1,387,857 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,9472013 1,390,440 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,8222014 1,396,496 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 178,144
2015 1,372,604 14,303 1,070 1,188,551 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,750
2016 1,366,840 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,3422017 
p 1,351,290 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,800
2018 p 1,322,995 14,833 921 1,149,883 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,279
2016         Q1 1,382,473 11,976 1,051 1,187,081 666,565 225,678 61,893 14,603 4,395 98,232 20,526 1,205 183,416
         Q2 1,391,131 12,181 1,033 1,189,273 675,794 220,840 49,675 14,550 3,099 99,417 28,369 1,108 189,676         Q3 1,381,054 15,370 1,021 1,195,734 664,034 231,375 50,869 14,570 3,097 102,053 30,626 922 169,949         Q4 1,366,840 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,342
2017         Q1  
p 1,350,988 12,891 995 1,169,939 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 168,158
         Q2  p 1,353,600 15,196 986 1,172,911 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,493
         Q3  p 1,352,975 16,161 977 1,171,089 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,726
         Q4  p 1,351,290 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,800
2018         Q1  p 1,338,606 12,472 951 1,169,279 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,855
         Q2  p 1,329,320 12,636 941 1,163,353 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,330
         Q3  p 1,335,479 15,607 932 1,165,619 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,254
         Q4  p 1,322,995 14,833 921 1,149,883 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,279
2019         Q1  p 1,325,052 15,635 902 1,153,064 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,354
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2019
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
    
  
  2017   2018   2019
  2016   2017   2018   2016   2017   2018   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2010 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector(excluding construction) 118.0 120.8 121.7 4.8 2.4 0.7 2.6 3.5 1.6 3.2 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 2.4Construction 105.5 108.0 111.3 1.8 2.4 3.0 1.8 2.3 1.1 3.1 2.9 4.4 4.6Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 110.6 114.3 116.8 1.3 3.4 2.2 3.5 2.8 2.1 2.9 1.7 2.0 1.7Information and communication 132.9 137.6 142.4 3.4 3.6 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.8 3.2 3.6 3.1Financial and insuranceactivities 104.5 105.0 105.7 0.4 0.4 0.7 0.4 0.5 0.2 0.7 0.5 1.5 1.1Real estate activities 104.5 105.6 106.7 0.0 1.1 1.0 1.3 1.4 1.1 1.0 0.9 1.0 0.7Business services  
1 109.5 112.3 114.2 1.0 2.6 1.7 2.9 2.3 1.6 2.8 1.5 1.0 1.0
Public services, education andhealth 108.2 109.7 111.3 2.6 1.4 1.4 1.4 0.8 1.5 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5Other services 98.9 100.1 100.5 − 1.1 1.2 0.4 1.4 0.4 0.1 0.9 0.1 0.5 0.8
Gross value added 111.1 113.5 115.1 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.3 2.3 1.5 2.3 1.0 0.9 0.5Gross domestic product  
2 111.3 113.7 115.3 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 0.9 0.6
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 108.4 110.3 111.5 2.1 1.8 1.1 2.1 1.1 1.9 1.2 0.4 1.0 1.1
Government consumption 112.3 114.1 115.3 4.0 1.6 1.0 1.5 1.7 0.7 1.2 0.6 1.5 1.4Machinery and equipment 113.8 118.0 123.0 2.2 3.7 4.2 4.1 4.7 4.8 5.4 3.4 3.5 2.3Premises 112.3 115.6 118.4 3.8 2.9 2.4 3.0 1.8 0.5 2.7 2.5 3.9 5.3Other investment  
4 124.7 126.3 126.8 5.2 1.3 0.4 0.4 1.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5 − 0.1
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.2 0.1 0.5 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.3 1.2 0.6 0.0
Domestic demand 109.5 111.7 113.9 3.0 2.0 1.9 2.2 1.5 1.5 1.9 2.2 2.2 1.6
Net exports  6 . . . − 0.5 0.3 − 0.4 0.1 0.8 0.0 0.6 − 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.9
Exports 127.8 133.7 136.4 2.3 4.6 2.0 4.9 4.7 2.2 4.3 1.2 0.4 1.5Imports 125.5 131.6 136.0 4.1 4.8 3.3 5.5 3.7 2.6 3.6 3.8 3.2 4.1
Gross domestic product  
2 111.3 113.7 115.3 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 0.9 0.6
At current prices ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,675.6 1,732.2 1,775.9 2.7 3.4 2.5 3.6 2.7 3.1 2.5 1.9 2.6 2.4
Government consumption 615.5 638.9 661.2 4.8 3.8 3.5 3.9 4.4 3.2 3.7 3.1 3.9 4.1Machinery and equipment 206.5 215.2 225.7 2.6 4.2 4.9 4.5 5.7 5.1 6.0 4.1 4.3 3.2Premises 307.1 326.6 350.6 5.6 6.4 7.3 6.5 5.8 4.8 7.3 7.8 9.3 10.7Other investment  
4 120.4 123.9 127.1 6.0 2.9 2.6 2.1 3.1 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.7 2.7
Changes in inventories  5 − 12.8 − 7.2 16.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,912.3 3,029.5 3,156.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.3 3.6 3.3 4.1 4.8 4.6 3.6
Net exports 247.5 247.8 229.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,450.2 1,541.9 1,590.2 1.5 6.3 3.1 6.5 6.0 2.7 4.9 2.9 2.1 3.0Imports 1,202.8 1,294.1 1,361.0 1.5 7.6 5.2 7.2 5.5 2.9 4.7 7.1 5.9 5.2
Gross domestic product  
2 3,159.8 3,277.3 3,386.0 3.6 3.7 3.3 4.2 4.0 3.2 4.2 3.0 2.9 2.7
IV. Prices (2010 = 100)
Private consumption 106.9 108.6 110.2 0.7 1.6 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.2Gross domestic product 110.1 111.8 113.8 1.4 1.5 1.9 2.0 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.9 2.1Terms of trade 103.9 102.8 102.2 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.5 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.9 0.4
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,601.0 1,668.8 1,746.1 3.8 4.2 4.6 4.3 4.1 4.5 4.5 5.0 4.4 4.7Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 762.7 787.6 785.9 3.5 3.3 − 0.2 5.4 3.3 0.1 3.5 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 2.6
National income 2,363.7 2,456.4 2,532.0 3.7 3.9 3.1 4.7 3.9 3.0 4.2 2.6 2.6 2.2
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,222.4 3,346.3 3,458.5 3.5 3.8 3.4 4.3 3.8 3.1 4.3 3.1 3.0 2.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2019. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
August 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
2. Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015 = 100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.59 29.45 36.98 2.27 10.89 10.31 9.95 12.73 14.16
Period
2015 99.7 99.6 100.0 99.7 99.8 99.7 99.6 99.8 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.6
2016 101.5 105.2 98.5 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.6 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.12017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.7 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.22018
2 105.8 2 109.0 97.4 105.9 105.5 106.0 106.1 106.9 107.3 108.9 106.5 103.5
 
2018         Q2 106.7 110.2 91.0 107.4 107.7 107.5 105.4 106.8 109.7 107.2 104.8 110.6
         Q3 106.3 116.1 93.3 105.6 106.7 103.1 104.1 111.4 108.0 110.3 105.1 96.5         Q4 107.7 122.1 99.9 105.8 101.8 109.3 106.3 105.0 104.8 110.3 115.7 97.7
2019         Q1
r 100.9 92.9 102.4 102.2 104.3 100.8 108.4 100.1 106.5 104.4 100.3 98.0
         Q2 x,p 102.3 112.0 84.3 102.0 103.3 101.4 103.5 100.2 105.5 103.3 101.5 95.3
 
2018         June 109.8 113.5 89.2 110.8 109.5 112.4 110.2 109.0 111.9 112.4 112.5 111.8
         July 3 107.2 118.4 93.5 106.4 108.5 104.2 98.4 109.9 109.3 108.9 104.7 100.6
         Aug. 3 100.4 110.8 94.8 99.0 102.8 93.0 95.0 110.0 102.9 105.5 98.1 80.4
         Sep. 111.2 119.0 91.6 111.4 108.8 112.1 118.8 114.3 111.7 116.5 112.6 108.5
         Oct. 110.0 120.3 97.5 109.2 109.2 108.5 112.2 110.9 112.2 112.4 108.7 104.3
         Nov. 111.3 122.0 99.0 110.5 107.3 113.5 112.0 108.4 112.0 114.7 113.4 107.8         Dec. 101.8 124.0 103.1 97.8 88.9 105.8 94.8 95.6 90.2 103.7 124.9 80.9
2019         Jan.
r 92.8 75.1 109.5 94.6 100.1 88.6 100.8 98.5 100.7 97.6 88.3 84.9
         Feb. r 98.3 92.6 96.6 99.4 100.7 99.4 105.3 94.6 103.1 99.7 97.1 99.5
         Mar. r 111.7 111.0 101.1 112.7 112.2 114.3 119.1 107.1 115.8 115.8 115.4 109.7
         Apr. x 101.5 111.6 88.1 100.7 103.5 98.8 102.0 99.5 105.8 101.4 99.4 92.6
         May x 101.3 109.8 84.2 101.2 102.8 100.0 101.6 100.5 104.1 101.8 98.9 96.2
         June x,p 104.1 114.6 80.7 104.1 103.5 105.5 107.0 100.6 106.7 106.6 106.2 97.1
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2015 + 0.9 − 2.3 + 5.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.8 + 5.6 − 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.52017 + 3.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.02018
2 + 0.9 2 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 − 1.6
 
2018         Q2 + 2.2 − 0.8 − 3.0 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 6.4 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 4.4
         Q3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 2.0 + 5.9 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.0 − 8.3         Q4 − 2.0 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 1.8 − 3.0 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 6.7
2019         Q1
r − 1.6 + 6.2 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 1.4 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 4.1 − 0.3 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 10.2
         Q2 x,p − 4.2 + 1.6 − 7.3 − 5.0 − 4.1 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 6.2 − 3.8 − 3.6 − 3.1 − 13.9
 
2018         June + 2.5 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 3.5 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 2.0 + 6.9 + 2.6 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 5.1
         July 3 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.1 + 5.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 2.8 − 3.1
         Aug. 3 − 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.3 + 7.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 3.4 − 16.0
         Sep. − 0.3 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 5.4 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 6.5
         Oct. + 0.5 − 0.3 − 5.4 + 1.1 − 0.5 + 2.1 − 1.5 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 5.5 − 3.4
         Nov. − 4.1 − 1.1 − 5.1 − 4.4 − 3.9 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 2.2 − 11.9         Dec. − 2.4 + 1.1 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 4.2 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 2.9 − 3.3
2019         Jan.
r − 2.8 − 0.5 + 2.8 − 3.7 − 2.1 − 5.3 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.9 + 0.6 − 14.2
         Feb. r − 0.4 + 11.4 − 5.3 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.2 + 0.1 − 5.1
         Mar. r − 1.5 + 6.8 − 6.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.7 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 11.2
         Apr. x − 2.8 + 5.0 − 5.4 − 4.1 − 2.1 − 6.3 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 17.4
         May x − 4.4 − 1.0 − 7.2 − 4.9 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 1.1 − 7.7 − 4.5 − 3.5 − 2.7 − 10.9
         June x,p − 5.2 + 1.0 − 9.5 − 6.0 − 5.5 − 6.1 − 2.9 − 7.7 − 4.6 − 5.2 − 5.6 − 13.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, Office. 3Influenced by a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; estimated and ad-
see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to justed in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Pro-
II.12. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of duction Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry,
the production sector in the base year 2015. 2As of January 2018 weights in respectively. 
structural and civil engineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
August 2019
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
3. Orders received by industry *
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
Total
2014 97.8 + 2.7 100.6 + 0.6 96.2 + 3.9 96.8 + 4.6 95.8 + 0.6 97.1 + 5.9
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.8
2016 100.7 + 0.9 98.9 − 0.9 101.8 + 2.0 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.1 − 0.72017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.6 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.12018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2018         June 112.3 + 1.4 114.6 + 3.3 110.4 − 0.9 115.2 + 10.8 122.6 + 4.3 112.8 + 13.4
         July 107.9 + 2.0 113.6 + 4.4 102.7 − 1.1 120.7 + 12.1 120.0 + 10.3 120.9 + 12.7
         Aug. 98.9 − 0.1 103.2 − 1.6 94.7 + 0.6 109.9 + 1.9 116.7 + 1.2 107.6 + 1.9         Sep. 109.7 − 0.5 109.2 + 0.3 109.6 − 2.0 113.1 + 5.7 125.4 − 0.6 109.1 + 8.3
         Oct. 111.6 − 1.1 113.9 + 0.4 110.7 − 1.9 108.9 − 0.6 127.4 − 0.4 102.8 − 0.8
         Nov. 112.4 − 2.1 111.3 − 5.8 114.0 + 0.8 105.7 − 5.2 121.6 − 6.2 100.4 − 4.7         Dec. 111.6 − 3.1 96.8 − 6.4 122.8 − 1.9 95.8 + 1.5 109.6 + 0.9 91.3 + 1.8
2019         Jan. 108.0 − 2.4 110.0 − 5.0 106.8 − 0.6 108.3 − 3.0 118.6 + 3.7 104.9 − 5.2
         Feb. 102.8 − 7.0 104.5 − 5.0 101.4 − 8.5 106.5 − 4.7 114.9 + 3.5 103.8 − 7.3         Mar. 115.9 − 4.7 113.9 − 6.0 117.3 − 4.2 115.5 − 0.4 131.2 + 6.8 110.4 − 2.9
         Apr. 104.3 − 4.1 104.9 − 8.5 103.6 − 1.9 105.9 + 1.0 115.6 + 1.7 102.8 + 1.0
         May 101.2 − 7.7 102.1 − 9.7 100.3 − 7.0 104.2 − 2.3 113.7 − 6.0 101.0 − 0.9         June
p 108.7 − 3.2 105.4 − 8.0 110.9 + 0.5 108.0 − 6.3 122.2 − 0.3 103.4 − 8.3
From the domestic market
2014 98.1 + 1.1 101.7 − 1.1 95.2 + 3.1 97.1 + 2.0 100.4 + 0.0 96.0 + 2.8
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.9 + 2.2 98.1 − 1.7 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.8 101.6 + 3.6 108.6 + 5.3 99.3 + 3.12018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 − 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.6 98.9 − 0.4
2018         June 107.7 − 0.9 110.9 + 5.1 105.8 − 6.2 101.6 + 1.7 115.5 + 7.7 96.9 − 0.5
         July 109.6 + 2.2 112.9 + 4.3 107.2 + 0.4 106.3 + 1.4 108.9 + 6.6 105.4 − 0.3
         Aug. 97.6 − 3.6 101.5 − 5.1 93.5 − 2.0 103.1 − 3.0 114.8 + 3.5 99.2 − 5.3         Sep. 107.8 + 0.3 107.5 + 1.5 109.2 − 0.2 100.7 − 3.6 119.1 − 1.6 94.5 − 4.4
         Oct. 106.8 − 3.7 110.4 − 1.7 103.7 − 5.8 107.4 − 1.1 120.5 − 6.2 102.9 + 1.1
         Nov. 112.2 − 0.4 111.0 − 2.7 113.8 + 1.9 108.2 − 3.0 121.3 − 1.5 103.8 − 3.6         Dec. 101.4 + 0.1 91.6 − 6.9 111.3 + 4.9 90.9 + 5.5 99.0 + 11.2 88.1 + 3.4
2019         Jan. 107.2 − 0.6 106.3 − 6.2 108.9 + 4.7 101.1 − 1.2 109.3 + 1.8 98.3 − 2.3
         Feb. 104.3 − 0.6 102.6 − 4.3 105.4 + 2.1 106.9 + 3.0 112.6 + 4.2 105.0 + 2.5         Mar. 112.3 − 6.2 109.4 − 8.5 115.2 − 5.3 109.7 + 1.5 134.6 + 10.9 101.3 − 2.2
         Apr. 100.1 − 4.0 100.3 − 7.0 100.3 − 2.1 97.4 + 0.7 111.9 − 1.2 92.5 + 1.5
         May 99.3 − 6.3 99.6 − 8.6 99.4 − 3.9 96.8 − 8.6 105.9 − 16.8 93.7 − 5.1         June
p 101.1 − 6.1 100.1 − 9.7 102.5 − 3.1 97.9 − 3.6 105.9 − 8.3 95.2 − 1.8
From abroad
2014 97.5 + 3.8 99.5 + 2.5 96.7 + 4.2 96.5 + 6.6 92.0 + 1.1 97.9 + 8.3
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.4 + 0.6 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.0 + 7.2 101.1 + 1.32017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.5 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.8 104.4 + 3.32018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 111.9 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 − 0.5 113.3 + 8.5
2018         June 115.8 + 3.2 118.6 + 1.5 113.2 + 2.4 125.8 + 17.4 128.3 + 1.9 125.0 + 23.6
         July 106.6 + 1.7 114.3 + 4.4 100.0 − 2.0 131.8 + 19.9 128.9 + 12.9 132.8 + 22.3
         Aug. 99.8 + 2.6 105.1 + 2.4 95.5 + 2.4 115.1 + 5.4 118.3 − 0.4 114.1 + 7.4         Sep. 111.2 − 1.2 111.0 − 1.0 109.9 − 2.9 122.8 + 12.7 130.5 + 0.2 120.3 + 17.8
         Oct. 115.3 + 1.0 117.6 + 2.3 114.9 + 0.4 110.1 − 0.2 133.0 + 4.4 102.7 − 2.1
         Nov. 112.6 − 3.3 111.7 − 9.0 114.1 + 0.2 103.7 − 6.9 121.9 − 9.8 97.8 − 5.7         Dec. 119.4 − 5.0 102.5 − 5.8 129.8 − 5.0 99.6 − 1.2 118.1 − 5.0 93.7 + 0.5
2019         Jan. 108.6 − 3.7 113.9 − 3.9 105.5 − 3.6 113.9 − 4.2 126.1 + 5.0 110.0 − 7.2
         Feb. 101.7 − 11.4 106.5 − 5.8 99.0 − 14.1 106.2 − 9.9 116.7 + 2.9 102.9 − 13.8         Mar. 118.7 − 3.5 118.7 − 3.6 118.5 − 3.7 120.0 − 1.8 128.4 + 3.5 117.3 − 3.5
         Apr. 107.4 − 4.3 109.8 − 10.1 105.6 − 1.9 112.5 + 1.4 118.6 + 3.9 110.6 + 0.5
         May 102.7 − 8.6 104.8 − 10.9 100.9 − 8.8 109.9 + 2.6 120.0 + 3.5 106.6 + 2.2         June
p 114.5 − 1.1 111.1 − 6.3 116.0 + 2.5 115.9 − 7.9 135.3 + 5.5 109.6 − 12.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex-   
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics,  
Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
August 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2015 99.9 + 4.7 99.9 + 4.9 99.9 + 12.9 99.9 − 2.1 99.8 + 8.7 99.9 + 4.5 99.9 + 0.7 99.8 + 4.9
2016 114.4 + 14.5 115.0 + 15.1 116.9 + 17.0 114.9 + 15.0 108.8 + 9.0 113.7 + 13.8 111.7 + 11.8 116.0 + 16.22017 122.4 + 7.0 123.1 + 7.0 123.0 + 5.2 123.4 + 7.4 121.8 + 11.9 121.6 + 6.9 119.8 + 7.3 125.0 + 7.82018 134.7 + 10.0 131.2 + 6.6 136.6 + 11.1 127.9 + 3.6 125.2 + 2.8 138.8 + 14.1 135.7 + 13.3 132.5 + 6.0
 
2018         May 142.8 + 14.8 136.9 + 13.7 130.7 + 7.9 143.0 + 25.8 134.9 − 5.8 149.6 + 16.0 142.7 + 27.2 150.2 + 7.0
         June 147.1 + 5.6 141.7 + 0.7 142.5 − 1.0 136.1 + 3.0 159.7 − 1.0 153.4 + 11.3 136.8 + 7.5 161.6 + 7.4
         July 142.2 + 7.3 142.1 + 12.4 142.3 + 14.9 143.8 + 11.0 134.9 + 10.0 142.4 + 2.0 144.4 + 13.7 139.7 − 3.0
         Aug. 128.7 + 10.5 119.8 + 5.5 125.7 + 13.2 116.5 + 2.6 112.3 − 8.5 139.0 + 16.0 127.3 + 13.0 132.0 + 6.4         Sep. 139.7 + 14.2 143.6 + 16.9 155.9 + 28.7 130.4 + 9.0 152.2 + 8.5 135.3 + 11.1 134.8 + 13.9 135.6 + 6.2
         Oct. 132.1 + 15.8 128.6 + 11.6 141.3 + 14.3 122.2 + 14.8 110.8 − 7.7 136.1 + 20.5 134.4 + 24.0 123.8 + 7.7
         Nov. 128.6 + 13.9 125.6 + 6.6 139.5 + 23.0 117.1 − 6.8 111.8 + 9.2 131.9 + 23.0 136.7 + 10.0 112.5 + 13.2         Dec. 150.5 + 12.4 145.7 − 2.1 166.6 + 12.1 135.1 − 14.2 116.5 − 1.1 156.1 + 34.0 164.1 + 15.3 125.2 + 8.5
2019         Jan. 117.3 + 18.2 120.8 + 19.8 123.8 + 21.3 123.7 + 19.6 99.7 + 15.0 113.3 + 16.3 126.5 + 19.6 102.8 + 14.3
         Feb. 132.9 + 7.1 129.4 + 9.7 119.0 + 5.5 134.4 + 7.8 145.1 + 31.7 137.0 + 4.4 132.4 − 2.9 141.9 + 21.3         Mar. 171.7 + 17.9 163.9 + 16.8 170.3 + 22.9 158.4 + 15.6 163.1 + 3.2 180.9 + 19.2 166.5 + 21.1 178.7 + 12.2
         Apr. 153.1 + 12.7 149.0 + 14.0 149.8 + 6.2 151.6 + 20.5 136.8 + 19.6 157.9 + 11.4 145.5 + 14.6 163.9 + 14.8
         May 147.7 + 3.4 144.6 + 5.6 146.8 + 12.3 148.8 + 4.1 121.6 − 9.9 151.4 + 1.2 148.0 + 3.7 148.0 − 1.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; exclu- adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 1Excluding
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement − Seasonally housing construction orders. 2 Including road construction. 
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of which:In stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2015 3 100.1 + 3.7 3 100.1 + 3.8 100.1 + 2.9 100.2 + 0.3 100.2 + 1.0 100.2 + 2.7 100.0 + 5.3 3 100.0 + 20.0
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.2 + 2.1 101.7 + 1.6 101.0 + 0.8 99.9 − 0.3 101.5 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.82017 107.6 + 5.0 105.8 + 3.5 105.9 + 4.1 108.2 + 7.1 106.2 + 6.3 103.0 + 1.5 107.7 + 3.7 120.4 + 9.72018
4 110.7 + 2.9 107.5 + 1.6 109.8 + 3.7 105.5 − 2.5 106.8 + 0.6 103.0 + 0.0 112.5 + 4.5 127.6 + 6.0
 
2018         June 109.5 + 3.5 106.3 + 1.8 112.0 + 6.3 106.5 − 3.5 99.7 + 5.1 101.6 − 0.9 109.7 + 3.5 114.3 + 2.1
         July 110.4 + 2.7 108.1 + 1.6 110.7 + 2.8 105.4 − 2.0 96.5 − 4.5 102.8 − 1.2 115.6 + 6.0 122.4 + 8.9
         Aug. 106.2 + 3.1 103.5 + 1.6 107.5 + 3.5 98.4 − 1.1 96.9 − 0.2 96.3 − 0.8 109.2 + 4.8 115.4 + 4.6         Sep. 107.8 + 2.0 103.9 + 0.3 105.8 + 2.9 108.5 − 8.5 107.5 + 4.9 99.6 + 0.4 109.7 + 3.5 125.7 + 7.5
         Oct. 114.5 + 3.8 110.1 + 2.1 110.9 + 4.5 116.0 − 2.4 107.2 − 1.8 108.5 − 0.3 114.6 + 5.2 137.1 + 12.7
         Nov. 119.2 + 3.7 114.9 + 2.3 109.7 + 1.3 112.3 − 0.1 130.7 + 6.3 112.0 + 2.0 117.8 + 3.9 164.0 + 8.6         Dec. 129.2 − 0.1 125.5 − 0.8 127.1 + 1.1 121.6 − 4.9 157.2 − 2.8 109.3 − 2.5 124.9 + 1.3 156.3 + 1.2
2019         Jan. 103.9 + 3.4 101.4 + 2.8 102.2 + 2.6 87.6 − 2.2 110.1
+ 0.0 91.7 + 1.8 112.6 + 4.3 131.2 + 9.4
         Feb. 101.6 + 5.3 98.6 + 4.3 101.4 + 2.8 82.6 + 5.4 93.2 + 0.9 93.4 + 5.1 110.2 + 5.1 120.3 + 10.5         Mar. 115.7 + 4.0 112.1 + 3.7 114.3 + 3.3 104.2 + 4.0 103.4 − 0.1 114.6 + 7.1 117.2 + 3.1 133.5 + 5.6
         Apr. 114.7 + 1.5 110.4 + 0.7 113.2 + 0.4 109.5 − 8.4 92.5 + 1.9 114.4 + 0.5 116.2 + 2.7 132.9 + 8.9
         May 113.1 + 2.3 108.6 + 1.5 111.5 − 1.0 103.3 − 5.8 94.0 + 5.0 110.2 + 3.9 115.6 + 6.9 126.9 + 6.4         June 114.7 + 4.7 110.6 + 4.0 115.4 + 3.0 115.2 + 8.2 96.9 − 2.8 106.6 + 4.9 115.8 + 5.6 129.4 + 13.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value added integration of a larger online retail sales-based enterprise that founded a business
tax;  for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement 4 − Seasonally adjusted busi- establishment in Germany in May 2015. 4As of January 2018 figures are provisional,
ness statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. in some cases revised, and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates
1Including stalls and markets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3As of May 2015 for missing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
August 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
6. Labour market * 
  
 
Employment  1, r Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legalcategory
Solely
of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary social Unem- Temporary Security
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies,  4, 6 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4, 5 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2014 42,721 + 0.9 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,122 + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,655 + 1.2 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 6552017 44,248 + 1.4 32,234 + 2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533
7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,854 + 1.4 32,964 + 2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2016         Q2 43,568 + 1.2 31,350 + 2.2 8,988 21,298 820 4,823 59 47 2,674 782 6.1 653
         Q3 43,830 + 1.2 31,593 + 2.1 9,056 21,431 858 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682         Q4 44,091 + 1.3 32,014 + 2.2 9,137 21,770 866 4,781 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017         Q1 43,720 + 1.4 31,790 + 2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734
7 987 6.2 671
         Q2 44,153 + 1.3 32,064 + 2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 5.6 717         Q3 44,436 + 1.4 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763         Q4 44,684 + 1.3 32,759 + 2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 82 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1 44,380 + 1.5 32,563 + 2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 325 24 2,525 909 5.7 760
         Q2 44,776 + 1.4 32,802 + 2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 5.1 794         Q3 45,016 + 1.3 33,040 + 2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828         Q4 45,244 + 1.3 33,452 + 2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019         Q1 44,887 + 1.1
8 33,210 8 + 2.0 8 9,420 8 22,800 8 761 8 4,578 ... 8 35 2,360 892 5.2 780
         Q2 9 45,211 9 + 1.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10 2,227 778 10,11  4.9 795
2016         Mar. 43,245 + 1.3 31,209 + 2.2 8,954 21,217 804 4,782 252 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
         Apr. 43,411 + 1.2 31,314 + 2.2 8,983 21,279 809 4,806 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640         May 43,591 + 1.2 31,410 + 2.3 9,000 21,337 826 4,838 57 45 2,664 774 6.0 655         June 43,703 + 1.2 31,443 + 2.2 9,010 21,339 846 4,865 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665         July 43,697 + 1.1 31,378 + 2.1 9,007 21,273 853 4,863 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674         Aug. 43,768 + 1.2 31,675 + 2.2 9,076 21,486 865 4,802 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685         Sep. 44,024 + 1.2 32,007 + 2.2 9,157 21,729 869 4,768 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687         Oct. 44,102 + 1.2 32,045 + 2.2 9,154 21,773 871 4,767 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691         Nov. 44,154 + 1.2 32,069 + 2.2 9,147 21,807 876 4,794 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681         Dec. 44,016 + 1.3 31,848 + 2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan. 43,640 + 1.4 31,707 + 2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777
7 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb. 43,692 + 1.4 31,774 + 2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675         Mar. 43,829 + 1.4 31,930 + 2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692         Apr. 43,999 + 1.4 32,013 + 2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706         May 44,168 + 1.3 32,131 + 2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 5.6 714         June 44,291 + 1.3 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731         July 44,330 + 1.4 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750         Aug. 44,371 + 1.4 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765         Sep. 44,606 + 1.3 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773         Oct. 44,678 + 1.3 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780         Nov. 44,749 + 1.3 32,830 + 2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772         Dec. 44,625 + 1.4 32,609 + 2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 194 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan. 44,326 + 1.6 32,504 + 2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 287 23 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb. 44,358 + 1.5 32,551 + 2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 359 23 2,546 927 5.7 764         Mar. 44,456 + 1.4 32,660 + 2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778         Apr. 44,632 + 1.4 32,782 + 2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784         May 44,812 + 1.5 32,857 + 2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 5.1 793         June 44,885 + 1.3 32,870 + 2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805         July 44,918 + 1.3 32,844 + 2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823         Aug. 44,968 + 1.3 33,131 + 2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828         Sep. 45,161 + 1.2 33,422 + 2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834         Oct. 45,249 + 1.3 33,488 + 2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824         Nov. 45,312 + 1.3 33,513 + 2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807         Dec. 45,170 + 1.2 33,286 + 2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019         Jan. 44,839 + 1.2 33,156 + 2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
         Feb. 44,870 + 1.2
8 33,192 8 + 2.0 8 9,416 8 22,787 8 759 8 4,557 ... 8 30 2,373 908 5.3 784
         Mar. 44,951 + 1.1 8 33,280 8 + 1.9 8 9,443 8 22,848 8 750 8 4,570 ... 8 34 2,301 850 5.1 797
         Apr. 45,097 + 1.0 8 33,364 8 + 1.8 8 9,456 8 22,910 8 752 8 4,606 ... 8 41 2,229 795 4.9 796
         May 45,240 + 1.0 8 33,414 8 + 1.7 8 9,462 8 22,952 8 748 8 4,621 ... 8 4110 2,236 772 10,11  4.9 792
         June 9 45,295 9 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,216 766 4.9 798
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,275 825 5.0 799
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and Employment Agency. In 2017 and 2018 the estimated values for Germany deviated
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the from the final data by a maximum of 0.2% for employees subject to socia l
official figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly contributions, by a maximum of 0.4% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social
figures: end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month contributions, and by a maximum of 70.0% for cyclically induced short-time
level. 5Relative to the total civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted work. 9Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office. 10Statistical
forms of employment, including jobs located abroad. 7From January 2017 persons break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the legal category of the
receiving additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II). 11From May 2019 calculated on
benefit II at the same time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book the basis of new labour force figures. of the Social Security Code (SGB III). 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
August 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
7. Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which:  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  7 
prices ofindustrial
of which:
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Actual Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy rents struction the prices  of price index
Energy Services for (national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial
Total 2 Food 3 4, 5 2, 4 concept) index market  6 Exports Imports Energy  8 products  6 goods  4 housing materials  9 
Period 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.1 101.2 100.5 101.9 98.4 98.7 99.0 96.7 83.2 98.42017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.12018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7
10 108.9 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.2
 
2017         Sep. 103.0 104.1 102.8 97.5 104.0 103.2 102.7 101.5 110.2 100.5 99.3 96.3 102.8
         Oct. 102.7 104.8 103.1 97.4 103.1 103.3 102.5 101.6 109.6 100.6 99.9 101.6 102.7
         Nov. 102.0 104.8 103.1 98.7 101.3 103.5 102.1 106.5 101.7 109.4 100.8 100.6 110.3 103.8         Dec. 102.7 105.5 102.7 98.5 102.8 103.6 102.6 101.9 108.9 100.8 100.8 113.7 103.6
2018         Jan. 101.7 106.2 101.7 98.9 100.8 103.9 102.0 102.4 105.2 101.1 101.4 115.9 105.4
         Feb. 102.2 106.2 102.1 98.5 101.9 104.0 102.3 108.3 102.3 104.8 101.0 100.9 108.7 106.0         Mar. 103.0 106.4 103.1 97.9 102.9 104.1 102.9 102.4 105.8 101.1 100.8 109.5 104.9
         Apr. 103.2 106.8 103.3 99.5 102.8 104.3 103.1 102.8 105.6 101.3 101.4 116.7 106.1
         May 104.3 106.9 103.2 101.9 104.6 104.4 103.9 109.4 103.3 104.4 101.8 102.9 129.9 112.5         June 104.4 106.9 102.8 102.4 104.9 104.5 104.0 103.7 104.6 102.1 103.4 130.5 111.3
         July 105.2 106.6 101.7 102.3 107.4 104.7 104.4 103.9 107.1 102.2 103.3 129.9 105.8
         Aug. 105.2 106.4 102.3 103.1 107.0 104.8 104.5 111.0 104.2 110.5 102.4 103.3 130.5 105.7         Sep. 105.3 107.1 103.8 105.1 105.6 104.9 104.7 104.7
10 111.5 102.4 103.7 140.8 102.7
         Oct. 105.4 107.1 104.1 106.1 105.5 105.0 104.9 105.0 111.3 102.6 104.7 144.7 105.5
         Nov. 104.2 107.0 104.1 108.0 102.4 105.1 104.2 112.0 105.1 111.6 102.5 103.7 123.7 105.2         Dec. 104.4 107.0 103.8 103.5 104.0 105.2 104.2 104.7 111.5 102.1 102.4 111.4 103.2
2019         Jan. 103.4 107.4 102.9 101.5 102.9 105.4 103.4 105.1 111.4 102.2 102.2 112.3 104.4
         Feb. 103.9 107.9 103.4 101.7 103.6 105.6 103.8 114.0 105.0 112.0 102.3 102.5 114.3 109.4         Mar. 104.4 107.7 103.9 102.4 104.1 105.7 104.2 104.9 112.9 102.4 102.5 115.2 108.3
         Apr. 105.4 107.9 104.6 104.4 105.3 105.8 105.2 105.4 115.5 102.6 102.8 119.2 108.8
         May 105.7 108.3 104.6 106.1 105.3 105.9 105.4 115.0 105.3 115.6 102.5 102.7 116.6 106.6         June 106.0 108.4 104.1 104.9 106.6 106.1 105.7 104.9 115.1 102.3 101.3 102.8 108.6
         July 106.4 108.7 103.3 104.7 107.9 106.2 106.2 ... ... ... ... 105.7 113.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2015 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 1.9 − 5.3 + 0.9 − 2.8 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 16.8 − 1.62017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 10.0 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 19.7 + 8.82018 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 4.7 + 2.6
10 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 25.1 − 0.8
 
2017         Sep. + 1.9 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 3.2 + 11.7 + 1.5 + 2.8 + 14.8 + 6.0
         Oct. + 1.5 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 2.8 + 8.5 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 5.6 + 2.9
         Nov. + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 3.8 + 2.6 + 5.8 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 15.6 − 4.3         Dec. + 1.5 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 3.4 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 6.7 − 9.1
2018         Jan. + 1.5 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 6.4 − 9.1
         Feb. + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 1.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 10.8         Mar. + 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 9.8 − 9.9
         Apr. + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 16.2 − 3.6
         May + 2.5 + 3.3 + 0.5 + 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 4.3 + 2.5 − 6.5 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 39.5 + 8.0         June + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 6.7 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 52.3 + 10.9
         July + 2.2 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 6.7 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 4.2 + 1.7 + 4.8 + 50.2 + 2.8
         Aug. + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 7.1 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 1.7 + 2.1 + 4.8 + 44.8 + 2.3         Sep. + 2.2 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 7.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 3.2
10 + 1.2 + 1.9 + 4.4 + 46.2 − 0.1
         Oct. + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 4.8 + 42.4 + 2.7
         Nov. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 9.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 5.2 + 3.3 + 2.0 + 1.7 + 3.1 + 12.1 + 1.3         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.4
2019         Jan. + 1.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 5.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.9
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 6.9 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 3.2         Mar. + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 6.7 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 3.2
         Apr. + 2.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.5
         May + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 5.1 + 1.9 + 10.7 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 10.2 − 5.2         June + 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 21.2 − 2.4
         July + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 ... ... ... ... − 18.6 + 6.8
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on basis of the five digit structure set out in the European Classifi cation of Individual
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Consumption according to Purpose (ECOICOP). 5Electricity, gas and other fuels as
Materials: HWWI. 1Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. 2With well as transport fuels and lubricants, from January 2017 excluding lubricants. 6Exclu-
effect from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of ding value added tax. 7For the euro area, in euro. 8Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natu-
package holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series. 3Including alcoholic be- ral gas. 9Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 10From
verages and tobacco. 4Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the September 2018 onwards provisional figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2019
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
    
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age
€ billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.32013 1,167.4 3.0 778.3 2.8 388.1 0.1 1,166.4 1.9 1,717.2 1.3 153.7 − 2.5 8.92014 1,213.0 3.9 807.2 3.7 398.4 2.6 1,205.6 3.4 1,761.3 2.6 167.2 8.8 9.5
2015 1,261.4 4.0 837.2 3.7 416.5 4.5 1,253.7 4.0 1,805.7 2.5 174.8 4.5 9.7
2016 1,311.9 4.0 869.1 3.8 430.5 3.4 1,299.6 3.7 1,857.5 2.9 181.9 4.1 9.82017 1,366.6 4.2 902.9 3.9 444.8 3.3 1,347.7 3.7 1,922.0 3.5 189.8 4.3 9.92018 1,432.8 4.8 945.4 4.7 454.9 2.3 1,400.3 3.9 1,982.8 3.2 206.9 9.0 10.4
2017         Q4 377.6 4.0 249.2 3.7 110.3 2.9 359.5 3.5 485.1 2.9 42.0 6.0 8.7
2018         Q1 333.4 4.7 220.3 4.5 115.2 2.1 335.5 3.7 495.1 3.6 67.0 6.4 13.5
         Q2 349.2 4.8 225.3 4.7 112.3 2.1 337.6 3.8 493.8 3.1 48.9 8.8 9.9         Q3 355.2 5.3 239.5 5.2 114.4 2.4 353.9 4.2 492.5 2.6 44.2 10.9 9.0         Q4 395.0 4.6 260.3 4.4 113.0 2.5 373.3 3.8 501.4 3.3 46.7 11.2 9.3
2019         Q1 348.6 4.6 231.2 4.9 119.0 3.3 350.2 4.4 510.7 3.2 72.4 8.0 14.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2019. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change
2011 90.3 1.7 90.6 1.7 90.4 1.8 90.3 1.7 103.4 3.4
2012 92.7 2.6 92.9 2.6 92.9 2.8 92.9 2.8 106.2 2.72013 95.0 2.4 95.2 2.4 95.2 2.5 95.1 2.4 108.4 2.12014 97.8 2.9 97.8 2.8 97.8 2.7 97.7 2.7 111.5 2.8
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 114.6 2.8
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 117.3 2.42017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.1 104.3 2.2 104.6 2.3 120.3 2.52018 107.2 2.9 107.2 2.9 107.1 2.7 107.4 2.7 124.1 3.2
2018         Q1 99.1 2.3 99.1 2.3 99.0 2.1 106.0 2.2 116.8 2.9
         Q2 101.0 3.3 101.0 3.3 100.8 3.0 107.5 3.0 121.3 3.1         Q3 109.6 2.9 109.6 2.9 109.7 3.0 107.9 2.8 122.8 3.7         Q4 119.2 2.9 119.2 2.9 119.2 2.8 108.3 2.8 135.5 3.1
2019         Q1 101.9 2.9 101.9 2.9 101.9 3.0 109.1 3.0 120.4 3.1
         Q2 103.1 2.1 103.1 2.1 103.0 2.2 109.9 2.2 . .
2018         Dec. 102.8 2.9 102.8 2.9 102.9 2.9 108.4 2.9 . .
2019         Jan. 101.8 3.1 101.8 3.1 101.9 3.1 109.0 3.1 . .
         Feb. 102.1 3.4 102.1 3.4 101.9 3.1 109.1 3.1 . .         Mar. 101.9 2.2 101.9 2.2 102.0 2.8 109.2 2.8 . .
         Apr. 103.0 2.3 103.0 2.3 103.1 2.5 109.8 2.5 . .
         May 103.1 1.4 103.1 1.4 103.2 2.2 109.9 2.0 . .         June 103.2 2.7 103.2 2.6 102.7 2.0 110.0 2.0 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2019. as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
August 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
  
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
Non- Trade of which:
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2015 2,226.8 1,395.1 470.7 565.7 273.1 831.8 215.5 190.5 136.1 633.5 1,593.4 861.4 466.2 732.0 222.8 180.3
2016 2,367.7 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.82017 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.72018 
p,3 2,595.6 1,539.2 542.4 611.3 290.2 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.5 792.4 1,803.2 927.6 560.2 875.6 257.4 205.1
2017         H1 2,385.4 1,471.8 502.9 584.4 288.6 913.5 238.2 220.8 149.9 701.7 1,683.6 888.0 498.3 795.7 246.2 194.9
         H2 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2018         H1  3 2,551.8 1,533.0 541.7 602.5 289.8 1,018.8 250.1 236.1 143.3 775.6 1,776.2 909.4 541.0 866.7 254.7 210.2
         H2  p 2,595.6 1,539.2 542.4 611.3 290.2 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.5 792.4 1,803.2 927.6 560.2 875.6 257.4 205.1
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 62.7 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.1
2016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.12017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.22018 
p,3 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.2 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
2017         H1 100.0 61.7 21.1 24.5 12.1 38.3 10.0 9.3 6.3 29.4 70.6 37.2 20.9 33.4 10.3 8.2
         H2 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2018         H1  3 100.0 60.1 21.2 23.6 11.4 39.9 9.8 9.3 5.6 30.4 69.6 35.6 21.2 34.0 10.0 8.2
         H2  p 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.2 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2015 1,782.4 1,077.8 304.0 447.3 259.0 704.6 198.8 147.1 104.4 485.2 1,297.2 690.4 354.0 606.8 198.4 127.52016 1,910.1 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.92017 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.42018 
p,3 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.7
2017         H1 1,923.5 1,138.9 325.9 465.1 273.1 784.6 224.2 171.9 125.4 550.6 1,372.9 709.7 379.4 663.2 224.4 153.2
         H2 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.4
2018         H1  3 2,072.0 1,177.0 360.2 460.4 277.5 895.0 232.7 185.6 115.2 604.9 1,467.0 727.9 411.2 739.2 229.5 167.5
         H2  p 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.7
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.5 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.9 34.1 11.1 7.2
2016 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.42017 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.72018 
p,3 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
2017         H1 100.0 59.2 16.9 24.2 14.2 40.8 11.7 8.9 6.5 28.6 71.4 36.9 19.7 34.5 11.7 8.0
         H2 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2018         H1  3 100.0 56.8 17.4 22.2 13.4 43.2 11.2 9.0 5.6 29.2 70.8 35.1 19.9 35.7 11.1 8.1
         H2  p 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.72016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.92017 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.32018 
p,3 502.4 365.4 183.1 148.4 12.7 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.2 322.2 185.7 131.9 136.5 26.2 54.4
2017         H1 461.9 332.9 177.0 119.3 15.5 129.0 14.0 48.8 24.5 151.1 310.7 178.3 118.9 132.5 21.8 41.8
         H2 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2018         H1  3 479.8 356.0 181.4 142.1 12.3 123.8 17.4 50.5 28.1 170.7 309.2 181.6 129.8 127.6 25.2 42.7
         H2  p 502.4 365.4 183.1 148.4 12.7 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.2 322.2 185.7 131.9 136.5 26.2 54.4
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.32017 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.22018 
p,3 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.5 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.7 35.9 64.1 37.0 26.3 27.2 5.2 10.8
2017         H1 100.0 72.1 38.3 25.8 3.4 27.9 3.0 10.6 5.3 32.7 67.3 38.6 25.7 28.7 4.7 9.0
         H2 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2018         H1  3 100.0 74.2 37.8 29.6 2.6 25.8 3.6 10.5 5.9 35.6 64.4 37.8 27.1 26.6 5.2 8.9
         H2  p 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.5 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.7 35.9 64.1 37.0 26.3 27.2 5.2 10.8
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. 3From this point onwards: significant
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with p revious periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
August 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
  
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciationand amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  
1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
Annual Annual change in Annual change inper- per- per- per- per-centage centage centage centage centage
Period change  
4 change  4 % points  4 % % % change  4 % points  4 %%% € billion  3 € billion  3 € billion  3 
Total
2011 1,414.3 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.7 11.1 17.4 93.9 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 − 0.4 5.4 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 2.0 6.1 11.02013 1,541.1 − 0.6 187.2 − 2.8 12.2 − 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.5 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 2.0 5.9 11.12014 1,565.7 1.0 198.9 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.5 109.4 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.2
2015 1,635.4 6.9 196.2 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 18.1 91.7 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.7 11.6
2016 1,626.1 − 0.4 214.9 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.5 18.1 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.02017 1,721.7 5.1 243.9 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.3 33.2 8.3 1.7 2.5 6.9 12.22018 
p,6 1,709.6 0.7 233.5 − 0.9 13.7 − 0.2 6.3 10.6 17.8 129.8 − 6.1 7.6 − 0.6 2.3 6.5 11.9
2014         H1 757.3 − 0.9 97.3 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.8 9.6 16.2 57.9 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.1 5.3 10.7
         H2 808.8 2.9 101.7 5.3 12.6 0.3 5.6 11.0 19.2 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.8 7.1 12.1
2015         H1 815.3 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 5.0 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.3 − 0.5 1.2 5.9 10.9
         H2 831.4 5.1 93.6 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.5 32.7 − 36.6 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.2 11.7
2016         H1 782.7 − 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 6.1 10.5 18.0 65.7 2.9 8.4 0.4 1.7 6.4 11.4
         H2 843.4 1.1 103.1 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.2 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.6 12.5
2017         H1 845.0 6.8 125.9 14.5 14.9 1.0 5.8 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.3 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.7
         H2 879.8 3.5 117.7 14.7 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.4 63.2 38.3 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.5 12.4
2018         H1  6 849.5 − 0.0 120.7 − 2.5 14.2 − 0.4 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.9 − 5.2 8.6 − 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
         H2  p 870.9 1.4 115.3 0.9 13.2 − 0.1 6.5 11.2 18.3 58.4 − 7.3 6.7 − 0.6 2.2 6.8 12.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector  5 
 
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.6 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.4 6.9 11.52012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.8 10.3 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.9 6.1 9.82013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.8 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 5.1 10.3 15.7 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.6 5.8 10.52014 1,197.4 1.0 148.1 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.6 10.0 15.5 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.5 5.9 10.3
2015 1,282.5 7.0 144.0 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.0 65.2 − 20.2 5.1 − 1.8 2.1 6.5 10.3
2016 1,267.1 − 1.0 156.5 6.0 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 80.6 4.3 6.4 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.52017 1,362.9 5.5 181.6 16.8 13.3 1.3 6.8 10.9 15.6 108.0 41.0 7.9 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.42018 
p,6 1,334.9 1.0 169.1 − 1.6 12.7 − 0.3 6.8 10.6 15.6 95.5 − 7.0 7.2 − 0.6 2.7 6.8 10.9
2014         H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.3 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.9 9.7 15.2 46.3 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.6 5.5 9.7
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.8 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 16.0 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.4 10.8
2015         H1 636.4 8.7 80.1 7.8 12.6 − 0.1 5.4 10.2 15.5 48.8 4.8 7.7 − 0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 646.7 5.3 63.9 − 13.3 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.6 16.4 − 52.4 2.5 − 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.7
2016         H1 611.3 − 2.6 84.0 1.3 13.7 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.8 50.7 − 6.5 8.3 − 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.0
         H2 655.9 0.5 72.6 11.9 11.1 1.1 6.2 11.3 16.4 29.9 34.7 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.6
2017         H1 678.7 7.2 98.5 18.7 14.5 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 64.0 37.5 9.4 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
         H2 684.9 3.9 83.1 14.7 12.1 1.2 6.9 11.7 16.5 44.0 46.4 6.4 1.9 3.4 7.2 10.8
2018         H1  6 665.8 − 0.1 90.9 − 3.8 13.7 − 0.5 6.5 10.8 16.7 57.1 − 5.8 8.6 − 0.5 2.9 6.6 11.5
         H2  p 678.8 2.1 80.6 1.0 11.9 − 0.1 6.2 11.1 15.9 39.8 − 8.5 5.9 − 0.7 1.9 6.4 10.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2011 335.3 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 6.0 10.4 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.2 13.82012 359.1 2.8 48.0 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.22013 362.0 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.4 13.4 − 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.4 5.9 12.52014 368.3 1.1 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.1 6.2 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.2 4.8 14.8 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.4 58.4 14.6 16.3 1.8 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 24.7 8.8 1.5 2.5 8.3 15.52017 358.7 3.4 62.3 7.5 17.4 0.7 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 9.9 9.6 0.5 2.4 7.5 15.12018 
p,6 374.7 − 0.6 64.4 1.6 17.2 0.4 5.7 10.5 24.7 34.3 − 3.0 9.2 − 0.2 1.7 5.9 16.6
2014         H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.7 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.7 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.5 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.5 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.7 10.8 16.1 0.9 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 187.4 3.6 30.6 4.6 16.3 0.2 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.7 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2017         H1 166.3 4.8 27.4 − 0.2 16.5 − 0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 − 0.8 8.8 − 0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
         H2 195.0 2.0 34.7 14.6 17.8 2.0 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.2 19.9 9.9 1.5 3.0 8.2 17.9
2018         H1  6 183.7 0.5 29.8 3.0 16.2 0.4 4.0 9.7 22.9 15.8 − 1.8 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.9 5.1 15.5
         H2  p 192.1 − 1.7 34.7 0.4 18.1 0.4 7.0 13.3 25.7 18.5 − 3.9 9.6 − 0.2 2.7 7.3 18.0
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement stati stics, p. 3.
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly 4Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical S upplement 4 −
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 5Including groups in agriculture and forest-
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted ry. 6From this point onwards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing com-
return on sales. 3Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year parability with previous periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
August 2019
XII. External sector
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2018 2019
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar. Apr. May  p
Current account + 334,624 + 362,825 + 335,715 + 85,346 + 106,622 + 63,589 + 33,326 + 20,656 + 13,315A.
1. Goods
Exports 2,116,412 2,251,144 2,342,609 576,498 616,274 594,057 212,915 197,412 207,845Imports 1,769,839 1,933,352 2,063,300 514,885 538,540 526,343 181,157 173,776 178,948
Balance + 346,576 + 317,788 + 279,309 + 61,614 + 77,734 + 67,715 + 31,759 + 23,636 + 28,897
2. Services
Receipts 818,021 874,456 915,324 240,678 239,956 215,733 76,996 73,617 76,543Expenditure 774,459 770,519 805,581 205,667 219,296 194,471 67,254 67,655 70,681
Balance + 43,561 + 103,936 + 109,742 + 35,010 + 20,660 + 21,263 + 9,742 + 5,962 + 5,862
3. Primary income
Receipts 668,424 694,825 768,040 181,253 209,094 178,661 60,276 62,418 65,434Expenditure 585,226 616,494 669,878 157,293 157,911 152,097 54,588 60,844 80,670
Balance + 83,198 + 78,332 + 98,163 + 23,960 + 51,183 + 26,563 + 5,688 + 1,574 − 15,236
4. Secondary income
Receipts 103,416 107,802 115,563 26,814 30,613 27,079 9,923 8,589 11,066Expenditure 242,127 245,034 267,062 62,052 73,568 79,031 23,786 19,105 17,275
Balance − 138,711 − 137,230 − 151,500 − 35,239 − 42,955 − 51,950 − 13,862 − 10,515 − 6,209
Capital account + 1,620 − 21,413 − 33,451 + 3,022 − 42,323 − 4,286 − 3,160 + 539 + 968B.
Financial account (increase: +) + 336,720 + 376,168 + 279,357 + 85,257 + 67,837 + 57,543 + 52,137 − 22,886 + 52,993C.
1. Direct investment + 186,860 + 78,533 + 35,822 − 17,026 − 87,365 + 51,974 + 24,314 − 43,318 + 20,701
By resident units abroad + 541,442 + 435,361 − 260,922 − 110,612 − 269,645 + 79,690 + 5,387 + 29,875 + 12,912By non-resident units in the euro area + 354,583 + 356,827 − 296,743 − 93,585 − 182,280 + 27,718 − 18,926 + 73,193 − 7,788
2. Portfolio investment + 460,718 + 297,042 + 216,342 + 48,471 + 108,287 − 89,454 − 44,128 + 17,402 − 52,494
By resident units abroad + 386,628 + 653,092 + 195,807 + 38,951 − 35,409 + 52,883 + 15,337 + 9,463 − 157
Equity and
investment fund shares + 19,665 + 198,545 + 40,638 + 11,399 − 37,508 − 5,960 − 23,854 + 20,723 − 21,846
Long-term debt securities + 358,992 + 376,615 + 187,444 + 67,123 + 1,580 + 60,296 + 31,390 + 10,979 + 16,745Short-term debt securities + 7,971 + 77,936 − 32,275 − 39,570 + 518 − 1,453 + 7,801 − 22,239 + 4,944
By non-resident units in the euro area − 74,091 + 356,050 − 20,534 − 9,520 − 143,696 + 142,337 + 59,465 − 7,940 + 52,337
Equity and
investment fund shares + 112,111 + 486,296 + 154,211 − 3,038 + 36,336 − 11,354 + 49,727 − 569 + 33,873
Long-term debt securities − 238,070 − 135,984 − 98,240 + 3,230 − 101,653 + 127,659 − 1,954 + 5,203 + 25,598Short-term debt securities + 51,868 + 5,738 − 76,507 − 9,713 − 78,380 + 26,032 + 11,693 − 12,574 − 7,134
3. Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 15,229 + 23,967 + 96,939 + 34,878 + 29,871 + 6,628 + 6,764 + 3,101 + 5,259
4. Other investment − 341,566 − 21,975 − 94,720 + 17,669 + 11,216 + 85,670 + 59,970 − 3,236 + 77,815
Eurosystem − 152,798 − 175,527 − 132,123 + 40,025 − 148,797 + 141,268 − 19,806 + 29,171 + 20,390General government + 12,593 + 21,595 − 3,520 − 9,102 + 15,745 − 9,404 − 5,694 − 5,004 + 2,491MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 123,705 + 144,138 + 89,661 − 20,810 + 169,458 − 13,656 + 110,550 − 47,306 + 54,841Enterprises and households − 77,653 − 12,182 − 48,734 + 7,556 − 25,189 − 32,538 − 25,080 + 19,904 + 93
5. Reserve assets + 15,480 − 1,400 + 24,972 + 1,264 + 5,828 + 2,727 + 5,218 + 3,164 + 1,713
Net errors and omissions + 474 + 34,755 − 22,907 − 3,112 + 3,539 − 1,758 + 21,972 − 44,081 + 38,711D.
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary  
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
August 2019
XII. External sector
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.)  1 
of which:
Supple-mentary Balance of of which: Errorstrade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  
2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2004 + 102,270 + 152,851 − 7,174 − 35,201 + 14,577 − 29,957 − 119 + 112,867 − 1,470 + 10,715
2005 + 106,942 + 156,563 − 6,515 − 37,580 + 19,300 − 31,341 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 8,1722006 + 137,674 + 160,965 − 4,687 − 31,777 + 40,499 − 32,014 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 20,7962007 + 171,493 + 201,728 − 1,183 − 32,465 + 35,620 − 33,390 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,2732008 + 144,954 + 184,160 − 3,947 − 29,122 + 24,063 − 34,147 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 − 6,605 − 17,642 + 54,524 − 34,764 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 − 6,209 − 25,255 + 51,306 − 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 55,7602011 + 167,340 + 162,970 − 9,357 − 29,930 + 69,087 − 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 46,9022012 + 195,712 + 199,531 − 11,388 − 30,774 + 65,658 − 38,703 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 43,8822013 + 184,274 + 203,802 − 12,523 − 39,399 + 63,284 − 43,413 − 563 + 225,371 + 838 + 41,660
2014 + 210,735 + 219,629 − 14,296 − 25,873 + 57,858 − 40,880 + 2,936 + 240,117 − 2,564 + 26,446
2015 + 259,920 + 248,394 − 15,405 − 19,242 + 69,262 − 38,494 − 48 + 234,404 − 2,213 − 25,4672016 + 265,489 + 252,581 − 19,010 − 21,814 + 75,590 − 40,868 + 2,138 + 259,720 + 1,686 − 7,9082017 + 261,894 + 253,111 − 14,069 − 21,938 + 80,276 − 49,554 − 1,947 + 282,947 − 1,269 + 23,0002018 + 245,035 + 221,675 − 24,490 − 20,686 + 91,666 − 47,619 + 1,858 + 228,848 + 392 − 18,045
2016         Q3 + 60,302 + 63,541 − 4,007 − 11,827 + 20,320 − 11,733 + 412 + 60,148 − 261 − 566
         Q4 + 69,437 + 55,640 − 8,359 − 2,048 + 28,269 − 12,425 + 2,844 + 90,452 − 43 + 18,171
2017         Q1 + 69,906 + 63,678 − 1,365 − 2,653 + 22,781 − 13,901 + 562 + 69,234 − 360 − 1,234
         Q2 + 52,671 + 64,258 − 3,660 − 5,301 + 5,673 − 11,959 − 2,624 + 67,523 + 385 + 17,476         Q3 + 64,060 + 65,296 − 3,113 − 12,334 + 21,991 − 10,893 + 766 + 62,836 + 152 − 1,990         Q4 + 75,257 + 59,879 − 5,931 − 1,651 + 29,831 − 12,802 − 652 + 83,353 − 1,446 + 8,749
2018         Q1 + 69,966 + 61,219 − 3,973 − 2,203 + 25,279 − 14,329 + 4,003 + 67,340 + 699 − 6,629
         Q2 + 60,605 + 60,111 − 8,201 − 2,804 + 8,504 − 5,205 − 2,563 + 56,803 − 374 − 1,239         Q3 + 48,036 + 47,693 − 7,861 − 13,139 + 25,305 − 11,823 − 1,050 + 39,839 − 493 − 7,147         Q4 + 66,429 + 52,652 − 4,455 − 2,540 + 32,578 − 16,262 + 1,467 + 64,866 + 560 − 3,030
2019         Q1 + 66,737 + 59,927 − 1,896 − 2,309 + 25,733 − 16,615 + 1,408 + 59,428 − 63 − 8,717
         Q2  
p + 59,702 + 58,835 − 2,347 − 4,240 + 11,283 − 6,176 − 521 + 30,380 + 444 − 28,801
2017         Jan. + 15,714 + 15,218 − 880 − 619 + 7,919 − 6,803 − 104 + 11,208 − 124 − 4,403
         Feb. + 21,505 + 21,492 − 336 − 817 + 5,441 − 4,611 + 252 + 12,282 − 216 − 9,475         Mar. + 32,687 + 26,969 − 149 − 1,217 + 9,421 − 2,487 + 414 + 45,745 − 21 + 12,644
         Apr. + 15,315 + 19,080 − 763 − 1,286 + 5,841 − 8,319 − 384 + 17,461 − 2 + 2,529
         May + 14,767 + 21,701 − 2,429 − 1,721 − 4,343 − 869 + 20 + 10,532 − 47 − 4,256         June + 22,588 + 23,477 − 468 − 2,293 + 4,175 − 2,770 − 2,260 + 39,530 + 434 + 19,202
         July + 18,800 + 19,876 − 203 − 4,325 + 7,632 − 4,383 + 483 + 18,879 + 463 − 404
         Aug. + 17,949 + 20,316 − 2,098 − 5,515 + 6,576 − 3,427 + 130 + 9,684 − 912 − 8,395         Sep. + 27,311 + 25,104 − 812 − 2,494 + 7,783 − 3,082 + 154 + 34,273 + 602 + 6,808
         Oct. + 19,647 + 20,060 − 767 − 4,091 + 7,853 − 4,175 − 270 + 16,992 + 1,176 − 2,385
         Nov. + 27,382 + 23,893 − 1,960 − 345 + 8,266 − 4,432 − 521 + 30,390 − 270 + 3,530         Dec. + 28,228 + 15,926 − 3,204 + 2,785 + 13,712 − 4,195 + 139 + 35,971 − 2,353 + 7,604
2018         Jan. + 21,070 + 17,587 − 1,544 − 367 + 8,866 − 5,016 + 3,772 + 27,335 − 121 + 2,492
         Feb. + 19,495 + 19,147 − 883 − 772 + 6,465 − 5,346 + 324 + 13,905 + 583 − 5,913         Mar. + 29,401 + 24,484 − 1,546 − 1,064 + 9,948 − 3,967 − 92 + 26,100 + 236 − 3,208
         Apr. + 22,756 + 20,264 − 2,447 + 89 + 4,958 − 2,556 + 301 + 30,453 − 670 + 7,396
         May + 13,047 + 19,112 − 2,380 − 1,360 − 4,851 + 146 − 27 + 20,458 + 83 + 7,438         June + 24,802 + 20,734 − 3,373 − 1,533 + 8,396 − 2,795 − 2,838 + 5,892 + 213 − 16,072
         July + 13,874 + 15,287 − 1,892 − 4,865 + 8,090 − 4,638 − 231 + 6,482 + 266 − 7,161
         Aug. + 15,185 + 15,923 − 2,680 − 5,693 + 8,565 − 3,610 + 97 + 21,233 − 640 + 5,952         Sep. + 18,978 + 16,483 − 3,289 − 2,581 + 8,651 − 3,576 − 915 + 12,124 − 119 − 5,938
         Oct. + 20,181 + 19,801 − 512 − 4,338 + 9,005 − 4,287 − 822 + 4,021 + 700 − 15,337
         Nov. + 23,687 + 19,516 − 2,015 + 521 + 9,185 − 5,534 − 489 + 26,596 − 124 + 3,398         Dec. + 22,561 + 13,335 − 1,928 + 1,277 + 14,389 − 6,440 + 2,779 + 34,248 − 17 + 8,909
2019         Jan. + 18,776 + 15,789 − 1,006 − 1,088 + 9,112 − 5,036 + 2,133 + 17,677 + 158 − 3,232
         Feb. + 17,328 + 18,983 − 546 − 544 + 6,868 − 7,979 + 224 + 23,417 + 112 + 5,866         Mar. + 30,632 + 25,156 − 344 − 677 + 9,754 − 3,600 − 949 + 18,333 − 333 − 11,350
         Apr. + 22,903 + 19,255 − 972 − 516 + 7,789 − 3,625 + 79 + 18,531 + 547 − 4,451
         May + 16,153 + 21,480 − 1,048 − 791 − 5,274 + 739 − 435 − 287 + 182 − 16,005         June  
p + 20,646 + 18,100 − 327 − 2,933 + 8,769 − 3,290 − 165 + 12,136 − 285 − 8,345
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions resulting from the difference between the balance on the finan cial account
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account . 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
August 2019
 XII. External sector
 
 3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
  by country and group of countries*
 
 € million
 2019
Group of countries/country  2016  2017  2018 Feb. Mar. Apr. May June  p Jan./June  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,203,833 1,278,958 1,317,556 666,134 108,877 118,235 110,006 114,108 106,084
Imports 954,917 1,031,013 1,089,832 556,240 91,125 95,895 92,113 93,536 89,263Balance + 248,916 + 247,946 + 227,724 + 109,894 + 17,752 + 22,340 + 17,893 + 20,571 + 16,821
I. Exports 818,644 872,427 900,177 457,538 75,831 81,303 74,740 77,270 73,471European countries
Imports 657,753 699,677 745,351 381,882 63,068 66,871 62,819 64,313 62,113Balance + 160,891 + 172,749 + 154,827 + 75,656 + 12,763 + 14,432 + 11,921 + 12,957 + 11,358
Exports 705,548 749,850 778,646 395,534 65,731 70,633 64,164 66,191 63,499 1. EU Member States (28)
Imports 551,344 586,071 623,044 322,652 53,316 56,716 53,328 54,307 53,269Balance + 154,204 + 163,780 + 155,602 + 72,882 + 12,415 + 13,917 + 10,836 + 11,884 + 10,229
Euro area (19) Exports 441,092 471,213 492,501 252,227 41,527 44,546 41,785 42,337 40,577
countries Imports 358,848 378,700 404,655 211,482 34,972 36,946 34,950 35,893 34,963
Balance + 82,244 + 92,513 + 87,846 + 40,745 + 6,554 + 7,600 + 6,834 + 6,444 + 5,614
of which:
Austria Exports 59,778 62,656 64,978 33,706 5,533 5,946 5,689 5,799 5,353
Imports 38,543 40,686 43,117 22,757 3,656 3,901 3,885 3,975 3,724Balance + 21,235 + 21,970 + 21,860 + 10,949 + 1,877 + 2,045 + 1,804 + 1,824 + 1,629
Belgium and Exports 46,931 50,071 50,397 26,433 4,280 4,632 4,413 4,510 4,305
Luxembourg Imports 40,960 43,689 49,489 24,726 4,314 3,962 3,942 3,920 4,152
Balance + 5,971 + 6,381 + 907 + 1,707 − 34 + 670 + 471 + 591 + 153
France Exports 101,106 105,687 105,276 55,031 9,269 9,649 9,280 9,056 8,763
Imports 65,651 64,329 65,180 34,002 5,599 6,072 5,618 5,726 5,606Balance + 35,454 + 41,359 + 40,096 + 21,029 + 3,671 + 3,577 + 3,661 + 3,329 + 3,157
Italy Exports 61,265 65,422 69,922 35,258 5,744 6,334 5,628 5,977 5,802
Imports 51,737 55,342 60,325 28,914 4,722 5,064 4,735 4,805 5,076Balance + 9,528 + 10,080 + 9,597 + 6,344 + 1,022 + 1,270 + 892 + 1,172 + 726
Netherlands Exports 78,433 84,661 91,144 46,492 7,673 8,313 7,713 7,703 7,228
Imports 83,142 90,597 98,009 50,819 8,861 9,217 8,220 8,560 8,192Balance − 4,709 − 5,935 − 6,865 − 4,327 − 1,189 − 904 − 507 − 857 − 963
Spain Exports 40,497 43,067 44,220 23,230 3,805 4,032 3,803 3,860 3,922
Imports 27,870 31,396 32,467 17,691 2,680 3,101 2,697 3,360 2,972Balance + 12,627 + 11,671 + 11,753 + 5,539 + 1,125 + 931 + 1,106 + 500 + 950
Other EU Member Exports 264,456 278,638 286,145 143,307 24,204 26,087 22,380 23,855 22,922
States Imports 192,496 207,371 218,389 111,170 18,344 19,770 18,378 18,414 18,306
Balance + 71,960 + 71,267 + 67,756 + 32,137 + 5,861 + 6,317 + 4,002 + 5,440 + 4,616
of which:
United Exports 85,939 85,440 82,058 40,813 7,556 8,122 5,573 6,462 5,985Kingdom Imports 35,654 36,820 37,111 18,086 3,039 3,531 2,765 2,698 2,927
Balance + 50,285 + 48,620 + 44,947 + 22,727 + 4,517 + 4,591 + 2,808 + 3,764 + 3,058
Exports 113,096 122,576 121,531 62,004 10,100 10,670 10,576 11,079 9,973 2. Other European
Imports 106,409 113,607 122,307 59,230 9,753 10,155 9,491 10,006 8,844 countries
Balance + 6,687 + 8,969 − 776 + 2,774 + 348 + 515 + 1,085 + 1,073 + 1,129
of which:
Switzerland Exports 50,161 53,913 54,041 27,922 4,519 4,809 4,766 4,902 4,271
Imports 43,896 45,689 45,938 23,213 3,601 4,003 3,587 4,230 3,664Balance + 6,265 + 8,224 + 8,103 + 4,709 + 918 + 806 + 1,178 + 672 + 608
II. Exports 382,486 403,490 413,560 207,030 32,779 36,847 34,967 36,507 32,308Non-European
Imports 297,164 328,606 343,165 173,402 27,924 28,849 29,119 29,047 26,967 countries
Balance + 85,322 + 74,884 + 70,396 + 33,628 + 4,855 + 7,998 + 5,847 + 7,460 + 5,341
Exports 24,434 25,431 22,639 11,945 1,931 2,128 1,878 2,133 1,917 1. Africa
Imports 16,675 20,428 22,523 11,631 1,643 1,906 2,151 2,090 1,846Balance + 7,759 + 5,003 + 116 + 314 + 288 + 222 − 273 + 42 + 71
Exports 147,542 154,644 158,946 81,488 12,884 14,887 13,648 14,165 12,788 2. America
Imports 83,499 89,927 92,444 49,213 8,203 8,269 8,148 8,500 7,765Balance + 64,043 + 64,717 + 66,502 + 32,275 + 4,681 + 6,619 + 5,500 + 5,665 + 5,024
of which:
Exports 106,822 111,805 113,293 58,288 9,077 10,608 9,788 10,130 9,243 United States
Imports 57,968 61,902 64,520 34,866 5,965 5,963 5,789 6,014 5,328Balance + 48,855 + 49,903 + 48,774 + 23,422 + 3,113 + 4,646 + 3,999 + 4,116 + 3,914
Exports 200,158 212,070 219,685 107,992 16,982 18,926 18,419 19,254 16,727 3. Asia
Imports 193,979 214,393 224,560 110,686 17,843 18,301 18,523 18,044 17,077Balance + 6,179 − 2,323 − 4,875 − 2,694 − 861 + 626 − 104 + 1,210 − 350
of which:
Middle East Exports 36,659 33,104 29,148 13,253 1,948 2,480 2,116 2,455 2,339
Imports 6,581 6,963 8,145 3,706 541 613 618 602 668Balance + 30,079 + 26,141 + 21,003 + 9,547 + 1,407 + 1,868 + 1,497 + 1,853 + 1,672
Japan Exports 18,307 19,546 20,441 10,338 1,644 1,832 1,644 1,657 1,600
Imports 21,922 22,955 23,726 12,109 1,932 2,035 2,109 2,108 1,838Balance − 3,615 − 3,410 − 3,284 − 1,771 − 288 − 203 − 466 − 452 − 239
Exports 76,046 86,141 93,037 47,217 7,425 8,287 8,295 8,178 7,220 People‘s Republic
Imports 94,172 101,837 106,273 51,988 8,378 8,308 8,404 8,486 7,958 of China  
2 
Balance − 18,126 − 15,695 − 13,236 − 4,771 − 954 − 21 − 108 − 308 − 739
Exports 51,921 53,425 54,926 26,700 4,314 4,607 4,396 4,842 4,071 New industrial countries
Imports 42,966 50,873 52,966 26,064 4,220 4,438 4,513 4,182 4,081 and emerging markets
Balance + 8,955 + 2,552 + 1,960 + 636 + 94 + 169 − 118 + 660 − 10 of Asia  3 
Exports 10,352 11,344 12,291 5,605 983 905 1,021 955 876 4. Oceania and
Imports 3,011 3,857 3,638 1,872 236 374 297 412 279 polar regions
Balance + 7,341 + 7,487 + 8,653 + 3,734 + 747 + 532 + 724 + 543 + 597
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of K orea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
August 2019
XII. External sector
 
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
  
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  
2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2014 − 25,873 − 6,867 − 37,653 + 6,712 + 3,549 + 1,280 + 555 + 2,971 + 1,184 + 55,783 + 891
2015 − 19,242 − 5,203 − 36,595 + 8,621 + 5,354 + 2,601 − 1,216 + 3,161 + 1,114 + 68,506 − 3582016 − 21,814 − 5,978 − 38,247 + 8,607 + 6,779 + 1,536 − 1,716 + 3,093 + 441 + 76,218 − 1,0702017 − 21,938 − 3,669 − 43,558 + 10,726 + 5,930 + 1,349 + 39 + 2,138 − 702 + 82,270 − 1,2922018 − 20,686 − 2,500 − 44,543 + 10,044 + 7,453 + 1,597 − 353 + 3,209 − 1,118 + 93,548 − 765
2017         Q4 − 1,651 − 1,013 − 9,509 + 2,970 + 2,263 + 1,084 − 72 + 381 − 150 + 26,848 + 3,133
2018         Q1 − 2,203 − 811 − 6,977 + 2,590 + 1,077 − 68 + 43 + 824 + 374 + 25,736 − 831
         Q2 − 2,804 − 249 − 9,153 + 2,093 + 1,998 + 804 − 225 + 906 − 469 + 11,098 − 2,125         Q3 − 13,139 − 654 − 18,219 + 1,777 + 1,604 + 287 + 326 + 822 − 918 + 27,163 − 939         Q4 − 2,540 − 786 − 10,194 + 3,585 + 2,774 + 574 − 497 + 656 − 104 + 29,552 + 3,130
2019         Q1 − 2,309 − 686 − 6,978 + 2,272 + 2,154 − 157 − 454 + 760 + 329 + 26,232 − 828
         Q2  
p − 4,240 + 221 − 9,899 + 2,511 + 1,954 + 39 − 1,044 + 805 − 467 + 13,891 − 2,142
2018         Aug. − 5,693 − 271 − 6,570 + 280 + 989 − 171 − 271 + 187 − 306 + 9,198 − 327
         Sep. − 2,581 − 280 − 5,789 + 752 + 446 + 562 + 1,040 + 379 − 281 + 9,198 − 266
         Oct. − 4,338 − 290 − 6,073 + 940 + 637 − 68 − 81 + 238 − 47 + 9,589 − 537
         Nov. + 521 − 164 − 2,309 + 1,510 + 1,645 − 496 − 410 + 162 − 51 + 9,534 − 298         Dec. + 1,277 − 333 − 1,813 + 1,135 + 492 + 1,137 − 6 + 257 − 6 + 10,429 + 3,966
2019         Jan. − 1,088 − 337 − 1,739 + 762 + 218 − 119 − 362 + 244 + 119 + 9,207 − 214
         Feb. − 544 − 368 − 2,106 + 731 + 1,078 − 170 − 216 + 249 + 125 + 7,029 − 285         Mar. − 677 + 18 − 3,133 + 779 + 858 + 132 + 124 + 267 + 85 + 9,996 − 328
         Apr. − 516 + 185 − 1,830 + 936 + 512 − 240 − 601 + 278 − 152 + 8,365 − 425
         May − 791 + 89 − 3,401 + 706 + 1,080 − 130 − 6 + 267 − 157 − 3,630 − 1,487         June  
p − 2,933 − 54 − 4,668 + 869 + 363 + 409 − 437 + 259 − 157 + 9,156 − 230
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001 the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which: of which:
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which: resident and Non-produced
international non-resident Workers’ Capital income, wealth, non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2014 − 40,880 − 28,146 − 6,419 + 8,105 − 12,734 − 3,477 − 3,451 + 2,936 + 2,841 + 95
2015 − 38,494 − 24,087 − 6,805 + 10,455 − 14,406 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 48 + 1,787 − 1,8352016 − 40,868 − 25,232 − 11,516 + 10,627 − 15,636 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 2,138 + 3,208 − 1,0702017 − 49,554 − 21,979 − 9,852 + 10,446 − 27,576 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 1,947 + 2,502 − 4,4492018 − 47,619 − 27,748 − 9,880 + 10,351 − 19,871 − 5,152 − 5,142 + 1,858 + 5,375 − 3,517
2017         Q4 − 12,802 − 7,191 − 3,800 + 795 − 5,611 − 1,158 − 1,153 − 652 + 216 − 868
2018         Q1 − 14,329 − 9,218 − 2,234 + 1,698 − 5,111 − 1,291 − 1,286 + 4,003 + 3,390 + 613
         Q2 − 5,205 − 347 − 1,260 + 6,233 − 4,858 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 2,563 − 48 − 2,515         Q3 − 11,823 − 7,249 − 1,926 + 1,225 − 4,574 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 1,050 − 297 − 753         Q4 − 16,262 − 10,934 − 4,461 + 1,195 − 5,328 − 1,287 − 1,286 + 1,467 + 2,329 − 862
2019         Q1 − 16,615 − 12,096 − 2,756 + 2,015 − 4,519 − 1,360 − 1,358 + 1,408 + 845 + 563
         Q2  
p − 6,176 − 559 − 1,346 + 6,579 − 5,617 − 1,361 − 1,358 − 521 − 277 − 245
2018         Aug. − 3,610 − 2,441 − 529 + 281 − 1,169 − 429 − 429 + 97 + 244 − 147
         Sep. − 3,576 − 2,048 − 540 + 760 − 1,527 − 429 − 429 − 915 − 626 − 289
         Oct. − 4,287 − 3,183 − 1,074 + 172 − 1,104 − 429 − 429 − 822 − 594 − 228
         Nov. − 5,534 − 3,195 − 999 + 180 − 2,339 − 429 − 429 − 489 − 313 − 176         Dec. − 6,440 − 4,556 − 2,388 + 843 − 1,885 − 429 − 429 + 2,779 + 3,237 − 458
2019         Jan. − 5,036 − 3,623 − 1,286 + 278 − 1,413 − 453 − 453 + 2,133 + 1,831 + 302
         Feb. − 7,979 − 6,374 − 1,056 + 927 − 1,605 − 453 − 453 + 224 − 241 + 465         Mar. − 3,600 − 2,099 − 413 + 811 − 1,501 − 453 − 453 − 949 − 745 − 203
         Apr. − 3,625 − 1,072 − 371 + 1,138 − 2,553 − 454 − 453 + 79 + 305 − 226
         May + 739 + 2,424 − 333 + 4,352 − 1,685 − 453 − 453 − 435 − 554 + 119         June  
p − 3,290 − 1,911 − 643 + 1,088 − 1,379 − 454 − 453 − 165 − 27 − 138
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
August 2019
XII. External sector
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2018 2019
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q4 Q1 Q2  p Apr. May June  p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 401,354 + 376,599 + 352,485 + 9,965 + 128,959 + 100,604 + 13,114 + 26,114 + 61,376
1. Direct investment + 99,180 + 123,084 + 132,671 + 2,237 + 44,205 + 31,604 + 15,338 + 12,370 + 3,895
Equity + 83,199 + 76,326 + 140,071 + 11,697 + 24,175 + 31,158 + 17,275 + 8,527 + 5,356
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 32,535 + 24,572 + 31,689 + 3,530 + 12,762 + 13,366 + 4,398 + 4,955 + 4,013
Debt instruments + 15,981 + 46,758 − 7,400 − 9,459 + 20,030 + 445 − 1,937 + 3,843 − 1,461
2. Portfolio investment + 96,969 + 106,469 + 68,098 − 8,940 + 36,459 + 26,724 + 7,819 + 2,541 + 16,364
Shares  2 + 16,954 + 14,229 + 9,406 − 504 + 481 + 3,006 + 550 + 1,919 + 537
Investment fund shares  3 + 37,698 + 50,094 + 18,658 − 441 + 10,695 + 8,204 + 2,923 − 1,298 + 6,579
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 48,544 + 44,184 + 44,648 − 2,411 + 17,978 + 17,269 + 6,954 + 2,210 + 8,105
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 6,227 − 2,038 − 4,613 − 5,585 + 7,304 − 1,755 − 2,608 − 290 + 1,143
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 29,053 + 11,618 + 23,253 + 537 + 6,184 + 11,366 + 5,120 + 1,310 + 4,936
4. Other investment  7 + 174,467 + 136,697 + 128,070 + 15,571 + 42,174 + 30,467 − 15,710 + 9,710 + 36,467
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 18,509 − 20,986 + 49,856 + 1,493 + 51,097 + 34,382 + 21,613 − 3,874 + 16,644
Long-term + 44,861 + 19,641 + 4,456 + 3,023 + 12,324 + 7,843 + 1,919 + 873 + 5,050Short-term − 26,353 − 40,627 + 45,400 − 1,530 + 38,773 + 26,540 + 19,694 − 4,747 + 11,593
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 13,510 + 5,039 + 30,233 + 5,877 + 11,630 − 5,380 − 11,626 − 5,496 + 11,742
Long-term − 3,237 − 2,062 + 10,456 + 2,393 − 14 + 2,495 + 838 + 1,059 + 598Short-term − 10,273 + 7,102 + 19,777 + 3,484 + 11,645 − 7,876 − 12,465 − 6,555 + 11,144
General government − 1,022 − 3,993 − 8,814 + 1,020 + 1,764 − 451 − 3,017 + 2,605 − 39
Long-term − 7,408 − 4,408 − 1,097 − 121 − 358 − 1,512 − 215 + 97 − 1,394Short-term + 6,386 + 415 − 7,717 + 1,141 + 2,122 + 1,061 − 2,802 + 2,508 + 1,355
Bundesbank + 170,491 + 156,637 + 56,795 + 7,181 − 22,318 + 1,915 − 22,680 + 16,476 + 8,120
5. Reserve assets + 1,686 − 1,269 + 392 + 560 − 63 + 444 + 547 + 182 − 285
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(increase: +) + 141,635 + 93,652 + 123,637 − 54,901 + 69,531 + 70,224 − 5,417 + 26,401 + 49,240
1. Direct investment + 56,018 + 74,395 + 89,151 + 25,853 + 8,953 + 26,911 + 10,128 + 15,706 + 1,077
Equity + 13,883 + 21,255 + 13,396 + 7,680 + 8,138 + 3,089 + 1,063 + 1,907 + 119
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 2,188 + 8,115 + 4,531 + 2,551 + 4,062 + 1,322 + 1,064 + 340 − 83
Debt instruments + 42,135 + 53,140 + 75,755 + 18,172 + 815 + 23,822 + 9,065 + 13,799 + 959
2. Portfolio investment − 102,008 − 90,176 − 44,980 − 27,860 + 53,202 + 10,670 − 12,038 + 25,721 − 3,014
Shares  2 − 221 − 715 + 6,618 + 14 − 3,977 − 1,507 − 869 − 1,346 + 709
Investment fund shares  3 − 6,932 − 1,991 − 5,821 − 654 − 3,801 − 933 − 301 − 1,327 + 696
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 95,327 − 70,432 − 47,593 − 22,480 + 38,800 + 19,919 − 169 + 18,555 + 1,534
Short-termdebt securities  
5 + 471 − 17,039 + 1,815 − 4,740 + 22,179 − 6,810 − 10,699 + 9,840 − 5,951
3. Other investment  7 + 187,625 + 109,433 + 79,466 − 52,893 + 7,376 + 32,643 − 3,507 − 15,026 + 51,176
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 86,742 + 17,476 − 35,965 − 108,955 + 102,619 + 34,768 + 33,870 − 11,335 + 12,233
Long-term + 5,774 + 7,541 − 8,496 − 509 + 1,223 + 3,349 + 405 + 706 + 2,238Short-term + 80,968 + 9,935 − 27,469 − 108,446 + 101,396 + 31,419 + 33,465 − 12,041 + 9,995
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 4,658 + 23,541 + 15,750 − 19,053 + 26,964 + 468 − 9,827 + 3,818 + 6,477
Long-term + 78 + 8,855 + 8,259 − 1,417 + 3,091 + 2,738 + 2,934 − 908 + 711Short-term − 4,736 + 14,687 + 7,491 − 17,636 + 23,873 − 2,269 − 12,761 + 4,725 + 5,766
General government − 5,309 − 8,719 + 2,890 − 4,205 + 6,805 − 609 − 369 − 204 − 35
Long-term − 4,682 − 3,723 + 660 + 402 − 1 − 90 − 55 − 20 − 14Short-term − 626 − 4,996 + 2,230 − 4,607 + 6,807 − 519 − 314 − 184 − 21
Bundesbank + 110,849 + 77,135 + 96,792 + 79,319 − 129,012 − 1,985 − 27,181 − 7,305 + 32,501
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 259,720 + 282,947 + 228,848 + 64,866 + 59,428 + 30,380 + 18,531 − 287 + 12,136
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
August 2019
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
  
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts positiondrawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col. 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col. 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan.  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,6702003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,9212016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,7272017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,652 474,1932018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 765,813 444,168
2016         Nov. 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 552,558 438,550
         Dec. 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017         Jan. 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 577,945 456,858
         Feb. 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,216 451,678         Mar. 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,524 451,515
         Apr. 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 601,492 487,652
         May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 601,093 497,785         June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 623,914 474,966
         July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 612,871 479,898
         Aug. 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 620,273 469,611         Sep. 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 618,496 496,703
         Oct. 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 600,416 485,499
         Nov. 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 576,550 515,282         Dec. 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,652 474,193
2018         Jan. 1,114,774 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,665 882,043 53,165 617,024 497,750
         Feb. 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 636,717 511,262         Mar. 1,158,983 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 939,229 923,466 53,924 678,829 480,155
         Apr. 1,139,056 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 917,971 902,364 54,115 633,679 505,377
         May 1,198,995 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 973,323 956,150 54,203 656,506 542,489         June 1,213,511 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 991,577 976,266 54,857 701,075 512,436
         July 1,147,878 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 930,107 913,270 54,463 666,362 481,515
         Aug. 1,145,283 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 929,073 912,448 53,864 644,650 500,633         Sep. 1,189,175 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,380 956,487 54,717 686,357 502,818
         Oct. 1,167,004 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 943,644 927,555 55,089 662,976 504,029
         Nov. 1,184,703 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 960,478 941,130 56,026 671,196 513,507         Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 765,813 444,168
2019         Jan. 1,123,169 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,039 639,150 484,019
         Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 620,052 507,404         Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 637,050 553,366
         Apr. 1,167,188 177,378 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,482 935,563 919,696 54,247 609,858 557,329
         May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 602,571 583,822         June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 634,888 566,153
         July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 609,370 524,979
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to respective country designation), since November 2000 also bal ances with non-euro
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad. 4See
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5Euro opening
valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
August 2019
XII. External sector
 
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2015 876,992 264,561 612,431 416,692 195,739 181,240 14,499 1,018,628 152,364 866,264 681,975 184,289 112,668 71,6212016 877,132 245,991 631,141 420,851 210,290 196,110 14,180 1,051,138 132,151 918,987 722,253 196,734 124,129 72,6052017 892,379 218,372 674,007 450,147 223,860 210,204 13,657 1,087,106 138,289 948,818 750,318 198,500 128,892 69,6072018 914,056 233,402 680,654 450,943 229,712 215,637 14,075 1,174,527 138,328 1,036,199 832,342 203,857 133,440 70,417
2019         Jan. 920,513 231,959 688,554 456,365 232,189 218,067 14,121 1,186,689 149,754 1,036,935 837,130 199,805 128,847 70,958
         Feb. 935,021 234,300 700,721 466,686 234,036 219,649 14,387 1,194,265 146,169 1,048,097 849,383 198,713 127,000 71,713         Mar. 959,563 238,446 721,117 478,350 242,767 228,246 14,521 1,221,840 165,016 1,056,824 850,485 206,339 134,484 71,854
         Apr. 947,991 226,267 721,725 485,109 236,616 221,914 14,702 1,221,073 155,616 1,065,457 866,481 198,976 126,167 72,809
         May 945,779 221,210 724,569 487,822 236,747 222,353 14,394 1,238,781 158,729 1,080,052 881,048 199,005 127,163 71,842         June 953,791 228,832 724,958 488,473 236,485 221,898 14,587 1,244,812 160,916 1,083,896 882,347 201,549 129,224 72,325
Industrial countries 1
 
2015 768,263 260,659 507,604 374,690 132,915 119,868 13,047 919,095 147,507 771,588 644,558 127,030 91,119 35,9112016 760,622 242,112 518,510 378,804 139,705 127,025 12,680 946,894 128,163 818,731 685,120 133,611 96,436 37,1742017 773,242 214,321 558,921 406,982 151,939 139,749 12,190 982,241 131,450 850,792 711,976 138,816 104,054 34,7622018 789,499 228,170 561,329 406,279 155,050 142,678 12,372 1,058,150 125,576 932,574 792,349 140,225 105,662 34,563
2019         Jan. 797,882 227,225 570,657 411,689 158,968 146,553 12,415 1,071,055 134,564 936,492 797,253 139,239 104,035 35,204
         Feb. 813,733 229,668 584,065 421,232 162,833 150,078 12,755 1,085,646 136,836 948,810 808,802 140,008 104,544 35,464         Mar. 832,431 233,720 598,711 430,270 168,440 155,544 12,896 1,099,773 142,642 957,131 811,167 145,963 110,390 35,573
         Apr. 820,716 221,574 599,142 437,295 161,847 148,697 13,150 1,105,485 139,858 965,627 827,612 138,015 102,103 35,912
         May 819,654 216,486 603,168 441,245 161,924 149,117 12,806 1,121,023 139,328 981,695 842,151 139,544 104,462 35,082         June 826,595 224,060 602,535 440,933 161,602 148,562 13,040 1,121,413 136,503 984,910 843,617 141,293 105,266 36,027
EU Member States 1
 
2015 631,596 242,588 389,007 294,555 94,452 83,957 10,495 752,188 136,630 615,558 531,136 84,422 58,673 25,7492016 614,938 224,194 390,744 293,305 97,439 87,421 10,018 770,003 118,015 651,988 563,776 88,212 61,312 26,9012017 612,266 194,340 417,927 311,482 106,445 96,562 9,882 807,572 115,034 692,538 596,293 96,244 71,297 24,9472018 629,920 207,625 422,295 314,364 107,932 98,242 9,689 865,713 108,560 757,153 661,338 95,816 71,623 24,192
2019         Jan. 636,908 205,944 430,964 320,731 110,233 100,652 9,582 877,374 118,330 759,045 663,219 95,825 71,078 24,747
         Feb. 650,225 208,717 441,508 328,407 113,101 103,363 9,738 894,944 121,467 773,477 675,400 98,077 73,042 25,036         Mar. 661,769 211,392 450,377 332,137 118,241 108,492 9,748 904,541 123,318 781,223 679,002 102,220 77,107 25,113
         Apr. 654,450 200,962 453,489 341,586 111,902 101,852 10,050 909,613 121,585 788,027 692,216 95,812 70,297 25,515
         May 653,493 195,672 457,820 345,009 112,812 103,166 9,645 919,425 120,876 798,549 700,934 97,615 73,058 24,557         June 661,090 203,653 457,438 345,080 112,358 102,489 9,869 921,758 118,893 802,865 704,088 98,777 73,244 25,532
of which: Euro area 2
 
2015 469,103 195,348 273,755 212,286 61,469 54,890 6,579 606,161 94,619 511,542 458,734 52,808 38,164 14,6442016 450,353 171,625 278,728 214,125 64,603 57,876 6,727 616,804 75,803 541,001 484,967 56,034 41,167 14,8672017 449,892 150,351 299,541 227,981 71,560 64,102 7,458 642,801 74,554 568,248 503,475 64,773 49,432 15,3422018 461,247 155,715 305,532 234,656 70,875 63,734 7,141 702,037 67,366 634,671 569,246 65,425 49,682 15,743
2019         Jan. 467,975 156,211 311,764 240,030 71,734 64,716 7,018 710,224 72,176 638,047 572,881 65,166 49,197 15,969
         Feb. 474,189 157,169 317,021 244,083 72,937 65,794 7,143 722,514 75,863 646,651 580,051 66,600 50,332 16,268         Mar. 483,210 161,906 321,303 245,166 76,138 68,994 7,144 728,003 75,884 652,119 583,445 68,673 52,481 16,192
         Apr. 475,064 152,528 322,536 249,339 73,198 65,877 7,321 734,333 75,778 658,555 593,264 65,292 48,849 16,443
         May 475,158 151,513 323,645 249,843 73,803 66,678 7,124 742,927 75,513 667,414 602,524 64,890 49,627 15,263         June 480,606 154,852 325,754 252,462 73,291 66,152 7,139 751,802 73,687 678,114 610,567 67,547 51,126 16,422
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2015 107,753 3,094 104,659 42,003 62,656 61,204 1,452 95,363 886 94,477 37,218 57,259 21,549 35,7102016 115,100 2,632 112,468 42,031 70,437 68,937 1,500 101,101 1,061 100,039 36,933 63,107 27,693 35,4142017 117,488 2,618 114,871 43,097 71,774 70,307 1,467 98,839 1,101 97,738 38,142 59,596 24,838 34,7582018 122,483 3,445 119,038 44,535 74,503 72,800 1,703 104,630 1,236 103,394 39,793 63,601 27,778 35,823
2019         Jan. 120,577 2,946 117,630 44,548 73,082 71,376 1,707 101,471 1,299 100,172 39,677 60,496 24,780 35,716
         Feb. 119,242 2,851 116,391 45,325 71,066 69,434 1,631 100,315 1,304 99,011 40,381 58,630 22,424 36,205         Mar. 125,082 2,943 122,138 47,950 74,188 72,563 1,625 100,531 1,102 99,429 39,118 60,311 24,064 36,247
         Apr. 125,298 3,200 122,098 47,477 74,621 73,069 1,552 100,796 1,238 99,559 38,669 60,890 24,030 36,860
         May 124,128 3,238 120,890 46,232 74,658 73,070 1,587 99,326 1,242 98,085 38,696 59,388 22,665 36,723         June 125,195 3,286 121,909 47,195 74,714 73,167 1,547 99,948 1,232 98,715 38,530 60,185 23,920 36,265
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
August 2019
XII. External sector
 
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
  
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.47082009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.10692017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.12972018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2018         Apr. 1.5972 1.5622 7.7347 7.4479 132.16 9.6202 10.3717 1.1890 0.87212 1.2276
         May 1.5695 1.5197 7.5291 7.4482 129.57 9.5642 10.3419 1.1780 0.87726 1.1812         June 1.5579 1.5327 7.5512 7.4493 128.53 9.4746 10.2788 1.1562 0.87886 1.1678
         July 1.5792 1.5356 7.8504 7.4523 130.23 9.4975 10.3076 1.1622 0.88726 1.1686
         Aug. 1.5762 1.5063 7.9092 7.4558 128.20 9.6161 10.4668 1.1413 0.89687 1.1549         Sep. 1.6189 1.5211 7.9930 7.4583 130.54 9.6205 10.4426 1.1286 0.89281 1.1659
         Oct. 1.6158 1.4935 7.9481 7.4597 129.62 9.4793 10.3839 1.1413 0.88272 1.1484
         Nov. 1.5681 1.4998 7.8880 7.4611 128.79 9.6272 10.2918 1.1377 0.88118 1.1367         Dec. 1.5849 1.5278 7.8398 7.4653 127.88 9.8055 10.2766 1.1293 0.89774 1.1384
2019         Jan. 1.5975 1.5196 7.7504 7.4657 124.34 9.7631 10.2685 1.1297 0.88603 1.1416
         Feb. 1.5895 1.4995 7.6485 7.4627 125.28 9.7444 10.4986 1.1368 0.87264 1.1351         Mar. 1.5959 1.5104 7.5868 7.4625 125.67 9.7181 10.4999 1.1311 0.85822 1.1302
         Apr. 1.5802 1.5035 7.5489 7.4650 125.44 9.6233 10.4819 1.1319 0.86179 1.1238
         May 1.6116 1.5058 7.6736 7.4675 122.95 9.7794 10.7372 1.1304 0.87176 1.1185         June 1.6264 1.5011 7.7937 7.4669 122.08 9.7465 10.6263 1.1167 0.89107 1.1293
         July 1.6061 1.4693 7.7151 7.4656 121.41 9.6587 10.5604 1.1076 0.89942 1.1218
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 − Exchange rate statistics.    
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.12602011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.64662014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.7028042015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
August 2019
XII.  External sector
 
12.  Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
1999Q1=100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  4 
In real terms In real terms
of which: based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selectedconsumer domestic national consumer Euro
 area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 56 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.0 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.5 95.9 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.0 85.3 88.0 85.8 91.8 97.3 85.3 90.9 93.0 92.1 91.0
2001 87.8 87.0 86.5 86.0 90.6 86.8 91.7 96.4 86.2 90.2 93.1 91.5 90.92002 90.1 90.0 89.4 89.3 95.2 90.4 92.3 95.4 88.7 90.7 93.6 92.0 91.72003 100.7 101.1 100.3 100.5 107.1 101.2 95.7 94.4 97.8 94.8 97.0 96.6 96.72004 104.6 104.8 103.1 103.8 111.7 104.9 95.9 93.2 100.2 95.1 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.3 100.9 101.9 109.6 102.3 94.8 91.9 99.3 92.9 98.4 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.2 100.1 100.6 109.6 101.5 93.5 90.3 98.7 91.2 98.6 96.5 95.82007 106.1 105.8 101.9 102.8 113.0 103.4 94.4 89.5 102.5 91.4 100.9 97.9 97.12008 109.3 107.9 103.2 106.1 117.1 105.4 94.6 88.1 105.6 90.4 102.2 97.8 97.12009 110.7 108.7 104.1 111.0 120.2 106.4 94.8 88.8 105.0 91.0 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.0 95.9 102.9 111.6 97.5 92.3 88.5 98.6 87.2 98.7 93.6 92.0
2011 103.3 100.0 93.7 101.4 112.3 96.9 92.0 88.3 97.9 86.4 98.2 92.8 91.32012 97.7 94.7 88.3 95.3 107.2 92.1 90.1 88.2 92.9 83.7 95.9 89.8 88.32013 101.0 97.5 91.0 97.8 111.8 94.9 92.4 88.7 98.1 85.6 98.2 91.5 90.22014 101.4 97.1 91.0 98.7 114.1 95.3 92.9 89.5 98.4 86.3 98.3 91.7 90.8
2015 91.7 87.6 82.9 88.5 105.7 87.0 90.2 90.4 89.7 82.6 94.7 87.0 86.3
2016 94.4 89.5 85.1
p 89.3 109.7 p 88.9 91.1 90.9 91.2 84.1 95.3 88.0 p 87.5
2017 96.6 91.4 86.0 p 89.8 112.0 p 90.0 92.3 91.1 94.2 85.0 96.6 89.1 p 88.3
2018 98.9 93.4 87.5 p 90.9 117.9 p 93.8 93.5 91.2 97.1 86.0 98.0 90.3 p 90.4
2016         Aug. 94.9 90.0 85.5 p 89.6 110.0 p 89.1 91.1 90.8 91.6 84.2 95.6 88.2 p 87.6
         Sep. 95.1 90.2 110.2 p 89.2 95.6 88.3 p 87.7
         Oct. 95.1 90.3 110.0 p 89.0 95.9 88.3 p 87.6
         Nov. 94.6 89.7 84.8 p 88.8 109.6 p 88.6 91.0 90.8 91.3 83.9 95.4 88.1 p 87.4
         Dec. 93.7 89.0 108.6 p 87.8 95.3 87.9 p 87.1
2017         Jan. 93.9 89.1 109.0 p 88.0 95.2 87.7 p 87.0
         Feb. 93.4 88.9 83.5 p 87.9 108.1 p 87.4 90.8 90.8 90.7 83.5 95.0 87.6 p 86.7
         Mar. 94.0 89.2 108.5 p 87.5 95.3 87.7 p 86.7
         Apr. 93.7 89.0 108.2 p 87.2 95.1 87.6 p 86.5
         May 95.6 90.5 85.0 p 88.8 110.5 p 88.8 91.7 91.2 92.6 84.5 96.0 88.6 p 87.6
         June 96.3 91.1 111.4 p 89.5 96.4 88.9 p 88.0
         July 97.6 92.3 113.3 p 90.9 97.1 89.7 p 89.0
         Aug. 99.0 93.6 87.8 p 91.4 115.0 p 92.3 93.3 91.3 96.5 86.1 97.9 90.4 p 89.8
         Sep. 99.0 93.6 115.0 p 92.3 97.9 90.5 p 89.9
         Oct. 98.6 93.1 114.8 p 91.9 97.5 89.9 p 89.4
         Nov. 98.5 93.1 87.6 p 91.1 115.0 p 92.0 93.5 91.2 97.1 86.0 97.9 90.2 p 89.7
         Dec. 98.8 93.3 115.3 p 92.2 98.1 90.3 p 89.8
2018         Jan. 99.4 93.9 116.1 p 92.8 98.3 90.4 p 89.9
         Feb. 99.6 93.9 88.1 p 91.5 117.3 p 93.6 94.0 91.1 98.5 86.2 98.4 90.4 p 90.1
         Mar. 99.7 94.2 117.7 p 94.0 98.5 90.7 p 90.4
         Apr. 99.5 94.0 117.9 p 94.0 98.6 90.6 p 90.5
         May 98.1 92.8 87.1 p 90.5 116.6 p 93.1 93.6 91.3 97.3 85.7 98.1 90.1 p 90.0
         June 97.9 92.6 116.7 p 93.0 97.8 89.9 p 90.0
         July 99.2 93.8 118.2 p 94.2 97.6 90.3 p 90.4
         Aug. 99.0 93.4 87.7 p 91.3 119.0 p 94.6 93.5 91.3 96.8 86.2 97.5 90.2 p 90.6
         Sep. 99.5 93.9 120.4 p 95.5 98.0 90.8 p 91.5
         Oct. 98.9 93.4 119.0 p 94.4 97.6 90.3 p 90.7
         Nov. 98.3 92.9 87.1 p 90.4 117.9 p 93.5 93.1 91.3 95.8 85.8 97.6 90.3 p 90.5
         Dec. 98.4 92.7 118.0 p 93.4 97.4 90.0 p 90.3
2019         Jan. 97.8 92.2 117.3 p 92.7 97.0 89.5 p 89.7
         Feb. 97.4 91.7 p 85.9 p 89.1 116.6 p 92.0 92.8 91.3 95.1 p 85.2 96.9 89.3 p 89.4
         Mar. 96.9 91.1 116.2 p 91.6 96.5 88.8 p 88.9
         Apr. 96.7 p 91.0 116.1 p 91.4 96.9 p 89.1 p 89.2
         May 97.4 p 91.4 ... ... 117.0 p 91.9 ... ... ... ... 97.0 p 89.4 p 89.6
         June 97.9 p 91.9 117.4 p 92.2 97.2 p 89.7 p 89.8
         July 97.5 p 91.5 116.5 p 91.4 p 97.1 p 89.4 p 89.3
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the group EER-19 (see footnote 1) and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Bra zil, Chile,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zeala nd,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailan d, Turkey and
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Venezuela. Due to the redenomination of the Venezuelan bolívar on2001, pp.  50-53, May 2007, pp.  31-35 and August 2017, pp.  41-43). For more 20  August  2018, the spot rate from 17  August  2018 is used since t hen. 3Annual
detailed information on methodology, see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from
(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, fr om 2015
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Austra- including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norw ay, Sweden,
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro area countries
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-1 9.6Euro area
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai- countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the gro up EER-38 (see
lable, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2018 see the index attached 
to the January 2019 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
September 2018
– Models for short- term economic forecasts: 
an update
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2017
October 2018
– State government finances: comparison of 
developments, debt brakes and fiscal surveil -
lance
– The macroeconomic impact of uncertainty
– Activities of multinational enterprise groups 
and national economic statistics
– The growing importance of exchange- traded 
funds in the financial marketsNovember 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2018
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2019 and 2020 and 
an outlook for 2021
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2017
– Germany’s international investment position: 
amount, profitability and risks of cross-  
border assets
January 2019
– The impact of an interest rate normalisation 
on the private non- financial sector in the 
euro area from a balance sheet perspective
– Price competitiveness in individual euro area 
countries: developments, drivers and the in -
fluence of labour market reforms
– Financial cycles in the euro area
– IFRS 9 from the perspective of banking super -
vision
February 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2019
– German balance of payments in 2018
– Cash demand in the shadow economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
85•

April 2019
– Household wealth and finances in   Germany: 
results of the 2017 survey
– Interest rate pass- through in the low interest  
rate environment
– European Stability and Growth Pact: 
individual  reform options
– Germany’s debt brake: surveillance by the 
Stability Council
May 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2019
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2019 and 2020 and 
an outlook for 2021
– The European banking package – revised 
rules in EU banking regulation
– Payment services in transition: instant pay -
ments, PSD2 and new competitors
– The costs of payment methods in the retail 
sector
July 2019
– Parallels in the exchange rate movements of 
major currencies
– Crypto tokens in payments and securities 
settlement
August 2019
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20133
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
86•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20192, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification ,  
January 20192
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2013 to 
2018, July 20192
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2017, 
June 20192
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2014 bis 2015 , 
May 20182, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, October 20132
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
June 20191, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
19/ 2019  
Banks‘ holdings of risky sovereign bonds in the 
absence of the nexus – yield seeking with cen -
tral bank funding or de- risking?
20/ 2019  
The rise of part- time work: A German- French 
comparison
21/ 2019  
Bank profitability, leverage constraints, and risk- 
taking
22/ 2019  
Financial cycles across G7 economies: A view 
from wavelet analysis
23/ 2019  
Bank loan supply shocks and alternative finan -
cing of non-  financial corporations in the euro 
area
24/ 2019  
Capital flows in the euro area and TARGET2 bal -
ances
25/2019  
Macro to the rescue? – An analysis of macro -
prudential instruments to regulate housing 
credit
26/2019  
The effects of the Eurosystem’s APP on euro 
area bank lending: Letting different data speak
27/2019  
Do conventional monetary policy instruments 
matter in unconventional times?
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since 
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
87•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2019  
88•

