Monthly Report
May 2019
Vol. 71  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 17 May 2019.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
The weak state of the global car market  ............................................................................  12
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  21
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  22
Acquisition of financial assets and the search for yield in Germany  ....................................  31
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  37
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  46
The financial and economic crisis in Turkey and its impact on German exports  ..................  48
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  58
Current fiscal developments in the euro area  ......................................................................  60Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
5

Overview
Industrial downturn; 
domestic  economy remains 
resilient
As was already the case in the final quarter of 
2018, the global economy probably expanded 
at just a moderate pace at the start of the year. 
Developments were fairly varied from region to 
region, however. In the euro area, real gross 
domestic product (GDP) grew more strongly 
again. GDP also saw clearer growth in the 
United States. In both currency areas, though, 
favourable one- off factors are likely to have 
played a part in the pick- up. The Japanese 
economy seems to have weakened. In China, 
GDP rose at a similar pace as in the previous 
quarter, according to official data.
The current assessment contained in the April 
World Economic Outlook (WEO) published by 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) reflects 
the fact that global activity has persisted at a 
moderate level. In the Outlook, the IMF made 
another downward revision to its forecast for 
global economic growth (based on purchasing 
power parity weights) this year – to the new 
level of 3.3%. Nonetheless, the IMF regards the 
recent slowdown in global economic activity as 
a temporary blip and expects to see a gradual 
recovery in the second half of 2019. It therefore 
left its global growth forecast for 2020 un -
changed at 3.6%. As things stand, however, 
the outlook for the global economy appears 
extremely uncertain. This is partly down to the 
unresolved trade disputes, in particular.
Starting in the beginning of the year, the inter -
national financial markets have been influenced 
by the mixed economic signals set against a 
monetary policy that is still predominantly 
accom modative. Following the monetary policy 
decisions taken in March 2019 by the Eurosys -
tem and the Federal Reserve System, market 
participants for the most part no longer ex -
pected key interest rates to rise in the euro area or the United States this year. Downward revi -
sions to growth forecasts for this year are also 
likely to have played a part in this. As a result, 
the yield curves for both US Treasuries and Fed -
eral bonds dipped at the long end; they are 
now perceptibly flatter than at the end of 2018. 
On the stock markets, reduced capital market 
rates, which are associated with a lower dis -
count factor for future expected corporate 
profits, played a role in major price rises, des -
pite the economic uncertainty. Growing risk ap -
petite among investors and a temporary in -
crease in confidence in at least a partial reso -
lution of the global trade disputes gave an 
added boost to equity prices. Moreover, finan -
cing terms on the market for European corpor -
ate bonds improved. Towards the end of the 
reporting period, renewed tension in the trade 
dispute between the United States and China 
subdued prices worldwide, especially on the 
stock market; compared with the previous 
large price gains, however, these losses were 
limited. Volatility on the foreign exchange mar -
kets was low for the most part. Only the Ar -
gentinian peso and the Turkish lira recorded 
stronger movements, and these currencies had 
already experienced severe price swings last 
year. Overall, on a weighted average against 
the currencies of 19 major trading partners, the 
euro slipped slightly on balance compared with 
the end of December 2018.
Given a slower convergence of inflation to its 
target, the Governing Council of the ECB ad -
justed the calendar- based element of its guid -
ance on future key interest rate developments 
(“forward guidance”) after its March meeting. 
It now expects the key ECB interest rates to 
remain  unchanged at least through the end of 
2019. Additionally, the rates are to remain at 
their present levels in any case for as long as 
necessary to ensure the continued sustained 
convergence of inflation to levels that are 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.Global 
economic  
growth remains 
moderate
IMF expects 
global economy 
to strengthen in 
second half of 
2019
Financial 
markets  
influenced  by 
mixed economic 
picture, greater 
monetary  policy 
accommodation 
and declining 
capital market 
ratesMonetary 
policy : forward 
guidance on 
policy rates 
adjustedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
6

At the same time, the Governing Council 
decided  to launch a new series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO- III). 
They are intended to help to preserve favour -
able bank lending conditions and the smooth 
transmission of monetary policy. The Governing 
Council will announce further details on the 
precise terms of these operations at one of its 
upcoming meetings. It also extended its policy 
of full allotment, stating that all refinancing 
oper ations would continue to be conducted as 
fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment 
for as long as necessary, and at least until the 
end of the reserve maintenance period starting 
in March 2021.
The robust increase in the broad monetary ag -
gregate M3 continued in the reporting quarter, 
even though the Eurosystem had ceased its 
monthly net asset purchases at the end of 
2018. Lending to the domestic private sector 
and inflows from abroad remained the main 
drivers of monetary growth. Demand for credit 
in the private sector was supported by the on -
going favour  able financing terms and the 
healthy labour  market situation in the euro 
area. Lending to non- financial corporations 
was more moderate, on balance, than in the 
preceding quarters, but at the same time enter -
prises raised more funds on the capital market 
during the reporting quarter, including from 
euro area banks. The associated increase in 
banks’ securitised lending meant that net flows 
to bank loans to the private sector, adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation, grew slightly on 
the quarter.
The German economy got off to a good start in 
2019, after economic output had largely stag -
nated in the second half of 2018. According to 
the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real GDP was 0.4% up on the quarter after sea -
sonal and calendar adjustment. Temporary fac -
tors played an important role in this marked 
increase, however. For example, expansionary 
fiscal measures that entered into force at the 
start of this year probably gave added impetus 
to private consumption, which is likely to have received a further boost from car purchases 
that had earlier been deferred: in the second 
half of 2018, a considerable share of car pur -
chases had been put off because of supply 
shortages due to the introduction of a new 
emissions testing procedure, the Worldwide 
Harmonised Light Vehicle Test Procedure 
(WLTP). Construction activity was brisk over the 
winter months, facilitated primarily by favour -
able weather conditions. Disregarding these 
one- off factors, the underlying cyclical trend 
nonetheless remained weak overall, as it has 
been since mid-2018. This is likely to be true of 
the current quarter, as well. Following the de -
cline in the preceding six months, aggregate 
capacity utilisation stayed at what is still a sig -
nificantly above average level.
The construction, hospitality and retail sectors 
were clear sources of impetus, flanked by the 
one- off effects. Commercial services are also 
likely to have increased markedly in the report -
ing period. By contrast, the broad- based down -
turn in industry continued. On the demand 
side, the key driver of growth was probably pri -
vate consumption, which thus shrugged off 
the slump it went through in the second half of 
2018. Despite anaemic industrial activity, busi -
ness investment in new machinery, equipment 
and plants probably saw a distinct increase. 
Construction investment also expanded signifi -
cantly. Exports likewise rose.
Despite the slowdown in economic activity in 
the second half of 2018, banks’ lending busi -
ness in the reporting quarter was exceptionally 
dynamic. Loans to households accounted once 
again for the largest net inflows in lending to 
Germany’s private sector, although loans to 
non- financial corporations were also a key 
driver of growth in lending business. According 
to bank managers responding to the Bank 
Lending Survey, the higher level of funds 
needed for fixed investment was the main rea -
son for the rise in demand in this credit seg -
ment. At the same time, the results of the Bank 
Lending Survey indicate overall that the period 
of expansionary adjustments in lending policy New series of 
TLTROs and 
continuation  of 
full allotment
Lending to 
private  sector 
and inflows 
from abroad 
shape robust 
monetary 
growth in 
euro area
Distinct growth 
in German 
economy  in 
Q1 2019, mainly 
due to one- off 
effectsImpetus stem -
ming chiefly 
from private 
consumption 
and construc -
tion investment
German banks’ 
lending to 
domestic private 
sector lively 
againDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
7

was no longer ongoing for loans to households 
for house purchase or for loans to enterprises 
in the reporting quarter.
In the first quarter of 2019, the labour market 
continued to improve despite the slower under -
lying cyclical trend, which has been ongoing 
since mid-2018. This meant that employment 
creation continued and unemployment de -
clined, even if only slightly. As before, the rise 
in employment was mainly due to the increase 
in new jobs subject to social security contribu -
tions. By contrast, the number of self- employed 
persons and persons working exclusively in 
low- paid part- time jobs continued to go down. 
The number of job vacancies has remained at 
the high level it reached a few months ago. 
Leading indicators suggest that gloomier re -
cruitment plans have so far largely been con -
fined to manufacturing. On the whole, labour 
demand is continuing to trend upwards.
Negotiated wages also rose sharply in the first 
quarter. This was mainly due to the previous 
year’s wage settlements, which were higher 
than before on account of the pronounced 
tightness in the labour market. Likewise, the 
new agreements concluded in the 2019 pay 
round mainly envisage steeper wage rises than 
in the years from 2015 to 2017. The wage de -
mands for sectors where an agreement is still 
pending in this year’s pay round are slightly 
higher than in the previous year. The growth in 
actual earnings may have again surpassed that 
of the negotiated pay rates in the first quarter 
of 2019.
The annual inflation rate fell clearly from 2.1% 
to 1.6% in the first quarter. At the current end, 
this was attributable to a seasonally adjusted 
drop in prices of 0.2% from the last quarter of 
2018, which was mainly caused by lower 
energy  prices. The latter continued to fall on 
the back of decreased crude oil prices at the 
end of the previous year, even though there 
had been a considerable hike in the electricity 
and gas tariffs for households. By contrast, 
there was little change in overall food prices. The rise in the price of processed products was 
offset by a countermovement in unprocessed 
food prices. Increases in upstream prices of 
non- energy industrial goods were passed on to 
consumers. Services also became noticeably 
more expensive. Annual HICP inflation exclud -
ing energy and food saw a rise to 1.4%, which, 
in comparison to the previous year, was less 
sharp than in the fourth quarter of 2018, how -
ever. This was because, due to the relatively 
early date of Easter that year, price develop -
ments in the first quarter of 2018 had been 
similarly as high as in the reporting quarter. 
Consumer prices went up significantly in April, 
buoyed by higher energy prices and the effect 
of Easter on travel services. The headline rate 
rose to 2.1% on the year.
The pattern of a two- tiered economy that has 
been impacting on economic activity in Ger -
many since the summer of 2018 will remain in 
place in the second quarter of 2019. While the 
downturn in industry will continue, the expan -
sionary forces in the more domestically- oriented 
sectors are still intact. The overall result of this 
will continue to be a weak underlying cyclical 
trend. Given this setting, German economic 
output in the second quarter of 2019 is not 
very likely to exceed the level reached in the 
first quarter, which had been boosted by a 
number of one- off effects. These effects, which 
had largely driven growth after the turn of the 
year, are expected to lapse or even reverse 
themselves. To wit, the additional stimulus to 
private consumption from fiscal measures could 
dip temporarily in the second quarter before 
other measures to boost purchasing power 
pass through to households in the second half 
of the year. On top of this, it is likely that the 
processes for catch- up car purchases are largely 
complete. Last but not least, a dampening re -
bound effect can be expected in the construc -
tion sector following the very strong weather- 
related increase in the first quarter. Moreover, 
downturn forces continue to be prevalent in 
industry, and they may even intensify some -
what. This can also be seen, amongst other 
things, in the number of new orders in industry, Labour market 
bucking current 
slower under -
lying cyclical 
trend
Negotiated pay 
rates continuing 
to rise sharply
Energy main 
reason why 
annual con -
sumer price 
inflation down 
perceptibly in 
first quarterModerate 
economic  
output  expected 
in second 
quarter Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
8

which have declined significantly and on a 
broad front from the start of 2019. The busi -
ness climate index in manufacturing declined 
for the eighth consecutive period, too. Output 
and export expectations were also scaled back 
again. In line with this, the number of passen -
ger cars manufactured in April dropped quite 
considerably, after seasonal adjustment, ac -
cording to data provided by the German Asso -
ciation of the Automotive Industry (VDA). A 
gradual rebound in economic activity is only 
expected for the second half of the year along -
side a global economic recovery.
Public finances will perceptibly bolster the 
economy throughout the year. The general 
government fiscal balance is likely to see a dis -
tinct deterioration, though it will clearly remain 
within positive territory as things stand today. 
The main reason for the declining surplus is the 
fiscal accommodation, which can primarily be 
seen in accelerating spending hikes. The macro -
economic slowdown also means that tax rev -
enue is growing more slowly. The debt ratio is 
likely to fall below the 60% threshold.
Fiscal policy is expected to become more accom-
modative in the coming years owing to a wide 
range of projects. Steep spending increases are 
envisaged in the areas of pensions and long-  
term care. In addition, more funding is also set 
to be made available in areas such as infra -
structure, education, and internal and external 
security. On the revenue side, the coalition deal 
still essentially plans to partially abolish the soli -
darity surcharge in 2021.
Overall, however, general government is still 
expected to run a surplus as things stand today. This holds even if the lower revenue expect -
ations following the May tax estimate are fac -
tored in. That said, it looks as though govern -
ment budgets will come under pressure in the 
coming years. With the measures agreed so far, 
this mainly applies to central government as 
well as the statutory pension and health insur -
ance schemes, which, as of late, have still been 
running relatively large surpluses. As from the 
middle of the next decade, demographic 
change will once again weigh considerably on 
government budgets.
A severe deterioration in the Federal budget 
balance is expected this year and next year. 
However, the current decisions are adhering to 
the target of balancing the budget without net 
borrowing until 2023. The refugee reserve is 
expected to be used for this purpose. As things 
stand, this target appears at first glance to be 
highly achievable – even if the priority coalition 
agreements are implemented and the less 
favour  able tax estimate is applied. A distinctly 
more favourable Federal budget balance than 
planned and growing reserves lie ahead in the 
shorter run. Going forward, however, pressures 
will increase considerably, and even an initially 
larger refugee reserve will only be able to plug 
budget gaps temporarily. It is not just the costs 
of new measures that need to be considered. 
Demographic trends will sharply increase the 
grant towards statutory pension insurance 
schemes even without any additional increase 
in benefits. It is therefore recommended to set 
stricter priorities and to secure funding in the 
longer term to cover the high costs of add -
itional measures.Reduced 
government  
surplus  this year 
given fiscal 
accommodation
Further fiscal 
policy accom -
modation in 
coming years 
and …
… gradually 
lower surplusesWiggle room 
left in Federal 
budget but con -
siderable pres -
sure expected 
looking aheadDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
9

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
As in the final quarter of 2018, the global econ -
omy probably expanded at just a moderate 
pace at the start of the year. Developments var -
ied by a fair amount from region to region, 
however. In the euro area and the United King -
dom, real gross domestic product (GDP) grew 
more strongly again. Although US GDP in -
creased considerably, private final domestic 
demand  lost steam. The Japanese economy 
appears  to have weakened. In China, GDP rose 
at a similar pace as in the previous quarter, 
accord ing to official data.
A major factor behind the slowdown in global 
economic growth is weaker investment activity 
in the advanced economies. Investment in 
these economies cooled down, probably on the back of depressed earnings expectations 
and potentially also due to increased caution 
on the part of firms. For some time already, 
trade policy disputes have particularly repre -
sented a material downside risk to global eco -
nomic activity. The weakness of global demand 
for passenger cars is likely to be another factor 
behind lower investment activity. Although 
first- quarter sales recovered slightly following 
their slump in the second half of 2018, specific 
developments in the global car markets are 
making it unlikely that sales will return to the 
high growth rates of earlier years (see the box 
on pp. 12 f.). The less dynamic demand for cap -
ital goods is weighing on industrial activity, in 
particular. According to the Dutch Centraal 
Planbureau, average monthly global produc -
tion sector output in January/ February was 
even down slightly from the final quarter of 
2018. The trade dispute between the United 
States and China weighed additionally on inter -
national goods trade. On the whole, the aver -
age global trade volume in the first two months 
of 2019 was down significantly from the final 
quarter of 2018, in which it had already con -
tracted considerably.
The current assessment by the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) reflects the continued 
moderate pace of global economic activity.1 In 
April, the IMF made another downward revi -
sion to its projection for global economic 
growth (based on purchasing power parity 
weights) this year to 3.3%. It most notably re -
vised its projections downwards for several ad -
vanced economies, including the euro area, the 
United Kingdom and the United States. How -
ever, the IMF regards the recent slowdown in 
global economic activity as a brief blip and ex -
pects to see a gradual recovery in the second 
half of 2019. It therefore left its global growth 
projection for 2020 unchanged at 3.6%.Global 
economic  
growth remains 
moderate
Industrial sector 
and global trade 
still exception -
ally weak
IMF once again 
revised global 
growth projec -
tion downward 
for current year 
but confirmed 
outlook for 
2020Indicators of global industrial activity
Sources: CPB and Bundesbank calculations based on data pro-
duced by IHS Markit, J.P. Morgan, sentix GmbH, and Standard 
and Poor’s, which are provided by IHS Markit.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19202468
–++++Seasonally adjusted, monthly data
9899100101102Global trade volumeGlobal industrial output
Index points, long-term average = 100
Bundesbank leading indicatorYear-on-year percentage change
1 See International Monetary Fund (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
10

As things stand, however, the outlook for the 
global economy appears extremely uncertain. 
This is due to the ongoing trade disputes, in 
particular.2 The Bundesbank’s leading indicator 
for the global economy, developed in order to 
identify cyclical turning points in global indus -
trial activity, once again improved slightly in 
April, thus bringing a one- year slide to an end.3 
Other than that, however, there are only scant 
signs that the global industrial sector will soon 
rebound sustainably and the global economy 
will raise its moderate growth rate.
Despite the sluggishness of global industrial 
activity  , commodity prices recovered, in some 
cases considerably, over the reporting period. 
This was due in key measure to supply- side 
scarcity; iron ore prices, for instance, have gone 
up significantly since the turn of the year pri -
marily on the back of production losses in 
Brazil . Trends in the prices of other industrial 
commodities, by contrast, were uneven. Food 
and beverages were even somewhat cheaper. 
Accordingly, the HWWI index for non- energy 
commodities was up in April only slightly from 
its December level. Over the same period, spot 
prices for Brent crude oil were up by more than 
25%. Prices were driven up not only by OPEC 
production cutbacks and production stoppages 
in Venezuela but also, probably, by the tighten -
ing of sanctions on Iran by the US administra -
tion. As this report went to press, a barrel of 
Brent crude oil cost US$74. The prices for for -
ward deliveries failed to keep pace with the in -
crease in spot prices, however, causing forward 
discounts to increase markedly.
Consumer prices in the industrial countries 
once again picked up more significantly, in line 
with oil prices. After dropping to as low as 
1.4% in the interim, annual consumer price in -
flation went back up to 1.7% by March. Core 
inflation, which strips out energy and food 
prices, remained largely unchanged, however, 
and stayed rather muted at 1.5%.Currently 
no signs yet 
of major 
improvement 
Commodity 
prices up, in 
some cases 
considerably 
Consumer price 
inflation up 
perceptibly  at 
last reportWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and food
and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 10 May 2019, or 1 to 16 May 2019 for crude 
oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 193035405060708090100110120Monthly averages, log scale
5060708090100
60708090100US dollar basis,
2012 = 100
Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beverages
2 The trade dispute between the United States and China 
has recently been ratcheted up. Higher tariffs will be 
slapped on a considerable share of goods traded between 
the two economies, and a further escalation does not ap -
pear to be out of the question, either.
3 The Bundesbank’s leading indicator is based on a princi -
pal component analysis of global economic parameters. A 
rising indicator below the long- run mean of 100 is a signal 
of a cyclical recovery phase. The Bundesbank leading indi -
cator’s time series is available at: https:// www.bundesbank.
de/ dynamic/ action/ en/ statistics/ time- series- databases/ time- 
series- databases/ 759784/ 759784?listId=www_s3wa_
waeb_bbliDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
11

The weak state of the global car market
Worldwide sales of passenger cars fell last 
year for the fi  rst time since their crisis- 
induced slump in 2008 and 2009. The cur-
rent year seems likely to see a further de-
cline.1 Typically, sales of passenger cars are 
affected by trends in the economy as a 
whole and can therefore be regarded as a 
reliable (and also quickly available) indicator 
of economic activity.2 The impression of the 
global economic situation currently given 
by worldwide sales of passenger cars is 
likely to be too negative, however, as they 
chiefl  y refl  ect specifi  c developments in re-
gional markets, which are, in some cases, 
temporary. One factor that carried particu-
lar weight in 2018 in this context was a de-
cline for the fi  rst time – accord ing to the 
time series beginning in 2005 – in the an-
nual sales fi  gures in China. This was prob-
ably connected, in particular, with the re-
duction in tax breaks that had bolstered 
sales in the preceding years.3 Meanwhile, 
the temporary slump in new passenger car 
registrations in the euro area mainly re-
fl  ected temporary supply shortages. These 
were due to delays in the certifi  cation of 
models following the introduction of a new worldwide harmonised light vehicles test 
procedure (WLTP) for emissions, which has 
been in force in the EU since September 
2018.4
In the coming months, too, special devel-
opments could leave a clear mark on global 
car sales. First, the cut in value added tax 
in  China, which has been in effect since 
April, could boost demand for new vehicles 
in the short term. Additional supportive pol-
icy measures, aimed specifi  cally at the car 
market , are probably planned. Second, the 
United States is threatening to impose con-
siderably higher tariffs on car imports in the 
future.5 Such a step is likely to put a percep-
tible damper not only on imports but also 
on overall sales fi  gures in the United States.6
Looking ahead, even if positive factors pre-
vail in the short term, it is unlikely that 
global car sales will be able to match the 
high rates of growth seen from 2010 to 
2017. In the advanced economies, sales 
fi  gures  in 2016 were already matching the 
1 This was due chiefl  y to the extremely weak sales fi  g-
ures in the second half of 2018. The fi  rst few months 
of 2019 saw a slight pick- up in global demand for pas-
senger cars.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015).
3 At the end of 2015, the Chinese government halved 
purchase tax for small cars, which led to a very sharp 
rise in the sales fi  gures in 2016. With the progressive 
raising of the rate of tax, growth fl  attened out as early 
as the following year, however. The tax rebate was 
phased out completely at the beginning of 2018.
4 For a discussion of the effects on the German auto-
mobile industry, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a).
5 According to reports in the media, a confi  dential 
study from the United States Department of Com-
merce (DOC) concludes that imports of motor vehicles 
and motor vehicle parts pose a threat to national se-
curity and recommends setting protective tariffs.
6 According to a study by the Center for Automotive 
Research, model simulations with a 25  percentage 
point hike in tariffs on motor vehicles and motor ve-
hicle parts show car sales in the US as being two mil-
lion units lower annually over the long term compared 
with an alternative scenario in which trade policy is 
unchanged. See Schultz et al. (2018).Global car sales*
Sources: Haver Analytics, Global Insight and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. * Heterogeneous definitions of car sales. 1 IMF defini-
tions. 2  Annualised.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19020406080100Million units
China
Euro area
Other
advanced economies1Other emerging economies1USA
Q12Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
12

Selected emerging market 
economies
According to the official estimate, in the first 
quarter of 2019 real GDP in China was 6.4% 
higher than the same quarter a year earlier. This 
meant that GDP growth kept pace with the 
previous period’s growth rate following three 
quarters of gradual contraction. A quite strong 
surge in production in the manufacturing sec -
tor was the main factor behind the stabilisa -
tion. What makes this surprising, however, is 
that, in the past quarter, revenue from the ex -
port of goods (in US dollar terms) was only 
slightly above its previous year’s level. As a re -
sult of the trade dispute, the value of exports 
to the United States even dropped by as much 
as 9%. The increase in electricity consumption 
in this sector was muted, representing another 
indication that industrial activity is tending to 
be subdued. Some attribute the stabilisation of 
economic activity to recent fiscal and monetary 
policy accommodation, though the effects of this have probably not yet unfolded entirely; as 
a case in point, a VAT reduction did not go into 
effect until the beginning of April.4 Nonethe -
less, inflation as measured by the consumer 
price index (CPI) picked up somewhat from 
2.3% in March to 2.5% in April, on the back of 
a surge in pork prices following production 
stoppages caused by an epidemic.
The Indian economy is likely to have lost even 
more steam at the beginning of the year. GDP 
growth in the fourth quarter of 2018 had al -
ready dropped to 6.6% on the year. There is 
not yet any official estimate for the quarter 
ended. However, industrial output growth 
sagged significantly once again. Average an -
nual consumer price inflation in the first quarter 
clocked in at 2.5%, which was quite moderate 
by India’s standards. A persistently favourable Stabilisation 
of economic 
growth in China
India’s growth 
rate probably 
moderated 
further level around which they were fl  uctuating 
before the global fi  nancial and economic 
crisis. Given the demographic outlook and 
high motorisation rates, markets there are 
likely to be largely saturated. In emerging 
markets there still seems to be considerable 
potential for catching up in this regard. 
Espe cially in China, however, maintaining 
sales fi  gures at their current level would 
already  be enough for a comparatively rapid 
convergence in the stock of cars per cap-
ita.7 Not least on account of more stringent 
local environmental constraints and more 
frequent driving bans on cars with trad-
itional internal combustion engines, sales 
growth in the Chinese market is also likely 
to focus on the e- mobility sector. Against 
the backdrop of these global underlying 
conditions, the business environment could 
become more challenging for the German 
automobile industry as well.7 At roughly 150 registered passenger cars per 1,000 
inhabitants, this is still far below the corresponding fi  g-
ures for industrial countries. For example, in Germany, 
there are almost 570 vehicles per 1,000 persons. Even 
without a change in the numbers sold, however, the 
fi  gure for China could increase to 250 vehicles per 
1,000 inhabitants within a decade. The convergence 
processes in Japan and South Korea progressed at a 
similar pace in the past.
4 There are three different VAT rates in China. The max -
imum rate (which applies, amongst other things, to manu -
factured products) was reduced from 16% to 13% and the 
medium rate from 10% to 9%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
13

food supply situation is the primary factor in 
this development. Against that backdrop, the 
Reserve Bank of India maintained the loose 
monetary policy stance it had adopted at the 
beginning of the year.
Brazil’s economic recovery following the severe 
recession of 2015-16, already on shaky legs to 
begin with, could well have encountered a fur -
ther setback in the past quarter. Although no 
official GDP figures are available yet, the central 
bank’s activity indicator is pointing to GDP con -
traction. This is likely to be due primarily to se -
vere production losses in mining following the 
temporary closure of several large mines after a 
horrifying dam collapse in January. Moreover, 
retail sales did not continue their rise. House -
holds are still stuck in a tight spot, not least 
because efforts to reduce unemployment in the 
first quarter made only little headway. Con -
sumer price inflation in the first quarter, at 4.1% 
on the year, was just below the inflation target 
for 2019, which had been lowered to 4.25%. The Brazilian central bank left its policy rate un -
changed at 6.5%.
In Russia, annual GDP growth in the final quar -
ter of 2018, at 2.7%, was comparatively fast-  
paced. However, in the quarter ended, for 
which no official estimates were available as 
this report went to press, growth is likely to 
have decelerated perceptibly. Private consump -
tion, in particular, appears to have lost steam, 
as evidenced by the reduced growth of price-  
adjusted retail sales. Car sales were even down 
slightly on the year, in fact. Consumer restraint 
is likely to have been encouraged not least by 
the VAT hike from 18% to 20% at the begin -
ning of the year. This drove up the inflation rate 
from 3.9% in the final quarter of 2018 to 5.2% 
in the first quarter of 2019. Proceeding on the 
assumption that this is merely a temporary in -
flation surge, the Russian central bank there -
fore left its policy rate unchanged at 7.75%
United States
In the United States, economic growth acceler -
ated again in the first quarter. According to an 
initial official estimate, real GDP was up by 
0.8% on the previous quarter, in which it had 
grown by 0.5%. One- off developments, how -
ever, were primarily responsible for this acceler -
ation. For starters, imports were down percep -
tibly from their fourth- quarter levels. In the 
light of the ongoing trade dispute, fewer goods 
were imported from China, in particular. More -
over, US- based enterprises increasingly en -
gaged in stockpiling. To round out the list, pub -
lic sector demand grew sharply, fuelled to a 
meaningful extent by a spike in local spending 
on road construction which will probably not 
last.5 Private final domestic demand, which can Probably no 
meaningful 
improvement 
in Brazilian 
economy Decelerating 
growth in Russia
Considerable 
growth at 
beginning 
of yearContributions to real GDP growth in the 
United States
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis. 1 Private consumption 
and  private  gross  fixed  capital  formation.  2 Public  demand, 
changes in inventories and net exports.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20193210123456
–––++++++Annualised quarter-on-quarter change, seasonally adjusted
Other demand 2Private final domestic demand 1
Real GDP 
as a percentageContributions in percentage points
5 This increase in investment more than made up for the 
perceptible decline in civilian public consumption by the US 
federal government following the US government shut -
down. The direct impact of the shutdown on annualised 
real GDP growth in the first quarter, at -0.3 percentage 
point, was within the bounds of expectations. See Deut-
sche Bundesbank  (2019b) and Bureau of Economic Analysis 
(2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
14

be interpreted as an indicator of underlying 
cyclical momentum, saw only muted growth, 
however. Private consumption and private 
gross fixed capital formation remained anaemic 
in the first quarter of the year. At last report, 
however, capital goods orders and consumer 
spending rebounded. Households’ propensity 
to purchase is likely to be buttressed in the 
second quarter by the persistently favourable 
labour market situation as well. In April, the 
unemployment rate fell to a new cyclical 
trough. Consistent with high utilisation of the 
potential labour force, wage growth also re -
mained quite brisk. CPI-  based annual inflation 
went up to 2.0% in the same month. The US 
Federal Reserve System recently refrained from 
making any changes to its monetary policy 
stance.
Japan
The Japanese economy seems to have weak -
ened at the start of the year.6 Although real 
GDP had picked up in the final quarter of 2018 
by 0.5% on the period, this was on the heels of 
a 0.6% contraction in the third quarter, due 
particularly to weather- related factors. At all 
events, in the first quarter industrial produc -
tion, which often tracks aggregate output fairly 
closely, fell well short of its level a quarter earl -
ier. Demand- side indicators likewise indicate a 
sluggish economy. For one thing, the Bank of 
Japan’s price- adjusted Consumption Activity 
Index treaded water compared to the final 
quarter of 2018. This coincided with a marked 
decline in goods imports, whilst at the same 
time goods exports, for their part, fell distinctly. 
Even though the underlying cyclical trend was 
only moderate, the labour market maintained 
its robust state of health. The unemployment 
rate remained exceptionally low. Annual CPI in -
flation excluding energy and food remained 
low in March at 0.3%. Against the backdrop of 
exceedingly muted inflationary pressures, the 
Bank of Japan maintained its accommodative 
stance.United Kingdom
According to the provisional estimate, quarterly 
GDP growth in the United Kingdom acceler -
ated to 0.5% in the first quarter of 2019, fol -
lowing an increase of merely 0.2% in the final 
quarter of 2018. One of the main factors be -
hind this accelerated growth was a spike in 
gross value added in manufacturing following 
rather severe losses a quarter earlier. However, 
this increase was probably, in particular, a re -
flection of increased stockpiling by enter prises 
in the run- up to the United Kingdom’s ex -
pected withdrawal from the European Union. 
Whereas construction activity accelerated con -
siderably in the winter, the services sector, 
which accounts for a major share of the UK 
economy, saw a perceptible dip in its growth 
rate. The labour market situation remained ex -
ceedingly favourable. In the first quarter of 
2019, the unemployment rate hit a new cyclical 
low of 3.8%. Annual inflation as measured by 
the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices 
(HICP) remained largely stable in the January to 
March period, at around 1.9%. At the begin -
ning of May, the Bank of England adhered to 
its monetary policy stance.
Poland
In Poland, economic growth revived distinctly 
in the first quarter of the year. Seasonally ad -
justed real GDP rose by 1.4% quarter- on- 
quarter, following an increase of 0.5% a quar -
ter earlier. Healthy construction activity and a 
perceptible pick- up in industrial production 
were the major factors in this development. On 
the expenditure side, growth was propelled in 
particular by surging private consumer spend -
ing fuelled by high employment growth and 
wage increases. Unemployment reached a new 
low of 3.4% in March. Annual consumer price 
inflation surged in April once again, to 2.2%. Listless 
economic  
growthDistinct 
acceleration  
in growth
Distinct revival 
of economic 
growth; increas -
ing consumer 
price inflation
6 As this issue of the Monthly Report went to press, no 
official estimate of Japanese GDP for the first quarter of 
2019 was available yet.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
15

Core inflation – excluding energy and food – 
likewise increased, to 1.7%. However, this in -
crease was still below the inflation target set by 
the central bank, which thus left its policy rate 
unchanged.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
Economic growth picked up distinctly in the 
euro area at the start of 2019. According to 
Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP in the first 
quarter rose by 0.4% on the quarter after sea -
sonal adjustment, following an increase of 0.2% in the last quarter of 2018. The annual 
growth rate remained at 1.2% after adjustment 
for calendar effects and thus slightly below the 
estimated potential rate. Aggregate capacity 
utilisation is likely to have moved close to nor -
mal levels. Germany was the main reason for 
the rather volatile pattern in growth rates since 
the middle of last year. The recent acceleration 
in economic expansion there was probably 
driven by a number of special factors (see 
pp. 46 ff.). Construction activity was fostered 
by the mild winter weather, for instance. Fur -
thermore, it is likely that growth in households’ 
income was especially strong in Germany and 
other euro area Member States due to fiscal 
measures. This probably benefited certain ser -
vices sectors in particular and also contributed 
to a slight recovery in industrial production. 
After these temporary factors peter out, the 
euro area economy will probably return to its 
underlying moderate path of growth. This is 
supported by the fact that so far there has not 
been any major improvement in business and 
consumer sentiment.
On the expenditure side, private consumption 
in particular picked up steam. After three quar -
ters of only low growth rates, consumption is 
likely to have increased more sharply again re -
cently. In any event, retail sales were up mark -
edly after price and seasonal adjustment, and 
the number of motor vehicle registrations 
climbed steeply from the subdued level of the 
preceding quarter. Households’ purchasing 
power has been buoyed up since the start of 
the year by the distinct rise in wage income, 
not least because of the minimum wage hike in 
several Member States,7 and by a variety of fis -
cal measures that provided relief.8 Upward 
price pressures also flattened out markedly. 
Stronger 
economic  
growth at start 
of year, though 
one- off factors 
probably 
decisiveDistinct expan -
sion of private 
consumptionAggregate output in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19100103106109112Real GDP, 2010 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, 
log scale
9497100103
9497100103106109112100103106109112
Italy
SpainFranceEuro area
of which:
7 Spain, Greece and Lithuania had especially strong rises in 
the minimum wage, while there were marked increases in 
Germany, Slovakia, Slovenia and Estonia.
8 In France, for instance, far- reaching measures to boost 
the purchasing power of lower income groups were 
adopted in response to protests by the “yellow vest” move -
ment. In Germany, the social security contributions paid by 
employees were lowered at the start of 2019, amongst 
other things.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
16

These had previously had a distinct dampening 
effect on households’ purchasing power.
Gross fixed capital formation is likely to have 
seen another distinct rise in the euro area.9 The 
weather also caused construction investment 
to grow more strongly than in the preceding 
quarter, at least going by the steep growth in 
construction output in the first quarter. Invest -
ment in machinery and equipment also appears 
to have regained traction after the slump in the 
second half of 2018. The increase in domestic 
turnover seen by producers of capital goods 
firmed considerably in the first two months of 
this year compared to the fourth quarter of last 
year. Initial data from the national accounts of 
Member States also signal a visible rise in real 
expenditure on machinery and equipment. 
Overall, investment activity is likely to have 
remained  subdued despite recent improve -
ments. Geopolitical risks and a deterioration in 
businesses’ earnings prospects probably had a 
negative impact.
The value of exports to countries outside the 
euro area was up again distinctly at the start of 
2019 according to the foreign trade statistics, 
following a significant rise in the final quarter 
of 2018. Exports to the United Kingdom in -
creased sharply, and exports to China also grew 
considerably again. By contrast, exports to the 
United States slowed. The slightly downward 
trend in export prices gave rise to a markedly 
positive volume effect. Stronger domestic de -
mand in the euro area was accompanied by 
rises in real imports from non- euro area coun -
tries. Foreign trade between euro area coun -
tries, which had lost considerable steam last 
year, recouped at the start of 2019. Trade in 
consumer goods in particular picked up for 
both intra and extra trade.
Industrial production in the first quarter rose by 
¾% on the preceding period, though this has 
not offset the setback from the final quarter of 
2018. Industrial output is still 1¼% lower than 
the last peak in the fourth quarter of 2017. The 
marked increase in the first quarter was chiefly attributable to the recovery in consumer goods 
production, while the production of intermedi -
ate and capital goods was only able to pick up 
slightly. Though motor vehicle output grew dis -
tinctly, so far only a very small part of the losses 
from the second half of 2018 have been re -
couped. This suggests that the decline is not 
only down to problems in switching to the new 
WLTP emissions testing procedure but could 
also be linked to factors on the demand side.
Among the larger Member States, economic 
growth rose markedly in Germany and Italy in 
particular. In Italy, real GDP was up by a sea -
sonally adjusted 0.2% on the preceding period 
according to preliminary estimates from the 
statistical office, following two quarters with 
slightly negative growth rates. The stabilisation 
of domestic demand, which had still fallen in 
the second half of last year chiefly owing to 
declining investment expenditure, is likely to 
have been a major factor in this. Italy’s goods 
exports, including in particular trade with non- 
euro area countries, showed another marked 
increase at the start of the year, while its im -
ports rose moderately, if at all, in keeping with 
its weak domestic activity. In France, economic 
output maintained the moderate pace of 
growth seen in the preceding quarter with a 
quarterly growth rate of 0.3%. Domestic de -
mand had a positive effect on growth, with pri -
vate consumption rising markedly again after a 
sideways movement, for example. Likewise, in -
vestment activity remained on a distinct up -
ward trajectory despite a marginal slowdown 
in growth. Exports remained at the substan -
tially increased level of the preceding quarter, 
while imports were up markedly. Spain saw an -
other slight increase in the existing robust re -
bound in economic activity. Real GDP rose by Investment 
up again
Exports to 
non- euro area 
countries up 
again
Higher industrial 
production at 
start of yearEconomic 
output  up in 
most Member 
States
9 It should be noted that almost half of the investment in -
crease in the second half of 2018 was attributable to devel -
opments in Ireland. Excluding Ireland, investment activity 
has flattened over the past year, especially in machinery 
and equipment. For several years now, the reporting of 
invest ment in Ireland has been shaped by the activities 
of multinational enterprise groups which have been out -
sourcing intellectual property rights to Irish subsidiaries, 
amongst other things. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
17

0.7% on the quarter after seasonal adjustment, 
following 0.6% in the preceding period. A 
major acceleration in investment activity con -
tributed to this, while private consumption ex -
panded moderately again. By contrast, exports 
contracted, and imports likewise declined con -
siderably. Aside from this, economic activity 
remained  lively, especially in the eastern Mem -
ber States, while Austria, Belgium and Portugal 
achieved only moderate GDP growth.
The euro area labour market situation con -
tinued to improve despite the subdued under -
lying cyclical trend. The number of unemployed 
persons in the first quarter fell by 230,000 
compared to the fourth quarter of 2018, after 
seasonal adjustment, and by 1.1 million on the 
year. As a result, the standardised unemploy -
ment rate came down to 7.7% by March. Thus, 
the unemployment rate was still 0.4 percent -
age point higher than its cyclical low prior to 
the onset of the global financial and economic 
crisis. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, the number of persons in employment rose at 
the same pace as in the preceding quarter, at 
0.3%. It now exceeds the pre- crisis peak by 5.2 
million persons. Average labour productivity 
barely increased at the start of the year follow -
ing a downward trend in the preceding quar -
ters. The rather high labour shortage in manu -
facturing and in the services sector saw a fur -
ther slight narrowing until April according to 
survey results. The brisk growth in gross wages 
per employee is likely to have firmed up, not 
least because of the rise in the minimum wage 
in several countries.
Euro area consumer prices in the first quarter of 
2019 remained unchanged compared with the 
fourth quarter of 2018 after seasonal adjust -
ment, after they had risen steeply in some 
cases in previous quarters. This was chiefly due 
to energy prices, which fell significantly short of 
the level in the fourth quarter of last year. The 
prices of non-  energy industrial goods and ser -
vices increased moderately as before and food 
prices were even up substantially. Annual head -
line HICP inflation contracted from 1.9% to 
1.4% because – unlike this year – energy had 
become significantly more expensive in the first 
quarter of 2018. By contrast, the rate excluding 
energy and food remained at 1.0%.
The impression of a moderately upward path of 
underlying inflation remained in place even 
after a number of methodological changes 
were made at the beginning of 2019. Since 
then, what are known as special aggregates 
(energy, food, non- energy industrial goods and 
services) are derived (retroactively from 2017) 
from a more detailed classification level of the 
basket of goods.10 As a result, certain items 
switched between processed and unprocessed 
food and between services and non- energy in -
dustrial goods.11 That said, this had no major 
impact on how the core rates were reported. Further improve -
ment in labour 
market situationConsumer price 
inflation weaker 
in Q1 because 
of energy
Methodological 
changes in 
January  2019 
and their 
implications Sentiment indicators for the euro area
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19–25–20–15–10–50Percentage balances of positive and negative responses, 
seasonally adjusted, monthly data
3025201510505101520
––––––++++
Consumer confidenceManufacturing
industryServices sectorBusiness confidence
Construction
10 This is the ECOICOP level (European classification of in -
dividual consumption according to purpose), which pro -
vides around 300 HICP sub- aggregates for all countries and 
the euro area as a whole from no later than January 2017.
11 See European Central Bank (2019a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
18

This is in contrast to the methodological change 
in the calculation of the price index for package 
holidays in Germany, which led to the HICP 
being revised retroactively back to January 
2015. This raised the inflation rate reported for 
2015 considerably.12
In April 2019, consumer prices were up sub -
stantially on the previous month by 0.4% after 
seasonal adjustment, and annual HICP inflation 
rose to 1.7%. The later date of Easter com -
pared with 2018 is likely to have played an im -
portant role here, meaning that prices for travel 
services rose steeply on the year.
Economic growth in the euro area is likely to 
weaken somewhat in the second quarter. Not 
only are favourable weather conditions lacking; 
in fact, the weather may even result in a coun -
termovement. Overall, sentiment indicators 
suggest a muted underlying cyclical trend. It 
appears that industry has not yet moved past 
its sluggish phase, as indicated in any event by 
the Purchasing Managers’ Index for manufac -
turing, which remained clearly in contraction -
ary territory in April despite a slight improve -
ment, and by the European Commission’s cor -
responding sentiment indicator, which once 
again lowered recently and thus only just ex -
ceeded the long- term average. Sectors geared 
towards the domestic economy are providing 
sustained growth stimuli, however. While senti -
ment indicators in the services sector deterior -
ated somewhat, they still exceeded the expan -
sion threshold and their long- term average. In addition, consumer confidence remained fairly 
high. Although income growth is likely to be 
somewhat lower in the coming months than at 
the start of the year, the continuing favourable 
labour market situation should bolster con -
sumption activity and with it economic expan -
sion.Steep consumer 
price inflation in 
April especially 
owing to late 
Easter date
Weaker 
economic  
growth in 
second quarter
List of references
Bureau of Economic Analysis (2019), Gross Domestic Product: First Quarter of 2019 (Advance Esti -
mate), Technical Note, 26 April 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), The weakness of German motor vehicle production in the second 
half of 2018, Monthly Report, February 2019, pp. 47 ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), The macroeconomic effects of the government shutdown in the 
United States, Monthly Report, February 2019, pp. 14 ff.Consumer prices in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 190.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
–++++++Year-on-year percentage change, monthly data
0+0.5+1.0+1.5+2.0 Excluding energy and foodHICPCurrent Prior to revision
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c) and European Cen -
tral Bank (2019b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
19

Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c), The revision of the sub- index for package holidays and its impact 
on the HICP and core inflation, Monthly Report, March 2019, pp. 8 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), Developments in global car sales and implications for the world 
economy, Monthly Report, November 2015, pp. 12 ff.
European Central Bank (2019a), New features in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices: ana -
lytical groups, scanner data and web- scraping, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/ 2019, pp. 53 ff.
European Central Bank (2019b) A new method for the package holiday price index in Germany 
and its impact on HICP inflation rates, Economic Bulletin, Issue 2/ 2019, pp. 61ff.
International Monetary Fund (2019), World Economic Outlook: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Re -
covery, April 2019.
Schultz, M., K. Dziczek, B. Swiecki and Y. Chen (2018), Trade Briefing: Consumer Impact of Poten -
tial U.S. Section 232 Tariffs and Quotas on Imported Automobiles & Automotive Parts, Center for 
Automotive Research, July 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
20

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its March meeting, the ECB Governing 
Council made a number of new monetary pol -
icy decisions. First, the Council adjusted the 
calendar- based element of its guidance on 
future  key policy rate developments (“forward 
guidance”). The ECB Governing Council now 
expects policy rates to remain unchanged at 
least through the end of 2019. The state-  
contingent element of the Council’s forward 
guidance indicates, moreover, that policy rates 
will, in any case, remain at their present levels 
for as long as necessary to ensure the con -
tinued sustained convergence of inflation to 
levels that are below, but close to, 2% over the 
medium term. The ECB Governing Council did 
not change its forward guidance regarding the 
reinvestment of securities acquired as part of 
the expanded asset purchase programme 
(APP). Policy rates were also left unadjusted in 
the period under review. The main refinancing 
rate thus remains at 0%, while the rate of the 
marginal lending facility stands at 0.25% and 
the deposit facility rate at -0.40%.
Second, the ECB Governing Council decided to 
launch a new series of targeted longer- term re -
financing operations (TLTRO-  III). They are in -
tended to help to preserve favourable bank 
lending conditions and the smooth transmis -
sion of monetary policy. The ECB Governing 
Council communicated that these new oper -
ations will be conducted at quarterly intervals 
from September 2019 to March 2021 and will 
each have a maturity of two years. Under these 
operations, banks will be entitled to borrow 
funds totalling up to 30% of the stock of eli -
gible loans as at 28 February 2019. Over the 
maturity of each individual operation, the inter -
est rate will be indexed to the interest rate on 
the main refinancing operations. Like the previ -
ous series of TLTROs, TLTRO- III will also include 
incentives to lend. The ECB Governing Council will announce further details on the precise 
terms of TLTRO- III at one of its upcoming meet -
ings. This will also include establishing the 
interest rate conditions. In particular, this deci -
sion will take into account a thorough assess -
ment of the bank- based transmission channel 
of monetary policy as well as further develop -
ments in the economic outlook.
Furthermore, the ECB Governing Council de -
cided at its March meeting to conduct all of its 
refinancing operations as fixed rate tender pro -
cedures with full allotment for as long as ne -
cessary, and at least until the end of the reserve 
maintenance period starting in March 2021.
Following its April meeting, the ECB Governing 
Council indicated that its regular assessment 
will consider whether any side effects on bank 
intermediation might necessitate mitigating ECB Governing 
Council adjusts 
forward guid -
ance on policy 
rates …
… and approves 
new series of 
TLTROsECB Governing 
Council extends 
full allotment 
policy to 2021
ECB Governing 
Council 
announces 
review of impact 
of negative 
interest rates
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. • Average 
1 to 16 May 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 20190.40.200.20.40.6
––+++
01020Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points% p.a. Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR 1
EONIA 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
21

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve periods between 30 Janu-
ary 2019 and 16  April 2019 saw a slight 
decrease  in euro area liquidity needs stem-
ming from autonomous factors (see the 
table below). At an average of €1,363.3 bil-
lion in the March- April 2019 period, they 
stood €49.2 billion below the average for 
December 2018- January 2019, the period 
preceding the periods under review. The 
sum of the autonomous factors fl  uctuated 
within a corridor between €1,323.0 billion 
and €1,417.7 billion. The decrease in liquid-
ity needs was mainly due to the liquidity- 
increasing rise in the combined total of net 
foreign assets and other factors, which are 
considered together as a result of liquidity- 
neutral valuation effects. In aggregate 
terms, they went up by €85.4 billion over 
the aforementioned timeframe. A corres-
ponding decline of €3.0 billion in banknotes 
in circulation to €1,215.8 billion also re-duced liquidity needs (see the chart on 
p. 23). The larger volume of general govern-
ment deposits with the Eurosystem, on the 
other hand, increased the need for liquidity: 
in the March- April 2019 period, they stood 
at an average of €270.5 billion, €39.2 bil-
lion higher than the average for the Decem-
ber 2018- January 2019 period. The min-
imum reserve requirement in the March- 
April 2019 reserve period amounted to 
€128.4 billion.
The outstanding tender volume from the 
Eurosystem’s open market operations 
changed only slightly during the reporting 
period. In the March- April 2019 reserve 
period, it averaged around €726 billion, 
putting it just short of €6 billion below the 
corresponding fi  gure for the December 
2018- January 2019 period. The decrease 
stemmed from a reduction in banks’ partici-
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2019
30 January
to
12 March13 March
to
16 April
I Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +  9.6 –  6.6
2 Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) – 26.0 – 13.2
3 Net foreign assets 1 +  9.7 + 13.1
4 Other factors 1 + 46.8 + 15.8
Total + 40.1 +  9.1
II Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  1.9 –  0.3
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  0.7 –  2.8
(c) Other operations –  7.0 –  9.9
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.0 +  0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) +  2.4 + 18.0
Total –  7.2 +  5.0
III Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I + II) + 32.7 + 14.2
IV Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  0.5 –  0.5
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
22

pation in the regular tender operations as 
well as voluntary early repayments of the 
second series of targeted longer- term refi  -
nancing operations (TLTRO- II), which came 
to €3.4 billion towards the end of March. 
This translates into a total of approximately 
€715 billion still outstanding in the four 
TLTRO- II operations. Demand for the main 
refi  nancing operation in the March- April 
2019 period fell to an average of €5.7 bil-
lion (-€2.2 billion compared with the De-
cember 2018- January 2019 period). In add-
ition, comparing averages for the same 
periods, the outstanding volume of three- 
month tenders decreased by €1.4 billion to 
€3.6 billion.
The bulk of the central bank liquidity con-
tinued to be provided by the Eurosystem 
through its monetary policy asset purchase 
programmes. They accounted for nearly 
four- fi  fths of the total liquidity made avail-
able through open market operations in the 
reporting period. The average balance sheet 
holdings of all purchase programmes in the 
March- April 2019 period stood at €2,636 
billion, representing a decline of €17 billion 
compared to the corresponding average 
holdings during the December 2018- 
January 2019 reserve period. The end of the 
net purchases, amortisation adjustments, 
maturities and fl  exibility in terms of reinvest-
ment played a role in this (see the adjacent 
table). The share of the PSPP in the holdings 
of all purchase programmes amounted to 
71%. As a result of this reduction in the 
holdings of securities and the decrease in 
the tender volume in the period under re-
view, central bank liquidity supplied by 
means of open market operations fell again 
slightly. The trend of a continuous increase 
in outstanding liquidity from open market 
operations, observed since the launch of 
the PSPP purchases in March 2015, thus re-
versed at the beginning of the year (see the 
chart on p. 25).This reduced liquidity provision counter-
acted a stronger rise in excess liquidity, des-
pite the somewhat lower liquidity needs 
stemming from autonomous factors. It 
reached an average value of €1,870 billion 
during the March- April 2019 reserve period, 
thus increasing by €25 billion compared to 
the December 2018- January 2019 period. In 
the intervening period, excess liquidity was 
only marginally higher, averaging €1,874 
billion. Overall, excess liquidity in the re-
porting period thus remained within the 
ranges that had already been observed over 
the course of 2018. At that time, the in-
creasing autonomous factors effectively 
prevented a rise in excess liquidity, in spite Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as 
at 10 May 
2019
Active programmes 1
PSPP –  6.8 2,092.8
CBPP3 –  0.7 261.6
CSPP –  0.2 177.8
ABSPP –  0.7 26.2
Completed programmes 
SMP – 10.3 62.8
CBPP1 –  0.8 3.2
CBPP2 –  0.2 3.5
1 Changes due to maturities, reinvestments and amortisa-
tion adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Including  end-
of-quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20191,2501,0007505002500250500750
–––––+++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
23

of the net purchases under the purchase 
programmes.
On account of the very favourable liquidity 
conditions, overnight rates continued to be 
geared to the rate on the deposit facility 
(see the chart above). In the March- April 
2019 reserve period, EONIA once again 
stood at an average of -0.37%. This was al-
ready the case in the previous two reserve 
periods. At an average of €2.6 billion, the 
underlying EONIA turnover for unsecured 
overnight deposits remained low. Secured 
overnight deposits, on the other hand, 
mainly traded below the deposit facility 
rate: on the GC Pooling platform, overnight 
trades in the ECB basket in the March- April 
2019 period were executed at an average 
of -0.43% and thus 1 basis point below the 
December 2018- January 2019 period. Over-
night deposits in the ECB EXTended basket, 
with its larger set of eligible securities, 
traded at -0.42% on average in the March- April 2019 period, which was also lower 
than in the December 2018- January 2019 
period (-0.38%). Aggregate overnight turn-
over across both segments in the March- 
April 2019 reserve period amounted to an 
average of €9.1 billion; as such, it exceeded 
the December 2018- January 2019 reference 
period level of €7.0 billion, and remained 
clearly above the EONIA turnover.
At 56 days, the particularly long current 
reserve  period of April- June 2019 indicates 
a continuation of the aforementioned de-
velopments at present. As such, euro area 
liquidity needs stemming from autonomous 
factors again saw a slight decrease up to 
10  May 2019 – despite a marked rise in 
banknotes in circulation in the wake of the 
Easter holidays. The growing trend in the 
minimum reserve requirement and the 
limited interest of credit institutions in the 
Eurosystem’s standard tenders are also con-
tinuing. Overnight rates barely changed in 
the fi  rst three full weeks of the current 
reserve  period.Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
Deutsche BundesbankDec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May
2018 20190.60.50.40.30.20.10
––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
1,6001,8002,000Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for the reserve
maintenance period 2EONIA
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
24

measures in order to preserve the favourable 
economic implications of negative interest 
rates.
The monetary policy decisions in March were 
taken against the backdrop of renewed weaker 
economic data. According to the ECB Govern -
ing Council’s analysis, these data are indicative 
of the slowdown in economic growth that was 
already observed in 2018 continuing into the 
current year. Accordingly, the ECB staff fore -
casts for GDP growth in 2019 presented at the 
beginning of March were also considerably 
weaker than they had been even in December. 
The forecasts state that the persistence of un -
certainties related to geopolitical factors, the 
threat of protectionism and vulnerabilities in 
emerging markets are leaving their mark on 
economic sentiment. The monetary policy deci -
sions of March are intended to ensure that the 
sustained convergence of inflation to a level 
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term will continue despite the weaker economic 
data.
In addition, the ECB Governing Council stated 
that some country- specific factors that are 
dampening growth are starting to abate. At 
the same time, supportive financing conditions, 
favourable labour market dynamics with fur -
ther growth in employment and rising wage 
growth continue to underpin the euro area ex -
pansion and gradually rising inflation pressures.
The APP holdings recorded on the balance 
sheet continued to see slight fluctuations over 
time. This was due, on the one hand, to the 
smoothing over time of reinvestments as part 
of the technical parameters agreed upon in De -
cember and, on the other hand, to the use of 
amortised cost accounting.1 On 10 May 2019, Adjustment of 
inflation slowed 
by weaker eco -
nomic activityPositive labour 
market develop -
ments and 
higher wage 
growth support 
gradually 
increasing 
inflationary  
pressures
Little change 
in securities 
holdings 
recorded on 
balance  sheetOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operations in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201903006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,0003,300€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition value 
and the redemption value is spread over the residual ma -
turity of a security, treated as part of interest income and 
measured at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
25

the Eurosystem held assets totalling €2,558 bil -
lion as part of the APP (see the box “Money 
market management and liquidity needs” on 
pp. 22 ff. for a breakdown of the holdings into 
the individual programmes).
The first quarter of 2019 also saw a continu -
ation of the trend towards lower voluntary 
repay ments for the second series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO- II). 
The option to make repayments in all four op -
erations on 27  March 2019 was utilised by 
Euro system counterparties to the extent of 
around €3.4 billion. This was only marginally 
higher than the repayment in December 2018. 
As a result, a TLTRO- II volume of around €715 
billion is currently still outstanding.
Excess liquidity continued to move within a 
narrow range and stood most recently at 
€1,906 billion. The short- term money market 
rates likewise saw only minor fluctuations. The 
unsecured overnight money market rate (EONIA) 
remained within a range of between -0.36% 
and -0.37%. Most recently, the secured over -
night rate (STOXX GC Pooling) was just under 
the deposit facility rate at -0.42% and the 
three- month EURIBOR was virtually unchanged 
at -0.31%.
Money market forward rates remained on their 
downward trajectory, which has been ongoing 
since October of last year, meaning that the 
futures  curve has continued to flatten signifi -
cantly overall since the beginning of the year. 
Since the end of March, the short end of the 
curve has even been slightly inverted at times, 
as it is at the moment. As a result, forward 
rates were lower than the current EONIA level 
at times. At present, a higher deposit facility 
rate is – depending on the size of the assumed 
change in interest rates – factored into forward 
rates only for the period from the third quarter 
of 2021 to the third quarter of 2022.2 Recent 
surveys also suggest that the expected timing 
of the first rise in interest rates has shifted 
markedly into the future. Furthermore, the un -
certainty regarding the timing of the first inter -est rate rise has increased in the surveys. How -
ever, it still remains the case that, due to nega -
tive term premia, money market forward rates 
derived from the EONIA swap curve tend to 
point to a later date for an initial rise in interest 
rates than surveys.3
The main drivers of this development were, on 
the one hand, the monetary policy decisions in 
March. The adjustment of the calendar- based 
element of forward guidance is likely to have 
contributed to a further shift in the overall dis -
tribution of interest rate expectations. How -
ever, at present, expectations are being shaped 
by the latest economic news and therefore by 
the state- contingent element of forward guid -
ance. In this context, the downward revisions 
of the Eurosystem forecasts published follow -
ing the March meeting are also likely to have 
affected interest rate expectations. On the 
other hand, the communication from members 
of the ECB Governing Council at the end of 
March as well as corresponding media reports 
were taken by market participants as a signal 
that the Eurosystem could be contemplating 
measures to mitigate any potential side effects 
of the negative deposit facility rate. Market 
participants associated the discussions about 
such measures with a potential prolongation of 
the low interest rate environment, which post -
poned the expected timing of the first interest 
rate rise.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The robust increase in the broad monetary 
aggre gate M3 continued in the reporting quar -
ter, even though the Eurosystem discontinued 
its monthly net asset purchases at the end of 
2018. At the end of March, the annual growth Limited repay -
ments of 
TLTRO- II once 
again
Excess liquidity 
and money 
market  rates 
remain in 
previous  range
Money market 
forward rates 
continue to 
declineMonetary policy 
decisions and 
communication 
as drivers of 
forward  rates
Lending to 
private  sector 
remains key 
driver of 
monetary  
growth
2 Estimates as to how large the first interest rate rise might 
plausibly be can be derived from surveys on interest rate 
expectations and range from 10 to 25 basis points.
3 For more information on the discrepancy between the 
time frame for the first interest rate rise derived from 
money market forward rates and interest rate surveys, see 
also Deutsche Bundesbank (2018a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
26

rate of M3 stood at 4.5%. The main drivers of 
growth remained credit to the domestic private 
sector on the one hand and inflows of funds 
from abroad on the other. Demand for credit in 
the private sector was supported by the on -
going favourable financing terms and the 
healthy labour market situation in the euro 
area. Although lending to non- financial corpor -
ations was more moderate in net terms than 
in  the preceding quarters, at the same time, 
enter  prises raised more funds on the capital 
market during the reporting quarter, including 
from euro area banks. The associated increase 
in securitised lending meant that net inflows to 
banks’ credit to the private sector rose slightly 
in comparison with the preceding quarter.
Monetary growth in the first quarter of 2019 
was driven almost exclusively by the growth in 
overnight deposits. Alongside households, 
which traditionally account for the largest in -
flows, non- financial corporations also substan -
tially increased their overnight deposits at the 
start of the year; cash holdings and short- term 
savings deposits likewise saw distinct growth. 
The oppor tunity costs of holding cash, which 
remained comparatively low, are likely to have 
been a key factor in this development. In add -
ition, the increased uncertainty regarding the 
economic outlook could have also played a 
role. By contrast, the other components of M3 – short- term time deposits and marketable in -
struments – were reduced in net terms.
From the counterpart perspective, credit to the 
domestic private sector again made a signifi -
cant contribution to monetary growth. During 
the reporting period, this was attributable not 
only to loans, but also to securitised lending, 
particularly in the form of shares and invest -
ment fund shares. Overall, this means that 
the economic slowdown has so far not been 
entirely reflected in banks’ credit to the domes -
tic private sector, even though lending to the 
private non- financial sector again lost some of 
its momentum in the reporting quarter.
This was chiefly due to the fact that net inflows 
in loans to non- financial corporations slowed 
down further in the first quarter of 2019. The 
annual growth rate of these loans fell to 3.5% 
at the end of March, but was still slightly higher 
than one year before. As in the previous quar -
ters, growth was driven primarily by large con -
tributions of banks domiciled in Germany and 
France. In the quarter under review, however, 
institutions in Spain had also begun to mark -
edly expand their net lending to non- financial 
corporations. By contrast, Italian banks re -
corded net outflows in this credit segment 
for the second time in succession. On the one 
hand, the recent weak cyclical developments Overnight 
deposits again 
main driver of 
M3 growth; 
broadly distrib -
uted across 
sectors  in first 
quarter of 2019Securitised lend -
ing offsets lower 
momentum in 
lending
Weaker lending 
to non- financial 
corporations, 
notably in ItalyConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q4 2018 Q1 2019
Holdings against central government 2 24.1 – 10.9
Monetary aggregate M3 171.5 129.4
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 117.4 177.8
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 13.7 2.1
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 40.4 – 50.5
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 17.5 50.3
of which:
Capital and reserves 15.5 16.5
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities 1.9 33.8Assets Q4 2018 Q1 2019
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 66.2 101.7
Loans 60.0 78.7
Loans, adjusted 1 88.2 74.2
Securities 6.2 23.0
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 40.7 – 40.2
Loans 4.0 –  6.8
Securities 36.7 – 33.5
Net external assets 35.0 113.6
Other counterparts of M3 22.9 –  6.2
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
27

and the subdued growth prospects dampened 
credit demand in Italy. On the other hand, the 
latest Bank Lending Survey (BLS) indicates that, 
against this backdrop, banks in Italy again dis -
tinctly tightened their credit conditions overall 
in the quarter under review.
However, according to BLS data, banks’ lend -
ing policies towards enterprises remained virtu -
ally unchanged at the euro area level. Accord -
ing to the bank managers surveyed, demand 
for loans on the part of enterprises likewise did 
not change in net terms during the reporting 
period. However, this was the result of com -
pensatory effects in the reported influencing 
factors: all other things being equal, the low 
general interest rate level and the increased 
finan cing needs for fixed investment caused 
demand to rise, while the heightened issuance 
of debt securities and equity in particular had a 
dampening effect on demand for loans.
The fact that securitised lending in the MFI sec -
tor to the domestic private section grew con -
siderably in the first quarter of 2019 is consist -
ent with this assessment. While the Eurosystem 
has not increased its stock of corporate bonds 
any further since the start of the reinvestment 
phase of the APP in January 2019, banks in the 
euro area recorded net purchases of both debt 
securities and shares of domestic enterprises. 
These inflows are in line with higher net issu -
ance of bonds of non- financial corporations.
Unlike loans to enterprises, lending to house -
holds (adjusted for sales and securitisation) 
recorded  considerable inflows in the first quar -
ter, too. This was true for both consumer credit 
and loans for house purchase; the latter is 
much larger in terms of volume. The annual 
growth rate was unchanged at 3.2% at the 
end of March. Banks in Germany and France, 
but also Italy, again made the largest contribu -
tions to the growth of this credit segment, 
while lending to households in Spain stagnated 
further.Lending policies 
towards enter -
prises and credit 
demand virtually 
unchanged 
overall
Enterprises’ 
issuing  activity 
on the capital 
market subdues 
loan growth
Loans to house -
holds once 
again record 
considerable 
inflowsMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10
2024
–++M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsYear-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households 5Contribution of components in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage growth
in M3
Percentage
growth 
in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
28

As in the previous quarter, the banks surveyed 
in the BLS reported a marked increase in de -
mand for housing loans in the euro area as 
a whole, which they mainly attributed to the 
low general interest rate level. Accord ing to the 
information provided by the bank managers, 
standards for loans for house purchase tight -
ened marginally on balance for the first time 
since the beginning of 2016, having been re -
laxed continuously over the preceding quarters.
The MFI sector’s net external asset position was 
an important mainstay of monetary growth in 
the first quarter. The persistent surplus in the 
euro area’s current account likewise paved the 
way for the inflows of funds from abroad at 
the beginning of the year. In addition, balance 
of payments data for January and February in -
dicate that, on balance, non- resident investors 
acquired a sizeable volume of euro area secur -
ities despite the persistently negative yield 
spread in the euro area relative to most other 
economic areas. At the same time, domestic in -
vestors’ demand for securities investments in 
non- euro area countries remained moderate.
Monetary growth was dampened by compara -
tively large inflows of monetary capital. Longer- 
term bank bonds showed an especially sharp 
increase. This form of financing is likely to have 
become more attractive to banks in light of the 
declining maturities of the Eurosystem’s longer- 
term refinancing operations and with a view to 
locking in interest rates.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic  customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers recorded another strong increase in 
the first quarter of 2019. Again, this was largely 
thanks to short- term deposits – most notably 
the persistently strong inflows into overnight 
deposits. At the same time, unlike in the previ -
ous quarters, short-  term time deposits remu -
nerating at close- to- market rates and short-  Increases in net 
external assets 
bolstered by 
current account 
surplus
Marked increase 
in monetary 
capital owing to 
longer- term 
bank bonds
Further strong 
growth in 
German  banks’ 
deposit businessLoans to non-financial corporations
in the euro area*
60
4030201001020304050+
––––+++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data,
seasonally adjusted
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculation. * Loans to non-fin-
ancial corporations and quasi-corporations, adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Also  adjusted  for  positions  arising 
from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche BundesbankExtended by the euro area MFI sector 1
... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
Securities-based lending* to private 
non-banks in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Eurosystem: debt 
securities  only;  other  MFIs:  debt  securities  and  equities. 
1 Shares and other equities.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 1915010050050100150200250
–––+++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
of which:Extended by the MFI sector as a whole
Eurosystem
MFIs excluding the Eurosystem: equities1MFIs excluding the Eurosystem: debt securitiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
29

term savings deposits expanded markedly, 
while long- term bank deposits again showed a 
distinct decline. This development should still 
be viewed in conjunction with the low interest 
rate level and the flat yield curve (see the chart 
above).
Households were again primarily responsible 
for the strong growth in short- term bank de -
posits as they boosted their overnight deposits 
substantially. Non- financial corporations also 
distinctly stepped up their overnight deposits in 
the reporting quarter, even though the interest 
rate on these deposits had already been in 
slightly negative territory for several quarters. In the reporting quarter as a whole, the financial 
corporations sector, which traditionally has 
a  greater interest in seeking higher returns, 
recorded  further marked outflows in the case 
of bank deposits (for background information, 
see the box entitled “Acquisition of financial 
assets and the search for yield in Germany” on 
pp. 31ff.).
Despite the clear slowdown in economic activ -
ity in the second half of 2018, banks’ lending 
business with the domestic non- bank sector 
was exceptionally dynamic in the quarter under 
review. This was mainly thanks to the sharp 
expan sion in lending to the domestic private 
sector. By contrast, loans to general govern -
ment declined again markedly in the reporting 
quarter as the public sector’s financing needs 
remained low.
In terms of lending to the private sector, loans 
to households once again recorded the largest 
net inflows. This was primarily due to house -
holds’ strong demand for housing loans, which 
expanded significantly once more. As in the 
previous quarter, the annual growth rate of 
loans for house purchase came to 4.6% at the 
end of the quarter.
The banks surveyed as part of the BLS stated 
that, as in previous quarters, this first- quarter 
increase was driven in particular by the low 
general interest rate level. In addition to this, 
households view the housing market and 
house price developments in a positive light. 
Credit standards for loans to households for 
house purchase were tightened slightly for the 
first time since the third quarter of 2016. 
Accord ing to the bank managers surveyed, this 
was largely because of banks’ reduced risk 
toler ance. With no adjustments being made in 
the previous quarter either, the period of eas -
ing credit standards observed since the begin -
ning of 2017 thus appears to have come to an 
end for the time being.
Lending to domestic non- financial corporations 
was another important driver of the growth in Households 
still primarily 
responsible for 
build- up of over -
night depositsSharp expansion 
in lending 
business  with 
non- banks,
… while house -
holds record 
largest net 
inflows
Credit standards 
tightened 
slightly for loans 
for house 
purchase  for the 
first time since 
the third quarter 
of 2016Interest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for 
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new 
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike 
the overall volume of contracts (i.e. deposit contracts on the 
balance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new 
business (i.e. all contracts concluded in the course of a month) 
is explicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 201901234% p.a., monthly data
0123Overall volume1
New business2... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
30

Acquisition of fi  nancial assets and the search for yield 
in Germany
The development of fi  nancial investment by 
the individual money- holding sectors in 
Germany over recent years indicated that 
the persistent low interest rate environment 
was having only a limited impact on the 
portfolio structure of the private non- 
fi  nancial sector.1 Despite rising gradually be-
tween 2014 and 2017, households’ search 
for yield played a subordinate role overall. 
Risk aversion and preference for liquidity re-
mained the predominant factors. By con-
trast, fi  nancial corporations2 exhibited a 
certain search for yield.
According to the latest data from monetary 
statistics and fi  nancial accounts, these de-
velopments generally continued in 2018. 
Households’ bank deposits again saw re-
cord infl  ows last year, making them by far 
the most important form of investment for 
this sector (see the chart on p. 32). The in-
fl  ows were almost entirely attributable to 
the build- up of overnight deposits, which 
accelerated further. At the same time, the 
moderate net reduction in the other types 
of deposits slowed down. Households’ 
preference for particularly liquid overnight 
deposits was bolstered by the fact that the 
interest rate spreads between the different 
types of deposits remained at historically 
low levels. Furthermore, claims on insur-
ance corporations represented a major 
form of investment for households in 2018, 
although infl  ows were weaker on the year. 
The combined, large share of fi  nancial asset 
acquisition accounted for by these two 
asset classes, which are perceived as being 
very safe, thus indicates that households 
are still strongly averse to risk.
Having risen continuously over the previous 
years, this sector’s capital market invest-
ment in 2018 undershot the previous year’s level for the fi  rst time in fi  ve years. In par-
ticular, infl  ows to investment funds from 
Germany and abroad fell considerably com-
pared with the previous year. However, the 
acquisition of shares also slowed down 
markedly, especially towards the end of 
2018. By contrast, debt securities recorded 
net purchases for the fi  rst time since 2008, 
albeit to a fairly limited extent. Taken to-
gether, the less favourable developments in 
the stock markets compared with previous 
years –  and the associated perception of 
heightened uncertainty regarding future 
gains on securities – probably contributed 
to the slight decline in households’ willing-
ness to take yield calculations into account 
when making their investment decisions in 
the year under review.
After three strong years, the build- up of de-
posits in the non- fi  nancial corporations sec-
tor weakened considerably. This was due to 
the steep drop in infl  ows, in particular, to 
overnight deposits held at commercial 
banks. The short- term types of deposits are 
likely to have lost much of their appeal due 
to the cuts in interest rates in recent years, 
which – unlike in the case of households – 
are now in negative territory across the 
board. Non- fi  nancial corporations’ remain-
ing fi  nancial asset acquisition – which is far 
more important in terms of investment vol-
ume  – was considerably lower again in 
2018 following the very strong infl  ows one 
year earlier. A signifi  cant part of the funds 
was invested in equity investments, above 
all in the form of other equity. Lending, 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018b).
2 For the purpose of this box, fi  nancial corporations 
exclude monetary fi  nancial institutions, as the analysis 
relates to the money- holding sectors. In addition, the 
following sectoral analysis disregards the general gov-
ernment sector, as its acquisition of fi  nancial assets is 
comparatively modest and volatile.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
31

however, was down after performing 
strongly the year before. In particular, intra- 
sectoral loans and loans to non- euro area 
countries experienced a decline. As in previ-
ous years, strategic participations thus ap-
pear to have been the main driver of invest-
ment decisions made by German non- 
fi  nancial corporations. By contrast, the pref-
erence for liquid and safe financial 
investments receded slightly.
Within the fi  nancial sector, insurance cor-
porations and pension funds continued in 
unmodifi  ed form their strong reduction of 
longer- term bank deposits in particular, which began in 2010. Once again, it was 
chiefl  y banks’ registered debt securities and 
borrowers’ note loans, which for statistical 
purposes are considered as time deposits, 
that were pared back. Compared with pre-
vious years, insurance corporations and 
pension funds shifted the composition of 
their new investments more heavily towards 
less liquid, higher- yielding fi  nancial instru-
ments. Above all, net purchases of unlisted 
shares as well as the granting of (non- 
tradable) loans increased noticeably. By 
contrast, the acquisition of investment fund 
shares was somewhat less pronounced 
compared with the previous year. Neverthe-Build-up of deposits and total acquisition of financial assets in the private 
non-financial sector in Germany
1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. Deposits figures seasonally adjusted. 2 Households including non-profit institutions 
serving households. 3 Non-financial corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 201815010050050100150200250
–––+++++€ billion, 12-month flows at quarter-end 1
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2018–500+50+100+150+200+250
30201001020304050
–––+++++
–200–150–100–500+50+100+150+200+250+300+350Households 2
Non-financial corporations 3... with a longer maturity... redeemable at notice of up to 3 months... with an agreed maturity of up to 2 years
Overnight depositsDeposits ... Deposits
Securities
Claims on insurance corporations
Other
Loans
TotalTotalTotal acquisition of financial assets DepositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
32

less, as in the years before, it accounted for 
a large portion of the fi  nancial assets 
acquired  by this sub- sector (see the chart 
above). The build- up of holdings of debt 
secur ities slackened pace, too, and the im-
pact was felt across all sectors both at 
home and abroad.
Securities also accounted for the largest 
portion of the total sectoral fi  nancial assets 
acquired by other fi  nancial institutions.3 The 
listed shares of non- fi  nancial corporations 
recorded particularly strong infl  ows. By con-
trast, purchases of investment fund shares 
were signifi  cantly weaker in 2018 than in previous years. Net purchases of debt secur-
ities likewise decreased somewhat. At the 
same time, funds directly invested in secur-
ities shifted clearly away from foreign to 
domestic  paper. One factor to bear in mind 
in this connection is that the Eurosystem 
halved the volume of its monthly net pur-
chases of domestic sovereign and corporate 
bonds at the beginning of 2018, and re-
duced it again signifi  cantly in the fourth 
quarter. Furthermore, lending by other 
3 Including investment funds, but excluding monetary 
fi  nancial institutions and thus also money market 
funds.Build-up of deposits and total acquisition of financial assets in the money-holding 
financial sector in Germany
1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. Deposits figures seasonally adjusted. 2 Other financial intermediaries including in-
vestment funds but excluding monetary financial institutions and thus excluding money market funds.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 201840302010010
––––+€ billion, 12-month flows at quarter-end 1
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2018–500+50+100+150+200
40302010010203040
––––++++
–100–500+50+100+150+200+250Insurance corporations and pension funds
Other financial intermediaries 2... with a longer maturity... redeemable at notice of up to 3 months... with an agreed maturity of up to 2 years
Overnight depositsDeposits ... Deposits
Equity
Loans
Debt securities
Other
TotalTotalDeposits Total acquisition of financial assetsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
33

German banks’ lending business in the quarter 
under review. Despite recent subdued eco -
nomic activity, the net increase in this credit 
segment was markedly higher than in the final 
quarter of 2018. Owing to a negative base 
effect , the annual growth rate for loans to non- 
financial corporations nevertheless fell slightly 
to 5.1% in the reporting quarter.
Enterprises again showed a greater preference 
for longer- term loans in order to finance their 
longer- term, typically larger- scale investment 
projects. By contrast, shorter- term loans re -
corded modest outflows, as in the preceding 
quarter. This development suggests that Ger -
man enterprises are still relying more heavily on 
their own funds and/ or alternative sources of 
funding to finance their short- term expend -
iture.
The results of the BLS largely support this view. 
According to bank managers, the rise in de -
mand for loans to enterprises was mainly attribut able to increased financing needs re -
lated to fixed investment. By contrast, taken in 
isolation, enterprises’ recourse to alternative 
sources of funding continued to have a damp -
ening effect on demand. The responses from 
the latest BLS do not indicate any major 
changes to the lending policies of the surveyed 
banks. Nevertheless, they suggest that the 
period of expansionary adjustments in lending 
policy has initially come to a halt for loans to 
enterprises, too.
In the longer term, i.e. relative to the midpoint 
of the range set by the standards implemented 
since 2003, banks reported their current credit 
standards for loans to enterprises and for con -
sumer credit and other loans as being some -
what tighter, and those for loans to households 
for house purchase as being considerably 
tighter.
Banks reported that, over the last six months, 
the Eurosystem’s expanded APP had improved Renewed note -
worthy increase 
in lending to 
non- financial 
corporations …
… driven by 
longer- term 
loansAccording to 
BLS, rise in 
demand due to 
financing needs 
for fixed invest -
ment, in particu -
lar; easing of 
lending policy 
initially at an 
end
German banks’ 
profitability 
dented by APP 
and negative 
deposit facility 
ratefinan cial institutions, notably to non- 
fi  nancial corporations in the euro area, rose 
appreciably. Infl  ows of deposits, which 
were lower than infl  ows channelled to 
other fi  nancial assets, fell short of the previ-
ous year’s fi  gure. This was partly due to the 
reduced build- up of overnight deposits by 
investment funds and partly the result of 
the slight contraction in the longer- term 
time deposits of fi  nancial vehicle corpor-
ations (FVCs).4
Overall, the developments seen in the previ-
ous years continued in 2018. In the case of 
households, investment decisions were 
again shaped by risk aversion and a prefer-
ence for liquidity. Generally speaking, yield 
aspects had been taken into consideration 
to a greater extent from 2014 onwards. 
However, households’ capital market ex-
posure weakened again somewhat in 2018 
due, in part, to the unfavourable stock mar-ket developments. While the acquisition of 
strategic stakes was the main driver of 
fi  nan cial investment for non- fi  nancial cor-
porations, the continued scaling back of 
deposits  and the shift towards less liquid 
instru ments among fi  nancial corporations 
pointed to a certain degree of searching for 
yield.
4 The latter arise for accounting reasons following a 
net increase in securitisation transactions in the bank-
ing sector. If a bank securitises loans without removing 
them from its balance sheet, the transaction is booked 
according to the countervalue received by the bank 
from the FVC for those securitised loans, typically as a 
long- term liability of the bank to that FVC.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
34

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until 
May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June 
2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is 
calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 3 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit 
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the num-
ber of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: differ-
ence between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the  number of respondents 
reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q2 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 20191.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 190.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
30030
–+
603003060
––++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest 
rates on loans for 
house purchase2
with an initial rate fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
35

their liquid ity position but continued to erode 
their profitability. Through its impact on net 
interest income, the negative interest rate on 
the deposit facility likewise put discernible pres -
sure on banks’ profitability over the past six 
months. As well as directly affecting banks’ 
interest expenditure via excess liquidity hold -
ings, this is also likely to have had indirect ef -
fects. These indirect effects may stem, inter 
alia, from the fact that banks’ margins are 
being squeezed owing to their reluc tance to 
further reduce interest rates on deposits – espe-
cially those of households – for fear of poten -
tial withdrawals. Banks can try to counteract 
this strain on their profitability by expanding 
their credit volume.
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018a), Monetary policy and banking business, Monthly Report, August 
2018, p. 26.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018b), Acquisition of financial assets and the search for yield in Germany, 
Monthly Report, May 2018, pp. 30-33.Lending and deposits of monetary 
 fi  nancial institutions in Germany*
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2018 2019
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 41.0 43.0
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 2.9 9.8
over 2 years – 0.5 – 9.4
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 0.3 3.9
over 3 months – 1.5 – 0.1
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 0.1 – 4.1
Securities – 5.9 – 1.8
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 23.1 34.0
of which: to households 3 16.2 18.2
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 7.2 11.9
Securities – 2.6 – 0.7
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions 
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter 
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
prises, households and general government excluding central 
government. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
cluding non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4  Non- 
fi  nancial corporations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
36

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Since the beginning of the year, global financial 
markets have been influenced by mixed eco -
nomic signals set against a monetary policy 
that is still predominantly accommodative. Fol -
lowing the monetary policy decisions taken in 
March 2019 by the Eurosystem and the Federal 
Reserve, market participants for the most part 
no longer expected key interest rates to be 
lifted in the euro area or the United States be -
fore the end of this year. Downward revisions 
to growth forecasts for this year are also likely 
to have played a part in this. As a result, the 
yield curves for both US Treasuries and Federal 
bonds dipped at the long end, leaving them 
perceptibly flatter than they were at the end of 
2018. In equity markets, reduced capital mar -
ket rates, which are associated with a lower 
discount factor, sent prices sharply higher, des -
pite the economic uncertainty. Growing risk ap -
petite among investors and a brief upturn in 
confidence in at least a partial resolution of the 
global trade disputes gave an added boost to 
equity prices. Moreover, market financing 
terms for European corporate bonds improved. 
Towards the end of the reporting period, a re -
newed escalation of the trade dispute between 
the United States and China had a dampening 
effect on asset prices worldwide, especially 
those of shares; however, compared with the 
previous sharp price gains, the impact was 
limited. Volatility in foreign exchange markets 
was low for the most part. The only currencies 
to record stronger movements were the Argen -
tine peso and Turkish lira, which had already 
experienced heavy price swings last year. Over -
all, on a weighted average against the curren -
cies of 19 major trading partners, the euro 
slipped slightly on balance compared with the 
end of December 2018.Exchange rates
Daily fluctuations in the EUR/ USD exchange 
rate mostly remained relatively low during the 
first part of the year. On balance, however, the 
euro’s value against the US dollar has drifted 
downwards over the period from the begin -
ning of the year to the middle of May. The euro 
entered a period of weakness in early March 
when market participants, seeing a deterior -
ation in the economic outlook, also took an 
increas  ingly dim view of the monetary policy 
prospects in the euro area. It gave up add -
itional ground in direct response to the March 
meeting of the ECB Governing Council, falling 
to a rate of US$1.12. One of the main reasons 
for this was the Eurosystem announcement 
that, in view of a weaker economic and infla -
tion outlook, policy rates would be left un -
changed at least until the end of 2019. In the 
subsequent weeks, however, the US dollar 
temporarily surren dered a large part of its gains 
against the euro as subdued inflation figures in 
the United States bolstered the growing ex -
pectation among market participants of a 
postpone ment of further monetary tightening 
there or even an easing of monetary policy. The 
euro appreciated once more in direct response 
to the March meeting of the Federal Open 
Market Committee, propelled by the unexpect -
edly strong downward revision of the Federal 
Reserve’s growth outlook and by surprise 
among market participants at the Fed’s an -
nouncement that it intended to end its balance 
sheet normalisation in September rather than 
in December.
In the days that followed, sentiment in foreign 
exchange markets turned back against the 
euro, as a series of disappointing economic fig -
ures weighed on the single currency, particu -
larly the unexpectedly weak flash estimate of 
the Eurozone Composite PMI at the end of 
March. Over the course of April, the euro was 
also buffeted by surprisingly poor figures on Financial 
markets  
influenced  by 
monetary  policy 
accommodation 
and declining 
capital market 
ratesEuro down 
against the 
US dollar, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
37

consumer confidence in the euro area and on 
the business climate in Germany. On the other 
side of the Atlantic, by contrast, newly pub -
lished data signalled that the US economy was 
becoming increasingly robust, buoying the US 
dollar. Amid these developments, the euro de -
preciated until the end of April to stand at 
US$1.11, its lowest level since May 2017. At the 
end of the period under review it was trading 
at US$1.12, which means that the euro has 
racked up losses of 2.2% since the end of De -
cember 2018.
The euro’s movements against the pound ster -
ling during the reporting period were driven by market participants’ shifting assessments of 
what form the United Kingdom’s planned with -
drawal from the EU would take. In the second 
half of February, the pound initially gained in 
value against the euro. Although it was still 
not clear in February whether Prime Minister 
Theresa May would get a parliamentary major -
ity for the withdrawal agreement negotiated 
with the EU, the impression among market par -
ticipants strengthened that Brexit might be 
postponed, if necessary, to prevent the UK 
leaving without a deal. There then followed a 
series of temporary swings in both directions 
which lasted into April. This increased volatility 
was generally related to news on the planned 
withdrawal. The agreement in mid-  April to 
postpone the exit date to October 2019 finally 
brought calm to the exchange rate. At the end 
of the reporting period, the euro was trading at 
£0.87, which was around 2.2% lower than at 
the beginning of the year.
The EUR/JPY exchange rate followed a similar 
pattern to the EUR/ USD exchange rate from 
mid- February to the end of March. Thus, start -
ing from a year- to- date high of ¥127 at the be -
ginning of March, the euro depreciated against 
the yen in two waves just as it did against the 
US dollar. From the beginning of April, eco -
nomic figures from Japan and China sent the 
euro higher against the yen. First of all, the 
business climate in Japanese industry deterior -
ated unexpectedly sharply. This was followed, a 
few days later, by reports of surprisingly strong 
growth in Chinese exports. These figures, 
which are associated with positive signals for 
the global economy, led to a higher risk appe -
tite in the foreign exchange market, which 
tends to favour capital outflows from Japan 
and puts pressure on the yen. Under the add -
itional strain of the aforementioned economic 
figures from the euro area at the end of the 
reporting period, the euro was trading at ¥123 
as this report went to press, down 2.4% on its 
level at the end of December 2018.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro depreci -… against 
the pound 
sterling  …
… and against 
the yenExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries. An increase indicates an appreciation 
of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S O ND J FMAM J
2018 20191.101.151.201.25
120125130135140
0.700.750.800.850.90
95100105Daily data, log scale
¥US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange rate:
€1 = US$ 1.1789 1
... yen
Launch exchange rate: €1 = ¥ 133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange rate: €1 = £ 0.71111
Nominal effective exchange rate2
Q1 1999 = 100
Launch exchange rate: 103.12 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
38

ated by 1.0% on balance in this period. This 
performance also included, for example, losses 
against the renminbi (-2.1%) in connection with 
the relatively robust economic data in China 
and, for a while, growing hopes of a successful 
conclusion of the trade talks with the United 
States. Outside the group of 19 partner curren -
cies, by contrast, the euro recorded marked 
gains against the Argentine peso (+17.0%) and 
the Turkish lira (+11.4%). Against the backdrop 
of a tense economic situation in Turkey, the 
euro began to gradually appreciate against the 
lira from mid- February. This was temporarily 
interrupted by sharp swings in the run- up to 
the Turkish local elections at the end of March. 
Although monetary policy support measures by 
the Turkish central bank, among other factors, 
led to a temporary countermovement, ongoing 
uncertainty about both the future monetary 
policy stance and shifts in Turkish foreign cur -
rency reserves saw the euro extend its gains 
against the lira over the course of April. The 
pace of appreciation accelerated at the begin -
ning of May when some of the local election 
results were annulled.1 By contrast, the ex -
change rates of other emerging market econ -
omies against the euro remained broadly un -
affected by these developments.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  investment
Bond market
Government bond yields on both sides of the 
Atlantic continued on their downward trajec -
tories that had set in during the second half of 
2018. In the United States, yields on ten- year 
US Treasuries have fallen 29 basis points since 
the start of the year to stand at 2.4%, and the 
interest rate differential in the maturity cat -
egory of between three months and ten years 
has narrowed by 26 basis points overall. At its 
meetings this year, the US Federal Reserve kept 
the target range for the fed funds rate between 
2.25% and 2.5%. Perceiving this to be accom -
modative language, market participants all but abandoned any lingering assumptions that 
there would be a further interest rate rise in the 
United States in 2019. Along with a yield curve 
which has even become more inverse at the 
short end, surveys reveal that analysts have re -
vised downwards their growth forecasts for US 
gross domestic product (GDP) in 2019 from 
2.6% in December to 2.4% in April (Consensus 
Forecast). At the same time, the yield on two- 
year Treasuries declined to 2.2%, leaving it at 
the lower end of the target range. This reflects 
expectations that the Fed’s interest rate path 
will be very flat.
The yield on ten- year Federal bonds has de -
creased by 34 basis points since the end of 
2018 to -0.1%, its lowest level since September 
2016. More so than in the United States, 
gloomy GDP expectations contributed to this Effective euro 
exchange rate 
weaker
Monetary policy 
and economic 
outlook push 
down yields on 
both sides of the 
Atlantic
Yield on 
ten- year Bunds 
also downBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20190.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
Germany
JapanEuro areaUnited States
United
Kingdom
1 See the box on pp. 48 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
39

development.2 Alongside the economic down -
side risks flagged by market players, the looser 
monetary policy stance adopted by the Euro -
system was another reason for the fall in the 
interest rate level. For example, the point in 
time at which the first interest rate hike is ex -
pected was pushed back to 2020 following the 
March meeting of the ECB Governing Council. 
In addition, the Governing Council’s announce -
ment that it would offer banks a new series of 
targeted long- term refinancing operations is 
likely to have dampened yields. On balance, 
the yield spread between ten- year US and Ger -
man government bonds remained virtually un -
changed at just over 250 basis points.
The yield curve derived from yields on Federal 
securities became flatter as of the end of 2018 
under the impact of the looser monetary policy 
stance and real economic influences. As this re -
port went to press, the yield curve was in nega -
tive territory up to maturities of ten years. 
Bonds with residual maturities of up to five 
years yielded less than the deposit facility rate. 
At the same time, the scarcity and liquidity pre -
mia of Bunds, measured by the spread be -
tween yields on ten- year Bunds and compar -
ably safe bonds from the Kreditanstalt für 
Wiederaufbau (KfW), stood just slightly below 
their highs attained in January.The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP- weighted average) widened 
slightly overall compared to the beginning of 
the year (+3 basis points to 112 basis points). 
Italian government bond spreads, in particular, 
were relatively volatile and rose on balance. 
The fact that credit rating agencies accepted by 
the Eurosystem decided not to downgrade Ita -
ly’s credit rating in the period under review re -
stored a degree of calm among market partici -
pants for a time. However, after the Italian gov -
ernment was forced in April to sharply revise 
downwards its growth forecast for 2019 and 
increased the budget deficit for the current 
year by more than originally agreed with the 
European Commission, investors’ concerns 
about the sustainability of Italian public fi -
nances and the fiscal stance of the government 
grew once more. As this report went to press, 
the yield spread of Italian government bonds 
stood at 280 basis points, 114 basis points 
above its five- year mean. That of Greek govern -
ment bonds declined sharply, meanwhile. In 
addition to the economic recovery in Greece 
and a rating upgrade by one credit rating 
agency, the Eurogroup’s assessment that the 
Greek government had implemented some 
major economic policy reforms is certainly likely 
to have contributed to this. Yield spreads of 
Portuguese, Irish and Spanish government 
bonds also narrowed.
By the end of March, yields on ten- year UK gilts 
had fallen 28 basis points to 1.0%. Yields did 
pick up again after the United Kingdom and 
the EU agreed in April to postpone Brexit, but 
they were still 20 basis points down on their 
year- end level as this report went to press. Ten- 
year Japanese sovereign bonds were yielding 6 
basis points lower than at the close of 2018, at 
-0.06%. Japan’s long- term interest rate thus 
remained  within the band of -0.2% to 0.2% German yield 
curve flatterYield spreads 
have widened, 
particularly of 
Italian bonds 
over Bunds
Yields down in 
the United King -
dom and JapanYield curve in the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest 
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.200.20.4
––––++
Residual maturity in years16 May 201928 December 2018% p.a.
2 According to analyst surveys (Consensus), growth ex -
pectations in the euro area for 2019 fell from 1.6% in De -
cember to 1.1%. For Germany, analysts downgraded their 
growth forecasts for the current year even more sharply, 
reducing them from 1.5% to 0.8%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
40

within which market participants believe that 
the Bank of Japan does not intervene.
Despite higher crude oil prices, euro area for -
ward inflation rates derived from inflation 
swaps for a period of five years starting in five 
years’ time decreased by 24 basis points to 
1.3%. Inflation expectations computed from 
Consensus Forecasts were also revised down -
wards, with the analysts lowering their inflation 
expectations for 2019 from 1.6% to 1.3% for 
the euro area and from 1.9% to 1.4% for Ger -
many. Longer- term inflation expectations de -
rived from surveys saw a comparatively mar -
ginal reduction, however. At the same time, 
both market- based and survey- based deflation 
probabilities for the coming years remained 
low, though. Moreover, estimates suggest that 
inflation expectations are still anchored: the 
aforementioned medium- term forward infla -
tion rates did not show any systematic response 
to inflation shocks in the winter and spring 
months. Bundesbank estimates simultaneously 
indicate that declining term premia3 are mainly 
driving the fall in Bund yields. It can therefore 
be argued that the lower forward inflation 
rates are another major factor reflecting the 
dwindling risk premia.
Yields on European corporate bonds have 
fallen steeply since the start of the year, after 
having risen considerably over the course of 
2018 as pessimism spread among market par -
ticipants. Bonds issued by BBB- rated financial 
corporations with a residual maturity of be -
tween seven and ten years were yielding 2.1% 
as this report went to press, down 94 basis 
points on the end of December. Yields on non- 
financial corporate bonds of equivalent matur -
ity fell by 78 basis points to 1.4%. The signifi -
cant decline in corporate bond yields was 
driven not only by the lower risk- free interest 
rates but also by distinctly compressed yield 
spreads over Bunds. Overall, the yield spreads 
of financial and non- financial corporations nar -
rowed by 61 basis points and 45 basis points 
respectively, leaving them below or close to 
their respective five- year averages. Receding spreads, which are consistent with tighter CDS 
spreads (iTraxx Europe) and reduced uncer -
tainty in equity markets, suggest that risk aver -
sion among market participants has eased, a 
sentiment reinforced by the use of what mar -
kets perceived to be accommodative central 
bank language. Financing conditions for Euro -
pean corporations can be described as favour -
able.Forward infla -
tion rate and 
survey- based 
inflation expect -
ations down
Corporate bond 
yields down 
significantly Forward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 1 Brent blend (for delivery in 
one month).
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 20191.82.12.42.7Weekly averages
20406080100% p.a.
00.30.60.9Five-year forward inflation rate 
five years ahead, based on swapsConsensus inflation expectations
six to ten years ahead
United StatesEuro area
Memo item:
Crude oil price1
Difference between forward inflation
rates in the United States and the euro areaPer-
cent-
age
pointsUS$1.21.51.82.1
% p.a.
3 Market participants receive this premium in exchange for 
holding securities with longer rather than shorter matur -
ities in their portfolios.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
41

Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €377½ billion in the first quarter of 
2019, well up on the figure for the previous 
quarter (€264½ billion). After deducting re -
demptions and taking account of changes in 
issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net issu -
ance of debt securities came to €52½ billion. In 
addition, foreign borrowers placed debt secur -
ities worth €24½ billion in the German market. 
Together, funds totalling €77 billion net were 
thus raised in the German bond market in the 
reporting period.
Domestic credit institutions issued new bonds 
totalling €29½ billion net in the first quarter of 
2019. Debt securities of specialised credit insti -
tutions (€21 billion) constituted the lion’s share 
of issues, followed on a smaller scale by mort -
gage Pfandbriefe (€6½ billion) and public 
Pfandbriefe (€1½ billion).
In the first quarter of 2019, the public sector 
increased its capital market debt by €16½ bil -lion in net terms. This figure includes issues by 
resolution agencies set up for German banks, 
which are ascribed to the public sector for stat -
istical purposes. The quarter under review saw 
state and local governments in particular step 
up bond issuance, to the tune of €12½ billion. 
Central government, which as of this year is 
also taking on a portion of the borrowing for 
FMS Wertmanagement,4 issued mainly Treasury 
discount paper (Bubills; €5½ billion), 30- year 
Bunds (€5 billion) and two- year Federal Treas -
ury notes (Schätze; €4 billion). Meanwhile, 
there were net redemptions of five- year Federal 
notes (Bobls) and ten- year Bunds totalling €3½ 
billion in each case.
In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises issued debt securities worth €6 billion 
net. On balance, the vast majority of these 
were bonds with maturities of more than one 
year. For the most part, these issues were at -
tributable to non- financial corporations.
In the first three months of 2019, non- resident 
investors ranked as the main buyers in the do -
mestic bond market; they added paper worth a 
net €61 billion to their portfolios, chiefly invest -
ing in debt securities issued by the private sec -
tor. Domestic non- banks and domestic credit 
institutions acquired debt securities worth €17 
billion and €7 billion in net terms, respectively. 
In both cases, demand centred around foreign 
paper. Following the termination of net pur -
chases under the Eurosystem’s asset purchase 
programmes at the end of 2018, the Bundes -
bank’s securities portfolio shrank by €8 billion 
for operational reasons.High net sales 
in bond market
Significant rise 
in credit institu -
tions’ capital 
market debtNet public 
sector  issuance 
comparatively 
high
Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Non- residents 
chief buyers of 
debt securitiesInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2018 2019
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 34.6 8.9 16.0
Credit institutions – 1.9 – 11.9 7.0
of which:
Foreign debt securities 4.4 –  2.8 7.4
Deutsche Bundesbank 19.1 10.9 – 8.1
Other sectors 17.4 9.9 17.1
of which:
Domestic debt securities – 0.4 16.6 – 2.6
Non-residents 5.1 – 26.2 61.0
Shares
Residents 22.2 –  7.3 6.7
Credit institutions – 6.5 –  3.4 – 0.9
of which:
Domestic shares – 9.5 –  2.7 – 0.6
Non-banks 28.7 –  3.9 7.6
of which:
Domestic shares 7.3 2.7 5.7
Non-residents 4.5 2.0 – 3.4
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 25.4 34.1 20.0
Investment in retail funds 6.9 0.6 3.1
of which:
Equity funds 0.2 –  3.0 – 0.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 For the first time, central government’s issuance plan for 
2019 also includes the proportional refinancing of the 
euro- denominated debt of the Federal Government’s 
winding- up institution, FMS Wertmanagement , amounting 
to €20 billion. See Deutsche Finanzagentur GmbH press re -
lease of 18 December 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
42

Equity market
From the beginning of the year, global equity 
markets were heavily influenced by the pre -
dominantly accommodative monetary policy 
and the decline in risk- free interest rates. An -
other factor up until the start of May was the 
mounting optimism in investor circles that the 
United States and China would resolve their 
trade dispute. Unlike at the end of 2018, when 
pessimism hung heavy over equity markets, 
share prices proved relatively robust to bouts of 
economic concern and repeated flare- ups of 
uncertainty surrounding Brexit. Meanwhile, a 
handful of upbeat global economic signals, 
such as strong US labour market figures and 
economic indicators pointing to solid growth in 
China, served to strengthen investor optimism, 
which had also firmed up since March on the 
back of recovering earnings prospects for US 
enterprises. Towards the end of the reporting 
period, an escalation of the trade conflict be -
tween the United States and China had a 
dampening effect on equity prices worldwide. 
However, relative to the significant gains re -
corded prior to this, the declines were modest 
and had little net impact overall on perform -
ance in the period in question.
On balance, the US S&P 500 has risen 14.7% 
since the start of the year. Tech stocks, which 
are more reliant than most on global trade, 
registered particularly strong gains. The mostly 
positive start to the quarterly reporting season 
probably helped to bolster prices here. With 
many firms having lowered their earnings fore -
casts ahead of reporting season, the majority 
of quarterly figures reported so far now ex -
ceeded analysts’ expectations.
Measured in terms of the broad EURO STOXX 
index, European equities have posted gains of 
14.0% in the year to date. German equities 
(CDAX) saw a similarly strong increase of 
13.8%. The fall in interest rates in the bond 
market lowered the discount factor for ex -
pected corporate profits, providing strong tail -
winds for equity prices in Europe. A search for Equity markets 
influenced by 
accommodative 
monetary policy, 
falling interest 
rates and 
a growing 
appetite  for risk
Significant 
equity market 
gains in both 
the US …
… and 
European  and 
Japanese equity 
marketsEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cal-
culated using the prices of index options. For the euro area, 
calculated using options on the EURO STOXX 50.
Deutsche BundesbankLin scale
Implied volatility1Daily data
%Beginning of 2016 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
90100110120130140150
10203040
2017 2018 2019Euro area (EURO STOXX)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
Euro area (VSTOXX)
United States (VIX)
Sources: Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S on a weekly basis, Bundes-
bank calculations. Earnings yields (EY) plotted as an inverted 
price/earnings ratio; implied cost of equity (CE) and equity risk 
premium (RP) derived from the dividend discount model. 
Deutsche Bundesbank246810121416% p.a., data since January 2004Equity market valuations
RP RP EY EY CE CEEuro area (EURO STOXX)Median level
25th percentileCurrent level75th percentile
MinimumMaximum
S&P 500Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
43

yield, of the kind commonly seen in a low inter -
est rate setting, and an increasing appetite for 
risk on the part of investors are also likely to 
have been instrumental in driving stock prices 
higher. In the United Kingdom, Brexit- related 
uncertainty and the postponement of the date 
for the country’s planned exit from the EU 
proved relatively modest burdens for the equity 
market (FTSE-  All Share: +9.6%). The value of 
Japanese shares (Nikkei 225) rose by 5.2%.
In the opening weeks of the reporting period, 
analysts’ earnings expectations fell on both 
sides of the Atlantic, before going on, after 
March, to stabilise for European firms and 
largely recover for US corporates. All in all, the 
strong price gains in both European and US 
equity markets made for rising price/ earnings 
ratios (lower earnings yields), which are an indi -
cation that shares are more highly valued than 
at the start of the year. Another measure which 
can be used to gauge stock market valuation is 
the implied equity risk premium, which is de -
rived from a dividend discount model. Unlike 
the price/  earnings ratio, this risk premium is a 
relative measure that takes account of alterna -
tive investments in government bonds. It can 
therefore be interpreted as a premium that in -
vestors demand for making a risky investment 
rather than a safe one. The equity risk premium 
decreased for both the EURO STOXX and the 
S&P 500, which is likewise suggestive of a 
higher equity market valuation and an in -
creased appetite for risk. The current risk pre -
mium for the S&P 500 is hovering close to its 
five- year mean, while in the case of the EURO 
STOXX it is still lying above it.
Issuing activity in the German equity market 
was moderate in the first quarter of 2019. Do -
mestic enterprises issued €1½ billion worth of 
new shares in net terms. The outstanding vol -
ume of foreign shares in the German market 
also rose by €1½ billion over the same period. 
On balance, equities were acquired exclusively 
by domestic non-  banks (€7½ billion). By con -
trast, foreign investors and German credit insti -Stock valuations 
higher on both 
sides of the 
Atlantic
Stock market 
funding and 
stock purchases 
moderateMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2018 2019
Q1 Q4 Q1p
I. Current account + 70.0 +  67.4 + 66.6
1. Goods 1 + 61.2 +  52.7 + 59.9
2. Services 2 –  2.2 –   1.6 –  2.5
3. Primary income + 25.3 +  32.6 + 25.8
4. Secondary income – 14.3 –  16.3 – 16.6
II. Capital account +  4.0 +   1.5 +  1.5
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 67.3 +  61.6 + 50.9
1. Direct investment + 24.8 –  23.6 + 34.0
Domestic investment 
abroad + 47.6 +   2.2 + 42.5
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 22.8 +  25.9 +  8.5
2. Portfolio investment + 30.8 +  18.9 – 17.4
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 43.4 –   8.9 + 35.9
Shares 3 +  8.2 –   0.5 +  0.5
Investment fund shares 4+ 10.6 –   0.4 + 10.7
of which:
Money market fund 
shares +  0.5 +   4.9 –  2.3
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 + 22.4 –   2.4 + 17.4
of which:
Denominated in euro 6 + 21.0 +   2.7 + 15.8
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  2.2 –   5.6 +  7.3
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities + 12.7 –  27.9 + 53.3
Shares 3 +  4.5 +   0.0 –  4.0
Investment fund shares –  1.8 –   0.7 –  3.8
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 + 15.1 –  22.5 + 41.1
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 8 –  2.2 –  18.8 + 16.2
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –  5.2 –   4.7 + 20.0
3. Financial derivatives 9 +  1.9 +   0.5 +  6.2
4. Other investment 10 +  9.2 +  65.2 + 28.1
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 –  4.0 + 110.4 – 51.6
Enterprises and 
 households 12 + 12.5 +  21.7 – 15.3
General government –  4.4 +   5.2 –  4.4
Bundesbank +  5.1 –  72.1 + 99.4
5. Reserve assets +  0.7 +   0.6 –  0.1
IV. Errors and omissions 13 –  6.6 –   7.2 – 17.3
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 
6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: 
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the Bun-
desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as 
non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13   Statistical errors and omissions, 
resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi  nan-
cial account and the balances on the current account and the 
capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
44

tutions pared back their equity holdings by 
€3½ billion and €1 billion, respectively.5
Mutual funds
During the reporting period, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded inflows of €23 bil -
lion, after raising funds totalling €34½ billion in 
the previous three months. The fresh cash 
mainly accrued to specialised funds reserved 
for institutional investors (€20 billion). Among 
the various asset classes, mixed securities funds 
were the chief sellers of new fund shares (€11 
billion), but open- end real estate funds (€5 bil -
lion), bond funds (€3 billion), and funds of 
funds (2½ billion) also placed fund units, albeit 
to a lesser extent. Foreign funds marketed in 
the German market attracted fresh funds total -
ling €10½ billion net in the first quarter of 
2019. Domestic non-  banks were the main 
buyers, adding mutual fund shares worth 
€37½ billion to their portfolios. On balance, 
their focus was predominantly on German 
paper. Domestic credit institutions added just 
small volumes of mutual fund shares to their 
existing holdings during the quarter under re -
view, while foreign investors scaled back their 
German fund portfolio by €4 billion net.
Direct investment
In contrast to cross- border portfolio invest -
ment, which saw net inflows of €17½ billion in 
the first quarter of 2019, direct investment 
transactions resulted in net capital exports of 
€34 billion.Firms domiciled in Germany substantially 
stepped up their foreign direct investment in 
the first three months of 2019, providing an 
additional €42½ billion in FDI (compared with 
€2 billion in the previous quarter and €47½ bil -
lion in the same quarter last year). They in -
creased their equity capital (€23½ billion), 
more than half of which by reinvesting earn -
ings, and granted a total of €19 billion in loans 
to affiliated enterprises abroad, primarily in the 
form of financial credits, on balance. The main 
destinations for German FDI were the United 
States (€8 billion), China (€6 billion) and the 
United Kingdom (€5 billion).
Foreign companies invested a net €8½ billion 
in Germany between January to March 2019, 
compared with €26 billion in the final quarter 
of 2018 and €23 billion in the first quarter of 
2018. They expanded their equity capital in 
Germany by €6 billion. The remaining €2½ bil -
lion of additional FDI took the form of intra-  
group loans, with financial credits from sister 
companies domiciled abroad accounting for 
the bulk of flows. “Sister companies” are affili -
ates with a common parent company which, in 
this case, established or expanded their own 
independent credit relationships. With regard 
to trade credits, meanwhile, there were out -
flows. The main countries of origin for incom -
ing FDI were the United Kingdom (€4½ billion), 
Luxembourg (€4 billion) and Ireland (€3 billion). 
By contrast, direct investors from the Nether -
lands withdrew funds from Germany.Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
shares
Direct invest -
ment sees 
capital  exportsCapital outflows 
as a result of 
transactions 
by domestic 
enterprises 
Lower FDI 
in Germany 
5 For further details, see Direct investment below.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
45

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy got off to a good start in 
2019, after economic output had largely stag -
nated in the second half of 2018. According to 
the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) was 0.4% 
up on the quarter after seasonal and calendar 
adjustment. Temporary factors played a big 
part in this marked increase, however. For ex -
ample, the expansionary fiscal measures that 
entered into force at the start of the year prob -
ably gave an additional boost to private con -
sumption, which is likely to have received fur -
ther impetus from car purchases that had been 
put on hold earlier. In the second half of 2018, 
a considerable number of car purchases had 
been deferred because of supply shortages 
caused by the introduction of the new World -
wide Harmonised Light Vehicle Test Procedure (WLTP) for motor vehicle emissions. Construc -
tion activity was buoyant over the winter 
months, which was made possible primarily by 
the favourable weather conditions. Disregard -
ing these one- off factors, the underlying cyc -
lical trend remained weak overall however, as it 
has been since mid-2018. This is likely to be 
true of the current quarter, as well. Following 
the decline in the preceding six months, aggre -
gate capacity utilisation stayed at a level that 
was still significantly higher than average.
The construction, hospitality and retail sectors 
– flanked by the one- off effects – were clear 
sources of impetus. Commercial services, too, 
are likely to have shown marked growth in the 
reporting period. By contrast, the broad- based 
downturn in industry continued. On the de -
mand side, the key driver of growth was prob -
ably private consumption, which thus over -
came the period of sluggishness it underwent 
in the second half of 2018. Despite anaemic 
industrial activity, business investment in new 
machinery, equipment and plants probably 
showed a distinct increase. Construction in -
vestment, too, expanded significantly. Growth 
was likewise achieved in exports.
German enterprises’ export business expanded 
markedly, in real terms, in the first quarter of 
2019. Broken down by regions, there was a 
fairly broad- based rise in exports. Exports to 
euro area countries increased significantly. 
There was a somewhat smaller increase in ex -
ports to non- euro area countries. Exports to 
the United Kingdom rose sharply – possibly in 
part due to frontloading effects in connection 
with the UK’s withdrawal from the EU, which 
was originally scheduled for the end of March. 
They were supported, in particular, by deliveries 
of motor vehicles, which had fallen sharply 
when the new emissions test was introduced 
last summer. German products were in greater 
demand in China and the United States, too. 
German exporters further reported strong sales Distinct growth 
in German econ -
omy in winter 
2019, mainly 
thanks to 
one-off effects
Impetus stem -
ming chiefly 
from private 
consumption 
and construc -
tion investment
Exports 
expanded 
considerably Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19104106108110112114116
–10+1+2+32010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
46

growth in Russia, in Japan and in the newly in -
dustrialised Asian economies. There was an es -
pecially sharp increase in the value of exports 
to Turkey, which had earlier undergone dra -
matic declines (see also the box on pp. 48 f.). 
Exports  to the south and east Asian emerging 
market economies, by contrast, fell consider -
ably. German enterprises were also facing 
lower demand from central and eastern Euro -
pean EU countries.
Commercial investment in machinery and 
equipment is expected to have risen percep -
tibly in the first quarter of 2019 despite persist -
ently weak industrial activity and, along with 
this, declining capacity utilisation in this sector. 
In value terms, imports of capital goods were 
down considerably, but this was more than off -
set by domestic producers’ strong sales of cap -
ital goods on the domestic market. In this con -
text, domestic producers of computers and 
electronic and optical products, in particular, 
considerably increased their turnover. German 
mechanical engineering firms also benefited 
from the buoyant demand for capital goods. In 
addition, the automotive sector reported a 
considerable increase in sales in domestic busi -
ness. It can be assumed, however, that this was 
partly due to catch- up effects following the 
weak second half of 2018, which suffered from 
the introduction of the new WLTP emissions 
testing procedure. Irrespective of this, however, 
companies also stepped up investment in their 
vehicle fleets. This is suggested by the fact that 
there was a sharp rise not only in the number 
of registrations for commercial passenger cars, 
but also in those for commercial vehicles. The 
latter are likely to have been left largely un -
scathed by the turmoil resulting from the new 
emissions testing procedure. They should there -
fore be seen as an indication that the under -
lying propensity to invest remained relatively 
high in the German economy.
Construction investment rose steeply in the first 
quarter of 2019. This buoyant growth was due 
chiefly to the favourable weather conditions in 
February and March. Turnover in the main con -struction sector, the figures for which are avail -
able up to February, was quite considerably 
higher than in the previous quarter. Both hous -
ing investment and commercial construction 
activities are likely to have expanded strongly.
Private consumption is thought to have ex -
panded sharply in the first quarter of 2019. This 
was in part the result of the expansionary fiscal 
measures which entered into force at the be -
ginning of this year and catch- up effects in 
terms of households’ car purchases. Private 
consumption thus overcame the weakness it 
had experienced in the last six months of 2018. 
This is signalled, first and foremost, by retail Despite weak 
industrial activ -
ity, probably still 
perceptible pro -
pensity to invest
Strong 
expansion  in 
construction 
investmentPrivate con -
sumption is 
likely to have 
seen strong 
growth in the 
first quarter90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 1990100110
8590100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 190100 100110
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesof which:Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
47

The fi  nancial and economic crisis in Turkey and 
its impact on German exports
Germany’s export business lost considerable 
momentum during the course of last year. 
While revenue from the export of goods 
was up by 8¼% on the year in calendar- 
adjusted terms in the fi  nal quarter of 2017, 
growth slowed to 1½% by the end of 2018. 
In regional terms, this slowdown was very 
broadly based. Turkey made a fairly high 
indi vid ual contribution in arithmetic terms, 
although the country, with a share of less 
than 2% of exports of goods, is not one of 
the German economy’s most important ex-
port markets. Nevertheless, the fi  nancial and 
economic crisis in Turkey meant that Ger-
man exports to Turkey in the fi  nal quarter of 
2018 were almost 30% down on the previ-
ous year’s level in value terms.
A factor contributing to the onset of the cri-
sis in Turkey was a general deterioration in emerging markets’ external fi  nancing con-
ditions last year after US monetary policy 
was normalised. Turkey was particularly vul-
nerable and reliant on a steady infl  ow of 
foreign capital because of its large stock of 
short- term external liabilities. In this envir-
onment, foreign investors’ increasing 
doubts about Turkish policymakers’ com-
mitment to macroeconomic stability proved 
fateful. Following the attempted coup in 
Turkey in mid-2016, the government and 
central bank considerably boosted domestic 
demand by means of an extremely accom-
modative monetary policy and large- scale 
granting of credit guarantees.1 At the end 
of 2017, signs of overheating began to 
spread again and the infl  ation rate rose to 
12%. Nevertheless, the authorities scaled 
back their expansionary policy stance only 
slightly.
In August and September 2018, the situ-
ation in the Turkish fi  nancial markets took a 
turn for the worse. The lira depreciated 
massively. It temporarily lost almost half its 
value against the US dollar in comparison 
with the start of the year. The lira was able 
to recoup some of its losses only after the 
policy rate was drastically raised to 24%.2 
However, now the real economy increas-
ingly began to slow down. Real GDP fell by 
4% overall in seasonally adjusted terms be-
tween the second and fourth quarters of 
2018, largely as a result of a marked drop in 
domestic demand. This was accompanied 
1 The credit guarantees were taken on by the public 
“Credit Guarantee Fund”, whose volume increased 
tenfold in 2017 to a ratio of around 7% of gross do-
mestic product (GDP). For more information, see Inter-
national Monetary Fund (2018).
2 The one- week repo rate acts as the offi   cial policy 
rate in Turkey. At times, however, specifi  cally in 2017, 
the central bank provided commercial banks with 
liquid ity primarily or exclusively via the marginal lend-
ing facilities.German exports by region
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Ac-
cording to foreign trade statistics. 2 Difference between the 
rate of change of total exports and growth contributions of 
the regions mentioned.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20191012345678
–++++++++Year-on-year change, seasonally and calendar adjusted
All countries
Percentage changeUnited KingdomTurkey
Central and eastern 
European non-euro 
area EU countriesUnited States
ChinaEuro area 
Other countries 2Contributions to total exports of goods1
in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
48

by a dramatic decline in real imports, due in 
part to the strong depreciation of the lira. 
Against this backdrop, Turkey’s very large 
current account defi  cit moved back into 
positive territory for the fi  rst time since 2003.
In the fourth quarter of 2018, Turkey’s im-
ports of goods were down by just over one- 
quarter in real terms compared with the 
year- earlier period. China was most affected 
by this decline, followed by Germany. To-
gether with Russia, which mainly provides 
energy products, these countries constitute 
Turkey’s main trading partners. Other Euro-
pean countries also suffered a considerable 
drop in their trade with Turkey. On a macro-
economic scale, the shortfall in demand 
was particularly signifi  cant in south- eastern 
Europe. Broken down by categories of 
goods, the decline in Turkey’s import de-
mand was broadly based. From the German 
perspective, too, revenue from exports in 
many product categories fell sharply, includ-
ing machinery; computers, electronic and 
optical products, as well as electrical equip-
ment. In terms of value, motor vehicle deliv-
eries plummeted by around two- thirds.
In recent months, various indicators have 
suggested that the economic situation in 
Turkey is stabilising. Import demand revived 
somewhat, which also benefi  ted German 
exporters. Furthermore, sentiment bright-
ened among enterprises and households. 
Nonetheless, it is questionable whether the 
economy has in fact bottomed out. For in-
stance, seasonally adjusted unemployment 
rose again signifi  cantly to almost 14% in 
the fi  rst quarter of 2019. Moreover, the 
Turkish government announced plans to 
consolidate public fi  nances, which are yet 
to be implemented.3 Lastly, private Turkish 
banks are currently holding off on granting 
loans. Their balance sheets have deterior-
ated considerably due to a sharp increase in 
loans at risk of default.As this report went to press, the situation in 
Turkish fi  nancial markets remained fragile. 
Since February, the lira has again depreci-
ated considerably in an environment char-
acterised by domestic and geopolitical un-
certainties. Another factor which contrib-
uted to the weakening of the lira was 
growing doubt as to whether the central 
bank would maintain its tight monetary 
policy stance. Consumer price infl  ation fell 
only moderately from the peak it reached in 
October 2018 (25%) to just under 20% 
most recently. Medium- term infl  ation ex-
pectations are also still considerably above 
the monetary policy target rate of 5%. Fur-
thermore, it is unclear how sustainable the 
improvement of the current account bal-
ance is. Thus far, it has been driven mainly 
by the import side. In the event of a cyclical 
recovery of the Turkish economy, the cur-
rent account defi  cit could be expected to 
grow again.
3 According to the medium- term economic plan ap-
proved in September 2018, the government is striving 
for a primary surplus of 0.8% of GDP for 2019, com-
pared with 0.1% of GDP last year. Fiscal consolidation 
is to be achieved primarily by means of expenditure 
cuts. In actual fact, however, government spending in 
the fi  rst quarter of 2019 exceeded the previous year’s 
level by one- third.Turkey’s economic output and imports
Sources: Turkish Statistical Institute and German Federal Statist-
ical Office. 1 According to foreign trade statistics.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019708090100110120Q1 2016 = 100, seasonally and calendar adjusted, log scale
Total imports of goods1
(price adjusted)GDP
(price adjusted)
Memo item:
German exports 
of goods to Turkey1
(on the basis of values in euro)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
49

sales, which rose sharply in real terms in the 
reporting quarter. Food retailers, for instance, 
reported a considerable increase in sales. Sales 
of textiles, clothing and shoes were also boom -
ing. The retail sector also benefited from buoy -
ant demand for domestic appliances. The par -
ticularly strong growth in sales of do- it- yourself 
(DIY) and home improvement goods as well as 
in sales of furniture and furnishings was prob -
ably due to the extremely warm weather con -
ditions during the winter months, which 
allowed buoyant construction activity. By con -
trast, there was a slight contraction in online 
trading and mail order business, which had 
clearly been supporting private consumption in 
the previous quarter. High street demand for IT 
and telecommunications equipment was also 
lower. Besides retail sales, spending in the 
hotels, restaurants and catering sector also 
grew significantly. In addition, households’ car 
purchases largely recovered, having been sig -
nificantly dampened in the second half of 2018 
by the supply shortages associated with the introduction of the new emissions testing pro -
cedure.
German imports of goods rose sharply in the 
first quarter of 2019 in price-  adjusted terms. 
This was mainly attributable to considerably 
higher crude oil imports, which could be linked 
to the sharp fall in oil prices. However, demand 
for non- energy imports remained subdued. 
Only foreign manufacturers of intermediate 
goods recorded a slight increase in sales overall 
in Germany. Looking at the geographic origin 
of the imported goods, developments were 
mixed. For instance, the value of imports from 
the euro area countries expanded considerably. 
What is especially striking here was the sharp 
increase in motor vehicle imports, which is 
probably related to catch- up effects following 
the introduction of the new WLTP emissions 
testing procedure last year. By contrast, the 
value of imports of goods from non- euro area 
countries showed a perceptible decline.
Sectoral trends
The downturn in the manufacturing sector 
continued. Industrial output in the first quarter 
of 2019 stagnated at the previous quarter’s 
level, after having, in fact, fallen sharply in the 
second half of 2018. A considerable expansion 
in the manufacture of computers and elec -
tronic and optical products provided a boost in 
the reporting period. By contrast, output in the 
automotive sector rose only slightly. Catch-  up 
effects after the WLTP- related decline in the 
second half of last year are likely to have been 
largely eclipsed by weaker global demand for 
cars and possibly also by production being re -
located to other European countries. Output in 
the pharmaceutical sector largely stabilised. In 
the final quarter of 2018, output had been cut 
back by more than one-  fifth as part of a one-  
off development unrelated to cyclical factors.
The ongoing weakness in the industrial sector 
means that utilisation of existing production 
capacities is falling. According to ifo Institute Imports of 
goods up 
sharply
Industry still in a 
downturn
Lower capacity 
utilisation in the 
industrial sectorOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19Industry
95100105110
120
859095100105110115125
Construction1
Main construction2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scaleDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
50

data, capacity utilisation of tangible fixed assets 
in manufacturing was down for the third time 
in succession in the first quarter of 2019. None -
theless, it was still clearly above its long- term 
average. Producers of intermediate goods re -
cently experienced an especially pronounced 
drop in capacity utilisation. In the consumer 
goods sector, by contrast, capacity utilisation 
actually rose somewhat.
Construction output in the first three months 
of 2019 rose strongly on the quarter in season -
ally adjusted terms. The main reason for this 
sharp increase was the exceptionally warm 
weather in February and March. The expansion 
of construction output in the finishing trades 
was only marginally weaker than in the main 
construction industry, where civil engineering 
activities experienced the strongest growth. 
Even after adjustment for the additional stimu -
lus provided by the favourable weather condi -
tions, the figures suggest that the construction 
boom in Germany was continuing.
Business in the services sectors weathered the 
period of weak industrial activity and probably 
continued its upward movement in the winter 
of 2019. Real sales in the retail trade and in the 
hotels, restaurants and catering sector saw a 
sharp increase. Sales in the wholesale trade 
also grew considerably in real terms. Driven by 
catch- up effects following last year’s upheaval 
in connection with the new emissions testing 
procedure, the motor vehicle trade is also likely 
to have registered a clear rise in sales. In add -
ition, business activity in the other services 
sectors  excluding trade probably remained 
fairly buoyant. This is suggested by the assess -
ment of the business situation for this industry. 
According to the ifo Institute, it remained at a 
very high level despite a slight downward revi -
sion in the reporting period.
Labour market
The labour market continued to improve in the 
first quarter of 2019 despite the slower under -lying pace of economic activity since mid-2018. 
This meant that employment creation con -
tinued and unemployment declined, albeit only 
slightly. As before, employment rose largely 
thanks to positive developments in jobs subject 
to social security contributions. By contrast, the 
number of self- employed persons and persons 
working exclusively in low- paid part- time jobs 
continued to go down. The number of job 
vacan cies remained at the high level it reached 
a few months earlier. According to the leading 
indicators, gloomier recruitment plans have so 
far largely been confined to manufacturing. On 
the whole, labour demand remains on an up -
ward trajectory.
In the first quarter of 2019, the number of 
employed  persons in Germany increased by 
149,000 (or 0.3%) after seasonal adjustment, a 
slightly stronger rise than in the previous three 
quarters. This growth was driven solely by the 
expansion of employment subject to social 
security  contributions. According to a first esti -
mate by the Federal Employment Agency, the 
number of people in jobs subject to social 
security  contributions went up by 162,000, or 
0.5%, in the first two months of the reporting 
quarter alone compared with the average for 
the final quarter of 2018.
From a sectoral perspective, there is a striking 
shift of emphasis within the production sector. 
In manufacturing, stagnant or declining de -
mand meant that employment subject to social 
security contributions was rising more slowly 
towards the end of the period under review. 
Meanwhile, in the construction sector – which 
had been operating at close to full capacity and 
was having trouble finding new staff in 2018 – 
the employment figures were now going up at 
a higher rate. Significant improvements in pay 
in the construction industry last year may have 
boosted the sector’s relative attractiveness. In 
addition, business-  related services (excluding 
temporary employment) and IT experienced 
the strongest employment growth. Across the 
other services sectors, employment growth 
also remained high. In the financial and insur -Construction 
output increased 
sharply, largely 
because of the 
weather
Services sectors 
likely still on 
a growth 
trajectory Labour market 
withstanding 
present slower 
underlying cyc -
lical momentum
Sharp rise in 
jobs subject to 
social security 
contributions …
… shifting from 
manufacturing 
to the construc -
tion sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
51

ance sector, the decline in the number of em -
ployees came to a halt, at least for the time 
being. The number of employees subject to 
social  security contributions in the temporary 
employment sector fell considerably again in 
the course of 2018.
In February 2019, 671,000 more jobs subject to 
social security contributions were filled than in 
the same month last year. In the period under 
review, demand for labour rose significantly 
faster than the domestic labour supply. Despite 
falling unemployment and the growing partici -
pation of domestic workers in the labour force, 
in arithmetical terms, it was possible to fill only 
just under half of the new positions with per -
sons possessing German citizenship. Though 
immigration from abroad is still considerable, 
the trend is slightly downwards.1 Around one 
in five of the new positions were filled by some -
one from countries that have joined the EU 
since 2004. In addition, the integration of mi -
grants into the labour market is making rapid 
progress.
Registered unemployment fell slightly in the 
first quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. Aver -
aged over the reporting period, 33,000 fewer 
persons were unemployed than in the previous 
quarter; rounding meant that the unemploy -
ment rate remained unchanged. In April, the 
number of registered unemployed showed a 
further fall, the unemployment rate now being 
4.9%. This decline is entirely due to a drop in 
the number of unemployed persons receiving 
the basic welfare allowance. By contrast, the 
number of unemployed persons claiming insur -
ance benefits has been at its current low level 
for one year now. Without the increased use of 
active labour market policy measures, the fig -
ure would probably even have gone up during 
the period under review. Overall underemploy -
ment (excluding short- time working), which Domestic 
sources insuffi -
cient to satisfy 
demand for 
labour
Unemployment 
on the decline 
only among 
those receiving 
the basic wel -
fare allowance; 
active labour 
market policy 
expandedLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19Apr.42.042.543.043.544.044.545.0
29.029.530.030.531.031.532.032.533.033.505001,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200Apr.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Apr.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Jan.-
Feb.
1 According to migration statistics published by Germany’s 
Federal Statistical Office, the migration surplus with the rest 
of the world was as high as 500,000 in 2016, falling to 
416,000 persons in 2017, and amounting to 386,000 per -
sons in 2018 according to preliminary data.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
52

also includes persons taking part in active 
labour  market policy measures, rose slightly in 
April. Since the beginning of the year, there has 
been a significantly more frequent deployment 
of, in particular, short- term measures for get -
ting people into work and integrating them 
into the job market, besides for vocational 
training.
The number of short- time workers doubled in 
the late summer of 2018 from what was histor -
ically an extremely low level.2 The increase was 
mainly due to the downturn in manufacturing. 
Since then, however, the number of reports of 
short- time work for economic reasons –  for 
which data are available up to March of this 
year – has remained broadly constant and is 
still at a low level. A further increase is there -
fore not to be expected in the short term.
The leading indicators suggest that there has 
so far been no deterioration in the labour mar -
ket outlook outside the manufacturing sector. 
Enterprises are still indicating a strong willing -
ness to recruit new staff, with both the labour 
market barometer of the Institute for Employ -
ment Research (IAB) and the Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s BA-  X job index maintaining 
their very high level over the past few months. 
The ifo employment barometer, which enquires 
about the recruitment plans of trade and indus -
try over the next three months, declined per -
ceptibly towards the end of the period under 
review. This is chiefly attributable to depressed 
sentiment in the manufacturing sector, how -
ever. All in all, there was a pronounced short -
age of labour. This is shown in the continuing 
increase in the duration of vacancies, for ex -
ample.3 The leading indicator for unemploy -
ment in the IAB labour market barometer fell 
somewhat and is now in neutral territory. 
Registered unemployment is therefore not ex -
pected to decline further in the next three 
months.Wages and prices
Negotiated wages continued to rise steeply in 
the first quarter of 2019. This is mainly due to 
the previous year’s wage settlements, which 
were higher than before on account of the pro -
nounced tightness of the labour market. Nego -
tiated pay rates, including additional benefits, 
were 2.9% up on the year, as in the final quar -
ter of 2018. The increases in the production 
sector (including construction) were still signifi -
cantly higher than in the services sector. Growth 
in actual earnings may have again been greater 
than that in negotiated rates of pay.Short- time work -
ing still very low
Labour demand 
outside the 
manufacturing 
sector still 
expansionary
Negotiated pay 
rates continue 
to rise steeply2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201900.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–0.50+0.5+1.0%
Q1
Wage drift 1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 The wage 
drift is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual 
earnings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 Data on short- time work as a whole are available only 
with a longer time lag and currently extend only up to 
Octo ber 2018.
3 The Federal Employment Agency measures the vacancy 
period from the desired starting date to when the position 
is withdrawn.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
53

Like last year, the new agreements concluded 
in the 2019 pay round mostly envisage steeper 
wage rises than in the years from 2015 to 2017. 
In annualised terms, wages have gone up 
by 3¼%4 in the public sector of federal state 
govern ment and by 3%5 in the steel industry. 
The considerably longer durations of the col -
lective wage agreements –  at 33 and 26 
months respectively – are worth noting. After 
tough negotiations, the printing industry, which 
is going through a period of structural up -
heaval, also concluded a new collective agree -
ment with a term of 36 months. The current 
wage round focuses on the services sectors. 
The wage demands for sectors where an agree -ment is still pending are between 5% and 6.5% 
over a term of 12 months and are thus slightly 
higher than in the previous year. Wage negoti -
ations are currently being held between man -
agement and labour in the retail and wholesale 
trade, in private banking and in the regional 
automotive trade. The individual options of 
more leisure time or a higher pay rise remain a 
key element in some sectors.
As of the reporting month January, the national 
consumer price index (CPI) for Germany was 
rebased  on the year 2015. Methodological ad -
justments were made to the way in which 
prices are collected in the statistics for rents 
and package holidays. The latter led to not only 
the CPI being recalculated back to the new 
base year, as is usual, but also the harmonised 
indices of consumer prices (HICP), which is 
more important for European monetary policy.6 
First, this involved a marked upward revision of 
headline and core inflation in 2015. Second, 
the fluctuations in the prices recorded for pack -
age holidays appear to have become even 
more pronounced compared with the previous 
year, which is also likely to have heightened the 
volatility of headline and core inflation.
The annual inflation rate fell significantly from 
2.1% to 1.6% in the first quarter.7 At the cur -
rent end, this was due to a seasonally adjusted 
0.2% decline in prices compared with the final 
quarter of 2018, mainly as a result of lower en -
ergy prices. The latter continued to fall on the 
back of lower crude oil prices at the end of last 
year, even though there was a marked hike in 
electricity and gas prices for households. By 
contrast, there was little change in food prices 
overall. The rise in the price of processed prod -Wage settle -
ments in the 
current wage 
round mostly 
higher so far 
than in years 
2015 to 2017Changes in 
methodology 
used for con -
sumer prices 
and resulting 
steep upward 
revision of infla -
tion rate in 2015
Energy main 
reason for per -
ceptible year- 
on- year fall in 
consumer price 
inflation in first 
quarterExport pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 1995100105110
95100105
95100105
0123
+++2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2Producer prices1
%Log scale
April95100105
AprilImport prices
4 Calculation based on a representative recipient of the 
agreed basic pay rate who benefits from the minimum 
amounts in 2019 (€100), 2020 (€90) and 2012 (€50).
5 Salaried employees in the steel industry can convert the 
additional negotiated remuneration amounting to €1,000 
due for the first time at the end of July 2020 into up to five 
work- free days.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019); and European Central 
Bank (2019).
7 The corresponding CPI figure was +1.4% compared with 
+2.0%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
54

ucts was offset by a countermovement in un -
processed food. In the case of non- energy in -
dustrial goods, perceptible price increases in 
the early stages were passed on to consumers. 
Services also became noticeably more expen -
sive. Even so, at 1.4%, the annual increase in 
the HICP excluding energy and food was no 
stronger than it was in the fourth quarter of 
2018. This was because the relatively early date 
of Easter meant that price dynamics in the first 
quarter of 2018 were at much the same high 
level as in the reporting quarter.
Seasonally adjusted consumer prices in April 
were up by a substantial 0.6% on the month. 
The resurgence in crude oil prices was not the 
only reason why energy became more expen -
sive. In fact, profit margins were up in the case 
of refined petroleum products, too. Food prices 
rose somewhat. Another reason why industrial 
goods became noticeably more expensive was 
that lower prices for clothing from the previous 
month were reversed again. Prices for services 
were also up markedly on the month. The rise 
in prices for package holidays was sharper than 
is already suggested by the late date of Easter. 
The underlying trend in services  price inflation 
was also quite strong. In line with this, core in -
flation increased to 2.0%. The headline rate 
went up to 2.1%.
Owing to the comparatively late date of Whit -
suntide, both headline and core inflation are 
likely to contract again markedly at first and 
then go up again in the current and the next 
month. However, it is unlikely that the April 
rates will be matched again.
Order books and outlook
The pattern of a two- speed economy that has 
been shaping economic activity in Germany 
since the summer of 2018 will remain in place 
in the second quarter of 2019. While the down -
turn in industry will continue, the expansionary 
forces in the more domestically- oriented sec -
tors are still intact. The overall outcome of this is an ongoing weak underlying cyclical trend. 
Given this setting, German economic output in 
the second quarter of 2019 is likely to barely 
exceed the level reached in the first quarter, 
which was boosted by a number of one- off 
effects . These special factors, which were 
major drivers of growth after the turn of the 
year, are expected to come to an end or even 
go into reverse. The added stimulus to private 
consumption provided by fiscal measures could 
ease off for a time in the second quarter before 
other measures boosting purchasing power 
reach households in the second half of the 
year. Furthermore, it is likely that the catch- up 
process behind new car purchases is largely 
complete. Not least, a negative rebound effect 
may be expected in the construction sector fol -
lowing the very strong weather- related increase 
in the first quarter. Moreover, downward forces 
continue to dominate in industry, and may 
even gain some further momentum. One indi -
cation of this is the very sharp, broad- based de -
cline in new industrial orders since the start of 
2019. Apart from this, the business climate 
index for the manufacturing sector declined for 
the eighth time in succession. Output and ex -
port expectations were also scaled back once 
again. In line with this, data provided by the 
Association of the Automotive Industry (VDA) 
show a quite considerable seasonally adjusted 
fall in the numbers of passenger cars produced 
in April. A gradual rebound in economic activity 
can be expected only in the wake of a global 
economy recovery in the second half of the 
year.
Surveys by the ifo Institute indicate that the 
downward spiral in sentiment in the German 
economy since the summer of last year has 
largely tailed off towards the end of the period 
under review. Looking at the individual sectors 
of the economy, however, this was due to a 
noticeably mixed development. Manufacturing 
enterprises, for example, were still taking an 
increas ingly pessimistic view of the future, with 
their assessment of both the business situation 
and business expectations continuing to deteri -
orate. The short-  term export and production Prices up steeply 
in April mainly 
due to energy 
and late date of 
Easter
Strong volatility 
in inflation rates 
likely in near 
future
Moderate eco -
nomic output 
expected in 
second quarterMixed sentiment 
across the sec -
tors in period 
under reviewDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
55

expectations for this sector also fell again 
somewhat and are below their long- term aver -
age. By contrast, sentiment in the other sectors 
– in trade, other services and main construc -
tion – became somewhat brighter again after 
hitting a low at the beginning of the year and 
is, in all of these sectors, above the long- term 
average.
In the first quarter of 2019, the order situation 
in German industry became increasingly gloomy 
on a broad front. This is also true if the typically 
irregular inflow of large orders is not included. 
In a regional breakdown, the lack of new 
orders from non- euro area countries was par -
ticularly noticeable, although the inflow of 
orders from Germany and the euro area also 
showed a steep decline. With regard to the in -
dividual sectors, German manufacturers of ma -
chinery had to cope with a very severe slump in 
demand. There were also significantly fewer 
new orders in the automotive sector than in 
the previous quarter. While orders of motor 
vehicles  from the euro area increased substan -
tially and those from Germany stagnated, the 
volume of new orders from non-  euro area 
countries fell sharply. This is probably attribut -
able to the positive stimulus from the euro area 
and stable domestic demand, as well as to 
catch- up effects after the WLTP-  related delays 
in the second half of 2018. The results of the 
Ifo Institute’s survey on the volume of orders 
still being processed in the manufacturing sec -
tor also point to a further overall deterioration 
in the order situation of German industrial 
enter  prises. Federal Statistical Office data also 
indicate a contraction in industrial orders, with 
the March level being significantly lower than 
the average for the final quarter of 2018.
Construction output in the second quarter of 
2019 is likely to increase only slightly on the 
quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. This is due 
to a rebound effect following a strong, tem -
porary expansion in construction output in the 
first quarter as a result of favourable weather 
conditions. Aside from this special factor, the 
boom in construction is likely to continue un -Sharp deterior -
ation in indus -
trial orders
Only slight 
increase in con -
struction output 
expected in 
second quarter 
due to weather- 
related rebound 
effectDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source  of  the  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office. 
1 Only calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 199095100105110115
–50+5+10
9095100105110115
9095100 100105110
Jan.-
Feb.Jan.-
Feb.
9095100105110115120125130135
505101520
–++++Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scaleLog scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Main construction orders%
%TotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
56

abated. New orders received by the main con -
struction sector on an average of January and 
February – data are available up to this time – 
showed a significant decline compared with 
the previous quarter. However, the inflow of 
orders in the final quarter of 2018 was excep -
tionally strong and characterised by large- scale 
orders, so this does not indicate weaker con -
struction activity. Other economic indicators 
also suggest continued strong underlying mo -
mentum in the construction sector. Towards 
the end of the period under review, equipment 
utilisation and the reach of orders books in the 
main construction industry remained only mar -
ginally down on their peak levels, according to 
the ifo Institute. At the same time, following a 
temporary decline in the second half of 2018, 
there was a significant increase again in the 
percentage of construction firms reporting a 
shortage of skilled workers as the most signifi -
cant factor hampering production.Private consumption will probably remain a 
major source of growth in the second quarter 
of 2019 as well. Employment developments are 
still very favourable and wage growth is strong. 
Private consumption is likely to grow at a per -
ceptibly slower pace than in the previous quar -
ter, however. This is due to two one- off effects 
which boosted private consumption at the start 
of the year and which have now come to an 
end. The added impetus provided by the ex -
pansionary fiscal measures that entered into 
force in the first quarter should gradually fade 
out. Furthermore, the process of catching up 
on car purchases following the WLTP- related 
delays in the second half of 2018 is likely to be 
coming to an end. This is suggested by new 
passenger car registrations, with the first quar -
ter of this year already seeing them match their 
level prior to the introduction of the new emis -
sions test procedure.Private con -
sumption still a 
major, albeit less 
powerful source 
of growth
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), The revision of the sub- index for package holidays and its impact on 
the HICP and core inflation, Monthly Report, March 2019, pp. 8-9.
European Central Bank (2019) A new method for the package holiday price index in Germany and 
its impact on HICP inflation rates, Issue 2/ 2019, pp. 61ff.
International Monetary Fund (2018), Turkey – Staff Report for the 2018 Article IV Consultation, Box 
5: Credit Guarantee Fund, p. 24.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
57

Public finances*
General government budget
Germany’s government finances have been 
shaping up very well in recent years. This has 
been driven largely by low interest rates and 
dynamic revenue growth. Last year, general 
government recorded a surplus of 1.7% of 
gross domestic product (GDP), while the debt 
ratio fell to 60.9%. This year, the fiscal balance 
is set to see a marked deterioration for the first 
time since 2010. The main reason for this is fis -
cal loosening. In addition, positive cyclical ef -
fects are tailing off. Nevertheless, the govern -
ment budget is expected to run a significant 
surplus again. The debt ratio is likely to fall 
below the 60% threshold.
The economic downturn is primarily evidenced 
by slower tax revenue growth, and the loos -
ened fiscal policy stance by sharper spending 
hikes. For example, pension benefits were once 
again expanded on a considerable scale at the 
start of the year. Additionally, more funding 
was made available in areas such as infrastruc -
ture, education and defence. Still falling inter -
est payments and what is expected to be lower 
state government expenditure to stabilise the 
Landesbanken will provide a slight counterbal -
ance. The tax and social contributions ratio is 
likely to barely change: income tax cuts will be 
essentially offset by progressive taxation. Social 
contribution rates have fallen for employees, 
but they have risen for enterprises.
As things currently stand, the surplus will be 
gradually depleted over the next few years. The 
main reason for this is that fiscal policy is set to 
be loosened even further. Current projections 
show no major additional burdens in the base -
lines stemming from cyclical developments. 
Thus, the debt ratio is likely to continue to fall.
Under these conditions, compliance with the 
EU’s agreed budgetary rules for general gov -
ernment will be achieved by some margin. Ac -cording to the latest stability programme, this is 
also the Federal Government’s plan.1 While 
budget planning is still based on January’s 
macroeconomic projection, the spring forecast 
published at the same time is unlikely to funda -
mentally change this picture: in the short term, 
GDP growth is even lower, and revenue expect -
ations have been scaled back slightly further 
based on the latest tax estimate. However, the 
social security funds should be hardly affected 
given the labour market’s continued strong 
performance. Therefore, the general govern -
ment surplus will probably be revised only 
moderately compared with the scenario out -
lined in the stability programme.
Fiscal loosening reflects a whole raft of projects 
and developments. Sharp spending increases 
are envisaged in the areas of pensions and 
long- term care. The same is true of investment 
in transport infrastructure and digitalisation, 
personnel in sectors such as childcare and edu -
cation, and internal and external security. There 
are also plans under the coalition agreement to 
again significantly increase child benefits from 
2021, widen the provision of childcare services 
for primary school children, channel additional 
funds into regional policies and partly abolish 
the solidarity surcharge. Due to international 
agreements, spending on defence and devel -
opment aid may be higher in the medium term 
than so far accounted for by central govern -
ment in its plans. Furthermore, there is talk of 
introducing a basic pension without means 
testing. This would go beyond the scope of the 
coalition agreement and would entail consider -
able additional spending.Reduced surplus 
this year amid 
fiscal loosening
Macroeconomic 
development 
dampening 
revenue  growth; 
expenditure 
being stepped 
up considerably
Shrinking surplus 
in coming years, 
too, due to con -
tinued fiscal 
loosening
Compliance with 
budgetary rules 
to be achieved 
by some marginMany and 
varied  measures 
putting pressure 
on government 
budgets
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No figures for the first quarter of 2019 are yet avail -
able for local government or the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes. These will be 
analysed in the short commentaries featured in the next 
two issues of the Monthly Report.
1 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
58

All things considered, there will probably still 
be some financial leeway initially. However, the 
budgets look set to feel the squeeze eventually. 
This applies, in particular, to central govern -
ment as well as to the statutory pension and 
health insurance schemes, which have still 
been recording relatively high surpluses as of 
late. As from the middle of the next decade, 
demographic change will weigh yet more heav -
ily on the budgets.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Year- on- year growth in tax revenue2 came to 
2% in the first quarter of 2019 (see the chart 
and table on pp. 63 and 64). Wage tax growth 
remained dynamic (+6%). This was driven 
chiefly by the continued favourable develop -ment of gross wages and salaries. Progressive 
taxation was offset by tax relief measures. These 
include the Family Relief Act (Familienentlas -
tungsgesetz),  which is intended, inter alia, to 
compensate for last year’s bracket creep.3 How -
ever, revenue from profit- related taxes declined 
markedly (-4½%). Driving the decrease was 
withholding tax on interest income  and capital 
gains. Revenue from this source halved, which 
is probably attributable to lower capital gains, in 
particular. In addition, there was a slight dip in 
revenue from assessed income and corporation 
taxes. However, the respective previous year’s 
levels were high, and growth was recorded for 
both in the important prepayment month of 
March. By contrast, growth in revenue from 
non- assessed taxes on earnings was dynamic. Financial leeway 
gradually 
narrowing 
Subdued growth 
in Q1Key fi  gures of the general government fi  scal plans drawn up by Federal Government*
 
Item 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Real GDP growth (%)
Stability programme April 2019 1.4 1.0 1.6 1.1 1.1 1.1
Updated draft budgetary plan June 2018 2.3 2.1 1.4 1.4 1.4 .
Stability programme April 2018 2.4 1.9 1.3 1.3 1.3 .
Fiscal balance (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2019 1.7 ¾ ¾ ½ ½ ½
Updated draft budgetary plan June 2018 1¼ ¾ ¾ ½ ¾ .
Stability programme April 2018 1 1¼ 1½ 1½ . .
Structural fi  scal balance (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2019 1.4 ¾ ½ ½ ¼ ½
Updated draft budgetary plan June 2018 1 ¼ ½ ½ ¾ .
Stability programme April 2018 ½ ¾ 1 1½ . .
Debt level (% of GDP)
Stability programme April 2019 60.9 58¾ 56½ 54¾ 53 51¼
Updated draft budgetary plan June 2018 61 58¼ 56¼ 54¼ 52 .
Stability programme April 2018 61 58¼ 55¾ 53 . .
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * The stability programmes are based on Federal Government’s macroeconomic projection from Janu-
ary of the same year. The measures stipulated in the coalition agreement were not factored into the 2018 stability programme. These 
were not taken into account until the updated draft budgetary plan of June 2018, which was based on the macroeconomic projection 
from April 2018.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
3 The basic income tax allowance and child tax allowances 
were raised and the other income tax brackets shifted to 
the right. Child benefits, which are deducted from cash rev -
enue, will not be raised until the middle of the year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
59

Current fi  scal developments in the euro area
2018: lower defi  cit ratio due to 
economic  developments and interest 
rates
The general government defi  cit ratio in the 
euro area stood at 0.5% last year, down by 
½ percentage point. According to calcula-
tions by the European Commission, this fall 
was driven by favourable economic devel-
opments and lower interest expenditure. By 
contrast, the fi  scal stance (as measured by 
the change in the cyclically adjusted pri-
mary balance)1 was broadly neutral. The 
debt ratio sank from 89.1% to 87.1%.2 
Nominal GDP growth in the denominator 
(denominator effect), which pushes down 
the ratio, was much stronger than the debt- 
increasing effect of the defi  cit.
Defi  cit ratio to rise again in 2019 due to 
fi  scal loosening
According to the European Commission’s 
forecast from the beginning of May, the 
defi  cit ratio is expected to rise again to 
0.9% in 2019, where it will stay put for 
2020. This is not down to interest expend-
iture and economic developments, but 
rather  to a marked fi  scal loosening in 2019. 
The debt ratio is set to fall at a somewhat 
slower pace than in previous years.
Greece: programme completed, 
suﬃ   cient  primary surpluses on the 
horizon  but also risks concerning 
reforms 
Greece completed its assistance programme 
under the European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM) in August 2018. Since then, Greece 
has been raising its own funds in the capital 
markets again,3 aided by the fact that it 
continued to comply with (and even out-
performed) the fi  scal target for the primary 
surplus (3.5% of GDP)4 in 2018. The Com-
mission has also forecast that Greece will 
continue to meet its target in 2019 and 2020, especially because the negative cyc-
lical factors are expected to shrink signifi  -
cantly. At the same time, the fi  scal stance is 
being loosened considerably. The debt ratio 
is set to fall rapidly on the back of the pri-
mary surplus, the relatively low interest bur-
den and ongoing economic growth. How-
ever, it will still amount to 168.9% in 2020. 
Political initiatives that are intent on rolling 
back reforms beyond the measures that 
have already been taken to loosen the fi  scal 
stance are a cause for concern. The ESM, 
too, warns that Greece may miss its budget-
ary objective by a wide margin. Further-
more, pending court rulings pose a risk to 
public fi  nances.
Recently, further fi  nancial assistance has 
been granted by other euro area Member 
States. This assistance was envisaged in 
May 2016 subject to the condition that 
Greece implements and abides by the 
agreed reforms. The responsible European 
institutions confi  rmed the release of the 
fi  rst tranche in April 2019, stating that 
“Greece has taken the necessary actions to 
achieve all specifi  c reform commitments for 
end-2018.” The Eurogroup resolved to grant 
Greece further debt relief measures. First, it 
scrapped the decision to raise the interest 
rate on some of the assistance loans for a 
certain period (start of 2018 to mid-2019) 
as originally planned. Second, it paid trans-
fers corresponding to some of the revenue 
from Greek government securities gener-
1 The primary balance equals the fi  scal balance exclud-
ing interest expenditure.
2 These European Commission fi  gures on the debt 
level in the euro area do not consolidate lending be-
tween euro area countries.
3 The available cash reserves would enable Greece to 
cover its fi  nancing needs without recourse to the cap-
ital market for a temporary period only.
4 The targets concern the general government primary 
balance. However, the defi  nition deviates from that 
used in the national accounts, primarily by not includ-
ing expenditure related to support for the banking sec-
tor or revenue from transfers in connection with the 
Eurosystem’s SMP/ ANFA transactions.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
60

ated in the Eurosystem (SMP and ANFA 
transactions). This resulted in total relief of 
around €1 billion for Greece (0.5% of 
Greece’s GDP). If Greece continues to hon-
our the agreed reforms and implement 
them in full, more of such relief measures 
(scheduled for December and June) can be 
granted up to June 2022.
Highly indebted countries: fi  scal stance 
generally unsatisfactory
In addition to Greece, according to the 
Commission’s forecast, Italy, Portugal and 
Belgium will continue to record debt ratios 
in excess of 100% in 2020, and the levels in 
France and Spain will be only slightly below 
this fi  gure. It is specifi  cally those countries 
that have very high levels of debt that are 
reducing their debt ratios at a slower pace 
than agreed in the common fi  scal rules.
After Greece, Italy has the highest debt 
ratio – far above that of the other euro area 
countries. The European Commission even 
forecasts a further increase in this level as it 
expects macroeconomic growth to be weak 
and the defi  cit ratio to rise. Interest expend-iture and economic developments are not 
likely to have a notable impact on the bal-
ance. Instead the Italian government has 
been pursuing a looser fi  scal stance which 
is at odds with the key requirements of the 
European fi  scal rules. First, the high debt 
ratio is not coming down – let alone at a 
rapid pace as required under the Maastricht 
Treaty.5 Second, rising structural defi  cit 
ratios in this scenario are likewise incompat-
ible with the rules.6 By choosing to follow 
this approach, the required improvement of 
0.3 percentage point for 2018 was missed 
5 A defi  cit procedure based on the debt criterion may 
be launched if the debt ratio does not fall rapidly 
enough. It is suffi   cient if the differential with respect to 
the reference value of 60% decreases over three years 
at an average rate of one- twentieth per year (even 
when cyclical effects are taken into account). Transi-
tional provisions are in place for countries that were 
subject to an excessive defi  cit procedure (e.g. France) 
at the time that this rule entered into force.
6 As a rule, the Stability and Growth Pact prescribes 
structural improvements of 0.5% of GDP per year until 
the budgetary objectives are achieved. However, 
country- specifi  c recommendations can deviate from 
this.Public fi  nances of the euro area countries
European Commission spring forecast, May 2019
CountryBudget balance as a percentage 
of GDPGovernment debt as a percent-
age of GDPStructural balance as a 
 percentage of potential GDP
2018 2019 2020 2018 2019 2020 2018 2019 2020
Austria 0.1 0.3 0.2 73.8 69.7 66.8 – 0.5 – 0.1 0.0
Belgium – 0.7 – 1.3 – 1.5 102.0 101.3 100.7 – 1.4 – 1.4 – 1.8
Cyprus – 4.8 3.0 2.8 102.5 96.4 89.9 2.0 1.1 0.7
Estonia – 0.6 – 0.3 – 0.5 8.4 8.5 8.5 – 2.2 – 1.7 – 1.5
Finland – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.2 58.9 58.3 57.7 – 1.0 – 1.0 – 0.6
France – 2.5 – 3.1 – 2.2 98.4 99.0 98.9 – 2.6 – 2.6 – 2.5
Germany 1.7 1.0 0.8 60.9 58.4 55.6 1.6 1.1 0.8
Greece 1.1 0.5 – 0.1 181.1 174.9 168.9 5.0 1.9 0.8
Ireland 0.0 0.0 0.3 64.8 61.3 55.9 – 1.4 – 1.2 – 0.5
Italy – 2.1 – 2.5 – 3.5 132.2 133.7 135.2 – 2.2 – 2.4 – 3.6
Latvia – 1.0 – 0.6 – 0.6 35.9 34.5 33.5 – 2.1 – 1.6 – 1.1
Lithuania 0.7 0.3 0.0 34.2 37.0 36.4 – 0.8 – 1.0 – 0.9
Luxembourg 2.4 1.4 1.1 21.4 20.7 20.3 2.1 0.9 0.5
Malta 2.0 1.1 0.9 46.0 42.8 40.2 1.4 0.6 0.7
Netherlands 1.5 1.4 0.8 52.4 49.1 46.7 0.8 0.7 0.2
Portugal – 0.5 – 0.4 – 0.1 121.5 119.5 116.6 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5
Slovakia – 0.7 – 0.5 – 0.6 48.9 47.3 46.0 – 1.3 – 1.3 – 1.4
Slovenia 0.7 0.7 0.9 70.1 65.9 61.7 – 0.7 – 0.8 – 0.3
Spain – 2.5 – 2.3 – 2.0 97.1 96.3 95.7 – 2.7 – 2.9 – 3.2
Euro area – 0.5 – 0.9 – 0.9 87.1 85.8 84.3 – 0.7 – 0.9 – 1.2
Sources: European Commission, ameco.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
61

by a wide margin.7 Third, the European 
Commission has forecast a defi  cit ratio of 
3.5% for 2020, which is far higher than the 
reference value of 3%.
France is the only other country in the euro 
area in which the very high debt ratio is 
expected  to continue rising (slightly). Its 
defi  cit ratio is also set to breach the 3% ceil-
ing (by a minimal amount) this year as a 
one- off event. This is partly due to the deci-
sion to change corporate levies that was 
taken at the end of 2017, resulting in a tem-
porary strain of around 1% of GDP on the 
2019 budget. Further pressure will come 
from the measures implemented by the 
government at the end of 2018. According 
to the Commission’s forecast, the defi  cit 
ratio will fall back to 2.2% in 2020. In struc-
tural terms, it has remained broadly un-
changed at 2½% since 2015. At the same 
time, the European Commission has noted 
a cyclical improvement for the years since 
2015 and favourable economic develop-
ments are expected over the forecast hori-
zon. France’s fi  scal developments are also 
incompatible with the key requirements of 
the fi  scal rules. France is still a long way 
from achieving the target of a structurally 
close- to- balance budget (medium- term 
budgetary objective: MTO); it is not even 
getting closer to achieving this target; it 
plans to breach the 3% threshold in 2019, 
and its high debt ratio is not coming down. 
Furthermore, it is possible that the develop-
ment of its public fi  nances will be even 
more unfavourable as the European Com-
mission did not factor the additional meas-
ures announced by the government at the 
end of April into its forecast.
The European Commission has also forecast 
unsatisfactory developments in two other 
highly indebted countries; namely Spain 
and Belgium. Despite still not achieving 
their MTO, both countries are easing their 
fi  scal stance. Spain’s defi  cit ratio has not 
been above 3% since 2018. A further slight 
reduction is also on the cards because the 
economy is faring well and the interest ex-penditure ratio is falling. As a result, it looks 
likely that the last of the defi  cit proceedings 
will come to an end.8 However, the fact 
that the debt ratio remains close to 100% 
and the structural defi  cit is not approaching 
the MTO is critical. Indeed, the structural 
defi  cit is drifting further and further away 
from the MTO and is even expected to ex-
ceed 3% of GDP in 2020. Belgium’s defi  cit 
ratio is lower than that of Spain – both in 
unadjusted and in structural terms. It has 
also loosened its future fi  scal stance to a 
lesser extent. But its debt ratio also remains 
virtually unchanged at a very high level.
Portugal and Cyprus9 also still have very 
high debt levels. However, the structural 
budgetary position in these countries is 
much more favourable. They have both 
achieved the MTO,10 meaning that their 
debt ratios are reducing rapidly.11 Those 
other euro area countries with a debt ratio 
of over 60% are also pursuing the agreed 
path to bring their ratio below the refer-
ence value. Germany should succeed in 
2019 and Ireland in 2020.
7 At the end of 2018, the European Commission 
accepted  the Italian government’s intention to even 
allow the structural balance to deteriorate somewhat 
for 2019, and now also expects this deterioration in its 
forecast.
8 The structural improvement required to correct the 
excessive defi  cit has not been achieved a priori in any 
year since 2014.
9 In 2018, Cyprus deviated signifi  cantly from the refer-
ence value for the defi  cit ratio. This was due to a one- 
off effect resulting from support measures for Cyprus 
Cooperative Bank. At the beginning of 2019, Eurostat 
decided that these measures placed a strain of 8.3% 
of GDP on the 2018 balance; they push up the 2018 
debt level by 16 percentage points.
10 According to the Fiscal Compact, the general ceil-
ing for the MTO is a structural defi  cit ratio of no more 
than 0.5%. Only if the debt ratio is signifi  cantly below 
60% may the MTO be a structural defi  cit ratio of up to 
1%. But other components also need to be taken into 
consideration when setting the country- specifi  c MTO. 
Therefore, a number of countries, including Portugal, 
have more ambitious targets (structurally balanced 
budget or surplus). For the sake of simplicity, this an-
alysis uses a ceiling of 0.5% or 1% of GDP rather than 
the country- specifi  c MTOs.
11 According to the Commission’s forecast, Portugal is 
close to complying with the “¹⁄ ₂₀ requirement”.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
62

Its main component is investment income tax 
on dividends. This growth reflects repeated de -
ferrals of dividend payment dates during the 
year. Turnover tax revenue, which is generally 
quite volatile over the course of the year, in -
creased moderately by 2%.
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue (including local government taxes) is 
expected to increase by 2½% for 2019 as a 
whole (see the tax estimate table on p. 65). The 
assumed macroeconomic growth, including 
progressive taxation, will make for a slightly 
higher increase. However, this will be damp -
ened to a marked extent, on balance, by legis -
lative changes.4 These primarily concern the 
aforementioned Family Relief Act, but also other legislative changes. For example, the 
raised immediate write- off threshold for low-  
value assets will result in shortfalls. Repayments 
are also expected in connection with a VAT 
ruling  made some time ago.5
Subdued rise 
in tax revenue 
expected for 
2019Often insuﬃ   cient progress towards MTO
The European Commission expects defi  cit 
ratios in most countries to rise (or surpluses 
to fall) by 2020. Italy is the only country ex-
pected to breach the 3% ceiling in 2020. 
However, almost half of the Member States 
are likely to infringe the MTO. Of those that 
missed the target in 2018, 40% are actually 
easing their fi  scal stance up to 2020, which 
will take them even further away from the 
target. With the exception of Latvia, none 
of the Member States that failed to achieve 
their MTO in 2018 has managed to reduce 
their structural defi  cit ratio by 0.5% per-
centage point per year.12
The European institutions should strictly 
apply those rules that they have agreed 
upon jointly in order to bring about a 
change in policy stance. The European 
Commission has announced that it will ana-
lyse and evaluate fi  scal developments in the 
Member States by the start of June. This will be based on the results for 2018 as well as 
the government plans submitted at the end 
of April 2019. The Spring Package on 
budgetary surveillance will therefore be 
available later than usual – and not until 
after the European elections.
12 According to the change forecast for 2020, Slo-
venia and Ireland are now expected to achieve their 
MTO.
Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20192024681012
–++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
4 The official tax estimate is generally based on current 
legis lation.
5 Application of the Federal Fiscal Court ruling on the VAT 
liability of property developers (Federal Fiscal Court ruling V 
R  37/ 10 and Federal Ministry of Finance letter dated 
24 January 2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
63

Tax revenue is expected to grow by 3% next 
year. Macroeconomic development will be 
more favourable. Furthermore, legislative 
changes will make themselves felt to a slightly 
lesser extent than in the year prior. Although 
the Family Relief Act will have more of a damp -
ening impact than in 2019, other legislative 
changes will play a less important role. Tax rev -
enue growth of 3½% is expected for each of 
the subsequent years up to 2023. This largely 
reflects the macroeconomic assumptions and 
progressive taxation. In net terms, revenue 
shortfalls from legislative changes and court 
rulings will weigh only marginally on growth. 
The tax ratio (as defined in the government finance  statistics) will dip slightly in 2019 and 
2020. Thereafter, it will rise again and is pro -
jected to increase to 23.0% by 2023 (2018: 
22.9%). Measures which are planned but have 
not yet been adopted, such as the partial abo -
lition of the solidarity surcharge, have not been 
taken into account here.
Compared with the November 2018 forecast, 
tax revenue has been revised downwards by 
€11 billion for 2019. A large part of the down -
ward revision was due to the macroeconomic 
assumptions being adjusted. However, the rev -
enue shortfalls stemming from legislative 
changes made in the intervening period are 
also important. Once again, the most signifi -
cant factor here is the Family Relief Act. The 
revenue budgeted for 2020 is €23 billion lower 
than estimated in the autumn. Roughly half of 
this is attributable to less favourable economic 
development, with new legislative changes 
account ing for the other half. This breakdown 
also applies to the downward revisions for the 
years thereafter up to 2023, which amount to 
around €30 billion per year.
While the shortfalls compared with the Novem -
ber estimate are considerable, they are rather 
moderate compared with the most recent 
plans presented by the Federal Government. 
The now gloomier macroeconomic environ -
ment and the burdens arising from new legisla -
tive changes have already been largely factored 
into the stability programme and the bench -
mark figures for the central government budget 
up to 2023.
Central government budget
In the first quarter, the central government 
budget recorded a deficit of €1½ billion, com -
pared with a surplus of €4 billion at the start of 
the previous year. Revenue fell by 3½%. This 
was due mainly to a significant decrease in tax 
revenue (-€4 billion), which was driven by the 
€4½ billion rise in transfers to the EU budget 
(deducted from taxes). This is broadly the total Somewhat 
higher growth 
in subsequent 
yearsRevenue expect -
ations lowered 
significantly 
overall com -
pared with 
November 2018
Shortfalls in 
plans already 
taken into 
account for the 
most part
Significantly 
worse outturn 
in Q1Tax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2019 1 2018 2019
€ billionYear-
on-year 
change 
%Year-
on-year 
change 
%
Tax revenue, total 2 172.1 175.2 +  1.8 +  2.4
of which:
Wage tax 48.1 50.9 +  6.0 +  5.3
Profi  t-related taxes 33.7 32.1 –  4.7 –  1.7
Assessed income 
tax3 17.6 17.5 –  1.1 –  0.4
Corporation tax 9.4 9.2 –  2.4 –  2.1
Non- assessed 
taxes on earnings 3.5 4.0 + 13.4 +  4.1
Withholding tax 
on interest 
income  and 
capital  gains 3.1 1.4 – 53.2 – 31.4
Turnover taxes 4 59.2 60.4 +  1.9 +  3.4
Other 
consumption-related 
taxes 5 20.0 20.1 +  0.7 –  0.4
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2019. 2 Includ-
ing EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from 
local government taxes. 3  Employee refunds deducted from 
revenue. 4  Turnover tax and import turnover tax. 5  Taxes on 
energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, 
air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alco-
pops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
64

increase expected for the year as a whole. In 
addition, a larger turnover tax revenue amount 
was transferred to state government. Non- tax 
receipts rose by €½ billion on balance. This was 
due primarily to additional revenue from the 
Bundesbank’s profit distribution and the heavy 
goods vehicle toll. Revenue from the latter 
went up on account of higher toll rates and, 
since mid-2018, all federal trunk roads being 
subject to tolls. Expenditure grew by 2½%. The 
reason for the only moderate increase was de -
clining interest expenditure (-€1½ billion), 
chiefly as a result of higher income from pre -
miums. By contrast, there was significant add -
itional spending on grants (particularly to the 
pension insurance scheme), staff and other op -
erating expenditure (notably military procure -
ment).
According to the budgetary plan approved last 
November, the 2019 outturn will be far worse 
than the one for 2018 (a deterioration of €16½ 
billion). The planned deficit of €6 billion is to be 
covered by the refugee reserve in the amount 
of €5½ billion and by coin seigniorage to the 
tune of €½ billion. Since then, the macroeco -
nomic outlook has taken a turn for the worse. 
According to the latest tax estimate, revenue 
shortfalls of €1½ billion on balance are now 
anticipated – despite a downward revision of 
transfers to the EU budget. More favourable developments elsewhere are likely to be far 
more significant, however. In particular, 
planned expenditure appears to be overstated 
again. In the absence of any further unpleasant 
surprises, it may therefore be possible to bal -
Performance still 
looks set to be 
better than 
envisaged for 
year as a wholeCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q45051015
–+++
–50+5+10+15+20
2018
20172017Quarterly figures
2019Cumulated from start of year2019
2018€ billionOﬃ   cial tax estimate fi  gures and Federal Government’s macroeconomic projection
Item 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
Tax revenue1
€ billion 776.3 793.7 818.0 847.0 877.8 908.4
As % of GDP 22.9 22.8 22.7 22.8 22.9 23.0
Year-on-year change (%) 5.7 2.3 3.1 3.5 3.6 3.5
Revision of previous tax estimate (€ billion) 1.0 – 10.9 – 23.2 – 28.2 – 29.7 – 32.3
Real GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2019) 1.4 0.5 1.5 1.2 1.2 1.2
Autumn projection (October 2018) 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.3 1.3 1.3
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2019) 3.3 2.8 3.5 3.0 3.0 3.0
Autumn projection (October 2018) 3.5 3.8 3.7 3.2 3.2 3.2
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates (May 2019) and the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 1 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue and receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
65

ance the central government budget again 
without withdrawing funds from the reserves.
In mid- March, the Federal Government adopted 
the benchmark figures for the 2020 central 
government budget and for the fiscal plan up 
to 2023. It is remaining true to its goal of 
aiming for a budget without net borrowing. As 
previously, the plan is to empty out the refugee 
reserve to achieve this. Compared with the fis -
cal plan drawn up in the summer of 2018, the 
available funds in this reserve have increased by 
almost €13 billion. Furthermore, total estimated 
interest expenditure is €5 billion lower. How -
ever, lower tax projections (over and above the 
measures already included via global revenue 
shortfalls in the last fiscal plan) will broadly bal -
ance out these two relief- providing factors. In 
addition, further additional expenditure from 
the budget discussions for 2019 as well as a 
somewhat higher defence budget are taken into 
account. In order to nevertheless refrain from 
net borrowing, marked global cuts in expend -iture of what appears to be around €4 billion 
per year from 2020 onwards were factored in.
Given the estimated low expenditure growth, 
spending buffers are likely to be nigh on ex -
hausted in the medium term. On the revenue 
side, however, it would appear that extensive 
global revenue shortfalls are still included. They 
seem to be sufficient for the partial abolition of 
the solidarity surcharge and the increase in 
child benefits in 2021. Furthermore, as stipu -
lated in the coalition agreement, the continu -
ation of tax transfers to state government 
(albeit  to a lesser degree) to cover a portion of 
refugee- related costs appears to have been 
safeguarded.
Compared with the benchmark figures, the lat -
est tax estimate forecasts tax shortfalls totalling 
around €3 billion per year from 2021 to 2023. 
Moreover, the coalition agreement signals, 
inter alia, that compensation measures for 
bracket creep in the income tax regime will be Benchmark fig -
ures up to 2023 
feature burdens 
arising not only 
from economic 
slowdownBuffers 
exhausted to a 
large degree
Funding absent 
for many 
planned projectsBenchmark fi  gures for Federal Government’s fi  scal planning up to 2023
 
Item2018 
actual 2019 
target 2020 2021 2022 2023
€ billion
Expenditure affecting the fi  scal balance 336.7 356.4 362.6 364.1 369.8 373.1
Revenue affecting the fi  scal balance 1 347.6 350.6 352.5 353.4 364.0 374.8
Tax revenue 322.4 325.5 328.6 337.5 348.8 360.2
Other revenue affecting the fi  scal balance 1 25.2 25.1 23.9 15.9 15.2 14.6
of which: global revenue shortfalls 1 (rounded) – 0 –  2.5 – 13 – 14 – 14.5
Net borrowing – – – – – –
Coin seigniorage 1 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
Withdrawals from reserves – 11.2 5.5 9.8 12.4 7.5 0.0
Topping up reserve for demographic challenges – – – 2.0 2.0 2.0
Core budget balance 1 10.9 –  5.8 – 10.1 – 10.7 –  5.8 1.7
Cyclical component 2 6.7 0.7 1.3 –  0.1 –  0.4 –
Balance of fi  nancial transactions 1 0.7 0.7 – – – –
Balance of off-budget entities 1,3 4.0 –  3.6 –  3 –  3 –  3 –  3
Structural net borrowing (+ = repayment) 1 –  3.4 –  5.0 –  4.3 –  2.9 –  2.6 –  3.0
Structural balance 1 7.5 – 10.8 – 14.4 – 13.6 –  8.4 –  1.3
% of GDP 4
Structural balance 1 0.23 –  0.33 –  0.43 –  0.39 –  0.23 –  0.04
Structural net borrowing (+ = repayment) 1 –  0.11 –  0.15 –  0.13 –  0.08 –  0.07 –  0.08
€ billion
Stock of refugee reserve 35.2 29.7 19.9 7.5 – –
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank estimates. 1 Estimates as of 2020. 2 Data from Federal Government’s 2019 spring 
forecast. 3 Digitalisation fund, energy and climate fund, fl  ood relief fund as well as fund to promote municipal investment. 4 As with the 
limit for structural net new borrowing (-0.35% of GDP) which is anchored in Article 115 of Germany’s Basic Law, the relevant fi  gure is 
stated as a percentage of GDP in the year before the budget was drawn up.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
66

taken beyond 2020. The agreement also con -
tains plans to provide tax incentives for enter -
prises engaging in research. Additional pres -
sure may arise in various areas on the expend -
iture side – for instance, in connection with 
international agreements. For one, the defence 
budget is set to surge next year, but only for a 
year. After that it will come back down again in 
relation to GDP . Spending earmarked for inter -
national development aid also appears to be 
rather low over the medium term. Moreover, 
an annual amount of only €½ billion has been 
set aside for phasing out the use of coal. How -
ever, the report submitted by the responsible 
commission, which was welcomed by the Fed -
eral Government, puts the figure much higher, 
estimating that it will already be at around €4 
billion in 2023 (excluding costs for decommis -
sioning power stations). Finally, the Ministry of 
Social Affairs is planning to introduce a basic 
pension without means testing; the annual 
costs of which are likely to be in the mid- single- 
digit billions. There are risks for the (remaining) 
revenue from the solidarity surcharge: concerns 
have been voiced that this may be in conflict 
with constitutional law – not least as special 
assistance for eastern Germany will be paid for 
the last time at the end of this year.
Even if the budget outturns are initially likely to 
be better than planned, pressure on the central 
government budget will mount considerably. 
Going forward, there will be no scope to coun -
terbalance the numerous potential strains. It 
will be possible to use reserves to a greater 
extent  than originally planned, at best, for a 
limited time only. And it is by no means just the 
costs of new measures that need to be con -
sidered. Demographic trends alone will necessi -
tate a sharp rise in the grant to the pension 
insurance scheme – even before pension bene -
fits are expanded additionally. It is therefore 
recommended to set stricter priorities now and 
to secure funding in the longer term against 
additional costly measures.
The Federal Ministry of Finance reported a sur -
plus of €1 billion for central government’s off- budget entities in the first quarter of 2019.6 
This constitutes a year- on- year improvement of 
€1½ billion. The absence of repayments of 
inflation- indexed Federal securities, above all, 
provided notable relief. Last year, an inflation 
compensation payment of €1 billion was re -
quired when such a repayment became due. In 
addition, the fund to extend childcare posted a 
surplus of just under €½ billion due to a central 
government transfer. The small deficit for the 
energy and climate fund (ECF), the fund to pro -
mote municipal investment, the flood relief 
fund and the digitalisation fund together rose 
slightly. The fiscal balances of these four off-  
budget entities  are included in the debt brake.
For the 2019 annual outturn, it is essential that 
central government does not pay any more 
into the digitalisation fund (-€2½ billion) and 
that it cuts its payments to the ECF (-€1½ bil -
lion). These cuts will be offset by the digitalisa -
tion fund’s proceeds from the auction of rights 
to use 5G radio frequencies. From the bids 
received  so far (€6 billion), revenue of just over 
€5 billion is due this year. This will help central 
government comply with the debt brake.7 
Overall, the off- budget entities’ 2019 cash bal -
ance may slightly outperform the high level (€6 
billion) recorded last year.
State government budgets8
State government core budgets posted a sur -
plus of €7 billion in the first quarter of 2019. 
This constitutes a year-  on- year rise of €1 bil -Essential to set 
prioritiesCentral 
 government’s 
off- budget 
entities: slight 
improvement 
in Q1 results …
… and surplus 
for 2019 as a 
whole may rise 
due to 5G 
auction 
Surplus higher 
in Q1 2019
6 This does not include a deficit of €7½ billion for SoFFin 
on account of a new (re)financing scheme for the 
government- owned bad bank FMS Wertmanagement.
7 By contrast, under the national accounts definition, 
which is key for the European budgetary rules, income is 
spread over the period of use (after a change in rules). In 
this year’s auction of use rights up to 2040, the frequency 
packages from the auction in 2000, which generated high 
levels of revenue, were offered again. The rights auctioned 
at that time come to an end in 2020. After that, average 
annual income will be much lower, which will strain the 
national accounts balance that is relevant for the European 
rules somewhat.
8 The data on state government budgets as a whole are 
based on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
67

lion. Overall, revenue went up significantly by 
5½%, but growth in tax revenue was distinctly 
lower (+3%). Revenue was driven, not least, by 
a sharp rise in transfers from public administra -
tions (+6½%). Expenditure continued to record 
dynamic growth (+4½%). A major contribution 
came from transfers to public administrations 
(+7%), which were also boosted by passing on 
higher central government transfers to munici -
palities. Staff costs, one of the major expend -
iture items, increased only moderately (+2½%). 
The impact of the March 2019 pay agreement, 
which put up rates by over 3% and is likely to 
also be applied to civil servants’ pay and pen -
sion, has not yet made its mark on the cash 
balance.
After the extremely favourable outturn in 2018, 
the surpluses are likely to start easing as of this 
year, but to still be comparatively high. Expend -
iture is set to remain on its dynamic growth 
track. Considerable additional spending is 
planned for education and the police force, in particular. Furthermore, spending on civil ser -
vants’ pensions is likely to continue rising 
sharply for a few more years. The rise in tax 
revenue is initially expected to be reined in by 
weaker macroeconomic growth. However, the 
latest tax estimate forecasts a return to more 
significant growth (average of 3½%) for the 
period from 2020 to 2023.
Germany’s Basic Law has recently been 
amended to extend mixed financing by central 
and state government again. Such financing 
tends to be problematic.9 This enables central 
government to co- finance investment (and 
closely related expenditure) in the local educa -
tion infrastructure. Yet, in return, central gov -
ernment receives only a limited influence in 
educational matters. The first central govern -
ment funds from the digital pact for schools 
are expected this year. The programme is 
scheduled to run for five years and has a vol -
ume of €5½ billion, including a 10% contribu -
tion from state government.
At the end of April, Berlin, Bremen, Saarland, 
Saxony-  Anhalt and Schleswig- Holstein submit -
ted their consolidation reports for 2018 to the 
Stability Council showing whether the struc -
tural deficit (i.e. adjusted for cyclical influences 
and financial transactions) complied with the 
agreed ceiling. In case of compliance, those 
states have a claim on the full amount of con -
solidation assistance for 2018.
Bremen’s report, which has been published 
already  , puts its structural deficit at €170 mil -
lion, i.e. €80 million below the ceiling. How -
ever, this does not include a high net burden of 
€110 million from financial transactions. In the 
budget, a capital injection of €90 million was 
earmarked for hospitals. However, as no yield is 
to be expected from this amount, in economic 
terms, this payment cannot be classified as a 
finan cial transaction. Instead it should be 
included  in the relevant deficit. The same Surpluses to be 
somewhat lower 
again for year 
as a whole and 
in medium termConstitutional 
amendment 
extends mixed 
financing, but 
central govern -
ment’s influence 
remains limited
Consolidation 
reports on com -
pliance with 
deficit  ceilings 
in 2018: …
… classification 
of expenditure 
not convincing 
in Bremen …State government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q463036912
––++++
3691215182124
2018
20172017Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192019
2018€ billion
9 For a critical evaluation, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019a), p. 66.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
68

applies  to the assumption of a private universi -
ty’s debt, which was approved in a supplemen -
tary budget. Had these two transactions been 
included in the results – as intended under the 
national accounts – the agreed deficit ceiling 
would have been breached, assuming that no 
other adjustments (i.e. to reserves) had been 
made.
According to a press release issued by the state 
of Saarland, its deficit came in €15 million 
below the ceiling. The cash statistics record a 
€60 million acquisition which, according to the 
budget plan, mainly comprises a further capital 
injection into the state theatre. In economic 
terms, this is not a financial transaction, either. 
Had it been classified otherwise, Saarland would 
have missed the required budgetary consolida -
tion targets in 2018, had no other adjustments 
been made elsewhere.
Schleswig- Holstein has yet to publish its report. 
However, measures to support HSH Nordbank 
inflated the deficit substantially in 2018. To date, 
comparable payments from guarantees have 
been recorded  as a financial transaction and 
thus not included in the deficit. However, last 
year, the Stability Council ruled that, for the pur -
pose of monitoring the debt brake, such trans -
actions are to be recognised in the balance – in 
line with the national accounts. The Federal Stat -
istical Office has announced that it will amend 
its reports accordingly. Against this background, 
it would be consistent for Schleswig- Holstein to 
include these payments in its deficit when filing 
its new consolidation report.
When monitoring those states that receive 
consolidation assistance, it is essential that ex -
penditure is only classified as a financial trans -
action if it is actually used to purchase assets. 
This is consistent with the approach used in the 
national accounts. Not following this approach 
risks jeopardising the desired debt contain -
ment. States that receive consolidation assis -
tance against the background of high debt 
levels should be expected to use any budgetary 
relief to repay debt and not to stockpile funds as reserves for future budgetary strains. Overall, 
valid and transparent information is of elemen -
tary importance for the Stability Council to 
monitor state budgets. Ideally the respective 
data should adhere to the accounting rules in 
the national accounts as closely as possible.10 
In addition, the Stability Council should publish 
all consolidation reports swiftly. This would en -
able the general public to be informed at an 
early stage, thus strengthening control.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of €½ billion in the first quarter 
of 2019. This constitutes a year- on- year im -
provement of €½ billion. The expansion of 
“mothers’ pensions” at the beginning of the 
year is yet to make a notable impact. The full 
effect is likely to be felt towards the middle of 
the year. In the first quarter, the additional pen -
sions – which are far from having been fully 
paid out – amounted to €1 billion. Expenditure 
growth of 4% was driven primarily by the July 
2018 pension adjustment (just under 3½%) 
and a slight increase in the number of pen -
sions. Revenue grew by 5% thanks to con -
tinued positive employment and per capita 
wage developments.
In mid-2019, pensions will be raised by 3.2% in 
the west German states and 3.9% in the east 
German states due to the favourable per capita 
wage developments last year. This will be re -
inforced by the very positive situation on the 
labour market. The number of persons subject 
to compulsory contributions rose faster than 
the number of pension recipients, thus increas -
ing the pension adjustment via the sustainabil -
ity factor. Furthermore, in line with the pension 
adjustment formula, pensions will rise by a little … or in 
Saarland 
Schleswig- 
Holstein’s 
budget strained 
by extensive 
bank support 
measures
Stability Council 
should use data 
consistent with 
national 
accounts and 
publish reports 
swiftlyLower deficit in 
Q1 as impact 
of “mothers’ 
pensions” only 
beginning to 
filter  through to 
balance
Significant pen -
sion adjustment 
in 2019
10 For information on budgetary surveillance requirements 
for state governments, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), 
pp. 32-37. For a critical examination of the controls planned 
as of 2020, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), pp. 91-98.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
69

more because the contribution rate was cut by 
0.1 percentage point in 2018.
The payments and back payments of higher 
“mothers’ pensions” will push up spending 
growth distinctly as the year progresses. By 
contrast, the development of revenue is likely 
to be relatively stable. The result is thus ex -
pected to be significantly lower in 2019: fol -
lowing a high surplus last year, the budget is 
set to be roughly balanced this year.
New limits for the contribution rate (upper 
limit) and the pension level (lower limit) have 
been agreed for the statutory pension insur -ance scheme. Up to 2025, the contribution 
rate may not exceed 20% and the pension level 
may not fall below 48%. The pension level 
stands at 48.2% for the current year. In line 
with the regular adjustment formula, as demo -
graphic pressure rises, pensions are going to 
increase at a slower pace than wages, with the 
pension level falling as a result. Once the lower 
limit has been reached, the regular formula will 
be abandoned and the level will have to be sta -
bilised. This will give rise to additional expend -
iture. At the same time – given that deficits are 
on the cards – the reserves will fall to the lower 
limit of 20% of one month’s expenditure. To 
ensure that this lower limit is not undershot 
going forward, the contribution rate will have 
to be raised. At present, the contribution rate 
looks likely to reach its new upper limit of 20% 
in 2025 and a special transfer will then be re -
quired from central government.
In the long term, demographic trends will place 
an ever greater strain on the pension scheme’s 
finances. This will be especially true when, as of 
the mid-2020s, the baby boomer generation 
enters retirement. As things currently stand, 
the limits for the contribution rate and pension 
level apply up to and including 2025 only. The 
reforms implemented in the 2000s put in place 
key measures to ensure that the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme’s finances remain sus -
tainable. They envisaged a certain decline in 
the pension level and a rise in the contribution 
rate. This principle still seems to make sense. In 
addition, it would be advisable to tether the 
statutory retirement age to (rising) life expect -
ancy for the post-2030 period, as some coun -
tries are doing at present. Otherwise, the 
cohort- specific number of years in retirement 
will be longer and longer in relation to the cor -
responding years of contributions.11 Caution is 
advised when considering stretching the cen -
tral government budget further: it is already 
under pressure from sharp increases in grants 
to the pension insurance scheme.Accelerated 
spending 
growth to 
dampen result 
for year as a 
wholeIncreasing finan -
cial pressure on 
scheme’s 
finances in 
medium term
Ongoing reform 
debateFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). Preliminary quarterly figures. The fi-
nal annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary  quarterly  figures  as  the  latter  are  not  revised  sub-
sequently.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201920182017
2018
201720192017 2018 20190246
2017 2018 20190246 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
11 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2016), p. 71.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
70

Federal Employment Agency
In the first quarter of 2019, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency recorded a small deficit in the 
core budget,12 similar to that from the previous 
year. The strain on the balance was eased by 
the fact that the special transfer of €1½ billion 
to the civil servants’ pension fund from the first 
quarter of 2018 was not repeated. However, 
the significant decline in the contribution rate 
at the beginning of the year (by 0.5 percentage 
point to 2.5%) accounted for a similar amount. 
On the expenditure side, spending on un -
employment benefits was up by just over 3½%. 
This was the first notable increase since the be -
ginning of 2014. The number of benefit recipi -
ents also rose again slightly. Spending on active 
labour market policy increased by 4½%, prob -
ably due to vocational training measures being 
extended. After adjustment for the absence of 
the special transfer to the civil servants’ pen -
sion fund, the Federal Employment Agency’s 
spending grew by 3%.
Despite the more muted macroeconomic out -
look, employment and wages are both ex -
pected to fare well over the year as a whole. 
Nevertheless, the Federal Employment Agen -
cy’s revenue will fall due to the contribution 
rate cut. On the expenditure side, the current 
unemployment benefit and active labour mar -
ket policy trends are likely to continue. This 
means, however, that expenditure will remain 
far below budgeted levels. The surplus for the 
year as a whole could thus again be much 
higher than anticipated (€½ billion).Deficit small 
in Q1
Surplus for year 
as a whole 
much lower due 
to contribution 
rate cut, but 
result probably 
better than 
planned
List of references
Federal Ministry of Finance (2019), German stability programme, April 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), Public finances, Monthly Report, February 2019, pp. 58-70.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), Germany’s debt brake: surveillance by the Stability Council, 
Monthly Report, April 2019, pp. 91-98.Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency *
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201920182017
2017
201920182017 2018 2019–12–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2017 2018 201912963036912
––––++++ Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
12 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are recorded as expenditure and thus reduce the 
core budget balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
71

Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), State government finances: comparison of developments, debt 
brakes and fiscal surveillance, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 13-47.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Excursus: longer- term pension developments, Monthly Report, 
August  2016, pp. 68-77.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
72

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43 •
2. Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43 •
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
4. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
3•

6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  78 •
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ....................................................  78 •
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
8. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  81 •
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
May 2019
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 EONIA  5,7 EURIBOR  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2017         July 9.3 5.0 4.6 4.8 3.8 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2
         Aug. 9.6 5.4 5.1 4.9 3.8 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0         Sep. 9.7 5.3 5.1 5.1 3.9 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
         Oct. 9.5 5.4 5.0 5.0 3.8 2.5 − 1.4 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Nov. 9.1 5.2 4.9 4.9 3.9 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.35 − 0.33 0.9         Dec. 8.8 5.2 4.7 4.7 3.6 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.34 − 0.33 0.9
2018         Jan. 8.8 5.2 4.6 4.5 3.5 2.9 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb. 8.4 4.8 4.2 4.2 3.3 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2         Mar. 7.5 4.3 3.6 3.9 2.8 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Apr. 7.1 4.2 3.8 3.8 2.8 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.37 − 0.33 1.0
         May 7.5 4.6 4.0 4.0 3.3 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 7.4 4.7 4.3 4.1 3.1 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1
         July 7.0 4.4 3.9 3.9 3.4 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.0
         Aug. 6.5 4.0 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.4 − 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1         Sep. 6.8 4.3 3.5 3.6 3.2 3.2 0.0 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2
         Oct. 6.8 4.4 3.8 3.7 2.9 2.9 0.6 − 0.37 − 0.32 1.3
         Nov. 6.7 4.3 3.7 3.9 2.6 2.8 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2         Dec. 6.6 4.3 4.1 3.9 2.8 3.0 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.31 1.1
2019         Jan. 6.2 4.0 3.8 4.1 2.7 2.9 0.8 − 0.37 − 0.31 1.0
         Feb. 6.6 4.5 4.3 4.2 3.0 3.2 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.9         Mar. 7.4 5.1 4.5 ... 2.7 2.9 1.3 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, overnight index average. 6 Euro interbank offered rate. 7 See also footnotes to Table
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by VI.4, p. 43  .8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2. External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which: Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 EUR 1 = USD ...
2017         July + 36,903 + 29,503 + 26,865 − 1,747 + 25,725 − 1,180 + 9,259 − 5,193 1.1511 97.6 92.1
         Aug. + 34,357 + 22,574 − 3,379 − 20,425 + 67,631 − 4,607 − 45,304 − 674 1.1807 99.0 93.5         Sep. + 47,719 + 31,894 + 89,394 + 57,928 + 12,827 − 1,813 + 14,040 + 6,413 1.1915 99.0 93.5
         Oct. + 38,522 + 27,778 + 24,605 + 14,555 + 54,152 + 1,530 − 42,938 − 2,695 1.1756 98.6 93.0
         Nov. + 39,121 + 33,281 − 5,116 − 58,948 + 24,346 + 1,610 + 21,712 + 6,164 1.1738 98.5 92.9         Dec. + 46,006 + 29,489 + 104,577 + 51,429 − 8,935 + 2,518 + 61,170 − 1,604 1.1836 98.8 93.2
2018         Jan. + 8,547 + 9,504 + 4,044 + 38,113 + 12,898 − 2,375 − 46,792 + 2,201 1.2200 99.4 93.8
         Feb. + 22,055 + 22,408 + 17,214 + 2,229 + 61,505 + 1,046 − 47,518 − 49 1.2348 99.6 93.8         Mar. + 43,867 + 34,210 + 80,731 + 81,831 − 62,274 − 3,169 + 55,182 + 9,160 1.2336 99.7 94.0
         Apr. + 31,364 + 23,023 − 11,062 + 25,557 + 30,285 + 12,717 − 75,982 − 3,640 1.2276 99.5 93.8
         May + 12,284 + 22,909 + 29,524 − 1,157 + 57,043 + 13,890 − 42,622 + 2,369 1.1812 98.1 92.6         June + 29,445 + 27,165 + 24,523 − 6,342 − 35,666 + 11,780 + 46,880 + 7,872 1.1678 97.9 92.4
         July + 29,734 + 24,072 − 4,463 − 3,920 + 2,688 + 13,200 − 12,139 − 4,292 1.1686 99.2 93.6
         Aug. + 27,181 + 17,271 + 47,865 − 6,460 + 76,752 + 15,763 − 41,406 + 3,215 1.1549 99.0 93.2         Sep. + 25,922 + 18,200 + 43,691 − 3,566 − 35,126 + 6,465 + 73,594 + 2,323 1.1659 99.5 93.7
         Oct. + 33,951 + 23,958 − 27,510 + 18,927 − 15,286 + 7,007 − 37,409 − 750 1.1484 98.9 93.2
         Nov. + 28,829 + 27,629 + 51,943 − 35,632 + 14,132 + 15,967 + 54,019 + 3,456 1.1367 98.3 92.8         Dec. + 41,494 + 26,091 + 61,091 − 56,946 + 107,041 + 6,565 + 1,308 + 3,124 1.1384 98.4 92.6
2019         Jan. + 10,616 + 8,459 + 1,360 − 18,476 + 2,530 + 5,278 + 14,686 − 2,658 1.1416 97.8 p 92.0
         Feb. + 15,472 + 24,292 + 9,901 + 13,121 − 17,553 + 3,942 + 9,638 + 753 1.1351 97.4 p 91.6         Mar. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1302 96.9 p 91.0
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1238 96.7 p 90.8
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary Tables XII.10 and 12, pp.
82-83   .2Including employee stock options. 3Against the
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 1Monthly averages, see also currencies of the EER-19 group. 4 Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2019
I. Key economic data for the euro area
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2016 2.0 1.5 2.2 3.5 2.8 1.2 − 0.2 5.0 1.1 2.1
2017 2.4 1.7 2.2 4.9 2.7 2.2 1.5 7.2 1.7 4.6
2018 1.9 1.4 1.4 3.9 2.3 1.5 1.9 6.7 0.9 4.8
2017         Q4 2.7 1.9 2.2 4.8 2.4 2.8 2.1 6.5 1.5 4.3
2018         Q1 2.4 1.5 1.4 3.3 2.4 2.0 2.3 9.6 1.2 4.0
         Q2 2.2 1.5 2.3 3.9 2.5 1.6 1.4 9.5 1.3 5.3
         Q3 1.6 1.6 1.1 4.0 2.1 1.5 2.4 5.4 0.6 4.5
         Q4 1.2 1.2 0.9 4.2 2.3 1.1 1.6 3.0 0.5 5.2
2019         Q1 1.2 ... 0.6 ... ... 1.0 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 2
 Annual percentage change
2016 1.6 4.5 1.1 3.0 4.2 0.5 2.6 1.8 1.9 4.9
2017 2.9 2.9 3.4 4.3 3.4 2.4 4.8 − 2.2 3.6 8.5
2018 0.9 1.2 r 1.0 4.1 3.1 0.4 1.2 − 0.1 0.6 2.0
2017         Q4 4.2 1.9 5.0 1.5 4.3 4.1 1.9 0.5 4.0 4.9
2018         Q1 3.0 2.7 r 3.8 4.6 5.8 2.4 − 0.5 − 2.3 3.4 4.4
         Q2 2.2 1.3 r 2.8 3.1 2.3 0.6 1.7 4.1 1.7 0.1
         Q3 0.5 − 0.5 r − 0.1 3.7 2.9 0.2 1.8 5.9 − 0.3 3.0
         Q4 − 1.9 1.1 r − 2.3 5.1 1.6 − 1.7 1.7 − 6.4 − 2.4 0.9
2019         Q1 e − 0.3 ... p − 2.2 3.5 0.4 0.3 1.4 p 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.8
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 As a percentage of full capacity
2016 81.6 80.0 84.6 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 78.3 76.3 72.6
2017 83.0 81.8 86.6 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 79.5 76.8 74.5
2018 83.9 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.4
2018         Q1 84.2 82.1 88.2 75.5 83.1 86.2 70.4 77.0 78.3 75.8
         Q2 84.0 81.2 87.8 73.9 84.3 85.9 71.2 76.1 78.1 76.3
         Q3 83.8 79.9 87.8 75.2 84.7 85.9 70.7 74.6 77.9 77.4
         Q4 83.6 80.8 87.1 73.0 84.1 85.7 70.9 77.0 77.9 75.9
2019         Q1 83.6 81.5 86.3 75.2 83.2 85.2 70.2 80.3 78.4 77.0
         Q2 82.8 81.3 85.3 73.5 80.8 84.8 71.7 76.9 77.5 76.9
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 4
 As a percentage of civilian labour force
2016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 8.4 11.7 9.6
2017 9.1 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.4 21.5 6.7 11.2 8.7
2018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 9.1 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.4
2018         Nov. 7.9 5.8 3.3 4.4 6.8 8.9 18.6 5.6 10.6 6.9
         Dec. 7.9 5.8 3.2 4.2 6.7 8.9 18.5 5.5 10.5 7.1
2019         Jan. 7.8 5.8 3.3 4.3 6.6 8.9 18.6 5.2 10.4 7.3
         Feb. 7.8 5.8 2.9 4.6 6.6 8.8 18.5 5.0 10.5 7.2
         Mar. 7.7 5.7 3.4 ... 6.6 8.8 ... 4.7 10.2 7.1
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.6 ... ...Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2019
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
2017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2018         Nov. 1.9 2.9 2.2 3.2 1.4 2.2 1.1 0.8 1.6 2.9
         Dec. 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.3 1.3 1.9 0.6 0.8 1.2 2.5
2019         Jan. 1.4 1.8 1.7 2.8 1.2 1.4 0.5 0.8 0.9 2.9
         Feb. 1.5 2.0 1.7 1.9 1.3 1.6 0.8 0.7 1.1 2.8
         Mar. 1.4 2.2 1.4 2.2 1.1 1.3 1.0 1.1 1.1 2.7
         Apr. e 1.7 2.0 2.1 3.2 e 1.5 e 1.4 1.1 1.7 e 1.2 3.3
 
 General government financial balance 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2016 − 1.6 − 2.4 0.9 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5 0.5 − 0.7 − 2.5 0.1
2017 − 1.0 − 0.8 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 2.8 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.6
2018 − 0.5 − 0.7 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 2.5 1.1 0.0 − 2.1 − 1.0
 
 General government debt 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2016 89.2 106.1 68.5 9.2 63.0 98.0 178.5 73.5 131.4 40.3
2017 87.1 103.4 64.5 9.2 61.3 98.4 176.2 68.5 131.4 40.0
2018 85.1 102.0 60.9 8.4 58.9 98.4 181.1 64.8 132.2 35.9
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical are provisional. 1  Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted. 2  Manufacturing,
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations. 3  Manufacturing: quarterly

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2019
I. Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1
 Annual percentage change
2.4 2.4 5.7 2.2 2.0 1.9 3.1 3.1 3.2 4.8 20164.1 1.5 6.7 2.9 2.6 2.8 3.2 4.9 3.0 4.5 20173.5 2.6 6.6 2.7 2.7 2.1 4.1 4.5 2.6 3.9 2018
3.8 2.7 5.1 2.7 2.4 2.4 3.7 6.3 3.2 3.7 2017          Q4
3.7 3.0 5.1 2.9 3.6 2.1 3.7 4.8 2.8 4.0 2018          Q1
3.8 3.0 6.6 3.2 2.7 2.6 4.5 4.1 2.6 4.0          Q22.6 2.9 7.1 2.4 2.2 2.1 4.6 5.0 2.3 3.8          Q33.8 1.6 7.2 2.2 2.4 1.7 3.6 4.1 2.6 3.8          Q4
3.9 ... ... 1.7 1.1 ... 3.7 ... 2.1 ... 2019          Q1
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2.7 0.1 − 7.3 1.3 2.8 2.4 4.6 7.7 1.7 9.1 20166.8 3.8 8.8 1.3 5.5 3.5 3.3 8.4 3.3 7.5 20175.2 − 1.9 1.2 0.6 3.7 0.1 4.3 5.0 0.4 6.9 2018
7.1 5.5 8.6 2.3 6.6 2.4 3.8 11.0 5.4 6.9 2017          Q4
7.1 1.4 2.0 2.5 5.0 2.2 1.3 8.7 2.9 5.1 2018          Q1
5.2 − 3.1 0.8 1.5 5.1 0.9 5.7 6.9 1.3 10.3          Q22.9 − 3.2 − 2.1 0.1 2.4 − 1.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 6.1          Q35.7 − 2.6 4.5 − 1.6 2.3 − 1.4 4.5 0.9 − 2.9 6.0          Q4
4.6
p 0.1 p − 1.0 p − 1.2 ... − 4.4 6.7 p 4.3 p − 0.2 ... 2019          Q1
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
75.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 201677.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 201777.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 2018
77.8 83.1 81.1 83.9 88.8 81.6 83.7 85.0 79.7 60.4 2018          Q1
77.5 82.0 77.6 83.6 88.7 81.4 86.3 86.0 80.3 60.9          Q277.2 80.8 83.2 84.4 88.7 82.0 84.0 84.6 79.3 61.8          Q377.4 79.0 79.1 84.0 88.5 81.2 87.6 85.6 78.6 62.5          Q4
77.5 80.1 77.1 84.4 87.0 77.8 88.2 85.2 80.8 61.5 2019          Q1
76.9 79.7 78.2 84.3 87.2 79.4 89.1 84.8 80.4 66.0          Q2
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
7.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.0 19.6 13.0 20167.1 5.6 4.0 4.9 5.5 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.2 11.1 20176.2 5.4 3.7 3.8 4.9 7.0 6.5 5.1 15.3 8.4 2018
5.8 5.2 3.6 3.5 4.6 6.7 6.0 4.4 14.5 7.7 2018          Nov.
5.8 5.1 3.5 3.6 4.6 6.6 5.9 4.3 14.4 7.4          Dec.
6.1 5.1 3.5 3.6 4.8 6.6 5.9 4.3 14.3 7.3 2019          Jan.
6.1 5.3 3.6 3.4 4.9 6.5 5.8 4.4 14.2 7.1          Feb.5.8 5.5 3.5 3.3 4.8 6.4 5.7 4.4 14.0 7.0          Mar.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Apr.Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2019
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
 Annual percentage change
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 20163.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 20172.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 2018
2.4 2.6 1.4 1.8 2.3 0.9 2.0 2.1 1.7 1.6 2018          Nov.
1.8 1.9 1.2 1.8 1.7 0.6 1.9 1.4 1.2 1.0          Dec.
1.6 1.6 1.0 2.0 1.7 0.6 2.2 1.2 1.0 2.1 2019          Jan.
2.0 2.1 1.3 2.6 1.4 0.9 2.3 1.3 1.1 0.8          Feb.2.6 2.4 1.3 2.9 1.7 0.8 2.7 1.6 1.3 1.1          Mar.
2.7
e 2.2 1.7 3.0 ... 0.9 e 2.4 1.8 1.6 1.2          Apr.
General government financial balance 5
As a percentage of GDP
0.2 1.9 0.9 0.0 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.3 20160.5 1.4 3.4 1.2 − 0.8 − 3.0 − 0.8 0.0 − 3.1 1.8 20170.7 2.4 2.0 1.5 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.7 0.7 − 2.5 − 4.8 2018
General government debt 5
As a percentage of GDP
40.0 20.7 55.5 61.9 83.0 129.2 51.8 78.7 99.0 105.5 201639.4 23.0 50.2 57.0 78.2 124.8 50.9 74.1 98.1 95.8 201734.2 21.4 46.0 52.4 73.8 121.5 48.9 70.1 97.1 102.5 2018
data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter. 4Monthly data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5  According to Maastricht Treaty definition. 
data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
May 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2017         Aug. 11.8 − 20.7 − 15.9 32.4 38.5 − 26.9 − 2.8 24.0 6.8 − 6.1 − 0.8 − 3.0 16.7
         Sep. 56.5 44.7 − 12.6 11.8 17.3 5.3 − 35.6 − 40.9 − 24.1 − 11.8 − 0.9 − 30.0 18.6
         Oct. 63.6 52.0 − 10.2 11.7 11.5 − 68.6 87.8 156.4 − 30.0 − 27.0 − 0.6 − 7.2 4.8
         Nov. 127.5 98.8 21.8 28.7 34.8 18.4 − 1.0 − 19.4 5.5 4.4 − 0.8 − 1.5 3.4
         Dec. − 107.5 − 89.3 − 8.8 − 18.2 − 8.6 17.0 − 151.8 − 168.9 − 2.0 11.4 − 0.6 − 7.9 − 4.9
2018         Jan. 124.7 83.9 26.4 40.8 27.6 − 43.9 152.4 196.3 11.6 − 8.5 − 0.1 22.0 − 1.8
         Feb. 7.6 3.4 − 0.3 4.2 20.8 − 11.4 46.9 58.3 − 16.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 13.4 − 1.7
         Mar. 65.8 60.9 1.5 4.9 6.9 81.5 − 66.0 − 147.5 13.2 − 5.9 − 0.4 1.9 17.6
         Apr. 66.3 65.2 52.5 1.1 − 0.7 − 75.3 42.0 117.3 − 5.5 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.3
         May 122.3 88.1 11.0 34.2 39.9 − 35.5 120.6 156.1 − 4.5 − 7.4 − 0.4 1.2 2.1
         June − 5.6 − 23.0 − 22.3 17.3 20.5 77.3 − 67.6 − 144.9 − 8.4 − 4.8 − 0.4 − 7.7 4.6
         July 67.7 66.9 19.9 0.8 3.4 − 25.3 41.6 66.9 10.4 6.1 − 0.6 − 8.3 13.1
         Aug. − 2.2 − 13.6 − 4.8 11.4 22.7 − 27.3 − 1.3 26.0 4.1 − 8.3 − 0.4 1.4 11.4
         Sep. 25.3 22.4 − 11.2 2.9 7.1 65.6 − 26.5 − 92.1 23.8 − 12.5 − 0.5 22.3 14.6
         Oct. 12.0 18.1 3.7 − 6.1 − 7.9 − 11.9 73.4 85.4 7.9 − 6.5 − 0.2 3.8 10.9
         Nov. 92.0 91.1 11.7 0.9 2.4 70.9 35.0 − 35.9 3.6 − 4.2 − 1.0 4.0 4.9
         Dec. − 89.0 − 69.5 − 21.1 − 19.6 − 21.5 0.6 − 162.8 − 163.4 5.8 16.3 0.1 − 7.8 − 2.8
2019         Jan. 125.8 70.1 14.9 55.7 44.2 7.7 193.4 185.7 20.9 − 8.6 0.1 26.2 3.3
         Feb. 53.5 42.4 17.4 11.0 24.7 22.9 − 25.7 − 48.6 19.5 0.7 − 0.1 24.7 − 5.8
         Mar. 5.9 31.8 0.9 − 25.9 − 25.9 56.2 12.2 − 44.0 8.9 − 2.1 0.1 − 5.0 15.9
  
  
b) German contribution
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2017         Aug. 13.6 10.2 − 0.6 3.4 8.3 14.7 − 13.8 − 28.5 4.5 0.1 − 0.8 3.5 1.7
         Sep. 17.8 14.1 − 1.8 3.7 8.0 − 22.3 9.2 31.5 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.3 2.3
         Oct. 15.9 8.6 0.4 7.3 6.5 6.1 − 11.4 − 17.5 − 11.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 9.5 − 0.1
         Nov. 27.2 16.7 6.4 10.5 11.2 23.1 − 2.6 − 25.7 2.6 3.3 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.1
         Dec. − 5.4 − 3.5 4.3 − 1.8 1.0 − 48.9 − 8.1 40.8 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 1.9 5.3
2018         Jan. 19.1 21.3 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.3 10.1 28.1 18.0 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 14.2 − 5.6
         Feb. 5.1 10.7 − 1.7 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 20.7 11.6 32.4 − 5.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 2.9
         Mar. 7.2 9.7 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.6 7.9 − 5.2 − 13.1 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 4.0 2.2
         Apr. 7.3 7.2 0.9 0.1 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 13.9 − 8.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.1 1.9
         May 19.2 21.2 5.0 − 2.1 2.4 − 10.7 29.8 40.6 − 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 4.1 − 4.6
         June 16.7 17.9 2.1 − 1.1 1.3 − 18.2 − 20.4 − 2.1 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 3.1 8.1
         July 12.7 9.7 0.0 2.9 0.9 26.0 − 0.3 − 26.3 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.7 5.9
         Aug. 4.1 5.7 − 8.7 − 1.6 2.8 − 8.5 − 11.6 − 3.1 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 1.7 1.8
         Sep. 19.3 18.3 1.8 1.0 4.1 − 4.1 7.9 12.0 12.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 7.6 7.8
         Oct. 7.0 8.7 1.4 − 1.7 − 5.0 34.2 2.8 − 31.4 1.6 0.1 − 0.5 4.1 − 2.0
         Nov. 20.0 18.5 0.9 1.5 2.5 15.1 − 3.7 − 18.8 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 3.0 − 1.4
         Dec. − 5.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 33.5 3.6 37.1 − 1.1 0.7 − 0.3 − 9.1 7.5
2019         Jan. 16.3 15.0 0.3 1.3 − 1.3 67.9 21.1 − 46.8 2.1 − 5.7 − 0.5 14.0 − 5.7
         Feb. 12.5 16.4 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 1.4 24.3 − 15.4 − 39.6 6.6 − 0.8 0.1 12.6 − 5.2
         Mar. 9.6 17.2 0.3 − 7.6 − 4.9 − 32.2 14.0 46.2 − 5.1 − 3.2 0.2 − 4.5 2.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report, p. 30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
May 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 a) Euro area 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which: ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl. money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
− 18.3 − 59.5 − 55.9 45.5 30.9 − 2.3 33.3 8.1 6.4 2.6 9.4 − 5.3 2017          Aug.
41.3 24.1 − 20.4 23.3 47.8 0.9 47.0 − 21.5 − 3.0 7.0 − 4.1 10.4          Sep.
− 43.4 53.0 − 15.4 12.0 22.7 1.9 20.8 − 8.0 − 2.7 19.8 9.0 − 7.8          Oct.
− 8.8 71.7 − 77.4 73.2 81.7 0.9 80.7 − 7.6 − 0.8 17.2 − 3.8 0.1          Nov.− 21.4 − 89.3 − 22.2 63.8 66.3 16.1 50.2 − 6.6 4.1 − 31.8 − 26.5 − 7.1          Dec.
40.9 20.0 − 8.3 − 2.4 − 19.6 − 15.2 − 4.5 5.6 11.7 − 7.8 20.1 − 12.7 2018          Jan.
13.8 11.1 − − 12.4 − 9.4 5.3 0.3 5.0 − 17.4 2.7 − 4.8 − 11.3 4.9          Feb.13.9 49.3 − 70.9 67.5 64.7 8.7 56.0 − 3.6 6.3 8.2 − 1.4 8.3          Mar.
− 19.8 − 32.6 − 48.9 29.9 48.6 4.2 44.4 − 20.7 2.0 − 3.8 11.3 0.8          Apr.
7.1 15.5 − 68.6 93.1 95.8 4.9 90.9 − 10.0 7.2 24.9 − 12.3 − 6.7          May
21.4 − 43.4 − 102.1 108.7 91.1 11.4 79.6 14.2 3.4 − 5.6 − 8.9 4.8          June
7.6 34.1 − − 9.6 − 9.5 − 6.1 6.7 − 12.8 − 8.1 4.7 6.7 10.3 − 7.1          July
2.9 − 41.1 − 4.6 − 1.4 − 0.0 2.9 − 2.9 − 6.7 5.2 3.8 − 1.6 1.2          Aug.
40.6 5.9 − 20.5 45.4 69.3 2.1 67.1 − 20.8 − 3.2 − 10.7 − 19.5 1.1          Sep.
− 38.9 − 5.4 − 36.4 13.3 8.0 1.8 6.3 8.3 − 3.0 − 10.2 23.8 − 0.8          Oct.
7.3 64.8 − 87.3 88.2 97.7 5.3 92.4 − 11.6 2.2 31.5 0.3 − 3.8          Nov.
− 59.7 − 88.2 − 53.8 50.3 49.3 18.0 31.4 − 4.4 5.3 − 14.2 0.6 8.0          Dec.
66.1 64.2 − − 17.8 − 22.4 − 39.6 − 13.1 − 26.5 3.3 13.9 15.6 8.1 − 7.2 2019          Jan.
18.7 − 0.6 − 38.7 44.6 38.7 3.2 35.5 − 0.5 6.5 0.2 − 7.2 0.1          Feb.
− 20.8 − 33.6 − 107.5 131.8 126.1 6.2 119.9 − 6.2 11.8 − 11.4 − 5.4 − 20.1          Mar.
 
 
  b) German contribution 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  10 
of which: Components of the money stockIntra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl. money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
7.4 5.1 3.7 − 1.3 11.2 14.7 − 2.9 − 0.3 0.1 0.2 − 0.5 2017          Aug.
9.6 − 14.2 3.5 − 0.3 5.9 5.6 0.8 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 0.3          Sep.
− 14.2 43.1 2.1 0.8 4.5 14.3 − 9.3 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5          Oct.
6.2 8.7 1.2 − 0.0 32.7 33.8 − 1.7 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.2          Nov.
10.0 − 58.0 3.8 2.0 − 8.8 − 10.1 0.4 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.8          Dec.
− 24.3 35.5 − 0.0 − 2.8 13.1 11.5 2.4 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 2018          Jan.
9.2 − 21.2 2.0 − 0.3 1.7 5.2 − 4.4 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 0.7          Feb.8.3 0.6 6.9 − 1.5 3.1 − 0.5 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1          Mar.
− 15.2 14.5 1.3 1.9 5.3 14.7 − 8.6 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr.
11.7 − 42.5 5.4 − 0.1 39.3 38.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.1          May17.7 − 26.3 3.6 2.5 4.8 − 6.4 14.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.1 − 2.6          June
− 21.0 57.8 3.1 2.2 − 0.5 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.6 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.9          July
13.7 − 14.2 5.3 0.5 − 0.4 2.4 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 1.7          Aug.12.2 − 32.9 3.9 − 0.3 23.8 27.3 − 2.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.5          Sep.
− 17.8 43.5 3.8 0.1 13.8 11.1 − 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.0 2.3          Oct.
9.7 − 8.2 2.5 1.0 32.8 38.6 − 4.1 0.5 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.5          Nov.
− 5.4 − 27.6 4.0 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.3 − 3.3 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.8          Dec.
− 18.5 103.9 − 9.6 7.5 − 3.4 − 14.3 9.6 0.3 0.9 0.0 0.0 2019          Jan.
− 2.7 20.3 2.9 0.4 12.5 8.3 3.6 1.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7          Feb.
17.8 − 56.9 2.5 1.2 21.7 20.8 − 1.5 2.2 0.0 − 0.2 0.3          Mar.
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
May 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2017         Feb. 27,043.4 17,416.7 13,032.5 10,845.5 1,398.2 788.8 4,384.3 1,076.5 3,307.8 5,494.3 4,132.3
         Mar. 26,995.3 17,549.7 13,115.5 10,902.2 1,423.6 789.7 4,434.2 1,073.0 3,361.2 5,414.8 4,030.8
         Apr. 27,097.0 17,594.2 13,129.6 10,897.5 1,429.3 802.9 4,464.6 1,075.7 3,388.9 5,447.2 4,055.6
         May 27,012.9 17,632.3 13,145.1 10,895.9 1,451.1 798.2 4,487.1 1,062.5 3,424.6 5,357.9 4,022.7
         June 26,689.9 17,610.8 13,132.6 10,895.2 1,441.2 796.1 4,478.3 1,063.1 3,415.2 5,192.9 3,886.2
         July 26,650.3 17,603.7 13,118.4 10,866.0 1,460.0 792.4 4,485.3 1,060.3 3,425.0 5,229.5 3,817.2
         Aug. 26,683.9 17,609.7 13,086.6 10,852.9 1,444.0 789.6 4,523.2 1,054.6 3,468.6 5,199.9 3,874.3
         Sep. 26,562.4 17,656.1 13,131.0 10,905.8 1,434.3 790.9 4,525.1 1,046.0 3,479.1 5,171.5 3,734.8
         Oct. 26,760.5 17,733.1 13,189.5 10,968.3 1,423.0 798.2 4,543.6 1,046.2 3,497.4 5,292.7 3,734.6
         Nov. 26,790.2 17,846.3 13,272.1 11,037.5 1,430.9 803.7 4,574.2 1,038.3 3,535.9 5,247.3 3,696.6
         Dec. 26,320.8 17,707.9 13,166.9 10,942.4 1,425.5 798.9 4,541.0 1,028.7 3,512.3 5,065.9 3,547.0
2018         Jan. 26,335.6 17,818.8 13,241.0 10,990.5 1,448.8 801.7 4,577.8 1,041.6 3,536.2 5,253.9 3,262.9
         Feb. 26,299.5 17,821.0 13,239.7 10,993.3 1,456.5 790.0 4,581.2 1,025.2 3,556.0 5,342.9 3,135.6
         Mar. 26,291.7 17,880.1 13,279.0 11,032.1 1,466.5 780.4 4,601.1 1,023.3 3,577.8 5,257.7 3,154.0
         Apr. 26,515.2 18,032.6 13,432.7 11,127.7 1,490.0 814.9 4,599.9 1,025.1 3,574.8 5,334.9 3,147.6
         May 26,916.0 18,104.0 13,514.0 11,201.8 1,504.5 807.7 4,590.1 1,019.9 3,570.2 5,543.5 3,268.5
         June 26,771.9 18,098.7 13,482.1 11,193.5 1,501.6 786.9 4,616.7 1,016.8 3,599.9 5,455.8 3,217.3
         July 26,782.0 18,156.2 13,547.0 11,235.8 1,523.9 787.2 4,609.3 1,012.7 3,596.5 5,466.1 3,159.6
         Aug. 26,815.7 18,127.4 13,530.6 11,227.3 1,523.9 779.3 4,596.8 1,001.7 3,595.1 5,485.0 3,203.4
         Sep. 26,769.6 18,147.6 13,539.4 11,248.0 1,509.2 782.1 4,608.3 1,000.7 3,607.5 5,462.0 3,159.9
         Oct. 27,088.7 18,151.6 13,555.6 11,266.4 1,511.2 778.0 4,596.0 1,002.6 3,593.4 5,679.3 3,257.9
         Nov. 27,225.8 18,243.2 13,637.8 11,338.0 1,515.9 783.9 4,605.5 1,001.0 3,604.5 5,704.0 3,278.5
         Dec. 26,993.7 18,172.9 13,568.4 11,296.3 1,501.9 770.3 4,604.5 1,002.8 3,601.7 5,562.2 3,258.6
2019         Jan. 27,396.2 18,309.2 13,637.7 11,345.8 1,517.4 774.5 4,671.5 1,015.9 3,655.6 5,776.4 3,310.5
         Feb. 27,441.4 18,354.5 13,683.8 11,368.9 1,528.5 786.5 4,670.6 1,001.2 3,669.4 5,770.6 3,316.3
         Mar. 27,739.9 18,389.9 13,728.6 11,408.4 1,525.7 794.5 4,661.2 1,001.4 3,659.9 5,852.5 3,497.6
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2017         Feb. 6,196.5 4,075.7 3,124.9 2,691.3 168.1 265.5 950.8 344.6 606.2 1,281.9 839.0
         Mar. 6,176.3 4,089.6 3,136.8 2,701.2 169.6 266.0 952.8 340.6 612.3 1,281.0 805.7
         Apr. 6,174.4 4,103.1 3,143.3 2,709.1 170.4 263.9 959.8 342.3 617.5 1,264.2 807.1
         May 6,160.2 4,114.5 3,157.3 2,719.6 172.6 265.0 957.2 332.2 624.9 1,234.6 811.2
         June 6,106.3 4,120.6 3,165.9 2,722.5 173.2 270.2 954.7 330.8 623.9 1,238.6 747.1
         July 6,069.0 4,135.9 3,176.7 2,731.5 175.2 269.9 959.2 332.6 626.7 1,201.4 731.7
         Aug. 6,084.5 4,152.3 3,186.3 2,741.6 174.3 270.3 966.1 327.8 638.3 1,185.1 747.2
         Sep. 6,076.7 4,167.7 3,200.9 2,757.6 174.3 269.1 966.8 323.2 643.6 1,194.6 714.3
         Oct. 6,082.0 4,185.9 3,210.4 2,766.1 174.6 269.8 975.4 324.0 651.4 1,188.5 707.7
         Nov. 6,088.7 4,211.0 3,227.4 2,777.0 178.7 271.6 983.6 321.5 662.1 1,177.2 700.5
         Dec. 6,051.1 4,202.2 3,222.8 2,768.6 180.4 273.8 979.4 318.5 660.9 1,163.4 685.4
2018         Jan. 6,074.8 4,214.9 3,242.3 2,786.5 181.6 274.2 972.5 317.0 655.6 1,176.4 683.5
         Feb. 6,051.9 4,220.1 3,253.3 2,799.4 183.1 270.8 966.8 311.4 655.4 1,195.1 636.8
         Mar. 6,053.7 4,228.1 3,260.9 2,809.5 183.0 268.4 967.2 309.7 657.5 1,184.4 641.2
         Apr. 6,046.4 4,233.3 3,267.7 2,816.0 184.4 267.4 965.6 310.5 655.0 1,178.5 634.6
         May 6,148.1 4,248.4 3,280.8 2,824.1 186.8 269.8 967.6 306.5 661.1 1,226.7 673.0
         June 6,120.9 4,264.2 3,297.3 2,838.8 187.5 271.0 966.9 304.3 662.7 1,201.8 654.9
         July 6,089.3 4,274.2 3,307.9 2,849.4 187.0 271.5 966.3 304.9 661.4 1,194.2 620.9
         Aug. 6,121.9 4,279.7 3,313.6 2,863.9 183.8 265.9 966.0 300.5 665.5 1,189.8 652.4
         Sep. 6,119.7 4,295.4 3,331.0 2,880.3 184.8 265.9 964.4 297.5 666.9 1,194.5 629.8
         Oct. 6,154.2 4,303.6 3,339.1 2,888.2 185.3 265.6 964.5 300.8 663.7 1,208.1 642.4
         Nov. 6,177.4 4,323.4 3,356.8 2,905.6 188.1 263.0 966.7 299.8 666.9 1,202.7 651.3
         Dec. 6,194.1 4,317.4 3,353.6 2,903.7 187.8 262.2 963.7 296.4 667.3 1,208.5 668.2
2019         Jan. 6,252.9 4,333.5 3,366.6 2,917.4 188.8 260.4 966.9 299.2 667.7 1,232.6 686.9
         Feb. 6,243.9 4,343.3 3,382.0 2,932.6 189.2 260.2 961.3 296.6 664.7 1,221.0 679.6
         Mar. 6,391.6 4,373.8 3,414.6 2,963.5 189.8 261.3 959.2 293.9 665.3 1,265.9 751.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12   ).
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
May 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which: up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,078.5 11,994.0 11,210.5 11,330.1 5,849.1 919.5 284.5 2,028.8 2,183.6 64.6 2017          Feb.
1,082.9 12,103.6 11,279.9 11,422.6 5,945.0 912.9 284.5 2,027.9 2,188.3 64.1          Mar.
1,089.7 12,140.9 11,322.9 11,456.1 6,022.2 888.7 278.2 2,013.3 2,190.1 63.7          Apr.
1,090.2 12,151.7 11,338.9 11,444.1 6,044.1 862.7 272.6 2,003.3 2,199.3 62.0          May1,099.7 12,214.1 11,384.0 11,483.6 6,113.3 854.2 265.6 1,986.7 2,201.9 61.9          June
1,105.6 12,209.8 11,392.9 11,476.5 6,123.4 848.8 262.8 1,976.5 2,206.6 58.4          July
1,103.3 12,226.5 11,422.5 11,504.8 6,146.4 857.8 260.6 1,969.4 2,213.0 57.7          Aug.1,104.2 12,271.6 11,432.3 11,519.7 6,196.5 843.3 256.2 1,956.5 2,210.4 56.8          Sep.
1,106.2 12,217.1 11,420.3 11,507.4 6,216.9 846.4 250.5 1,929.6 2,207.7 56.2          Oct.
1,107.1 12,249.2 11,471.4 11,544.6 6,291.1 832.2 245.9 1,912.7 2,207.2 55.5          Nov.1,123.2 12,286.2 11,543.2 11,618.1 6,349.3 834.7 242.2 1,925.2 2,211.7 54.9          Dec.
1,108.0 12,318.5 11,528.3 11,610.5 6,348.3 840.6 236.7 1,915.0 2,214.1 55.8 2018          Jan.
1,108.3 12,329.8 11,524.6 11,603.3 6,352.3 831.3 232.1 1,915.9 2,216.5 55.1          Feb.1,117.0 12,393.9 11,580.6 11,660.8 6,416.6 831.5 226.4 1,909.0 2,222.6 54.8          Mar.
1,121.2 12,401.6 11,611.1 11,680.7 6,454.5 817.7 222.3 1,907.2 2,224.6 54.4          Apr.
1,126.1 12,502.7 11,691.0 11,763.4 6,548.1 810.6 217.7 1,900.9 2,232.1 54.0          May1,137.6 12,613.8 11,777.2 11,845.2 6,623.7 821.4 214.9 1,895.2 2,236.3 53.7          June
1,145.3 12,606.1 11,760.9 11,827.3 6,603.9 817.3 212.1 1,899.9 2,241.0 53.1          July
1,148.3 12,595.5 11,753.5 11,804.8 6,594.2 812.2 208.9 1,890.4 2,246.4 52.7          Aug.1,150.4 12,662.3 11,780.4 11,833.5 6,657.4 796.4 205.9 1,877.8 2,243.7 52.3          Sep.
1,152.2 12,639.6 11,788.7 11,848.8 6,669.1 812.9 203.6 1,872.0 2,239.2 52.1          Oct.
1,157.5 12,719.4 11,862.2 11,912.8 6,750.9 801.7 200.7 1,866.8 2,241.5 51.3          Nov.1,175.4 12,713.5 11,926.7 11,989.8 6,803.3 800.9 200.7 1,888.3 2,245.0 51.5          Dec.
1,162.4 12,764.6 11,908.5 11,974.3 6,782.0 798.4 199.4 1,885.0 2,258.2 51.3 2019          Jan.
1,165.5 12,829.2 11,956.6 12,002.5 6,809.9 795.4 196.8 1,885.3 2,263.8 51.2          Feb.1,171.7 12,938.2 12,069.7 12,125.5 6,927.5 786.6 199.4 1,885.3 2,275.3 51.3          Mar.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
246.6 3,532.6 3,448.3 3,313.4 1,881.5 175.3 38.8 630.0 537.9 50.0 2017          Feb.
247.7 3,549.3 3,449.2 3,318.1 1,886.4 177.4 39.9 628.4 536.5 49.5          Mar.
249.3 3,540.9 3,447.5 3,317.0 1,895.9 170.7 40.0 624.7 536.6 49.0          Apr.
248.6 3,566.1 3,465.8 3,327.4 1,910.5 167.5 40.2 624.1 536.4 48.7          May249.5 3,590.5 3,482.0 3,339.9 1,928.7 165.5 40.3 621.4 535.7 48.3          June
251.6 3,583.1 3,472.8 3,333.0 1,927.8 162.6 40.3 619.5 537.9 44.9          July
250.4 3,600.7 3,483.1 3,338.6 1,938.3 159.0 40.3 619.3 537.5 44.1          Aug.250.1 3,616.3 3,486.8 3,345.9 1,945.0 162.3 39.6 617.9 537.5 43.5          Sep.
250.9 3,606.4 3,490.8 3,352.9 1,958.5 158.8 38.6 616.2 538.0 42.7          Oct.
250.9 3,646.8 3,521.5 3,383.7 1,990.6 157.1 37.4 618.2 538.3 42.1          Nov.252.9 3,647.9 3,515.8 3,378.5 1,976.2 162.0 37.7 620.4 540.7 41.5          Dec.
250.1 3,632.5 3,522.3 3,390.7 1,994.6 161.5 36.4 616.5 539.5 42.2 2018          Jan.
249.8 3,642.4 3,523.0 3,388.4 1,995.9 160.2 35.3 615.5 540.0 41.5          Feb.248.3 3,652.2 3,524.1 3,389.6 1,998.1 164.6 34.2 612.1 539.4 41.0          Mar.
250.3 3,641.8 3,529.8 3,395.0 2,013.5 157.6 33.6 610.6 539.1 40.6          Apr.
250.2 3,693.8 3,568.4 3,425.0 2,048.0 154.6 33.0 610.2 539.0 40.3          May252.7 3,716.5 3,574.0 3,423.0 2,039.4 165.5 32.6 607.2 538.5 39.8          June
256.0 3,694.1 3,571.0 3,429.7 2,053.1 161.2 32.2 605.8 538.0 39.4          July
256.4 3,703.1 3,568.1 3,417.3 2,051.8 153.7 34.0 601.1 537.7 38.9          Aug.256.1 3,737.2 3,588.3 3,437.1 2,076.9 153.2 33.2 597.4 537.8 38.6          Sep.
256.3 3,730.6 3,595.8 3,453.9 2,092.2 155.1 33.6 596.9 538.0 38.1          Oct.
257.2 3,774.2 3,632.0 3,482.3 2,127.4 149.8 33.2 595.9 538.5 37.4          Nov.260.0 3,766.4 3,629.3 3,481.1 2,120.4 152.5 33.7 596.7 540.6 37.2          Dec.
267.6 3,737.2 3,622.2 3,471.2 2,113.7 154.3 33.5 592.1 540.9 36.7 2019          Jan.
268.0 3,747.2 3,634.2 3,474.2 2,117.5 153.9 33.2 591.0 541.8 36.7          Feb.269.1 3,785.7 3,652.3 3,490.1 2,136.1 152.2 33.0 587.7 544.0 37.1          Mar.
volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra -Eurosystem
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability ite ms“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
May 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont’d)
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which: market of which:
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund Denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2017         Feb. 299.9 364.1 175.0 96.2 20.2 44.1 23.1 5.4 241.7 241.0 521.9 2,212.2 1,492.2
         Mar. 324.0 357.0 165.4 96.5 21.5 44.6 23.6 5.4 256.5 255.8 534.0 2,184.3 1,478.2
         Apr. 318.6 366.2 176.4 92.4 23.7 44.7 23.5 5.5 250.4 249.7 529.6 2,156.4 1,464.9
         May 332.1 375.5 181.6 94.5 25.3 45.2 24.2 4.7 238.4 237.7 524.9 2,164.7 1,489.4
         June 352.5 378.0 181.2 95.7 26.6 45.8 24.0 4.7 221.7 221.0 504.1 2,147.8 1,477.6
         July 345.0 388.3 191.0 95.2 26.7 46.2 24.4 4.8 197.4 196.8 517.0 2,127.0 1,469.9
         Aug. 326.7 395.0 197.1 94.8 27.8 46.2 24.4 4.7 199.6 198.9 526.4 2,112.1 1,462.7
         Sep. 362.5 389.5 193.2 91.9 28.1 47.5 24.1 4.7 206.6 205.9 522.1 2,092.5 1,446.5
         Oct. 318.9 390.9 197.9 87.6 28.3 48.3 24.1 4.7 226.5 225.8 531.3 2,083.4 1,429.2
         Nov. 310.2 394.4 197.6 89.5 29.8 49.0 23.8 4.6 243.4 242.8 527.6 2,096.7 1,444.2
         Dec. 289.0 379.1 191.1 81.5 31.5 46.8 23.5 4.6 211.2 210.7 501.2 2,076.2 1,433.0
2018         Jan. 329.9 378.0 186.1 84.3 31.1 47.5 24.1 5.0 203.0 202.5 521.3 2,070.6 1,439.3
         Feb. 343.7 382.8 191.5 83.4 30.4 47.8 24.8 4.8 198.5 198.0 510.0 2,072.8 1,430.6
         Mar. 357.8 375.3 181.4 85.8 29.5 48.6 25.1 4.8 206.7 206.1 508.5 2,077.7 1,435.4
         Apr. 337.9 383.0 190.3 84.7 28.4 49.7 25.1 4.7 227.6 227.1 519.7 2,085.5 1,436.6
         May 345.0 394.3 196.4 87.2 29.8 51.0 25.2 4.7 253.0 252.5 507.4 2,097.7 1,439.2
         June 366.4 402.2 199.3 91.7 29.9 51.9 24.8 4.7 247.4 246.8 498.2 2,095.1 1,439.0
         July 374.2 404.6 203.1 88.4 30.9 52.8 24.8 4.7 254.0 253.5 508.7 2,075.6 1,432.2
         Aug. 377.0 413.7 208.3 90.6 31.0 54.4 24.8 4.6 257.8 257.3 507.1 2,081.7 1,438.6
         Sep. 414.0 414.8 210.8 87.8 32.4 54.8 24.4 4.6 247.2 246.7 487.6 2,109.0 1,457.2
         Oct. 375.3 415.4 213.2 84.0 32.3 55.7 25.7 4.5 237.4 236.9 511.4 2,164.7 1,474.7
         Nov. 382.8 423.8 218.9 85.1 33.6 56.3 25.7 4.3 268.8 268.4 511.7 2,161.5 1,468.8
         Dec. 322.3 401.4 203.6 78.6 34.2 56.9 23.7 4.3 254.5 254.2 512.5 2,157.7 1,472.1
2019         Jan. 388.4 401.9 196.7 85.9 34.8 55.8 24.2 4.5 270.2 269.6 521.5 2,176.4 1,485.0
         Feb. 407.3 419.4 207.2 92.1 34.2 56.3 25.1 4.5 270.5 269.7 514.4 2,204.1 1,506.2
         Mar. 386.4 426.4 211.9 92.4 35.4 56.7 25.5 4.4 268.6 268.2 508.9 2,186.5 1,487.6
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2017         Feb. 17.5 201.8 61.5 83.2 15.7 37.7 3.1 0.6 4.5 4.5 2.2 556.7 262.6
         Mar. 31.6 199.5 58.7 82.5 16.5 38.2 3.1 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.1 551.8 263.6
         Apr. 25.0 198.9 59.0 79.4 18.8 38.2 3.0 0.6 3.5 3.5 2.1 546.7 264.9
         May 32.7 206.1 61.6 81.6 20.6 38.7 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 542.6 263.2
         June 39.8 210.9 63.4 82.6 22.0 39.3 3.0 0.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 542.7 266.0
         July 42.3 207.8 60.3 81.5 22.6 39.8 3.0 0.7 3.3 3.3 2.1 534.5 264.9
         Aug. 49.7 212.4 64.0 81.0 23.6 40.1 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.4 2.3 534.4 267.8
         Sep. 59.5 210.9 63.2 78.5 24.3 41.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.3 529.1 264.0
         Oct. 45.3 208.2 64.4 73.5 24.7 41.9 3.0 0.7 2.3 2.3 2.0 521.8 252.3
         Nov. 51.7 211.4 65.5 73.0 26.2 43.1 2.9 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 518.3 251.1
         Dec. 61.7 207.7 69.3 66.3 27.8 40.6 2.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.7 512.7 256.4
2018         Jan. 37.4 204.4 61.6 70.3 27.5 41.4 2.8 0.8 4.3 4.3 1.7 518.8 262.8
         Feb. 46.7 207.4 66.3 69.2 26.8 41.5 3.0 0.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 522.7 263.8
         Mar. 55.0 207.6 63.2 72.7 25.8 42.3 3.0 0.6 2.9 2.9 2.2 523.5 265.6
         Apr. 39.7 207.0 63.1 72.5 24.4 43.3 3.0 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 524.1 270.0
         May 51.4 217.4 68.6 74.9 25.7 44.5 3.1 0.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 536.8 274.3
         June 69.1 224.5 70.7 79.2 25.6 45.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 2.0 531.3 274.8
         July 48.1 216.4 63.4 76.6 26.5 46.2 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.8 1.9 526.6 277.0
         Aug. 61.7 224.1 67.3 78.9 26.4 47.7 3.1 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.9 527.7 282.0
         Sep. 73.9 226.2 69.6 76.9 27.8 48.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.9 536.3 287.6
         Oct. 56.1 220.6 66.1 73.9 28.0 48.9 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 1.9 544.5 286.9
         Nov. 65.7 226.3 69.4 74.8 28.7 49.7 3.1 0.7 1.3 1.3 2.2 544.9 290.3
         Dec. 60.3 225.0 74.6 67.5 29.3 49.9 3.0 0.6 0.8 0.8 2.2 532.5 283.4
2019         Jan. 41.8 224.2 67.1 74.8 30.0 48.7 3.0 0.6 1.7 1.7 2.2 546.6 294.1
         Feb. 38.8 234.3 71.8 80.3 29.3 49.1 3.1 0.6 2.0 2.0 2.2 560.4 302.9
         Mar. 56.5 239.1 75.9 80.0 30.3 49.3 3.1 0.6 11.4 11.4 2.0 557.3 297.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p. 10    ).9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
May 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item:
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (from 2002 German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which: MonetaryIntra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
43.2 44.4 2,124.6 4,382.6 2,684.4 − 23.5 3,951.5 − 7,218.4 10,769.9 11,449.6 6,951.9 140.1 2017          Feb.
41.9 44.5 2,097.9 4,322.7 2,665.4 − 6.2 3,852.2 − 7,309.1 10,860.5 11,554.2 6,905.3 140.0          Mar.
30.1 40.5 2,085.8 4,405.2 2,662.8 − 2.2 3,864.2 − 7,406.4 10,927.1 11,602.1 6,875.7 142.1          Apr.
37.0 40.9 2,086.8 4,337.9 2,658.7 − 0.2 3,846.5 − 7,437.0 10,939.6 11,618.3 6,860.8 145.0          May37.6 39.8 2,070.4 4,139.0 2,631.0 6.5 3,726.0 − 7,515.8 11,007.6 11,656.5 6,800.5 145.5          June
35.1 38.7 2,053.2 4,184.5 2,615.9 9.4 3,683.8 − 7,544.1 11,032.5 11,692.4 6,755.1 148.0          July
30.6 38.7 2,042.7 4,181.0 2,647.7 − 0.9 3,688.2 − 7,571.6 11,073.6 11,744.4 6,768.5 148.5          Aug.39.4 38.3 2,014.8 4,159.3 2,650.8 17.0 3,538.2 − 7,620.4 11,098.3 11,764.0 6,731.1 150.4          Sep.
33.6 36.4 2,013.4 4,340.8 2,666.0 13.3 3,575.8 − 7,646.1 11,114.4 11,783.8 6,718.2 148.7          Oct.
37.4 36.7 2,022.6 4,290.9 2,657.3 45.9 3,572.1 − 7,724.0 11,175.5 11,852.9 6,701.7 151.3          Nov.32.5 34.8 2,008.9 4,099.3 2,730.9 26.2 3,266.5 − 7,786.8 11,234.8 11,870.8 6,771.4 146.0          Dec.
24.9 28.7 2,017.1 4,416.9 2,714.8 − 44.2 3,026.7 − 7,767.7 11,221.3 11,866.7 6,755.2 148.1 2018          Jan.
32.0 27.2 2,013.6 4,507.7 2,708.1 − 28.7 2,892.9 − 7,777.2 11,218.2 11,861.5 6,745.3 147.5          Feb.39.8 27.1 2,010.8 4,350.0 2,719.4 − 8.3 2,926.9 − 7,840.4 11,283.4 11,929.2 6,747.4 147.5          Mar.
41.3 26.9 2,017.3 4,495.7 2,720.5 9.9 2,933.4 − 7,892.3 11,317.3 11,985.6 6,753.8 148.4          Apr.
35.6 26.7 2,035.3 4,710.4 2,699.6 13.5 3,005.5 − 7,995.1 11,420.1 12,065.3 6,745.5 147.0          May41.4 26.0 2,027.7 4,564.2 2,670.0 31.6 2,914.0 − 8,086.9 11,529.7 12,168.3 6,703.1 150.2          June
33.0 27.1 2,015.5 4,614.4 2,665.2 18.6 2,894.1 − 8,080.9 11,519.3 12,157.6 6,691.2 152.4          July
34.4 27.1 2,020.2 4,651.7 2,661.0 25.7 2,887.0 − 8,082.4 11,520.1 12,164.8 6,683.3 155.5          Aug.37.0 25.1 2,046.8 4,573.9 2,660.3 27.3 2,851.7 − 8,152.7 11,567.1 12,186.6 6,696.5 157.9          Sep.
35.9 26.8 2,102.0 4,705.4 2,705.9 − 2.6 2,974.8 − 8,164.2 11,585.7 12,230.0 6,792.2 153.6          Oct.
37.2 21.7 2,102.5 4,661.5 2,708.5 15.7 3,021.3 − 8,260.8 11,672.7 12,316.0 6,789.8 157.4          Nov.46.3 20.6 2,090.8 4,505.8 2,724.3 13.9 2,936.1 − 8,311.2 11,719.7 12,366.5 6,816.0 154.1          Dec.
35.4 24.0 2,117.0 4,695.8 2,750.4 21.5 3,033.6 − 8,268.3 11,693.6 12,345.6 6,864.0 151.7 2019          Jan.
32.5 26.0 2,145.5 4,664.7 2,738.0 23.5 3,031.4 − 8,308.6 11,740.5 12,385.9 6,880.8 150.4          Feb.15.9 22.8 2,147.8 4,675.5 2,766.3 26.7 3,197.4 − 8,439.1 11,878.2 12,499.7 6,911.8 152.3          Mar.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
22.2 15.2 519.2 972.2 587.9 − 944.3 1,484.8 330.1 1,943.0 2,797.0 2,841.1 1,825.3 − 2017          Feb.
19.5 15.9 516.4 979.6 586.5 − 957.7 1,462.2 331.9 1,945.1 2,801.0 2,841.1 1,819.5 −          Mar.
17.7 16.9 512.1 985.8 597.9 − 965.5 1,463.1 335.2 1,954.8 2,803.4 2,843.5 1,822.6 −          Apr.
18.4 16.8 507.4 957.7 595.0 − 967.6 1,461.9 338.1 1,972.1 2,821.5 2,861.2 1,814.4 −          May19.3 16.4 507.0 946.6 591.5 − 981.1 1,412.1 342.8 1,992.1 2,841.2 2,880.9 1,808.1 −          June
18.8 16.2 499.5 926.1 589.1 − 975.5 1,406.4 345.0 1,988.1 2,835.9 2,876.2 1,793.6 −          July
18.5 15.8 500.0 894.5 597.2 − 970.2 1,422.2 348.6 2,002.3 2,846.8 2,886.8 1,801.4 −          Aug.19.3 15.4 494.4 927.7 594.2 − 982.9 1,387.5 352.1 2,008.2 2,853.5 2,893.0 1,792.0 −          Sep.
18.6 15.7 487.5 913.6 596.3 − 946.7 1,386.3 354.2 2,023.0 2,859.6 2,898.2 1,785.4 −          Oct.
18.5 15.8 484.0 883.4 593.7 − 940.3 1,382.0 355.5 2,056.1 2,890.9 2,929.9 1,781.9 −          Nov.17.7 14.8 480.2 921.3 668.6 − 999.6 1,295.2 359.3 2,045.5 2,882.9 2,920.4 1,852.1 −          Dec.
16.0 14.2 488.5 931.6 656.8 − 974.7 1,303.7 359.3 2,056.2 2,894.2 2,930.5 1,846.2 − 2018          Jan.
16.7 14.3 491.6 968.4 653.3 − 1,003.8 1,263.2 361.3 2,062.1 2,896.6 2,933.5 1,844.1 −          Feb.16.0 13.9 493.6 953.5 657.7 − 1,016.5 1,278.1 368.2 2,061.3 2,901.1 2,936.2 1,847.4 −          Mar.
17.5 12.3 494.3 949.7 658.7 − 1,002.9 1,270.5 369.5 2,076.6 2,907.0 2,941.3 1,848.1 −          Apr.
19.0 13.1 504.7 997.9 662.3 − 1,044.2 1,297.9 374.9 2,116.6 2,946.8 2,982.4 1,862.6 −          May17.0 12.5 501.8 996.0 666.2 − 1,070.1 1,277.7 378.5 2,110.1 2,954.5 2,987.3 1,860.9 −          June
16.7 11.9 498.0 967.9 665.4 − 1,019.3 1,250.8 381.6 2,116.5 2,954.1 2,986.4 1,855.4 −          July
18.3 12.0 497.4 966.5 672.6 − 1,024.8 1,273.6 386.9 2,119.1 2,953.0 2,986.4 1,858.4 −          Aug.17.8 11.0 507.4 979.8 670.9 − 1,059.4 1,251.7 390.8 2,146.5 2,978.4 3,010.4 1,863.3 −          Sep.
20.2 11.0 513.2 952.8 676.1 − 1,031.2 1,277.1 394.6 2,158.3 2,990.0 3,025.5 1,873.8 −          Oct.
19.4 10.3 515.2 932.7 675.8 − 1,041.8 1,288.0 397.1 2,196.8 3,024.9 3,058.2 1,874.7 −          Nov.17.7 10.1 504.6 967.9 689.9 − 1,063.4 1,297.9 401.1 2,195.0 3,021.7 3,052.5 1,879.0 −          Dec.
18.2 9.6 518.7 920.7 690.0 − 971.6 1,326.1 391.5 2,180.7 3,017.3 3,049.1 1,886.9 − 2019          Jan.
19.1 8.2 533.2 882.8 684.4 − 966.0 1,330.9 394.4 2,189.4 3,030.9 3,062.3 1,895.1 −          Feb.19.2 8.3 529.8 958.8 696.3 − 1,031.3 1,411.3 396.9 2,211.9 3,054.5 3,095.4 1,900.9 −          Mar.
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to three months (excluding central govern ments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to two years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the over two years and at agreed notice of over three months, debt securities w ith
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two maturities of over two years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
May 2019
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2016         Oct. 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1,447.0 387.3 0.0 1,094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2,259.4
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1,570.2 439.4 0.0 1,103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2,366.3
2017         Jan. 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1,670.8 434.4 0.0 1,119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2,472.6
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1,787.5 479.2 0.0 1,110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2,550.9
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 678.6 18.5 707.4 0.3 1,905.3 550.0 0.0 1,118.4 182.0 378.8 1,081.1 2,749.4
         June 683.1 13.7 767.4 0.2 1,995.0 593.7 0.0 1,126.0 163.6 397.4 1,178.7 2,898.5
         July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2,076.1 595.3 0.0 1,136.3 229.8 379.4 1,169.2 2,900.8
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 639.0 5.5 768.6 0.3 2,150.2 611.4 0.0 1,142.5 181.8 385.1 1,242.7 2,996.7
         Oct. 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2,239.2 648.1 0.0 1,142.8 218.3 383.9 1,253.3 3,044.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 634.5 3.0 763.7 0.2 2,333.5 682.5 0.0 1,146.6 188.5 407.6 1,309.7 3,138.8
2018         Jan. 635.7 2.9 760.6 0.2 2,398.2 689.2 0.0 1,158.2 188.1 487.0 1,275.2 3,122.5
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 630.9 1.5 760.5 0.0 2,435.5 686.3 0.0 1,148.2 203.6 474.9 1,315.6 3,150.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 627.1 1.9 759.5 0.1 2,476.8 668.0 0.0 1,159.0 247.5 495.6 1,295.3 3,122.3
         June 625.2 1.8 757.3 0.1 2,519.9 659.5 0.0 1,170.4 218.0 502.5 1,353.9 3,183.8
         July 635.1 2.1 744.2 0.1 2,558.4 652.2 0.0 1,183.6 263.4 533.8 1,306.9 3,142.6
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 637.5 3.0 739.9 0.1 2,589.7 671.2 0.0 1,192.2 239.1 519.1 1,348.7 3,212.0
         Oct. 625.2 6.9 727.8 0.1 2,622.8 631.8 0.0 1,194.3 283.1 504.4 1,369.0 3,195.1
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 625.1 6.8 726.4 0.1 2,642.3 635.9 0.0 1,202.4 240.2 542.9 1,379.4 3,217.7
2019         Jan. 655.8 7.9 723.8 0.1 2,652.8 640.0 0.0 1,218.8 231.3 618.2 1,332.1 3,190.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 665.5 6.0 723.1 0.1 2,645.8 637.6 0.0 1,209.2 257.3 571.4 1,364.8 3,211.7
         Apr. 678.6 5.7 720.3 0.1 2,635.9 619.6 0.0 1,215.8 270.5 555.6 1,379.0 3,214.4
Deutsche Bundesbank
2016         Oct. 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2017         Jan. 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 164.4 1.0 86.0 0.1 412.4 181.4 0.0 264.1 29.7 − 185.3 374.0 819.5
         June 165.8 0.3 95.0 0.0 431.8 181.2 0.0 266.2 32.4 − 204.9 418.0 865.4
         July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 155.2 0.3 94.9 0.0 463.2 165.5 0.0 269.9 52.4 − 192.6 418.5 853.9
         Oct. 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 154.2 0.5 94.8 0.0 501.4 187.5 0.0 270.3 56.0 − 218.6 455.8 913.6
2018         Jan. 155.5 0.9 93.3 0.0 514.7 204.4 0.0 272.8 54.9 − 192.2 424.5 901.7
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 151.5 0.6 93.4 0.0 522.9 207.9 0.0 271.0 56.8 − 221.3 453.9 932.8
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 150.7 1.1 93.3 0.0 530.6 190.8 0.0 273.8 61.1 − 191.3 440.9 905.5
         June 150.1 1.1 93.1 0.0 540.6 200.3 0.0 277.4 59.2 − 217.9 466.0 943.6
         July 151.9 0.4 91.8 0.0 547.6 196.8 0.0 280.0 69.4 − 194.1 439.6 916.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 152.1 0.4 91.5 0.0 556.2 192.9 0.0 282.0 65.2 − 178.9 439.0 913.9
         Oct. 148.1 0.5 88.5 0.0 563.5 160.0 0.0 282.6 81.3 − 183.4 460.0 902.6
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 146.9 0.6 88.1 0.0 570.0 148.0 0.0 283.6 69.6 − 185.2 489.5 921.2
2019         Jan. 155.8 1.7 87.6 0.1 570.4 153.1 0.0 293.4 60.5 − 144.9 453.7 900.1
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 158.3 0.6 87.6 0.0 569.5 163.3 0.0 294.3 49.3 − 157.0 466.0 923.7
         Apr. 160.8 0.6 86.7 0.0 563.7 172.5 0.0 296.1 61.2 − 199.4 481.6 950.1
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
May 2019
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2 2016          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9          Dec.
− 12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2017          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 16.2 − 10.5 + 153.1 + 0.0 + 117.8 + 70.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 21.7 + 56.6 + 120.2 + 198.5          May
+ 4.5 − 4.8 + 60.0 − 0.1 + 89.7 + 43.7 + 0.0 + 7.6 − 18.4 + 18.6 + 97.6 + 149.1          June
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 17.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 74.1 + 16.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 48.0 + 5.7 + 73.5 + 95.9          Sep.
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 94.3 + 34.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 29.8 + 23.7 + 56.4 + 94.6          Dec.
+ 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 64.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 11.6 − 0.4 + 79.4 − 34.5 − 16.3 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 37.3 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 10.0 + 15.5 − 12.1 + 40.4 + 27.6          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 3.8 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 41.3 − 18.3 + 0.0 + 10.8 + 43.9 + 20.7 − 20.3 − 27.8          May
− 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 43.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 11.4 − 29.5 + 6.9 + 58.6 + 61.5          June
+ 9.9 + 0.3 − 13.1 + 0.0 + 38.5 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 13.2 + 45.4 + 31.3 − 47.0 − 41.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 2.4 + 0.9 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 31.3 + 19.0 + 0.0 + 8.6 − 24.3 − 14.7 + 41.8 + 69.4          Sep.
− 12.3 + 3.9 − 12.1 + 0.0 + 33.1 − 39.4 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 44.0 − 14.7 + 20.3 − 16.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 19.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 − 42.9 + 38.5 + 10.4 + 22.6          Dec.
+ 30.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 16.4 − 8.9 + 75.3 − 47.3 − 26.8 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 9.7 − 1.9 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 9.6 + 26.0 − 46.8 + 32.7 + 20.8          Mar.
+ 13.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 18.0 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 13.2 − 15.8 + 14.2 + 2.7          Apr.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5 2016          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6          Dec.
− 4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2017          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 4.9 + 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.0 + 25.9 + 27.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 6.6 − 15.6 + 33.0 + 62.5          May
+ 1.5 − 0.7 + 9.0 − 0.1 + 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.6 − 19.6 + 44.0 + 45.9          June
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 4.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 15.4 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 9.0 + 5.8 + 2.1          Sep.
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 16.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 9.9 − 21.0 + 33.1 + 50.4          Dec.
+ 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 13.3 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.1 + 26.4 − 31.3 − 11.9 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.2 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 1.9 − 29.1 + 29.4 + 31.1          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 − 17.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 4.2 + 30.0 − 13.0 − 27.3          May
− 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 10.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 3.6 − 1.8 − 26.6 + 25.1 + 38.1          June
+ 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 10.2 + 23.9 − 26.4 − 27.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 4.2 + 15.2 − 0.6 − 2.5          Sep.
− 4.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 32.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 16.1 − 4.5 + 21.1 − 11.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.6 − 12.0 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 11.7 − 1.8 + 29.5 + 18.5          Dec.
+ 8.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 + 9.7 − 9.2 + 40.2 − 35.9 − 21.1 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 11.2 − 12.0 + 12.3 + 23.6          Mar.
+ 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 12.0 − 42.5 + 15.6 + 26.5          Apr.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
May 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claims
external loans residents with banks, arising from
As at Gold and other denominated security the credit
reporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
date assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2018 Oct.               19 4,628.3 355.5 320.0 73.8 246.2 19.6 18.7 18.7 −
                              26 4,624.8 355.5 318.7 73.8 244.9 19.4 19.5 19.5 −
         Nov.                 2 4,622.2 355.5 318.7 74.9 243.9 20.2 19.1 19.1 −
                                9 4,626.2 355.5 319.8 74.8 245.0 20.0 19.8 19.8 −
                              16 4,638.3 355.5 321.4 74.9 246.5 19.6 19.5 19.5 −
                              23 4,646.9 355.5 323.1 74.9 248.2 18.5 20.6 20.6 −
                              30 4,660.3 355.5 324.7 74.9 249.8 17.7 22.2 22.2 −
         Dec.                 7 4,663.0 355.5 326.1 74.9 251.2 17.2 22.2 22.2 −
                              14 4,668.1 355.5 325.4 73.8 251.5 17.5 20.9 20.9 −
                              21 4,674.9 355.5 328.4 76.2 252.2 20.7 20.9 20.9 −
                              28 4,669.0 355.5 329.2 76.3 252.8 20.6 20.3 20.3 −
2019 Jan.                 4 4,694.4 389.8 329.0 76.9 252.0 16.3 20.9 20.9 −
                              11 4,703.4 389.8 327.9 76.9 250.9 17.2 19.3 19.3 −
                              18 4,705.9 389.8 327.6 76.9 250.7 18.8 18.1 18.1 −
                              25 4,708.9 389.8 327.9 77.0 251.0 20.8 19.0 19.0 −
2019 Feb.                 1 4,695.5 389.8 326.9 76.9 250.0 21.7 22.3 22.3 −
                                8 4,696.5 389.8 328.2 76.8 251.4 21.3 20.2 20.2 −
                              15 4,702.8 389.8 329.0 76.9 252.1 20.8 23.0 23.0 −
                              22 4,692.1 389.8 328.8 76.9 251.9 20.4 19.1 19.1 −
         Mar.                 1 4,686.3 389.8 327.7 76.9 250.8 20.9 21.8 21.8 −
                                8 4,691.3 389.8 328.5 76.9 251.6 21.0 23.6 23.6 −
                              15 4,680.6 389.8 329.3 76.9 252.4 19.5 19.7 19.7 −
                              22 4,677.0 389.8 331.2 76.8 254.4 19.0 18.6 18.6 −
                              29 4,695.8 402.3 340.2 78.1 262.1 20.2 19.0 19.0 −
         Apr.                 5 4,699.6 402.2 338.7 78.0 260.7 19.6 18.2 18.2 −
                              12 4,701.8 402.2 342.2 80.5 261.7 19.4 16.5 16.5 −
                              19 4,707.9 402.1 343.5 80.5 263.0 19.3 19.6 19.6 −
                              26 4,697.6 402.1 344.6 80.5 264.1 18.5 18.1 18.1 −
         May                 3 4,683.9 402.1 344.1 80.5 263.7 19.0 19.3 19.3 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2018 Oct.               19 1,763.5 110.8 51.2 19.1 32.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 −
                              26 1,766.4 110.8 50.6 19.1 31.5 0.0 3.5 3.5 −
         Nov.                 2 1,769.2 110.8 51.0 19.4 31.6 0.0 2.2 2.2 −
                                9 1,783.8 110.8 51.1 19.5 31.6 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
                              16 1,790.8 110.8 51.3 19.5 31.9 0.0 2.1 2.1 −
                              23 1,784.2 110.8 50.8 19.5 31.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 −
                              30 1,807.8 110.8 50.9 19.5 31.4 0.0 4.1 4.1 −
         Dec.                 7 1,785.4 110.8 50.8 19.5 31.3 0.0 4.3 4.3 −
                              14 1,797.0 110.8 50.4 19.1 31.3 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
                              21 1,808.6 110.8 50.9 19.7 31.1 1.6 2.7 2.7 −
                              28 1,822.3 110.8 50.9 19.7 31.1 1.6 1.1 1.1 −
2019 Jan.                 4 1,794.5 121.4 51.6 19.9 31.7 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
                              11 1,766.7 121.4 51.6 19.9 31.8 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
                              18 1,772.0 121.4 51.6 19.9 31.8 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
                              25 1,737.6 121.4 52.1 19.9 32.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
2019 Feb.                 1 1,745.8 121.4 51.9 19.8 32.0 0.0 6.5 6.5 −
                                8 1,753.1 121.4 51.7 19.8 31.9 0.0 4.1 4.1 −
                              15 1,773.9 121.4 51.7 19.9 31.9 0.0 6.5 6.5 −
                              22 1,745.1 121.4 51.6 19.9 31.8 0.0 2.7 2.7 −
         Mar.                 1 1,741.6 121.4 52.0 19.9 32.1 0.0 4.7 4.7 −
                                8 1,742.8 121.4 52.3 19.9 32.4 0.0 6.9 6.9 −
                              15 1,745.6 121.4 52.0 19.9 32.2 0.0 3.2 3.2 −
                              22 1,751.0 121.4 51.7 19.9 31.8 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
                              29 1,812.7 125.3 52.8 20.2 32.6 0.0 2.9 2.9 −
         Apr.                 5 1,774.3 125.3 52.9 20.2 32.7 0.0 2.2 2.2 −
                              12 1,760.4 125.3 53.6 20.9 32.7 0.0 0.9 0.9 −
                              19 1,773.9 125.3 53.3 20.9 32.4 0.0 4.1 4.1 −
                              26 1,787.4 125.3 53.6 20.9 32.7 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
         May                 3 1,786.4 125.2 53.5 20.9 32.7 0.0 3.2 3.2 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrum ents are valued at the
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB. 
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
May 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for governmentfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    As atopera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
733.4 7.9 725.5 − − 0.0 − 34.2 2,877.3 2,626.2 251.1 24.4 245.3 2018 Oct.                19
733.4 7.7 725.5 − − 0.2 − 30.8 2,879.8 2,630.0 249.8 24.4 243.4                               26
734.3 8.0 726.2 − − 0.1 − 26.9 2,878.7 2,629.9 248.8 24.4 244.3          Nov.                  2
732.8 6.6 726.2 − − 0.0 − 21.8 2,883.3 2,634.3 249.0 24.4 248.8                                 9
733.0 6.7 726.2 − − 0.1 − 27.8 2,888.7 2,639.5 249.2 24.4 248.5                               16
732.9 6.4 726.2 − − 0.4 − 25.1 2,892.4 2,642.9 249.5 24.4 254.4                               23
733.5 6.5 726.7 − − 0.3 − 26.0 2,892.8 2,643.8 249.1 24.4 263.5                               30
733.3 6.6 726.7 − − 0.0 − 25.0 2,899.1 2,650.8 248.3 24.0 260.8          Dec.                  7
733.8 7.1 726.7 − − 0.1 − 25.2 2,903.5 2,655.6 247.9 24.0 262.4                               14
733.5 9.6 723.8 − − 0.0 − 25.4 2,909.0 2,660.0 249.0 24.0 257.6                               21
733.5 9.6 723.8 − − 0.1 − 19.9 2,907.4 2,658.5 248.9 24.0 258.7                               28
732.1 8.2 723.8 − − 0.1 − 29.1 2,892.6 2,645.7 246.9 23.9 260.8 2019 Jan.                  4
731.2 7.3 723.8 − − 0.0 − 33.6 2,898.4 2,651.3 247.2 23.9 262.0                               11
730.2 6.3 723.8 − − 0.1 − 35.0 2,898.0 2,651.2 246.8 23.9 264.5                               18
730.5 6.6 723.8 − − 0.0 − 38.5 2,899.1 2,651.9 247.3 23.9 259.3                               25
730.0 6.6 723.3 − − 0.1 − 35.5 2,890.2 2,644.5 245.7 23.9 255.3 2019 Feb.                  1
728.8 5.4 723.3 − − 0.1 − 33.9 2,892.7 2,646.8 245.9 23.9 257.9                                 8
729.3 5.9 723.3 − − 0.1 − 35.3 2,895.3 2,649.5 245.8 23.9 256.6                               15
729.3 5.9 723.2 − − 0.1 − 35.4 2,891.7 2,646.3 245.4 23.9 253.6                               22
729.1 6.5 722.6 − − − − 32.6 2,879.3 2,639.7 239.6 23.9 261.3          Mar.                  1
728.5 5.8 722.6 − − 0.1 − 37.7 2,883.1 2,643.2 240.0 23.9 255.3                                 8
728.7 6.1 722.6 − − 0.0 − 36.1 2,878.1 2,639.1 239.0 23.9 255.4                               15
728.2 5.6 722.6 − − − − 38.2 2,877.0 2,637.1 239.9 23.9 251.1                               22
725.3 6.1 718.7 − − 0.5 − 39.1 2,868.5 2,629.7 238.8 23.9 257.2                               29
724.1 5.4 718.7 − − − − 40.8 2,873.5 2,634.9 238.6 23.9 258.7          Apr.                  5
724.1 5.3 718.7 − − 0.1 − 39.9 2,873.0 2,634.9 238.1 23.9 260.7                               12
727.8 5.4 718.7 − − 3.7 − 39.0 2,873.6 2,635.8 237.8 23.9 259.1                               19
724.7 6.0 718.6 − − 0.1 − 39.2 2,869.4 2,633.7 235.7 23.9 257.1                               26
724.3 5.7 718.6 − − − − 38.2 2,857.9 2,624.8 233.1 23.9 255.0          May                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
88.5 0.5 87.9 − − 0.0 − 7.3 562.7 562.7 − 4.4 935.5 2018 Oct.                19
88.2 0.3 87.9 − − 0.0 − 6.8 564.9 564.9 − 4.4 937.1                               26
88.4 0.3 88.1 − − 0.0 − 5.8 566.8 566.8 − 4.4 939.8          Nov.                  2
88.4 0.4 88.1 − − − − 6.1 567.9 567.9 − 4.4 952.6                                 9
88.5 0.4 88.1 − − 0.0 − 6.9 569.1 569.1 − 4.4 957.7                               16
88.3 0.3 88.1 − − − − 7.2 569.6 569.6 − 4.4 949.5                               23
88.6 0.5 88.1 − − − − 7.0 569.8 569.8 − 4.4 972.1                               30
88.8 0.7 88.1 − − − − 6.2 573.4 573.4 − 4.4 946.7          Dec.                  7
89.5 1.4 88.1 − − 0.0 − 6.4 571.9 571.9 − 4.4 961.0                               14
89.6 1.9 87.6 − − 0.0 − 4.3 573.3 573.3 − 4.4 971.1                               21
89.6 1.9 87.6 − − 0.1 − 0.6 573.3 573.3 − 4.4 989.9                               28
90.3 2.6 87.6 − − − − 6.2 567.2 567.2 − 4.4 951.0 2019 Jan.                  4
89.8 2.1 87.6 − − 0.0 − 6.6 568.9 568.9 − 4.4 921.9                               11
88.4 0.8 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.5 570.2 570.2 − 4.4 927.1                               18
88.8 1.2 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.7 569.4 569.4 − 4.4 890.8                               25
88.2 0.6 87.6 − − 0.0 − 6.8 569.6 569.6 − 4.4 896.9 2019 Feb.                  1
88.2 0.5 87.6 − − 0.0 − 5.9 570.5 570.5 − 4.4 906.9                                 8
88.2 0.6 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.9 571.4 571.4 − 4.4 922.2                               15
88.2 0.7 87.6 − − 0.0 − 6.3 567.8 567.8 − 4.4 902.6                               22
88.3 0.7 87.6 − − − − 7.3 567.4 567.4 − 4.4 896.0          Mar.                  1
88.1 0.5 87.6 − − − − 7.6 568.6 568.6 − 4.4 893.4                                 8
88.2 0.6 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.0 565.2 565.2 − 4.4 904.1                               15
88.2 0.6 87.6 − − − − 5.9 563.5 563.5 − 4.4 913.7                               22
87.3 0.7 86.2 − − 0.5 − 5.5 562.2 562.2 − 4.4 972.3                               29
86.8 0.6 86.2 − − − − 6.6 564.0 564.0 − 4.4 932.1          Apr.                  5
86.7 0.5 86.2 − − 0.1 − 6.9 560.7 560.7 − 4.4 922.0                               12
86.8 0.7 86.2 − − 0.0 − 7.6 562.1 562.1 − 4.4 930.2                               19
86.9 0.6 86.1 − − 0.1 − 7.5 563.1 563.1 − 4.4 944.7                               26
86.7 0.5 86.1 − − − − 7.4 563.8 563.8 − 4.4 942.2          May                  3

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
May 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro
(covering Fine- area credit
the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
As at Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
date liabilities lation  1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 3
 
2018 Oct.               19 4,628.3 1,194.0 1,999.4 1,379.7 619.7 − − 0.0 8.1 − 416.9 293.2 123.8
                              26 4,624.8 1,195.4 1,997.1 1,405.5 591.5 − − 0.1 6.3 − 412.8 288.2 124.6
         Nov.                 2 4,622.2 1,200.7 2,050.7 1,433.0 617.4 − − 0.2 4.8 − 342.6 217.9 124.7
                                9 4,626.2 1,198.6 2,054.1 1,403.2 650.8 − − 0.2 5.7 − 338.8 213.9 124.9
                              16 4,638.3 1,197.3 1,986.1 1,362.1 623.8 − − 0.2 6.9 − 401.9 267.6 134.3
                              23 4,646.9 1,197.2 1,982.3 1,353.3 628.8 − − 0.2 6.8 − 408.2 279.2 129.0
                              30 4,660.3 1,203.3 2,007.5 1,352.5 654.8 − − 0.2 7.0 − 375.3 245.5 129.8
         Dec.                 7 4,663.0 1,209.6 2,029.9 1,375.5 654.2 − − 0.2 9.6 − 348.2 216.7 131.5
                              14 4,668.1 1,214.0 1,995.1 1,364.1 630.8 − − 0.1 9.4 − 371.4 237.9 133.5
                              21 4,674.9 1,227.9 1,978.6 1,364.7 613.9 − − 0.0 10.7 − 327.5 201.8 125.7
                              28 4,669.0 1,231.5 1,913.4 1,299.7 613.6 − − 0.1 20.4 − 324.3 201.4 122.9
2019 Jan.                 4 4,694.4 1,224.7 1,971.6 1,304.8 666.4 − − 0.3 12.9 − 321.3 197.8 123.5
                              11 4,703.4 1,215.8 2,026.4 1,356.6 669.5 − − 0.2 7.6 − 334.2 213.5 120.8
                              18 4,705.9 1,209.9 1,988.3 1,350.4 637.8 − − 0.1 8.6 − 387.7 258.3 129.4
                              25 4,708.9 1,206.4 1,985.1 1,344.8 640.2 − − 0.1 8.4 − 404.3 281.7 122.6
2019 Feb.                 1 4,695.5 1,209.2 2,015.1 1,341.9 673.0 − − 0.2 8.5 − 356.3 230.6 125.7
                                8 4,696.5 1,208.3 2,024.9 1,366.2 658.6 − − 0.0 7.6 − 355.0 232.4 122.6
                              15 4,702.8 1,207.9 1,977.1 1,342.2 634.9 − − 0.0 10.0 − 405.0 286.1 118.8
                              22 4,692.1 1,207.2 1,971.1 1,337.0 634.1 − − 0.0 7.9 − 414.3 289.1 125.2
         Mar.                 1 4,686.3 1,212.2 2,021.2 1,380.2 641.0 − − 0.0 7.6 − 361.6 234.2 127.4
                                8 4,691.3 1,213.6 2,044.6 1,412.8 631.8 − − 0.0 9.6 − 349.1 219.4 129.7
                              15 4,680.6 1,213.3 1,995.0 1,403.5 591.5 − − 0.0 6.7 − 398.7 272.3 126.4
                              22 4,677.0 1,212.4 1,971.7 1,351.4 620.2 − − 0.0 7.0 − 429.9 302.3 127.6
                              29 4,695.8 1,216.1 1,948.2 1,348.9 599.2 − − 0.1 5.3 − 389.9 263.7 126.2
         Apr.                 5 4,699.6 1,218.3 2,036.0 1,401.7 634.2 − − 0.0 5.4 − 370.4 244.6 125.8
                              12 4,701.8 1,221.2 2,028.3 1,396.8 631.5 − − 0.0 6.6 − 382.4 253.9 128.5
                              19 4,707.9 1,229.4 1,980.3 1,393.9 586.4 − − 0.0 6.5 − 416.5 285.8 130.7
                              26 4,697.6 1,228.5 1,989.6 1,378.8 610.6 − − 0.1 5.4 − 401.5 271.4 130.1
         May                 3 4,683.9 1,229.0 2,037.6 1,403.9 633.7 − − 0.1 5.1 − 325.4 203.1 122.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2018 Oct.               19 1,763.5 282.6 619.8 460.1 159.6 − − 0.0 5.6 − 146.1 87.4 58.6
                              26 1,766.4 284.3 621.0 481.9 139.1 − − 0.0 4.3 − 142.6 84.2 58.5
         Nov.                 2 1,769.2 282.5 652.4 500.8 151.6 − − 0.0 2.9 − 106.8 48.8 57.9
                                9 1,783.8 282.5 656.9 507.7 149.3 − − 0.0 3.5 − 111.8 53.2 58.5
                              16 1,790.8 282.7 637.5 497.4 140.1 − − 0.0 4.1 − 138.1 79.1 59.0
                              23 1,784.2 283.2 627.3 492.6 134.7 − − 0.0 4.1 − 139.1 79.2 59.9
                              30 1,807.8 283.0 658.0 500.3 157.7 − − 0.0 4.0 − 128.1 64.9 63.3
         Dec.                 7 1,785.4 285.3 638.6 475.9 162.7 − − 0.0 4.9 − 123.9 58.5 65.4
                              14 1,797.0 287.4 597.9 455.6 142.3 − − 0.0 4.5 − 163.8 99.5 64.3
                              21 1,808.6 293.5 609.7 451.8 157.9 − − 0.0 2.9 − 137.2 79.3 57.9
                              28 1,822.3 293.5 593.9 440.3 153.6 − − 0.0 5.9 − 123.1 65.1 57.9
2019 Jan.                 4 1,794.5 295.9 616.6 456.1 160.5 − − 0.1 7.5 − 101.0 38.8 62.3
                              11 1,766.7 293.8 615.2 462.6 152.6 − − 0.0 3.9 − 105.6 51.5 54.1
                              18 1,772.0 292.7 622.7 472.0 150.7 − − 0.0 4.5 − 118.5 60.8 57.7
                              25 1,737.6 292.1 607.5 456.5 150.9 − − 0.0 4.6 − 104.0 55.0 48.9
2019 Feb.                 1 1,745.8 293.6 625.4 453.2 172.2 − − 0.0 4.6 − 87.6 39.4 48.2
                                8 1,753.1 294.1 634.1 466.7 167.4 − − 0.0 3.7 − 90.3 41.8 48.5
                              15 1,773.9 294.6 624.1 463.0 161.0 − − 0.0 6.6 − 115.1 67.4 47.7
                              22 1,745.1 294.9 619.5 463.2 156.2 − − 0.0 4.5 − 104.3 57.4 47.0
         Mar.                 1 1,741.6 294.5 639.9 470.4 169.4 − − 0.0 4.4 − 88.7 41.3 47.4
                                8 1,742.8 295.0 646.1 477.5 168.6 − − 0.0 5.7 − 89.4 41.4 48.0
                              15 1,745.6 295.4 628.3 470.9 157.3 − − 0.0 3.8 − 120.3 72.5 47.8
                              22 1,751.0 295.7 641.5 475.2 166.3 − − 0.0 4.2 − 119.4 71.2 48.2
                              29 1,812.7 295.2 663.4 481.2 182.2 − − 0.0 2.1 − 109.0 61.8 47.3
         Apr.                 5 1,774.3 296.5 679.7 492.9 186.8 − − 0.0 2.3 − 98.8 50.2 48.6
                              12 1,760.4 298.1 675.4 496.0 179.3 − − 0.0 3.5 − 92.7 44.6 48.1
                              19 1,773.9 301.4 654.9 487.2 167.7 − − 0.0 3.3 − 112.1 62.9 49.2
                              26 1,787.4 301.1 657.4 482.5 174.9 − − 0.0 2.9 − 121.5 72.2 49.3
         May                 3 1,786.4 298.4 687.5 504.6 182.8 − − − 2.5 − 82.5 38.7 43.8
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8%
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1In accordance with the accounting value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
May 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to  area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    As atdenominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    reporting credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
1 accounts reserves    date liabilities  2 
Eurosystem 3
 
255.6 5.4 11.8 11.8 − 56.0 234.3 − 342.3 104.4 2018 Oct.                19
263.4 5.5 10.1 10.1 − 56.0 231.4 − 342.3 104.4                               26
269.6 5.2 10.0 10.0 − 56.0 235.9 − 342.3 104.4          Nov.                  2
274.9 5.9 10.1 10.1 − 56.0 235.4 − 342.3 104.4                                 9
288.5 5.3 10.4 10.4 − 56.0 239.1 − 342.3 104.4                               16
291.7 5.3 10.3 10.3 − 56.0 242.4 − 342.3 104.4                               23
299.0 5.0 10.9 10.9 − 56.0 249.6 − 342.3 104.4                               30
301.2 4.5 11.2 11.2 − 56.0 246.1 − 342.3 104.4          Dec.                  7
311.9 4.7 11.0 11.0 − 56.0 247.9 − 342.3 104.4                               14
364.0 4.8 11.1 11.1 − 56.0 247.6 − 342.3 104.4                               21
412.3 4.3 10.8 10.8 − 56.0 249.2 − 342.3 104.4                               28
364.1 4.3 10.4 10.4 − 56.5 248.1 − 376.2 104.4 2019 Jan.                  4
317.6 4.5 10.2 10.2 − 56.5 250.1 − 376.1 104.5                               11
305.6 5.1 10.2 10.2 − 56.5 253.8 − 376.1 104.3                               18
296.0 6.0 11.1 11.1 − 56.5 254.7 − 376.1 104.2                               25
298.2 7.2 9.7 9.7 − 56.5 254.6 − 376.1 104.2 2019 Feb.                  1
290.6 7.8 9.9 9.9 − 56.5 255.6 − 376.1 104.2                                 8
291.8 8.0 9.4 9.4 − 56.5 256.8 − 376.1 104.2                               15
279.2 7.6 9.3 9.3 − 56.5 258.1 − 376.1 104.8                               22
270.9 6.6 9.5 9.5 − 56.5 259.1 − 376.1 104.9          Mar.                  1
262.2 6.9 9.8 9.8 − 56.5 258.0 − 376.1 104.9                                 8
255.5 5.6 10.1 10.1 − 56.5 256.9 − 376.1 106.2                               15
245.3 6.3 9.6 9.6 − 56.5 256.0 − 376.1 106.2                               22
302.5 5.6 9.8 9.8 − 57.5 256.6 − 397.5 106.8                               29
239.3 6.2 10.4 10.4 − 57.5 251.7 − 397.3 107.2          Apr.                  5
230.5 5.9 11.7 11.7 − 57.5 253.3 − 397.3 107.2                               12
239.6 7.1 10.9 10.9 − 57.5 255.6 − 397.3 107.2                               19
236.9 6.7 11.5 11.5 − 57.5 255.5 − 397.3 107.2                               26
248.5 5.9 12.2 12.2 − 57.5 258.3 − 397.3 107.2          May                  3
 Deutsche Bundesbank
160.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.5 29.7 390.8 107.5 5.7 2018 Oct.                19
165.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 29.8 390.8 107.5 5.7                               26
172.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.5 30.1 394.6 107.5 5.7          Nov.                  2
176.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 30.1 394.6 107.5 5.7                                 9
175.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.5 30.1 394.6 107.5 5.7                               16
177.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 30.2 394.6 107.5 5.7                               23
178.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 30.6 397.1 107.5 5.7                               30
177.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.5 30.5 397.1 107.5 5.7          Dec.                  7
188.1 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.5 30.6 397.1 107.5 5.7                               14
209.7 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.5 30.9 397.1 107.5 5.7                               21
250.2 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.5 30.9 397.1 107.5 5.7                               28
211.7 0.0 − − − 14.7 31.2 391.9 118.5 5.7 2019 Jan.                  4
186.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.7 31.2 391.9 118.5 5.7                               11
171.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.7 31.2 391.9 118.5 5.7                               18
166.4 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.7 31.7 392.0 118.5 5.7                               25
171.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 31.9 391.5 118.5 5.7 2019 Feb.                  1
168.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 31.9 391.5 118.5 5.7                                 8
170.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.7 31.9 391.5 118.5 5.7                               15
159.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.7 32.3 391.5 118.5 5.7                               22
150.6 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 29.8 394.4 118.5 5.7          Mar.                  1
142.8 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.7 29.8 394.4 118.5 5.7                                 8
134.0 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 30.1 394.4 118.5 5.7                               15
126.7 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.7 30.2 394.4 118.5 5.7                               22
172.9 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.9 29.4 396.9 123.1 5.7                               29
126.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 29.5 396.9 123.1 5.7          Apr.                  5
120.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 29.7 396.9 123.1 5.7                               12
131.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 29.9 396.9 123.1 5.7                               19
133.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 30.0 396.9 123.1 5.7                               26
140.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 30.1 400.8 123.1 5.7          May                  3
 
basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/li ability related to bank-
banknotes issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note issue“. 2For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DEM banknotes still in circu-
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according lation. 3 Source: ECB. 
to the aforementioned accounting procedure and the value of euro banknotes put

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2017         June 7,849.7 27.3 2,245.7 1,830.9 1,548.9 282.1 414.8 284.2 130.6 3,780.7 3,364.7 2,859.4 2,559.7
         July 7,818.7 26.6 2,258.5 1,840.3 1,560.2 280.0 418.2 289.0 129.2 3,787.1 3,370.5 2,867.1 2,567.3
         Aug. 7,807.7 27.5 2,243.1 1,828.2 1,553.7 274.5 415.0 286.9 128.0 3,792.2 3,377.0 2,876.6 2,576.3
         Sep. 7,811.3 28.4 2,262.7 1,847.3 1,578.3 269.0 415.4 288.4 127.0 3,799.4 3,385.3 2,890.2 2,589.5
         Oct. 7,825.7 28.4 2,285.3 1,873.3 1,604.0 269.2 412.1 285.1 127.0 3,804.7 3,393.5 2,899.1 2,598.2
         Nov. 7,849.9 28.0 2,312.8 1,901.5 1,633.0 268.5 411.3 285.5 125.8 3,818.1 3,411.2 2,919.0 2,612.6
         Dec. 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018         Jan. 7,817.2 29.2 2,296.1 1,891.0 1,624.5 266.5 405.1 280.3 124.9 3,813.9 3,407.5 2,930.5 2,622.5
         Feb. 7,790.8 29.6 2,298.1 1,892.3 1,627.0 265.2 405.9 280.6 125.2 3,814.1 3,406.5 2,938.1 2,633.4
         Mar. 7,746.6 35.1 2,254.6 1,852.5 1,585.3 267.1 402.1 274.9 127.2 3,814.9 3,410.8 2,946.8 2,644.4
         Apr. 7,781.1 33.8 2,300.8 1,892.1 1,625.1 267.0 408.7 280.6 128.0 3,818.5 3,417.4 2,956.1 2,650.7
         May 7,882.8 35.0 2,314.0 1,900.7 1,630.1 270.6 413.3 284.6 128.6 3,823.8 3,418.9 2,963.0 2,656.6
         June 7,804.7 35.0 2,266.6 1,853.0 1,584.7 268.2 413.6 285.5 128.1 3,832.7 3,430.8 2,979.9 2,672.2
         July 7,784.2 34.7 2,276.2 1,852.8 1,585.7 267.1 423.4 295.9 127.5 3,840.0 3,437.3 2,987.0 2,679.3
         Aug. 7,828.0 35.1 2,294.8 1,865.2 1,597.6 267.6 429.6 301.1 128.5 3,840.6 3,431.8 2,987.4 2,690.7
         Sep. 7,799.9 35.8 2,267.8 1,846.4 1,577.7 268.7 421.4 291.0 130.4 3,854.6 3,447.2 3,006.3 2,708.5
         Oct. 7,845.2 36.9 2,286.9 1,855.6 1,588.6 267.0 431.4 298.1 133.2 3,858.3 3,447.8 3,009.7 2,711.9
         Nov. 7,881.2 36.8 2,303.5 1,872.8 1,605.2 267.6 430.8 295.9 134.8 3,874.4 3,460.7 3,023.7 2,727.7
         Dec. 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 36.7 2,267.3 1,827.4 1,559.5 267.8 439.9 304.8 135.1 3,878.8 3,468.7 3,032.2 2,737.6
         Feb. 7,935.7 36.9 2,304.8 1,862.5 1,591.5 271.1 442.3 304.8 137.5 3,893.1 3,477.0 3,044.8 2,751.0
         Mar. 8,120.9 37.0 2,343.5 1,885.9 1,614.7 271.2 457.6 319.2 138.4 3,920.9 3,488.5 3,059.9 2,765.7
 Changes 3
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 − 29.2 − 49.7 − 53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2017         July − 14.3 − 0.7 14.5 10.5 12.2 − 1.7 4.0 5.2 − 1.2 8.6 7.1 8.9 8.6
         Aug. − 4.7 0.9 − 14.3 − 11.6 − 6.3 − 5.3 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.2 5.6 6.8 9.9 9.3
         Sep. 4.8 0.9 21.8 21.5 26.0 − 4.5 0.3 1.2 − 0.9 6.9 7.1 12.0 13.5
         Oct. 8.6 0.1 21.9 25.5 25.4 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.7 0.1 4.6 8.0 8.6 8.6
         Nov. 33.4 − 0.4 28.9 28.8 29.4 − 0.6 0.0 1.2 − 1.1 14.8 18.7 19.0 13.5
         Dec. − 126.4 4.1 − 90.1 − 74.7 − 72.0 − 2.7 − 15.4 − 15.0 − 0.4 − 15.2 − 10.0 0.1 − 2.4
2018         Jan. 124.2 − 2.9 82.2 70.9 68.7 2.2 11.3 11.5 − 0.2 14.7 8.2 12.4 13.0
         Feb. 6.3 0.3 0.5 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.7 7.7 10.7
         Mar. − 37.4 5.5 − 42.9 − 39.5 − 41.4 1.9 − 3.4 − 5.3 2.0 2.7 5.6 10.1 12.3
         Apr. 28.9 − 1.3 45.6 39.7 39.9 − 0.2 5.9 5.1 0.9 4.0 7.1 9.8 6.3
         May 85.0 1.3 12.4 9.1 5.7 3.4 3.4 2.8 0.5 12.9 9.4 15.3 14.3
         June − 77.2 − 0.1 − 47.4 − 47.7 − 45.4 − 2.3 0.3 0.9 − 0.5 9.9 12.8 17.9 16.4
         July − 14.4 − 0.3 10.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 10.1 10.7 − 0.6 7.8 6.8 5.9 6.1
         Aug. 41.9 0.4 19.8 13.8 13.0 0.8 5.9 4.9 1.0 0.6 − 5.6 0.4 11.3
         Sep. − 30.4 0.8 − 27.3 − 18.9 − 19.9 1.0 − 8.4 − 10.4 1.9 14.2 15.9 19.2 18.2
         Oct. 36.4 1.1 15.0 8.5 10.3 − 1.8 6.5 6.1 0.4 3.8 0.5 3.4 3.2
         Nov. 38.5 − 0.1 17.2 17.6 16.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.0 1.6 16.7 13.4 14.4 16.1
         Dec. − 100.0 3.8 − 114.6 − 104.0 − 104.3 0.2 − 10.6 − 10.9 0.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 1.6 − 0.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 − 3.9 79.5 59.2 58.8 0.5 20.3 20.0 0.3 17.0 12.6 10.0 11.4
         Feb. 31.1 0.1 36.8 34.8 31.7 3.0 2.1 − 0.4 2.5 15.5 9.5 13.7 14.5
         Mar. 131.4 0.2 33.7 26.0 26.7 − 0.7 7.7 7.2 0.5 13.1 11.1 14.9 15.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro area
to non-banks in other Member States residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which: Secur- of which: Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
299.7 505.4 296.4 208.9 416.0 283.4 162.6 132.6 29.9 102.6 1,064.9 817.0 731.1 2017          June
299.8 503.4 298.3 205.1 416.6 285.0 164.1 131.7 29.9 101.8 1,028.5 780.9 717.9          July
300.4 500.4 293.4 207.0 415.2 283.8 165.2 131.4 30.0 101.4 1,011.0 765.3 733.9          Aug.300.7 495.1 289.0 206.1 414.1 283.0 167.9 131.1 29.8 101.3 1,021.2 776.3 699.6          Sep.
301.0 494.4 289.2 205.3 411.2 281.6 167.7 129.6 30.4 99.2 1,014.2 768.9 693.0          Oct.
306.4 492.2 287.3 205.0 406.8 276.8 164.2 130.0 29.8 100.2 1,005.3 759.4 685.6          Nov.308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9          Dec.
308.0 477.0 282.8 194.2 406.4 278.6 163.9 127.8 29.7 98.0 1,009.1 758.2 668.9 2018          Jan.
304.7 468.4 277.4 191.0 407.6 280.5 165.9 127.1 29.6 97.5 1,026.5 775.9 622.5          Feb.302.4 463.9 275.5 188.4 404.1 278.3 164.9 125.9 29.8 96.1 1,016.8 763.8 625.3          Mar.
305.4 461.2 276.2 185.0 401.2 275.1 165.1 126.0 29.9 96.2 1,009.2 757.3 618.9          Apr.
306.4 455.9 272.3 183.6 404.9 280.2 167.4 124.8 29.8 95.0 1,052.9 799.1 657.1          May307.7 450.8 270.0 180.8 402.0 278.4 166.4 123.6 29.9 93.7 1,032.5 777.4 637.9          June
307.7 450.3 270.8 179.5 402.7 281.2 169.9 121.5 29.7 91.8 1,028.8 770.8 604.5          July
296.8 444.3 266.4 178.0 408.9 286.1 173.1 122.8 29.7 93.1 1,021.0 762.2 636.6          Aug.297.8 440.9 263.4 177.5 407.4 283.7 171.7 123.6 29.6 94.0 1,028.7 770.3 613.1          Sep.
297.8 438.1 265.4 172.7 410.5 287.6 176.1 122.9 31.0 91.9 1,037.4 780.7 625.6          Oct.
296.0 437.0 264.5 172.5 413.7 290.8 177.8 122.9 30.9 92.1 1,032.1 777.3 634.5          Nov.297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2          Dec.
294.6 436.5 265.9 170.6 410.1 291.8 179.6 118.3 28.9 89.5 1,049.5 794.1 670.0 2019          Jan.
293.8 432.2 263.3 168.9 416.1 294.1 181.5 122.0 28.8 93.1 1,037.8 781.6 663.2          Feb.294.2 428.6 260.6 168.0 432.4 311.2 197.6 121.2 28.9 92.3 1,084.6 826.9 734.8          Mar.
Changes 3
− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
− 9.8 − 46.2 − 19.1 − 27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 − 11.4 − 1.5 − 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
0.3 − 1.7 2.0 − 3.7 1.4 2.4 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 24.4 − 24.9 − 12.3 2017          July
0.6 − 3.0 − 4.9 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.9 − 11.3 16.0          Aug.
− 1.5 − 4.9 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 8.3 9.0 − 33.1          Sep.
0.1 − 0.7 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.2 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 6.6          Oct.
5.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 4.3 − 3.1 0.4 − 0.6 1.0 − 2.5 − 3.6 − 7.3          Nov.2.5 − 10.1 − 2.8 − 7.2 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 5.4 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.3 − 9.5 − 16.9          Dec.
− 0.6 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 6.5 7.7 6.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.2 29.4 24.6 0.7 2018          Jan.
− 3.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 − 3.3 1.0 1.7 1.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 10.6 11.1 − 5.4          Feb.− 2.2 − 4.5 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 5.5 − 8.2 2.8          Mar.
3.5 − 2.6 0.7 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 3.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 13.2 − 11.9 − 6.2          Apr.
0.9 − 5.8 − 4.3 − 1.5 3.5 4.6 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 30.9 29.9 27.5          May1.5 − 5.0 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 20.4 − 21.8 − 19.2          June
− 0.2 0.9 2.2 − 1.3 0.9 3.1 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 31.6          July
− 10.9 − 6.0 − 4.5 − 1.5 6.2 4.9 3.1 1.3 0.0 1.2 − 11.0 − 11.5 32.1          Aug.
1.1 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.6 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 5.4 5.9 − 23.5          Sep.
0.2 − 2.9 1.9 − 4.8 3.3 4.5 4.1 − 1.2 1.4 − 2.6 4.0 3.5 12.6          Oct.
− 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 3.3 3.3 1.5 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 − 4.0 − 2.2 8.8          Nov.
1.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 3.5 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.3 − 1.5 3.5 3.5 16.1          Dec.
− 1.4 2.6 2.4 0.2 4.4 5.1 3.2 − 0.8 0.3 − 1.0 16.5 15.8 19.8 2019          Jan.
− 0.8 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 1.7 6.0 2.4 2.2 3.7 − 0.0 3.7 − 14.5 − 15.1 − 6.9          Feb.− 0.1 − 3.7 − 2.7 − 1.0 2.0 3.2 2.7 − 1.2 0.0 − 1.3 22.6 22.9 61.8          Mar.
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home Member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country States Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2017         June 7,849.7 1,235.2 1,054.2 181.0 3,477.7 3,362.0 1,865.6 911.8 290.3 584.6 536.2 107.1 44.8
         July 7,818.7 1,239.8 1,062.3 177.5 3,470.9 3,353.4 1,862.3 907.6 287.9 583.4 538.2 107.5 45.8
         Aug. 7,807.7 1,243.3 1,065.8 177.4 3,486.1 3,368.4 1,880.5 905.5 285.7 582.4 537.9 108.3 47.5
         Sep. 7,811.3 1,256.2 1,071.9 184.3 3,494.8 3,371.4 1,886.8 902.8 284.3 581.8 537.9 114.7 50.7
         Oct. 7,825.7 1,272.0 1,081.9 190.1 3,505.8 3,388.0 1,912.7 893.9 277.3 581.5 538.4 109.2 46.3
         Nov. 7,849.9 1,275.5 1,081.0 194.5 3,542.9 3,417.4 1,939.9 896.5 276.9 581.0 538.6 113.6 52.1
         Dec. 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018         Jan. 7,817.2 1,249.4 1,060.8 188.6 3,539.8 3,419.1 1,944.5 892.2 276.8 582.4 539.7 110.6 46.4
         Feb. 7,790.8 1,246.9 1,058.2 188.8 3,536.8 3,416.5 1,945.4 888.9 273.3 582.1 540.4 109.7 47.1
         Mar. 7,746.6 1,238.1 1,057.5 180.6 3,537.7 3,413.3 1,944.1 888.1 274.7 581.2 539.9 115.3 48.7
         Apr. 7,781.1 1,233.9 1,053.5 180.4 3,551.3 3,430.7 1,967.4 882.9 270.2 580.4 539.6 108.8 46.7
         May 7,882.8 1,232.4 1,037.1 195.3 3,582.2 3,462.4 1,998.3 884.0 271.4 580.1 539.5 109.4 47.7
         June 7,804.7 1,224.7 1,035.7 189.0 3,582.9 3,463.7 1,991.4 893.1 281.1 579.2 539.1 109.0 44.0
         July 7,784.2 1,228.5 1,042.2 186.3 3,584.2 3,462.9 1,997.6 887.1 277.5 578.2 538.6 108.8 44.5
         Aug. 7,828.0 1,229.6 1,043.7 185.9 3,595.2 3,474.5 2,014.0 882.9 276.6 577.6 538.3 106.9 45.1
         Sep. 7,799.9 1,220.4 1,034.2 186.2 3,594.0 3,473.8 2,017.5 879.0 273.7 577.3 538.4 108.8 48.2
         Oct. 7,845.2 1,227.0 1,034.3 192.7 3,614.3 3,494.1 2,039.3 877.8 273.4 577.0 538.6 108.8 47.3
         Nov. 7,881.2 1,244.5 1,046.8 197.7 3,646.1 3,527.4 2,074.8 875.8 271.5 576.8 539.1 106.2 47.1
         Dec. 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 1,238.4 1,040.5 197.9 3,646.4 3,530.1 2,074.3 877.3 277.3 578.4 541.4 104.9 45.9
         Feb. 7,935.7 1,258.4 1,046.6 211.8 3,658.9 3,544.0 2,083.6 880.9 281.8 579.5 542.4 103.3 44.6
         Mar. 8,120.9 1,281.9 1,050.1 231.8 3,676.7 3,554.7 2,095.6 877.1 280.6 582.0 544.7 109.8 51.6
 Changes 4
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 − 20.1 − 25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 − 18.8 − 6.5 − 4.3 1.2 − 4.3 2.3
2017         July − 14.3 5.3 8.9 − 3.5 − 5.3 − 7.4 − 2.4 − 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.4 0.7 1.1
         Aug. − 4.7 4.1 3.8 0.3 15.8 15.5 18.5 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 1.7
         Sep. 4.8 3.0 − 3.8 6.7 8.4 2.9 6.1 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.6 0.0 6.4 3.2
         Oct. 8.6 15.2 9.8 5.5 10.3 16.0 25.5 − 9.1 − 7.1 − 0.3 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.4
         Nov. 33.4 4.6 − 0.3 4.9 37.9 30.2 27.9 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 0.2 4.6 5.9
         Dec. − 126.4 − 36.9 − 27.7 − 9.2 − 13.1 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 4.6 − 2.6 1.9 2.4 − 4.9 − 9.6
2018         Jan. 124.2 17.6 13.1 4.5 12.2 9.1 8.7 0.9 3.2 − 0.5 0.2 2.4 4.0
         Feb. 6.3 − 3.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.5 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 0.2 0.4 − 1.1 0.7
         Mar. − 37.4 − 8.3 − 0.5 − 7.9 1.3 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 5.7 1.6
         Apr. 28.9 − 4.5 − 3.8 − 0.6 13.5 17.5 22.8 − 4.6 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 6.6 − 2.0
         May 85.0 − 3.5 − 17.3 13.9 29.2 30.2 29.9 0.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 0.9
         June − 77.2 − 7.8 − 1.5 − 6.3 0.7 1.2 − 6.9 9.0 9.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 3.8
         July − 14.4 4.7 7.2 − 2.5 1.8 − 0.4 6.5 − 5.9 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 41.9 2.0 2.6 − 0.6 10.7 11.3 16.1 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.0 0.6
         Sep. − 30.4 − 9.6 − 9.7 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 3.6 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 0.0 1.9 3.1
         Oct. 36.4 5.4 − 0.4 5.9 19.1 19.3 21.1 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.0
         Nov. 38.5 17.7 12.6 5.1 32.1 33.5 35.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.1 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.2
         Dec. − 100.0 − 30.3 − 24.8 − 5.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 1.3 − 3.1 − 4.2 1.7 2.0 − 1.7 − 2.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 24.8 18.9 6.0 3.6 3.0 − 1.2 4.4 10.1 − 0.2 0.3 0.4 1.0
         Feb. 31.1 19.6 5.6 13.9 12.0 13.3 9.0 3.2 4.1 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 − 1.4
         Mar. 131.4 20.2 3.1 17.1 16.6 10.2 11.5 − 3.9 − 1.2 2.5 2.2 5.8 6.3
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which: from Money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- repos with
of which: of which: central non-banks fund euro Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 201049.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 201663.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 201756.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.3 20.1 3.0 2.6 8.6 7.9 1.8 2.2 1,039.2 44.8 689.8 610.2 793.5 2017          June
58.8 19.1 3.0 2.6 10.0 7.9 3.3 2.2 1,029.2 43.9 684.2 606.2 782.9          July
57.8 18.3 3.0 2.6 9.4 7.9 3.4 2.4 1,024.7 42.6 643.1 608.1 796.7          Aug.61.0 20.5 2.9 2.6 8.7 8.0 2.6 2.4 1,015.2 42.2 669.5 612.4 758.2          Sep.
59.9 18.3 2.9 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.3 2.2 1,008.9 40.7 667.9 612.7 753.9          Oct.
58.6 16.7 2.9 2.6 11.8 8.3 2.6 2.2 1,004.7 40.1 664.4 609.8 747.9          Nov.63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8          Dec.
61.3 18.9 2.9 2.6 10.0 8.9 4.3 2.1 1,002.6 35.4 682.4 666.5 670.0 2018          Jan.
59.7 18.2 2.9 2.6 10.7 8.8 3.8 2.1 1,006.3 36.0 690.3 678.6 625.9          Feb.63.8 22.6 2.9 2.6 9.1 8.3 2.9 2.3 1,014.0 35.2 641.0 675.0 635.6          Mar.
59.2 18.0 2.9 2.5 11.7 8.4 2.4 2.2 1,016.6 34.7 672.9 677.3 624.6          Apr.
58.8 16.8 2.9 2.5 10.4 8.8 1.6 2.0 1,031.1 36.4 707.2 679.7 646.6          May62.2 21.7 2.9 2.5 10.2 9.3 1.3 2.1 1,022.2 33.7 670.8 680.2 620.5          June
61.5 19.0 2.9 2.5 12.4 10.0 1.8 2.0 1,016.9 33.1 681.9 682.2 586.7          July
58.9 16.4 2.8 2.5 13.9 10.6 1.2 2.0 1,021.2 35.0 690.5 684.5 603.8          Aug.57.8 17.4 2.8 2.5 11.5 9.2 1.3 2.0 1,034.7 33.9 681.7 687.2 578.7          Sep.
58.6 17.2 2.8 2.5 11.4 9.7 2.4 2.0 1,044.7 36.2 666.9 687.8 600.0          Oct.
56.3 15.0 2.8 2.5 12.5 10.0 1.3 2.4 1,048.3 34.6 643.3 688.1 607.3          Nov.56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7          Dec.
56.2 15.3 2.8 2.5 11.5 10.1 1.7 2.4 1,048.1 32.1 636.9 688.3 640.1 2019          Jan.
55.9 14.9 2.8 2.5 11.7 10.0 2.0 2.3 1,067.9 32.2 621.9 684.9 639.5          Feb.55.4 14.9 2.8 2.5 12.2 10.6 11.4 2.1 1,065.3 32.7 666.9 699.7 716.9          Mar.
Changes 4
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
− 6.4 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 2.1 2.1 − 2.6 0.3 30.0 − 5.9 − 36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
− 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 10.6 2017          July
− 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 39.0 2.7 13.0          Aug.
3.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.7 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.5 25.3 4.7 − 25.6          Sep.
− 1.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.6          Oct.
− 1.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 0.3 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 7.1          Nov.
4.7 3.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 2.3 − 59.2 5.6 − 16.1          Dec.
− 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 15.8 − 2.2 84.0 − 17.5 11.0 2018          Jan.
− 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 5.0 10.8 − 1.0          Feb.
4.1 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 0.2 9.4 − 0.8 − 48.1 − 3.0 12.1          Mar.
− 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 28.0 1.7 − 8.4          Apr.
− 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 7.3 1.4 29.3 0.1 23.6          May
3.3 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.4 0.1 − 9.2 − 2.7 − 36.6 0.4 − 24.3          June
− 0.6 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.7 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 0.6 12.3 2.6 − 32.6          July
− 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 2.8 1.9 7.5 2.3 17.3          Aug.− 1.2 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 0.0 11.8 − 1.1 − 10.0 2.2 − 23.7          Sep.
0.8 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.1 5.5 2.2 − 18.1 − 0.7 24.1          Oct.
− 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.5 − 1.0 0.3 4.4 − 1.6 − 23.1 0.5 7.6          Nov.
0.5 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 0.5 − 0.6 0.0 − 12.7 − 2.6 − 66.2 8.0 4.7          Dec.
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.4 0.9 0.0 13.9 0.2 61.2 − 7.3 31.7 2019          Jan.
− 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 17.8 − 0.0 − 16.4 − 4.0 1.9          Feb.− 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 0.0 − 0.3 − 1.6 1.4 18.7 10.6 67.2          Mar.
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which: of which:
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2018         Oct. 1,583 7,893.2 560.9 2,336.7 1,854.7 478.4 4,156.9 367.3 3,104.8 0.5 677.7 110.6 728.0
         Nov. 1,581 7,928.3 550.1 2,358.2 1,873.0 482.3 4,173.7 368.0 3,124.0 0.6 674.6 110.1 736.0
         Dec. 1,583 7,823.7 464.0 2,337.6 1,855.6 480.2 4,156.4 348.6 3,130.8 0.6 671.9 113.2 752.4
2019         Jan. 1,578 7,949.9 497.6 2,378.0 1,894.5 481.4 4,189.6 373.7 3,140.5 0.5 667.9 112.6 772.1
         Feb. 1,579 7,984.1 516.1 2,393.6 1,904.1 487.0 4,195.5 367.4 3,150.9 0.5 670.6 112.8 766.2
         Mar. 1,579 8,171.4 521.8 2,473.2 1,982.4 487.8 4,224.4 382.7 3,162.7 0.6 669.7 112.6 839.3
Commercial banks 6
2019         Feb. 264 3,226.0 314.2 973.9 890.4 83.2 1,331.1 212.8 909.2 0.4 206.4 51.8 554.9
         Mar. 264 3,358.0 314.3 1,032.6 946.9 85.2 1,348.6 226.4 912.5 0.5 204.5 51.6 610.9
   Big banks 7
2019         Feb. 4 1,871.7 134.1 567.9 536.7 31.2 627.4 120.9 397.2 0.1 107.6 45.2 497.0
         Mar. 4 1,926.1 125.0 588.6 556.0 32.6 626.7 118.3 399.0 0.1 105.6 45.2 540.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2019         Feb. 150 953.9 85.6 208.3 158.6 49.7 603.8 59.8 452.1 0.3 91.4 5.6 50.5
         Mar. 152 1,021.7 91.1 241.3 190.8 50.3 622.3 76.1 453.9 0.3 91.4 5.3 61.6
   Branches of foreign banks
2019         Feb. 110 400.5 94.5 197.7 195.1 2.3 99.9 32.1 60.0 0.1 7.4 1.1 7.3
         Mar. 108 410.2 98.2 202.7 200.1 2.2 99.5 32.0 59.5 0.1 7.5 1.1 8.8
Landesbanken
2019         Feb. 6 789.2 60.8 253.5 191.9 61.2 390.8 45.8 296.1 0.0 47.2 9.0 75.1
         Mar. 6 807.0 60.3 262.4 201.5 60.4 391.9 46.9 296.3 0.0 46.9 9.0 83.3
Savings banks
2019         Feb. 385 1,289.5 48.1 189.7 70.0 119.6 1,017.6 52.1 802.4 0.0 162.9 14.1 20.0
         Mar. 385 1,294.6 47.1 191.3 71.9 119.2 1,021.7 52.6 806.2 0.0 162.7 14.2 20.4
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2019         Feb. 875 936.4 21.0 172.7 65.0 107.4 706.0 34.6 558.8 0.0 112.4 17.2 19.4
         Mar. 875 938.9 20.6 172.6 65.5 106.7 708.4 35.1 560.3 0.0 112.8 17.3 20.1
Mortgage banks
2019         Feb. 11 233.6 4.9 30.6 20.3 10.3 191.4 2.6 167.6 − 21.1 0.2 6.6
         Mar. 11 235.0 3.7 31.9 21.5 10.4 192.9 2.8 168.9 − 21.2 0.2 6.3
Building and loan associations
2019         Feb. 20 234.3 1.1 54.1 38.2 15.9 174.5 1.1 147.6 . 25.8 0.3 4.2
         Mar. 20 235.3 1.5 54.4 38.4 16.0 175.0 1.1 148.3 . 25.5 0.3 4.1
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2019         Feb. 18 1,275.0 65.9 719.0 628.4 89.4 384.0 18.2 269.1 − 94.7 20.2 85.9
         Mar. 18 1,302.7 74.4 728.0 636.6 90.0 386.0 17.9 270.2 − 96.0 20.1 94.2
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2019         Feb. 144 1,125.8 144.9 379.9 344.2 35.4 503.1 78.4 338.0 0.4 85.9 3.6 94.3
         Mar. 144 1,206.1 151.6 417.7 379.6 37.6 520.9 94.4 339.9 0.4 85.4 3.7 112.2
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2019         Feb. 34 725.3 50.4 182.3 149.1 33.1 403.2 46.3 278.0 0.3 78.5 2.6 87.0
         Mar. 36 795.9 53.4 215.0 179.4 35.4 421.4 62.4 280.3 0.3 77.9 2.6 103.5
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,735.3 524.9 1,210.5 3,775.0 2,174.5 286.9 687.1 72.3 584.0 544.8 42.5 1,140.4 526.5 715.8 2018          Oct.
1,739.4 526.0 1,213.5 3,795.6 2,212.2 269.6 688.1 61.7 583.9 545.3 41.8 1,143.7 527.1 722.5          Nov.1,664.0 476.1 1,187.8 3,769.1 2,190.3 260.8 691.2 38.8 585.6 547.3 41.2 1,130.3 531.3 729.0          Dec.
1,714.0 520.3 1,193.6 3,809.3 2,212.1 284.4 686.8 70.9 585.4 547.6 40.6 1,143.3 531.3 752.0 2019          Jan.
1,744.9 549.0 1,195.8 3,796.2 2,199.0 285.3 685.5 49.5 586.5 548.7 40.0 1,159.7 533.6 749.8          Feb.1,812.3 586.4 1,225.8 3,824.4 2,214.9 287.6 683.4 53.4 588.9 550.9 49.6 1,169.0 536.1 829.6          Mar.
Commercial banks 6
842.3 388.7 453.6 1,536.5 964.1 178.2 278.6 45.5 99.6 93.0 16.1 178.2 193.0 475.9 2019          Feb.
899.3 423.3 475.9 1,548.5 968.6 173.7 278.2 49.7 102.1 95.1 25.8 175.9 196.0 538.3          Mar.
Big banks 7
446.9 188.5 258.4 765.9 454.8 108.1 116.4 45.5 83.1 77.5 3.5 128.1 109.6 421.2 2019          Feb.
451.8 195.4 256.3 765.7 453.4 106.8 116.3 40.1 85.7 79.6 3.6 126.1 109.9 472.6          Mar.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
175.4 67.0 108.3 610.5 397.0 45.6 139.1 0.1 16.3 15.3 12.5 49.5 73.4 45.0 2019          Feb.
209.6 78.4 131.1 630.7 409.4 43.7 139.0 9.6 16.3 15.3 22.2 48.9 76.8 55.7          Mar.
Branches of foreign banks
220.1 133.2 86.9 160.1 112.2 24.5 23.1 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.6 10.1 9.6 2019          Feb.
238.0 149.5 88.5 152.2 105.9 23.2 22.9 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.8 9.3 10.0          Mar.
Landesbanken
248.5 66.3 182.2 231.5 103.1 41.9 78.8 3.3 7.4 7.2 0.3 185.4 42.3 81.6 2019          Feb.
249.7 61.7 188.1 236.0 106.3 44.1 77.9 2.0 7.3 7.2 0.3 187.3 42.0 92.0          Mar.
Savings banks
133.5 5.1 128.5 974.8 633.5 16.1 15.7 − 292.5 269.7 17.0 19.0 117.1 45.1 2019          Feb.
133.7 5.4 128.3 978.5 636.3 17.5 15.7 − 292.1 269.5 16.9 18.8 117.2 46.4          Mar.
 
Credit cooperatives
 
117.8 1.3 116.6 698.2 459.4 33.2 14.0 − 186.6 178.3 4.9 9.8 79.5 31.1 2019          Feb.
117.5 1.6 115.9 700.0 460.7 33.4 14.0 − 186.9 178.6 4.9 9.9 79.5 32.0          Mar.
Mortgage banks
48.1 4.8 43.3 74.2 2.2 3.1 68.9 0.0 − − . 93.4 10.6 7.3 2019          Feb.
50.4 6.1 44.3 74.0 2.2 3.0 68.7 − − − . 93.2 10.4 7.0          Mar.
Building and loan associations
23.1 2.7 20.4 185.2 3.2 2.0 179.4 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 3.2 11.7 11.0 2019          Feb.
23.5 2.7 20.7 185.6 3.2 2.1 179.8 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 3.2 11.8 11.2          Mar.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
331.4 80.3 251.1 95.7 33.4 10.8 50.0 0.6 − − . 670.7 79.4 97.8 2019          Feb.
338.2 85.6 252.6 101.8 37.5 13.7 49.1 1.7 − − . 680.7 79.1 102.8          Mar.
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
398.1 214.2 183.9 551.6 393.8 53.0 79.1 1.8 19.9 19.5 5.8 28.3 55.7 92.0 2019          Feb.
445.6 240.9 204.7 565.1 401.1 49.8 78.7 12.0 19.9 19.4 15.6 28.2 58.2 109.1          Mar.
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
178.0 81.1 96.9 391.5 281.6 28.4 56.0 1.8 19.7 19.3 5.8 27.8 45.6 82.4 2019          Feb.
207.7 91.4 116.2 412.9 295.3 26.6 55.8 12.0 19.7 19.2 15.6 27.4 48.9 99.0          Mar.
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerisc he Hypo- und
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan Vereinsbank AG) and Deutsche Postbank AG. 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreign banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks (with dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking  categories. 
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2017         Oct. 28.1 472.7 1,378.5 1,130.6 0.0 0.9 247.0 1.7 3,326.1 2,887.0 0.3 0.8 438.0
         Nov. 27.7 457.1 1,422.2 1,175.1 0.0 0.8 246.3 1.8 3,343.7 2,899.6 0.2 1.2 442.6
         Dec. 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018         Jan. 29.0 448.1 1,421.7 1,176.0 0.0 0.7 245.1 2.5 3,339.3 2,904.9 0.3 1.0 433.1
         Feb. 29.3 460.7 1,409.5 1,165.3 0.0 0.8 243.3 2.9 3,338.3 2,910.6 0.2 1.2 426.4
         Mar. 34.8 440.7 1,389.5 1,143.5 0.0 0.9 245.2 3.2 3,342.5 2,919.6 0.3 1.0 421.7
         Apr. 33.5 464.4 1,405.8 1,159.9 0.0 0.8 245.1 3.6 3,348.5 2,926.7 0.2 1.6 420.0
         May 34.8 475.7 1,398.4 1,153.4 0.0 1.0 244.1 4.1 3,350.0 2,928.6 0.2 2.3 418.8
         June 34.7 437.6 1,388.9 1,146.3 0.0 1.0 241.6 4.5 3,361.8 2,941.9 0.2 1.8 417.7
         July 34.4 456.8 1,369.6 1,128.2 0.0 1.1 240.3 4.8 3,368.0 2,949.9 0.2 2.2 415.6
         Aug. 34.8 455.2 1,383.7 1,141.5 0.0 1.2 241.0 5.3 3,368.5 2,956.8 0.2 1.6 409.9
         Sep. 35.6 471.0 1,349.1 1,105.9 0.0 1.3 241.9 5.9 3,384.0 2,971.7 0.2 1.8 410.2
         Oct. 36.6 505.8 1,323.8 1,082.0 0.0 1.4 240.3 6.1 3,384.4 2,977.1 0.2 0.6 406.6
         Nov. 36.5 496.8 1,350.3 1,107.7 0.0 1.3 241.3 6.0 3,397.3 2,992.0 0.2 0.8 404.3
         Dec. 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019         Jan. 36.5 451.8 1,346.4 1,106.7 0.0 0.8 238.9 6.1 3,405.3 3,003.3 0.2 1.0 400.8
         Feb. 36.6 471.9 1,361.8 1,118.8 0.0 0.8 242.1 6.1 3,413.6 3,014.0 0.2 0.3 399.0
         Mar. 36.8 476.4 1,380.3 1,137.3 0.0 1.0 242.0 6.0 3,425.0 3,026.0 0.3 1.0 397.7
Changes *
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.2
2017         Oct. + 0.1 + 63.5 − 37.6 − 37.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
         Nov. − 0.4 − 15.6 + 43.7 + 44.4 − − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 17.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.6
         Dec. + 4.1 − 64.6 − 10.3 − 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.1
2018         Jan. − 2.9 + 55.6 + 13.7 + 12.1 − + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 11.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 4.4
         Feb. + 0.3 + 12.7 − 12.3 − 10.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 6.7
         Mar. + 5.5 − 20.0 − 19.9 − 21.9 − + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 4.7
         Apr. − 1.3 + 23.6 + 16.8 + 16.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 6.4 + 7.1 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.3
         May + 1.3 + 11.4 − 5.8 − 4.9 − + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 10.4 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.2
         June − 0.1 − 38.1 − 9.5 − 7.1 − + 0.0 − 2.4 + 0.4 + 11.8 + 13.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
         July − 0.3 + 19.3 − 19.3 − 18.1 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 6.2 + 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.1
         Aug. + 0.4 − 1.6 + 15.6 + 14.8 − + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 7.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.8
         Sep. + 0.8 + 16.0 − 34.6 − 35.7 − + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 15.5 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
         Oct. + 1.1 + 34.7 − 25.4 − 23.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.6
         Nov. − 0.1 − 9.0 + 26.6 + 25.7 − − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 12.9 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.2
         Dec. + 3.9 − 80.6 − 26.9 − 24.0 − − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5
2019         Jan. − 3.9 + 35.6 + 23.0 + 23.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.8 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 3.1
         Feb. + 0.1 + 20.1 + 15.3 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 8.3 + 10.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.7
         Mar. + 0.2 + 3.8 + 22.0 + 22.7 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 12.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
− 19.4 87.9 1,081.0 122.8 958.2 0.0 5.3 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 581.5 44.8 29.9 2017          Oct.
− 19.4 88.1 1,079.8 125.9 953.9 0.0 5.3 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 581.0 44.3 30.1          Nov.− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0          Dec.
− 18.9 88.2 1,060.1 116.0 944.1 0.0 5.0 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 582.4 42.9 30.4 2018          Jan.
− 19.0 88.5 1,056.6 110.3 946.4 0.0 5.0 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 582.2 42.3 30.9          Feb.− 18.9 88.5 1,056.3 118.6 937.7 0.0 5.0 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 581.3 41.8 31.5          Mar.
− 18.8 89.2 1,052.8 118.2 934.6 0.0 5.0 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 580.5 41.3 31.9          Apr.
− 18.8 93.8 1,035.9 107.1 928.9 0.0 5.0 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 580.2 40.9 32.4          May− 18.7 94.0 1,034.3 122.0 912.2 0.0 4.9 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 579.3 40.6 32.6          June
− 18.5 94.4 1,041.4 118.8 922.6 0.0 4.9 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 578.2 40.0 32.8          July
− 18.4 88.0 1,042.8 117.3 925.5 0.0 4.8 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 577.6 39.5 33.1          Aug.− 18.3 87.9 1,033.4 117.1 916.2 0.0 4.8 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 577.3 39.1 33.9          Sep.
− 17.9 87.9 1,032.9 111.3 921.6 0.0 4.8 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 577.0 38.6 33.7          Oct.
− 17.9 87.7 1,045.8 115.5 930.3 0.0 4.7 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 576.9 37.9 33.7          Nov.− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9          Dec.
− 17.8 90.8 1,039.4 114.9 924.6 0.0 4.7 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 578.5 36.7 33.8 2019          Jan.
− 17.8 90.8 1,045.6 118.2 927.4 0.0 4.7 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 579.5 36.1 34.0          Feb.− 17.6 90.9 1,049.4 122.3 927.1 0.0 4.7 3,565.2 2,101.1 846.3 582.0 35.8 33.9          Mar.
Changes *
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 − + 0.0 + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 2017          Oct.
− − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 3.1 − 4.2 − + 0.0 + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1          Nov.− − 0.3 + 0.5 − 27.3 − 15.0 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1          Dec.
− − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 5.2 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 2018          Jan.
− − 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.5 − 5.8 + 2.3 − + 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5          Feb.− − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 8.3 − 8.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5          Mar.
− − 0.1 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 4.6 − 16.9 − 11.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5          May− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 15.0 − 16.6 − − 0.1 + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3          June
− − 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.7 − 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2          July
− + 0.0 − 6.0 + 2.8 − 1.5 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5          Aug.− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 9.3 − − 0.0 − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6          Sep.
− − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2          Oct.
− − 0.0 − 0.2 + 13.0 + 4.2 + 8.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 3.2 − 24.9 − 8.9 − 16.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2          Dec.
− − 0.2 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 9.4 + 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2019          Jan.
− − − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Feb.− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.3 + 11.9 − 3.8 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Mar.
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2017         Oct. 0.3 996.7 769.4 473.5 295.9 1.9 225.3 2.1 739.9 457.9 104.8 353.1 6.5 275.6
         Nov. 0.3 988.3 761.0 467.6 293.4 1.4 225.9 2.2 736.5 454.9 105.5 349.3 6.4 275.2
         Dec. 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018         Jan. 0.3 985.4 758.1 466.7 291.4 1.8 225.5 2.2 735.1 450.6 105.6 345.0 5.5 279.1
         Feb. 0.3 999.3 770.8 477.7 293.1 2.1 226.3 2.3 742.5 459.1 111.5 347.7 6.2 277.2
         Mar. 0.3 993.3 759.8 469.7 290.0 2.2 231.3 2.4 736.2 456.1 108.7 347.4 6.5 273.6
         Apr. 0.3 1,003.7 769.6 478.3 291.3 2.3 231.8 2.4 730.1 453.9 105.2 348.7 6.8 269.4
         May 0.3 1,030.6 796.6 501.0 295.6 2.3 231.7 2.5 749.9 470.2 112.9 357.2 5.3 274.4
         June 0.3 1,027.1 792.4 501.1 291.2 2.3 232.4 2.5 732.4 454.6 97.7 356.9 5.9 271.8
         July 0.2 1,031.9 795.4 502.7 292.7 2.3 234.2 2.6 740.4 464.1 103.9 360.2 6.1 270.2
         Aug. 0.2 1,027.9 789.8 496.9 292.9 2.3 235.8 2.6 748.7 469.5 107.6 362.0 6.5 272.7
         Sep. 0.3 1,028.7 787.7 496.7 291.1 2.3 238.6 2.7 742.5 464.0 102.4 361.6 5.3 273.2
         Oct. 0.3 1,013.0 772.7 492.7 280.0 2.1 238.1 2.8 772.5 495.4 115.8 379.6 6.0 271.1
         Nov. 0.3 1,007.9 765.4 491.4 274.0 1.5 241.0 2.9 776.4 500.3 117.6 382.7 5.9 270.2
         Dec. 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019         Jan. 0.2 1,031.6 787.8 518.2 269.6 1.3 242.5 3.1 784.3 511.1 119.4 391.8 6.0 267.2
         Feb. 0.2 1,031.8 785.3 511.5 273.7 1.7 244.8 3.2 782.0 504.5 110.6 393.9 5.9 271.5
         Mar. 0.2 1,092.9 845.1 565.9 279.2 2.0 245.8 3.2 799.5 519.8 122.7 397.0 7.8 272.0
Changes *
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.7
2017         Oct. + 0.0 − 13.4 − 13.6 − 12.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.4 + 2.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
         Nov. − 0.0 − 3.2 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.1
         Dec. − 0.0 − 21.1 − 19.6 − 25.1 + 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 11.1 − 11.9 + 0.8 − 2.2 + 2.5
2018         Jan. + 0.0 + 30.6 + 28.8 + 29.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 15.8 + 12.3 + 12.8 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 2.3
         Feb. − 0.0 + 8.4 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3
         Mar. − 0.0 − 3.1 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 3.4
         Apr. + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 4.3
         May − 0.0 + 16.9 + 17.3 + 17.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 14.7 + 12.1 + 7.0 + 5.1 − 1.5 + 4.2
         June + 0.0 − 4.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 17.4 − 15.4 − 15.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
         July − 0.0 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 10.4 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 0.1 − 1.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 6.4 − 7.9 − 7.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 7.3 + 4.7 + 3.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3
         Sep. + 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 − 7.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 − 1.3 − 1.1 + 0.3
         Oct. − 0.0 − 7.7 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 14.8 + 10.5 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
         Nov. + 0.0 − 4.9 − 6.5 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Dec. − 0.0 + 8.0 + 8.2 + 13.2 − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 9.5 − 17.4 + 7.9 − 2.0 − 2.0
2019         Jan. − 0.0 + 17.6 + 16.1 + 14.5 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 22.2 + 21.4 + 19.4 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.9
         Feb. + 0.0 − 1.8 − 4.4 − 7.7 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 8.3 − 9.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 4.2
         Mar. + 0.0 + 28.2 + 27.8 + 24.7 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 3.4 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 1.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
12.3 24.8 687.6 433.6 254.0 169.4 84.7 0.0 282.8 132.3 150.5 87.9 62.6 0.4 2017          Oct.
12.4 24.7 694.2 428.8 265.4 179.7 85.7 0.0 284.4 140.6 143.8 81.7 62.1 0.4          Nov.12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3          Dec.
12.0 24.2 711.8 450.8 261.0 172.7 88.3 0.0 275.0 130.5 144.6 82.2 62.3 0.3 2018          Jan.
12.1 23.7 715.7 441.2 274.5 185.5 89.0 0.0 279.6 134.8 144.8 85.5 59.3 0.3          Feb.12.2 24.0 668.6 385.6 283.0 196.4 86.5 0.0 272.9 126.3 146.6 87.8 58.8 0.3          Mar.
12.3 23.6 685.3 410.6 274.7 188.3 86.4 0.0 282.6 138.4 144.2 85.2 59.0 0.3          Apr.
12.2 23.7 730.1 452.6 277.4 188.0 89.4 0.0 285.8 140.5 145.4 86.9 58.5 0.3          May12.1 23.7 713.1 432.8 280.3 187.1 93.1 0.0 259.1 123.3 135.8 78.9 56.9 0.3          June
11.9 23.0 708.4 420.2 288.2 197.2 91.0 0.0 273.1 129.4 143.7 84.1 59.6 0.3          July
11.9 23.1 709.8 404.3 305.5 217.7 87.8 0.0 278.8 129.5 149.2 90.1 59.1 0.3          Aug.11.8 22.4 711.7 426.7 285.0 197.3 87.7 0.0 269.3 133.2 136.1 79.2 56.9 0.1          Sep.
11.8 22.5 702.4 413.6 288.9 200.1 88.8 0.0 271.0 129.8 141.2 82.8 58.4 0.1          Oct.
11.8 22.3 693.6 410.5 283.1 194.4 88.7 0.0 258.1 132.6 125.5 67.7 57.8 0.2          Nov.11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1          Dec.
11.7 21.5 674.5 405.5 269.1 182.9 86.1 0.0 268.4 132.7 135.8 77.9 57.9 0.1 2019          Jan.
11.8 21.7 699.2 430.9 268.3 181.1 87.3 0.0 241.7 110.2 131.5 73.6 57.8 0.1          Feb.13.0 21.5 762.8 464.1 298.7 209.1 89.6 1.3 259.1 113.8 145.3 87.7 57.6 0.1          Mar.
Changes *
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018
− 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 2.4 − 8.3 − 8.3 + 0.0 − + 3.0 − 1.4 + 4.4 + 3.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 2017          Oct.
+ 0.1 − 0.0 + 9.4 − 3.6 + 13.0 + 11.6 + 1.4 − + 2.3 + 8.6 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 0.0          Nov.− 0.3 − 0.4 − 33.3 − 38.4 + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.5 − − 42.5 − 31.0 − 11.6 − 13.4 + 1.8 − 0.1          Dec.
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 57.4 + 63.5 − 6.1 − 5.0 − 1.1 − + 35.0 + 21.4 + 13.6 + 14.4 − 0.8 − 0.0 2018          Jan.
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 10.9 + 12.0 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 4.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 − 3.2 + 0.0          Feb.+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 45.8 − 55.0 + 9.1 + 11.5 − 2.3 − − 6.4 − 8.3 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0          Mar.
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.1 + 22.9 − 9.8 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.9 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 39.7 + 40.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 2.3 − + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − − 17.3 − 19.9 + 2.7 − 1.0 + 3.7 − − 26.8 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 8.0 − 1.6 −          June
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 12.2 + 9.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − + 13.9 + 6.3 + 7.6 + 5.4 + 2.2 −          July
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 16.4 + 16.3 + 20.0 − 3.7 − + 5.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Aug.− 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 22.1 − 21.2 − 20.9 − 0.3 − − 9.8 + 3.6 − 13.3 − 11.2 − 2.2 − 0.2          Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 12.5 − 14.5 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − + 0.7 − 3.8 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 0.0          Oct.
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 2.8 − 5.4 − 5.4 − 0.0 − − 12.7 + 2.9 − 15.6 − 15.0 − 0.6 + 0.0          Nov.+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 49.1 − 40.2 − 8.9 − 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 22.3 − 4.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 31.6 + 34.9 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 0.7 − + 36.9 + 22.5 + 14.5 + 14.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2019          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 24.8 − 1.2 − 2.2 + 1.0 − − 27.2 − 22.6 − 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Feb.+ 1.3 − 0.2 + 32.9 + 22.7 + 10.2 + 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 1.6 + 3.5 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2017         Oct. 3,326.1 2,887.3 248.0 215.3 214.7 0.6 32.7 32.6 0.2 3,078.1 2,616.7
         Nov. 3,343.7 2,899.8 248.0 215.4 214.9 0.5 32.6 31.9 0.7 3,095.6 2,636.3
         Dec. 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018         Jan. 3,339.3 2,905.2 249.7 217.4 216.8 0.6 32.3 31.9 0.4 3,089.6 2,645.2
         Feb. 3,338.3 2,910.8 247.6 219.8 219.3 0.6 27.8 27.1 0.6 3,090.7 2,650.4
         Mar. 3,342.5 2,919.9 253.5 225.6 224.9 0.7 27.9 27.6 0.2 3,089.0 2,653.3
         Apr. 3,348.5 2,926.9 254.0 223.0 222.1 0.9 31.0 30.3 0.7 3,094.5 2,664.6
         May 3,350.0 2,928.9 254.5 226.6 225.4 1.2 27.9 26.8 1.1 3,095.5 2,667.7
         June 3,361.8 2,942.2 257.0 229.8 228.9 0.9 27.2 26.3 0.9 3,104.7 2,681.4
         July 3,368.0 2,950.1 256.7 225.4 224.7 0.7 31.3 29.8 1.5 3,111.3 2,692.5
         Aug. 3,368.5 2,957.0 250.5 223.9 223.1 0.8 26.6 25.7 0.9 3,118.0 2,700.6
         Sep. 3,384.0 2,971.9 255.9 232.3 231.6 0.7 23.6 22.5 1.1 3,128.1 2,711.1
         Oct. 3,384.4 2,977.3 252.6 228.0 227.4 0.6 24.6 24.7 − 0.1 3,131.8 2,718.7
         Nov. 3,397.3 2,992.2 251.7 227.9 227.4 0.5 23.9 23.6 0.3 3,145.6 2,732.7
         Dec. 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019         Jan. 3,405.3 3,003.5 255.8 230.8 230.3 0.5 25.0 24.5 0.5 3,149.4 2,738.4
         Feb. 3,413.6 3,014.2 257.6 235.4 234.9 0.5 22.2 22.4 − 0.2 3,156.0 2,746.4
         Mar. 3,425.0 3,026.3 261.6 241.0 240.4 0.6 20.6 20.2 0.4 3,163.4 2,755.8
Changes *
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2017         Oct. + 8.6 + 8.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 8.0
         Nov. + 17.7 + 12.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 17.6 + 17.8
         Dec. − 11.1 − 5.5 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 4.7 + 3.6
2018         Jan. + 6.9 + 11.0 + 8.0 + 6.5 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.7
         Feb. − 1.0 + 5.5 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 − 4.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 5.0
         Mar. + 4.2 + 9.2 + 5.9 + 5.8 + 5.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.9
         Apr. + 6.4 + 7.0 + 0.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 11.7
         May + 10.4 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 9.9 + 12.4
         June + 11.8 + 13.3 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 9.3 + 13.6
         July + 6.2 + 7.9 − 0.3 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 9.9
         Aug. + 0.7 + 7.1 − 6.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 4.7 − 4.1 − 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.2
         Sep. + 15.5 + 14.9 + 5.6 + 8.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.3 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 10.3
         Oct. + 0.5 + 5.3 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 2.2 − 1.1 + 5.2 + 9.1
         Nov. + 12.9 + 14.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 13.8 + 14.0
         Dec. − 2.9 − 1.8 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 10.8 + 13.1 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 5.6
         Feb. + 8.3 + 10.7 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 6.5 + 8.0
         Mar. + 10.9 + 12.0 + 4.1 + 5.7 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 2018
2,383.4 270.9 2,112.5 233.2 17.8 461.4 256.6 22.7 234.0 204.8 − 1.6 2017          Oct.
2,397.7 274.4 2,123.3 238.6 17.8 459.3 255.4 22.8 232.6 204.0 − 1.6          Nov.2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7          Dec.
2,405.7 274.8 2,130.8 239.5 17.4 444.4 250.9 22.0 228.9 193.6 − 1.5 2018          Jan.
2,414.1 275.1 2,139.0 236.3 17.5 440.3 250.3 21.9 228.4 190.1 − 1.5          Feb.2,419.5 275.2 2,144.2 233.8 17.4 435.8 247.9 22.1 225.8 187.9 − 1.6          Mar.
2,428.6 277.1 2,151.5 236.0 17.3 430.0 245.9 21.9 224.1 184.0 − 1.5          Apr.
2,431.2 270.8 2,160.4 236.6 17.3 427.7 245.5 21.9 223.6 182.2 − 1.5          May2,443.3 275.3 2,168.0 238.1 17.2 423.4 243.7 21.0 222.7 179.7 − 1.5          June
2,454.6 277.7 2,176.9 237.9 17.0 418.7 241.0 20.3 220.8 177.7 − 1.5          July
2,467.5 279.3 2,188.2 233.1 17.0 417.4 240.6 21.1 219.5 176.8 − 1.3          Aug.2,476.9 280.1 2,196.8 234.1 16.9 417.1 241.0 20.5 220.5 176.1 − 1.3          Sep.
2,484.5 279.7 2,204.9 234.1 16.6 413.1 240.7 20.2 220.5 172.5 − 1.3          Oct.
2,500.3 284.2 2,216.1 232.4 16.6 412.9 240.9 20.0 220.9 171.9 − 1.3          Nov.2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4          Dec.
2,507.3 283.1 2,224.2 231.1 16.5 411.1 241.4 19.3 222.0 169.7 − 1.3 2019          Jan.
2,516.1 284.2 2,231.9 230.3 16.5 409.6 240.8 18.9 221.9 168.7 − 1.3          Feb.2,525.3 286.6 2,238.7 230.5 16.3 407.6 240.4 18.7 221.8 167.2 − 1.3          Mar.
Changes *
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018
+ 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.9 − − 0.0 2017          Oct.
+ 12.4 + 3.5 + 9.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.8 − −          Nov.+ 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 8.3 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 − + 0.1          Dec.
+ 5.7 + 1.6 + 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.9 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 3.4 − − 0.1 2018          Jan.
+ 8.2 + 0.3 + 8.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5 − − 0.0          Feb.+ 5.4 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 2.2 − + 0.0          Mar.
+ 9.1 + 1.8 + 7.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 3.9 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 11.8 + 2.6 + 9.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.8 − + 0.0          May+ 12.1 + 4.5 + 7.6 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 2.6 − − 0.1          June
+ 10.1 + 2.5 + 7.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.9 − − 0.0          July
+ 13.1 + 1.6 + 11.5 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.9 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 9.2 + 0.5 + 8.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 9.2 + 1.0 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 15.8 + 4.6 + 11.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Nov.− 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 − + 0.2          Dec.
+ 8.0 + 0.5 + 7.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 − − 0.2 2019          Jan.
+ 8.7 + 1.1 + 7.6 − 0.7 − − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.0 − −          Feb.+ 9.0 + 2.1 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.5 − + 0.0          Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2017 2,610.1 1,304.3 1,326.6 1,053.0 273.6 1,403.1 368.5 131.3 112.6 67.3 133.3 50.2 51.5 147.9
2018         Mar. 2,644.4 1,317.6 1,338.2 1,061.5 276.7 1,429.5 373.4 136.0 115.2 69.4 137.5 50.1 51.2 151.4
         June 2,672.2 1,333.8 1,357.5 1,074.2 283.3 1,445.5 380.1 139.2 114.2 71.9 136.5 50.5 51.0 152.8
         Sep. 2,708.5 1,349.5 1,377.7 1,086.8 290.9 1,476.9 389.6 140.5 115.9 73.0 138.8 53.5 50.8 157.0
         Dec. 2,727.0 1,382.2 1,391.2 1,116.4 274.8 1,483.6 392.7 139.3 116.5 71.9 138.7 53.2 50.6 157.3
2019         Mar. 2,765.7 1,437.3 1,404.9 1,152.3 252.6 1,513.4 398.4 144.4 117.8 74.0 141.0 53.6 50.1 160.5
 Short-term lending
2017 210.6 − 6.5 − 6.5 180.8 3.6 32.3 4.0 13.6 45.2 3.4 4.0 27.4
2018         Mar. 224.9 − 6.8 − 6.8 195.3 3.8 36.6 5.0 14.9 48.4 3.5 4.2 29.1
         June 228.9 − 7.1 − 7.1 199.2 4.0 36.7 4.8 16.6 47.3 3.9 4.2 28.5
         Sep. 231.6 − 7.4 − 7.4 201.9 4.3 37.3 4.2 16.6 48.7 4.2 4.0 29.4
         Dec. 227.6 − 7.2 − 7.2 195.9 4.1 35.5 4.9 14.7 48.3 3.7 4.9 28.0
2019         Mar. 240.4 − 7.7 − 7.7 210.1 4.5 39.5 6.2 15.8 49.6 4.0 5.0 29.7
 Medium-term lending
2017 273.5 − 34.0 − 34.0 193.1 14.0 23.6 5.1 11.3 18.2 4.3 10.3 46.7
2018         Mar. 275.2 − 34.0 − 34.0 194.0 14.4 23.3 5.0 11.7 18.6 4.2 10.4 47.0
         June 275.3 − 34.7 − 34.7 195.1 15.0 25.5 4.4 11.8 18.2 4.2 10.4 47.5
         Sep. 280.1 − 35.6 − 35.6 199.4 15.6 24.9 4.4 12.2 18.3 4.4 11.1 48.0
         Dec. 282.6 − 35.4 − 35.4 202.5 15.4 24.9 4.5 12.5 19.0 4.5 10.6 49.0
2019         Mar. 286.6 − 35.1 − 35.1 206.0 15.4 25.4 4.5 12.9 19.3 4.5 10.4 49.1
 Long-term lending
2017 2,125.9 1,304.3 1,286.1 1,053.0 233.1 1,029.2 351.0 75.4 103.5 42.4 70.0 42.4 37.2 73.8
2018         Mar. 2,144.2 1,317.6 1,297.3 1,061.5 235.8 1,040.2 355.2 76.1 105.2 42.8 70.4 42.3 36.7 75.3
         June 2,168.0 1,333.8 1,315.7 1,074.2 241.5 1,051.1 361.1 77.0 105.0 43.5 71.0 42.4 36.4 76.8
         Sep. 2,196.9 1,349.5 1,334.6 1,086.8 247.8 1,075.6 369.7 78.4 107.4 44.2 71.8 44.9 35.7 79.6
         Dec. 2,216.8 1,382.2 1,348.6 1,116.4 232.2 1,085.2 373.2 78.9 107.2 44.7 71.4 45.0 35.1 80.3
2019         Mar. 2,238.7 1,437.3 1,362.1 1,152.3 209.8 1,097.4 378.5 79.5 107.2 45.3 72.2 45.1 34.6 81.7
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2018         Q1 + 33.6 + 10.6 + 11.1 + 8.1 + 3.0 + 26.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.4
         Q2 + 37.0 + 15.4 + 17.8 + 11.8 + 6.0 + 23.1 + 6.6 + 4.1 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.6
         Q3 + 35.2 + 12.9 + 19.4 + 11.1 + 8.3 + 19.3 + 6.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 2.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 4.1
         Q4 + 18.5 + 10.8 + 15.2 + 8.9 + 6.2 + 6.8 + 4.8 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
2019         Q1 + 38.7 + 15.1 + 12.1 + 11.4 + 0.7 + 29.8 + 4.1 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 4.9
 Short-term lending
2018         Q1 + 14.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 14.4 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.7
         Q2 + 4.0 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6
         Q3 + 2.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.9
         Q4 − 5.5 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.4
2019         Q1 + 12.9 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 14.3 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 3.5
 Medium-term lending
2018         Q1 + 2.0 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
         Q2 + 8.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 7.3 + 0.6 + 3.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6
         Q3 + 4.6 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.5
         Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9
2019         Q1 + 3.7 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
 Long-term lending
2018         Q1 + 17.4 + 10.6 + 10.8 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 10.3 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6
         Q2 + 24.1 + 15.4 + 16.9 + 11.8 + 5.1 + 11.7 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6
         Q3 + 27.8 + 12.9 + 18.2 + 11.1 + 7.1 + 13.5 + 5.3 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 2.7
         Q4 + 20.1 + 10.8 + 14.7 + 8.9 + 5.8 + 9.6 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5
2019         Q1 + 22.0 + 15.1 + 11.9 + 11.4 + 0.5 + 12.3 + 3.7 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.5
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
709.0 214.9 42.3 186.4 411.2 47.7 1,192.3 954.3 237.9 171.6 8.6 14.8 3.7 2017
718.8 217.2 44.1 188.5 414.4 48.2 1,200.0 961.1 239.0 173.3 8.4 14.9 3.7 2018          Mar.
729.3 221.8 47.3 190.7 415.5 48.3 1,211.8 973.7 238.1 173.0 8.4 14.9 3.8          June747.4 231.0 48.2 194.9 430.6 48.6 1,216.6 984.4 232.2 172.2 8.4 15.0 3.7          Sep.756.0 237.0 47.3 196.9 432.6 48.0 1,228.4 994.8 233.7 172.9 8.3 15.0 3.7          Dec.
772.0 242.9 48.7 197.6 436.3 48.6 1,237.2 1,002.7 234.4 173.7 8.0 15.1 3.8 2019          Mar.
Short-term lending
50.9 10.1 6.8 10.3 23.3 5.0 29.3 2.9 26.4 1.6 8.6 0.5 0.0 201753.5 10.2 7.9 10.7 23.7 5.8 29.0 3.0 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.6 − 2018          Mar.
57.2 10.7 10.2 10.6 23.5 5.7 29.2 3.1 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.5 −          June57.4 11.6 10.3 10.2 24.0 5.7 29.2 3.2 26.0 1.5 8.4 0.5 0.0          Sep.55.9 12.0 8.1 10.4 24.0 5.2 31.2 3.1 28.2 1.5 8.3 0.5 −          Dec.
60.1 12.1 9.3 10.4 24.4 5.8 29.8 3.2 26.5 1.5 8.0 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
Medium-term lending
73.5 12.1 9.3 18.3 32.7 3.6 79.9 20.0 59.9 55.2 − 0.6 0.0 201773.9 12.6 9.3 18.3 32.8 3.4 80.7 19.7 61.0 56.5 − 0.5 0.0 2018          Mar.
73.0 13.0 9.7 19.2 31.0 3.4 79.6 19.7 59.9 55.4 − 0.5 0.0          June76.2 14.0 9.8 20.0 31.7 3.5 80.1 20.0 60.2 55.8 − 0.5 0.1          Sep.77.5 14.8 9.9 21.3 31.5 3.5 79.6 19.9 59.7 56.4 − 0.5 0.1          Dec.
80.0 15.4 9.6 21.8 31.7 3.5 80.1 19.6 60.5 57.2 − 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
Long-term lending
584.6 192.6 26.2 157.8 355.3 39.2 1,083.1 931.4 151.6 114.8 − 13.7 3.7 2017591.3 194.5 27.0 159.4 357.9 39.1 1,090.3 938.5 151.9 115.3 − 13.7 3.7 2018          Mar.
599.1 198.1 27.4 160.9 361.1 39.2 1,103.0 950.9 152.1 116.0 − 13.9 3.7          June613.8 205.3 28.0 164.7 374.9 39.5 1,107.2 961.2 146.0 114.9 − 14.0 3.7          Sep.622.6 210.2 29.2 165.3 377.2 39.3 1,117.6 971.8 145.8 115.0 − 14.0 3.7          Dec.
631.8 215.4 29.8 165.4 380.2 39.3 1,127.3 979.9 147.4 115.1 − 14.1 3.7 2019          Mar.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 11.0 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 2.9 + 3.6 + 0.5 + 7.5 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 14.5 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 14.0 + 11.1 + 2.8 + 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 9.6 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.4 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 8.4 + 6.1 − 1.1 + 2.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 11.7 + 10.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 14.1 + 4.6 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.6 + 8.8 + 8.0 + 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
Short-term lending
+ 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 3.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          Q2− 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q3− 1.8 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 2019          Q1
Medium-term lending
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 3.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0          Q3+ 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.5 − + 0.0 −          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2019          Q1
Long-term lending
+ 7.7 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 7.0 + 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2018          Q1
+ 7.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 12.3 + 11.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 6.9 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 14.2 + 13.0 + 1.2 + 1.7 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 8.9 + 5.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 10.4 + 10.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 9.3 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 9.7 + 8.2 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2018         Apr. 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 210.7 635.6 50.7 584.9 580.5 41.3 31.9 15.1 0.9
         May 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 210.8 636.9 51.9 585.0 580.2 40.9 32.4 14.8 0.7
         June 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 221.2 635.6 51.4 584.2 579.3 40.6 32.6 15.3 0.7
         July 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 218.3 634.0 52.0 582.1 578.2 40.0 32.8 14.9 1.5
         Aug. 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 215.1 632.8 53.8 579.0 577.6 39.5 33.1 14.9 0.5
         Sep. 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 210.9 633.0 54.7 578.3 577.3 39.1 33.9 14.8 0.3
         Oct. 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 210.3 633.4 55.1 578.3 577.0 38.6 33.7 14.9 0.7
         Nov. 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 208.1 635.0 55.8 579.2 576.9 37.9 33.7 14.9 0.4
         Dec. 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2019         Jan. 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 212.7 633.6 57.1 576.4 578.5 36.7 33.8 14.9 0.8
         Feb. 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 217.9 632.2 56.2 576.0 579.5 36.1 34.0 15.1 0.6
         Mar. 3,565.2 2,101.1 846.3 215.8 630.5 57.0 573.5 582.0 35.8 33.9 15.2 0.2
Changes*
2017 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 24.7 − 2.8 + 10.1 − 12.8 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.8
2018 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 3.5 − 7.3 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 1.4 − 1.2
2018         Apr. + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 1.3 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2
         May + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2
         June + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 + 10.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.0
         July + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 2.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.8
         Aug. + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 3.2 − 1.1 + 1.9 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 1.0
         Sep. − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Nov. + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
         Dec. + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 − 4.7 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 + 9.3 − 4.6 + 0.3 − 4.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 5.2 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2
         Mar. + 10.3 + 11.9 − 3.8 − 2.1 − 1.7 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
Domestic government End of year or month*
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2018         Apr. 205.1 56.9 140.2 72.3 67.9 23.8 44.1 3.7 4.4 26.0 2.3 −
         May 215.9 62.8 145.0 74.7 70.3 25.1 45.2 3.8 4.3 26.0 2.2 −
         June 221.4 63.3 150.0 79.3 70.7 24.9 45.8 3.8 4.3 25.8 2.2 −
         July 214.9 57.0 149.9 77.3 72.6 25.8 46.8 3.8 4.3 25.7 2.2 0.7
         Aug. 223.9 62.7 153.2 79.1 74.0 25.7 48.3 3.8 4.3 25.7 2.2 −
         Sep. 221.1 60.4 152.7 76.9 75.9 27.1 48.8 3.8 4.3 25.6 2.2 −
         Oct. 216.5 57.5 151.1 73.8 77.3 27.3 50.0 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
         Nov. 224.6 62.6 154.0 74.8 79.1 27.9 51.2 3.8 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
         Dec. 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019         Jan. 221.7 59.2 154.7 74.8 79.8 29.2 50.6 3.7 4.2 25.2 2.2 −
         Feb. 230.4 63.0 159.5 80.1 79.4 28.4 51.0 3.8 4.1 25.2 2.2 −
         Mar. 232.2 64.0 160.3 79.8 80.5 29.3 51.2 3.8 4.1 25.1 2.2 −
Changes*
2017 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 2.4 − 14.1 + 11.7 + 10.7 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0
2018 + 16.9 + 3.6 + 13.5 + 2.0 + 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2018         Apr. − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 −
         May + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.8 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.0 −
         June + 5.3 + 0.5 + 4.9 + 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
         July − 6.4 − 6.3 − 0.1 − 2.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7
         Aug. + 9.1 + 5.7 + 3.3 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7
         Sep. − 2.9 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 2.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Oct. − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.7 − 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Nov. + 8.1 + 5.1 + 3.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Dec. − 5.7 + 0.1 − 5.7 − 6.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
2019         Jan. + 2.7 − 3.5 + 6.3 + 6.9 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb. + 8.7 + 3.8 + 4.9 + 5.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Mar. + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.92017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.62018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.5
2018         Apr. 3,234.4 1,914.4 706.1 138.5 567.7 26.9 540.8 576.8 37.0 5.9 12.8 0.9
         May 3,255.5 1,939.8 702.7 136.1 566.6 26.8 539.7 576.4 36.6 6.4 12.6 0.7         June 3,251.8 1,933.3 706.7 141.8 564.9 26.5 538.4 575.5 36.3 6.9 13.1 0.7
         July 3,258.2 1,945.7 702.4 141.0 561.4 26.1 535.3 574.5 35.7 7.0 12.8 0.8
         Aug. 3,261.1 1,957.3 694.7 135.9 558.8 28.1 530.7 573.8 35.3 7.4 12.7 0.5         Sep. 3,261.8 1,962.1 691.2 134.1 557.1 27.6 529.5 573.5 34.8 8.2 12.6 0.3
         Oct. 3,287.5 1,987.2 692.6 136.5 556.1 27.8 528.3 573.3 34.4 8.4 12.7 0.7
         Nov. 3,312.8 2,017.0 689.1 133.3 555.8 27.8 528.0 573.1 33.7 8.4 12.7 0.4         Dec. 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.5
2019         Jan. 3,319.1 2,020.2 691.6 137.9 553.7 27.9 525.8 574.8 32.5 8.7 12.7 0.8
         Feb. 3,324.1 2,025.8 690.6 137.8 552.8 27.8 525.0 575.8 31.9 8.8 12.9 0.6         Mar. 3,333.0 2,037.1 686.0 136.0 550.0 27.7 522.3 578.3 31.7 8.8 13.0 0.2
Changes*
2017 + 104.1 + 141.3 − 25.1 − 10.6 − 14.4 − 0.7 − 13.8 − 5.3 − 6.7 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.82018 + 100.8 + 135.7 − 24.3 − 5.5 − 18.8 − 1.3 − 17.5 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 4.1 − 1.3 − 1.2
2018         Apr. + 19.4 + 23.7 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2
         May + 21.1 + 25.3 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2         June − 3.6 − 6.5 + 4.2 + 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0
         July + 6.6 + 12.4 − 4.2 − 0.8 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. + 2.8 + 11.6 − 7.7 − 5.1 − 2.6 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4         Sep. + 1.0 + 5.2 − 3.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 25.8 + 25.1 + 1.5 + 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Nov. + 25.3 + 29.8 − 3.6 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3         Dec. + 5.9 + 0.8 + 3.9 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 0.5 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 4.9 + 5.6 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 8.6 + 10.9 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.92017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.62018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.5
2018         Apr. 1,034.1 566.2 448.6 89.6 359.0 14.6 344.4 7.1 12.3 2.9 10.5 0.9
         May 1,042.4 578.3 444.6 87.0 357.7 14.6 343.0 7.2 12.3 2.9 10.2 0.7         June 1,030.4 562.4 448.5 92.7 355.8 14.2 341.6 7.2 12.4 2.9 10.7 0.7
         July 1,033.0 569.8 444.0 91.5 352.5 14.0 338.5 7.2 12.1 2.6 10.4 0.8
         Aug. 1,028.5 573.1 436.2 86.3 349.9 16.3 333.6 7.2 12.0 2.5 10.3 0.5         Sep. 1,021.9 570.3 432.5 84.5 348.0 16.0 332.0 7.2 11.9 2.6 10.3 0.3
         Oct. 1,039.7 586.7 434.0 86.6 347.4 16.4 331.0 7.1 11.8 2.6 10.3 0.7
         Nov. 1,040.8 590.9 431.3 84.2 347.1 16.5 330.6 7.1 11.6 2.6 10.3 0.4         Dec. 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.5
2019         Jan. 1,036.9 587.8 430.7 88.3 342.4 16.9 325.5 7.0 11.4 2.6 10.2 0.8
         Feb. 1,026.7 579.2 429.1 88.2 340.9 16.7 324.2 7.0 11.4 2.7 10.4 0.6         Mar. 1,028.2 585.5 424.1 86.2 337.9 16.6 321.3 7.1 11.5 2.6 10.5 0.2
Changes*
2017 + 19.5 + 40.2 − 20.0 − 4.7 − 15.4 − 0.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.82018 − 3.2 + 25.1 − 27.2 − 5.9 − 21.3 + 0.3 − 21.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.2
2018         Apr. + 8.1 + 11.2 − 3.0 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2
         May + 8.3 + 12.1 − 3.9 − 2.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2         June − 11.9 − 15.9 + 4.1 + 5.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0
         July + 2.7 + 7.4 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. − 4.5 + 3.4 − 7.8 − 5.2 − 2.6 + 2.3 − 4.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4         Sep. − 6.5 − 2.7 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 17.8 + 16.4 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Nov. + 1.1 + 4.1 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3         Dec. − 5.4 − 6.6 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 1.6 + 3.9 − 2.2 + 2.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. − 10.3 − 8.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 1.1 + 5.9 − 4.9 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
2018         Oct. 2,247.8 1,400.5 1,362.8 246.1 964.4 152.3 37.7 258.6 244.7 21.2 187.0 36.5
         Nov. 2,272.0 1,426.1 1,388.9 248.6 985.1 155.3 37.2 257.8 244.3 21.2 186.7 36.4
         Dec. 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
2019         Jan. 2,282.2 1,432.4 1,395.7 251.2 988.1 156.4 36.6 260.9 247.2 21.4 188.8 37.0
         Feb. 2,297.4 1,446.6 1,408.9 252.6 999.8 156.5 37.7 261.5 247.7 21.5 189.3 36.9
         Mar. 2,304.9 1,451.5 1,413.3 247.7 1,008.8 156.8 38.3 261.9 248.2 21.6 189.7 36.9
Changes*
2017 + 84.7 + 101.1 + 99.8 + 17.5 + 77.8 + 4.5 + 1.3 − 5.0 − 5.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 1.3
2018 + 104.0 + 110.5 + 109.7 + 20.3 + 83.1 + 6.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 5.8 − 0.3
2018         Oct. + 8.0 + 8.7 + 8.9 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1
         Nov. + 24.2 + 25.6 + 26.2 + 2.5 + 20.7 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1
         Dec. + 11.3 + 7.3 + 7.2 − 0.2 + 6.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3
2019         Jan. − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 2.8 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3
         Feb. + 15.2 + 14.2 + 13.2 + 1.4 + 10.9 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.1
         Mar. + 7.4 + 4.9 + 4.3 − 4.4 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
 
 
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
2018         Oct. 216.5 9.7 5.1 1.3 3.1 0.1 12.4 46.1 11.2 19.1 14.5 1.2 12.8
         Nov. 224.6 10.0 4.9 1.4 3.7 0.1 12.4 40.6 11.2 14.1 14.2 1.2 12.9
         Dec. 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
2019         Jan. 221.7 10.1 4.8 1.2 4.1 0.1 12.2 43.3 12.1 18.4 11.7 1.2 12.9
         Feb. 230.4 10.0 5.0 1.0 4.0 0.1 12.2 49.9 12.7 24.0 12.1 1.2 13.0
         Mar. 232.2 10.5 5.7 1.0 3.8 0.1 12.2 55.2 13.9 27.5 12.6 1.1 12.9
Changes*
2017 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 − 0.5
2018 + 16.9 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.5
2018         Oct. − 4.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov. + 8.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.4 − 0.2 − 5.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Dec. − 5.7 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 − − 0.2 − 1.6 + 2.2 − 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.2
2019         Jan. + 2.7 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 4.2 − 1.3 + 6.9 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.1
         Feb. + 8.7 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 6.4 + 0.7 + 5.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Mar. + 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.3 + 1.2 + 3.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 201614.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 201713.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 2018
13.9 49.9 208.7 11.4 197.3 566.1 558.6 7.5 22.6 5.8 2.4 − 2018          Oct.
13.5 49.1 208.7 11.3 197.4 566.0 558.7 7.3 22.1 5.8 2.4 −          Nov.13.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 −          Dec.
13.8 49.6 211.3 11.1 200.3 567.8 560.5 7.3 21.1 6.0 2.4 − 2019          Jan.
13.8 49.6 211.9 11.1 200.8 568.7 561.5 7.3 20.6 6.1 2.4 −          Feb.13.7 49.8 212.1 11.1 201.0 571.2 563.7 7.5 20.2 6.2 2.5 −          Mar.
Changes*
+ 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 2017− 0.2 + 0.4 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.2 − 4.5 − 3.9 − 0.6 − 5.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 2018
− 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2018          Oct.
− 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Nov.+ 0.2 + 0.3 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Dec.
+ 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 2019          Jan.
− 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          Feb.− 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 2.5 + 2.3 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 −          Mar.
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
56.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 201661.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 201765.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 2018
58.2 28.4 9.4 14.8 5.6 0.0 102.6 12.7 44.0 44.8 1.1 − 2018          Oct.
62.8 32.5 9.7 14.9 5.7 0.0 111.1 14.0 49.7 46.3 1.1 −          Nov.65.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 −          Dec.
57.7 28.0 9.2 14.9 5.6 0.0 110.6 14.4 46.1 49.1 1.0 − 2019          Jan.
61.6 31.5 9.6 14.9 5.7 0.0 108.8 13.7 45.6 48.5 1.0 −          Feb.60.3 30.4 9.5 14.8 5.6 0.0 106.2 14.0 41.8 49.2 1.0 −          Mar.
Changes*
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 11.8 +11.6 − 0.4 − 2017+ 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 +10.8 − 0.1 − 2018
− 1.9 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 2018          Oct.
+ 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.5 + 1.3 + 5.7 + 1.5 − 0.0 −          Nov.+ 2.7 + 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.2 − 4.5 − 4.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 −          Dec.
− 7.8 − 7.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 6.7 + 4.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 2019          Jan.
+ 3.9 + 3.5 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 −          Feb.− 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.8 + 0.0 −          Mar.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturities
Special Special At 3 on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
2018         Nov. 583.9 576.9 539.1 332.2 37.8 27.4 7.0 6.2 0.1 41.8 37.9 28.2 3.9
         Dec. 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 1.0 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
2019         Jan. 585.4 578.5 541.4 331.6 37.0 26.9 7.0 6.2 0.1 40.6 36.7 27.4 3.9
         Feb. 586.5 579.5 542.5 329.9 37.1 27.0 7.0 6.2 0.1 40.0 36.1 26.9 3.9
         Mar. 588.9 582.0 544.7 330.4 37.3 27.3 6.9 6.2 0.1 49.6 35.8 26.8 13.8
Changes*
2017 − 6.2 − 5.6 + 1.5 − 13.1 − 7.1 − 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 . − 7.2 − 6.7 − 4.4 − 0.5
2018 − 4.7 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 9.1 − 6.5 − 3.6 − 2.6
2018         Nov. − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.0
         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.0
2019         Jan. − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.0
         Feb. + 1.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.0
         Mar. + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.2 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
 
 
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
2018         Nov. 1,112.9 140.5 28.3 360.2 87.9 107.4 3.6 22.6 6.8 983.0 0.7 0.1 30.8 0.4
         Dec. 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
2019         Jan. 1,112.4 138.1 30.0 358.3 84.6 105.8 3.2 21.6 5.8 985.1 0.7 0.1 30.9 0.4
         Feb. 1,128.7 139.1 30.4 359.7 81.8 103.0 3.1 21.0 5.5 1,004.7 0.8 0.1 30.9 0.4
         Mar. 1,139.1 139.4 31.9 374.4 92.4 115.6 2.9 20.8 5.4 1,002.7 0.7 0.1 29.9 0.7
Changes*
2017 − 30.8 − 29.7 − 2.1 − 36.7 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 − 22.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0
2018 + 33.6 − 7.8 + 1.5 − 14.3 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 10.5 − 0.3 + 45.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
2018         Nov. + 3.3 − 0.3 + 1.2 − 3.6 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Dec. − 13.3 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 11.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
2019         Jan. + 12.7 − 1.3 + 2.5 + 2.3 − 3.7 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 13.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2 −
         Feb. + 16.3 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 1.4 − 2.8 − 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 + 19.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 −
         Mar. + 10.4 + 0.3 + 1.5 + 14.7 + 10.6 + 12.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2017 20 229.2 41.8 0.0 15.8 12.3 104.4 24.8 25.1 2.6 23.0 168.6 9.5 3.0 11.0 83.6
2018 20 233.4 39.4 0.0 15.7 11.9 110.2 25.7 25.8 2.8 20.4 174.3 10.0 3.3 11.7 86.6
2019         Jan. 20 233.6 39.2 0.0 15.9 11.9 110.4 25.9 25.7 2.8 20.2 174.8 9.9 3.3 11.7 6.9
         Feb. 20 234.3 39.3 0.0 15.9 11.8 110.8 26.1 25.8 2.8 20.3 175.4 9.8 3.2 11.7 7.1         Mar. 20 235.3 39.9 0.0 16.0 11.8 111.6 26.1 25.5 2.8 20.6 175.7 9.9 3.2 11.8 7.4
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Jan. 12 162.2 23.7 − 6.7 8.9 85.7 22.2 11.6 1.7 18.4 113.6 9.6 3.3 8.0 4.3
         Feb. 12 162.7 23.7 − 6.6 8.9 86.0 22.4 11.6 1.7 18.7 113.9 9.5 3.2 8.0 4.6         Mar. 12 163.3 24.2 − 6.5 8.9 86.6 22.4 11.3 1.7 18.8 114.1 9.7 3.2 8.2 4.7
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Jan. 8 71.4 15.6 0.0 9.2 3.0 24.7 3.7 14.1 1.1 1.8 61.3 0.3 − 3.7 2.7
         Feb. 8 71.6 15.6 0.0 9.3 2.9 24.8 3.7 14.2 1.1 1.7 61.5 0.3 − 3.7 2.5         Mar. 8 72.0 15.7 0.0 9.4 3.0 24.9 3.7 14.2 1.1 1.8 61.7 0.3 − 3.7 2.7
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2017 26.7 2.3 7.6 45.3 26.0 39.6 16.4 4.1 4.5 3.4 18.7 16.4 7.4 7.1 6.2 0.2
2018 27.0 2.1 7.4 45.2 25.1 40.2 15.9 4.3 4.8 3.7 19.5 16.6 6.8 6.6 5.5 0.2
2019         Jan. 2.5 0.0 0.6 3.8 2.2 3.4 1.3 0.4 0.5 0.4 1.7 16.7 6.9 0.6 0.0
         Feb. 2.3 0.0 0.5 3.8 2.1 3.1 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.5 17.0 7.0 0.6 0.0         Mar. 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.9 2.0 3.5 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.7 17.2 6.9 0.6 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Jan. 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.6 2.7 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.3 12.0 3.9 0.5 0.0
         Feb. 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.4 2.4 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.2 12.1 3.8 0.5 0.0         Mar. 1.5 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.4 2.6 1.0 0.2 0.3 0.2 1.4 12.2 3.8 0.5 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Jan. 0.9 0.0 0.3 0.9 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.0 0.1 0.0
         Feb. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.7 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.2 0.1 0.0         Mar. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.6 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.9 3.1 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV.  Banks
  
13.  Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with of which:
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2016 51 192 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2017 52 188 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2018         May 48 182 1,612.2 497.1 484.2 190.3 293.9 12.8 531.9 452.8 14.5 438.3 79.1 583.2 364.2
         June 48 183 1,533.3 473.3 461.3 182.2 279.1 11.9 510.3 431.6 14.5 417.1 78.7 549.8 350.1
         July 48 183 1,523.3 472.0 459.9 186.8 273.1 12.1 523.2 443.2 23.6 419.6 80.0 528.1 328.8
         Aug. 48 182 1,501.4 450.4 438.8 183.2 255.6 11.6 524.4 442.6 22.5 420.1 81.8 526.6 328.2
         Sep. 48 183 1,494.1 452.1 441.2 185.4 255.8 10.8 541.6 456.5 21.9 434.7 85.1 500.5 318.4
         Oct. 49 184 1,487.3 439.9 428.6 205.9 222.7 11.3 535.8 448.0 20.3 427.8 87.8 511.6 336.0
         Nov. 49 184 1,456.1 454.1 443.4 206.9 236.5 10.8 519.7 433.1 20.7 412.4 86.6 482.2 313.7
         Dec. 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019         Jan. 50 184 1,451.6 419.4 408.0 190.8 217.2 11.4 541.3 453.3 19.8 433.5 88.0 491.0 309.4
         Feb. 50 186 1,457.9 426.1 413.9 203.7 210.2 12.2 562.1 472.2 19.2 453.1 89.9 469.6 290.3
Changes *
2017 + 1 − 4 − 216.7 − 52.5 − 49.4 − 7.9 − 41.5 − 3.1 − 10.9 − 10.0 − 1.4 − 8.6 − 0.9 − 74.6 − 60.4
2018 − 3 − 5 − 250.2 −101.0 −102.0 − 5.0 − 97.0 + 1.0 − 24.8 − 27.1 + 7.0 − 34.1 + 2.4 − 148.2 − 102.6
2018         June − + 1 − 79.0 − 24.1 − 23.2 − 8.1 − 15.1 − 0.9 − 21.5 − 21.2 − 0.0 − 21.1 − 0.3 − 33.5 − 14.3
         July − − − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.6 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 15.2 + 13.5 + 9.1 + 4.4 + 1.6 − 21.1 − 20.3
         Aug. − − 1 − 22.4 − 23.1 − 22.6 − 3.6 − 19.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 1.7 − 2.0 − 1.5
         Sep. − + 1 − 7.7 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 15.3 + 12.3 − 0.6 + 12.9 + 3.0 − 26.6 − 10.6
         Oct. + 1 + 1 − 8.5 − 16.3 − 16.7 + 20.5 − 37.2 + 0.4 − 12.1 − 14.1 − 1.6 − 12.5 + 1.9 + 9.5 + 15.0
         Nov. − − − 30.9 + 14.9 + 15.4 + 1.0 + 14.4 − 0.5 − 14.9 − 13.8 + 0.5 − 14.3 − 1.1 − 29.1 − 21.8
         Dec. − − 1 − 54.5 − 49.4 − 49.7 − 14.8 − 34.9 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 0.7 − 3.3 + 2.8 − 1.3 − 3.9
2019         Jan. + 1 + 1 + 50.5 + 15.5 + 15.2 − 1.3 + 16.5 + 0.3 + 24.1 + 25.4 − 0.2 + 25.6 − 1.3 + 10.5 + 0.4
         Feb. − + 2 + 5.8 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 12.8 − 8.0 + 0.8 + 18.5 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 17.7 + 1.4 − 21.7 − 20.0
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 −
2018         May 20 50 274.5 67.0 60.5 26.3 34.1 6.6 149.3 121.6 21.8 99.8 27.6 58.2 −
         June 20 48 269.1 64.2 57.9 24.5 33.4 6.3 148.8 122.5 21.9 100.5 26.3 56.1 −
         July 19 47 248.5 62.2 56.0 24.5 31.5 6.3 136.5 112.6 13.5 99.1 23.8 49.8 −
         Aug. 19 47 245.8 56.7 50.6 21.1 29.5 6.1 137.9 113.2 13.4 99.8 24.7 51.1 −
         Sep. 18 46 244.8 55.2 49.4 19.8 29.6 5.8 138.8 114.5 13.7 100.8 24.4 50.8 −
         Oct. 17 45 243.8 52.1 46.2 19.5 26.7 5.9 139.3 114.2 13.5 100.7 25.1 52.4 −
         Nov. 17 45 239.8 51.0 45.0 20.4 24.7 6.0 136.8 110.8 13.6 97.2 26.1 52.0 −
         Dec. 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 −
2019         Jan. 16 42 234.8 49.0 42.8 18.1 24.6 6.2 135.4 109.4 13.9 95.4 26.0 50.5 −
         Feb. 16 42 236.0 50.6 44.6 19.0 25.6 5.9 134.3 108.5 13.9 94.6 25.8 51.2 −
Changes *
2017 − − 3 − 33.3 − 4.9 − 2.4 + 3.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 8.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 20.2 −
2018 − 3 − 7 − 42.2 − 20.9 − 19.9 − 4.9 − 15.1 − 1.0 − 14.2 − 11.6 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 7.0 −
2018         June − − 2 − 5.4 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 1.8 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 2.1 −
         July − 1 − 1 − 20.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 12.2 − 9.7 − 8.4 − 1.3 − 2.5 − 6.4 −
         Aug. − − − 3.4 − 6.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.4 −
         Sep. − 1 − 1 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.4 −
         Oct. − 1 − 1 − 2.1 − 3.8 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 1.6 −
         Nov. − − − 3.8 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 1.0 − 0.4 −
         Dec. − − 2 − 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 2.4 −
2019         Jan. − 1 − 1 − 2.2 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 1.3 + 0.8 −
         Feb. − − + 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.7 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
May 2019
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of which:paper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 20161,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
1,034.4 685.7 411.6 274.1 348.7 13.5 11.9 1.5 335.2 104.5 51.7 421.6 358.5 2018          May
973.0 658.6 407.0 251.7 314.4 12.4 10.9 1.5 301.9 109.6 51.7 399.0 347.1          June
972.2 662.1 405.8 256.3 310.1 10.8 9.3 1.5 299.3 101.5 53.1 396.5 323.8          July
957.3 651.9 404.6 247.4 305.3 10.4 8.8 1.5 295.0 108.1 53.2 382.8 325.2          Aug.964.0 648.5 417.8 230.7 315.4 10.8 9.3 1.5 304.6 101.5 53.5 375.2 313.0          Sep.
938.4 608.2 400.9 207.3 330.2 8.8 7.3 1.5 321.4 100.2 53.9 394.7 330.9          Oct.
931.9 611.9 392.8 219.1 319.9 13.1 11.3 1.8 306.8 101.4 53.8 369.0 307.1          Nov.897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6          Dec.
928.8 622.0 420.2 201.8 306.7 9.5 7.7 1.7 297.3 93.9 54.0 375.0 304.6 2019          Jan.
952.3 635.2 419.8 215.4 317.1 11.8 9.9 1.8 305.4 97.2 54.2 354.1 287.1          Feb.
Changes *
− 97.3 − 80.7 − 52.1 − 28.6 − 16.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 17.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 86.5 − 58.1 2017− 113.1 − 84.7 + 56.0 −140.8 − 28.3 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 23.8 − 9.4 + 2.0 − 139.7 − 105.7 2018
− 61.7 − 27.3 − 4.6 − 22.7 − 34.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 33.3 + 4.9 + 0.1 − 22.5 − 11.6 2018          June
+ 0.6 + 4.7 − 1.2 + 6.0 − 4.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 7.5 + 1.3 − 2.6 − 22.3          July
− 16.4 − 11.5 − 1.2 − 10.3 − 4.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 13.6 + 0.4          Aug.+ 5.7 − 4.3 + 13.2 − 17.6 + 10.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 7.1 + 0.4 − 7.7 − 13.1          Sep.
− 29.3 − 43.9 − 16.9 − 26.9 + 14.6 − 2.0 − 2.0 − + 16.6 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 19.5 + 15.0          Oct.
− 5.9 + 4.3 − 8.0 + 12.3 − 10.2 + 4.3 + 4.0 + 0.3 − 14.5 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 25.7 − 23.3          Nov.− 33.9 − 4.0 + 36.0 − 40.0 − 29.9 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 28.2 − 9.8 + 0.1 − 10.1 − 3.7          Dec.
+ 31.7 + 14.9 − 8.6 + 23.5 + 16.8 − 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 18.7 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 16.1 + 2.0 2019          Jan.
+ 22.7 + 12.4 − 0.4 + 12.8 + 10.3 + 2.3 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 8.0 + 3.0 + 0.2 − 20.9 − 17.5          Feb.
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 − 2018
206.7 95.4 49.8 45.6 111.2 12.3 6.4 5.9 98.9 13.4 23.9 30.5 − 2018          May
202.6 95.4 50.9 44.5 107.2 12.1 6.1 6.0 95.1 12.7 23.8 30.0 −          June
184.1 77.4 40.3 37.2 106.7 12.3 6.3 5.9 94.4 12.7 22.9 28.8 −          July
181.4 78.7 40.2 38.5 102.8 9.5 5.6 3.8 93.3 12.7 22.9 28.7 −          Aug.178.9 75.0 37.8 37.3 103.9 10.1 6.1 3.9 93.8 13.9 22.8 29.2 −          Sep.
175.5 73.4 36.5 36.8 102.1 9.6 6.0 3.6 92.6 14.1 22.8 31.3 −          Oct.
172.2 72.6 35.7 37.0 99.5 9.1 5.5 3.6 90.4 13.7 22.5 31.4 −          Nov.171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 −          Dec.
168.3 70.9 35.5 35.4 97.4 7.0 4.3 2.7 90.4 16.1 21.8 28.7 − 2019          Jan.
168.3 69.6 35.4 34.2 98.7 7.9 5.2 2.7 90.8 16.1 21.8 29.8 −          Feb.
Changes *
− 32.8 − 33.7 − 22.0 − 11.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2017− 37.4 − 25.8 − 13.7 − 12.0 − 11.7 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 8.8 + 1.3 − 1.8 − 4.3 − 2018
− 4.2 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 4.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 2018          June
− 18.2 − 17.8 − 10.6 − 7.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.1 −          July
− 3.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 4.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 − 2.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 −          Aug.− 2.8 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 −          Sep.
− 4.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.9 −          Oct.
− 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 −          Nov.− 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.4 −          Dec.
− 3.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.1 − 2.1 − − 0.4 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 2019          Jan.
− 0.3 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 −          Feb.
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
May 2019
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019         Feb. . . . . . .
         Mar. 12,882.9 128.8 128.4 1,379.0 1,250.6 0.0
         Apr.  p 12,922.4 129.2 128.8 ... ... ...
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019         Feb. . . . . . . .
         Mar. 3,567,804 27.7 35,678 35,525 481,562 446,037 1
         Apr.  p 3,588,173 27.8 35,882 35,729 ... ... ...
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019         Feb. . . . . . . .
         Mar. 7,481 5,125 2,913 11,492 6,690 98 1,727
         Apr. 7,551 5,159 2,896 11,609 6,723 98 1,693
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019         Feb. . . . . .
         Mar. 2,496,551 1,227 382,972 578,521 108,534
         Apr. 2,504,513 1,338 396,918 579,681 105,717
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
May 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
1. ECB interest rates 2. Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code  1 
2005 Dec.                 6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr.                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan.                1 2.57 2009 Jan.                1 1.62
         July               13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar.                 8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov.                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dec.                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan.                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug.                 9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct.               11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan.                1 0.12
         Dec.               13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan.                1 1.14
2013 May                 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan.                1 −0.13
2007 Mar.               14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov.                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan.                1 1.21
2014 June               11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan.                1 −0.63
2008 July                 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep.                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct.                 8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan.                1 1.37
         Oct.                 9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec.                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan.                1 −0.83
         Nov.               12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec.               10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar.                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan.                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July               1 3.19
2009 Jan.               21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00
         Mar.               11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan.                1 3.32
         Apr.                 8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2019 Apr.               17 5,403 5,403 0.0 0−−−7
         Apr.               24 5,959 5,959 0.0 0−−−8
         May                 2 5,743 5,743 0.0 0−−−6
         May                 8 5,394 5,394 0.0 0−−−7
         May               15 5,399 5,399 0.0 0−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2019 Feb.               28 1,319 1,319 2 ... − − − 91
         Mar.               28 1,072 1,072 2 ... − − − 91
         Apr.               25 860 860 2 ... − − − 98
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4. Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR  2 
Monthlyaverage EONIA  
1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2018         Oct. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.26 − 0.15
         Nov. − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.32 − 0.26 − 0.15         Dec. − 0.36 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.24 − 0.13
2019         Jan. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.24 − 0.12
         Feb. − 0.37 − 0.37 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.23 − 0.11         Mar. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.23 − 0.11
         Apr. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.23 − 0.11
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published v ia
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the Reuters. 2Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by
EURIBOR. 1Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for inter- Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
bank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
May 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Mar. 0.27 65,081 1.30 216,572 0.05 72,699 1.01 26,676
         Apr. 0.27 64,883 1.29 216,237 0.04 69,677 0.99 26,913
         May 0.27 64,743 1.28 216,238 0.06 68,665 0.97 26,848
         June 0.26 64,554 1.27 216,143 0.03 68,825 0.94 26,966
         July 0.26 64,623 1.26 215,907 0.03 67,013 0.93 26,859
         Aug. 0.25 64,215 1.25 216,126 0.03 67,659 0.92 27,206
         Sep. 0.24 63,849 1.25 216,273 0.03 66,871 0.90 27,188
         Oct. 0.24 63,652 1.24 215,766 0.04 66,681 0.89 27,535
         Nov. 0.24 62,369 1.23 215,502 0.03 68,118 0.88 28,176
         Dec. 0.23 63,057 1.23 217,570 0.01 68,323 0.87 28,597
2019         Jan. 0.23 62,837 1.21 217,168 0.01 68,701 0.86 28,839
         Feb. 0.23 62,576 1.20 217,250 0.01 69,389 0.85 28,815
         Mar. 0.23 62,652 1.20 217,159 0.02 67,395 0.84 29,250
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2018         Mar. 2.31 3,983 1.94 25,497 2.62 1,153,724 7.03 49,131 3.82 88,481 3.91 311,587
         Apr. 2.32 3,933 1.93 25,480 2.60 1,157,212 6.99 48,590 3.79 89,131 3.90 312,321
         May 2.31 4,024 1.93 25,609 2.58 1,162,731 7.04 48,209 3.76 84,759 3.89 312,220
         June 2.27 4,139 1.92 25,721 2.56 1,169,692 7.03 48,827 3.74 85,404 3.88 311,756
         July 2.27 4,217 1.90 25,586 2.54 1,174,210 7.00 48,360 3.75 85,994 3.86 312,593
         Aug. 2.28 4,215 1.89 25,643 2.52 1,180,809 7.00 48,053 3.75 86,634 3.85 313,801
         Sep. 2.27 4,306 1.89 26,196 2.50 1,186,420 7.00 49,160 3.74 86,205 3.85 313,297
         Oct. 2.25 4,311 1.87 26,171 2.48 1,191,048 7.17 50,033 3.54 85,254 3.83 313,604
         Nov. 2.25 4,299 1.87 26,265 2.46 1,196,579 7.01 49,658 3.53 85,715 3.83 314,344
         Dec. 2.27 4,242 1.86 26,203 2.44 1,199,525 7.10 51,196 3.53 85,387 3.81 312,896
2019         Jan. 2.27 4,379 1.85 25,867 2.42 1,200,982 7.19 49,709 3.52 85,499 3.79 314,143
         Feb. 2.28 4,300 1.85 25,861 2.41 1,204,756 7.17 49,608 3.51 85,678 3.78 314,960
         Mar. 2.27 4,424 1.85 25,905 2.39 1,210,361 7.16 49,864 3.50 86,453 3.78 314,919
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Mar. 2.39 145,640 1.87 139,810 2.18 672,250
         Apr. 2.33 145,705 1.86 140,823 2.16 675,236
         May 2.26 149,325 1.78 138,956 2.15 678,530
         June 2.29 149,189 1.76 140,052 2.13 680,131
         July 2.20 148,897 1.74 142,697 2.12 684,893
         Aug. 2.22 148,026 1.74 144,021 2.11 688,709
         Sep. 2.22 150,891 1.74 144,942 2.10 691,969
         Oct. 2.21 147,714 1.73 147,743 2.08 696,222
         Nov. 2.20 148,399 1.72 151,603 2.07 702,286
         Dec. 2.24 146,721 1.72 150,727 2.06 703,722
2019         Jan. 2.22 151,176 1.70 152,824 2.04 707,410
         Feb. 2.22 154,912 1.70 154,061 2.03 712,194
         Mar. 2.21 159,440 1.69 155,420 2.02 713,471
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined eff ective rates. Both
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans bu t not any
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administrat ion, preparation of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan a ssociations
corporations include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the re porting agents in
other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and
specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education, e tc.6Including overdrafts
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 on p. 47   ). 
are collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
May 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8  of
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2018         Mar. 0.02 1,334,702 0.30 3,995 0.38 470 0.74 765 0.17 539,077 0.27 41,021
         Apr. 0.02 1,347,466 0.31 4,240 0.32 552 0.60 712 0.17 538,787 0.26 40,559
         May 0.02 1,360,605 0.36 4,235 0.42 446 0.62 587 0.16 538,616 0.27 40,277         June 0.02 1,370,363 0.30 4,294 0.51 597 0.66 737 0.16 538,165 0.26 39,811
         July 0.02 1,375,299 0.27 5,005 0.40 626 0.63 693 0.16 537,703 0.26 39,331
         Aug. 0.01 1,383,683 0.30 5,135 0.43 516 0.67 677 0.15 537,459 0.26 38,903         Sep. 0.01 1,391,356 0.31 4,831 0.40 476 0.64 645 0.15 537,477 0.25 38,579
         Oct. 0.01 1,399,998 0.28 4,853 0.38 772 0.70 803 0.15 537,728 0.25 38,051
         Nov. 0.02 1,425,632 0.30 4,599 0.39 752 0.65 752 0.15 538,222 0.25 37,420         Dec. 0.02 1,432,861 0.28 5,439 0.26 642 0.65 702 0.14 540,271 0.25 37,155
2019         Jan. 0.02 1,432,335 0.28 6,375 0.44 603 0.69 1,074 0.14 540,608 0.24 36,693
         Feb. 0.02 1,446,689 0.29 5,693 0.45 619 0.68 1,032 0.13 541,529 0.24 36,726         Mar. 0.01 1,451,638 0.29 5,595 0.34 837 0.73 978 0.13 543,711 0.25 37,036
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Mar. − 0.02 418,683 − 0.08 10,133 0.13 347 0.31 427
         Apr. − 0.03 430,412 − 0.11 8,954 0.06 314 0.35 815
         May − 0.03 440,268 − 0.04 9,576 0.11 490 0.34 587         June − 0.03 424,633 − 0.10 11,185 0.06 240 0.23 447
         July − 0.02 429,934 − 0.13 11,466 0.08 354 0.29 754
         Aug. − 0.02 436,893 − 0.06 10,147 0.07 303 0.46 723         Sep. − 0.02 433,078 − 0.10 9,835 0.07 347 0.23 375
         Oct. − 0.03 445,427 − 0.07 12,291 0.17 518 0.66 891
         Nov. − 0.03 448,301 − 0.08 12,192 0.13 376 0.78 1,035         Dec. − 0.03 445,954 − 0.07 15,012 0.14 308 0.55 1,109
2019         Jan. − 0.03 443,971 0.01 16,527 0.08 549 0.40 545
         Feb. − 0.03 439,934 0.02 15,774 0.11 277 0.31 238         Mar. − 0.03 443,497 0.01 15,807 0.07 389 0.65 299
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million
2018         Mar. 5.44 5.43 9,545 7.04 1,732 5.97 287 4.10 4,259 6.53 4,999
         Apr. 5.66 5.64 9,413 7.17 1,772 6.14 290 4.27 3,912 6.64 5,211
         May 5.87 5.85 9,002 7.40 1,846 6.12 292 4.42 3,737 6.91 4,973         June 5.87 5.85 9,052 7.39 1,870 6.25 279 4.39 3,737 6.92 5,036
         July 6.02 6.00 9,543 7.42 2,140 6.64 312 4.57 3,715 6.93 5,516
         Aug. 6.08 6.02 9,242 7.44 1,938 7.95 395 4.59 3,702 6.91 5,145         Sep. 5.96 5.91 8,166 7.33 1,629 8.14 372 4.41 3,239 6.79 4,555
         Oct. 6.06 5.99 8,915 7.34 1,797 7.68 421 4.60 3,527 6.83 4,967
         Nov. 5.84 5.83 8,668 7.19 1,694 7.21 489 4.40 3,599 6.80 4,580         Dec. 5.80 5.81 6,514 7.04 1,133 7.58 518 4.45 2,820 6.72 3,176
2019         Jan. 5.98 5.98 9,985 7.13 2,196 8.08 544 4.53 3,696 6.72 5,745
         Feb. 5.80 5.83 9,354 6.98 1,934 7.98 486 4.44 3,556 6.55 5,312         Mar. 5.73 5.72 9,868 6.88 1,765 8.48 528 4.25 3,929 6.52 5,411
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  .+For deposits with an agreed maturity and all means that all outstanding deposit and lending business at the end of the month has
loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business covers to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of inter est.7Estimated. The
all new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the bank. volume of new business is extrapolated to form the underlying tota l using a
The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates of all new grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including
agreements concluded during the reporting month. For overnight deposits, deposits fidelity and growth premiums. 9Excluding overdrafts. 10Annual percentage rate of
redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business charge, which contains other related charges which may occur fo r enquiries,
is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the sake of simplicity. This administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
May 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans to households for other purposes  5  with an initial rate fixation of
of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
Loans to households
2018         Mar. 2.03 5,883 1.87 1,424 1.77 2,440 2.58 950 2.08 2,493
         Apr. 2.12 5,995 2.02 1,826 1.95 2,612 2.65 1,008 2.09 2,375
         May 2.04 5,257 1.84 1,476 1.87 2,165 2.48 737 2.07 2,355
         June 2.06 6,370 1.93 1,713 1.87 2,607 2.58 903 2.07 2,860
         July 2.06 6,380 1.88 2,123 1.94 2,532 2.35 910 2.08 2,938
         Aug. 2.07 5,365 1.83 1,452 1.99 2,124 2.51 756 2.00 2,485
         Sep. 2.08 4,952 1.76 1,425 1.98 2,265 2.51 634 2.05 2,053
         Oct. 2.11 5,549 1.84 1,952 2.01 2,413 2.48 810 2.08 2,326
         Nov. 1.96 5,394 1.75 1,743 1.76 2,263 2.51 720 1.98 2,411
         Dec. 1.89 5,777 1.79 1,716 1.76 2,554 2.42 717 1.87 2,506
2019         Jan. 1.96 5,889 1.84 2,160 1.81 2,541 2.39 860 1.96 2,488
         Feb. 1.99 4,707 1.78 1,409 1.82 2,095 2.59 661 1.96 1,951
         Mar. 1.90 5,598 1.77 1,515 1.68 2,497 2.51 772 1.92 2,329
of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2018         Mar. 2.07 4,103 . . 1.87 1,645 2.65 741 2.02 1,717
         Apr. 2.18 4,204 . . 2.05 1,850 2.75 793 2.04 1,561
         May 2.11 3,558 . . 2.09 1,373 2.50 560 2.00 1,625
         June 2.07 4,528 . . 1.92 1,869 2.58 692 2.02 1,967
         July 2.13 4,266 . . 2.09 1,755 2.46 647 2.05 1,864
         Aug. 2.13 3,553 . . 2.12 1,431 2.56 563 1.98 1,559
         Sep. 2.04 3,403 . . 1.91 1,586 2.52 491 2.02 1,326
         Oct. 2.11 3,858 . . 2.04 1,691 2.49 597 2.04 1,570
         Nov. 1.96 3,869 . . 1.81 1,526 2.50 561 1.93 1,782
         Dec. 1.96 4,139 . . 1.94 1,777 2.42 546 1.83 1,816
2019         Jan. 2.00 4,236 . . 1.94 1,774 2.46 640 1.89 1,822
         Feb. 2.02 3,331 . . 1.94 1,502 2.61 504 1.89 1,325
         Mar. 1.99 3,895 . . 1.95 1,539 2.53 580 1.86 1,776
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans  3  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) Renegotiated loans  9 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2018         Mar. 1.94 1.89 20,592 1.95 3,981 2.05 2,256 1.73 1,773 1.74 7,047 1.98 9,516
         Apr. 1.94 1.89 21,351 1.92 4,645 2.09 2,369 1.72 1,895 1.77 7,418 1.96 9,669
         May 1.96 1.91 19,514 1.97 3,803 2.09 2,193 1.74 1,735 1.77 6,847 2.00 8,739
         June 1.95 1.90 21,464 1.98 4,691 2.07 3,226 1.76 1,882 1.75 6,771 1.97 9,585
         July 1.94 1.88 22,177 1.94 4,907 2.16 2,675 1.74 1,994 1.73 7,666 1.95 9,842
         Aug. 1.93 1.87 20,493 1.96 3,401 2.13 2,337 1.70 1,753 1.71 6,974 1.97 9,429
         Sep. 1.92 1.86 17,864 1.96 3,046 2.11 1,973 1.71 1,544 1.69 5,923 1.94 8,424
         Oct. 1.91 1.86 21,275 1.94 4,124 2.08 2,443 1.68 1,884 1.71 7,669 1.97 9,279
         Nov. 1.94 1.88 20,357 1.94 3,423 2.02 2,313 1.74 1,779 1.72 6,738 1.98 9,527
         Dec. 1.90 1.85 17,630 1.89 3,168 2.02 2,113 1.71 1,519 1.70 6,088 1.94 7,910
2019         Jan. 1.92 1.86 20,907 1.93 4,619 2.09 2,475 1.69 1,962 1.70 7,080 1.95 9,390
         Feb. 1.84 1.78 19,352 1.84 3,469 2.04 2,163 1.65 1,749 1.63 6,344 1.85 9,095
         Mar. 1.80 1.74 21,335 1.83 3,606 2.04 2,413 1.64 1,755 1.59 6,884 1.79 10,283
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2018         Mar. . 1.81 9,154 . . 1.96 831 1.61 871 1.67 3,271 1.94 4,181
         Apr. . 1.82 9,782 . . 2.08 866 1.55 907 1.71 3,606 1.91 4,403
         May . 1.84 8,392 . . 2.02 733 1.55 834 1.71 3,043 1.96 3,782
         June . 1.83 9,040 . . 2.00 1,087 1.61 901 1.71 3,025 1.94 4,027
         July . 1.83 9,622 . . 2.06 914 1.60 960 1.69 3,575 1.94 4,173
         Aug. . 1.82 8,424 . . 2.02 807 1.54 792 1.65 2,911 1.96 3,914
         Sep. . 1.82 7,495 . . 2.13 664 1.51 715 1.65 2,604 1.95 3,512
         Oct. . 1.81 9,201 . . 1.98 880 1.51 846 1.67 3,351 1.96 4,124
         Nov. . 1.83 8,504 . . 1.95 750 1.53 771 1.67 2,910 1.98 4,073
         Dec. . 1.79 7,242 . . 2.02 694 1.49 670 1.64 2,592 1.93 3,286
2019         Jan. . 1.81 9,238 . . 2.04 922 1.50 948 1.65 3,196 1.96 4,172
         Feb. . 1.72 8,040 . . 2.07 682 1.45 859 1.56 2,709 1.84 3,790
         Mar. . 1.68 8,615 . . 2.06 732 1.43 768 1.51 2,924 1.77 4,191
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . For   
footnote 11, see p. 47   .  

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
May 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12 Revolving loans  12 
and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 Extended and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 
Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 credit card debt Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Mar. 8.31 39,818 8.36 31,844 14.87 4,340 3.41 71,713 3.43 71,381
         Apr. 8.29 39,308 8.35 31,176 14.85 4,408 3.29 72,449 3.30 72,100
         May 8.29 39,115 8.38 30,991 14.79 4,376 3.35 71,010 3.37 70,690         June 8.26 39,717 8.34 31,627 14.77 4,370 3.30 74,485 3.32 74,136
         July 8.19 39,373 8.29 31,035 14.74 4,430 3.25 73,268 3.26 72,921
         Aug. 8.20 39,040 8.27 30,862 14.73 4,390 3.21 72,775 3.23 72,415         Sep. 8.18 40,096 8.27 31,781 14.79 4,421 3.18 76,148 3.19 75,723
         Oct. 8.16 39,591 8.24 31,353 14.79 4,366 3.13 74,312 3.15 73,892
         Nov. 7.88 40,395 7.93 31,901 14.77 4,429 3.11 74,306 3.13 73,881         Dec. 7.86 41,799 7.96 32,782 14.75 4,585 3.14 73,787 3.16 73,380
2019         Jan. 8.01 40,499 7.96 32,586 14.78 4,389 3.09 76,006 3.10 75,622
         Feb. 7.99 40,394 7.99 32,324 14.76 4,384 3.09 78,104 3.10 77,717         Mar. 7.98 40,531 7.97 32,533 14.75 4,355 3.06 80,843 3.07 80,447
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of
Renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2018         Mar. 1.42 69,102 1.52 18,706 2.48 8,966 2.52 1,744 1.93 1,470 1.09 44,944 1.50 3,379 1.74 8,599
         Apr. 1.39 65,864 1.46 18,840 2.44 8,704 2.54 1,749 1.94 1,527 1.04 43,667 1.64 2,828 1.73 7,389
         May 1.20 72,958 1.36 17,150 2.31 9,732 2.40 1,395 1.95 1,290 0.85 51,023 1.59 2,988 1.73 6,530         June 1.31 84,383 1.42 24,657 2.24 11,612 2.44 1,531 1.97 1,470 0.97 55,948 1.64 3,981 1.73 9,841
         July 1.19 81,709 1.41 22,096 2.09 10,235 2.41 1,466 1.93 1,578 0.85 55,149 1.53 3,956 1.74 9,325
         Aug. 1.18 66,072 1.41 16,124 2.05 9,274 2.44 1,316 1.86 1,311 0.85 44,950 1.73 2,130 1.64 7,091         Sep. 1.26 76,448 1.40 22,010 2.04 9,668 2.49 1,315 1.94 1,180 0.98 53,010 1.78 3,023 1.66 8,252
         Oct. 1.28 78,085 1.39 21,850 2.04 10,699 2.50 1,580 1.92 1,403 0.98 52,918 1.64 3,158 1.72 8,327
         Nov. 1.27 74,844 1.47 18,178 2.05 9,884 2.46 1,578 1.91 1,400 0.96 50,045 1.80 3,422 1.63 8,515         Dec. 1.29 96,525 1.46 25,307 2.06 10,205 2.40 1,480 1.85 1,434 1.02 62,907 1.72 5,156 1.60 15,343
2019         Jan. 1.24 74,566 1.42 20,900 2.01 10,992 2.43 1,491 1.94 1,376 0.96 50,703 1.46 2,676 1.58 7,328
         Feb. 1.25 65,642 1.46 16,418 2.04 9,918 2.51 1,338 1.86 1,136 0.97 43,885 1.37 3,016 1.56 6,349         Mar. 1.29 77,547 1.41 22,154 2.05 11,060 2.56 1,534 1.85 1,391 1.05 52,988 1.49 2,834 1.43 7,740
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2018         Mar. 1.62 11,118 . . 1.92 608 2.46 160 1.78 396 1.44 6,583 1.68 1,010 1.93 2,361
         Apr. 1.57 8,174 . . 1.91 620 2.50 152 1.83 434 1.26 4,155 2.07 764 1.77 2,049
         May 1.61 7,425 . . 1.93 540 2.47 158 1.77 354 1.38 4,223 1.82 639 1.92 1,511         June 1.68 12,565 . . 1.88 647 2.60 182 1.82 380 1.42 7,324 2.60 1,202 1.83 2,830
         July 1.55 9,982 . . 1.95 707 2.74 155 1.81 468 1.25 5,263 1.81 1,205 1.85 2,184
         Aug. 1.56 7,174 . . 2.10 507 2.74 151 1.76 302 1.32 4,296 2.50 348 1.68 1,570         Sep. 1.56 10,319 . . 1.89 576 2.57 124 1.83 309 1.33 6,391 2.52 646 1.79 2,273
         Oct. 1.55 9,237 . . 1.96 640 2.64 138 1.84 376 1.32 5,296 1.77 627 1.80 2,160
         Nov. 1.61 9,181 . . 1.96 528 2.64 140 1.79 379 1.41 5,283 2.15 824 1.72 2,027         Dec. 1.50 16,695 . . 1.90 607 2.55 122 1.68 411 1.37 8,845 2.04 1,266 1.51 5,444
2019         Jan. 1.42 9,732 . . 1.83 630 2.46 149 1.84 429 1.20 5,503 1.90 464 1.57 2,557
         Feb. 1.42 7,982 . . 1.90 485 2.59 151 1.70 323 1.23 4,383 1.46 648 1.56 1,992         Mar. 1.49 11,158 . . 1.87 508 2.65 144 1.78 388 1.40 7,357 1.71 520 1.53 2,241
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . (d) there is no obligation of regular repayment of funds. 13Overdrafts are defined as
11For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured debit balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdraf ts regardless of
if collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed be tween customers and the
in at least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or bank. 14Including convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is
assigned. 12Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without payment transactions effected with the card during one billing cycle and the date at
giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become d ue.15The amount
decrease as funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
May 2019
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1. Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and fund Financial technical Non-financial Remaining
year/quarter Total deposits  1 securities Loans  2 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
 
2016         Q3 2,219.9 378.7 397.3 387.3 280.2 613.9 5.3 46.1 31.4 79.9
         Q4 2,189.4 361.5 371.0 374.6 308.6 623.2 3.3 44.1 32.4 70.6
2017         Q1 2,189.7 355.4 377.5 367.7 297.7 635.8 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
         Q2 2,178.4 344.0 378.9 365.2 302.0 643.8 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6
         Q3 2,188.1 331.2 386.1 371.0 305.6 650.5 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.4
         Q4 2,212.2 320.9 387.0 354.3 336.1 671.3 2.9 48.2 34.3 57.3
2018         Q1 2,217.9 344.3 394.6 327.1 343.3 663.1 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.5
         Q2 2,226.3 347.5 400.2 320.1 347.1 668.0 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6
         Q3 2,224.8 327.3 401.2 328.7 350.5 675.0 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6
         Q4 2,211.9 320.8 400.8 329.9 351.0 662.0 2.0 55.7 36.8 53.0
Life insurance
2016         Q3 1,247.0 242.9 203.0 241.2 47.0 445.8 4.0 10.2 18.7 34.0
         Q4 1,197.3 231.3 182.7 223.0 50.7 456.9 2.1 9.6 19.1 21.9
2017         Q1 1,170.5 223.8 185.3 217.2 37.2 462.6 1.8 8.2 19.1 15.3
         Q2 1,172.8 215.7 189.5 217.6 38.6 467.1 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3
         Q3 1,177.5 207.6 193.6 220.6 38.4 472.5 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0
         Q4 1,193.2 199.2 192.4 226.1 41.4 487.8 1.8 8.6 20.0 16.0
2018         Q1 1,187.6 213.0 199.0 207.0 43.1 480.9 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
         Q2 1,195.2 216.2 202.0 201.1 46.3 486.1 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
         Q3 1,194.1 201.0 202.2 209.8 47.4 491.2 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
         Q4 1,184.9 196.3 201.3 209.3 50.5 481.1 1.0 11.6 20.3 13.5
Non-life insurance
2016         Q3 592.3 123.8 103.2 93.6 50.8 154.4 0.5 28.5 8.6 28.8
         Q4 583.5 118.9 98.6 91.8 56.8 152.0 0.5 26.8 9.0 29.0
2017         Q1 606.7 120.3 102.5 92.1 56.9 157.3 0.3 34.1 9.1 34.2
         Q2 603.7 116.8 103.9 91.2 58.5 160.4 0.4 33.3 9.1 30.1
         Q3 603.1 111.9 106.2 92.9 58.6 162.9 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4
         Q4 606.7 111.6 108.1 82.2 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.4 9.7 26.5
2018         Q1 623.1 120.1 112.5 75.1 72.3 166.9 0.3 34.6 9.8 31.4
         Q2 621.6 120.0 115.3 72.9 73.4 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
         Q3 618.0 116.2 115.6 72.9 74.4 168.8 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
         Q4 614.8 114.0 116.6 73.1 74.2 167.2 0.2 33.8 10.8 24.8
Reinsurance  3 
2016         Q3 380.7 12.0 91.0 52.5 182.3 13.8 0.8 7.3 4.0 17.0
         Q4 408.6 11.3 89.7 59.7 201.0 14.3 0.7 7.7 4.3 19.7
2017         Q1 412.5 11.4 89.8 58.4 203.6 15.9 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
         Q2 401.9 11.6 85.5 56.5 204.8 16.3 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2
         Q3 407.5 11.7 86.3 57.5 208.6 15.1 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9
         Q4 412.3 10.2 86.5 45.9 223.9 17.6 0.7 8.2 4.7 14.7
2018         Q1 407.2 11.2 83.1 45.0 227.8 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
         Q2 409.5 11.3 82.9 46.1 227.4 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
         Q3 412.7 10.0 83.4 46.0 228.7 14.9 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
         Q4 412.2 10.4 82.8 47.6 226.2 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.7
Pension funds  4 
2016         Q3 608.0 107.7 63.5 29.3 19.1 326.2 − 6.3 35.4 20.5
         Q4 609.6 106.4 61.1 29.7 19.9 328.1 − 6.7 37.0 20.8
2017         Q1 617.0 103.4 60.3 30.1 20.3 337.7 − 6.7 37.5 20.9
         Q2 624.5 102.7 60.6 30.3 20.7 344.3 − 6.8 38.1 21.1
         Q3 633.7 100.6 61.7 30.3 21.2 353.1 − 7.0 38.6 21.3
         Q4 645.5 96.0 63.5 30.6 21.6 364.5 − 7.1 40.3 21.8
2018         Q1 646.8 94.8 63.1 31.0 22.0 366.1 − 7.2 40.6 21.9
         Q2 652.7 95.2 62.8 31.5 22.9 369.9 − 7.3 41.1 22.1
         Q3 656.4 92.0 62.6 31.6 23.3 376.3 − 7.3 41.5 21.9
         Q4 663.0 91.4 63.3 32.0 23.5 380.3 − 7.4 42.6 22.3
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- ed on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower s’ note loans and
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- registered Pfandbriefe. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by pri-
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. *Valuation of list- mary insurers, which is included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the insti-
ed securities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB’s securities data- tutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Accou nts. Pension funds
base. 1Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension sch emes for the
bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Including deposits retain- self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
May 2019
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2. Liabilities
  
 € billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life/
Debt claims on
End of securities Shares and pension fund Financial Remainingyear/quarter Total issued Loans  
1 other equity Total reserves  2 Non-life derivatives liabilities Net worth  5 
Insurance corporations
 
2016         Q3 2,219.9 30.7 73.7 383.0 1,579.4 1,396.9 182.5 1.5 151.5 −
         Q4 2,189.4 30.7 70.3 441.0 1,494.4 1,313.3 181.1 2.3 150.7 −
2017         Q1 2,189.7 30.5 57.2 448.6 1,511.9 1,309.6 202.3 1.8 139.6 −
         Q2 2,178.4 28.6 57.0 450.8 1,505.5 1,308.5 197.0 2.1 134.3 −         Q3 2,188.1 28.5 58.4 455.6 1,513.1 1,317.2 195.9 2.3 130.2 −         Q4 2,212.2 28.3 62.6 466.0 1,521.6 1,334.2 187.4 2.2 131.6 −
2018         Q1 2,217.9 28.0 61.9 460.5 1,538.9 1,333.5 205.4 1.5 127.1 −
         Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 457.1 1,553.3 1,347.6 205.7 1.9 122.3 −         Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.6 1,545.0 1,343.7 201.4 2.0 122.5 −         Q4 2,211.9 29.3 64.6 463.0 1,529.6 1,331.5 198.1 1.6 123.9 −
Life insurance
2016         Q3 1,247.0 3.8 25.9 96.0 1,066.2 1,066.2 − 0.7 54.4 −
         Q4 1,197.3 4.1 25.0 116.3 993.7 993.7 − 1.2 56.9 −
2017         Q1 1,170.5 4.1 12.5 116.3 991.8 991.8 − 0.9 44.8 −
         Q2 1,172.8 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.6 989.6 − 1.0 46.2 −         Q3 1,177.5 4.1 12.3 121.5 994.0 994.0 − 1.1 44.5 −         Q4 1,193.2 4.1 12.8 122.2 1,007.1 1,007.1 − 1.1 45.9 −
2018         Q1 1,187.6 4.0 13.3 119.8 1,007.0 1,007.0 − 0.7 42.7 −
         Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.6 1,017.0 1,017.0 − 0.8 40.8 −         Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.2 1,013.3 1,013.3 − 0.9 42.0 −         Q4 1,184.9 4.1 15.2 122.9 1,000.3 1,000.3 − 0.5 42.0 −
Non-life insurance
2016         Q3 592.3 0.9 6.6 120.0 407.4 310.1 97.3 0.0 57.3 −
         Q4 583.5 1.1 6.3 130.4 390.1 300.5 89.7 0.2 55.4 −
2017         Q1 606.7 1.1 7.3 134.1 409.0 300.8 108.2 0.1 55.1 −
         Q2 603.7 1.1 6.8 135.7 406.8 302.5 104.3 0.1 53.1 −         Q3 603.1 1.1 6.9 137.5 406.8 305.8 101.1 0.1 50.7 −         Q4 606.7 1.1 6.7 141.2 405.7 309.7 96.0 0.1 51.9 −
2018         Q1 623.1 1.1 7.7 141.4 422.8 311.1 111.7 0.0 50.0 −
         Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 −         Q3 618.0 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 −         Q4 614.8 1.0 8.2 139.6 417.1 315.5 101.6 0.0 48.8 −
Reinsurance  3 
2016         Q3 380.7 26.0 41.3 167.0 105.8 20.5 85.3 0.8 39.8 −
         Q4 408.6 25.5 39.0 194.3 110.5 19.1 91.4 0.9 38.3 −
2017         Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
         Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −         Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.9 1.1 35.0 −         Q4 412.3 23.1 43.1 202.6 108.8 17.4 91.4 1.0 33.8 −
2018         Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 −
         Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 −         Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 −         Q4 412.2 24.1 41.2 200.6 112.2 15.7 96.5 1.1 33.2 −
Pension funds  4 
2016         Q3 608.0 − 6.4 6.7 536.0 536.0 − − 3.3 55.6
         Q4 609.6 − 6.8 6.9 546.0 546.0 − − 2.4 47.5
2017         Q1 617.0 − 6.9 7.0 552.9 552.9 − − 2.5 47.8
         Q2 624.5 − 6.9 7.1 558.7 558.7 − − 2.5 49.4         Q3 633.7 − 6.9 7.2 565.2 565.2 − − 2.5 51.9         Q4 645.5 − 7.1 7.4 576.1 576.1 − − 2.5 52.4
2018         Q1 646.8 − 7.2 7.4 579.5 579.5 − − 2.6 50.0
         Q2 652.7 − 7.3 7.5 585.7 585.7 − − 2.6 49.6         Q3 656.4 − 7.4 7.7 587.7 587.7 − − 2.6 51.0         Q4 663.0 − 7.6 7.8 597.2 597.2 − − 2.6 47.8
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- tor. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “pension
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. 1Including depo- funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company
sits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-emp loyed. Social se-
and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Insurance technical reserves “life“ taking account of curity funds are not included. 5Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and
transitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the “non-life insurance“ sec- the liability item “Shares and other equity“. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
May 2019
VIII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities ities  3 Total 4 Bundesbank sectors  6 residents  7 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  5 
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,379
2014 64,775 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 − 12,124 − 11,951 74,484 14,366
2015 33,024 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 − 66,330 121,164 61,657 − 83,471
2016 69,745 27,429 19,177 18,265 − 10,012 42,316 164,603 − 58,012 187,500 35,113 − 94,856
2017 53,710 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 42,147 141,177 − 71,454 161,012 51,620 − 87,470
2018 56,664 16,630 33,251 12,433 − 29,055 40,034 102,442 − 24,417 67,328 59,529 − 45,778
2018         May 20,869 20,327 6,728 2,570 11,028 542 1,645 − 1,553 7,676 − 4,479 19,225
         June − 13,186 − 12,897 − 10,982 − 2,030 115 − 289 6,121 − 7,009 6,353 6,777 − 19,307
         July − 3,825 − 9,880 − 7,055 3,563 − 6,389 6,055 11,980 − 3,117 5,835 9,262 − 15,805
         Aug. 16,191 10,891 2,640 − 3,890 12,142 5,300 10,923 − 1,567 4,562 7,928 5,267
         Sep. 19,809 11,015 8,990 − 84 2,109 8,794 19,310 5,189 7,652 6,470 499
         Oct. 2,853 7,812 10,652 4,521 − 7,361 − 4,959 − 1,962 − 8,161 3,659 2,540 4,815
         Nov. 18,500 13,260 6,849 − 693 7,104 5,240 11,009 3,159 3,945 3,904 7,492
         Dec. − 39,633 − 31,356 − 9,339 − 2,127 − 19,890 − 8,277 − 106 − 6,873 3,343 3,424 − 39,527
2019         Jan. 34,314 20,326 8,377 1,319 10,630 13,988 9,297 1,486 − 1,700 9,511 25,018
         Feb. 25,646 13,718 16,833 2,035 − 5,150 11,928 12,638 7,239 − 1,984 7,383 13,008
         Mar. 17,076 18,264 4,492 2,581 11,191 − 1,188 − 5,939 − 1,736 − 4,425 222 23,015
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total 10 tutions  5 Other sectors  11 residents  12 
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,195
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 − 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 − 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 31,881 4,409 27,472 30,525 − 5,143 35,668 1,356
2017 50,410 15,570 34,840 48,773 7,031 41,742 1,637
2018 61,212 16,188 45,024 50,020 − 11,184 61,204 11,192
2018         May 17,273 1,175 16,098 16,713 1,156 15,557 560
         June 8,677 6,593 2,084 8,537 2,250 6,287 140
         July 5,062 549 4,513 5,110 257 4,853 − 48
         Aug. 4,698 193 4,505 6,240 473 5,767 − 1,542
         Sep. − 484 225 − 709 − 2,392 − 2,837 445 1,908
         Oct. − 13,611 1,227 − 14,838 − 16,477 − 1,242 − 15,235 2,866
         Nov. − 3,032 227 − 3,259 − 3,854 − 1,544 − 2,310 822
         Dec. 11,300 482 10,818 13,017 − 637 13,654 − 1,717
2019         Jan. 4,206 671 3,535 5,804 − 55 5,859 − 1,598
         Feb. 634 122 512 1,500 − 436 1,936 − 866
         Mar. − 1,536 948 − 2,484 − 636 − 458 − 178 − 900
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own 8Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices. 9Net pur-
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. chases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  re sidents;  
3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction transaction  values. 10Domestic and foreign shares. 11Residual; also including
values. 4Domestic and foreign debt securities. 5Book values; statistically adjusted. purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 12Net
6Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct in vestment) by
mutual funds. Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank. 7Net purchases or non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values. provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
May 2019
VIII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
  
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 
 
Debt securities
Corporate issued by special-
Mortgage Public purpose Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe debt securities (non-MFIs)  2 debt securities credit institutions
Gross sales
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,044 262,873
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,9742009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,421
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,3752012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,5302013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,8922014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
2016 
3 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
2017 3 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2018         Aug. 101,600 64,709 1,549 184 50,391 12,584 5,293 31,597
         Sep. 86,951 56,321 4,237 560 41,454 10,070 4,764 25,867
         Oct. 105,393 68,523 3,117 636 54,075 10,694 7,347 29,523
         Nov. 92,380 53,292 3,214 39 39,121 10,918 5,917 33,171         Dec. 54,388 28,723 2,215 151 19,140 7,217 11,345 14,320
2019         Jan. 127,454 77,489 6,215 3,057 58,545 9,672 5,380 44,585
         Feb. 123,547 81,698 5,742 1,909 57,017 17,030 5,091 36,758         Mar. 116,190 65,908 1,768 741 50,411 12,988 7,155 43,128
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four  years 4
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,6592008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,4072009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,4312012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,8882013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,7652014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 
3 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017 3 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2018         Aug. 27,181 12,138 1,305 133 4,488 6,212 2,962 12,081
         Sep. 35,433 19,654 3,047 558 13,354 2,694 3,847 11,932
         Oct. 24,646 9,564 2,567 636 3,609 2,751 4,924 10,158
         Nov. 32,905 15,498 2,686 39 9,850 2,924 5,015 12,391         Dec. 16,845 5,192 1,542 20 1,905 1,725 8,650 3,003
2019         Jan. 46,309 24,508 5,786 750 15,779 2,194 4,264 17,538
         Feb. 42,078 23,849 3,661 1,726 13,196 5,266 3,505 14,723         Mar. 38,161 11,772 1,637 685 4,153 5,296 4,995 21,394
Net sales 5
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,0932008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,3022009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,2892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,2982013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,4792014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 
3 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017 3 2,669 5,954 6,389 − 4,697 18,788 − 14,525 6,828 − 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 − 6,564 18,850 − 5,453 9,738 − 33,630
2018         Aug. 11,892 2,687 886 − 481 − 1,396 3,679 − 3,774 12,979
         Sep. 11,957 8,528 2,319 42 5,728 438 714 2,715
         Oct. 2,584 7,796 2,226 − 359 3,035 2,894 3,318 − 8,529
         Nov. 13,993 3,367 1,184 − 662 1,476 1,370 − 574 11,200         Dec. − 30,192 − 11,122 966 − 1,558 − 7,164 − 3,366 − 593 − 18,478
2019         Jan. 10,398 8,587 4,184 1,318 6,820 − 3,735 735 1,075
         Feb. 16,523 17,671 2,937 0 9,033 5,702 2,320 − 3,468         Mar. 13,397 3,874 − 910 − 280 5,369 − 306 1,676 7,847
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Supplemen t 2 − Capital of debt securities. 4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 5 Gross
market statistics on pp. 23 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2 Including sales less redemptions. 
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3 Sectoral reclassification

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
May 2019
VIII. Capital market
 
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
 
 
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
 
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special-purpose Other bank bonds Public
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017 1 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2018         Sep. 3,104,917 1,194,119 156,711 54,018 672,715 310,674 311,376 1,599,422
         Oct. 3,107,502 1,201,915 158,937 53,659 675,750 313,569 314,694 1,590,893
         Nov. 3,121,495 1,205,282 160,121 52,996 677,226 314,938 314,120 1,602,093
         Dec. 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 311,572 313,527 1,583,616
2019         Jan. 3,101,701 1,202,748 165,272 52,757 676,882 307,837 314,262 1,584,691
         Feb. 3,118,224 1,220,419 168,209 52,757 685,915 313,538 316,582 1,581,223
         Mar. 3,131,621 1,224,293 167,299 52,477 691,284 313,232 318,258 1,589,070
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-March 2019 
996,828 445,320 44,278 17,930 278,215 104,896 62,858 488,651     less than  2
625,933 284,618 39,509 12,291 162,442 70,378 47,477 293,837 2 to less than  4
514,273 207,872 40,116 7,507 114,477 45,771 48,440 257,959 4 to less than  6
308,052 121,754 21,702 8,029 58,168 33,853 29,752 156,545 6 to less than  8
236,555 84,273 15,763 4,330 44,318 19,863 17,326 134,954 8 to less than 10
118,035 31,913 4,500 568 14,434 12,411 27,542 58,580 10 to less than 15
84,047 18,934 576 1,373 13,580 3,405 6,273 58,839 15 to less than 20
247,900 29,607 854 448 5,651 22,655 78,588 139,704 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for
reclassification of debt securities. 2Adjustments due to change of domicile of debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
issuers. 3Calculated from month under review until final maturity for debt securities
 
 
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita- cash payments
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims of shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  1 bonus shares real assets etc. of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 − − 457 − 661 − 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 − − 1,055 − 1,111 − 946 1,634,155
2018         Sep. 180,260 256 189 195 1 − − 51 − 36 − 43 1,856,858
         Oct. 180,431 170 284 32−2 − 9 1 − 2 9 1,759,237
         Nov. 180,307 − 123 106 1 93−00 − 2 5 2 1,729,978
         Dec. 180,187 − 120 317 22 6 − − 13 − 423 − 29 1,634,155
2019         Jan. 180,090 − 97 223 − − − − 2 − 8 − 310 1,726,959
         Feb. 180,116 26 116 −−−− − 3 7 − 5 2 1,755,552
         Mar. 180,706 590 929 179 − − − 486 2 − 34 1,722,937
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and Deutsche
out of company profits. 2All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
May 2019
 VIII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Corporate German German With a residual With a residual
maturity of bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share maturity of more
9 to (non- index share price index than 9 years and € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total up to 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1,000
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.062017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.642018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2018         Nov. 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.6 1.0 3.0 141.47 109.14 509.46 11,257.24
         Dec. 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.6 1.0 3.3 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019         Jan. 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.5 0.9 3.3 142.15 110.01 505.55 11,173.10
         Feb. 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.8 3.0 142.06 109.52 517.62 11,515.64         Mar. 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.6 2.7 143.19 111.35 516.84 11,526.04
         Apr. 0.1 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 0.3 0.5 2.6 142.69 110.72 552.28 12,344.08
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of standing of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthl y figures are calcula-
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt ted on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annu al figures
securities and similar, debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero coupon are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts out- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which:
Sales of which: of which:
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0352012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4372013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 − 1,745 143,256 44,266 − 3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,8712016 157,068 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,698 163,998 2,877 − 3,172 161,121 40,870 − 6,9312017 145,017 94,921 29,560 − 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 50,096 147,006 4,938 1,048 142,068 49,048 − 1,9912018 122,353 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 18,660 128,170 2,979 − 2,306 125,191 20,966 − 5,821
2018         Sep. 7,531 5,836 937 25 − 285 797 4,899 1,695 8,132 1,126 249 7,006 1,446 − 601
         Oct. 4,731 6,658 649 80 − 713 820 6,009 − 1,927 5,704 180 − 758 5,524 − 1,169 − 974
         Nov. 11,824 11,097 1,729 378 542 580 9,368 727 11,966 − 1,338 − 718 13,304 1,445 − 143         Dec. 17,639 16,880 − 1,797 6 − 2,620 511 18,676 759 17,176 − 697 − 574 17,873 1,333 462
2019         Jan. 11,660 7,739 1,569 56 43 1,336 6,170 3,921 12,727 − 1,334 423 14,061 3,498 − 1,067
         Feb. 12,476 8,702 1,188 − 107 127 965 7,514 3,774 14,478 692 1,228 13,786 2,546 − 2,002         Mar. 9,608 6,647 302 − 283 − 29 624 6,345 2,961 10,351 698 595 9,653 2,366 − 743
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
May 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2017 2018 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 37.18 48.20 25.66 0.02 25.72 − 15.64 0.05 12.22 29.04
Debt securities − 3.40 − 5.65 5.10 − 1.05 − 3.01 0.65 0.55 1.46 2.44
Short-term debt securities − 0.58 − 2.26 1.00 − 0.26 − 0.34 − 0.12 − 0.02 0.38 0.77
Long-term debt securities − 2.81 − 3.39 4.10 − 0.78 − 2.67 0.77 0.57 1.09 1.68
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 2.68 − 2.80 1.45 − 1.07 − 1.15 0.11 0.47 − 0.02 0.89
Non-financial corporations 0.67 − 0.56 0.51 − 0.56 − 0.14 − 0.01 0.32 − 0.13 0.33
Financial corporations − 2.53 − 0.41 1.18 − 0.14 − 0.59 0.19 0.31 0.08 0.61
General government − 0.82 − 1.82 − 0.25 − 0.37 − 0.43 − 0.07 − 0.15 0.03 − 0.05
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 0.72 − 2.85 3.66 0.02 − 1.86 0.54 0.08 1.48 1.56
Loans 18.11 52.64 − 23.47 7.52 1.67 − 2.46 − 9.92 − 0.59 − 10.51
Short-term loans 18.80 28.74 4.73 2.69 4.31 5.71 − 4.96 − 0.62 4.59
Long-term loans − 0.70 23.90 − 28.19 4.83 − 2.63 − 8.17 − 4.96 0.03 − 15.09
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 0.67 21.78 − 3.15 2.42 7.47 − 0.75 − 3.75 4.64 − 3.29
Non-financial corporations − 4.78 15.23 − 9.64 4.07 4.18 − 2.41 − 4.52 2.50 − 5.20
Financial corporations 5.25 6.26 6.29 − 1.72 3.22 1.60 0.72 2.10 1.87
General government 0.20 0.29 0.20 0.07 0.07 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05
Loans to the rest of the world 17.44 30.86 − 20.32 5.10 − 5.80 − 1.71 − 6.17 − 5.23 − 7.22
Equity and investment fund shares 89.30 54.66 121.40 17.38 17.98 30.21 42.62 40.73 7.84
Equity 83.47 46.11 119.73 15.11 8.27 26.69 41.64 40.63 10.77
Listed shares of domestic sectors 22.91 − 3.82 18.82 1.91 0.65 21.74 − 2.70 − 1.34 1.12
Non-financial corporations 22.59 − 3.76 18.27 1.96 0.80 21.64 − 2.90 − 1.38 0.91
Financial corporations 0.31 − 0.06 0.55 − 0.04 − 0.14 0.10 0.20 0.04 0.21
Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.84 7.16 2.12 − 5.14 0.42 0.80 16.15 − 15.14 0.32
Other equity  1 49.73 42.77 98.79 18.34 7.20 4.15 28.19 57.11 9.33
Investment fund shares 5.83 8.55 1.67 2.26 9.71 3.52 0.98 0.10 − 2.93
Money market fund shares 0.36 − 0.46 − 0.53 − 1.07 0.89 − 0.63 − 0.03 − 0.14 0.27
Non-MMF investment fund shares 5.47 9.01 2.21 3.34 8.83 4.15 1.01 0.24 − 3.19
Insurance technical reserves 1.15 3.92 4.68 1.26 0.51 0.96 1.36 1.33 1.04
Financial derivatives 22.74 12.68 6.19 2.85 2.86 2.57 − 2.68 1.37 4.94
Other accounts receivable 3.76 155.95 36.53 56.16 33.87 26.61 10.62 0.56 − 1.26
Total 168.83 322.40 176.10 84.13 79.61 42.89 42.61 57.07 33.54
External financing
Debt securities 23.71 8.56 7.08 0.96 0.55 2.79 2.36 0.90 1.03
Short-term securities − 0.15 0.60 4.08 − 2.62 − 1.83 2.54 1.48 0.38 − 0.32
Long-term securities 23.85 7.95 3.00 3.58 2.37 0.24 0.89 0.53 1.35
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 10.82 7.13 3.70 0.76 1.83 2.48 1.65 − 0.98 0.55
Non-financial corporations 0.67 − 0.56 0.51 − 0.56 − 0.14 − 0.01 0.32 − 0.13 0.33
Financial corporations 10.06 9.13 3.17 1.48 2.39 2.19 1.38 − 0.58 0.18
General government 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 − 0.01 0.00 0.00
Households 0.08 − 1.45 0.01 − 0.16 − 0.42 0.29 − 0.05 − 0.27 0.04
Debt securities of the rest of the world 12.89 1.42 3.38 0.20 − 1.28 0.31 0.71 1.88 0.48
Loans 41.74 97.41 135.49 23.95 14.83 40.15 46.92 33.60 14.83
Short-term loans 14.98 21.51 69.62 9.93 − 6.31 26.97 22.86 23.49 − 3.71
Long-term loans 26.76 75.91 65.88 14.02 21.14 13.18 24.06 10.11 18.54
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 20.78 55.94 78.12 14.94 10.82 27.94 19.87 23.77 6.54
Non-financial corporations − 4.78 15.23 − 9.64 4.07 4.18 − 2.41 − 4.52 2.50 − 5.20
Financial corporations 22.35 40.62 84.15 13.16 4.12 30.50 23.61 20.14 9.89
General government 3.22 0.09 3.61 − 2.28 2.52 − 0.15 0.78 1.13 1.85
Loans from the rest of the world 20.95 41.47 57.38 9.00 4.01 12.21 27.05 9.83 8.29
Equity 16.09 13.41 14.80 5.76 − 2.67 2.40 11.38 − 1.03 2.06
Listed shares of domestic sectors 27.31 6.93 73.09 3.43 5.36 19.82 4.46 5.16 43.64
Non-financial corporations 22.59 − 3.76 18.27 1.96 0.80 21.64 − 2.90 − 1.38 0.91
Financial corporations − 2.10 9.53 46.56 0.26 3.83 − 5.23 4.50 4.07 43.23
General government 0.07 0.51 0.53 0.16 0.15 0.16 0.15 0.09 0.13
Households 6.74 0.65 7.72 1.05 0.59 3.26 2.71 2.38 − 0.63
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 25.79 − 2.59 − 31.81 − 1.47 − 4.71 8.91 6.20 − 4.78 − 42.14
Other equity  1 14.57 9.07 − 26.47 3.80 − 3.32 − 26.33 0.71 − 1.42 0.56
Insurance technical reserves 3.60 7.25 7.25 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 0.13 3.69 3.61 1.00 − 2.12 1.50 3.27 3.72 − 4.87
Other accounts payable 37.62 57.05 22.26 25.29 15.71 18.30 19.82 5.60 − 21.46
Total 122.62 187.37 190.50 58.76 28.11 66.95 85.55 44.60 − 6.60
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
May 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2017 2018 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 516.9 559.6 575.8 533.7 559.6 528.4 540.4 541.9 575.8
Debt securities 44.8 38.8 43.1 41.9 38.8 39.2 39.7 41.0 43.1
Short-term debt securities 5.5 3.3 4.2 3.6 3.3 3.1 3.1 3.5 4.2
Long-term debt securities 39.3 35.6 38.8 38.3 35.6 36.0 36.6 37.5 38.8
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 20.8 18.2 19.2 19.3 18.2 18.2 18.7 18.6 19.2
Non-financial corporations 4.4 3.9 4.3 4.1 3.9 3.8 4.1 4.0 4.3Financial corporations 12.0 11.7 12.7 12.3 11.7 11.9 12.2 12.3 12.7General government 4.4 2.5 2.3 3.0 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 24.0 20.7 23.8 22.6 20.7 21.0 21.1 22.5 23.8
Loans 546.2 590.7 567.7 591.2 590.7 586.9 578.5 577.9 567.7
Short-term loans 450.7 475.0 480.2 472.3 475.0 480.1 476.0 475.5 480.2
Long-term loans 95.5 115.8 87.4 118.9 115.8 106.9 102.5 102.4 87.4
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 351.2 373.0 369.9 365.6 373.0 372.3 368.5 373.2 369.9
Non-financial corporations 282.6 297.8 288.2 293.6 297.8 295.4 290.9 293.4 288.2Financial corporations 62.0 68.2 74.5 65.0 68.2 69.8 70.5 72.6 74.5General government 6.7 7.0 7.2 7.0 7.0 7.1 7.1 7.2 7.2
Loans to the rest of the world 195.0 217.7 197.8 225.6 217.7 214.6 210.0 204.7 197.8
Equity and investment fund shares 2,013.5 2,155.5 2,119.9 2,112.5 2,155.5 2,152.2 2,202.8 2,232.2 2,119.9
Equity 1,853.6 1,985.5 1,955.6 1,951.1 1,985.5 1,981.3 2,030.0 2,058.4 1,955.6
Listed shares of domestic sectors 292.3 332.2 302.6 322.7 332.2 349.4 338.5 338.3 302.6
Non-financial corporations 286.2 325.3 296.0 315.9 325.3 342.2 330.9 330.4 296.0Financial corporations 6.1 6.8 6.6 6.9 6.8 7.1 7.6 7.9 6.6
Listed shares of the rest of the world 44.4 48.5 46.3 47.8 48.5 49.3 64.8 49.7 46.3
Other equity  
1 1,516.8 1,604.8 1,606.8 1,580.6 1,604.8 1,582.6 1,626.7 1,670.3 1,606.8
Investment fund shares 159.9 170.1 164.3 161.4 170.1 170.9 172.8 173.9 164.3
Money market fund shares 1.9 1.5 1.0 0.6 1.5 0.9 0.9 0.7 1.0Non-MMF investment fund shares 158.0 168.6 163.3 160.7 168.6 170.0 172.0 173.1 163.3
Insurance technical reserves 50.2 54.2 59.0 53.5 54.2 55.4 56.6 57.8 59.0Financial derivatives 60.1 49.3 43.7 50.2 49.3 48.7 42.8 41.4 43.7Other accounts receivable 974.2 1,081.3 1,116.1 1,075.4 1,081.3 1,137.0 1,150.5 1,145.9 1,116.1
Total 4,205.9 4,529.5 4,525.2 4,458.3 4,529.5 4,547.8 4,611.4 4,638.2 4,525.2
Liabilities
Debt securities 183.8 210.6 187.8 210.2 210.6 185.4 189.0 185.8 187.8
Short-term securities 2.9 3.4 6.1 5.3 3.4 5.9 7.4 6.5 6.1
Long-term securities 180.9 207.2 181.6 205.0 207.2 179.4 181.6 179.2 181.6
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 72.1 82.8 78.9 80.0 82.8 79.6 80.1 78.9 78.9
Non-financial corporations 4.4 3.9 4.3 4.1 3.9 3.8 4.1 4.0 4.3Financial corporations 51.9 64.3 60.5 61.0 64.3 61.2 61.5 60.7 60.5General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1Households 15.7 14.4 13.9 14.8 14.4 14.4 14.3 14.1 13.9
Debt securities of the rest of the world 111.7 127.8 108.9 130.3 127.8 105.8 108.9 106.9 108.9
Loans 1,514.1 1,610.8 1,735.6 1,586.2 1,610.8 1,648.0 1,693.2 1,721.2 1,735.6
Short-term loans 598.0 624.1 688.9 621.3 624.1 650.1 674.1 692.7 688.9
Long-term loans 916.1 986.8 1,046.6 964.9 986.8 997.9 1,019.1 1,028.5 1,046.6
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 1,160.2 1,211.4 1,282.1 1,201.0 1,211.4 1,237.4 1,253.3 1,276.1 1,282.1
Non-financial corporations 282.6 297.8 288.2 293.6 297.8 295.4 290.9 293.4 288.2Financial corporations 817.2 854.2 931.9 849.7 854.2 883.0 903.0 922.4 931.9General government 60.4 59.5 62.0 57.7 59.5 59.0 59.5 60.4 62.0
Loans from the rest of the world 353.9 399.4 453.5 385.2 399.4 410.6 439.9 445.1 453.5
Equity 2,785.3 3,062.0 2,684.8 3,014.5 3,062.0 2,957.4 2,978.5 2,942.3 2,684.8
Listed shares of domestic sectors 664.0 756.6 691.2 737.6 756.6 745.7 735.0 740.5 691.2
Non-financial corporations 286.2 325.3 296.0 315.9 325.3 342.2 330.9 330.4 296.0Financial corporations 154.7 180.2 187.5 173.4 180.2 163.6 164.5 167.5 187.5General government 44.4 51.8 48.7 51.0 51.8 48.7 49.0 52.1 48.7Households 178.7 199.2 159.0 197.4 199.2 191.1 190.7 190.5 159.0
Listed shares of the rest of the world 803.7 925.3 732.9 906.1 925.3 881.6 907.0 875.0 732.9
Other equity  
1 1,317.6 1,380.1 1,260.7 1,370.8 1,380.1 1,330.2 1,336.5 1,326.8 1,260.7
Insurance technical reserves 259.5 266.7 274.0 264.9 266.7 268.6 270.4 272.2 274.0Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 38.2 26.9 23.3 31.3 26.9 26.7 28.2 30.1 23.3
Other accounts payable 1,056.9 1,103.8 1,150.7 1,091.6 1,103.8 1,128.7 1,147.9 1,158.4 1,150.7
Total 5,837.8 6,280.8 6,056.2 6,198.8 6,280.8 6,214.7 6,307.2 6,310.0 6,056.2
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
May 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2017 2018 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 114.85 106.17 140.00 22.25 41.37 14.00 40.39 27.25 58.36
Currency 21.18 19.73 32.22 6.67 3.81 3.67 7.57 7.00 13.98
Deposits 93.68 86.45 107.78 15.58 37.57 10.33 32.83 20.24 44.38
Transferable deposits 105.26 99.72 109.62 20.65 35.86 12.14 33.90 21.35 42.23
Time deposits 1.28 − 4.03 6.79 − 2.47 2.34 1.15 1.99 1.43 2.23
Savings deposits
(including savings certificates) − 12.87 − 9.24 − 8.63 − 2.61 − 0.64 − 2.95 − 3.06 − 2.53 − 0.08
Debt securities − 12.80 − 8.14 1.81 − 2.28 − 3.01 − 1.00 0.52 1.71 0.58
Short-term debt securities − 0.16 − 0.20 − 0.13 − 0.34 − 0.41 − 0.37 − 0.01 − 0.02 0.26
Long-term debt securities − 12.63 − 7.93 1.94 − 1.94 − 2.60 − 0.63 0.53 1.72 0.32
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 4.14 − 5.09 2.29 − 1.88 − 2.56 − 0.01 0.16 1.18 0.96
Non-financial corporations − 0.01 − 1.43 − 0.09 − 0.14 − 0.40 0.08 − 0.23 − 0.12 0.19
Financial corporations − 2.48 − 2.68 2.83 − 1.55 − 1.97 0.07 0.61 1.36 0.79
General government − 1.65 − 0.99 − 0.46 − 0.18 − 0.19 − 0.17 − 0.22 − 0.06 − 0.02
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 8.66 − 3.05 − 0.48 − 0.41 − 0.45 − 0.98 0.36 0.53 − 0.38
Equity and investment fund shares 45.78 55.13 39.42 14.08 16.62 17.73 8.06 11.79 1.84
Equity 21.65 14.69 18.92 5.11 3.97 7.35 2.79 7.01 1.76
Listed shares of domestic sectors 9.37 0.90 9.46 0.89 0.04 4.27 2.55 2.63 0.02
Non-financial corporations 6.09 0.54 6.33 1.01 0.47 3.12 1.63 2.27 − 0.69
Financial corporations 3.28 0.36 3.14 − 0.12 − 0.43 1.15 0.92 0.37 0.70
Listed shares of the rest of the world 6.94 9.66 4.41 2.94 2.77 1.47 − 0.83 2.82 0.95
Other equity  1 5.35 4.13 5.04 1.28 1.15 1.61 1.07 1.57 0.79
Investment fund shares 24.13 40.44 20.51 8.97 12.65 10.38 5.27 4.77 0.08
Money market fund shares − 0.53 − 0.28 − 0.33 − 0.16 0.05 − 0.40 − 0.03 − 0.06 0.16
Non-MMF investment fund shares 24.66 40.72 20.84 9.12 12.60 10.79 5.29 4.83 − 0.07
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 15.58 20.23 16.84 4.17 7.75 4.22 4.24 4.16 4.22
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 24.79 37.68 32.66 7.55 8.20 11.79 8.20 7.47 5.20
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 32.58 30.84 21.91 6.87 3.49 4.30 4.84 4.51 8.26
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  2 − 19.49 − 30.79 − 17.37 − 5.28 − 25.36 19.03 − 9.88 − 7.96 − 18.56
Total 201.31 211.12 235.27 47.35 49.06 70.09 56.37 48.91 59.89
  External financing
Loans 47.46 55.55 68.25 18.56 12.45 10.81 20.12 20.41 16.91
Short-term loans − 4.31 − 2.19 2.44 − 1.09 − 0.40 − 0.02 0.11 1.83 0.53
Long-term loans 51.76 57.74 65.81 19.66 12.85 10.83 20.01 18.58 16.39
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 41.92 47.41 57.25 15.84 12.15 9.00 15.79 17.50 14.97
Consumer loans 9.78 11.25 11.14 3.41 2.19 1.78 4.34 2.36 2.67
Entrepreneurial loans − 4.24 − 3.11 − 0.14 − 0.68 − 1.89 0.04 − 0.01 0.55 − 0.73
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 42.87 49.99 61.72 16.93 10.42 11.00 17.65 19.41 13.67
Loans from other financial institutions 4.59 5.57 6.52 1.63 2.03 − 0.19 2.47 1.00 3.24
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable − 0.23 0.53 0.08 0.02 0.34 0.22 0.01 − 0.05 − 0.10
Total 47.23 56.09 68.32 18.58 12.79 11.03 20.13 20.36 16.81
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
May 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2017 2018 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,208.7 2,313.7 2,455.5 2,274.3 2,313.7 2,327.7 2,368.1 2,397.1 2,455.5
Currency 174.4 194.1 226.3 190.3 194.1 197.8 205.3 212.3 226.3
Deposits 2,034.4 2,119.6 2,229.2 2,084.0 2,119.6 2,130.0 2,162.8 2,184.8 2,229.2
Transferable deposits 1,188.0 1,287.7 1,397.1 1,251.8 1,287.7 1,299.8 1,333.7 1,354.9 1,397.1Time deposits 248.7 245.4 252.4 243.1 245.4 246.6 248.6 250.2 252.4Savings deposits(including savings certificates) 597.7 586.5 579.7 589.1 586.5 583.6 580.5 579.8 579.7
Debt securities 127.4 120.5 115.7 123.6 120.5 117.7 118.1 119.3 115.7
Short-term debt securities 2.7 2.5 2.1 2.9 2.5 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.1
Long-term debt securities 124.7 118.0 113.6 120.7 118.0 115.6 116.0 117.3 113.6
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 85.6 82.5 79.9 85.1 82.5 81.2 81.4 82.5 79.9
Non-financial corporations 13.9 12.5 12.1 12.9 12.5 12.4 12.1 12.1 12.1Financial corporations 66.7 66.1 64.4 68.1 66.1 65.1 65.7 67.0 64.4General government 5.0 3.9 3.4 4.1 3.9 3.7 3.5 3.4 3.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 41.8 37.9 35.9 38.5 37.9 36.4 36.7 36.9 35.9
Equity and investment fund shares 1,105.7 1,215.8 1,138.9 1,190.9 1,215.8 1,196.1 1,214.9 1,239.8 1,138.9
Equity 587.9 639.7 583.2 630.2 639.7 624.0 628.5 644.2 583.2
Listed shares of domestic sectors 200.8 226.4 183.0 223.7 226.4 217.3 214.2 217.2 183.0
Non-financial corporations 169.8 190.3 151.0 188.4 190.3 182.5 180.8 180.8 151.0Financial corporations 31.0 36.1 32.0 35.4 36.1 34.8 33.4 36.5 32.0
Listed shares of the rest of the world 86.8 101.0 98.2 96.5 101.0 97.7 102.9 111.4 98.2
Other equity  
1 300.3 312.3 302.0 309.9 312.3 309.0 311.5 315.6 302.0
Investment fund shares 517.8 576.2 555.7 560.7 576.2 572.1 586.3 595.7 555.7
Money market fund shares 2.8 2.7 2.3 2.6 2.7 2.3 2.3 2.1 2.3Non-MMF investment fund shares 515.0 573.5 553.4 558.1 573.5 569.8 584.1 593.5 553.4
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 339.9 360.1 376.9 352.3 360.1 364.3 368.6 372.7 376.9
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 947.8 991.4 1,025.7 981.9 991.4 1,003.6 1,012.2 1,020.1 1,025.7
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 819.2 849.8 871.7 839.7 849.8 854.1 859.0 863.5 871.7
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 32.6 31.1 31.5 31.7 31.1 31.5 31.8 31.8 31.5
Total 5,581.4 5,882.5 6,016.0 5,794.4 5,882.5 5,895.1 5,972.6 6,044.4 6,016.0
  Liabilities
Loans 1,654.7 1,711.9 1,775.6 1,699.1 1,711.9 1,722.6 1,737.9 1,758.7 1,775.6
Short-term loans 56.6 54.4 58.1 54.8 54.4 54.4 54.5 56.3 58.1
Long-term loans 1,598.1 1,657.5 1,717.5 1,644.3 1,657.5 1,668.2 1,683.4 1,702.4 1,717.5
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 1,195.8 1,247.4 1,307.9 1,234.7 1,247.4 1,257.4 1,275.0 1,292.9 1,307.9Consumer loans 201.8 211.8 218.1 210.6 211.8 212.8 213.4 215.5 218.1Entrepreneurial loans 257.0 252.7 249.7 253.8 252.7 252.5 249.5 250.4 249.7
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,558.3 1,610.0 1,667.2 1,599.2 1,610.0 1,620.9 1,633.7 1,653.5 1,667.2Loans from other financial institutions 96.4 101.9 108.5 99.9 101.9 101.8 104.2 105.2 108.5Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.4 16.3 16.2 16.7 16.3 17.6 17.2 17.4 16.2
Total 1,670.1 1,728.3 1,791.9 1,715.8 1,728.3 1,740.3 1,755.1 1,776.1 1,791.9
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 − 4.0 − 7.4 − 2.5 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2014 + 16.7 + 13.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
2015 p + 23.9 + 14.7 + 2.2 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 28.7 + 11.5 + 4.2 + 4.8 + 8.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 34.0 + 6.1 + 8.3 + 9.5 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
2018 pe + 58.0 + 17.9 + 11.1 + 14.0 + 14.9 + 1.7 + 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4
2017         H1  p + 19.8 + 1.5 + 5.1 + 6.2 + 7.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4
         H2  p + 14.2 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2
2018         H1  pe + 48.2 + 17.3 + 14.5 + 7.5 + 9.0 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  pe + 9.8 + 0.6 − 3.3 + 6.6 + 6.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.3
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2012 2,225.2 1,387.9 684.1 169.8 1.2 80.7 50.3 24.8 6.2 0.0
2013 2,210.7 1,390.4 663.5 172.9 1.3 78.2 49.2 23.5 6.1 0.0
2014 2,212.3 1,396.5 657.8 174.5 1.4 75.3 47.5 22.4 5.9 0.0
2015 p 2,182.0 1,372.6 654.5 174.4 1.4 71.6 45.0 21.5 5.7 0.0
2016 p 2,165.9 1,366.8 637.5 175.8 1.1 68.5 43.3 20.2 5.6 0.0
2017 p 2,115.4 1,351.3 610.5 171.7 0.8 64.5 41.2 18.6 5.2 0.0
2018 p 2,063.2 1,323.0 595.5 162.6 0.7 60.9 39.1 17.6 4.8 0.0
2017         Q1  p 2,140.2 1,351.0 628.1 174.7 1.2 67.0 42.3 19.7 5.5 0.0
         Q2  p 2,133.9 1,353.6 620.5 174.6 0.9 66.4 42.1 19.3 5.4 0.0
         Q3  p 2,127.5 1,353.0 618.5 173.1 0.8 65.5 41.7 19.1 5.3 0.0
         Q4  p 2,115.4 1,351.3 610.5 171.7 0.8 64.5 41.2 18.6 5.2 0.0
2018         Q1  p 2,092.5 1,338.6 599.8 171.2 1.0 63.4 40.5 18.2 5.2 0.0
         Q2  p 2,076.9 1,329.3 595.9 169.8 0.9 62.2 39.8 17.9 5.1 0.0
         Q3  p 2,077.1 1,335.5 594.8 164.5 0.8 61.8 39.7 17.7 4.9 0.0
         Q4  p 2,063.2 1,323.0 595.5 162.6 0.7 60.9 39.1 17.6 4.8 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 1,259.0 651.0 465.0 143.0 1,263.0 666.4 217.8 133.0 60.1 55.5 130.2 − 4.0 1,120.3
2014 1,308.5 673.6 482.0 153.0 1,291.8 691.1 224.4 137.7 60.1 47.0 131.6 + 16.7 1,160.2
2015 p 1,356.5 704.2 500.8 151.5 1,332.6 721.7 229.8 143.8 64.1 42.3 130.9 + 23.9 1,212.0
2016 p 1,415.5 738.7 523.9 152.9 1,386.8 755.2 237.8 150.1 68.2 37.4 138.0 + 28.7 1,269.5
2017 p 1,473.8 772.5 548.6 152.8 1,439.8 784.5 246.7 156.3 72.4 33.8 146.1 + 34.0 1,327.9
2018 pe 1,543.6 807.8 571.7 164.0 1,485.5 806.5 256.3 161.8 78.1 31.0 151.9 + 58.0 1,386.6
As a percentage of GDP
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.3
2013 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.1 39.6
2014 44.5 22.9 16.4 5.2 44.0 23.5 7.6 4.7 2.0 1.6 4.5 + 0.6 39.5
2015 p 44.5 23.1 16.4 5.0 43.7 23.7 7.5 4.7 2.1 1.4 4.3 + 0.8 39.8
2016 p 44.8 23.4 16.6 4.8 43.9 23.9 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.2 4.4 + 0.9 40.2
2017 p 45.0 23.6 16.7 4.7 43.9 23.9 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.0 4.5 + 1.0 40.5
2018 pe 45.6 23.9 16.9 4.8 43.9 23.8 7.6 4.8 2.3 0.9 4.5 + 1.7 41.0
Percentage growth rates
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.6
2013 + 3.1 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 3.2 + 2.6 + 5.1 − 2.2 − 12.0 + 15.4 . + 3.4
2014 + 3.9 + 3.5 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.3 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 15.4 + 1.1 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.7 + 4.5 + 3.9 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 6.6 − 9.9 − 0.6 . + 4.5
2016 p + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 0.9 + 4.1 + 4.6 + 3.5 + 4.4 + 6.5 − 11.7 + 5.5 . + 4.7
2017 p + 4.1 + 4.6 + 4.7 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 3.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 6.2 − 9.5 + 5.9 . + 4.6
2018 pe + 4.7 + 4.6 + 4.2 + 7.4 + 3.2 + 2.8 + 3.9 + 3.6 + 7.9 − 8.5 + 4.0 . + 4.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  
Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 + 17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.3 1,236.7 + 8.6
2015 p 829.5 673.3 10.4 804.1 244.1 302.6 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,300.8 1,273.4 + 27.4
2016 p 862.1 705.8 9.0 843.4 251.3 320.5 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 18.7 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.0 1,329.2 + 25.8
2017 p 900.0 734.5 7.9 872.1 261.6 325.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 27.9 631.3 621.8 + 9.5 1,417.0 1,379.7 + 37.4
2016         Q1  p 206.1 169.9 1.4 205.5 60.0 81.2 17.7 8.4 2.2 + 0.6 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 322.2 325.3 − 3.0
         Q2  p 216.7 176.6 2.4 194.1 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 338.5 314.2 + 24.3
         Q3  p 207.1 169.3 2.9 210.9 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 328.2 333.4 − 5.2
         Q4  p 232.6 189.2 2.1 233.2 68.1 82.6 7.7 17.2 4.8 − 0.6 160.1 152.2 + 7.8 365.3 358.1 + 7.2
2017         Q1  p 216.0 180.4 0.9 199.6 62.9 80.3 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 16.4 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 338.0 326.4 + 11.6
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.6 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.7 + 13.4
         Q3  p 219.6 180.4 3.5 215.9 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 3.8 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 346.1 343.2 + 2.8
         Q4  p 243.8 196.3 2.1 244.4 69.8 84.7 6.9 19.2 4.1 − 0.6 168.2 158.0 + 10.2 383.4 373.8 + 9.6
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 421.2 400.5 + 20.7 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2016         Q1  p 81.1 82.2 − 1.1 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
         Q2  p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
         Q3  p 85.2 88.6 − 3.5 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
         Q4  p 90.9 93.9 − 3.0 104.3 104.4 − 0.0 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
2017         Q1  p 88.2 82.9 + 5.3 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.0 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
         Q3  p 88.6 93.6 − 5.0 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
         Q4  p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.7 109.2 − 4.5 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 114.1 118.9 − 4.8 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2017         Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
         Q2 177,090 149,915 76,391 66,605 6,918 27,631 − 456 6,825
         Q3 180,407 155,250 82,576 66,718 5,957 25,517 − 361 7,467
         Q4 195,537 170,139 92,507 71,019 6,613 34,060 − 8,662 6,471
2018         Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
         Q2 194,715 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 29,064 − 540 6,592
         Q3 189,015 161,683 84,952 69,414 7,317 27,579 − 248 7,579
         Q4 203,128 177,157 92,363 76,459 8,335 35,492 − 9,521 6,206
2019         Q1 ... 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 ... ... 6,270
2018         Mar. . 62,868 32,928 27,419 2,521 . . 2,133
2019         Mar. . 65,536 34,406 28,556 2,573 . . 2,090
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2017         Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
         Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121
         Q3 165,923 75,218 47,253 12,720 6,034 9,211 56,481 42,571 13,911 2,214 25,114 5,580 1,315 10,673
         Q4 182,288 82,077 54,707 14,873 6,843 5,654 58,128 43,846 14,282 3,868 31,587 5,384 1,243 12,149
2018         Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
         Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912
         Q3 173,202 78,105 50,368 12,683 7,192 7,862 59,169 43,951 15,218 2,315 26,424 5,797 1,391 11,519
         Q4 190,161 86,001 58,409 15,204 7,513 4,876 60,581 44,994 15,587 4,257 31,936 6,109 1,276 13,004
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
2018         Mar. 67,995 40,329 15,022 15,369 8,160 1,779 16,034 11,596 4,438 21 9,091 2,069 452 5,127
2019         Mar. 70,888 41,924 15,856 15,895 8,899 1,273 16,213 11,608 4,605 11 10,067 2,281 392 5,352
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2018: 49.6:47.2:3.2. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2018: 22.7:77.3. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,017
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2017         Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
         Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 − 5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 18,113 13,881 3,832         Q3 10,497 4,144 3,867 2,669 2,132 1,628 502 −324 3,394 1,497 417 273 16,698 12,443 3,824         Q4 15,622 4,677 4,261 2,070 1,906 1,786 538 727 3,257 1,438 456 233 17,118 13,670 3,082
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
         Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 18,827 14,548 3,853         Q3 10,423 4,353 3,886 2,752 2,128 1,677 531 674 3,592 1,463 464 278 18,128 13,764 3,919         Q4 15,436 4,860 4,543 2,197 1,956 1,650 545 749 3,645 1,752 481 231 17,224 13,713 3,140
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 ... ... ...
2018         Mar. 3,150 2,227 1,103 735 958 594 142 184 1,222 492 155 199 . . .
2019         Mar. 3,181 2,319 1,405 1,380 909 539 146 188 1,293 634 156 197 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,315
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 
p 311,975 221,558 89,699 307,944 263,687 18,582 + 4,031 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2016         Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
         Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220         Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213         Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115         Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −
2016         Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
         Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −
         Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −
         Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −
         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −
         Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −
         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −
         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 and aids benefits iture  5 surplus
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,041
2018 p 242,367 224,913 14,500 239,807 74,544 38,566 40,023 14,453 15,894 13,091 11,481 + 2,560
2016         Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
         Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615
         Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517
         Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298
         Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415
         Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264
         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934
         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. 
sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 
p 37,719 37,654 41,273 4,783 12,952 10,877 2,080 1,594 − 3,553
2016         Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
         Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259         Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147         Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400         Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999         Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,202 3,251 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,229 3,251 2,835 561 384 − 510
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which: of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,225,204 12,126 652,393 199,132 60,157 1,301,397
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,210,739 12,438 660,140 190,555 43,994 1,303,6122014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,212,280 12,774 630,752 190,130 44,949 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,181,972 85,952 617,681 186,661 45,028 1,246,650
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,165,891 205,391 594,765 179,755 41,737 1,144,2432017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017  
p 2,115,397 319,159 547,973 175,617 38,678 1,033,970
2018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018  p 2,063,172 364,731 493,533 181,077 39,043 984,788
2016         Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2016          Q1 2,190,308 108,746 632,259 183,160 41,396 1,224,747
         Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084          Q2 2,193,776 142,139 620,966 181,372 39,602 1,209,696         Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864          Q3 2,187,329 172,567 607,540 179,359 38,912 1,188,950         Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333          Q4 2,165,891 205,391 594,765 179,755 41,737 1,144,243
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1  
p 2,140,165 239,495 581,651 178,219 39,561 1,101,239
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2  p 2,133,921 265,130 567,962 176,810 39,008 1,085,011
         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941          Q3  p 2,127,477 290,214 555,881 176,646 39,276 1,065,460
         Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95          Q4  p 2,115,397 319,159 547,973 175,617 38,678 1,033,970
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1  p 2,092,470 329,387 525,588 176,495 37,574 1,023,426
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2  p 2,076,933 344,279 509,060 179,856 36,929 1,006,809
         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3  p 2,077,122 356,899 497,343 180,464 37,203 1,005,212
         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4  p 2,063,172 364,731 493,533 181,077 39,043 984,788
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
 
 
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other government
or quarter) Total and deposits  1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2012 2,225,204 9,742 106,945 1,441,406 124,389 542,722 . .
2013 2,210,739 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 100,646 542,966 . .
2014 2,212,280 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,945 530,073 . .
2015 2,181,972 14,303 65,676 1,499,098 85,232 517,662 . .
2016         Q1 2,190,308 11,976 69,372 1,491,129 104,397 513,434 . .
         Q2 2,193,776 12,181 76,710 1,485,041 111,107 508,737 . .
         Q3 2,187,329 15,370 77,249 1,491,971 98,090 504,648 . .
         Q4 2,165,891 15,845 69,715 1,484,378 91,406 504,547 . .
2017         Q1  p 2,140,165 12,891 60,798 1,479,234 89,209 498,033 . .
         Q2  p 2,133,921 15,196 54,362 1,486,948 83,649 493,767 . .
         Q3  p 2,127,477 16,161 48,197 1,489,630 82,844 490,645 . .
         Q4  p 2,115,397 14,651 48,789 1,484,691 82,876 484,390 . .
2018         Q1  p 2,092,470 12,472 48,449 1,479,750 70,445 481,354 . .
         Q2  p 2,076,933 12,636 54,968 1,466,057 66,345 476,927 . .
         Q3  p 2,077,122 15,607 60,047 1,466,370 63,884 471,215 . .
         Q4  p 2,063,172 14,833 52,674 1,456,412 71,008 468,245 . .
Central government
2012 1,387,857 9,742 88,372 1,088,796 88,311 112,636 1,465 11,354
2013 1,390,440 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,970 122,852 2,696 10,303
2014 1,396,496 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,756 1,202 12,833
2015 1,372,604 14,303 49,512 1,139,039 45,256 124,494 2,932 13,577
2016         Q1 1,382,473 11,976 49,030 1,138,051 58,381 125,035 2,853 10,025
         Q2 1,391,131 12,181 59,399 1,129,874 65,168 124,508 2,803 11,367
         Q3 1,381,054 15,370 61,408 1,134,326 46,832 123,117 2,634 9,042
         Q4 1,366,840 15,845 55,208 1,124,445 50,004 121,338 2,238 8,478
2017         Q1  p 1,350,988 12,891 45,510 1,124,430 48,082 120,075 2,465 7,469
         Q2  p 1,353,600 15,196 40,225 1,132,686 44,682 120,811 2,547 8,136
         Q3  p 1,352,975 16,161 34,216 1,136,873 45,235 120,490 2,674 10,160
         Q4  p 1,351,290 14,651 36,297 1,132,542 47,758 120,041 2,935 10,603
2018         Q1  p 1,338,606 12,472 35,921 1,133,358 37,206 119,650 2,953 9,862
         Q2  p 1,329,320 12,636 42,883 1,120,469 34,038 119,293 2,662 10,643
         Q3  p 1,335,479 15,607 46,608 1,119,011 35,617 118,637 2,492 10,185
         Q4  p 1,322,995 14,833 42,237 1,107,646 41,057 117,222 2,468 9,917
State government
2012 684,123 − 18,802 355,756 12,314 297,252 13,197 2,968
2013 663,514 − 6,847 360,706 11,862 284,099 12,141 2,655
2014 657,812 − 8,391 361,916 19,182 268,323 14,825 2,297
2015 654,484 − 16,169 362,376 18,707 257,232 15,867 4,218
2016         Q1 647,567 − 20,347 355,304 21,563 250,352 12,358 4,230
         Q2 644,144 − 17,318 357,069 23,456 246,301 13,860 4,061
         Q3 644,655 − 15,848 359,618 26,149 243,040 11,685 3,871
         Q4 637,534 − 14,515 361,996 16,116 244,907 11,408 3,376
2017         Q1  p 628,149 − 15,308 356,832 15,938 240,071 10,407 3,527
         Q2  p 620,539 − 14,167 356,647 14,792 234,933 11,180 3,578
         Q3  p 618,534 − 14,021 355,342 16,358 232,813 13,313 3,581
         Q4  p 610,473 − 12,543 354,941 15,154 227,835 14,325 3,609
2018         Q1  p 599,752 − 12,583 349,945 13,307 223,916 13,305 3,740
         Q2  p 595,914 − 12,144 349,086 13,648 221,036 14,387 3,754
         Q3  p 594,816 − 13,499 350,782 11,107 219,427 13,967 3,666
         Q4  p 595,496 − 10,499 352,351 15,127 217,520 14,344 3,272
Local government
2012 169,839 − − 423 24,791 144,625 3,124 802
2013 172,858 − − 646 25,435 146,777 2,523 530
2014 174,527 − − 1,297 26,121 147,109 1,959 734
2015 174,415 − − 2,047 26,998 145,370 2,143 463
2016         Q1 176,617 − − 2,076 26,908 147,633 2,348 476
         Q2 176,233 − − 2,453 26,469 147,312 2,216 503
         Q3 177,037 − − 2,455 26,788 147,794 2,123 527
         Q4 175,839 − − 2,404 26,521 146,914 1,819 566
2017         Q1  p 174,709 − − 2,645 25,561 146,503 1,959 610
         Q2  p 174,565 − − 2,672 25,370 146,523 1,950 644
         Q3  p 173,054 − − 2,687 24,581 145,786 1,851 664
         Q4  p 171,702 − − 2,947 24,101 144,654 1,600 714
2018         Q1  p 171,159 − − 2,427 22,887 145,846 1,765 719
         Q2  p 169,777 − − 2,561 22,551 144,665 1,912 724
         Q3  p 164,544 − − 2,703 20,604 141,236 2,049 757
         Q4  p 162,623 − − 2,914 18,823 140,887 1,804 770
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2012 1,171 − − − 195 976 − 2,661
2013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,8722014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,1222015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,685
2016         Q1 1,211 − − − 458 753 − 2,828
         Q2 1,147 − − − 443 704 − 2,948         Q3 1,025 − − − 334 691 − 3,002         Q4 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2017         Q1  
p 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,226
         Q2  p 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,318
         Q3  p 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,433
         Q4  p 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2018         Q1  p 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,702
         Q2  p 883 − − − 383 500 − 3,840
         Q3  p 790 − − − 400 390 − 3,900
         Q4  p 674 − − − 372 302 − 4,659
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 984,256 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,997
2008 1,016,364 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 75,1442009 1,082,644 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,592
2010 1,334,021 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 239,112
2011 1,344,082 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 212,3222012 1,387,857 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,9472013 1,390,440 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,8222014 1,396,496 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 178,144
2015 1,372,604 14,303 1,070 1,188,551 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,750
2016 1,366,840 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,3422017 
p 1,351,290 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,800
2018 p 1,322,995 14,833 921 1,149,883 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,279
2016         Q1 1,382,473 11,976 1,051 1,187,081 666,565 225,678 61,893 14,603 4,395 98,232 20,526 1,205 183,416
         Q2 1,391,131 12,181 1,033 1,189,273 675,794 220,840 49,675 14,550 3,099 99,417 28,369 1,108 189,676         Q3 1,381,054 15,370 1,021 1,195,734 664,034 231,375 50,869 14,570 3,097 102,053 30,626 922 169,949         Q4 1,366,840 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,342
2017         Q1  
p 1,350,988 12,891 995 1,169,939 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 168,158
         Q2  p 1,353,600 15,196 986 1,172,911 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,493
         Q3  p 1,352,975 16,161 977 1,171,089 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,726
         Q4  p 1,351,290 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,800
2018         Q1  p 1,338,606 12,472 951 1,169,279 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,855
         Q2  p 1,329,320 12,636 941 1,163,353 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,330
         Q3  p 1,335,479 15,607 932 1,165,619 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,254
         Q4  p 1,322,995 14,833 921 1,149,883 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,279
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
May 2019
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2017   2018
  2016   2017   2018   2016   2017   2018   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2010 = 100 Annual percentage change
At  constant  prices,  chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 118.0 120.8 121.8 4.8 2.4 0.8 − 0.6 2.6 3.5 1.7 3.3 − 0.2 − 1.5
Construction 105.5 108.0 111.3 1.8 2.4 3.0 0.3 1.8 2.3 1.0 3.1 3.0 4.4
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and restaurant
services 110.6 114.3 116.7 1.3 3.4 2.1 2.2 3.5 2.8 1.9 2.8 1.7 2.0
Information and communication 132.9 137.6 142.5 3.4 3.6 3.5 3.2 3.4 3.4 3.6 3.9 3.3 3.4
Financial and insurance
activities 104.5 105.0 105.6 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.2 1.0 0.6 0.7
Real estate activities 104.5 105.6 106.8 0.0 1.1 1.1 0.4 1.3 1.4 1.1 1.0 1.0 1.2
Business services  1 109.5 112.3 114.2 1.0 2.6 1.7 0.9 2.9 2.3 1.8 2.8 1.5 0.9
Public services, education and
health 108.2 109.7 111.2 2.6 1.4 1.4 1.2 1.4 0.8 1.4 1.2 1.3 1.6
Other services 98.9 100.1 100.5 − 1.1 1.2 0.5 0.1 1.4 0.4 0.1 0.9 0.2 0.7
Gross value added 111.1 113.5 115.1 2.2 2.2 1.4 0.7 2.3 2.3 1.5 2.4 1.0 0.9
Gross domestic product  2 111.3 113.7 115.3 2.2 2.2 1.4 0.9 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 0.9
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 108.4 110.3 111.3 2.1 1.8 1.0 1.8 2.1 1.1 1.7 1.0 0.2 1.0
Government consumption 112.3 114.1 115.3 4.0 1.6 1.0 1.4 1.5 1.7 0.7 1.1 0.5 1.8
Machinery and equipment 113.8 118.0 123.0 2.2 3.7 4.2 1.7 4.1 4.7 4.8 5.4 3.4 3.5
Premises 112.3 115.6 118.4 3.8 2.9 2.4 1.6 3.0 1.8 0.5 2.7 2.3 4.0
Other investment  4 124.7 126.3 126.8 5.2 1.3 0.4 1.2 0.4 1.5 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.5
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.2 0.1 0.6 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.5
Domestic demand 109.5 111.7 113.9 3.0 2.0 1.9 2.0 2.2 1.5 1.5 1.9 2.2 2.2
Net exports  6 . . . − 0.5 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.9 0.1 0.8 0.0 0.6 − 0.9 − 1.1
Exports 127.8 133.7 136.4 2.3 4.6 2.0 1.8 4.9 4.7 2.2 4.3 1.2 0.4
Imports 125.5 131.6 136.0 4.1 4.8 3.3 4.5 5.5 3.7 2.6 3.7 3.8 3.2
Gross domestic product  2 111.3 113.7 115.3 2.2 2.2 1.4 0.9 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 0.9
At  current  prices  ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,675.6 1,732.2 1,776.7 2.7 3.4 2.6 3.4 3.6 2.7 3.1 2.6 1.9 2.7
Government consumption 615.5 638.9 662.2 4.8 3.8 3.6 3.4 3.9 4.4 3.3 3.8 3.1 4.3
Machinery and equipment 206.5 215.2 225.7 2.6 4.2 4.9 2.1 4.5 5.7 5.1 6.0 4.1 4.3
Premises 307.1 326.6 350.5 5.6 6.4 7.3 4.8 6.5 5.8 4.7 7.2 7.6 9.4
Other investment  4 120.4 123.9 127.1 6.0 2.9 2.6 2.8 2.1 3.1 2.6 2.6 2.6 2.7
Changes in inventories  5 − 12.8 − 7.2 14.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,912.3 3,029.5 3,156.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 4.0 4.3 3.6 3.3 4.1 4.8 4.6
Net exports 247.5 247.8 229.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,450.2 1,541.9 1,590.2 1.5 6.3 3.1 3.9 6.5 6.0 2.7 4.9 2.9 2.1
Imports 1,202.8 1,294.1 1,360.9 1.5 7.6 5.2 8.0 7.2 5.5 2.9 4.7 7.1 5.9
Gross domestic product  2 3,159.8 3,277.3 3,386.0 3.6 3.7 3.3 2.5 4.2 4.0 3.2 4.2 3.0 2.9
IV. Prices (2010 = 100)
Private consumption 106.9 108.6 110.4 0.7 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.7
Gross domestic product 110.1 111.8 113.8 1.4 1.5 1.9 1.6 2.0 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.9
Terms of trade 103.9 102.8 102.1 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 0.9
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,601.0 1,668.8 1,746.0 3.8 4.2 4.6 4.4 4.3 4.1 4.6 4.6 5.1 4.3
Entrepreneurial and property
income 762.7 787.6 785.3 3.5 3.3 − 0.3 − 1.5 5.4 3.3 − 0.0 3.4 − 2.2 − 2.2
National income 2,363.7 2,456.4 2,531.3 3.7 3.9 3.1 2.5 4.7 3.9 3.0 4.2 2.6 2.5
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,222.4 3,346.3 3,458.4 3.5 3.8 3.3 2.8 4.3 3.8 3.1 4.3 3.1 3.0
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2019. 1Professional, stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
May 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
2. Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015 = 100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.59 29.45 36.98 2.27 10.89 10.31 9.95 12.73 14.16
Period
2015 99.7 99.6 100.0 99.7 99.8 99.7 99.6 99.8 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.6
2016 101.5 105.2 98.5 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.6 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.12017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.7 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.22018
r 2 105.8 2 109.0 97.4 105.9 105.5 106.0 106.1 106.9 107.3 108.9 106.5 103.5
 
2018         Q1 102.5 87.5 105.5 104.9 105.9 104.1 108.8 104.3 106.8 108.0 100.4 109.1
         Q2 106.7 110.2 91.0 107.4 107.7 107.5 105.4 106.8 109.7 107.2 104.8 110.6         Q3 106.3 116.1 93.3 105.6 106.7 103.1 104.1 111.4 108.0 110.3 105.1 96.5         Q4
r 107.7 122.1 99.9 105.8 101.8 109.3 106.3 105.0 104.8 110.3 115.7 97.7
2019         Q1 x,p 101.6 95.3 103.0 102.6 103.7 102.3 109.3 99.5 104.7 105.5 99.5 102.5
 
2018         Mar. r 113.4 103.9 108.0 115.4 113.0 118.3 118.6 111.6 115.0 118.3 116.5 123.5
         Apr. r 104.4 106.3 93.1 105.0 105.7 105.4 103.2 102.4 108.1 103.6 100.2 112.1
         May r 106.0 110.9 90.7 106.4 107.9 104.6 102.7 108.9 109.0 105.5 101.6 108.0
         June r 109.8 113.5 89.2 110.8 109.5 112.4 110.2 109.0 111.9 112.4 112.5 111.8
         July 3,r 107.2 118.4 93.5 106.4 108.5 104.2 98.4 109.9 109.3 108.9 104.7 100.6
         Aug. 3,r 100.4 110.8 94.8 99.0 102.8 93.0 95.0 110.0 102.9 105.5 98.1 80.4
         Sep. r 111.2 119.0 91.6 111.4 108.8 112.1 118.8 114.3 111.7 116.5 112.6 108.5
         Oct. r 110.0 120.3 97.5 109.2 109.2 108.5 112.2 110.9 112.2 112.4 108.7 104.3
         Nov. r 111.3 122.0 99.0 110.5 107.3 113.5 112.0 108.4 112.0 114.7 113.4 107.8
         Dec. r 101.8 124.0 103.1 97.8 88.9 105.8 94.8 95.6 90.2 103.7 124.9 80.9
2019         Jan. x 93.6 77.1 109.8 95.2 99.5 90.5 101.9 98.0 99.2 98.7 87.9 89.9
         Feb. x 98.9 94.3 97.1 99.9 100.2 101.1 106.3 94.0 101.6 100.9 96.7 103.5
         Mar. x,p 112.4 114.6 102.1 112.8 111.4 115.3 119.8 106.4 113.4 117.0 113.9 114.2
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2015 + 0.9 − 2.3 + 5.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.8 + 5.6 − 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.52017 + 3.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.02018
r 2 + 0.9 2 + 0.3 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 − 1.6
 
2018         Q1 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 4.0 + 3.6 + 4.2 + 2.5 + 5.0 + 3.4 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 3.9
         Q2 + 2.2 − 0.8 − 3.0 + 3.2 + 2.1 + 3.3 − 0.2 + 6.4 + 2.5 + 2.5 + 2.9 + 4.4         Q3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 2.0 + 5.9 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.0 − 8.3         Q4
r − 2.0 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 1.8 − 3.0 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 6.7
2019         Q1 x,p − 0.9 + 9.0 − 2.4 − 2.2 − 2.0 − 1.8 + 0.5 − 4.7 − 2.0 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 6.0
 
2018         Mar. r + 3.5 − 1.7 + 5.4 + 4.2 + 2.7 + 5.3 + 3.6 + 4.3 + 2.3 + 5.7 + 6.3 + 7.2
         Apr. r + 1.3 − 2.7 − 2.5 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 3.7 − 2.3 + 3.7 + 2.4 + 0.7 + 2.8 + 4.7
         May r + 2.9 + 1.3 − 4.2 + 3.8 + 3.5 + 2.9 − 0.5 + 8.5 + 2.4 + 3.4 + 2.9 + 3.3
         June r + 2.5 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 3.5 + 2.5 + 3.4 + 2.0 + 6.9 + 2.6 + 3.2 + 3.1 + 5.1
         July 3,r + 0.5 − 0.6 + 2.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 3.1 + 5.1 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 2.8 − 3.1
         Aug. 3,r − 0.8 − 1.4 + 1.9 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.3 + 7.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 3.4 − 16.0
         Sep. r − 0.3 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.4 − 0.2 + 5.4 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 6.5
         Oct. r + 0.5 − 0.3 − 5.4 + 1.1 − 0.5 + 2.1 − 1.5 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 5.5 − 3.4
         Nov. r − 4.1 − 1.1 − 5.1 − 4.4 − 3.9 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 2.2 − 11.9
         Dec. r − 2.4 + 1.1 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 4.2 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 2.9 − 3.3
2019         Jan. x − 2.0 + 2.1 + 3.1 − 3.1 − 2.6 − 3.3 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 1.9 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 9.2
         Feb. x + 0.2 + 13.5 − 4.8 − 1.3 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 5.1 − 2.7 − 3.1 − 0.3 − 1.3
         Mar. x,p − 0.9 + 10.3 − 5.5 − 2.3 − 1.4 − 2.5 + 1.0 − 4.7 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 2.2 − 7.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, Office. 3Influenced by a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; estimated and ad-
see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to justed in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Pro-
II.12. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of duction Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry,
the production sector in the base year 2015. 2As of January 2018 weights in respectively. 
structural and civil engineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
May 2019
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
3. Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
Total
2014 97.8 + 2.7 100.6 + 0.6 96.2 + 3.9 96.8 + 4.6 95.8 + 0.6 97.1 + 5.9
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.8
2016 100.7 + 0.9 98.9 − 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.0 − 0.8
2017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2018         Mar. 121.6 + 3.8 121.2 + 4.1 122.5 + 3.3 116.0 + 5.0 122.9 − 2.8 113.7 + 8.0
         Apr. 108.8 + 2.0 114.7 + 6.1 105.6 − 0.8 104.8 + 2.6 113.7 + 2.2 101.8 + 2.7
         May 109.6 + 5.6 113.1 + 6.2 107.8 + 5.3 106.6 + 4.9 121.0 + 9.7 101.9 + 3.1
         June 112.3 + 1.4 114.6 + 3.3 110.4 − 0.9 115.2 + 10.8 122.6 + 4.3 112.8 + 13.4
         July 107.9 + 1.9 113.6 + 4.4 102.7 − 1.0 120.7 + 12.1 120.0 + 10.3 120.9 + 12.6
         Aug. 98.9 − 0.1 103.2 − 1.6 94.7 + 0.5 109.9 + 1.9 116.7 + 1.3 107.6 + 1.9
         Sep. 109.7 − 0.5 109.2 + 0.3 109.6 − 2.0 113.1 + 5.7 125.5 − 0.6 109.1 + 8.3
         Oct. 111.6 − 1.1 113.9 + 0.4 110.7 − 1.9 108.9 − 0.6 127.4 − 0.4 102.8 − 0.8
         Nov. 112.4 − 2.1 111.3 − 5.8 114.0 + 0.8 105.7 − 5.2 121.6 − 6.2 100.4 − 4.7
         Dec. 111.6 − 3.1 96.8 − 6.4 122.8 − 1.9 95.8 + 1.5 109.6 + 0.9 91.3 + 1.8
2019         Jan. 108.0 − 2.4 110.0 − 5.0 106.8 − 0.6 108.3 − 3.0 118.6 + 3.7 104.9 − 5.2
         Feb. 102.8 − 7.0 104.5 − 5.0 101.4 − 8.5 106.5 − 4.7 114.9 + 3.5 103.8 − 7.3
         Mar. p 115.7 − 4.9 113.8 − 6.1 116.9 − 4.6 116.1 + 0.1 131.8 + 7.2 111.0 − 2.4
From the domestic market
2014 98.1 + 1.1 101.7 − 1.1 95.2 + 3.1 97.1 + 2.0 100.4 + 0.0 96.0 + 2.8
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.9 + 2.2 98.0 − 1.8 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.8 101.7 + 3.8 108.6 + 5.3 99.3 + 3.1
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 − 1.1 102.9 + 1.2 114.7 + 5.6 98.9 − 0.4
2018         Mar. 119.7 + 4.4 119.5 + 6.0 121.6 + 3.1 108.1 + 2.7 121.4 + 4.5 103.6 + 2.0
         Apr. 104.3 − 5.3 107.9 + 2.0 102.4 − 12.0 96.7 + 3.6 113.3 + 11.3 91.1 + 0.8
         May 106.0 + 4.6 109.0 + 5.1 103.4 + 3.5 105.9 + 9.7 127.3 + 28.8 98.7 + 3.1
         June 107.7 − 0.9 110.9 + 5.1 105.8 − 6.2 101.6 + 1.7 115.5 + 7.7 96.9 − 0.5
         July 109.6 + 2.1 112.9 + 4.3 107.2 + 0.4 106.3 + 1.3 108.9 + 6.6 105.4 − 0.4
         Aug. 97.6 − 3.6 101.5 − 5.1 93.5 − 2.0 103.1 − 3.0 114.8 + 3.5 99.2 − 5.3
         Sep. 107.8 + 0.3 107.5 + 1.5 109.2 − 0.2 100.7 − 3.6 119.1 − 1.6 94.5 − 4.4
         Oct. 106.8 − 3.7 110.4 − 1.7 103.7 − 5.8 107.4 − 1.1 120.5 − 6.2 102.9 + 1.1
         Nov. 112.2 − 0.4 111.0 − 2.7 113.8 + 1.9 108.2 − 3.0 121.3 − 1.5 103.8 − 3.6
         Dec. 101.4 + 0.1 91.6 − 6.9 111.3 + 4.9 90.9 + 5.5 99.0 + 11.2 88.1 + 3.4
2019         Jan. 107.2 − 0.6 106.3 − 6.2 108.9 + 4.7 101.1 − 1.2 109.3 + 1.8 98.3 − 2.3
         Feb. 104.3 − 0.6 102.6 − 4.3 105.4 + 2.1 106.9 + 3.0 112.6 + 4.2 105.0 + 2.5
         Mar. p 112.7 − 5.8 110.2 − 7.8 115.2 − 5.3 110.5 + 2.2 134.4 + 10.7 102.4 − 1.2
From abroad
2014 97.5 + 3.8 99.5 + 2.5 96.7 + 4.2 96.5 + 6.6 92.0 + 1.1 97.9 + 8.3
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.4 + 0.6 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.0 + 7.2 101.1 + 1.3
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.5 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.8 104.4 + 3.3
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 111.9 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 − 0.5 113.3 + 8.5
2018         Mar. 123.0 + 3.3 123.1 + 2.2 123.0 + 3.3 122.2 + 6.7 124.1 − 7.8 121.5 + 12.4
         Apr. 112.2 + 7.7 122.1 + 10.5 107.6 + 7.0 111.0 + 1.9 114.1 − 4.0 110.0 + 4.1
         May 112.4 + 6.3 117.6 + 7.4 110.5 + 6.4 107.1 + 1.4 115.9 − 3.0 104.3 + 3.2
         June 115.8 + 3.2 118.6 + 1.5 113.2 + 2.4 125.8 + 17.4 128.3 + 1.9 125.0 + 23.6
         July 106.6 + 1.7 114.3 + 4.4 100.0 − 1.9 131.8 + 19.9 128.9 + 12.9 132.8 + 22.3
         Aug. 99.8 + 2.6 105.1 + 2.4 95.5 + 2.2 115.1 + 5.4 118.3 − 0.3 114.1 + 7.4
         Sep. 111.2 − 1.2 111.0 − 1.0 109.9 − 2.9 122.8 + 12.7 130.6 + 0.2 120.3 + 17.8
         Oct. 115.3 + 1.0 117.6 + 2.3 114.9 + 0.4 110.1 − 0.3 133.0 + 4.4 102.7 − 2.1
         Nov. 112.6 − 3.3 111.7 − 9.0 114.2 + 0.3 103.7 − 6.9 121.9 − 9.8 97.8 − 5.7
         Dec. 119.4 − 5.0 102.5 − 5.8 129.8 − 5.0 99.6 − 1.2 118.1 − 5.0 93.7 + 0.5
2019         Jan. 108.6 − 3.7 113.9 − 3.8 105.5 − 3.6 113.9 − 4.2 126.0 + 4.9 110.0 − 7.2
         Feb. 101.7 − 11.4 106.5 − 5.8 99.0 − 14.1 106.2 − 9.9 116.7 + 2.9 102.9 − 13.8
         Mar. p 118.0 − 4.1 117.6 − 4.5 118.0 − 4.1 120.5 − 1.4 129.7 + 4.5 117.5 − 3.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex-   
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics,  
Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
May 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2015 99.9 + 4.7 99.9 + 4.9 99.9 + 12.9 99.9 − 2.1 99.8 + 8.7 99.8 + 4.4 99.9 + 0.7 99.8 + 4.9
2016 114.4 + 14.5 115.0 + 15.1 116.9 + 17.0 114.9 + 15.0 108.8 + 9.0 113.7 + 13.9 111.7 + 11.8 116.0 + 16.22017 122.4 + 7.0 123.1 + 7.0 123.0 + 5.2 123.4 + 7.4 121.8 + 11.9 121.6 + 6.9 119.8 + 7.3 125.0 + 7.82018 134.7 + 10.0 131.2 + 6.6 136.6 + 11.1 127.9 + 3.6 125.2 + 2.8 138.8 + 14.1 135.7 + 13.3 132.5 + 6.0
 
2018         Feb. 124.1 + 18.4 118.0 + 9.3 112.8 + 6.1 124.7 + 11.4 110.2 + 11.5 131.2 + 29.8 136.3 + 31.3 117.0 + 11.4
         Mar. 145.6 + 1.7 140.3 − 0.5 138.6 − 4.9 137.0 + 0.1 158.0 + 12.4 151.8 + 4.3 137.5 + 2.9 159.2 + 4.5
         Apr. 135.8 + 1.4 130.7 + 1.2 141.1 + 13.1 125.8 − 7.6 114.4 − 2.4 141.8 + 1.7 127.0 + 0.2 142.8 − 3.4
         May 142.8 + 14.8 136.9 + 13.7 130.7 + 7.9 143.0 + 25.8 134.9 − 5.8 149.6 + 16.0 142.8 + 27.4 150.2 + 7.0         June 147.1 + 5.6 141.7 + 0.7 142.5 − 1.0 136.1 + 3.0 159.7 − 1.0 153.4 + 11.3 136.8 + 7.5 161.6 + 7.4
         July 142.2 + 7.3 142.1 + 12.4 142.3 + 14.9 143.8 + 11.0 134.9 + 10.0 142.4 + 2.0 144.4 + 13.6 139.7 − 3.0
         Aug. 128.7 + 10.6 119.8 + 5.5 125.7 + 13.2 116.5 + 2.6 112.3 − 8.5 139.0 + 16.1 127.3 + 13.0 132.0 + 6.4         Sep. 139.8 + 14.3 143.6 + 16.9 155.9 + 28.7 130.4 + 9.0 152.2 + 8.5 135.3 + 11.1 134.8 + 13.9 135.6 + 6.2
         Oct. 132.1 + 15.8 128.6 + 11.6 141.3 + 14.3 122.2 + 14.8 110.8 − 7.7 136.1 + 20.4 134.4 + 23.9 123.8 + 7.7
         Nov. 128.6 + 13.9 125.6 + 6.6 139.5 + 23.0 117.1 − 6.8 111.8 + 9.2 131.9 + 23.0 136.7 + 10.0 112.5 + 13.2         Dec. 150.5 + 12.4 145.7 − 2.1 166.6 + 12.1 135.1 − 14.2 116.5 − 1.1 156.2 + 34.1 164.2 + 15.4 125.2 + 8.5
2019         Jan. 117.3 + 18.2 120.7 + 19.7 123.8 + 21.3 123.6 + 19.5 99.7 + 15.0 113.3 + 16.3 126.4 + 19.5 102.8 + 14.3
         Feb. 132.9 + 7.1 129.4 + 9.7 119.0 + 5.5 134.4 + 7.8 145.1 + 31.7 137.0 + 4.4 132.4 − 2.9 141.9 + 21.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; exclu- adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 1Excluding
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement − Seasonally housing construction orders. 2 Including road construction. 
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of which:In stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2015 3 100.1 + 3.7 3 100.1 + 3.8 100.1 + 2.9 100.2 + 0.3 100.2 + 1.0 100.2 + 2.7 100.0 + 5.3 3 100.0 + 20.0
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.2 + 2.1 101.7 + 1.6 101.0 + 0.8 99.9 − 0.3 101.5 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.82017 107.6 + 5.0 105.8 + 3.5 105.9 + 4.1 108.2 + 7.1 106.2 + 6.3 103.0 + 1.5 107.7 + 3.7 120.4 + 9.72018
4 110.5 + 2.7 107.3 + 1.4 109.5 + 3.4 105.6 − 2.4 106.8 + 0.6 103.0 + 0.0 112.0 + 4.0 127.5 + 5.9
 
2018         Mar. 110.9 + 1.2 107.8 + 0.2 110.3 + 3.9 100.1 − 10.1 103.7 + 2.2 107.0 − 4.6 113.3 + 3.8 126.3 + 5.9
         Apr. 112.9 + 5.5 109.5 + 4.3 112.4 + 4.1 119.9 + 9.8 90.8 − 1.7 113.9 + 5.0 112.8 + 7.5 121.9 + 7.4
         May 110.4 + 2.6 106.8 + 1.0 112.2 + 5.0 110.0 − 1.0 89.6 + 0.6 106.1 − 1.0 107.7 + 1.0 119.2 + 3.9         June 109.3 + 3.3 106.1 + 1.6 111.6 + 5.9 106.2 − 4.0 99.8 + 5.2 101.5 − 1.0 109.2 + 3.0 114.2 + 2.0
         July 110.2 + 2.5 107.9 + 1.4 110.4 + 2.5 105.6 − 1.9 96.6 − 4.4 102.8 − 1.2 115.1 + 5.5 122.4 + 8.9
         Aug. 106.0 + 2.9 103.3 + 1.4 107.1 + 3.1 98.4 − 1.0 97.0 − 0.1 96.3 − 0.8 108.7 + 4.3 115.3 + 4.5         Sep. 107.6 + 1.8 103.7 + 0.1 105.5 + 2.6 108.7 − 8.3 107.8 + 5.2 99.6 + 0.4 109.3 + 3.1 125.6 + 7.4
         Oct. 114.1 + 3.4 109.8 + 1.9 110.6 + 4.2 116.0 − 2.5 107.2 − 1.8 108.5 − 0.3 113.9 + 4.6 137.0 + 12.6
         Nov. 118.9 + 3.5 114.7 + 2.1 109.3 + 0.9 112.4
+ 0.0 130.8 + 6.3 111.9 + 1.9 117.3 + 3.4 163.8 + 8.5
         Dec. 128.9 − 0.3 125.3 − 0.9 126.6 + 0.7 121.6 − 4.9 156.1 − 3.5 109.3 − 2.5 124.5 + 1.0 156.1 + 1.1
2019         Jan. 103.8 + 3.5 101.3 + 2.9 102.0 + 2.7 87.8 − 1.9 109.6 − 0.4 91.9 + 2.0 112.2 + 4.3 130.9 + 9.4
         Feb. 101.5 + 5.4 98.5 + 4.5 101.0 + 2.7 82.8 + 5.6 92.7 + 0.2 94.2 + 6.0 110.8 + 6.0 119.8 + 10.2         Mar.  
5 115.0 + 3.7 111.3 + 3.2 114.4 + 3.7 103.3 + 3.2 103.7 + 0.0 114.3 + 6.8 115.4 + 1.9 128.9 + 2.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value added integration of a larger online retail sales-based enterprise that founded a business
tax;  for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement 4 − Seasonally adjusted busi- establishment in Germany in May 2015. 4As of January 2018 figures are provisional,
ness statistics, Table II.24. oUsing the Census X-12-ARIMA method, version 0.2.8. and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports. 5Un-
1Including stalls and markets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3As of May 2015 adjusted figures partially estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
May 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legal
category
Solely of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary social Unem- Temporary Security
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies,  4,6 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4,5 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2014 42,670 + 0.8 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,071 + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,642 + 1.3 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 44,269 + 1.4 32,234 + 2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 r 44,841 r + 1.3 8 32,968 8 + 2.3 8 9,350 8 22,535 8 840 8 4,670 ... 8 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2016         Q1 43,087 + 1.4 31,077 + 2.4 8,929 21,131 793 4,785 312 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
         Q2 43,563 + 1.3 31,350 + 2.2 8,988 21,298 820 4,823 59 47 2,674 782 6.1 653
         Q3 43,842 + 1.3 31,593 + 2.1 9,056 21,431 858 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682
         Q4 44,076 + 1.4 32,014 + 2.2 9,137 21,770 866 4,781 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017         Q1 43,729 + 1.5 31,790 + 2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734 7 987 6.2 671
         Q2 44,195 + 1.5 32,064 + 2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 5.6 717
         Q3 44,479 + 1.5 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763
         Q4 44,672 + 1.4 32,759 + 2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 82 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1 r 44,370 r + 1.5 32,563 + 2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 325 24 2,525 909 5.7 760
         Q2 r 44,783 r + 1.3 32,802 + 2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 9 5.1 794
         Q3 r 45,015 r + 1.2 33,040 + 2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
         Q4 r 45,195 r + 1.2 8 33,466 8 + 2.2 8 9,501 8 22,901 8 819 8 4,623 ... 8 36 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019         Q1 10 44,851 10 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,360 892 5.2 780
2015         Dec. 43,385 + 1.3 31,150 + 2.5 8,964 21,167 798 4,843 177 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2016         Jan. 42,993 + 1.3 30,983 + 2.3 8,906 21,073 784 4,774 343 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
         Feb. 43,049 + 1.4 31,069 + 2.4 8,923 21,127 793 4,769 343 50 2,911 947 6.6 614
         Mar. 43,218 + 1.4 31,209 + 2.2 8,954 21,217 804 4,782 252 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
         Apr. 43,386 + 1.3 31,314 + 2.2 8,983 21,279 809 4,806 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640
         May 43,580 + 1.3 31,410 + 2.3 9,000 21,337 826 4,838 57 45 2,664 774 6.0 655
         June 43,724 + 1.3 31,443 + 2.2 9,010 21,339 846 4,865 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665
         July 43,704 + 1.2 31,378 + 2.1 9,007 21,273 853 4,863 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674
         Aug. 43,810 + 1.3 31,675 + 2.2 9,076 21,486 865 4,802 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685
         Sep. 44,011 + 1.3 32,007 + 2.2 9,157 21,729 869 4,768 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687
         Oct. 44,093 + 1.3 32,045 + 2.2 9,154 21,773 871 4,767 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691
         Nov. 44,140 + 1.3 32,069 + 2.2 9,147 21,807 876 4,794 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681
         Dec. 43,994 + 1.4 31,848 + 2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan. 43,644 + 1.5 31,707 + 2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777 7 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb. 43,694 + 1.5 31,774 + 2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
         Mar. 43,850 + 1.5 31,930 + 2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr. 44,024 + 1.5 32,013 + 2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
         May 44,205 + 1.4 32,131 + 2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 5.6 714
         June 44,356 + 1.4 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July 44,375 + 1.5 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
         Aug. 44,445 + 1.4 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765
         Sep. 44,618 + 1.4 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
         Oct. 44,683 + 1.3 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
         Nov. 44,737 + 1.4 32,830 + 2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772
         Dec. 44,595 + 1.4 32,609 + 2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 194 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan. r 44,318 r + 1.5 32,504 + 2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 287 23 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb. r 44,340 r + 1.5 32,551 + 2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 359 23 2,546 927 5.7 764
         Mar. r 44,452 r + 1.4 32,660 + 2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778
         Apr. r 44,626 r + 1.4 32,782 + 2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
         May r 44,813 r + 1.4 32,857 + 2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 9 5.1 793
         June r 44,911 r + 1.3 32,870 + 2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
         July r 44,922 r + 1.2 32,844 + 2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
         Aug. r 44,990 r + 1.2 33,131 + 2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
         Sep. r 45,132 r + 1.2 33,422 + 2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
         Oct. r 45,215 r + 1.2 33,488 + 2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
         Nov. r 45,264 r + 1.2 8 33,546 8 + 2.2 8 9,521 8 22,961 8 822 8 4,633 ... 8 39 2,186 745 4.8 807
         Dec. r 45,106 r + 1.1 8 33,307 8 + 2.1 8 9,439 8 22,870 8 773 8 4,620 ... 8 31 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019         Jan. r 44,792 r + 1.1 8 33,174 8 + 2.1 8 9,410 8 22,776 8 763 8 4,552 ... 8 35 2,406 919 5.3 758
         Feb. r 44,817 r + 1.1 8 33,222 8 + 2.1 8 9,423 8 22,810 8 759 8 4,532 ... 8 32 2,373 908 5.3 784
         Mar. 10 44,943 10 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,301 850 5.1 797
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,229 795 4.9 796
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and Code (SGB III). 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the offi- 2016 and 2017 the estimated values for Germany deviated from th e final data by a
cial figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: maximum of 1.1% for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of
end of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the 0.4% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum
total civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment, in- of 70.0% for cyclically induced short-time work. 9From May 2018 calculated on the
cluding jobs located abroad. 7From January 2017 persons receiving additional basis of new labour force figures. 10Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same tical Office. 
time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social Security

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
May 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
7. Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which:  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  7 
prices ofindustrial
of which:
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Actual Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy rents struction the prices  of price index
Energy Services for (national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial
Total 2 Food 3 4 5 2 4 concept) index market  6 Exports Imports Energy  8 products  6 goods  4 housing materials  9 
Period 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2010 = 100
Index level  
  
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.1 101.2 100.5 101.9 98.4 106.6 99.0 96.7 83.2 98.42017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 115.2 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.12018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7
10 115.2 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.2
 
2017         June 102.3 103.6 102.0 96.1 103.5 102.9 102.1 100.8 121.3 100.6 99.0 85.7 100.4
         July 102.9 103.8 101.3 95.9 105.2 103.0 102.5 101.0 120.2 100.5 98.6 86.5 102.9
         Aug. 103.0 103.8 101.7 96.3 105.2 103.1 102.6 105.7 101.1 121.2 100.3 98.6 90.1 103.3         Sep. 103.0 104.1 102.8 97.5 104.0 103.2 102.7 101.5 116.0 100.5 99.3 96.3 102.8
         Oct. 102.7 104.8 103.1 97.4 103.1 103.3 102.5 101.6 114.3 100.6 99.9 101.6 102.7
         Nov. 102.0 104.8 103.1 98.7 101.3 103.5 102.1 106.5 101.7 114.8 100.8 100.6 110.3 103.8         Dec. 102.7 105.5 102.7 98.5 102.8 103.6 102.6 101.9 114.4 100.8 100.8 113.7 103.6
2018         Jan. 101.7 106.2 101.7 98.9 100.8 103.9 102.0 102.4 110.6 101.1 101.4 115.9 105.4
         Feb. 102.2 106.2 102.1 98.5 101.9 104.0 102.3 108.3 102.3 110.1 101.0 100.9 108.7 106.0         Mar. 103.0 106.4 103.1 97.9 102.9 104.1 102.9 102.4 111.4 101.1 100.8 109.5 104.9
         Apr. 103.2 106.8 103.3 99.5 102.8 104.3 103.1 102.8 110.8 101.3 101.4 116.7 106.1
         May 104.3 106.9 103.2 101.9 104.6 104.4 103.9 109.4 103.3 109.7 101.8 102.9 129.9 112.5         June 104.4 106.9 102.8 102.4 104.9 104.5 104.0 103.7 110.5 102.1 103.4 130.5 111.3
         July 105.2 106.6 101.7 102.3 107.4 104.7 104.4 103.9 112.5 102.2 103.3 129.9 105.8
         Aug. 105.2 106.4 102.3 103.1 107.0 104.8 104.5 111.0 104.2 115.6 102.4 103.3 130.5 105.7         Sep. 105.3 107.1 103.8 105.1 105.6 104.9 104.7 104.7
10 118.2 102.4 103.7 140.8 102.7
         Oct. 105.4 107.1 104.1 106.1 105.5 105.0 104.9 105.0 117.8 102.6 104.7 144.7 105.5
         Nov. 104.2 107.0 104.1 108.0 102.4 105.1 104.2 112.0 105.1 118.3 102.5 103.7 123.7 105.2         Dec. 104.4 107.0 103.8 103.5 104.0 105.2 104.2 104.7 118.2 102.1 102.4 111.4 103.2
2019         Jan. 103.4 107.4 102.9 101.5 102.9 105.4 103.4 105.1 118.5 102.2 102.2 112.3 104.4
         Feb. 103.9 107.9 103.4 101.7 103.6 105.6 103.8 114.0 105.0 120.0 102.3 102.5 114.3 109.4         Mar. 104.4 107.7 103.9 102.4 104.1 105.7 104.2 104.9 120.8 102.4 102.5 115.2 108.3
         Apr. 105.4 107.9 104.6 104.4 105.3 105.8 105.2 ... ... ... ... 119.2 108.8
Annual percentage change  
  
2015 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 2.5 + 1.2 . + 1.4 − 1.9 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.8 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 16.8 − 1.62017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 8.1 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 19.7 + 8.82018 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 4.7 + 2.6
10 + 0.0 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 25.1 − 0.8
 
2017         June + 1.7 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 1.8 + 1.4 + 2.4 + 14.0 + 1.6 + 2.4 − 2.5 + 1.5
         July + 1.7 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 0.8 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 1.4 + 2.4 + 9.3 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.7
         Aug. + 1.9 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 2.6 + 13.6 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 7.4 + 4.8         Sep. + 1.9 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 2.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 3.2 + 10.8 + 1.5 + 2.8 + 14.8 + 6.0
         Oct. + 1.5 + 3.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 2.8 + 5.1 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 5.6 + 2.9
         Nov. + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 3.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 3.8 + 2.6 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 15.6 − 4.3         Dec. + 1.5 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 6.7 − 9.1
2018         Jan. + 1.5 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 3.7 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 6.4 − 9.1
         Feb. + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 1.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 10.8         Mar. + 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.8 − 5.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 9.8 − 9.9
         Apr. + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 7.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 16.2 − 3.6
         May + 2.5 + 3.3 + 0.5 + 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 4.3 + 2.5 − 9.3 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 39.5 + 8.0         June + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 8.9 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 52.3 + 10.9
         July + 2.2 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 6.7 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 6.4 + 1.7 + 4.8 + 50.2 + 2.8
         Aug. + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 7.1 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 4.6 + 2.1 + 4.8 + 44.8 + 2.3         Sep. + 2.2 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 7.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 3.2
10 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 4.4 + 46.2 − 0.1
         Oct. + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 2.0 + 4.8 + 42.4 + 2.7
         Nov. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 9.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 5.2 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 3.1 + 12.1 + 1.3         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 3.3 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.4
2019         Jan. + 1.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 7.1 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.9
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 3.2         Mar. + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 8.4 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 3.2
         Apr. + 2.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 2.0 ... ... ... ... + 2.1 + 2.5
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on basis of the five digit structure set out in the European Classifi cation of Individual
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Consumption according to Purpose (ECOICOP). 5Electricity, gas and other fuels as
Materials: HWWI. 1Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. 2With well as transport fuels and lubricants, from January 2017 excluding lubricants. 6Exclu-
effect from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of ding value added tax. 7For the euro area, in euro. 8Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natu-
package holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series. 3Including alcoholic be- ral gas. 9Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 10From
verages and tobacco. 4Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the September 2018 onwards provisional figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
May 2019
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- As
age age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.3
2013 1,167.4 3.0 778.3 2.8 388.1 0.1 1,166.4 1.9 1,717.2 1.3 153.7 − 2.5 8.9
2014 1,213.0 3.9 807.2 3.7 398.4 2.6 1,205.6 3.4 1,761.3 2.6 167.2 8.8 9.5
2015 1,261.4 4.0 837.2 3.7 416.5 4.5 1,253.7 4.0 1,805.7 2.5 174.8 4.5 9.7
2016 1,311.9 4.0 869.1 3.8 430.5 3.4 1,299.6 3.7 1,857.5 2.9 181.9 4.1 9.8
2017 1,366.6 4.2 902.9 3.9 444.8 3.3 1,347.7 3.7 1,922.0 3.5 189.8 4.3 9.9
2018 1,432.5 4.8 945.2 4.7 455.7 2.5 1,400.9 3.9 1,983.6 3.2 206.9 9.0 10.4
2017         Q3 337.4 4.3 227.7 4.1 111.7 2.6 339.5 3.6 480.0 3.7 39.9 4.2 8.3
         Q4 377.6 4.0 249.2 3.7 110.3 2.9 359.5 3.5 485.1 2.9 42.0 6.0 8.7
2018         Q1 333.6 4.8 220.6 4.7 115.3 2.2 335.9 3.8 494.9 3.5 67.0 6.4 13.5
         Q2 349.3 4.8 225.4 4.7 112.4 2.3 337.8 3.9 494.2 3.2 48.8 8.6 9.9
         Q3 355.3 5.3 239.6 5.2 114.5 2.5 354.1 4.3 492.5 2.6 44.1 10.7 9.0
         Q4 394.3 4.4 259.6 4.2 113.5 2.9 373.1 3.8 502.0 3.5 46.9 11.6 9.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2019. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change
2011 101.7 1.7 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.4
2012 104.4 2.7 104.4 2.6 104.7 2.8 104.7 2.8 106.2 2.7
2013 106.9 2.4 106.9 2.4 107.2 2.4 107.2 2.4 108.4 2.1
2014 110.0 2.9 109.9 2.8 110.1 2.7 110.1 2.7 111.5 2.8
2015 112.6 2.3 112.3 2.2 112.6 2.3 112.7 2.3 114.6 2.8
2016 114.9 2.1 114.7 2.1 115.0 2.1 115.2 2.2 117.3 2.4
2017 117.3 2.1 117.1 2.1 117.4 2.1 117.8 2.3 120.3 2.5
2018 120.6 2.9 120.4 2.9 120.6 2.7 121.0 2.7 124.1 3.2
2017         Q4 130.3 1.9 130.1 1.9 130.5 1.9 118.6 2.2 131.4 2.4
2018         Q1 111.5 2.2 111.3 2.3 111.4 2.1 119.4 2.2 116.8 3.0
         Q2 113.7 3.3 113.4 3.3 113.4 3.0 121.1 3.0 121.3 3.2
         Q3 123.3 2.9 123.0 2.9 123.5 2.9 121.6 2.8 122.8 3.7
         Q4 134.1 2.9 133.9 2.9 134.1 2.8 122.0 2.8 135.2 2.9
2019         Q1 114.7 2.9 114.5 2.9 114.7 3.0 122.9 3.0 . .
2018         Sep. 113.4 2.7 113.2 2.7 113.6 2.7 121.7 2.7 . .
         Oct. 113.6 2.4 113.4 2.4 113.7 2.4 121.9 2.8 . .
         Nov. 173.2 3.3 172.8 3.3 172.8 2.9 122.1 2.8 . .
         Dec. 115.7 2.9 115.5 2.9 115.8 2.9 122.1 2.9 . .
2019         Jan. 114.6 3.1 114.4 3.1 114.7 3.1 122.9 3.1 . .
         Feb. 115.0 3.4 114.8 3.4 114.8 3.1 122.9 3.1 . .
         Mar. 114.6 2.2 114.4 2.2 114.8 2.8 123.0 2.8 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such February 2019. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
May 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
  
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
Non- Trade of which:
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2014 2,079.8 1,284.9 431.2 521.0 249.6 794.9 203.1 187.3 132.5 583.2 1,496.6 812.6 427.4 684.0 207.2 175.8
2015 2,226.9 1,395.2 470.9 565.6 273.1 831.7 215.5 190.5 136.1 633.6 1,593.3 861.3 466.2 732.0 222.8 180.32016 2,367.8 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.82017 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2016         H2 2,367.8 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.8
2017         H1 2,385.4 1,471.8 502.3 584.2 288.6 913.6 238.2 220.8 149.9 701.7 1,683.6 888.0 498.3 795.7 246.2 194.9
         H2 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2018         H1  
p,3 2,551.8 1,533.0 541.7 602.5 289.8 1,018.8 250.1 236.1 143.3 775.6 1,776.2 909.5 541.0 866.7 254.7 210.2
As a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.1 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.6 32.9 10.0 8.5
2015 100.0 62.7 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.12016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.12017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2016         H2 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.1
2017         H1 100.0 61.7 21.1 24.5 12.1 38.3 10.0 9.3 6.3 29.4 70.6 37.2 20.9 33.4 10.3 8.2
         H2 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2018         H1  
p,3 100.0 60.1 21.2 23.6 11.4 39.9 9.8 9.3 5.6 30.4 69.6 35.6 21.2 34.0 10.0 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2014 1,656.6 990.2 276.6 412.6 236.0 666.3 185.7 140.3 99.0 451.7 1,204.9 644.6 319.1 560.3 185.7 122.52015 1,782.4 1,077.9 304.2 447.3 259.0 704.5 198.8 147.0 104.4 485.3 1,297.1 690.3 354.0 606.8 198.4 127.52016 1,910.2 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.92017 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.1 698.4 381.6 649.7 215.5 148.4
2016         H2 1,910.2 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.9
2017         H1 1,923.5 1,138.9 325.3 464.9 273.1 784.6 224.2 171.9 125.5 550.6 1,372.9 709.7 379.4 663.2 224.4 153.2
         H2 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.1 698.4 381.6 649.7 215.5 148.4
2018         H1  
p,3 2,071.9 1,177.0 360.2 460.4 277.5 894.9 232.7 185.5 115.2 604.9 1,467.0 727.9 411.2 739.2 229.5 167.5
As a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.3 33.8 11.2 7.4
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.5 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.9 34.0 11.1 7.22016 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.42017 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2016         H2 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.4
2017         H1 100.0 59.2 16.9 24.2 14.2 40.8 11.7 8.9 6.5 28.6 71.4 36.9 19.7 34.5 11.7 8.0
         H2 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2018         H1  
p,3 100.0 56.8 17.4 22.2 13.4 43.2 11.2 9.0 5.6 29.2 70.8 35.1 19.9 35.7 11.1 8.1
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.42015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.72016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.92017 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2016         H2 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.9
2017         H1 461.9 332.9 177.0 119.3 15.5 129.0 14.0 48.8 24.5 151.1 310.7 178.3 118.9 132.5 21.8 41.8
         H2 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2018         H1  
p,3 479.8 356.0 181.4 142.1 12.3 123.8 17.4 50.5 28.1 170.7 309.2 181.6 129.8 127.6 25.2 42.7
As a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.92016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.32017 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2016         H2 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.3
2017         H1 100.0 72.1 38.3 25.8 3.4 27.9 3.0 10.6 5.3 32.7 67.3 38.6 25.7 28.7 4.7 9.0
         H2 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2018         H1  
p,3 100.0 74.2 37.8 29.6 2.6 25.8 3.6 10.5 5.9 35.6 64.4 37.8 27.1 26.6 5.2 8.9
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. 3From this point onwards: significant
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with p revious periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
May 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciation
and amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
Annual Annual change in Annual change in
per- per- per- per- per-
centage centage centage centage centage
Period change  4 change  4 % points  4 % % % change  4 % points  4 %%% € billion  3 € billion  3 € billion  3 
Total
2010 1,320.9 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.6 98.3 66.7 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.9 12.1
2011 1,414.3 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.5 11.0 17.4 93.8 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 − 0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 1.9 6.1 11.0
2013 1,541.1 − 0.6 187.2 − 2.8 12.2 − 0.3 5.1 10.3 18.5 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 11.1
2014 1,565.7 1.0 198.9 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.4 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,635.4 6.9 196.2 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.9 91.6 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.6 11.4
2016 1,626.1 − 0.4 214.9 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.6 11.4 18.0 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,722.9 5.2 243.9 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.3 33.2 8.3 1.7 2.5 6.7 12.1
2013         H2 780.0 − 1.1 93.9 − 2.0 12.0 − 0.1 5.4 10.9 19.2 45.7 25.6 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.3 12.2
2014         H1 757.3 − 0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.8 9.6 16.1 57.9 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
         H2 808.8 2.9 101.7 5.3 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2015         H1 815.3 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 4.8 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.3 − 0.5 1.1 5.9 10.9
         H2 831.4 5.1 93.5 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.5 32.7 − 36.6 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.2 11.7
2016         H1 782.7 − 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 6.1 10.5 18.0 65.7 2.8 8.4 0.4 1.7 6.4 11.4
         H2 843.4 1.1 103.1 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.8 11.9 19.1 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 2.9 7.5 12.5
2017         H1 845.0 6.8 125.9 14.5 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.3 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
         H2 881.1 3.7 117.8 14.7 13.4 1.3 6.8 11.9 19.2 63.3 38.4 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.3 12.4
2018         H1  p,6 849.5 − 0.1 120.7 − 2.4 14.2 − 0.3 5.1 10.5 18.2 72.9 − 5.0 8.6 − 0.5 1.6 6.3 12.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector  5 
 
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.5 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.0
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.1 6.8 11.5
2012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.8 6.1 9.8
2013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.8 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 4.4 10.3 15.7 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.3 5.8 10.5
2014 1,197.4 1.0 148.1 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.4 9.8 15.5 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,282.5 7.0 144.0 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.1 10.5 16.0 65.2 − 20.3 5.1 − 1.8 1.8 6.5 10.3
2016 1,267.1 − 1.0 156.5 6.0 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.5 16.0 80.6 4.3 6.4 0.3 2.7 6.3 10.4
2017 1,362.9 5.5 181.6 16.8 13.3 1.3 6.7 10.9 15.6 108.0 41.1 7.9 2.0 2.9 6.7 10.4
2013         H2 591.8 − 1.4 67.1 − 0.2 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.5 16.2 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 11.2
2014         H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.3 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.2 46.3 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.5 9.7
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.8 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.2 9.8 15.9 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.8
2015         H1 636.4 8.7 80.1 7.8 12.6 − 0.1 5.1 10.1 15.5 48.8 4.8 7.7 − 0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 646.7 5.3 63.9 − 13.3 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.6 16.4 − 52.4 2.5 − 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.7
2016         H1 611.3 − 2.6 84.0 1.3 13.7 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.8 50.7 − 6.5 8.3 − 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.0
         H2 655.9 0.5 72.5 11.9 11.1 1.1 6.1 11.2 16.0 29.9 34.8 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.5
2017         H1 678.7 7.2 98.5 18.7 14.5 1.4 5.9 10.1 16.1 64.0 37.5 9.4 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.6
         H2 684.9 3.9 83.1 14.7 12.1 1.2 6.6 11.7 16.5 44.0 46.4 6.4 1.9 3.0 7.1 10.8
2018         H1  p,6 665.8 − 0.2 90.9 − 3.7 13.7 − 0.5 6.2 10.8 16.7 57.1 − 5.6 8.6 − 0.5 2.8 6.6 11.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2010 340.2 5.8 45.1 9.0 13.3 0.4 6.0 11.2 19.7 22.6 47.0 6.7 1.8 3.4 6.0 12.8
2011 335.3 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 6.0 10.4 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.2 13.8
2012 359.1 2.8 48.0 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.2
2013 362.0 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.4 13.4 − 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.4 5.9 12.5
2014 368.3 1.1 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.1 6.2 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.2 4.8 14.8 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.4 58.4 14.6 16.3 1.8 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 24.7 8.8 1.5 2.5 8.3 15.5
2017 360.0 3.8 62.3 7.7 17.3 0.6 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 10.0 9.5 0.5 2.4 7.2 15.1
2013         H2 188.2 0.2 26.7 − 6.7 14.2 − 1.1 5.6 11.4 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.4 13.5
2014         H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.7 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.7 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.5 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.5 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.7 10.8 16.1 0.9 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 187.4 3.6 30.6 4.6 16.3 0.2 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.7 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2017         H1 166.3 4.8 27.4 − 0.2 16.5 − 0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 − 0.8 8.8 − 0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
         H2 196.2 2.8 34.7 14.9 17.7 1.9 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.3 20.2 9.8 1.4 3.0 7.8 17.9
2018         H1  p,6 183.7 0.4 29.8 3.0 16.2 0.4 4.0 9.7 22.9 15.8 − 1.8 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.9 5.1 15.5
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement stati stics, p. 3.
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly 4Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical S upplement 4 −
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 5Including groups in agriculture and forest-
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted ry. 6From this point onwards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing com-
return on sales. 3Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year parability with previous periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
May 2019
XII. External sector
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2018 2019
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec. Jan. Feb.  p
Current account + 334,624 + 362,825 + 334,673 + 73,093 + 82,837 + 104,274 + 41,494 + 10,616 + 15,472A.
1. Goods
Exports 2,116,412 2,251,144 2,332,835 580,267 574,155 614,387 186,097 187,736 190,278Imports 1,769,839 1,933,352 2,056,395 507,170 514,612 536,709 160,006 179,278 165,986
Balance + 346,576 + 317,788 + 276,440 + 73,097 + 59,543 + 77,678 + 26,091 + 8,459 + 24,292
2. Services
Receipts 818,021 874,456 904,308 222,989 239,254 237,466 84,193 72,188 64,956Expenditure 774,459 770,519 797,386 191,474 204,109 219,235 77,732 67,452 61,037
Balance + 43,561 + 103,936 + 106,923 + 31,516 + 35,145 + 18,231 + 6,461 + 4,736 + 3,918
3. Primary income
Receipts 668,424 694,825 752,705 204,533 179,961 199,725 77,254 57,920 53,152Expenditure 585,226 616,494 651,897 207,593 156,662 148,598 52,673 46,971 43,441
Balance + 83,198 + 78,332 + 100,807 − 3,061 + 23,299 + 51,126 + 24,580 + 10,949 + 9,712
4. Secondary income
Receipts 103,416 107,802 114,566 31,152 26,624 30,330 11,985 8,719 8,389Expenditure 242,127 245,034 264,062 59,611 61,774 73,091 27,623 22,246 30,839
Balance − 138,711 − 137,230 − 149,495 − 28,459 − 35,150 − 42,760 − 15,638 − 13,527 − 22,450
Capital account + 1,620 − 21,413 − 3,086 − 581 + 2,972 − 11,747 + 1,161 + 1,801 + 1,780B.
Financial account (increase: +) + 336,720 + 376,168 + 317,591 + 42,985 + 87,093 + 85,524 + 61,091 + 1,360 + 9,901C.
1. Direct investment + 186,860 + 78,533 + 52,634 + 18,058 − 13,946 − 73,651 − 56,946 − 18,476 + 13,121
By resident units abroad + 541,442 + 435,361 − 220,242 + 39,237 − 116,197 − 208,286 − 135,731 − 2,999 + 20,486By non-resident units in the euro area + 354,583 + 356,827 − 272,878 + 21,179 − 102,252 − 134,636 − 78,785 + 15,477 + 7,365
2. Portfolio investment + 460,718 + 297,042 + 213,992 + 51,662 + 44,314 + 105,887 + 107,041 + 2,530 − 17,553
By resident units abroad + 386,628 + 653,092 + 184,034 + 451 + 43,851 − 55,570 − 27,236 + 37,240 + 3,502
Equity and
investment fund shares + 19,665 + 198,545 + 19,020 + 6,015 + 12,681 − 56,946 − 39,989 + 14,920 + 5,572
Long-term debt securities + 358,992 + 376,615 + 201,143 + 14,571 + 71,390 + 5,990 + 6,768 + 7,726 + 13,582Short-term debt securities + 7,971 + 77,936 − 36,127 − 20,135 − 40,219 − 4,612 + 5,985 + 14,594 − 15,652
By non-resident units in the euro area − 74,091 + 356,050 − 29,958 − 51,211 − 463 − 161,457 − 134,277 + 34,710 + 21,056
Equity and
investment fund shares + 112,111 + 486,296 + 157,517 + 21,051 + 14,296 + 15,715 + 29,655 − 23,724 − 19,985
Long-term debt securities − 238,070 − 135,984 − 113,476 − 50,365 − 4,391 − 102,695 − 103,315 + 34,262 + 60,180Short-term debt securities + 51,868 + 5,738 − 74,003 − 21,898 − 10,370 − 74,478 − 60,617 + 24,172 − 19,140
3. Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 15,229 + 23,967 + 98,856 + 38,387 + 35,428 + 29,539 + 6,565 + 5,278 + 3,942
4. Other investment − 341,566 − 21,975 − 72,885 − 71,724 + 20,049 + 17,918 + 1,308 + 14,686 + 9,638
Eurosystem − 152,798 − 175,527 − 131,473 − 27,444 + 40,556 − 148,428 − 158,540 + 140,701 + 19,713General government + 12,593 + 21,595 − 3,327 − 4,105 − 8,979 + 15,534 + 19,689 + 6,090 − 7,996MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 123,705 + 144,138 + 95,773 − 38,864 − 20,592 + 175,314 + 162,340 − 126,132 − 19,594Enterprises and households − 77,653 − 12,182 − 33,857 − 1,310 + 9,065 − 24,504 − 22,183 − 5,972 + 17,516
5. Reserve assets + 15,480 − 1,400 + 24,989 + 6,601 + 1,246 + 5,830 + 3,124 − 2,658 + 753
Net errors and omissions + 474 + 34,755 − 13,993 − 29,527 + 1,285 − 7,001 + 18,436 − 11,057 − 7,352D.
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary  
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
May 2019
XII. External sector
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.)  1 
of which:
Supple-
mentary Balance of of which: Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2004 + 102,270 + 152,851 − 7,174 − 35,480 + 14,856 − 29,957 − 119 + 112,867 − 1,470 + 10,715
2005 + 106,942 + 156,563 − 6,515 − 37,924 + 19,644 − 31,341 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 8,172
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 − 4,687 − 32,206 + 40,928 − 32,014 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 20,796
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 − 1,183 − 32,909 + 36,064 − 33,390 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 − 3,947 − 29,453 + 24,394 − 34,147 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 − 6,605 − 16,973 + 53,855 − 34,764 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 − 6,209 − 24,476 + 50,527 − 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 − 9,357 − 29,004 + 68,161 − 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 − 11,388 − 30,056 + 64,940 − 38,703 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 43,882
2013 + 184,274 + 203,802 − 12,523 − 38,848 + 62,733 − 43,413 − 563 + 225,360 + 838 + 41,649
2014 + 210,735 + 219,629 − 14,296 − 25,029 + 57,014 − 40,880 + 2,936 + 240,117 − 2,564 + 26,446
2015 + 259,920 + 248,394 − 15,405 − 18,296 + 68,316 − 38,494 − 48 + 234,404 − 2,213 − 25,467
2016 + 265,489 + 252,581 − 19,010 − 20,967 + 74,743 − 40,868 + 2,138 + 259,720 + 1,686 − 7,908
2017 + 261,894 + 253,111 − 14,069 − 21,938 + 80,276 − 49,554 − 1,947 + 282,947 − 1,269 + 23,000
2018 + 246,171 + 221,675 − 24,490 − 19,551 + 91,666 − 47,619 + 1,858 + 225,597 + 392 − 22,432
2016         Q2 + 69,036 + 72,328 − 4,699 − 4,093 + 4,255 − 3,453 − 799 + 68,761 + 761 + 524
         Q3 + 60,302 + 63,541 − 4,007 − 11,645 + 20,138 − 11,733 + 412 + 60,148 − 261 − 566
         Q4 + 69,437 + 55,640 − 8,359 − 1,827 + 28,048 − 12,425 + 2,844 + 90,452 − 43 + 18,171
2017         Q1 + 69,906 + 63,678 − 1,365 − 2,653 + 22,781 − 13,901 + 562 + 69,234 − 360 − 1,234
         Q2 + 52,671 + 64,258 − 3,660 − 5,301 + 5,673 − 11,959 − 2,624 + 67,523 + 385 + 17,476
         Q3 + 64,060 + 65,296 − 3,113 − 12,334 + 21,991 − 10,893 + 766 + 62,836 + 152 − 1,990
         Q4 + 75,257 + 59,879 − 5,931 − 1,651 + 29,831 − 12,802 − 652 + 83,353 − 1,446 + 8,749
2018         Q1 + 69,981 + 61,219 − 3,973 − 2,188 + 25,279 − 14,329 + 4,003 + 67,340 + 699 − 6,644
         Q2 + 60,539 + 60,111 − 8,201 − 2,869 + 8,504 − 5,205 − 2,563 + 56,803 − 374 − 1,173
         Q3 + 48,267 + 47,692 − 7,861 − 12,908 + 25,305 − 11,823 − 1,050 + 39,839 − 493 − 7,378
         Q4 + 67,383 + 52,653 − 4,455 − 1,586 + 32,578 − 16,262 + 1,467 + 61,614 + 560 − 7,237
2019         Q1  p + 66,569 + 59,893 − 2,299 − 2,525 + 25,843 − 16,642 + 1,545 + 50,852 − 63 − 17,262
2016         Oct. + 19,688 + 19,289 − 1,161 − 3,490 + 7,371 − 3,482 − 37 + 32,541 − 145 + 12,890
         Nov. + 25,359 + 22,461 − 1,790 − 230 + 8,018 − 4,890 − 103 + 18,934 + 140 − 6,322
         Dec. + 24,390 + 13,891 − 5,408 + 1,893 + 12,659 − 4,053 + 2,984 + 38,976 − 38 + 11,603
2017         Jan. + 15,714 + 15,218 − 880 − 619 + 7,919 − 6,803 − 104 + 11,208 − 124 − 4,403
         Feb. + 21,505 + 21,492 − 336 − 817 + 5,441 − 4,611 + 252 + 12,282 − 216 − 9,475
         Mar. + 32,687 + 26,969 − 149 − 1,217 + 9,421 − 2,487 + 414 + 45,745 − 21 + 12,644
         Apr. + 15,315 + 19,080 − 763 − 1,286 + 5,841 − 8,319 − 384 + 17,461 − 2 + 2,529
         May + 14,767 + 21,701 − 2,429 − 1,721 − 4,343 − 869 + 20 + 10,532 − 47 − 4,256
         June + 22,588 + 23,477 − 468 − 2,293 + 4,175 − 2,770 − 2,260 + 39,530 + 434 + 19,202
         July + 18,800 + 19,876 − 203 − 4,325 + 7,632 − 4,383 + 483 + 18,879 + 463 − 404
         Aug. + 17,949 + 20,316 − 2,098 − 5,515 + 6,576 − 3,427 + 130 + 9,684 − 912 − 8,395
         Sep. + 27,311 + 25,104 − 812 − 2,494 + 7,783 − 3,082 + 154 + 34,273 + 602 + 6,808
         Oct. + 19,647 + 20,060 − 767 − 4,091 + 7,853 − 4,175 − 270 + 16,992 + 1,176 − 2,385
         Nov. + 27,382 + 23,893 − 1,960 − 345 + 8,266 − 4,432 − 521 + 30,390 − 270 + 3,530
         Dec. + 28,228 + 15,926 − 3,204 + 2,785 + 13,712 − 4,195 + 139 + 35,971 − 2,353 + 7,604
2018         Jan. + 21,060 + 17,587 − 1,544 − 378 + 8,866 − 5,016 + 3,772 + 27,335 − 121 + 2,503
         Feb. + 19,493 + 19,147 − 883 − 774 + 6,465 − 5,346 + 324 + 13,905 + 583 − 5,911
         Mar. + 29,428 + 24,484 − 1,546 − 1,036 + 9,948 − 3,967 − 92 + 26,100 + 236 − 3,236
         Apr. + 22,738 + 20,264 − 2,447 + 72 + 4,958 − 2,556 + 301 + 30,453 − 670 + 7,413
         May + 12,993 + 19,112 − 2,380 − 1,414 − 4,851 + 146 − 27 + 20,458 + 83 + 7,492
         June + 24,808 + 20,734 − 3,373 − 1,527 + 8,396 − 2,795 − 2,838 + 5,892 + 213 − 16,078
         July + 13,800 + 15,287 − 1,892 − 4,938 + 8,090 − 4,638 − 231 + 6,482 + 266 − 7,087
         Aug. + 15,118 + 15,923 − 2,680 − 5,759 + 8,565 − 3,610 + 97 + 21,233 − 640 + 6,018
         Sep. + 19,349 + 16,483 − 3,289 − 2,210 + 8,651 − 3,576 − 915 + 12,124 − 119 − 6,309
         Oct. + 20,631 + 19,802 − 512 − 3,888 + 9,005 − 4,287 − 822 + 2,938 + 700 − 16,872
         Nov. + 23,682 + 19,516 − 2,015 + 515 + 9,185 − 5,534 − 489 + 25,512 − 124 + 2,320
         Dec. + 23,070 + 13,335 − 1,928 + 1,787 + 14,389 − 6,440 + 2,779 + 33,164 − 17 + 7,316
2019         Jan. + 18,822 + 15,834 − 1,006 − 1,088 + 9,112 − 5,036 + 2,133 + 15,240 + 158 − 5,714
         Feb. + 17,530 + 19,185 − 546 − 544 + 6,868 − 7,979 + 224 + 20,981 + 112 + 3,227
         Mar.  p + 30,217 + 24,874 − 747 − 893 + 9,863 − 3,626 − 812 + 14,631 − 333 − 14,774
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions resulting from the difference between the balance on the finan cial account
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account . 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
May 2019
 XII. External sector
 
 3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
  by country and group of countries*
 
 € million
 2018  2019
Group of countries/country  2016  2017  2018 Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar.  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,203,833 1,278,958 1,317,556 117,130 116,329 96,036 108,877 108,876 118,310
Imports 954,917 1,031,013 1,089,832 98,535 96,102 81,753 94,314 90,922 95,627Balance + 248,916 + 247,946 + 227,724 + 18,594 + 20,227 + 14,283 + 14,563 + 17,954 + 22,683
I. Exports 818,644 872,427 900,184 80,505 78,838 63,385 74,914 75,834 81,181European countries
Imports 657,753 699,677 745,489 66,767 65,904 56,110 62,711 62,960 66,717Balance + 160,891 + 172,749 + 154,695 + 13,738 + 12,934 + 7,274 + 12,203 + 12,874 + 14,464
Exports 705,548 749,850 778,645 69,938 68,168 55,201 65,316 65,731 70,510 1. EU Member States (28)
Imports 551,344 586,071 623,191 55,275 54,731 47,416 51,710 53,287 56,593Balance + 154,204 + 163,780 + 155,454 + 14,663 + 13,437 + 7,785 + 13,606 + 12,444 + 13,917
Euro area (19) Exports 441,092 471,213 492,465 44,169 42,862 35,368 41,687 41,495 44,544
countries Imports 358,848 378,700 404,817 35,416 35,004 31,411 33,943 34,981 36,937
Balance + 82,244 + 92,513 + 87,648 + 8,754 + 7,858 + 3,957 + 7,744 + 6,514 + 7,607
of which:
Austria Exports 59,778 62,656 64,948 5,988 5,795 4,650 5,402 5,513 5,921
Imports 38,543 40,686 43,124 3,944 3,804 3,136 3,636 3,662 3,906Balance + 21,235 + 21,970 + 21,825 + 2,044 + 1,992 + 1,514 + 1,765 + 1,852 + 2,015
Belgium and Exports 46,931 50,071 50,409 4,423 4,279 3,665 4,294 4,281 4,626
Luxembourg Imports 40,960 43,689 49,535 3,852 4,355 3,869 4,481 4,323 3,935
Balance + 5,971 + 6,381 + 874 + 571 − 76 − 204 − 187 − 43 + 690
France Exports 101,106 105,687 105,268 8,969 9,116 7,872 9,004 9,292 9,670
Imports 65,651 64,329 65,227 5,970 5,758 5,107 5,419 5,592 6,063Balance + 35,454 + 41,359 + 40,041 + 2,999 + 3,359 + 2,765 + 3,585 + 3,700 + 3,608
Italy Exports 61,265 65,422 69,922 7,128 6,138 4,744 5,819 5,735 6,337
Imports 51,737 55,342 60,259 5,324 5,007 4,144 4,504 4,708 5,067Balance + 9,528 + 10,080 + 9,663 + 1,804 + 1,131 + 599 + 1,315 + 1,027 + 1,270
Netherlands Exports 78,433 84,661 91,129 8,119 8,101 6,720 7,957 7,640 8,346
Imports 83,142 90,597 98,069 8,820 8,375 8,179 7,858 8,892 9,296Balance − 4,709 − 5,935 − 6,940 − 701 − 274 − 1,459 + 99 − 1,252 − 950
Spain Exports 40,497 43,067 44,261 3,942 3,919 3,189 3,859 3,821 4,042
Imports 27,870 31,396 32,489 2,698 2,790 2,607 2,893 2,669 3,076Balance + 12,627 + 11,671 + 11,772 + 1,244 + 1,129 + 582 + 966 + 1,152 + 966
Other EU Member Exports 264,456 278,638 286,180 25,769 25,306 19,833 23,628 24,236 25,966
States Imports 192,496 207,371 218,374 19,859 19,727 16,005 17,767 18,306 19,656
Balance + 71,960 + 71,267 + 67,806 + 5,910 + 5,579 + 3,828 + 5,862 + 5,930 + 6,310
of which:
United Exports 85,939 85,440 82,061 7,088 7,136 5,558 6,796 7,534 8,087Kingdom Imports 35,654 36,820 37,076 3,296 3,258 2,782 2,887 2,964 3,413
Balance + 50,285 + 48,620 + 44,984 + 3,793 + 3,878 + 2,776 + 3,909 + 4,569 + 4,675
Exports 113,096 122,576 121,539 10,567 10,670 8,184 9,599 10,103 10,671 2. Other European
Imports 106,409 113,607 122,297 11,492 11,173 8,694 11,002 9,672 10,124 countries
Balance + 6,687 + 8,969 − 759 − 925 − 503 − 511 − 1,403 + 430 + 547
of which:
Switzerland Exports 50,161 53,913 54,044 4,963 4,912 3,632 4,644 4,531 4,809
Imports 43,896 45,689 45,885 4,350 4,246 3,099 4,103 3,606 4,006Balance + 6,265 + 8,224 + 8,159 + 613 + 666 + 533 + 541 + 925 + 804
II. Exports 382,486 403,490 413,614 36,248 37,175 32,447 33,680 32,777 36,837Non-European
Imports 297,164 328,606 342,969 31,634 30,066 25,514 31,432 27,789 28,726 countries
Balance + 85,322 + 74,884 + 70,645 + 4,614 + 7,108 + 6,932 + 2,248 + 4,988 + 8,111
Exports 24,434 25,431 22,635 1,945 1,939 1,891 1,967 1,926 2,129 1. Africa
Imports 16,675 20,428 22,506 2,205 2,098 1,729 1,980 1,643 1,874Balance + 7,759 + 5,003 + 129 − 260 − 159 + 162 − 14 + 283 + 255
Exports 147,542 154,644 158,972 14,153 14,153 11,820 13,118 12,886 14,884 2. America
Imports 83,499 89,927 92,378 8,022 7,996 6,787 8,303 8,081 8,198Balance + 64,043 + 64,717 + 66,594 + 6,132 + 6,158 + 5,033 + 4,815 + 4,805 + 6,686
of which:
Exports 106,822 111,805 113,312 9,979 10,165 8,494 9,444 9,075 10,605 United States
Imports 57,968 61,902 64,526 5,849 5,698 4,766 5,800 5,894 5,958Balance + 48,855 + 49,903 + 48,786 + 4,129 + 4,468 + 3,728 + 3,644 + 3,181 + 4,647
Exports 200,158 212,070 219,712 19,160 20,006 17,796 17,726 16,981 18,920 3. Asia
Imports 193,979 214,393 224,447 21,089 19,628 16,745 20,856 17,830 18,283Balance + 6,179 − 2,323 − 4,735 − 1,929 + 378 + 1,050 − 3,131 − 849 + 638
of which:
Middle East Exports 36,659 33,104 29,153 2,469 2,940 2,868 1,926 1,956 2,481
Imports 6,581 6,963 8,139 766 618 569 657 533 611Balance + 30,079 + 26,141 + 21,013 + 1,703 + 2,321 + 2,299 + 1,269 + 1,422 + 1,870
Japan Exports 18,307 19,546 20,437 1,724 1,748 1,657 1,962 1,643 1,832
Imports 21,922 22,955 23,727 2,108 2,081 1,637 2,085 1,938 2,030Balance − 3,615 − 3,410 − 3,290 − 384 − 333 + 20 − 123 − 295 − 198
Exports 76,046 86,141 93,076 8,472 8,365 7,142 7,836 7,428 8,290 People‘s Republic
Imports 94,172 101,837 106,250 10,508 9,869 8,370 10,455 8,382 8,320 of China  
2 
Balance − 18,126 − 15,695 − 13,174 − 2,036 − 1,504 − 1,228 − 2,619 − 954 − 30
Exports 51,921 53,425 54,913 4,613 4,738 4,021 4,475 4,310 4,597 New industrial countries
Imports 42,966 50,873 52,908 4,936 4,513 3,992 4,615 4,219 4,420 and emerging markets
Balance + 8,955 + 2,552 + 2,006 − 322 + 226 + 29 − 140 + 91 + 178 of Asia  3 
Exports 10,352 11,344 12,294 990 1,077 940 870 984 905 4. Oceania and
Imports 3,011 3,857 3,637 318 345 253 293 235 373 polar regions
Balance + 7,341 + 7,487 + 8,657 + 672 + 732 + 688 + 578 + 749 + 532
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of K orea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
May 2019
XII. External sector
 
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2014 − 25,029 − 6,867 − 37,653 + 7,556 + 3,549 + 1,280 + 555 + 2,971 + 1,184 + 54,939 + 891
2015 − 18,296 − 5,203 − 36,595 + 9,567 + 5,354 + 2,601 − 1,216 + 3,161 + 1,114 + 67,560 − 358
2016 − 20,967 − 5,978 − 38,247 + 9,454 + 6,779 + 1,536 − 1,716 + 3,093 + 441 + 75,371 − 1,070
2017 − 21,938 − 3,669 − 43,558 + 10,726 + 5,930 + 1,349 + 39 + 2,138 − 702 + 82,270 − 1,292
2018 − 19,551 − 2,500 − 43,408 + 10,044 + 7,453 + 1,597 − 353 + 3,209 − 1,118 + 93,548 − 765
2017         Q3 − 12,334 − 1,123 − 17,109 + 2,693 + 1,275 + 128 + 435 + 558 − 822 + 23,960 − 1,147
         Q4 − 1,651 − 1,013 − 9,509 + 2,970 + 2,263 + 1,084 − 72 + 381 − 150 + 26,848 + 3,133
2018         Q1 − 2,188 − 811 − 6,962 + 2,590 + 1,077 − 68 + 43 + 824 + 374 + 25,736 − 831
         Q2 − 2,869 − 249 − 9,219 + 2,093 + 1,998 + 804 − 225 + 906 − 469 + 11,098 − 2,125
         Q3 − 12,908 − 654 − 17,988 + 1,777 + 1,604 + 287 + 326 + 822 − 918 + 27,163 − 939
         Q4 − 1,586 − 786 − 9,239 + 3,585 + 2,774 + 574 − 497 + 656 − 104 + 29,552 + 3,130
2019         Q1  p − 2,525 − 810 − 6,978 + 2,271 + 2,110 − 188 − 427 + 759 + 329 + 26,342 − 828
2018         May − 1,414 − 74 − 3,751 + 657 + 837 + 162 − 45 + 268 − 160 − 3,357 − 1,334
         June − 1,527 − 25 − 3,910 + 646 + 413 + 682 + 181 + 367 − 151 + 8,893 − 346
         July − 4,938 − 103 − 5,933 + 744 + 168 − 104 − 443 + 256 − 332 + 8,767 − 346
         Aug. − 5,759 − 271 − 6,636 + 280 + 989 − 171 − 271 + 187 − 306 + 9,198 − 327
         Sep. − 2,210 − 280 − 5,418 + 752 + 446 + 562 + 1,040 + 379 − 281 + 9,198 − 266
         Oct. − 3,888 − 290 − 5,623 + 940 + 637 − 68 − 81 + 238 − 47 + 9,589 − 537
         Nov. + 515 − 164 − 2,314 + 1,510 + 1,645 − 496 − 410 + 162 − 51 + 9,534 − 298
         Dec. + 1,787 − 333 − 1,303 + 1,135 + 492 + 1,137 − 6 + 257 − 6 + 10,429 + 3,966
2019         Jan. − 1,088 − 337 − 1,739 + 762 + 218 − 119 − 362 + 244 + 119 + 9,207 − 214
         Feb. − 544 − 368 − 2,106 + 731 + 1,078 − 170 − 216 + 249 + 125 + 7,029 − 285
         Mar.  p − 893 − 106 − 3,133 + 778 + 814 + 101 + 151 + 266 + 84 + 10,107 − 328
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001 the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which: of which:
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which: resident and Non-produced
international non-resident Workers’ Capital income, wealth, non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2014 − 40,880 − 28,146 − 6,419 + 8,105 − 12,734 − 3,477 − 3,451 + 2,936 + 2,841 + 95
2015 − 38,494 − 24,087 − 6,805 + 10,455 − 14,406 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 48 + 1,787 − 1,835
2016 − 40,868 − 25,232 − 11,516 + 10,627 − 15,636 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 2,138 + 3,208 − 1,070
2017 − 49,554 − 21,979 − 9,852 + 10,446 − 27,576 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 1,947 + 2,502 − 4,449
2018 − 47,619 − 27,748 − 9,880 + 10,351 − 19,871 − 5,152 − 5,142 + 1,858 + 5,375 − 3,517
2017         Q3 − 10,893 − 5,341 − 1,557 + 1,780 − 5,552 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 766 + 1,396 − 630
         Q4 − 12,802 − 7,191 − 3,800 + 795 − 5,611 − 1,158 − 1,153 − 652 + 216 − 868
2018         Q1 − 14,329 − 9,218 − 2,234 + 1,698 − 5,111 − 1,291 − 1,286 + 4,003 + 3,390 + 613
         Q2 − 5,205 − 347 − 1,260 + 6,233 − 4,858 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 2,563 − 48 − 2,515
         Q3 − 11,823 − 7,249 − 1,926 + 1,225 − 4,574 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 1,050 − 297 − 753
         Q4 − 16,262 − 10,934 − 4,461 + 1,195 − 5,328 − 1,287 − 1,286 + 1,467 + 2,329 − 862
2019         Q1  p − 16,642 − 12,092 − 2,753 + 2,016 − 4,549 − 1,359 − 1,358 + 1,545 + 982 + 563
2018         May + 146 + 1,698 − 281 + 3,663 − 1,551 − 429 − 429 − 27 − 185 + 159
         June − 2,795 − 1,110 − 665 + 1,067 − 1,685 − 429 − 429 − 2,838 − 311 − 2,527
         July − 4,638 − 2,760 − 858 + 184 − 1,878 − 430 − 429 − 231 + 85 − 316
         Aug. − 3,610 − 2,441 − 529 + 281 − 1,169 − 429 − 429 + 97 + 244 − 147
         Sep. − 3,576 − 2,048 − 540 + 760 − 1,527 − 429 − 429 − 915 − 626 − 289
         Oct. − 4,287 − 3,183 − 1,074 + 172 − 1,104 − 429 − 429 − 822 − 594 − 228
         Nov. − 5,534 − 3,195 − 999 + 180 − 2,339 − 429 − 429 − 489 − 313 − 176
         Dec. − 6,440 − 4,556 − 2,388 + 843 − 1,885 − 429 − 429 + 2,779 + 3,237 − 458
2019         Jan. − 5,036 − 3,623 − 1,286 + 278 − 1,413 − 453 − 453 + 2,133 + 1,831 + 302
         Feb. − 7,979 − 6,374 − 1,056 + 927 − 1,605 − 453 − 453 + 224 − 241 + 465
         Mar.  p − 3,626 − 2,095 − 411 + 811 − 1,531 − 453 − 453 − 812 − 609 − 204
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
May 2019
XII. External sector
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2018 2019
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q3 Q4 Q1  p Jan. Feb. Mar.  p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 401,354 + 376,599 + 349,234 + 58,020 + 6,713 + 127,386 − 13,236 + 21,202 + 119,420
1. Direct investment + 99,180 + 123,084 + 132,671 + 24,534 + 2,237 + 42,516 + 15,956 + 7,525 + 19,035
Equity + 83,199 + 76,326 + 140,071 + 24,116 + 11,697 + 23,376 + 12,278 + 5,144 + 5,955
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 32,535 + 24,572 + 31,689 + 8,735 + 3,530 + 12,785 + 5,670 + 3,627 + 3,488
Debt instruments + 15,981 + 46,758 − 7,400 + 418 − 9,459 + 19,140 + 3,679 + 2,382 + 13,080
2. Portfolio investment + 96,969 + 106,469 + 68,098 + 27,974 − 8,940 + 35,888 + 21,242 + 16,118 − 1,471
Shares  2 + 16,954 + 14,229 + 9,406 + 3,866 − 504 + 505 + 3,332 + 416 − 3,244
Investment fund shares  3 + 37,698 + 50,094 + 18,658 + 3,959 − 441 + 10,655 + 3,921 + 3,774 + 2,961
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 48,544 + 44,184 + 44,648 + 20,819 − 2,411 + 17,447 + 8,605 + 11,795 − 2,954
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 6,227 − 2,038 − 4,613 − 671 − 5,585 + 7,281 + 5,383 + 132 + 1,766
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 29,053 + 11,618 + 23,253 + 10,660 + 537 + 6,219 + 756 + 3,527 + 1,935
4. Other investment  7 + 174,467 + 136,697 + 124,819 − 4,656 + 12,320 + 42,827 − 51,348 − 6,080 + 100,255
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 18,509 − 20,986 + 49,856 + 1,171 + 1,493 + 51,037 + 38,709 − 13,642 + 25,970
Long-term + 44,861 + 19,641 + 4,456 + 3,336 + 3,023 + 12,329 + 3,363 + 4,964 + 4,002Short-term − 26,353 − 40,627 + 45,400 − 2,165 − 1,530 + 38,708 + 35,346 − 18,606 + 21,968
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 13,510 + 5,039 + 26,981 + 16,433 + 2,625 + 11,693 − 3 + 4,141 + 7,555
Long-term − 3,237 − 2,062 + 10,456 + 2,606 + 2,393 − 11 + 951 + 282 − 1,244Short-term − 10,273 + 7,102 + 16,526 + 13,826 + 232 + 11,705 − 954 + 3,859 + 8,799
General government − 1,022 − 3,993 − 8,814 − 4,063 + 1,020 + 2,414 + 96 − 395 + 2,713
Long-term − 7,408 − 4,408 − 1,097 + 714 − 121 + 292 + 359 + 34 − 101Short-term + 6,386 + 415 − 7,717 − 4,777 + 1,141 + 2,122 − 263 − 429 + 2,814
Bundesbank + 170,491 + 156,637 + 56,795 − 18,197 + 7,181 − 22,318 − 90,150 + 3,816 + 64,017
5. Reserve assets + 1,686 − 1,269 + 392 − 493 + 560 − 63 + 158 + 112 − 333
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(increase: +) + 141,635 + 93,652 + 123,637 + 18,180 − 54,901 + 76,534 − 28,476 + 221 + 104,789
1. Direct investment + 56,018 + 74,395 + 89,151 + 17,882 + 25,853 + 8,506 + 3,678 + 7,911 − 3,083
Equity + 13,883 + 21,255 + 13,396 + 2,282 + 7,680 + 6,000 + 1,847 + 3,094 + 1,059
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 2,188 + 8,115 + 4,531 + 211 + 2,551 + 4,069 + 1,653 + 1,635 + 781
Debt instruments + 42,135 + 53,140 + 75,755 + 15,600 + 18,172 + 2,505 + 1,830 + 4,816 − 4,141
2. Portfolio investment − 102,008 − 90,176 − 44,980 − 11,969 − 27,860 + 53,264 + 22,352 + 9,540 + 21,372
Shares  2 − 221 − 715 + 6,618 − 1,589 + 14 − 3,964 − 1,598 − 1,465 − 900
Investment fund shares  3 − 6,932 − 1,991 − 5,821 − 341 − 654 − 3,812 − 1,067 − 2,002 − 743
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 95,327 − 70,432 − 47,593 − 13,850 − 22,480 + 41,086 + 15,289 + 17,682 + 8,116
Short-termdebt securities  
5 + 471 − 17,039 + 1,815 + 3,811 − 4,740 + 19,954 + 9,729 − 4,674 + 14,899
3. Other investment  7 + 187,625 + 109,433 + 79,466 + 12,268 − 52,893 + 14,764 − 54,506 − 17,230 + 86,500
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 86,742 + 17,476 − 35,965 + 8,519 − 108,955 + 102,623 + 68,246 − 3,896 + 38,273
Long-term + 5,774 + 7,541 − 8,496 − 3,878 − 509 + 1,223 − 442 + 910 + 755Short-term + 80,968 + 9,935 − 27,469 + 12,397 − 108,446 + 101,400 + 68,688 − 4,806 + 37,518
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 4,658 + 23,541 + 15,750 + 14,391 − 19,053 + 27,036 + 6,080 − 3,450 + 24,406
Long-term + 78 + 8,855 + 8,259 − 2,054 − 1,417 + 2,886 + 2,922 + 317 − 353Short-term − 4,736 + 14,687 + 7,491 + 16,445 − 17,636 + 24,150 + 3,158 − 3,768 + 24,759
General government − 5,309 − 8,719 + 2,890 + 4,069 − 4,205 + 6,808 − 4,563 + 6,845 + 4,526
Long-term − 4,682 − 3,723 + 660 + 101 + 402 + 1 − 0 + 10 − 9Short-term − 626 − 4,996 + 2,230 + 3,968 − 4,607 + 6,807 − 4,563 + 6,835 + 4,535
Bundesbank + 110,849 + 77,135 + 96,792 − 14,710 + 79,319 − 121,702 − 124,269 − 16,728 + 19,295
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 259,720 + 282,947 + 225,597 + 39,839 + 61,614 + 50,852 + 15,240 + 20,981 + 14,631
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
May 2019
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col. 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  1 col. 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan.  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,475
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,652 474,193
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 765,813 444,168
2016         Aug. 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 525,342 393,349
         Sep. 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 549,904 407,956
         Oct. 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 542,995 404,723
         Nov. 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 552,558 438,550
         Dec. 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017         Jan. 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 577,945 456,858
         Feb. 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,216 451,678
         Mar. 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,524 451,515
         Apr. 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 601,492 487,652
         May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 601,093 497,785
         June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 623,914 474,966
         July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 612,871 479,898
         Aug. 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 620,273 469,611
         Sep. 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 618,496 496,703
         Oct. 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 600,416 485,499
         Nov. 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 576,550 515,282
         Dec. 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,652 474,193
2018         Jan. 1,114,774 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,665 882,043 53,165 617,024 497,750
         Feb. 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 636,717 511,262
         Mar. 1,158,983 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 939,229 923,466 53,924 678,829 480,155
         Apr. 1,139,056 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 917,971 902,364 54,115 633,679 505,377
         May 1,198,995 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 973,323 956,150 54,203 656,506 542,489
         June 1,213,511 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 991,577 976,266 54,857 701,075 512,436
         July 1,147,878 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 930,107 913,270 54,463 666,362 481,515
         Aug. 1,145,283 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 929,073 912,448 53,864 644,650 500,633
         Sep. 1,189,175 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,380 956,487 54,717 686,357 502,818
         Oct. 1,167,004 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 943,644 927,555 55,089 662,976 504,029
         Nov. 1,184,703 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 960,478 941,130 56,026 671,196 513,507
         Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 765,813 444,168
2019         Jan. 1,123,169 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,039 646,268 476,902
         Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 624,925 502,530
         Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 644,360 546,056
         Apr. 1,167,174 177,364 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,469 935,563 919,696 54,247 617,168 550,006
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to respective country designation), since November 2000 also bal ances with non-euro
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad. 4See
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5Euro opening
valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
May 2019
XII. External sector
 
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2015 876,992 264,561 612,431 416,692 195,739 181,240 14,499 1,018,628 152,364 866,264 681,975 184,289 112,668 71,6212016 877,132 245,991 631,141 420,851 210,290 196,110 14,180 1,051,138 132,151 918,987 722,253 196,734 124,129 72,6052017 892,379 218,372 674,007 450,147 223,860 210,204 13,657 1,087,106 138,289 948,818 750,318 198,500 128,892 69,6072018 914,056 233,402 680,654 450,943 229,712 215,637 14,075 1,174,527 138,328 1,036,199 832,342 203,857 133,440 70,417
2018         Oct. 921,515 225,566 695,949 459,475 236,474 221,848 14,626 1,169,101 152,902 1,016,199 811,437 204,762 131,844 72,917
         Nov. 935,679 239,450 696,229 455,777 240,453 225,823 14,630 1,188,504 155,022 1,033,482 825,473 208,009 135,779 72,230         Dec. 914,056 233,402 680,654 450,943 229,712 215,637 14,075 1,174,527 138,328 1,036,199 832,342 203,857 133,440 70,417
2019         Jan. 920,513 231,959 688,554 456,365 232,189 218,067 14,121 1,186,689 149,754 1,036,935 837,130 199,805 128,847 70,958
         Feb. 935,021 234,300 700,721 466,686 234,036 219,649 14,387 1,194,265 146,169 1,048,097 849,383 198,713 127,000 71,713         Mar. 959,264 238,502 720,762 477,950 242,812 228,318 14,494 1,215,367 164,102 1,051,265 844,732 206,533 134,696 71,838
Industrial countries 1
 
2015 768,263 260,659 507,604 374,690 132,915 119,868 13,047 919,095 147,507 771,588 644,558 127,030 91,119 35,9112016 760,622 242,112 518,510 378,804 139,705 127,025 12,680 946,894 128,163 818,731 685,120 133,611 96,436 37,1742017 773,242 214,321 558,921 406,982 151,939 139,749 12,190 982,241 131,450 850,792 711,976 138,816 104,054 34,7622018 789,499 228,170 561,329 406,279 155,050 142,678 12,372 1,058,150 125,576 932,574 792,349 140,225 105,662 34,563
2018         Oct. 796,752 220,825 575,926 415,462 160,464 147,634 12,831 1,052,766 138,639 914,127 771,060 143,066 107,551 35,515
         Nov. 812,453 234,780 577,673 412,732 164,941 152,121 12,820 1,071,166 140,381 930,785 784,834 145,951 110,655 35,296         Dec. 789,499 228,170 561,329 406,279 155,050 142,678 12,372 1,058,150 125,576 932,574 792,349 140,225 105,662 34,563
2019         Jan. 797,882 227,225 570,657 411,689 158,968 146,553 12,415 1,071,055 134,564 936,492 797,253 139,239 104,035 35,204
         Feb. 813,733 229,668 584,065 421,232 162,833 150,078 12,755 1,085,646 136,836 948,810 808,802 140,008 104,544 35,464         Mar. 832,096 233,776 598,320 429,857 168,463 155,596 12,867 1,093,164 141,727 951,437 805,428 146,009 110,445 35,564
EU Member States 1
 
2015 631,596 242,588 389,007 294,555 94,452 83,957 10,495 752,188 136,630 615,558 531,136 84,422 58,673 25,7492016 614,938 224,194 390,744 293,305 97,439 87,421 10,018 770,003 118,015 651,988 563,776 88,212 61,312 26,9012017 612,266 194,340 417,927 311,482 106,445 96,562 9,882 807,572 115,034 692,538 596,293 96,244 71,297 24,9472018 629,920 207,625 422,295 314,364 107,932 98,242 9,689 865,713 108,560 757,153 661,338 95,816 71,623 24,192
2018         Oct. 629,357 199,862 429,495 317,937 111,557 101,287 10,270 864,837 121,601 743,237 643,082 100,154 74,962 25,192
         Nov. 647,568 214,611 432,957 316,846 116,111 106,011 10,100 880,193 123,014 757,179 654,397 102,783 77,829 24,953         Dec. 629,920 207,625 422,295 314,364 107,932 98,242 9,689 865,713 108,560 757,153 661,338 95,816 71,623 24,192
2019         Jan. 636,908 205,944 430,964 320,731 110,233 100,652 9,582 877,374 118,330 759,045 663,219 95,825 71,078 24,747
         Feb. 650,225 208,717 441,508 328,407 113,101 103,363 9,738 894,944 121,467 773,477 675,400 98,077 73,042 25,036         Mar. 661,607 211,385 450,222 331,907 118,315 108,578 9,738 898,096 122,403 775,693 673,412 102,281 77,177 25,104
of which: Euro area 2
 
2015 469,103 195,348 273,755 212,286 61,469 54,890 6,579 606,161 94,619 511,542 458,734 52,808 38,164 14,6442016 450,353 171,625 278,728 214,125 64,603 57,876 6,727 616,804 75,803 541,001 484,967 56,034 41,167 14,8672017 449,892 150,351 299,541 227,981 71,560 64,102 7,458 642,801 74,554 568,248 503,475 64,773 49,432 15,3422018 461,247 155,715 305,532 234,656 70,875 63,734 7,141 702,037 67,366 634,671 569,246 65,425 49,682 15,743
2018         Oct. 460,629 151,633 308,995 235,253 73,743 66,047 7,696 694,235 76,590 617,645 550,889 66,756 50,259 16,497
         Nov. 473,045 161,836 311,209 234,443 76,766 69,179 7,587 706,487 77,914 628,573 559,246 69,327 52,985 16,342         Dec. 461,247 155,715 305,532 234,656 70,875 63,734 7,141 702,037 67,366 634,671 569,246 65,425 49,682 15,743
2019         Jan. 467,975 156,211 311,764 240,030 71,734 64,716 7,018 710,224 72,176 638,047 572,881 65,166 49,197 15,969
         Feb. 474,189 157,169 317,021 244,083 72,937 65,794 7,143 722,514 75,863 646,651 580,051 66,600 50,332 16,268         Mar. 483,276 161,908 321,368 245,153 76,215 69,082 7,133 722,216 75,975 646,241 577,598 68,643 52,454 16,188
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2015 107,753 3,094 104,659 42,003 62,656 61,204 1,452 95,363 886 94,477 37,218 57,259 21,549 35,7102016 115,100 2,632 112,468 42,031 70,437 68,937 1,500 101,101 1,061 100,039 36,933 63,107 27,693 35,4142017 117,488 2,618 114,871 43,097 71,774 70,307 1,467 98,839 1,101 97,738 38,142 59,596 24,838 34,7582018 122,483 3,445 119,038 44,535 74,503 72,800 1,703 104,630 1,236 103,394 39,793 63,601 27,778 35,823
2018         Oct. 122,668 2,957 119,711 43,884 75,826 74,031 1,795 103,512 1,740 101,772 40,177 61,595 24,254 37,341
         Nov. 121,150 2,885 118,265 42,916 75,349 73,539 1,810 104,130 1,739 102,391 40,439 61,953 25,086 36,867         Dec. 122,483 3,445 119,038 44,535 74,503 72,800 1,703 104,630 1,236 103,394 39,793 63,601 27,778 35,823
2019         Jan. 120,577 2,946 117,630 44,548 73,082 71,376 1,707 101,471 1,299 100,172 39,677 60,496 24,780 35,716
         Feb. 119,242 2,851 116,391 45,325 71,066 69,434 1,631 100,315 1,304 99,011 40,381 58,630 22,424 36,205         Mar. 125,118 2,944 122,174 47,964 74,210 72,583 1,627 100,666 1,102 99,564 39,104 60,460 24,221 36,239
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
May 2019
XII. External sector
 
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2018         Jan. 1.5340 1.5167 7.8398 7.4455 135.25 9.6464 9.8200 1.1723 0.88331 1.2200
         Feb. 1.5684 1.5526 7.8068 7.4457 133.29 9.6712 9.9384 1.1542 0.88396 1.2348
         Mar. 1.5889 1.5943 7.7982 7.4490 130.86 9.5848 10.1608 1.1685 0.88287 1.2336
         Apr. 1.5972 1.5622 7.7347 7.4479 132.16 9.6202 10.3717 1.1890 0.87212 1.2276
         May 1.5695 1.5197 7.5291 7.4482 129.57 9.5642 10.3419 1.1780 0.87726 1.1812
         June 1.5579 1.5327 7.5512 7.4493 128.53 9.4746 10.2788 1.1562 0.87886 1.1678
         July 1.5792 1.5356 7.8504 7.4523 130.23 9.4975 10.3076 1.1622 0.88726 1.1686
         Aug. 1.5762 1.5063 7.9092 7.4558 128.20 9.6161 10.4668 1.1413 0.89687 1.1549
         Sep. 1.6189 1.5211 7.9930 7.4583 130.54 9.6205 10.4426 1.1286 0.89281 1.1659
         Oct. 1.6158 1.4935 7.9481 7.4597 129.62 9.4793 10.3839 1.1413 0.88272 1.1484
         Nov. 1.5681 1.4998 7.8880 7.4611 128.79 9.6272 10.2918 1.1377 0.88118 1.1367
         Dec. 1.5849 1.5278 7.8398 7.4653 127.88 9.8055 10.2766 1.1293 0.89774 1.1384
2019         Jan. 1.5975 1.5196 7.7504 7.4657 124.34 9.7631 10.2685 1.1297 0.88603 1.1416
         Feb. 1.5895 1.4995 7.6485 7.4627 125.28 9.7444 10.4986 1.1368 0.87264 1.1351
         Mar. 1.5959 1.5104 7.5868 7.4625 125.67 9.7181 10.4999 1.1311 0.85822 1.1302
         Apr. 1.5802 1.5035 7.5489 7.4650 125.44 9.6233 10.4819 1.1319 0.86179 1.1238
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 − Exchange rate statistics.    
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
May 2019
XII.  External sector
 
12.  Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
1999Q1=100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  4 
In real terms In real terms
of which: based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selectedconsumer domestic national consumer Euro
 area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 56 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.0 96.1 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.5 95.9 97.6 98.3 98.1 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.0 85.3 88.0 85.8 91.8 97.3 85.3 90.9 93.0 92.1 91.0
2001 87.8 87.0 86.5 86.0 90.6 86.8 91.7 96.4 86.2 90.2 93.1 91.5 90.92002 90.1 90.0 89.4 89.4 95.2 90.4 92.3 95.4 88.7 90.7 93.6 92.0 91.72003 100.7 101.1 100.3 100.5 107.1 101.2 95.7 94.4 97.8 94.8 97.0 96.6 96.72004 104.6 104.8 103.1 103.8 111.7 104.9 95.9 93.2 100.2 95.1 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.3 100.9 101.9 109.6 102.3 94.8 91.9 99.3 92.9 98.4 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.2 100.1 100.6 109.6 101.5 93.5 90.3 98.7 91.2 98.6 96.5 95.82007 106.1 105.8 101.9 102.8 113.0 103.4 94.4 89.5 102.5 91.4 100.9 97.9 97.12008 109.3 107.9 103.2 106.0 117.1 105.4 94.6 88.1 105.6 90.5 102.2 97.8 97.12009 110.7 108.7 104.1 111.0 120.2 106.4 94.8 88.8 105.0 91.0 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.0 95.9 102.9 111.6 97.4 92.3 88.5 98.6 87.2 98.7 93.6 92.0
2011 103.3 99.9 93.7 101.4 112.3 96.9 92.0 88.3 97.9 86.4 98.2 92.8 91.32012 97.7 94.7 88.3 95.3 107.2 92.0 90.1 88.3 92.9 83.7 95.9 89.8 88.32013 101.0 97.5 91.0 97.8 111.8 94.9 92.4 88.8 98.1 85.6 98.2 91.5 90.22014 101.4 97.1 91.1 98.7 114.1 95.2 93.0 89.6 98.4 86.3 98.3 91.7 90.8
2015 91.7 87.5 82.9 88.5 105.7 86.8 90.2 90.5 89.7 82.7 94.7 87.0 86.3
2016 94.4 89.4 85.1
p 89.3 109.7 p 88.7 91.1 91.0 91.2 84.1 95.3 88.0 p 87.5
2017 96.6 91.3 86.0 p 89.8 112.0 p 89.9 92.4 91.2 94.2 85.0 96.6 89.1 p 88.3
2018 98.9 93.3 p 87.6 p 91.0 117.9 p 93.7 93.6 91.3 97.1 p 86.0 98.0 90.4 p 90.4
2016         May 94.6 89.7 85.2 p 89.7 110.2 p 89.3 91.1 91.0 91.1 84.3 95.3 88.2 p 87.9
         June 94.4 89.5 109.8 p 88.9 95.1 88.1 p 87.6
         July 94.6 89.6 109.5 p 88.5 95.3 88.1 p 87.4
         Aug. 94.9 89.9 85.4 p 89.5 110.0 p 88.9 91.2 90.9 91.6 84.2 95.6 88.2 p 87.6
         Sep. 95.1 90.0 110.2 p 89.1 95.6 88.3 p 87.7
         Oct. 95.1 90.1 110.0 p 88.8 95.9 88.3 p 87.5
         Nov. 94.6 89.5 84.8 p 88.8 109.6 p 88.4 91.1 90.9 91.2 84.0 95.5 88.1 p 87.4
         Dec. 93.7 88.8 108.6 p 87.7 95.3 87.9 p 87.1
2017         Jan. 93.9 88.9 109.0 p 87.8 95.2 87.7 p 87.0
         Feb. 93.4 88.7 83.5 p 87.9 108.1 p 87.3 90.8 90.8 90.6 83.6 95.1 87.7 p 86.8
         Mar. 94.0 89.0 108.5 p 87.4 95.3 87.8 p 86.7
         Apr. 93.7 88.8 108.2 p 87.1 95.1 87.6 p 86.5
         May 95.6 90.3 85.0 p 88.7 110.5 p 88.6 91.8 91.2 92.5 84.5 96.0 88.6 p 87.6
         June 96.3 91.0 111.4 p 89.4 96.4 88.9 p 88.0
         July 97.6 92.1 113.3 p 90.8 97.1 89.7 p 89.0
         Aug. 99.0 93.5 87.8 p 91.4 115.0 p 92.2 93.3 91.3 96.4 86.1 97.9 90.4 p 89.8
         Sep. 99.0 93.5 115.0 p 92.1 97.9 90.4 p 89.9
         Oct. 98.6 93.0 114.8 p 91.8 97.5 89.9 p 89.4
         Nov. 98.5 92.9 87.6 p 91.1 115.0 p 91.9 93.5 91.3 97.0 86.0 97.9 90.2 p 89.7
         Dec. 98.8 93.2 115.3 p 92.0 98.1 90.3 p 89.8
2018         Jan. 99.4 93.8 116.1 p 92.6 98.4 90.5 p 90.0
         Feb. 99.6 93.8 p 88.1 p 91.5 117.3 p 93.5 94.0 91.1 98.5 86.2 98.5 90.6 p 90.2
         Mar. 99.7 94.0 117.7 p 93.8 98.4 90.6 p 90.3
         Apr. 99.5 93.8 117.9 p 93.9 98.6 90.6 p 90.5
         May 98.1 92.6 p 87.2 p 90.5 116.6 p 93.0 93.6 91.2 97.4 85.7 98.0 90.0 p 89.9
         June 97.9 92.4 116.7 p 92.9 97.8 89.9 p 89.9
         July 99.2 93.6 118.2 p 94.0 97.7 90.4 p 90.4
         Aug. 99.0 93.2 p 87.8 p 91.3 119.0 p 94.5 93.5 91.3 96.8 86.2 97.5 90.2 p 90.6
         Sep. 99.5 93.7 120.4 p 95.4 98.0 90.8 p 91.5
         Oct. 98.9 93.2 119.0 p 94.2 97.5 90.3 p 90.7
         Nov. 98.3 92.8 p 87.2 p 90.6 117.9 p 93.4 93.1 91.4 95.8 p 85.9 97.6 90.3 p 90.5
         Dec. 98.4 92.6 118.0 p 93.2 97.4 90.0 p 90.3
2019         Jan. 97.8 p 92.0 117.3 p 92.5 p 97.0 p 89.5 p 89.7
         Feb. 97.4 p 91.6 ... ... 116.6 p 91.9 ... ... ... ... p 96.9 p 89.3 p 89.4
         Mar. 96.9 p 91.0 116.2 p 91.5 p 96.6 p 88.9 p 89.0
         Apr. 96.7 p 90.8 116.1 p 91.3 p 97.0 p 89.3 p 89.4
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the group EER-19 (see footnote 1) and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Bra zil, Chile,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zeala nd,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailan d, Turkey and
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Venezuela. Due to the redenomination of the Venezuelan bolívar on2001, pp.  50-53, May 2007, pp.  31-35 and August 2017, pp.  41-43). For more 20  August  2018, the spot rate from 17  August  2018 is used since t hen. 3Annual
detailed information on methodology, see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from
(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, fr om 2015
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Austra- including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norw ay, Sweden,
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro area countries
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-1 9.6Euro area
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai- countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the gro up EER-38 (see
lable, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2018 see the index attached 
to the January 2019 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
June 2018
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2018 and 2019 and 
an outlook for 2020
– Lower bound, inflation target and the an -
choring of inflation expectations
July 2018
– The market for Federal securities: holder 
structure and the main drivers of yield move -
ments
– The realignment of the Chinese economy 
and its global  implications
– Trends in the financing structures of   German 
non- financial  corporations as reflected in the 
corporate financial  statements  statisticsAugust 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2018
– Models for short- term economic forecasts: 
an update
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2017
October 2018
– State government finances: comparison of 
developments, debt brakes and fiscal surveil -
lance
– The macroeconomic impact of uncertainty
– Activities of multinational enterprise groups 
and national economic statistics
– The growing importance of exchange- traded 
funds in the financial markets
November 2018
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2018
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2019 and 2020 and 
an outlook for 2021
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2017
– Germany’s international investment position: 
amount, profitability and risks of cross-  
border assetsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
85•

January 2019
– The impact of an interest rate normalisation 
on the private non- financial sector in the 
euro area from a balance sheet perspective
– Price competitiveness in individual euro area 
countries: developments, drivers and the in -
fluence of labour market reforms
– Financial cycles in the euro area
– IFRS 9 from the perspective of banking super -
vision
February 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2019
– German balance of payments in 2018
– Cash demand in the shadow economy
April 2019
– Household wealth and finances in   Germany: 
results of the 2017 survey
– Interest rate pass- through in the low interest  
rate environment
– European Stability and Growth Pact: 
individual  reform options
– Germany’s debt brake: surveillance by the 
Stability Council
May 2019
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20133
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
86•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20192, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification ,  
January 20192
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2012 to 
2017, July 20182
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2016, 
December 20172
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2014 bis 2015 , 
May 20182, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 20132
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
April 20191, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
08/ 2019  
The nonlinear dynamics of corporate bond 
spreads: Regime- dependent effects of their 
determinants 
09/ 2019  
Model and estimation risk in credit risk stress 
tests
10/ 2019  
Procyclical leverage in Europe and its role in 
asset pricing
11/ 2019  
Redemptions and asset liquidations in corporate 
bond funds
12/ 2019  
Fear, deposit insurance schemes, and deposit 
reallocation in the German banking system
13/ 2019  
Labor market reforms, precautionary savings, 
and global imbalances 
14/ 2019  
Equilibrium real exchange rate estimates across 
time and space
15/ 2019  
A flexible state- space model with lagged states 
and lagged dependent variables: Simulation 
smoothing
16/ 2019  
Extreme inflation and time- varying consump -
tion growth
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since 
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
87•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2019  
88•

