Monthly Report
November 2019
Vol. 71  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 15 November 2019.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
The two-speed global economy  ..........................................................................................  11
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  21
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  22
New methodology for calculating the EONIA since 2 October 2019  ...................................  27
Negative interest rates on the deposits of non- financial corporations  and households 
in Germany  .........................................................................................................................  31
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  37
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  46
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  57
Selected technical information on the official tax estimate  .................................................  59Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
5

Overview
Two-speed German economy  
continues
The global economy likely expanded in the 
third quarter of 2019 at a similar rate to the 
second quarter. This means that the upturn in 
economic activity predicted in a number of 
forecasts has not yet materialised. Of the major 
economies, the third quarter in the United 
States was once again characterised by robust 
aggregate output growth, and the UK econ -
omy recovered from its second- quarter set -
back. The euro area saw another period of 
muted economic growth. In China, the gradual 
moderation of growth continued, and in other 
large emerging markets economic activity re -
mained mostly subdued.
The ongoing moderate growth in the global 
economy was chiefly attributable to the slug -
gishness in global industry, which has barely ex -
panded its output since the first quarter of 
2019. The underlying trend of global trade like -
wise remained weak despite a marginal re -
bound in July and August. Although the global 
purchasing managers’ index for the manufac -
turing sector has picked up again somewhat in 
recent months, it has not reached the expan -
sion threshold. At the same time, there have 
been growing signs that this slowdown in in -
dustrial activity is spreading to the services sec -
tor. Throughout the reporting period, the trade 
dispute between the United States and China 
has been detrimental to global economic activ -
ity. Should the two countries reach an initial 
agreement soon, this could boost businesses’ 
confidence again.
The international financial markets have been 
characterised in the third and fourth quarters 
by shifting assessments of the political risks and 
the accommodative monetary policy decisions 
made by central banks on both sides of the 
Atlan tic. Yields on government bonds – amid 
fluctuations – largely fell overall as a result. This decline was quite considerable in the United 
States, where the Federal Reserve lowered the 
interest rate corridor by a total of 0.75 percent -
age point in three stages during the reporting 
period. Yields on ten- year Federal bonds (Bunds) 
also dropped sharply for a time, reaching tem -
porary historically low levels before recovering 
again. The interest rate spreads between ten-  
year bonds of other euro area countries and 
same- maturity Bunds narrowed in some cases, 
especially where Italian and Greek government 
bonds were concerned. The high demand for 
fixed-  income securities also benefited Euro -
pean corporate bonds, net yields on which had 
fallen sharply. In the international equity mar -
kets, lower yields and investors’ increased ap -
petite for risk – coupled with diminishing vola -
tility  – pushed prices up considerably. After 
analysts had scaled back the profit expectations 
for the reporting period, most US corporations, 
in particular, surprisingly generated better-  
than- expected profits for the third quarter. In 
the foreign exchange markets, the euro has 
slipped slightly since the end of June on a 
weighted average against the currencies of 19 
major trading partners. Above- average depreci -
ation against the US dollar, the yen and the 
pound sterling were counteracted by gains 
against some European currencies.
The Governing Council of the ECB adopted a 
comprehensive package of easing measures at 
the monetary policy meeting in September. It 
lowered the deposit facility rate by 10 basis 
points to -0.5% and adjusted its forward guid -
ance on key interest rates. The Governing 
Council of the ECB now expects the key inter -
est rates to remain at their present or lower 
levels until it has seen the inflation outlook 
clearly converge to a level sufficiently close to, 
but below, 2% within its projection horizon, 
and such convergence has been consistently 
reflected in core inflation dynamics.Global 
economic  
growth still 
moderate
Protracted 
sluggishness  in 
industry, with 
risk of spillover 
to services 
sector 
Political 
risks and 
accommodative 
monetary policy 
influencing 
financial 
markets Monetary 
policy : reduction 
in deposit 
facility  rate and 
adjustment to 
forward 
guidance , …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
6

Moreover, the Governing Council decided to 
restart net purchases under its expanded asset 
purchase programme (APP) at a monthly pace 
of €20 billion as from 1 November 2019. It ex -
pects these net purchases to run for as long as 
necessary to reinforce the accommodative im -
pact of its policy rates, and to end shortly be -
fore it starts raising the key ECB interest rates.
To provide further support for its accommoda -
tive monetary policy stance, the Governing 
Council of the ECB adjusted the modalities of 
the third series of targeted longer- term refinan -
cing operations (TLTRO III). It extended the ma -
turity of the individual operations and shelved 
the previously planned interest rate premium of 
10 basis points. In order to provide additional 
support for the bank-  based transmission of 
monetary policy, the Governing Council de -
cided to introduce a two- tier system for reserve 
remuneration. This means that, as of 30 Octo -
ber 2019, part of banks’ holdings of excess 
liquid ity on current accounts with the Eurosys -
tem will be exempt from the negative deposit 
facility rate and remunerated at 0%.
The broad monetary aggregate M3 registered 
strong inflows in the third quarter, continuing 
its robust growth. Lending to the domestic pri -
vate sector and inflows of funds from abroad 
remained the main growth drivers. While the 
expansion of loans to households continued on 
its upward trajectory, growth in lending to non- 
financial corporations was dampened some -
what by the persistent economic slowdown in 
the euro area. According to the latest bank 
lending survey, banks’ lending policies re -
mained largely unchanged on balance in both 
corporate and retail banking during the report -
ing quarter.
German economic output was up slightly in the 
third quarter of 2019. According to the Federal 
Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real gross 
domes tic product (GDP) increased by 0.1% on 
the previous quarter after seasonal and calen -
dar adjustment. The underlying cyclical trend 
remained muted. This was again mainly attrib -utable to the persistent weakness in the export- 
oriented industrial sector. Meanwhile, domes -
tically oriented sectors continued to provide 
some impetus, having been bolstered by the 
ongoing favourable income outlook for em -
ployees. Although the cyclical slowdown grad -
ually became noticeable in the labour market, 
it remained fairly robust.
In terms of the individual economic sectors, 
German economic activity continued to expand 
at two different speeds in the third quarter. De -
clining manufacturing activity was the main 
reason for a lack of GDP growth. Construction 
output is likely to have risen, however. Value 
added in business- related services sectors (ex -
cluding trade) also probably exceeded the level 
of the previous quarter somewhat. Trade pro -
vided a clear positive stimulus. This was not just 
down to flourishing retail trade; turnover in 
wholesale trade also saw a distinct rise despite 
the sluggishness of industry. On the demand 
side, higher private and government consump -
tion expenditure, in particular, boosted overall 
economic output. Exports likewise rose mark -
edly again compared with the weak preceding 
quarter. This is noteworthy because export ac -
tivity and industrial output usually track each 
other fairly closely. By contrast, private invest -
ment in machinery and equipment is unlikely to 
have changed much. The degree of overall cap -
acity utilisation decreased further and drew 
closer to the normal capacity utilisation range.
These two speeds of economic activity can also 
be seen in credit developments. While banks in 
Germany expanded their lending to the domes -
tic private sector distinctly again in the report -
ing quarter – albeit to a lesser extent than in 
the first half of the year – growth was primarily 
driven by loans to households, especially loans 
for house purchase. Loans to non- financial cor -
porations increased only slightly in the report -
ing quarter, however. First, a countermovement 
to the strong growth was apparent in the third 
quarter; second, subdued investment activity 
set in. Demand for loans to enterprises and 
housing loans was propped up by the pro -… resumption 
of net purchases 
under APP, …
… measures 
to support 
bank- based 
transmission
Robust under -
lying monetary 
dynamics
Economic 
activity  in 
Germany  rose 
slightly in 
Q3 2019Economic 
activity  still split
German banks’ 
lending to 
domestic private 
sector lively 
againDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
7

longed downward trend in lending rates, not -
ably for longer lock- in periods. Lending policies 
remained virtually unchanged on balance 
across all segments. Nevertheless, margins, es -
pecially on riskier loans, were expanded signifi -
cantly in some cases.
The considerable economic downturn is grad -
ually affecting the labour market. Nonetheless, 
the labour market still appeared fairly robust in 
the third quarter. Employment continued to 
rise, albeit at a considerably slower pace in 
comparison with last year. Unemployment did 
not fall any further, but stagnated at a level 
that was exceptionally low by historical stand -
ards. There was a slight increase in short- time 
work for economic reasons. However, the la -
bour market outlook for the next few months 
has deteriorated further.
The third quarter saw an exceptionally strong 
increase in negotiated pay rates. Including add -
itional benefits, these rates rose year-  on- year 
by 4.2% in the third quarter of 2019, compared 
with 2.1% in 2018. This temporary, consider -
ably higher growth rate was mainly due to new 
special payments in the metal- working and 
electrical engineering industries, which had 
been agreed last year and were first due in July 
2019. The increase in negotiated rates of basic 
pay – into which these special payments do not 
flow – was less significant. As in the previous 
quarter, the main drivers here were the services 
sectors. The weaker growth in the negotiated 
rates of basic pay in the production sector in -
cluding construction was primarily due to a 
several- month freeze at the old pay rates from 
the previous year’s collective wage agreements. 
One factor at play here was that regular in -
creases in the negotiated rates of basic pay had 
been substituted by special payments in some 
cases. By contrast, the economic downturn in 
industry was not yet particularly evident. The 
wage demands for the outstanding negoti -
ations in this year’s wage round are mostly 
higher than those of the last wage round for 
the same sectors.Consumer prices picked up moderately in the 
third quarter of the year. The Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) rose by 0.3% in sea -
sonally adjusted terms. In particular, this had a 
dampening effect on prices for energy, owing 
to distinctly lower crude oil prices. By contrast, 
food prices increased substantially and thus 
continued their upward movement, which has 
been persisting for some time now. Services 
also continued to become more expensive, 
albeit  only slightly. The travel market – a market 
in which prices often fluctuate heavily – was a 
source of dampening impulses here. The cost 
of air travel increased by roughly the same 
amount as the package holiday prices de -
creased. Given that package holidays account 
for a larger share in the basket of goods, their 
decline had a greater effect. The prices of in -
dustrial goods excluding energy saw a slight 
increase, in line with the development of the 
corresponding producer and import prices. 
Despite this, annual headline HICP inflation de -
clined significantly overall, from 1.7% to 1.1%. 
This was also the case for the rate excluding 
energy and food, which fell from 1.5% to 
0.9%. Above all, this was driven by a statistical 
effect in prices for package holidays, which is 
likely to have reduced the headline rate in the 
third quarter of 2019 by 0.4 percentage point 
and core inflation by as much as 0.6 percent -
age point. Seasonally adjusted consumer prices 
were unchanged in October on the month. 
Overall, inflation remained at 0.9% in year- on- 
year terms. Leaving aside not only energy and 
food but also the equally volatile price com -
ponents, travel services and clothing, the rate 
of inflation, at 1.5%, still stood at a higher 
level.
The slowdown of the German economy will 
probably continue in the fourth quarter of 
2019. However, it is not likely to intensify mark -
edly. As things currently stand, overall eco -
nomic output could more or less stagnate. 
Thus, the economy would largely tread water 
again in the second half of this year as a whole. 
However, from today’s vantage point, there is 
no reason to fear that Germany will slide into Impact of down -
turn on labour 
market limited 
so far
Sharp rise in 
negotiated pay 
rates on account 
of one- off 
effectsStatistical effect 
temporarily 
dampens 
consumer  price 
inflation in third 
quarter
German 
economy  could 
stagnate by the 
end of the yearDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
8

recession. On the contrary, leading economic 
indicators for industry are showing the first ten -
tative signs that the downward trend in this 
economic sector could decelerate. According 
to the ifo Institute, business expectations in the 
manufacturing sector recently brightened 
somewhat. Industrial enterprises’ order situ -
ation deteriorated only slightly in the third 
quarter. The underlying trend of incoming 
orders has remained the same for some 
months, albeit at a low level. The export-  
oriented industry could therefore stabilise be -
fore the more domestically- oriented sectors are 
affected more strongly. The domestic economy 
will probably continue to provide momentum. 
Capacity utilisation in the booming construc -
tion sector remains high, and no substantial 
growth in output is to be expected here. How -
ever, because the labour market is likely to re -
main fairly robust and wages are expected to 
grow considerably, households’ income pro -
spects should remain favourable. It is therefore 
to be assumed that private consumer demand 
will support economic activity in the current 
quarter, too. This also applies in general to the 
expansionary fiscal policy stance.
Public finances remain in very good shape. The 
general government surplus stood at 1.9% of 
GDP in 2018. It is likely to decline this year, yet 
still remain significant. Above all, spending pol -
icy is being relaxed and pensions and invest -
ment, for instance, are seeing dynamic growth. 
The economic slowdown is causing the rise in 
tax revenue, in particular, to decelerate slightly 
compared with the previous years. Overall, 
however, the cyclical component is moderate 
given the robust domestic economy.
It is foreseeable that the surplus will continue 
to shrink considerably in the coming two years. 
For example, fiscal policy is set to be loosened 
further. More funds are to be made available 
for infrastructure and education, and there are indications of continued high growth in social 
spending. Furthermore, the solidarity surcharge 
is being partially abolished in 2021. The new 
climate action programme will put a slight bur -
den on the government budget on balance.
The Federal budget is expected to record a sur -
plus again this year. In contrast to the original 
plans, it will not be necessary to tap the refu -
gee reserve to avoid net borrowing. In fact, the 
reserve could see a further marked increase. 
The budget plans for 2020 also appear to have 
been drawn up with caution, on the whole.
The structural surpluses of central and general 
government are likely to decline significantly. 
However, the national and European fiscal rules 
still make for financial leeway which could be 
used to improve the conditions for growth and 
employment. As a result, the solidarity sur -
charge could be reduced as early as in the 
coming year. It still appears appropriate to 
completely abolish this surcharge in the fore -
seeable future and, if necessary, to combine 
this step with a fundamental tax reform. State 
and local governments could reinforce their ef -
forts to improve education and infrastructure.
By contrast, a special package of measures to 
stimulate the economy does not seem neces -
sary at present. Most recent forecasts show the 
current and future economic situation more or 
less within the normal range. In this context, 
public finances are already stabilising economic 
growth appreciably. The considerable risks to 
the economic outlook, primarily resulting from 
the external environment, are nonetheless to 
be borne in mind. Should economic activity 
slump and aggregate capacity become sub -
stantially underutilised, fiscal policymakers 
would also be called upon to take steps to spur 
the economy. The fact that German public 
finances  are sound would then facilitate a size -
able contribution to stability.Government 
budget surplus 
still significant 
this year, but 
shrinking
Surplus to con -
tinue shrinking 
over next two 
yearsFederal budget 
once again 
records signifi -
cantly better 
result than 
planned
Measures 
conducive  to 
growth and 
employment 
could be 
accelerated 
Public finances 
are supporting 
economic 
activity ; currently 
no need for 
economic  
stimulus  
packages Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
9

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
The global economy likely expanded in the 
third quarter of 2019 at a similar rate to the 
second quarter. This means that the upturn in 
economic activity predicted in a number of 
forecasts has not yet materialised. Of the major 
economies, the United States was once again 
characterised by robust aggregate output 
growth in the third quarter, while the UK econ -
omy recovered from its second- quarter set -
back. In the euro area, economic growth was 
muted once again, and growth in Japan came 
to a virtual standstill. In China, the gradual 
moderation of growth continued, and in other 
large emerging markets economic activity re -
mained mostly subdued.The ongoing moderate growth in the global 
economy was chiefly attributable to the slug -
gishness in global industry, which has barely ex -
panded its production since the first quarter of 
2019. Although the global purchasing man -
agers’ index for the manufacturing sector has 
picked up again somewhat in recent months, it 
has not reached the expansion threshold. At 
the same time, there have been increasing indi -
cations that the slowdown in industry is spread -
ing to the services sector (see the box on 
pp. 11-12). One aspect that was weighing on 
global economic activity until recently was the 
trade conflict between the United States and 
China. In the past few weeks, however, there 
have been some signs of easing tensions.1 
Accord ing to the underlying trend, global trade 
remained listless until recently, despite a slight 
recovery in July and August.
In light of these developments, the latest pro -
jections from the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) could have been somewhat too optimis -
tic. Although the IMF staff revised its growth 
projections for 2019 and 2020 markedly down -
wards once again,2 it held on to its expectation 
that global economic activity would pick up in 
the second half of 2019. In particular, the sta -
bilisation of the difficult overall economic situ -
ation in some emerging market economies is 
expected to lift the growth rate of the global 
economy (based on purchasing power parity 
weightings) from 3.0% this year to 3.4% next 
year. Moreover, the expected recovery in global 
economic activity will depend on the impact of 
the supporting economic policy measures – pri -
marily the accommodative monetary policy in Global 
economic  
growth remains 
moderateProtracted 
sluggishness  in 
industry, with 
risk of spillover 
to services 
sector 
IMF revises 
projections  for 
global growth 
downwards 
once again, but 
anticipates a 
certain upturnGlobal industrial output and world trade
Source: Centraal Planbureau.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 20191001021041061081102015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
98100102104106108110112Global industrial output
Volume of world trade
July/
Aug.July/
Aug.
1 In mid- October, US President Donald Trump announced 
that a fundamental understanding between the two coun -
tries had been reached with regard to an agreement that 
would, above all, boost Chinese purchases of US agricul -
tural products. The agreement, which has not yet been 
signed, is intended to pave the way for a more comprehen -
sive trade agreement that will cover other contentious 
issues.
2 See International Monetary Fund (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
10

The two- speed global economy
The global economic expansion, which had 
previously been vibrant, has distinctly lost 
steam over the past year and a half. The de-
celeration has been particularly pronounced 
in the manufacturing sector, where produc-
tion growth has recently come to a virtual 
standstill.1 In other sectors, however, gross 
value added seems to have continued to 
expand at comparatively constant rates.2 
This “two- speed” global economic growth 
is also refl  ected in the results of business 
surveys. Whereas the global purchasing 
managers’ index (PMI) for manufacturing 
has dropped considerably since the turn of 
2017-18 and has even temporarily shown a 
contraction in production, its services coun-
terpart has remained quite solidly above the 
expansion threshold. On balance, a sizeable 
gap has opened up between the two indi-
cators.3 In the euro area, where the situ-
ation in manufacturing had been assessed 
particularly favourably in 2017, the indicator 
fell even more signifi  cantly. This led to a ra-
ther sizeable sentiment gap, which had last 
been observed in the aftermath of the 
global fi  nancial and economic crisis.
The diverging developments in the manu-
facturing and services sectors are likely to 
refl  ect a change in the composition of 
global demand, with investment dynamics slowing down distinctly in the past few 
quarters. The volume of global trade has 
even been trending downwards for nearly a 
year now. This has particularly affected the 
manufacturing sector, which is export- 
oriented and geared towards the produc-
tion of capital goods.4 By contrast, many 
branches of the services sector are more 
frequently used by households. Accordingly, 
this sector has benefi  ted more from the 
relatively robust consumption activity.
For the economic outlook, the degree of 
vulnerability of the services sector to poten-
tial contagion from the fl  agging industrial 
sector plays a major role. For instance, in 
the latest edition of its World Economic 
Outlook, the IMF points to spillover effects 
from manufacturing as a key downside risk 
to the world economy.5 Based on past ex-
perience, this concern appears to be justi-
1 According to data provided by the Dutch economic 
research institute Centraal Planbureau, global industrial 
production was up by merely 0.4% on the year in 
August  2019. This contrasts with a fi  gure of more than 
4% at the beginning of 2018.
2 In the euro area, for instance, gross value added in 
manufacturing was down in the second quarter of 
2019 by 1.1% on the year. Most other sectors saw 
growth rates ranging from 1% to 5%.
3 Among those countries that publish comparable 
PMIs, only in Brazil and India was production growth 
in manufacturing assessed more favourably than that 
in services in the third quarter of 2019.
4 According to OECD estimates, some 40% of manu-
facturing output in the G7 economies is produced to 
meet domestic investment demand and for exports. 
The corresponding share of services output is not even 
half this amount. See OECD (2019).
5 See International Monetary Fund (2019).Sectoral purchasing managers’ indices *
Sources:  J.  P.  Morgan,  IHS  Markit  and  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions.  * Sub-index  for  production.  1 Dark  shading  indicates 
worse and light shading indicates better survey results for the 
manufacturing sector.
Deutsche Bundesbank2006 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1930354045505560Index points, quarterly, seasonally adjusted
30354045505560Global economy
Euro area
Sentiment gap1Services
ManufacturingOct.
Oct.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
11

fi  ed. Historically, there has been strong co- 
movement between the sectoral PMIs over 
time, both globally and in the euro area. 
Substantial differences regarding the assess-
ment of production trends have appeared 
on numerous occasions. However, they 
have rarely been long- lasting. Turnarounds 
in manufacturing have often preceded simi-
lar changes in sentiment in the services sec-
tor. This dynamic correlation pattern has 
also shown up in phases similar to the cur-
rent situation. Both in the period from the 
fourth quarter of 2011 to the fi  rst quarter of 
2012 as well as in the second and third 
quarters of 2015, purchasing managers’ 
sentiment in global manufacturing was sub-
dued, whereas the survey results for ser-
vices held up better. In both cases, the sub-
sequent closing of the sentiment gap was 
initially triggered by a deteriorating assess-
ment of services, after which the macroeco-
nomic situation ultimately improved.There are, in fact, currently signs that the 
slump in industry is spilling over to services, 
especially into those sectors which are 
closely interlinked with manufacturing through 
value- added chains. Over the course of the 
past year, sentiment was already dipping 
markedly among fi  rms specialised in supply-
ing business- related services.6 In the euro 
area, the production indicators for this seg-
ment are already hinting at a slowing ex-
pansion.
Going forward, indirect transmission chan-
nels could also take on greater importance, 
with employment growth, in particular in 
the industrial sector, slowing in many places 
over the past few quarters. Survey- based in-
dicators are pointing to a further decline, 
which is spilling over to other sectors.7 
Should the labour market situation actually 
deteriorate, this will likely also impair the 
outlook for growth among consumption- 
related service providers.
These contagion effects could be amplifi  ed 
if industrial activity fails to regain traction 
soon or even takes a turn for the worse. 
Against this backdrop, it is a positive sign 
that the global PMI for manufacturing has 
undergone a slight recovery in the past few 
months and its counterpart for the euro 
area has at least stabilised.8 Consistent with 
these assessments, the Bundesbank’s lead-
ing indicator for the global economy is 
showing that industrial activity may possibly 
have bottomed out. However, there are no 
signs yet of major improvement.
6 This is refl  ected, inter alia, in a gloomier assessment 
of production growth. By contrast, the corresponding 
survey results for consumption- related services and the 
fi  nancial sector saw little decline.
7 For instance, since as long ago as May 2019, the 
employment component of the global PMI for manu-
facturing has remained stuck below the expansion 
threshold of 50 points. At last report, the PMI for the 
services sector was just slightly above this mark.
8 This development, however, has been accompanied 
by a further deterioration in sentiment in the services 
sector, meaning that the global gap between the sec-
tor indicators was nearly entirely closed in October.Correlation pattern of sectoral 
purchasing managers’ indices*
Sources:  J.  P.  Morgan,  IHS  Markit  and  Bundesbank  calcula-
tions.* Correlation between the contemporaneous production 
component of the indicator for services and the time-shifted 
counterpart for manufacturing. 1 Negative (positive) axis val-
ues correspond to a lead (lag) of the indicator for manufactur-
ing.
Deutsche BundesbankBased on seasonally adjusted monthly data as from January 2006
00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91.0
-  2 -  6 -  3 -  4 - 5 - 1 +2 +10 +6 +5 +4 +3
Time shift of the indicator for
the manufacturing sector in months 1Euro area Global economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
12

many countries – not being jeopardised by the 
emergence of risks such as a further escalation 
of trade disputes.
Against the background of persistently moder -
ate global economic activity, crude oil prices 
trended sideways over the course of the report -
ing period. Although crude oil prices jumped 
by 15% in the aftermath of production losses in 
Saudi Arabia resulting from an attack in Sep -
tember, they promptly reverted to their previ -
ous level as production in Saudi Arabia normal -
ised faster than anticipated. In addition, large 
global oil stocks had a stabilising effect and are 
indeed likely to have been able to offset the 
supply deficit for some time. This applies even 
more given the International Energy Agency ’s 
expectation that the crude oil market will have 
a tendency to be oversupplied next year.3 As 
this report went to press, the spot price for a 
barrel of Brent crude oil was, at US$63, only 
marginally higher than in August. Futures were 
still trading at marked discounts across the en -
tire range of maturities. According to the 
HWWI index, prices for non- energy commod -
ities were likewise essentially unchanged from 
the levels they had reached in mid-  August.
Energy prices caused price inflation in industrial 
countries to decrease markedly over the past 
few months to a fairly subdued level of 1.3% 
on the year in September. By contrast, the core 
rate excluding energy and food rose slightly 
over the same period to no less than 1.8%.
Selected emerging market 
economies
According to official data, annual real growth 
in China’s gross domestic product (GDP) decel -
erated to 6% in the third quarter. The gradual 
slowdown in growth that began in the second 
quarter of 2018 has thus continued. The fairly 
weak international environment continued to 
act as a major drag on growth. In the past 
quarter, revenues from goods exports to the 
United States were down by 15% in US dollar terms chiefly due to the trade dispute. Exports 
to other countries likewise remained lacklustre. 
In order to support economic activity, the Chi -
nese government has ushered in various ex -
pansionary measures since the beginning of 
the year. These focused on strengthening 
households’ purchasing power. For example, 
income tax and value- added tax were lowered. 
For consumers, however, this tax relief was 
eaten into by considerable rises in expenditure 
for food. In particular, pork prices surged in re -
cent months due to rampant swine fever. As a 
result, the rate of inflation as measured by the 
consumer price index (CPI) increased signifi -
cantly in October to 3.8%. This was the 
sharpest rise in prices since the beginning of 
2012.
In India, economic activity in the third quarter, 
for which there is not yet an official GDP esti -
mate, is likely to have lost more momentum. In Commodity 
prices largely 
moving 
sideways 
Rising core infla -
tion in industrial 
countries
Chinese growth 
gradually mod -
erating furtherWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and food
and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 8 November 2019, or 1 to 14 November 2019 
for crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 201930406080Monthly averages, log scale
8090100110120130140
8090100110120US dollar basis, 2015 = 100, enlarged scaleCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beveragesIndustrial commodities
3 See International Energy Agency (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
13

the second quarter, GDP growth had already 
fallen considerably to 5% on the year. The crisis 
in the Indian shadow banking industry was the 
main reason behind this renewed slowdown. 
Shadow banks play an important role in the 
supply of credit to households and small enter -
prises in India. This is especially true for motor 
vehicle financing. As a result, sales of passen -
ger cars dropped by 30% on the year in the 
third quarter. Industrial production also fell 
below the previous year’s level due to the 
slumping motor vehicle sector. At 3.5%, annual 
consumer price inflation in the previous quarter 
remained fairly weak by Indian standards. In 
light of the dampened inflationary pressures 
and the tensions in the financial sector, the Re -
serve Bank of India maintained its accommoda -
tive stance.
In Brazil, economic output is likely to have seen 
moderate growth again in the third quarter 
after rising in the second quarter by a season -
ally adjusted 0.4% on the quarter. Output in 
the mining sector, which had experienced mas -
sive losses as a result of a dam collapse at the 
beginning of the year, largely returned to nor -
mal levels. Sentiment among purchasing man -
agers in the manufacturing sector also bright -
ened noticeably. In addition, the major pension 
reform passed in October improved the long-  
term prospects for Brazilian public finances. In 
light of the persistently restrained annual con -
sumer price inflation, which was 2.9% in Sep -
tember, the Central Bank of Brazil once again 
loosened its monetary policy to a considerable 
degree. This move left the policy rate at a 
record- low 5%.
The Russian economy built up distinct momen -
tum in the third quarter. According to an initial 
estimate by the Russian Federal State Statistics 
Service, real GDP saw annual growth of 1.7% 
after having recorded gains of just 0.9% in the 
second quarter. This stronger growth is likely to 
have been largely attributable to one-  off fac -
tors, such as a plentiful harvest in particular. 
Until recently, growth in private consumption 
had been highly subdued and was likely to have still been restrained by the value-  added 
tax hike introduced at the beginning of the 
year. Investment activity likewise remained 
weak. The implementation of what are known 
as “national projects” – which comprise an 
ambitious , medium- term infrastructure pro -
gramme4 – has seen only sluggish progress so 
far. Consumer price inflation fell to 4.3% on 
the year in the third quarter. Against this back -
drop, the Bank of Russia cut its policy rate in 
four steps by a total of 125 basis points to 
6.5% at the end of the reporting period.
United States
In the United States, the robust overall eco -
nomic upturn maintained its pace and con -
tinued in the third quarter. According to an ini -
tial official estimate, real GDP was again up by 
0.5% from the preceding quarter. Burdens im -
posed by foreign trade and changes in inven -
tory, which had previously hampered growth, 
did not persist. Growth in domestic final de -
mand, however, was not entirely able to main -
tain the rapid pace seen in the second quarter. 
The renewed decline in industrial gross fixed 
capital formation played a role in this context.5 
In addition, public demand and private con -
sumption grew less strongly. This contrasted 
with an upturn in private housing construction 
– in some cases, the weakness in this sector 
had been interpreted as a harbinger of a po -
tential recession.6 Against the background of 
more favourable financing conditions, housing 
construction investment saw marked expan -
sion again for the first time in almost two years. 
This recovery could continue in the coming 
quarters, especially as the US Federal Reserve 
System lowered the fed funds rate by an add -Economic 
activity  in India 
likely to have 
lost more 
momentum
Recovery in 
Brazil  appears 
to be continuing
Underlying 
cyclical  trend 
remains muted 
in RussiaContinued solid 
economic 
growth
4 The Russian government has designated funds corres -
ponding to just under US$400 billion for the investment 
programme up until 2024. The programme is intended to 
focus on expanding the road network, the rail network, 
seaports and airports.
5 In this context, sharp declines were again recorded in the 
mining and aviation sectors. However, investment dynam -
ics remained listless in other sectors, too.
6 See Emmons (2018, 2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
14

itional 25 basis points at the end of October. 
The persistently good situation on the labour 
market is also likely to continue to prop up 
household demand. At the start of the fourth 
quarter, the unemployment rate remained at 
the very low level seen in the third. In line with 
this, domestic inflationary pressures were still 
fairly strong until recently. In October, the an -
nual growth rate of CPI excluding energy and 
food stood at 2.3%.
Japan
In Japan, economic growth almost came to a 
standstill in the third quarter. According to an 
initial official estimate, seasonally adjusted real 
GDP grew by only 0.1% over the previous 
period after still having risen fairly briskly in the 
two preceding quarters. Despite the anticipa -
tory effect in the run-  up to the increase in 
value- added tax on 1 October 2019, the rate of 
private consumption growth in the third quar -
ter could not quite match that of the preceding 
period. By contrast, industrial investment and 
expenditure for private housing construction 
were expanded to a greater degree. Private 
final demand, which was fairly brisk on the 
whole, was partially serviced using stockpiled 
goods, however. Furthermore, the decline in 
exports took its toll on economic output. Des -
pite a slight increase, the rate of unemploy -
ment remained at an exceptionally low level in 
September. Although the labour market situ -
ation continued to be favourable, wages still 
saw virtually no growth compared to the previ -
ous year. Accordingly, consumer price inflation 
remained subdued. In September, the annual 
rate of change in CPI excluding energy and 
food stood at 0.3%. Against this backdrop, the 
Bank of Japan maintained its accommodative 
stance.
United Kingdom
UK economic output rose again in the third 
quarter. According to an initial estimate, real GDP grew by a seasonally adjusted 0.3% over 
the previous quarter after having contracted 
slightly further in the second quarter. Key to 
this was a slight improvement in growth in the 
services sector, which makes a significant con -
tribution to national gross value added. In add -
ition, production in the manufacturing sector 
stabilised; this sector had been in sharp decline 
in the previous period due to the United King -
dom’s planned withdrawal from the EU, which 
had originally been scheduled for the end of 
March. Construction activity also recorded dis -
tinct growth. The situation on the labour mar -
ket still appeared exceptionally good; in the 
third quarter, unemployment was, at 3.8%, at 
its lowest level so far in the current cycle. The 
year- on- year change in the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) fell to 1.5% at the 
current end. Although the contours of an or -
derly exit of the UK from the EU have become 
more clearly visible in light of the renegotiation 
of the Withdrawal Agreement in October, sen -
timent amongst entrepreneurs and consumers Growth almost 
comes to 
standstill 
Economic out -
put rises againEconomic output in the United Kingdom
0.200.20.40.60.8
–++++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Source:  Haver  Analytics.  Original  source:  Office  for  National 
Statistics.
Deutsche Bundesbank97100103106109112115Gross valued added by sector
2015 = 100, log scaleReal GDP 
Quarter-on-quarter percentage change
Manufacturing
Construction
ServicesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
15

deteriorated markedly towards the end of the 
reporting period. Even in the event of an exit 
under these conditions, the National Institute 
of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) antici -
pates considerable GDP losses of around 3½% 
compared with the UK remaining a member of 
the EU.7
Poland
In Poland, economic expansion picked up 
steam again in the third quarter. Real GDP grew 
by 1.3% from the preceding quarter after sea -
sonal adjustment. This growth was bolstered 
by the ongoing favourable labour market situ -
ation, the continued strong wage growth and 
the additional social benefits ahead of parlia -
mentary elections. The unemployment rate de -
clined further in the third quarter to just 3.3% 
after seasonal adjustment. Nevertheless, the 
Polish economy did not remain unaffected by 
the global slowdown in the industrial sector. 
Industrial production contracted by a season -
ally adjusted 1.3% compared with the preced -
ing quarter, and industrial confidence fell to its 
lowest level since the start of 2017. Inflation 
firmed distinctly. The consumer price index 
(CPI) increased by 2.6% in September on the 
year; excluding energy and food, this figure 
stood at 2.4%. The core rate one year earlier 
had been 0.8%. The Polish central bank left its 
policy rate unchanged as before.
Macroeconomic trends in the 
euro area
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro 
area GDP grew in the third quarter, as in the 
second, by 0.2% on the quarter after seasonal 
adjustment. After having risen by 0.4% in the 
first quarter, which was also due to temporary 
one- off effects, the underlying pace is likely to 
be assessed as somewhat lower than in the 
first half of the year. The further decline in the 
sentiment indicators suggests this as well. An -
nual GDP growth remained unchanged at 1.2% in the third quarter, and thus lagged slightly be -
hind the potential growth rate of 1.3% esti -
mated by the European Commission. The main 
reason for this merely moderate economic 
growth was the ongoing downturn in the 
manufacturing sector. This was weighed down 
by lacklustre global investment dynamics, in 
part as a result of the elevated risk stemming 
from still simmering trade disputes. The weak -
ness in the industrial sector also spilled over to 
services sectors in business- related areas. By 
contrast, favourable financial conditions as well 
as the continuing resilient growth in household 
income provided support. So far, there are no 
indications that economic growth in the euro 
area could accelerate distinctly in the fourth 
quarter of 2019 and the first quarter of 2020. 
Instead, the business climate in the industrial 
and services sectors faltered slightly yet again 
in October, and the negative factors emanating 
from the global setting persisted.
Consumption activity has been rather robust so 
far when compared with the subdued aggre -
gate growth. Private consumption growth is 
likely to have been moderate in the third quar -
ter as well. Retail sales, after price and seasonal 
adjustment, were up less strongly in the third 
quarter than in the second quarter, while the 
number of new motor vehicle registrations rose 
steeply.8 The underlying conditions for private 
consumption also remain favourable given the 
positive labour market situation and the dis -
tinct increase in real disposable income. That 
said, households’ expectations regarding future 
economic developments deteriorated accord -
ing to the European Commission’s survey. This 
might have prompted additional saving.
Investment in the euro area (excluding Ireland) 
also presumably continued to go up, albeit not Upturn 
continuing , 
marked rise in 
consumer prices
Economic 
growth only 
moderateModerate 
growth in 
private  
consumption 
Investment up 
less strongly
7 See National Institute of Economic and Social Research 
(2019). According to NIESR, some of these losses expected 
over the medium term have already materialised as a result 
of uncertainty effects.
8 It may also be connected to the switchover to the new 
emissions standard EVAP (Evaporative Emissions) as of Sep -
tember. At all events, the number of registrations rose 
steeply in August and then dropped off in September.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
16

at the same pace as in the preceding quarter.9 
In any case, the domestic sales achieved by 
capital goods producers grew markedly in July 
and August, and imports of capital goods from 
the rest of the world picked up significantly. 
Positive financing conditions and fiscal invest -
ment incentives in some countries10 are likely to 
have been beneficial and to have mitigated 
flagging industrial capacity utilisation. Con -
struction investment, on the other hand, does 
not appear to have exceeded the previous 
quarter’s levels. At all events, construction out -
put stagnated in July and August. The Euro -
pean Commission surveys likewise point to a 
slackening in construction activity in the third 
quarter.
On the whole, foreign trade remained lack -
lustre in the third quarter as well. While exports 
of goods to non- euro area countries increased 
slightly in terms of value after seasonal adjust -
ment, intra- euro area trade tailed off markedly. 
Exports to the United States remained brisk, 
and deliveries to the United Kingdom recovered 
from their second-  quarter setback.11 However, 
exports to China were down for the second 
consecutive quarter. As export prices barely 
changed, the volume of exports to non-  euro 
area countries is also likely to have picked up 
somewhat. Consumer goods exports, in par -
ticular, increased in July and August (including 
food and pharmaceutical products), while ex -
ports of capital goods fell considerably for the 
third time in succession. The reduction in intra- 
euro area trade primarily impacted intermedi -
ate goods. This reflects the great importance of 
cross- country value chains in the euro area’s 
manufacturing sector. In contrast, intra- euro 
area trade in consumer goods saw a visible in -
crease. Imports from third countries remained 
sluggish, though there was a rise in capital 
goods imports.
The downward slide in industrial production 
continued in the third quarter. The production 
of intermediate goods saw an especially sharp 
decline. This area has been mired in a slump 
since the start of 2018. Likewise, consumer goods output also went down considerably, al -
though the production of capital goods experi -
enced a distinct increase. In this context, the 
number of passenger cars rolling off assembly 
lines continued to decrease markedly, while the 
manufacture of other transport equipment was 
stepped up. The momentum in the services 
sectors waned somewhat in July and August. 
The level of activity in the transport sector and 
among professional, scientific and technical 
services is likely to be affected more and more 
by the sluggish activity in the industrial sector.Exports to third 
countries up in 
value only 
slightly
Further decline 
in industrial pro -
duction, slow -
down in services 
growthAggregate output in the euro area *
949698100102104106108
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 2019
Source: Eurostat. * Affected by a level shift in Irish GDP from 
Q1 2015 onwards.
Deutsche Bundesbank–0.50+0.5+1.0Lin scale
Quarter-on-quarter change%2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic productPrice and seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
9 For the euro area as a whole, gross fixed capital forma -
tion is likely to have decreased in the third quarter as Ire -
land had again recorded considerable investment in intel -
lectual property rights in the preceding quarter. Gross fixed 
capital formation in Ireland has been very volatile for sev -
eral years due to the activities of multinational enterprises. 
By excluding Ireland from the analysis, the cyclical trend in 
the euro area becomes more apparent. See Deutsche Bun -
desbank (2018).
10 This includes, in particular, the special depreciation rules 
reintroduced in Italy in April.
11 This was due to increased stockpiling prior to the ori -
ginal date scheduled for the United Kingdom’s withdrawal 
from the European Union.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
17

In the third quarter, many Member States had 
similar GDP growth rates to the preceding 
quarter. The French economy maintained its 
moderate growth with a rise of 0.3% com -
pared with the second quarter. The increase in 
private consumption accelerated slightly. In -
vestment picked up again distinctly, albeit at a 
somewhat less buoyant pace than in the previ -
ous quarter. Exports rose again after a period 
of weakness, and imports even expanded sig -
nificantly. Italy recorded a small increase in eco -
nomic activity, as in the preceding quarter. The 
biggest contribution to growth probably came 
from investment activity, which had been 
boosted by special depreciation rules reintro -
duced in April. That said, private consumption 
is likely to have expanded moderately at most. 
In any event, real retail sales were up only 
slightly in the third quarter. On the other hand, 
goods exports, which had still been supporting 
economic activity in previous quarters, con -
tracted after adjustment for prices. In the third 
quarter, the Spanish economy grew again by 0.4% on the quarter. Investment in machinery 
and equipment as well as private consumption 
picked up steam again after a weak previous 
quarter. By contrast, exports recorded a distinct 
decline here, too. Imports increased signifi -
cantly in line with buoyant domestic demand. 
The Netherlands, Belgium and Austria likewise 
recorded virtually unchanged GDP growth rates.
The sluggish cyclical development is becoming 
increasingly noticeable in the euro area labour 
markets. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, 
the number of persons in employment rose in 
the third quarter by a mere 0.1% on the quarter 
after seasonal adjustment, and the number of 
unemployed persons decreased by just 70,000. 
However, the standardised unemployment rate 
of 7.5% also exceeded its cyclical trough prior 
to the global financial and economic crisis by 
just 0.2 percentage point. Labour shortages in 
the manufacturing and services sectors were 
still perceived as constraints, albeit no longer to 
the same extent as in the first half of the year. 
Wage growth is likely to have weakened slightly 
in the third quarter.
Consumer prices in the euro area rose moder -
ately in the third quarter by 0.2% on the quar -
ter after seasonal adjustment after still seeing 
strong growth of 0.5% in the second quarter. 
Energy prices, which had declined markedly 
due to low crude oil prices, were a key factor in 
this slowdown. By contrast, food prices rose 
even more sharply than in the preceding quar -
ter. Consumers also had to pay noticeably more 
for services, while prices for non- energy indus -
trial goods increased only slightly. Annual con -
sumer price inflation (HICP) dropped consider -
ably from 1.4% to 1.0%. Amongst other things, 
this was due to a base effect caused by the 
extremely sharp rise in energy prices in the third 
quarter of 2018. The rate excluding energy and 
food contracted from 1.1% to 0.9%, which was 
largely attributable to a statistical one- off effect 
in the German sub- index for package holi -
days.12 If the prices for the volatile travel and Pace of growth 
stable in many 
Member States 
compared with 
preceding 
quarter Only slight 
improvement in 
labour market 
situation
Energy and 
statistical  
one- off effect 
dampening 
consumer  price 
inflation in Q3Industrial production in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 20191001031061092015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
97100103106109
97100103106109
Consumer goodsCapital goodsof which:
Intermediate goodsIndustrial production
100103106
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
18

clothing components are also factored out, this 
indicator of underlying inflation remained un -
changed recently at 1.1%.
In October, consumer prices rose by a season -
ally adjusted 0.1% from the preceding month. 
Prices for services and energy were up slightly, 
while food and non- energy industrial goods 
prices remained unchanged. The annual rate of 
change in HICP declined to 0.7% owing to an -
other base effect caused by energy prices. In 
contrast, the rate excluding energy and food 
increased to 1.1%.
There are very few signs that the euro area will 
experience any distinct acceleration in eco -
nomic growth in the fourth quarter of 2019 
and the first quarter of 2020. Instead, senti -
ment continued to deteriorate amongst enter -
prises and households up until October, ac -
cording to the European Commission surveys. 
While confidence remained at its above-  
average level among consumers, in the manu -
facturing sector it was markedly below its long- 
term average. A similar picture emerges from 
the purchasing managers’ index for the econ -
omy as a whole, which was only slightly above 
the expansion threshold. In the manufacturing 
sector, where the current situation and outlook 
are considered to be especially poor, there have 
nevertheless been recent signs of stabilisation. 
The survey results also suggest, moreover, that 
the economic slowdown in the industrial sector is increasingly spilling over to the services sec -
tor. From this perspective, the growth outlook 
for the last quarter of 2019 and the first quarter 
of 2020 remains subdued. That said, a number 
of political risks may diminish in the global set -
ting and in the euro area, which could 
strengthen confidence again.Annual con -
sumer price 
inflation in 
October damp -
ened by energy; 
core rate up
No improvement 
in cyclical 
outlook  so far
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), The revision of the sub- index for package holidays and its impact on 
the HICP and core inflation, Monthly Report, March 2019, pp. 8 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65ff.
Emmons, W. (2019), Key Housing Indicators Weaken Further in 2019, On the Economy Blog, Fed -
eral Reserve Bank of St. Louis, post on 24 June 2019.
Emmons, W. (2018), Recession Signals: Four Housing Indicators to Watch in 2019, Housing Market 
Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, December 2018.Measures of underlying inflation 
in the euro area
Sources: Eurostat and ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20190.60.81.01.21.41.6Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
0.60.81.01.21.41.6 HICP excluding energy, food, 
travel and clothingHICP excluding energy and foodDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
19

International Energy Agency (2019), Oil Market Report, October 2019.
International Monetary Fund (2019), World Economic Outlook: Global Manufacturing Downturn, 
Rising Trade Barriers, October 2019.
National Institute of Economic and Social Research (2019), National Institute Economic Review, 
250, November 2019, pp. F34- F37.
OECD (2019), Linkages between manufacturing and service sectors, Economic Outlook, May 2019, 
pp. 14 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
20

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its monetary policy meeting in September 
2019, the Governing Council of the ECB 
adopted an extensive package of measures 
based on its assessment of the economic and 
inflation outlook. It lowered the interest rate on 
the deposit facility by 10 basis points to -0.5%, 
but kept the interest rate on main refinancing 
operations and the rate on the marginal lend -
ing facility unchanged at 0% and 0.25%, re -
spectively. At the same time, it adjusted its for -
ward guidance on future key interest rates. The 
Governing Council now expects key interest 
rates to remain at their present or lower levels 
until it has seen the inflation outlook robustly 
converge to a level sufficiently close to, but 
below, 2% within its projection horizon, and 
such convergence has been consistently re -
flected in underlying inflation dynamics.
Moreover, the Governing Council decided to 
restart net purchases under its expanded asset 
purchase programme (APP) at a monthly pace 
of €20 billion as from 1 November 2019. It ex -
pects these net purchases to run for as long as 
necessary to reinforce the accommodative im -
pact of its policy rates, and to end shortly be -
fore it starts raising the key ECB interest rates. 
There was no change to the Governing Coun -
cil’s forward guidance on the reinvestment of 
the securities already purchased.
To provide further support for its accommoda -
tive monetary policy stance, the Governing 
Council of the ECB decided to adjust the mo -
dalities of the third series of targeted longer-  
term refinancing operations (TLTRO III). It ex -
tended the maturity of the individual oper -
ations from two to three years and removed 
the previously planned interest rate premium of 
10 basis points. For banks whose eligible net 
lending exceeds a benchmark, the interest rate 
in each operation can now be as low as the average interest rate on the deposit facility pre -
vailing over the life of the operation. The ad -
justments are intended to maintain favourable 
bank lending conditions and ensure the smooth 
transmission of monetary policy.
In order to provide additional support for the 
bank- based transmission of monetary policy, 
the Governing Council decided to introduce a 
two- tier system for reserve remuneration. 
Under this system, part of banks’ holdings of 
excess liquidity on current accounts with the 
Eurosystem is exempt from the negative de -
posit facility rate and remunerated at 0%. The 
volume of reserve holdings in excess of min -
imum reserve requirements that is exempt from 
the negative deposit facility rate for each insti -
tution is determined as a multiple of that insti -
tution’s minimum reserve requirements. The 
multiplier is the same for all institutions and has 
initially been set at 6. The two- tier system was 
first applied in the seventh maintenance period 
of 2019, starting on 30 October 2019.1 Both 
the remuneration rate of the exempt tier and 
the multiplier can be changed over time.
The measures the ECB Governing Council 
adopted in September were taken in response 
to the continued shortfall of inflation with re -
spect to its aim. According to the Governing 
Council, the incoming information indicates a 
more protracted weakness of the euro area 
economy, the persistence of prominent down -
side risks and muted inflationary pressures. The 
September Eurosystem staff projections like -
wise pointed to a further deterioration in the 
inflation outlook. At the same time, however, 
robust employment growth and increasing 
wages continued to underpin the resilience of 
the euro area economy.
The APP holdings recorded on the balance 
sheet continued to fluctuate slightly over the ECB Governing 
Council lowers 
deposit rate to 
-0.5% and 
adjusts forward 
guidance
Resumption of 
net purchases 
under APP
Change to 
TLTRO III termsTwo- tier system 
for reserve 
remuneration
ECB Governing 
Council respond -
ing to inflation 
developments
1 See European Central Bank (2019a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
21

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve periods between 31  July 
2019 and 29 October 2019 saw euro area 
liquidity needs stemming from autonomous 
factors increase slightly (see the table 
below). At an average of €1,434.2 billion in 
the September- October 2019 period, they 
stood €15.5 billion above the average for 
the June- July 2019 period, the last reserve 
maintenance period prior to the reporting 
period. The sum of the autonomous factors 
remained volatile and fl  uctuated within a 
range of €1,381.5 billion and €1,472.4 bil-
lion over the two periods considered. The 
higher volume of banknotes in circulation in 
the Eurosystem was the main factor behind 
the additional liquidity needs. This volume 
increased by €11.9 billion to an average of 
€1,252.7 billion in the September- October 
2019 reserve period (see the chart on p. 24). 
By contrast, government deposits, which 
increased  by €2.7 billion to an average of €298.6 billion, remained virtually un-
changed on balance. The change to the 
combined total of net foreign assets and 
other factors, which are considered to-
gether owing to liquidity- neutral valuation 
effects, was smaller still. Here, additional 
liquid ity absorption amounted to just €0.9 
billion. Furthermore, the rise in the min-
imum reserve requirement also caused an 
increase in banks’ calculated need for 
central  bank money. The minimum reserve 
require ment rose by €1.8 billion to €133.2 
billion during the September- October 2019 
reserve period.
The total outstanding tender volume from 
the Eurosystem’s open market operations 
declined further and stood at just over €670 
billion on average in the September- October 
2019 period, around €34 billion below the 
average for the June- July 2019 period (see 
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2019
31 July
to
17 Sep. 201918 Sep.
to
29 Oct. 2019
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) – 10.3 –  1.6
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 27.4 – 30.1
3. Net foreign assets 1 +  9.9 + 38.3
4. Other factors 1 – 29.0 – 20.1
Total –  2.0 – 13.5
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
(a) Main refi  nancing operations –  1.6 –  1.0
(b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  7.6 – 24.0
(c) Other operations –  8.0 –  3.7
2. Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility +  0.0 +  0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 15.1 + 99.1
Total –  2.1 + 70.4
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) –  4.2 + 57.0
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  0.6 –  1.2
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
22

the chart on p.  25). The ECB Governing 
Council’s interest rate decision (see p. 21) 
had no impact on the standard tender op-
erations. However, this decision affected 
the lowest rate of interest payable on the 
third series of targeted longer- term refi  nan-
cing operations (TLTRO III), the modalities of 
which were also adjusted by the ECB Gov-
erning Council (see p. 21). On 25 Septem-
ber 2019, the fi  rst of seven TLTRO III oper-
ations was settled; however, with 28 insti-
tutions taking up a volume of €3.4 billion, 
demand was only small. This was mainly 
attributed to credit institutions not having 
the chance to react to the ECB Governing 
Council’s improvement to the conditions, as 
the key deadlines had already expired.
On the same day as the fi  rst TLTRO III, vol-
untary early repayments totalling €31.8 bil-
lion were settled on the still outstanding 
TLTRO II series, meaning that net liquidity of 
€28.4 billion was absorbed. During the ref-
erence period, there was also a decline in 
the central bank liquidity provided in the 
regular tender operations. For instance, de-
mand for main refi  nancing operations de-
creased on average by €2.6 billion to an 
average of just €2.0 billion compared with 
the June- July 2019 reserve period. Demand 
for the three- month tenders also fell by 
€0.5 billion to €2.8 billion.
However, the Eurosystem continued to 
provide  the bulk of central bank liquid ity 
through its asset purchase programmes. 
The average balance sheet holdings of 
these programmes amounted to €2,609 bil-
lion during the September- October 2019 
period, representing a share of almost 80% 
of Eurosystem central bank liquidity pro-
vided through open market oper ations. This 
represented a decline of roughly €12 billion 
compared with the corresponding average 
holdings in the June- July 2019 reserve 
period, which was due to amortisation ad-justments, maturities and fl  exibility in terms 
of reinvestment (see the above table).
Excess liquidity decreased over the review 
period as a result of the lower liquidity pro-
vision and the increased liquidity needs 
stemming from autonomous factors. At an 
average of €1,712 billion in the September- 
October 2019 reserve period, it was €63 bil-Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as 
at 8 Novem-
ber 2019
Active programmes 1
PSPP – 0.1 2,088.1
CBPP3 – 0.4 262.1
CSPP + 0.1 180.1
ABSPP + 0.7 27.5
Completed programmes 
SMP – 5.8 47.8
CBPP1 – 0.5 2.4
CBPP2 – 0.5 3.0
1 Changes due to maturities, reinvestments and amortisa-
tion adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankCentral bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources:  ECB,  Eurex  Repo  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 From 1 October 2019, EONIA is calculated as €STR + 8.5 
basis points. 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum 
reserve requirement plus the deposit facility. 3 The last period 
displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
20190.60.50.40.30.20.10
––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
1,6001,8002,000Excess liquidity2Main refinancing rate
0Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period 3EONIA1
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling OvernightDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
23

lion down on the June- July 2019 period. 
With the resumption of the asset purchase 
programmes in November 2019, increasing 
liquidity provision is likely to boost excess 
liquidity. Liquidity effects from the refi  nan-
cing operations, particularly the TLTROs, re-
main another important determinant here. 
The end of the period under review saw ex-
cess liquidity holdings shift from the deposit 
facility to current account holdings (see the 
table on p. 22). This shift from one com-
ponent of excess liquidity to the other is 
probably linked to the introduction of the 
two- tier system for reserve remuneration 
(see p. 21). As expected, the actual intro-
duction of the system in the current reserve 
period reinforced this development to a 
considerable degree (see the chart on p. 25).
The lowering of the deposit facility rate was 
transmitted in full to the secured and un-
secured money market rates at the begin-
ning of the September- October 2019 re-
serve period. Thus, overnight rates in the 
euro money market continued to be geared 
to the rate on the deposit facility (see the 
chart on p.  23). The same applies to the 
euro short- term rate (€STR), the new refer-
ence rate for unsecured overnight money 
fi  rst published for 1  October 2019. The €STR stood at an average of -0.55% until 
the end of the September- October 2019 
maintenance period. The methodology for 
calculating the EONIA was changed with 
the publication of the €STR (see the box on 
p. 27), but this did not affect the spread be-
tween the EONIA and the deposit facility 
rate. In the September- October 2019 re-
serve period, the EONIA stood at an aver-
age of -0.46% (previous reserve period July- 
September 2019: -0.36%). At €2.0 billion, 
EONIA turnover remained at a low level in 
the reporting period (up to and including 
30  September). The average underlying 
turnover for the calculation of the €STR 
(from 1 to 29 October) was €32.6 billion.
On average, secured overnight money 
traded at the level of the deposit facility 
rate. On the GC Pooling platform, overnight 
trades in the ECB basket were executed 
at  -0.50% on average in the September- 
October  2019 period and thus were 10 
basis points lower than in the previous 
period (July- September 2019). Overnight 
money in the ECB EXTended basket, with its 
larger set of eligible securities, traded at 
an  average of -0.49% in the September- 
October  2019 period. In the same period, 
aggregate overnight turnover across both 
segments was €7.2 billion on average, and 
therefore below the fi  gure of €9.7 billion 
recorded  in the previous reporting period.Autonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing (-absorbing) factors are preceded by a positive (negative) 
sign. 1 Including end-of-quarter liquidity-neutral valuation ad-
justments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20191,2501,0007505002500250500750
–––––+++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
24

period. This was due to two factors: the 
smoothing over time of reinvestments in line 
with the technical parameters agreed upon in 
December, and the use of amortised cost ac -
counting.2 On 8 November 2019, the stock of 
APP assets held by the Eurosystem reached a 
total of €2,558 billion (a breakdown of these 
holdings by individual asset purchase pro -
gramme can be found on p. 23). However, with 
new purchases starting at the beginning of No -
vember, the stocks will continue to increase.
Demand for the first TLTRO III operation, settled 
on 25 September, was very low, with 28 banks 
taking up €3.4 billion in total. At the same 
time, €31.8 billion was paid back on the second 
series of targeted longer- term refinancing op -
erations (TLTRO II) under the voluntary repay -
ment option. This resulted in a negative net 
liquid ity effect. Together, the TLTRO II and 
TLTRO III series currently have an outstanding 
volume of around €661 billion. Before the con -
ditions for TLTRO III operations were adjusted in September, they were less attractive than those 
for the TLTRO II series. Prior to the September 
meeting, many banks therefore had an incen -
tive to postpone the transition from TLTRO II to 
TLTRO III. These circumstances suggest that the 
limited demand for the first TLTRO III could be 
explained by the fact that the conditions for 
the operation were modified only shortly be -
fore it was launched. Given that the deadlines 
for various reporting requirements had passed, 
counterparties were unable to participate in 
the first TLTRO III operation unless they already 
met the requirements. As a result, demand for 
the second TLTRO III operation, which will be 
settled in December, is expected to be higher.
Excess liquidity increased and, at €1,815 billion, 
was slightly higher than at the end of the last 
reporting period. Looking ahead, the resump -Little change in 
securities hold -
ings recognised 
on balance 
sheet
Participation in 
first TLTRO III 
operation muted
Slight rise in 
excess liquidityLiquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP) and corporate sec-
tor  purchase  programme  (CSPP).  2 Current  account  holdings  minus  the  minimum  reserve  requirement  plus  the  deposit  facility. 
3 Volume so small it is hardly visible. 4 The marginal lending facility is not shown in this chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank2,0001,5001,00050005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,500
––––+++++++
April May June July August September October November
2019Current account 
holdings in excess 
of the reserve 
requirementDeposit facility 4Purchase
programmes 1
Main refinancing
operations 3
Three-month 
tenders 3
Second series of
targeted longer-
term refinancing 
operations
(TLTRO-II)Third series of 
targeted longer-
term refinancing 
operations 
(TLTRO-III)
2 In particular, the difference between an asset’s acquisition 
and redemption value is amortised over the residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and thus 
measured at (amortised) cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
25

tion of net purchases under the APP from the 
beginning of November means that excess 
liquid ity will probably rise more sharply again. 
However, its path will also depend on demand 
by banks for TLTRO III operations and use of the 
early repayment option under TLTRO II.
On 18 September, the deposit facility rate was 
lowered to -0.5%. The unsecured overnight 
money market rate (EONIA) mirrored the re -
duction almost completely and has fluctuated 
within a range of -0.45% and -0.47% since 
then. The introduction of a new methodology 
for calculating the EONIA (see the box on 
p. 27) has so far had no significant impact on 
the spread between the EONIA and the rate on 
the deposit facility.
Having fallen further in the weeks leading up to 
the September meeting, money market for -
ward rates rose significantly in the latter part of 
the reporting period. On 12 September itself, 
the day of the ECB Governing Council’s monet -ary policy meeting, there was a marked up -
ward shift in the yield curve. This upward 
movement suggests that expectations of a fur -
ther decline in interest rates are tailing off. For -
ward rates continued to rise in the weeks after 
the meeting, most likely owing to market par -
ticipants’ dwindling expectations of falling 
interest rates based on what they perceived as 
positive news about the Brexit negotiations 
and the US-  China trade disputes. At present, 
based on the forward rates, a further cut to the 
deposit facility rate by 10 basis points is no 
longer fully priced in. In the surveys carried out 
before the October meeting, in median terms, 
market participants expected the deposit facil -
ity rate to be lowered by a further 10 basis 
points in the first or second quarter of 2020. 
However, the survey results also suggest that 
uncertainty about a further interest rate cut has 
grown, as expectations, which were previously 
focused heavily on December 2019, now vary 
more widely and only a small overall majority 
of respondents still anticipate a further reduc -
tion.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 recorded 
strong inflows in the third quarter of 2019 as 
well, continuing its robust growth. Lending to 
the domestic private sector and inflows of 
funds from abroad were once again the main 
drivers of growth. While the expansion of loans 
to households continued its upward trajectory, 
growth in lending to non- financial corporations 
was dampened somewhat by the persistent 
economic slowdown in the euro area. Accord -
ing to the latest bank lending survey (BLS), 
banks’ lending policies remained largely un -
changed on balance in both corporate and re -
tail banking during the reporting quarter.
Among the components of M3, overnight de -
posits again accounted for by far the largest 
inflows in the third quarter. In addition, invest -
ors stepped up their holdings of cash, short-  Complete pass- 
through of 
decrease in 
deposit facility 
rate to short- 
term money 
market rates
Significant 
increase in 
money market 
forward rates 
of lateQ3 2019 sees 
continued 
robust monetary 
growth
Households’ 
overnight 
deposits still 
main driver of 
inflows to M3Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. • Average 
1 to 11 November 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 20190.60.40.200.20.4
–––++
051015Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points% p.a. Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR 1
EONIA 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
26

New methodology for calculating the EONIA 
since 2 October 2019
As of 2 October 2019, the European Money 
Markets Institute (EMMI) has published the 
unsecured overnight rate on the interbank 
money market (euro overnight index average, 
or EONIA) based on a new methodology.1 
EONIA is an important reference interest rate 
for the euro. It has, to date, been defi  ned as 
the interest rate at which sound banks within 
the European Union and the European Free 
Trade Association (EFTA) issue unsecured 
loans in the interbank overnight money mar-
ket denominated in euro. Up until 30 Septem-
ber 2019, the ECB calculated the EONIA on 
behalf of EMMI as the weighted average 
interest rate on the reported lending volumes 
and average interest rates of a panel compris-
ing 28 banks at last count.
Using the old methodology, the EONIA would, 
after 2020, no longer have complied with the 
criteria set out in the EU Benchmarks Regula-
tion. Back in September 2018, the private sec-
tor working group on euro risk- free rates2 
therefore recommended using the euro short- 
term rate (€STR), which is calculated and pro-
vided by the ECB based on European Money 
Market Statistical Reporting (MMSR), as the 
risk- free short- term euro reference interest 
rate going forward.3
The new €STR interest rate differs from the 
EONIA in key features. While the EONIA was 
based on the terms in interbank lending (lend-
ing concept), the €STR refl  ects banks’ whole-
sale unsecured borrowing costs (borrowing 
concept). Hence, the €STR includes not just 
interbank transactions but also banks’ bor-
rowing from other non- bank fi  nancial enter-
prises (for instance money market funds). 
Consequently, as the €STR also includes a 
large proportion of interest rates on transac-
tions with fi  nancial enterprises that do not 
have access to the Eurosystem’s deposit facil-
ity, the €STR is trading slightly below the de-
posit facility rate in the current environment 
of high excess liquidity. At high levels of ex-
cess liquidity, the EONIA as calculated using the old method, meanwhile, was always sev-
eral basis points above the deposit facility 
rate, as there is usually no incentive for banks 
with access to the deposit facility to issue 
interbank loans at a lower interest rate.
In order to ensure a smooth and gradual tran-
sition from the EONIA to the €STR, the work-
ing group in March 2019 recommended ad-
justing the methodology used to compute the 
EONIA for an interim period.4 For a transi-
tional period from the fi  rst publication of the 
€STR on 2 October 2019 onwards,5 EMMI will 
calculate the EONIA daily as the €STR plus a 
fi  xed spread of 8.5 basis points. This spread 
was calculated as the average difference be-
tween the two concepts during a one- year 
reference period and was fi  xed and published 
by the ECB in May 2019.6
As a result of the temporary parallel publica-
tion of the EONIA in accordance with the new 
methodology and the €STR, EONIA can still 
be used for fi  nancial contracts for a limited 
period. The working group recommends that 
market participants gradually replace the 
EONIA with the €STR in all products and con-
tracts and, going forward, use the €STR as the 
standard reference interest rate. Publication of 
the EONIA is to be discontinued on 3 January 
2022.
1 See European Money Markets Institute (2019).
2 The working group on euro risk- free rates was set up 
by the ECB, the Belgian Financial Services and Markets 
Authority (FSMA), the European Securities and Markets 
Authority (ESMA) and the European Commission in 
2018. Its main task is to identify and recommend alter-
native risk- free interest rates and transition paths. It is 
led by industry representatives, and the ECB provides 
the secretariat.
3 See European Central Bank (2018).
4 See European Central Bank (2019b).
5 The publication on day T+1 refl  ects transactions of 
the previous day, i.e. on 2 October 2019, the €STR for 
the reference date of 1 October 2019 was published.
6 See European Central Bank (2019c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
27

term savings deposits and money market fund 
shares. The increase in sight deposits domin -
ated the overall picture, however. Once again, 
inflows from households made the largest con -
tribution to this increase. As before, these in -
vestors’ marked preference for the shortest 
possible maturities probably stemmed from the 
narrow interest rate spreads between the dif -
ferent types of deposit and the uncertainty that 
continued to surround the economic outlook in 
the third quarter, too. The annual growth rate 
of M3 thus stood at 5.5% at the end of Sep -
tember.
Among the M3 counterparts, loans granted to 
the domestic private sector, adjusted for sales 
and securitisation, recorded the largest net in -
flows. Their contribution to the annual growth 
rate of M3 rose to 3.5 percentage points at the 
end of the quarter. However, compared with 
the strong second quarter, net inflows slack -
ened slightly. This applied mainly to loans to 
non- financial corporations, with the annual 
growth rate for this credit segment sinking to 
3.7% at the end of the quarter. Net inflows at 
banks in Germany and France, in particular, 
were smaller, probably due to the gloomier 
economic situation. In addition to this, net out -
flows in Italy increased, which may have been 
attributable, among other things, to an im -
provement in Italian enterprises’ liquidity situ -ation as a result of tax relief measures, despite 
similarly weak growth.
According to the information provided by the 
banks surveyed in the BLS, neither lending pol -
icies nor the demand for loans from enterprises 
changed notably in the euro area on balance. 
Although the surveyed banks tightened their 
credit terms and conditions slightly overall, they 
simultaneously marginally eased their stand -
ards for lending to enterprises. Interest rates for 
loans to enterprises reached new historic lows 
in the third quarter. This is consistent with the 
view expressed by the banks surveyed in the 
BLS that demand for corporate loans was pri -
marily bolstered by the low general level of 
interest rates. Conversely, the surveyed banks 
reported that their financing needs for fixed in -
vestment were now contributing only margin -
ally to the increase in demand. Taken in isol -
ation, declining financing needs for inventories 
and working capital as well as the use of alter -
native sources of funding pushed down de -
mand.
Adjusted for sales and securitisation, loans to 
households recorded substantial net inflows 
again in the reporting period, representing the 
largest contribution to growth in loans to the 
private sector. Although the momentum of 
consumer credit slowed somewhat, inflows to Loss of momen -
tum in loans to 
non- financial 
corporationsOn balance, 
lending policies 
and demand for 
loans virtually 
unchanged 
in Q3
Marked rise in 
loans to house -
holds continuesConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q2 2019 Q3 2019
Holdings against central government 2 – 0.7 23.6
Monetary aggregate M3 170.7 201.5
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 146.0 192.3
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 16.6 8.3
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 8.1 1.0
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 47.8 4.4
of which:
Capital and reserves 26.1 24.3
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities 21.7 – 19.9Assets Q2 2019 Q3 2019
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 126.4 127.7
Loans 113.8 102.8
Loans, adjusted 1 135.7 107.3
Securities 12.6 24.9
Credit to general government 
in the euro area – 56.8 8.4
Loans –  1.4 – 1.3
Securities – 55.7 9.7
Net external assets 108.9 81.4
Other counterparts of M3 39.5 11.9
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
28

loans for house purchase, which are a great 
deal more substantial, were perceptibly higher 
than the previous quarter’s. Once more, the 
euro area banks participating in the BLS attrib -
uted the observed rise in demand for housing 
loans to the low general interest rate level and 
the positive outlook for both the residential 
property market and its price movements. On 
balance, this resulted in a further slight increase 
in the annual growth rate of loans to house -
holds to 3.4%. Banks in France and Germany 
continued to post the highest net inflows, al -
though Italy, too, recorded noteworthy net 
gains.
According to the BLS results, the standards for 
loans for house purchase in the euro area re -
mained almost unchanged in the reporting 
period. By contrast, overall credit terms and 
conditions were tightened marginally on bal -
ance for the first time since the introduction of 
this separate survey category in April 2015. This 
was brought on, in part, by the surveyed banks 
widening their margins, especially on riskier 
loans. On the whole, however, this did not en -
tail a significant adjustment of lending policies.
The MFI sector’s net external asset position, 
too, continued to markedly support monetary 
growth in the quarter under review. Besides the 
euro area’s sustained current account surplus, 
M3 growth was also attributable to the slightly 
positive balance of portfolio investment. Based 
on the non- seasonally adjusted balance of pay -
ments figures available for July and August, for -
eign investors made net large- scale purchases 
of both longer- term bonds issued by domestic 
general government as well as shares and mu -
tual fund shares issued by the domestic private 
sector. Domestic investors exhibited an interest 
in foreign bonds, in particular.
On balance, the MFI sector’s securities- based 
lending likewise had a positive impact on mon -
etary growth in the reporting quarter. Since the 
discontinuation of the monthly net purchases 
of securities by the Eurosystem at end- 2018, 
the development of this counterpart has pri -Standards for 
loans for house 
purchase almost 
unchanged
M3 growth 
bolstered  by 
demand for 
domestic paper 
among foreign 
investors
M3 also 
supported  by 
securities  in Q3Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10
2024
–++M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsYear-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households 5Contribution of components in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage growth
in M3
Percentage
growth 
in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
29

marily reflected commercial banks’ investment 
behaviour. Bonds and debt securities, in par -
ticular, were accumulated, whereas equity ex -
perienced only a slight rise compared with the 
previous quarter.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers recorded another marked increase 
in the reporting quarter. As in previous quar -
ters, this solid growth was supported by strong net inflows into overnight deposits. Once 
again, it was households that showed a par -
ticular interest in this low- risk and highly liquid 
form of investment. The demand for overnight 
deposits was fuelled by the narrow spread on 
longer- term risk- free forms of investment, 
which dropped even further in the quarter 
under review. Non- financial corporations like -
wise further increased their holdings of over -
night deposits – though not nearly by as much 
as households. In the corporate sector, the at -
tractiveness of this type of deposit has tended 
to decrease in recent years due to the greater 
drop in the level of interest rates in this market 
segment, including into negative territory (see 
the box on pp. 31-32). All other types of deposit 
were scaled back further on balance. In par -
ticular, longer- term time deposits of insurance 
and pension funds recorded substantial out -
flows. These institutions have for some years 
reduced their holdings of bank deposits in fa -
vour of higher- yielding financial instruments.3
In the reporting quarter, German banks also 
significantly expanded their lending business 
with the domestic non- bank sector, albeit to a 
somewhat lesser extent than in the previous 
three- month period. The net increase – as in 
the preceding quarters – stemmed solely from 
lending business with the domestic private sec -
tor. This expansion was attributable not only to 
loans but also to a greater number of securi -
tised loans being granted, especially to finan -
cial corporations. The prolonged reduction of 
securities- based lending to general government 
which had started in autumn 2015 came to a 
temporary halt in the quarter under review. 
Loans to general government, on the other 
hand, continued to decline, albeit on a rela -
tively small scale.
In the summer months, the expansion of loans 
to the private sector was predominantly sup -
ported by lending to households, particularly in 
the form of loans for house purchase. Con -German banks’ 
deposit business 
still dominated 
by build- up of 
overnight 
deposits
Significant 
expansion in 
lending business
Consistently high 
demand for 
loans for house 
purchaseLoans to the private non-financial sector 
in the euro area*
403020100102030405060
––––++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, seasonally adjusted
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankExtended by the euro area MFI sector 2
... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
+60
–100+10+20+30+40+50 To households 3To non-financial corporations1
3 For background information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019), pp. 32 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
30

Negative interest rates on the deposits of non- fi  nancial 
corporations  and households in Germany
The aggregate interest rate on the over-
night deposits of non- fi  nancial corporations 
calculated in the MFI interest rate statistics1 
has been in negative territory since Novem-
ber 2016. By contrast, the interest rate on 
the overnight deposits of households has 
continued to be marginally positive, on 
average, as has the remuneration of time 
deposits.2
The MFI interest rate statistics calculate the 
level of interest rates applied to non- 
fi  nancial corporations and households (as 
well as the corresponding volumes) on a 
monthly basis. The data collection is de-
signed to be a representative sample and 
each of the currently roughly 220 banks in 
the sample reports its volume- weighted 
average interest rates for the individual de-
posit items to the Bundesbank. It is there-
fore not possible to calculate how many 
banks in Germany have introduced negative 
deposit rates based on the data included in 
the MFI interest rate statistics. However, be-
cause the sample is representative, extrapo-
lation does allow qualifi  ed conclusions to 
be drawn regarding the distribution in rela-
tive terms of negative interest rates across 
customer deposits in the German banking 
sector.
According to the data, 58% of reporting 
institutions  reported a negative volume- 
weighted average interest rate on overnight 
deposits held by enterprises in September 2019. The sum of deposits at these institu-
tions corresponds to 79% of the total vol-
ume of overnight deposits of enterprises at 
German banks. According to the reporting 
institutions, large- scale deposits, in particu-
lar, lead to negative volume- weighted aver-
age rates at bank level. Charging enterprises 
negative interest rates appears to be stand-
ard practice across almost all categories of 
banks.
In the case of households’ deposits, the 
share of German institutions that reported a 
negative volume- weighted average interest 
rate stood at 23%, which represents a share 
of 25% of the total volume of overnight 
deposits  of households at German banks. 
Negative interest rates are charged espe-
cially by big banks, savings banks and co-
operative banks.
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), pp. 93 ff.
2 While negative effective interest rates fi  rst appeared 
in the MFI interest rate statistics in 2016, the negative 
real remuneration of households’ bank deposits is not 
a new phenomenon. Over the past few decades, there 
have repeatedly been spells of negative real interest 
rates. The real deposit rate is an interest rate adjusted 
for infl  ation which refl  ects the increase in purchasing 
power resulting from the interest paid on the deposit. 
See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), pp. 101ff.Bank deposits remunerated at a negative 
rate of interest in Germany
1 Share of reporting institutions with a volume-weighted neg-
ative average interest rate in the full MFI interest rate statistics 
sample comprising roughly 220 institutions.  2 Share of the ex-
trapolated deposit volume of institutions with a negative aver-
age interest rate in the total deposit volume of banks in Ger-
many. 3 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 
Deutsche Bundesbank01020304050607080%, month-end data: September 2019
Time
depositsOvernight
depositsTime
depositsOvernight
depositsNon-financial 
corporations 
Households3Share of institutions 
with a negative average 
interest rate 1Share of the deposit 
volume remunerated 
at a negative rate of 
interest 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
31

sumer credit again recorded substantial inflows 
as well, although its growth slowed down 
somewhat compared with the strong previous 
quarter. According to the banks surveyed as 
part of the BLS, demand in both credit seg -
ments – as in the previous quarters – was sup -
ported, above all, by the low general level of 
interest rates. Interest rates on loans for house 
purchase with long rate fixation periods, for ex -
ample, dropped to a new all- time low of 1.2% 
at the end of the third quarter. In addition, 
households maintained a positive outlook on 
the housing market and house price develop -
ments. On balance, the annual growth rate of 
loans to households continued to rise slightly 
to 4.2% as at the end of the quarter, constitut -
ing a year- on- year increase of ½ percentage 
point.
The latest BLS results indicate that banks’ lend -
ing policies for retail customers remained 
broadly unchanged in the reporting quarter. In 
this context, the surveyed banks reported hav -ing left their credit standards unchanged. How -
ever, they tightened the terms and conditions 
for loans for house purchase on aggregate for 
the second time in a row, after having almost 
continuously eased them since early 2017. This 
primarily had a bearing on margins, which 
were widened again –  also for average-  risk 
loans – for the first time since 2014.
Loans to non- financial corporations grew only 
slightly in the quarter under review. On the one 
hand, this was due to the fact that a part of the 
strong build- up of short- term loans seen in the 
preceding quarter was redeemed in the third 
quarter. On the other hand, longer- term loans, 
which had posted dynamic growth in the first 
half of the year, likewise recorded substantially 
lower net inflows in the summer months. One 
reason for this could be a weakening of invest -
ment activity, which had already been observed 
in the second quarter and may have continued 
into the third. On balance, the annual growth 
rate of loans to domestic enterprises fell dis -Retail lending 
policies largely 
unchangedOnly slight 
increase in loans 
to non- financial 
corporationsIn the case of time deposit holdings, these 
fi  gures were signifi  cantly lower. On aver-
age, only around 10% of institutions re-
ported negative interest rates on time de-
posits for enterprises and around 2% of in-
stitutions reported negative interest rates 
on time deposits for households. This repre-
sents volume shares of 19% and 1%, re-
spectively.
Empirical studies on interest rate pass- 
through show that, in Germany, the interest 
rates on time deposits at the aggregate 
level are usually based on developments in 
short- term market interest rates (12- month 
EURIBOR), however, they exhibit a higher 
level.3 The 12- month EURIBOR has been in 
negative territory since February 2016 and 
sank to -0.34% at the end of September 
2019. In the long term, just over 73% of 
changes in the market rate are passed 
through to the interest rate on the time de-posits held by households and non- fi  nancial 
corporations. In the case of overnight de-
posits at the aggregate level, there is a 
long- term relationship with a market inter-
est rate (EONIA) only for the deposits of 
non- fi  nancial corporations.4 This may indi-
cate that developments in this deposit rate 
for households have decoupled from devel-
opments in market interest rates, particu-
larly when the latter are negative, and, for 
the most part, a zero lower bound for de-
posit rates still applies de facto.
3 The interest rate for households’ time deposits has 
been, on average, roughly 37 basis points above the 
level of the 12- month EURIBOR since 2003; for time 
deposits held by non- fi  nancial corporations, the spread 
was only around 3 basis points.
4 The interest rate on the overnight deposits of non- 
fi  nancial corporations has, on average, stood at 
around 15 basis points above the EONIA since 2003. 
The long- term pass- through is roughly 55%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
32

tinctly from 5.7% at end-  June to 4.9% at end- 
September.
Demand for loans to enterprises was propped 
up by the prolonged downward trend in inter -
est rates in this credit segment, notably for 
longer lock- in periods. This is consistent with 
the BLS banks reporting that the low general 
level of interest rates fuelled credit demand 
even more in the quarter under review than 
one quarter earlier, according to their assess -
ment. By contrast, demand was once again 
dampened by the decrease in financing needs 
for inventories and working capital and by 
companies tapping alternative sources of fund -
ing; however, the impact of the latter has been 
weakening discernibly since autumn 2018.
Following a period of easing, which lasted from 
the beginning of 2017 to end-2018, the sur -
veyed banks – according to the BLS – in the re -
porting quarter marginally tightened their lend -
ing policies in the corporate loan segment for 
the third consecutive time. The banks justified 
the adjustment of their standards, above all, 
with a more negative risk assessment of indus -
try and firm- specific factors. In addition, they 
reported a deterioration in how they perceived 
the economic situation and the economic out -
look, as well as higher capital costs. Taken as a 
whole, credit terms and conditions did not 
change, according to the surveyed banks. 
Nonetheless, the margins on riskier loans, in 
particular, but also on average exposures, were 
widened further.
In reply to the ad hoc questions in the October 
BLS, German banks reported that their funding 
conditions had remained virtually unchanged 
compared with the previous quarter. However, 
banks reported that, viewed in isolation, the 
Eurosystem’s expanded APP had slightly im -
proved their liquidity position over the past six 
months, whereas it did not improve their mar -
ket financing terms during this period. Further -
more, the programme weighed on banks’ 
profit situation more heavily than during the 
last survey, although net purchases had been Demand chiefly 
supported by 
low interest 
rates
Corporate 
lending  policies 
broadly 
unchanged
Virtually no 
change in 
German  banks’ 
funding 
environment Interest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations accor-
ding  to  the  harmonised  MFI  interest  rate  statistics  (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 201901234% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, seasonally adjusted
Item2019
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 36.9 40.3
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 7.7 – 0.6
over 2 years – 2.1 – 8.1
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 1.1 – 1.5
over 3 months 1.1 – 1.1
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 1.7 – 2.6
Securities – 2.7 0.6
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 40.6 24.4
of which: to households 3 18.5 16.9
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 20.7 3.8
Securities – 0.2 7.1
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Adjusted for statistical 
changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and gen-
eral government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted for 
loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institutions 
serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and quasi- 
corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
33

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents  reporting “tightened consider-
ably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percent-
age of the responses given; for margins: difference  between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened 
somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a  percentage of the re-
sponses given. 4 Expectations for Q4 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 20191.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.09.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 190.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
1.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
34

discontinued at the start of the year. Just as in 
the previous survey round, the APP had no 
meaningful impact on lending policies and the 
credit volume in the two preceding quarters.
In view of the ECB Governing Council’s deci -
sion in September to resume net purchases 
from November 2019 onwards, the credit insti -
tutions were apprehensive of heavier strains on 
their profitability over the next six months. At 
the same time, they deem it likely that the APP 
will lead to an increase in credit volume in busi -
ness with households. They do not expect their 
lending policies to be significantly affected, 
however.
The negative deposit facility rate was again a 
key factor in banks’ net interest income shrink -
ing over the past six months due to its damp -
ening impact on lending rates, amongst other 
reasons. Simultaneously, according to the 
banks’ assessment, the negative deposit rate 
led to an increase in the volume of loans to 
both enterprises and households during this 
period, when viewed in isolation. Overall, the 
banks expect the negative effect of the deposit 
facility rate on net interest income to ebb off 
over the next six months as a result of the relief 
the two- tier system for remunerating reserve 
holdings is expected to provide, as mentioned 
by some of the banks. At this stage, notable 
positive effects on credit volume are only an -
ticipated for loans to enterprises.German banks’ 
profitability 
strained by APP 
and …
… negative 
deposit facility 
rate
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), Acquisition of financial assets and the search for yield in Germany, 
Monthly Report, May 2019, pp. 31-34.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Changes to the MFI interest rate statistics, Monthly Report, July 
2017, pp. 93 ff.
European Central Bank (2019a), Press release of 12 September 2019, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/
press/pr/date/2019/html/ecb.pr190912_2~a0b47cd62a.en.html
European Central Bank (2019b), Press release of 14 March 2019, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/
press/pr/date/2019/html/ecb.pr190314_1~af10eb740e.en.htmlLoans to the private non-financial sector 
in the euro area*
403020100102030405060
––––++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, seasonally adjusted
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankExtended by the euro area MFI sector 2
... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
+60
–100+10+20+30+40+50 To households 3To non-financial corporations1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
35

European Central Bank (2019c), Press release of 31 May 2019, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/
pr/date/2019/html/ecb.pr190531~a3788de8f8.en.html
European Central Bank (2018), Press release of 13 September 2018, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/
press/pr/date/2018/html/ecb.pr180913.en.html
European Money Markets Institute (2019), Press release of 2  October 2019, https://www.
emmi-benchmarks.eu/assets/files/EONIA%2002102019/EONIA%20publication%20new%20
determination%20methodology%20and%20FSMA%20filing_FINAL.pdf .Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
36

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Developments in global financial markets in the 
third and fourth quarters of 2019 have played 
out against the backdrop of shifting assess -
ments of political risk as well as accommoda -
tive monetary policy decisions by central banks 
on both sides of the Atlantic. On balance, these 
factors drove down government bond yields 
for the most part amid some volatility. The drop 
in yields was fairly heavy in the United States, 
where the Federal Reserve lowered the interest 
rate corridor by a total of 0.75  percentage 
point in three stages during the reporting 
period. Yields on ten- year Federal bonds 
(Bunds) also dropped significantly at times, 
briefly touching all-  time lows before bouncing 
back subsequently. Yield spreads of ten- year 
government bonds issued by other euro area 
countries over matched- maturity Bunds nar -
rowed distinctly in some cases, especially in the 
case of Italian and Greek government paper. 
The brisk demand for fixed- income securities 
also provided tailwinds for European corporate 
bonds, whose yields fell strongly. In global 
equity markets, these lower yields combined 
with an increased investor appetite for risk and 
receding volatility pushed prices up consider -
ably. Following downward revisions of analysts’ 
earnings expectations in the reporting period, 
US firms in particular exceeded profit forecasts 
for the most part in the recently closed third 
quarter. In foreign exchange markets, the euro 
was slightly down on the end of June on bal -
ance when measured as a weighted average 
against the currencies of 19 major trading part -
ners. The single currency’s above- average 
losses against the US dollar, yen and pound 
sterling were offset to a degree by gains against 
a number of European currencies.Exchange rates
On balance, the euro has lost ground against 
the US dollar since the end of the first half of 
the year. Fading expectations that the Fed 
would lower policy rates bolstered the US cur -
rency in mid-  August 2019. Market participants 
were still expecting another rate cut by the Fed 
in September, but their reading of the minutes 
from the FOMC’s most recent meeting was 
that later policy rate cuts had become less 
likely. Fed Chair Jerome Powell’s widely re -
garded speech in Jackson Hole likewise con -
tained none of the hints that some market 
players had been hoping for that a protracted 
cycle of rate cuts was in the offing. In the euro 
area, meanwhile, some members of the ECB’s 
Governing Council were explicitly calling for 
an extensive easing of monetary policy in the 
Euro system, which weighed on the euro. The 
announcement of stronger- than- expected de -
clines in German GDP growth for the second 
quarter and in the Ifo business climate index 
provided further headwinds for the single cur -
rency. Towards the end of August, political un -
certainty in Italy, triggered by the collapse of 
the country’s coalition government, sent the 
euro lower still.
In September, the euro fluctuated within a rela -
tively narrow range of between US$1.09 and 
US$1.11, without any clearly discernible trend. 
The package of measures adopted by the ECB 
Governing Council to loosen monetary policy 
did not have a lasting effect on exchange rate 
developments. But following publication of 
lower- than- expected German inflation num -
bers, the euro slipped to just under US$1.09 as 
the month drew to a close, the lowest it has 
been since May 2017. Sentiment turned in the 
euro’s favour in early October as a raft of sur -
prisingly weak US economic data were re -
leased. After that, growing hopes that the 
United Kingdom and European Union might be 
able to agree on the UK’s orderly withdrawal Financial 
markets  mainly 
influenced by 
monetary policyEuro down 
against the 
US dollar, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
37

from the EU shored up the euro, including 
against the US dollar. While the policy rate cut 
agreed at the FOMC’s October meeting had 
been widely expected by markets, the Fed’s in -
dication that it would be pausing its monetary 
easing campaign put the euro under pressure 
for a time. As this report went to press, the 
euro was trading at US$1.10, 3.4% down on its 
level at the end of June 2019.
The euro depreciated against the yen in the 
second half of August, propelled by largely the 
same factors on the European side as those 
driving the single currency’s performance 
against the US dollar. In addition, as a result of an easing of the trade dispute between the 
United States and China, global risk aversion 
among market participants fell in the second 
week of September. Declines in global risk 
aversion tend to trigger net capital outflows 
out of Japan, weakening the country’s cur -
rency. This backdrop helped the euro to bounce 
back distinctly against the yen. The single cur -
rency did lose ground against the yen for a 
time during the second half of the month, 
when the Bank of Japan (unlike the ECB and 
Fed before it) decided not to loosen its monet -
ary policy stance any further. But in October, 
hopes of an orderly Brexit sent the euro higher 
again, just as they boosted the single curren -
cy’s performance against the US dollar. As this 
report went to press, the euro stood at ¥119, 
which was 2.5% lower than at the end of the 
second quarter.
The euro’s movements against the pound ster -
ling during the reporting period were largely 
determined by how likely different market play -
ers saw the prospect of the United Kingdom 
leaving the EU without a deal at the end of 
October. Peaking at a two- year high of £0.92 in 
mid- August, the euro fell back significantly 
until the middle of September, when the risk of 
a no- deal Brexit declined noticeably after the 
UK government lost its parliamentary majority, 
an early general election was rejected, and 
legis lation preventing such a disorderly Brexit 
was passed. In addition, better- than- expected 
retail sales and GDP numbers were reported in 
the UK. A brief countermovement ensued 
when debate over a disorderly Brexit flared up 
in the House of Commons, spooking markets 
again that the United Kingdom was set to 
withdraw from the EU without a deal on 
31  October. Against the odds, though, fresh 
hopes emerged on 10 October that UK and EU 
negotiators might yet be able to hammer out a 
new withdrawal agreement at short notice. 
Within the space of a day, this news wiped 
2.9% off the euro’s value (in terms of euro ref -
erence exchange rates), the heaviest single- day 
loss the single currency had ever sustained 
against the pound sterling. As it became in -… the Japanese 
yen, …… and particu -
larly against the 
pound sterlingExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries. An increase indicates an appreciation 
of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankJ A SOND J FMAM J J A SOND
2018 20191.101.151.201.25
115120125130135140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105Daily data, log scale
¥US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange rate:
€1 = US$1.1789 1
... yen
Launch exchange rate: €1 = ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange rate: €1 = £0.71111
Nominal effective exchange rate2
Q1 1999 = 100
Launch exchange rate: 103.12 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
38

creasingly clear during the following week that 
the EU and the UK would indeed strike a deal, 
the euro continued to depreciate against the 
UK currency. Calm returned to the EUR/ GBP ex -
change rate when the UK’s withdrawal from 
the European Union was postponed once 
again. At the close of the reporting period, the 
euro was trading at £0.86, which was around 
4.5% lower than at the end of June.
Measured as a weighted average against the 
currencies of 19 major trading partners, the 
euro has lost 1.6% of its value overall since the 
beginning of the third quarter. Considering the 
euro’s disproportionately heavy losses against 
the US dollar, yen and pound sterling, this was 
a relatively moderate decline in effective terms, 
thanks in part to the single currency’s gains 
against the Polish zloty (+1%), Swedish krona 
(+1.2%) and Norwegian krone (+4.4%). In -
deed, the euro briefly reached an all- time high 
against the latter Scandinavian currency. The 
real effective euro exchange rate – i.e. after 
taking into account the inflation differentials 
between the euro area and its major trading 
partners – likewise declined somewhat during 
the period under review. Making allowances 
for estimation uncertainty, the price competi -
tiveness of euro area suppliers can currently be 
regarded as neutral.
Securities markets 
and portfolio investment
Bond market
From the end of June 2019, government bond 
yields largely fell on balance in the major cur -
rency areas. In the United States, yields on ten- 
year US Treasuries retreated by 19 basis points 
to 1.8%, mainly because of lower term premia 
calculated from yield curve models. This might 
be indicative of reduced investor uncertainty 
over the future path of interest rates, after the 
Fed lowered the target corridor for the Federal 
Funds Rate as expected in multiple steps. On 
the other hand, estimates suggest that market expectations for short- term rates on average 
for the next ten years picked up slightly. The 
Fed noted at its meeting in late October that 
the latest cut in rates provides some insurance 
against ongoing risks, adding that it considers 
the current monetary policy stance appropriate 
and presently sees no need for any further cuts 
as long as economic conditions do not change 
substantially. In light of this, the fed funds fu -
tures market placed a low probability on an -
other interest rate move before the end of this 
year.
The yield on ten- year Federal bonds (Bunds) 
has fallen slightly amid substantial volatility 
since the end of June, closing the reporting 
period 2 basis points lower overall at -0.35%. 
Already back in negative territory since March, 
ten- year Bund yields continued to trend down -
wards in the third quarter, reaching a new all- 
time low of -0.75% in September. This decline 
was probably fuelled primarily by concerns that 
economic activity might weaken further and Euro weaker in 
effective terms 
as well
Yields down on 
both sides of 
Atlantic10- year Bund 
yield slightly 
lower on 
balance Bond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20190.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–––+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
Germany
JapanEuro areaUnited States United
KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
39

that the trade conflict between the United 
States and China could flare up. Market expect -
ations of a fresh round of monetary policy eas -
ing by the Eurosystem are also likely to have 
been behind the drop in yields. At its Septem -
ber meeting, the ECB Governing Council did 
indeed adopt a package of measures which in -
clude a 10- basis- point cut in the deposit facility 
rate as well as the resumption of net asset pur -
chases as part of the expanded asset purchase 
programme (APP) at a monthly pace of €20 bil -
lion as from 1 November. This decision immedi -
ately sent ten- year Bund yields lower as the day 
progressed and higher again after that. Evi -dently, some market players had been expect -
ing the policy decisions to be more expansion -
ary still. Starting in mid- October, yields on ten- 
year Bunds increased again quite substantially, 
mainly in response to signs that the trade con -
flict was easing and the decisions surrounding 
Brexit. On balance, the yield spread between 
ten- year US Treasuries and their German coun -
terparts narrowed by 17 basis points to 218 
basis points.
As this report went to press, the term structure 
computed from yields on Federal securities was 
flatter than at the end of the second quarter. 
The spread between ten- year and two- year 
yields came to 33 basis points in mid- November, 
meaning that the term structure was flatter for 
a time than it had been for more than a dec -
ade. Bonds with residual maturities of three 
years and more all touched record lows during 
the reporting period, with yields on 30- year 
Federal bonds also drifting into negative terri -
tory for the first time ever. Lower term premia 
also had a bearing on yield developments in 
Germany. Market uncertainty surrounding the 
future path of interest rates appears to have 
abated in the wake of September’s monetary 
policy decisions. The implicit short- term interest 
rate expectations contained in the Bund term 
structure for the average of the next ten years, 
on the other hand, have increased slightly since German yield 
curve still very 
flatFinancial market response to the ECB Governing Council’s decisions of 12 September 2019
1.00.80.60.40.200.20.40.60.81.0
–––––+++++Change relative to the status at 13:30
Deutsche Bundesbank–15–12–9–6–30+3+6+9+12+15
18:00 17:00 16:00 15:00 14:00 13:00
TimeEUR/USD exchange rate
EURO STOXX 50
Two-year German yield
Ten-year German yield
Press 
conference endsPress
conference startsPress
releaseRight-hand scale,
enlargedLeft-hand scale % Basis points
Yield curve in the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest 
rate on the deposit facility in place since 18 September 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.70.60.50.40.3
––––––
Residual maturity in years14 November 2019
28 June 2019% p.a.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
40

the end of June, suggesting that some market 
participants had been expecting a higher de -
gree of accommodation.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP-  weighted average) narrowed 
distinctly compared to the end of June (down 
20 basis points at 73 basis points). Spreads 
tightened particularly sharply for ten- year 
bonds from Greece and Italy, whose premia 
over ten- year German paper both declined by 
more than 70 basis points in the period under 
review. There are probably two reasons for this. 
The first is fiscal developments in both coun -
tries. Italy’s draft budget assuaged fears by not 
aiming to increase the deficit ratio. Greece, 
meanwhile, benefited from higher- than-  
expected tax revenue and an upgrade in its 
sovereign rating by one rating agency. The 
second reason is that both countries are likely 
to have been attractive to investors in search of 
yield, given that the interest on less risky bonds 
of other euro area countries is low.
Compared to the end of June, yields on ten-  
year UK bonds (gilts) were down by 12 basis 
points at 0.7%. The Bank of England left its 
monetary policy stance on hold at its Septem -
ber meeting and also stressed that a rate cut in 
the near future had become more likely, citing 
the uncertainty surrounding Brexit as well as 
the trade dispute between China and the 
United States. In Japan, meanwhile, ten- year 
government bonds were yielding -0.1% at last 
count, 10 basis points more than at the end of 
June. Yields thus remained within the broader 
corridor specified by the Bank of Japan as part 
of its yield curve control programme. At its 
meeting at the end of October, it expanded its 
monetary policy outlook to include the possibil -
ity of an interest rate cut, thereby adjusting its 
forward guidance slightly.
Five- year forward inflation rates five years 
ahead for the euro area came to 1.2% as this 
report went to press. However, the period 
under review saw market expectations for for -ward inflation rates fluctuate quite strongly, 
which will have been mainly due to shifting 
outlooks for the economy and expectations of 
monetary policy easing. In early October, the 
five- year forward inflation rate briefly touched 
a new all- time low of 1.1%. However, this indi -
cator gives a distorted view of the level of long- 
term inflation expectations, since it currently 
also includes negative liquidity and inflation risk 
premia. These risk premia are the reason for 
the gap between market- based indicators and 
the higher inflation expectations computed 
from surveys. Long- term euro area inflation ex -
pectations collated by Consensus Economics, 
on the other hand, rose slightly to 1.9%.
Yields on European corporate bonds declined 
further during the period under review. Bonds 
issued by BBB- rated financial corporations with 
a residual maturity of between seven and ten 
years were yielding 1.4% as this report went to 
press, 30 basis points less than at the end of 
June. Yields on non- financial corporate bonds Yield spreads 
over Bunds 
down sharply
Yields down in 
the UK, up in 
JapanEuro area 
forward  inflation 
rate down, 
survey- based 
inflation 
expectations  
up slightly
Corporate bond 
yields downYield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBOXX indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20190100200300400500600
100200300400High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB financial corporations 2
BBB non-financial corporations 2By rating categoryBasis points, daily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
41

of equivalent maturity fell by 15 basis points to 
0.9%. With risk- free interest rates only margin -
ally lower, corporate bond spreads over Bunds 
tightened on roughly the same scale, leaving 
them far below their respective five- year aver -
ages at last count. Furthermore, as spreads re -
ceded, so, too, did CDS spreads and equity 
market uncertainty. Altogether, this can be 
read as suggesting that market participants’ 
risk aversion has eased overall.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
stood at €356 billion in the third quarter of 
2019 and was therefore above its previous-  
quarter level (€324 billion). After deducting re -
demptions and taking account of changes in 
issuers’ holdings of their own bonds, net issu -
ance of bonds came to €18½ billion. More -
over, foreign borrowers placed debt securities 
worth €11 billion in the German market. The 
outstanding volume of debt instruments in the 
German market therefore rose by €29 billion in 
the period under review.The public sector issued bonds totalling €16 bil -
lion net in the July to September period. This 
figure also includes issues by resolution agen -
cies set up for German banks, which are 
ascribed to the public sector for statistical pur -
poses. In the quarter under review, state gov -
ernments in particular issued their own bonds 
on balance, to the value of €11½ billion. The 
Federal Government itself primarily issued five- 
year Federal notes (Bobls; €11 billion), but also 
issued 30-  year Federal bonds (Bunds; €4 bil -
lion) and Treasury discount paper (Bubills; €3 
billion). This contrasted with net redemptions 
of ten- year Bunds totalling €11 billion.
In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises issued debt securities worth a net €5½ 
billion, following strong net issuance amount -
ing to €15 billion in the previous quarter. Non- 
financial corporations were the primary issuers 
here and placed almost exclusively long- term 
securities in the market on balance.
Domestic credit institutions reduced their cap -
ital market debt by €3½ billion between July 
and September, following net issuance of €11 
billion in the previous quarter. The focus of 
their redemption activity lay on other bank 
debt secur ities that can be structured flexibly 
and mortgage Pfandbriefe (€4½ billion and 
€1½ billion, respectively). Specialised credit 
institu tions, meanwhile, issued debt securities 
totalling €1½ billion net.
In the third quarter, German non-  banks were 
the main buyers in the domestic bond market, 
adding paper worth a net €16½ billion to their 
portfolios. Domestic securities issued by the 
public sector were the focus of buyer interest. 
Domestic credit institutions increased their 
bond holdings by €10½ billion, acquiring exclu-
sively foreign bonds on balance. Non- resident 
investors added German debt securities total -
ling €5½ billion net to their portfolios. On bal -
ance, this was almost all in the form of secur -
ities issued by the private sector. The Bundes -
bank was alone in scaling back its portfolio, 
shedding €3 billion for operational reasons.Net issuance in 
the bond marketRise in public 
sector capital 
market debt
Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Net redemptions 
by credit 
institutions 
Domestic non- 
banks and credit 
institutions main 
buyers of debt 
securitiesInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2018 2019
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 42.2 24.9 23.8
Credit institutions 0.5 5.8 10.6
of which:
Foreign debt securities 8.9 7.7 11.2
Deutsche Bundesbank 18.0 3.6 – 3.1
Other sectors 23.7 15.5 16.3
of which:
Domestic debt securities 12.5 5.7 14.8
Non-residents – 10.0 13.7 5.4
Shares
Residents 9.0 12.5 6.6
Credit institutions –  2.1 0.5 – 3.4
of which:
Domestic shares 0.0 0.4 – 0.4
Non-banks 11.1 12.0 9.9
of which:
Domestic shares 0.7 2.7 – 0.6
Non-residents 0.3 – 1.4 1.2
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 16.1 12.8 20.7
Investment in retail funds 3.6 4.7 4.3
of which:
Equity funds 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.8
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
42

Equity market
There was a significant increase in equity prices 
worldwide in the period under review. On bal -
ance, the US S&P 500 saw a 5.3% rise on its 
end- June level. At 8.8%, the climb recorded by 
the Japanese Nikkei was even more substantial, 
though still failed to compensate for the first 
half of the year’s poorer performance in com -
parison to the other major international in -
dices. The European EURO STOXX rose by 
5.8%; Germany’s CDAX recorded a slightly 
higher increase of 6.0%. By contrast, the UK 
equity market saw significantly weaker per -
formance, with the FTSE All-  Share index re -
cording a slight loss of 0.9%. Equity prices 
were boosted by the accommodative monetary 
policy on both sides of the Atlantic.1 However, 
the economic impulses observed in the markets 
over the period under review did not add up to 
a clear picture on either  side of the Atlantic. 
Most recently, prices were being bolstered by 
the positive start to the US budget season as 
well as a better than expected US labour mar -
ket report. Further tailwinds came from signals 
of a more relaxed situation with respect to the 
trade conflict between the United States and 
China and in terms of Brexit. The lower equity 
risk premia for the S&P 500 and the EURO 
STOXX, as determined using a dividend dis -
count model, reflected this reduced degree of 
political uncertainty that pushed up equity 
prices. In the models, a greater appetite for risk 
on the part of investors and the falling interest 
rate level over the course of the period under 
review more than made up for the downward 
revision of profit expectations. This meant a rise 
in the calculated valuation levels, though these 
are still close to their five- year averages both in 
the case of the S&P 500 and the EURO STOXX.
On the back of strong quarterly results, bank 
shares in the United States rose by a consider -
able 11.2%. European bank shares also outper -
formed the European market as a whole 
(+5.6%). Stock in UK banks, meanwhile, experi -
enced a significant fall in value during the 
period under review (-5.7%). A key factor here is likely to have been the negative impact on 
the UK financial industry of the country’s im -
pending withdrawal from the EU, which re -
mains hard to gauge at this point.
Market participants’ uncertainty concerning 
future  price developments –  as measured by 
the implied volatility of equity indices calcu -
lated on the basis of options  – had initially 
surged at the end of July when the trade con -
flict between the United States and China tem -
porarily intensified. It subsequently receded on 
a continuous basis, and at the end of the 
period under review was back at the low levels 
seen before the aforementioned rise. This 
meant that it lay well below the five- year aver -
ages overall.Stock markets 
benefited from 
looser monetary 
policy and 
receding polit -
ical uncertainty
Varying per -
formance for 
bank sharesVolatility at a 
low level of lateEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cal-
culated using the prices of index options. For the euro area, 
calculated using options on the EURO STOXX 50.
Deutsche BundesbankLin scale
Implied volatility1Daily data
%Beginning of 2017 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
90100110120130140
10203040
2017 2018 2019Euro area (EURO STOXX)
Japan (Nikkei 225)United States (S&P 500)
Euro area (VSTOXX)
United States (VIX)
1 In response to the press release concerning the ECB Gov -
erning Council’s monetary policy decisions on 12 Septem -
ber 2019, the EURO STOXX 50 posted immediate gains; 
these cooled somewhat once the press conference was 
over. By 18:00, the price effect amounted to +0.5% (see 
the chart on p. 40).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
43

Domestic enterprises issued €½ billion worth 
of new shares in the third quarter of 2019, the 
majority of which were unlisted securities. The 
volume of foreign equities outstanding in the 
German market rose by €7½ billion. On bal -
ance, equities were acquired predominantly by 
domestic non- banks (€10 billion). Foreign in -
vestors purchased equities for €1 billion in net 
terms, while domestic credit institutions scaled 
back their equity holdings by €3½ billion.
Investment funds
During the quarter under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €25 
billion, after raising funds totalling €17½ billion 
in the previous three- month period. The fresh 
funds mainly accrued to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€20½ billion). 
Among the various asset classes, mixed secur -
ities funds, in particular, attracted large inflows 
(€15 billion). Open- end real estate funds and 
funds of funds also placed new shares in the 
market (€5 billion and €2½ billion, respect -
ively). Foreign funds operating in the German 
market attracted inflows totalling €11 billion 
net in the third quarter. Domestic non- banks 
were the main buyers, adding mutual fund 
shares worth €35 billion to their portfolios. 
Their focus was predominantly on German 
paper. Domestic credit institutions purchased 
mutual fund shares worth a net €2 billion, 
while foreign investors scaled back their invest -
ment in German funds by a net €1 billion.
Direct investment
While transactions in cross- border portfolio in -
vestment in the third quarter of 2019 resulted 
in net capital exports of €15½ billion, direct in -
vestment brought inflows of €6½ billion on 
balance.
In the period from July to September 2019, for -
eign direct investment in Germany came to a 
net €31 billion, compared to €26½ billion in Equity issuance 
and acquisition
Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
shares
Direct invest -
ment sees 
capital  imports
Rise in inward 
direct invest -
ment in 
Germany Major items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2018 r 2019
Q3 Q2 Q3p
I. Current account + 48.0 + 59.9 + 64.1
1. Goods 1 + 47.6 + 58.4 + 63.0
2. Services 2 – 13.1 –  3.7 – 13.7
3. Primary income + 25.3 + 11.4 + 27.0
4. Secondary income – 11.8 –  6.2 – 12.2
II. Capital account –  1.0 –  0.5 +  0.5
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 39.8 + 49.3 + 18.6
1. Direct investment +  6.7 +  4.0 –  6.5
Domestic investment 
abroad + 24.5 + 30.5 + 24.7
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 17.9 + 26.5 + 31.1
2. Portfolio investment + 39.9 + 16.5 + 15.6
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 28.0 + 27.8 + 20.9
Shares 3 +  3.9 +  2.9 –  0.7
Investment fund shares 4+  4.0 +  8.3 + 10.8
of which:
Money market fund 
shares –  1.7 +  2.2 –  0.4
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 + 20.8 + 17.0 + 13.6
of which:
Denominated in euro 6 + 18.6 + 13.7 +  8.0
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –  0.7 –  0.4 –  2.8
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities – 12.0 + 11.4 +  5.3
Shares 3 –  1.6 –  1.4 +  1.2
Investment fund shares –  0.3 –  0.9 –  1.2
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 – 13.9 + 20.5 –  2.7
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 8 –  7.9 +  1.3 –  7.4
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 +  3.8 –  6.7 +  8.0
3. Financial derivatives 9 + 10.7 + 11.2 +  3.5
4. Other investment 10 – 16.9 + 17.1 +  6.3
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 –  7.3 –  0.4 +  9.3
Enterprises and 
 households 12 +  2.0 –  6.2 +  8.0
General government –  8.1 +  0.2 +  1.3
Bundesbank –  3.5 + 23.5 – 12.2
5. Reserve assets –  0.5 +  0.4 –  0.3
IV. Errors and omissions 13 –  7.1 – 10.1 – 46.0
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 
6 Including outstanding foreign Deutsche Mark bonds. 7 Short- 
term: original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued 
by the former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce 
and the former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions aris-
ing from options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as em-
ployee stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and 
trade credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the 
Bundesbank. 12 Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- 
fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institutions 
serving households. 13 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting 
from the difference between the balance on the fi  nancial ac-
count and the balances on the current account and the capital 
account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
44

the previous quarter. At €25½ billion, most of 
this was in the form of intra- group loans, with 
funds predominantly being provided as finan -
cial credits, on balance. Almost half of these 
constituted reverse investments, whereby for -
eign affiliates grant credits to their German par -
ent companies. This is a typical way for them to 
pass on proceeds from securities issuance. For -
eign enterprises increased their equity capital 
in Germany by €6 billion in the third quarter, 
mainly through reinvested earnings. The third 
quarter saw comparably high inward FDI flows 
coming from Luxembourg (€10½ billion), the 
United Kingdom (€9½ billion) and the United 
States (€5½ billion), in particular.
Firms domiciled in Germany increased their dir -
ect investment abroad by €24½ billion be -tween July and September (compared with 
€30½ billion in the previous quarter). They pri -
marily boosted their equity capital abroad 
(€22½ billion), the lion’s share of which was 
accounted for by reinvested earnings. Further -
more, they also granted more loans to affiliated 
enterprises abroad on balance (€2½ billion). 
This lending came in the shape of financial 
credits, while there was a reduction in the vol -
ume of trade credits. German enterprises in -
vested in a number of countries and regions 
throughout the world. The period from July to 
September 2019 saw particularly high levels of 
investment in the United States and Luxem -
bourg (at roughly €5½ billion in each case) as 
well as the United Kingdom (€4½ billion), 
Switzerland (€3 billion) and Sweden (€2½ bil -
lion).Capital outflows 
as a result of 
transactions 
by domestic 
enterprisesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
45

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
German economic output saw a marginal in -
crease in the third quarter of 2019. According 
to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) was up by 
0.1% on the quarter after seasonal and calen -
dar adjustment. The underlying cyclical trend 
remained weak. This was again due mainly to 
the ongoing downturn in the export- oriented 
industrial sector. Meanwhile, the domestically 
oriented sectors continued to provide a certain 
amount of impetus, helped by the still favour -
able income outlook for employees. Although 
the cyclical slowdown is gradually becoming 
noticeable in the labour market, it has shown 
itself to be fairly robust on the whole. Leading 
economic indicators for industry are also show -
ing the first tentative signs that the downward 
trend in this sector might be decelerating. This would reduce the risk of the downturn spread -
ing to the domestic sectors on a larger scale.1
Looking at the individual economic sectors, the 
German economy continued to present a split 
picture in the third quarter. Declining manufac -
turing activity was the main reason for the fact 
that there was next to no growth in GDP . There 
is likely to have been a rise in construction out -
put, however. Value added in the business-  
related services sectors (excluding trade) is also 
likely to have been somewhat up on its level of 
the preceding quarter. Trade provided a clearly 
positive stimulus. This was not just down to 
buoyant activity in the retail sector; turnover in 
the wholesale trade also saw a distinct rise des -
pite sluggish business in industry. On the de -
mand side, it was chiefly higher private and 
government consumption expenditure that 
boosted aggregate output. Exports likewise 
showed a marked rise again compared with 
the weak preceding quarter. This is noteworthy 
because export activity and industrial output 
usually move fairly closely in parallel. By con -
trast, private investment in machinery and 
equipment is unlikely to have changed much. 
Overall capacity utilisation underwent a further 
decrease and drew closer to the normal level of 
utilisation.
The third quarter of 2019 saw a distinct expan -
sion in German firms’ exports in price- adjusted 
terms, with exports of goods to euro area and 
non- euro area countries growing on the same 
scale. The positive stimuli from non- euro area 
countries were fairly unevenly distributed 
across regions in terms of value. Exports to the 
United Kingdom, for example, rose strongly. 
This was probably only partly due to exports 
returning to normal after the weak second 
quarter. A large part of the increase was down 
to the surge in exports of precious metals. This 
could be because of London’s role as a key Economic 
activity  in 
Germany  
marginally  
higher in 
Q3 2019Divergence 
in economic 
activity 
continues 
Distinct rise in 
exportsOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019949698100102104106108
–10+1+2+3+42015 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
46

trading centre for such goods. German export -
ers also enjoyed brisk sales to Switzerland and 
the OPEC countries. Business with China and 
the newly industrialised Asian economies con -
tracted heavily, however. The value of exports 
to the South- East Asian emerging markets, to 
Russia and to Japan fell even more sharply. 
Broken down by category of goods, only real 
exports of capital goods underwent a marked 
decline according to the data available up to 
August, whereas exports of intermediate and 
consumer goods showed a distinct increase.
Investment in commercial machinery and 
equipment is likely to have seen little change in 
the third quarter of 2019. Utilisation of produc -
tion capacity in industry decreased further as 
the protracted bout of weakness in the indus -
trial sector continued. This is likely to have 
dampened enterprises’ willingness to invest. 
The value of domestic sales by German manu -
facturers of capital goods was no higher than 
its level in the previous quarter. The value of 
imported capital goods continued to show a 
slight decrease in fact. However, the steep in -
crease in new passenger car registrations for 
businesses probably gave a considerable boost 
to investment activity in the reporting period. 
This is true even taking into consideration the 
fact that a significant number of these new 
registrations were probably one- day registra -
tions. This is presumably due to the updated 
vehicles test procedure designed to limit evap -
orative emissions (EVAP amendment) valid 
since September 2019. Before the new stand -
ard entered into force, motor vehicle dealers 
probably undertook a greater number of one-  
day registrations for businesses so that they 
could later sell the brand new vehicles to pri -
vate owners under the old regulation. Some of 
these vehicles have presumably since been re -
sold as used cars. Nevertheless, one sign of a 
waning propensity to invest is provided by new 
registrations of commercial vehicles, which ex -
perienced an interruption in their steep upward 
trend of recent quarters and underwent a quite 
substantial decline.Construction investment rose in the third quar -
ter of 2019, according to the Federal Statistical 
Office. Figures for turnover in the main con -
struction sector available up to August showed 
a substantial fall on the quarter, but other eco -
nomic indicators, such as firms’ positive assess -
ment of the situation, suggest that the boom in 
this sector is continuing unabated.
Private consumption is likely to have expanded 
significantly in the third quarter of 2019. This is 
signalled, first and foremost, by real retail sales, 
which rose markedly on the quarter in the re -
porting period. Contributing factors are likely 
to have been exceptionally high wage growth Probably little 
change in 
commercial  
machinery and 
equipment
Construction 
investment up
Significant 
growth in 
private  
consumption 90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201990100110
8590100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 190100 100110
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
47

owing to bonus payments and the low inflation 
rate. Retailers of electrical household appli -
ances, furniture and furnishings were the main 
beneficiaries of consumers’ major willingness 
to spend. Online trading and mail order sales 
also provided impetus. Equally, trade in motor 
vehicles is likely to have boosted private con -
sumption during the third quarter. Although 
there was a sharp fall in new passenger car 
registrations by private owners, the third quar -
ter of 2019 saw an even stronger increase in 
new registrations by businesses. Some of these 
vehicles are likely to have been one- day regis -
trations, which car dealers have since sold to 
households. By contrast, the hotel and restaur -
ant sector had a dampening impact with real 
sales continuing their downward path from the 
previous quarter, after having risen strongly in 
the fourth quarter of 2018 and first quarter of 
2019.
German imports as defined in the national 
accounts  remained at roughly the same level as  the preceding quarter, according to data 
from the Federal Statistical Office. Based on the 
definition in the foreign trade statistics, on the 
other hand, there was a distinct increase in 
price- adjusted imports of goods in the third 
quarter of 2019. However, significantly lower 
energy prices resulted in a marked decline in 
nominal terms. The figures available up to Au -
gust show a strong decline in energy imports at 
current prices, although they increased quite 
substantially in real terms. Price- adjusted im -
ports of intermediate and capital goods de -
creased, remaining on their downward trajec -
tory of the preceding quarter amidst ongoing 
weakness in the industrial sector. Imports of 
consumer goods remained stable, however. 
Broken down by region, there was a significant 
decrease in imports from euro area countries, 
but an equally marked increase in imports from 
non- euro area countries, which have a higher 
weighting. In this instance, however, it was, 
above all, the value of trade with the United 
Kingdom that provided positive impetus, which 
is due in all probability to exceptional develop -
ments in connection with the ongoing contro -
versy over Brexit. Much like exports to the 
United Kingdom, imports experienced a slump 
in the second quarter. They have latterly re -
turned to normal levels.
Sectoral trends
The downturn in the industrial sector continued 
in the third quarter of 2019. In quarter- on- 
quarter terms, there was a major drop in indus -
trial output, which means that it contracted for 
the fifth time in a row. The strongest decline 
was in intermediate goods output, with manu -
facturers of electrical equipment and chemical 
products being hit hardest by severe cutbacks 
in production. Manufacturing of consumer 
goods also failed to match the previous quar -
ter’s level by a large margin, whereas produc -
tion of capital goods was down only slightly. 
The main dampening effect in this area stemmed 
from the automotive sector, where production 
fell sharply in the reporting period.Little change 
in imports of 
goods
Industrial output 
still decliningOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019Industry
95100105110
859095100105110115120125
Construction1
Main construction2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
Industry excluding
automotive sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
48

This represents a continuation of the pattern 
whereby production shortfalls in the automo -
tive sector are more pronounced than in other 
sectors in the current industrial downturn. One 
logical  explanation for this is the fact that 
global demand for motor vehicles is especially 
weak. Global sales of passenger cars have wit -
nessed a drop of 6½% since the fourth quarter 
of 2017, when the upturn had reached its 
peak.2 But this fact alone fails to explain the 
decline in the number of passenger cars manu -
factured in Germany, which – at just over 17% 
after seasonal adjustment – was much greater 
according to data from the German Associ -
ation of the Automotive Industry (VDA). Rather, 
it appears that there have also been instances 
of production being shifted from Germany, 
mainly to other EU countries. According to 
VDA data, passenger car production in Ger -
many by German carmakers fell by more than 
9% in 2018. By contrast, production by these 
manufacturers in other EU countries increased 
by more than 8%. The reasons for this develop -
ment are not entirely clear. It is possible that 
product range effects have played a part in 
production being relocated, meaning that pas -
senger car models of German corporate brands 
that are manufactured abroad could have been 
in greater demand recently than the models 
made in Germany. It is also conceivable that 
factories in Germany have been increasingly re -
fitted and retooled for the production of elec -
tric cars and that there was a cutback in pro -
duction during this period. The fact that 
capacity   utilisation was still at a high level in 
Germany in 2017 has also occasionally been 
advanced as a possible reason for production 
being relocated. However, manufacturing was 
evidently not transferred back to Germany 
once capacity was freed up again. This sug -
gests that cost considerations may have also 
been a factor.
Utilisation of available production capacity has 
declined further against the backdrop of the 
ongoing industrial downturn. According to ifo 
Institute data, capacity utilisation of tangible 
fixed assets in manufacturing was down con -siderably in the third quarter of 2019. It has 
thus been falling for more than a year now and 
has meanwhile dropped below its long- term 
mean. The main reason for the decrease in the 
third quarter was declining capacity utilisation 
in the intermediate and capital goods sectors. 
Producers of consumer goods, on the other 
hand, reported distinctly higher utilisation of 
their production capacity.
Construction sector output remained stable in 
the third quarter of 2019. Activity in the main 
construction sector rose slightly, with the ex -
pansion in building construction being margin -
ally greater than that in civil engineering pro -
jects. Construction activity in the finishing 
trades, by contrast, declined somewhat. Des -
pite the sideways movement shown by the 
output index, the sector’s real gross value 
added could have increased overall. The sector 
is still in the midst of a boom. This is signalled, 
amongst other things, by healthy sentiment 
and order books as well as construction per -
mits, which have increased steeply since the 
start of the year.
Economic activity in the services sectors is likely 
to have expanded slightly in the third quarter 
of 2019. There was a marked expansion in 
price- adjusted retail sales. Sales were also on 
an upward path in the wholesale trade, despite 
industry remaining weak. Taking the average of 
July and August – the months for which the 
latest statistical data are available – real whole -
sale sales rose markedly on their second- quarter 
level. Developments in turnover in the hotel 
and restaurant sector had a dampening effect, 
however. Car dealers reported strong sales 
growth in July and August compared with the 
previous quarter. However, it is likely that this 
was connected with a considerable increase in 
the number of one- day registrations before 
emissions standards were tightened from Sep -
tember 2019. A significant rebound effect is 
therefore expected in September. Growth in 
business activity in the other services sectors is Weak global 
demand and 
shifts in 
production  to 
neighbouring 
countries long 
taking toll on 
automotive 
production 
Further decline 
in industrial 
capacity  
utilisation Construction 
output virtually 
unchanged, but 
value added 
probably greater
Slight growth in 
services sectors 
likely
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
49

likely to have been muted. This is suggested by 
the assessment of the business situation in this 
sector, which, according to the ifo Institute, 
showed a distinct deterioration in the third 
quarter.
Labour market
The marked slowdown in the economy is grad -
ually affecting the labour market. Nonetheless, 
the labour market still appeared fairly robust in 
the third quarter. Employment continued to 
rise, albeit at a considerably slower pace than 
last year. There was no further fall in unemploy -
ment; rather, it stagnated at a level that was 
exceptionally low compared with other periods. 
There was no more than a slight increase in 
short- time work for economic reasons. How -
ever, there has been a further deterioration in 
the labour market outlook for the next few 
months.
Employment expanded in the third quarter of 
2019 as well, but only marginally. The season -
ally adjusted number of persons in work in Ger -
many rose by 37,000, or 0.1%, in the reporting 
quarter. Much like before, the positive employ -
ment balance is attributable to employment 
subject to social security contributions, while 
there is an ongoing decline mainly in the num -
ber of self- employed persons and people work -
ing exclusively in low- paid part- time jobs.
The monthly statistics on employment subject 
to social security contributions, which currently 
run up to August 2019, show slight increases in 
most sectors of the economy. Overall, the Fed -
eral Employment Agency’s initial estimate 
shows that, taking the average of the months 
of July and August, the number of persons in 
employment subject to social security contribu -
tions was 78,000 persons, or 0.2%, higher 
than the average of the second quarter. Em -
ployment was in steep decline solely in the 
temporary employment sector, with a fall of 
one- eighth within the past 12 months. Many 
temporary workers are employed in manufac -Impact of down -
turn on labour 
market limited 
so far
Little growth 
in employment 
in Q3
Decline in 
employment 
mainly for 
temporary  
workers , growth 
in many services 
subsectorsLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019Oct.42.042.543.043.544.044.545.045.5
29.530.030.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.005001,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200Oct.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Oct.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
July-
Aug.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
50

turing, which is suffering most from weak ex -
ports. However, the number of workers directly 
employed in manufacturing and subject to so -
cial security contributions remained largely un -
changed at the end of the period under review. 
Most enterprises in this sector are probably 
trying  to retain their core staff. This stands in 
contrast to a number of sectors where major 
recruit ment drives are continuing as before, 
reflect ing the ongoing two- speed development 
of the economy. Notable examples are, above 
all, the structurally growing IT sector, as well as 
personal services such as education, in addition 
to restaurants and hotels, the public sector and 
healthcare and social work. In the last- named 
case, the labour supply is likely to be still re -
stricting employment growth. Employment in 
business- related services (excluding temporary 
agency employment) at the end of the period 
under review was growing less strongly than 
before. In the construction sector, too, growth 
is no more than average.
Compared with the same month last year, 
the number of persons in employment subject 
to social security contributions rose by just 
489,000 due to the less expansive recruitment 
policies of enterprises at present. At the same 
time, the number of German nationals in em -
ployment is growing at an ever slower pace for 
demographic reasons, which meant that they 
were able to take up only around 40% of the 
additionally created jobs. The other 60% were 
taken up by nationals of other countries. How -
ever, immigration from other EU countries, in 
particular, has eased off considerably during 
the course of the year so far.3 In those eco -
nomic sectors especially hit by a shortage of 
labour, the shortfalls have barely been reduced 
as yet despite the cooling of the economy.
The fact that there was hardly any change in 
seasonally adjusted registered unemployment 
in recent months is consistent with this picture. 
On an average of the third quarter, 22,000 
more people were registered as unemployed 
than in the preceding quarter. This comparison 
partly reflects the fact that the unemployment figure for persons receiving the basic welfare 
allowance was revised upwards in May, how -
ever. The figure shown for April is still too low. 
From May up to and including October, regis -
tered unemployment fluctuated only slightly 
between 2.28 and 2.29 million persons. The 
unemployment rate remained unchanged at 
5.0% during this period. Nevertheless, the eco -
nomic downturn was clearly reflected in the 
unemployment insurance scheme, where the 
number of unemployed persons rose by more 
than 30,000 over the last five months. By con -
trast, the number of unemployed receiving the 
basic welfare allowance declined by virtually 
the same amount.
In addition to registered unemployment, total 
underemployment (excluding short- time work) 
has also been constant since May. Active labour  
market policy measures were neither expanded 
significantly nor reduced. By contrast, short-  
time work for economic reasons rose from a 
low level. Short- time work for economic rea -
sons has to be reported to the Federal Employ -
ment Agency (BA) before normal working 
hours can be reduced. The number of such re -
ports can therefore provide information about 
developments in the next few months. There 
was a significant rise in the number in Septem -
ber after the end of the summer holidays. For 
this reason, the Federal Employment Agency 
expects the number of persons in short- time 
working arrangements to rise to around 80,000 
persons in November, but even this would still 
be on a moderate scale.
The leading labour market indicators mostly 
showed a further deterioration during the past 
few months. This is true of employment indica -
tors such as the labour market barometer of 
the Institute for Employment Research (IAB) 
and the Federal Employment Agency’s BA-  X job 
index. Even so, they suggest that there will be Growth in 
labour demand 
flagging, while 
increase in 
labour supply 
only muted
Unemployment 
unchangedIncrease in 
short- time work 
likely in near 
future
Continuing 
deterioration 
in leading 
indicators  in 
most cases
3 According to the Federal Statistical Office’s migration 
statistics, Germany’s migration balance with the other EU 
countries amounted to just +78,000 persons in the period 
from January to July 2019. This is 43% lower than the fig -
ure for the same period of 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
51

a muted upward movement in employment in 
the fourth quarter. There was a marked de -
crease in the number of reported vacancies. In 
this context, the above- mentioned two- speed 
sectoral growth is likely to continue for the 
time being. More than half of the decline was 
due to the other business- related services sec -
tor, which is shaped by developments in tem -
porary employment. There was also a decrease 
in the number of vacancies in the sectors of 
manufacturing, logistics, and freelance, scien -
tific and technical services. This contrasted with 
vacancies in IT and personal services, which 
remained  stable or even saw an increase. This 
split development across sectors is also con -
firmed by the Ifo employment barometer, 
which stabilised overall towards the end of the 
period under review after undergoing several 
strong declines. The outlook in the manufac -
turing sector was predominantly pessimistic. 
On the other hand, positive plans for employ -
ment continue to dominate in the services sec -
tors (except in “neutral” trade) and in construc -tion. The leading indicator for unemployment 
in the IAB labour market barometer is still in 
slightly negative territory. Unemployment could 
go up somewhat over the next three months.
Wages and prices
The third quarter saw an exceptionally strong 
increase in negotiated pay rates. Including add -
itional benefits, rates of pay went up by 4.2% 
on the year in the third quarter of 2019, com -
pared with a 2.1% increase in the previous 
quarter. This, for a time, considerably higher 
rate of growth was mainly due to new special 
payments in the metal- working and electrical 
engineering industries, which had already been 
agreed last year.4 The fixed amount of €400 
and the negotiated additional sum amounting 
to 27.54% of one monthly wage were due for 
the first time in July 2019.
The increase in negotiated rates of basic pay 
– in which these special payments are not in -
cluded – was less marked. However, at an an -
nual rate of 2.4%, they, too, showed a some -
what stronger rise in the third quarter than in 
the relatively weak second quarter. As in the 
previous quarter, the services sectors were the 
key driver in this respect. The weaker rates of 
growth in negotiated basic pay in the produc -
tion sector, including construction, were largely 
due to an accumulation of months with pay 
freezes resulting from the previous year’s col -
lective wage agreements. One factor in play 
here was that regular increases in the negoti -
ated rates of basic pay had been substituted by 
special payments in some cases. By contrast, 
the economic downturn in industry was not yet 
particularly evident. In the third quarter, actual 
earnings are still likely to have risen more 
strongly than on an average of the past ten 
years.Sharp rise in 
negotiated pay 
rates due to 
one- off effects
Basic pay also 
pointing 
upwards2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201900.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
+++++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–0.50+0.5%
H1
H1Wage drift 1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 The wage 
drift is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual 
earnings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQ3
4 Special payments are recorded as additional benefits in 
the Bundesbank’s negotiated pay rate statistics.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
52

The wage demands for the outstanding nego -
tiations of this year’s wage round range be -
tween 5.5% and 8.5% over a 12- month period, 
which means that the demands are mostly 
higher than those of the last wage round for 
the same sectors. Wage negotiations are cur -
rently under way in the chemical industry, the 
wood and plastics processing industry, insur -
ance and temporary employment. Besides 
higher wages, trade unions are demanding 
new contractual elements such as individual 
future  working time accounts (to take time off 
work for several months or to take care of rela -
tives, for instance) and additional long- term 
care insurance financed by the employer.
Consumer prices increased moderately in the 
third quarter. The Harmonised Index of Con -
sumer Prices (HICP) rose by 0.3% in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Prices for energy had a particu -
larly dampening impact on the back of dis -
tinctly lower crude oil prices. By contrast, food 
prices increased substantially, thus continuing 
their upward movement, which has been per -
sisting for some time now; this was especially 
the case for meat and fish towards the end of 
the period under review. Services also con -
tinued to become more expensive, albeit only 
slightly. The travel market, where prices often 
fluctuate quite heavily, was a source of damp -
ening impulses. The cost of air travel went up 
by roughly the same amount as the prices of 
package holidays went down. However, as 
package holidays account for a larger share of 
the basket of goods, their decline had a greater 
impact. The prices of industrial goods, exclud -
ing energy, were up slightly, in line with the de -
velopment of industrial producer and import 
prices. Despite this, annual headline HICP infla -
tion declined significantly overall from 1.7% to 
1.1%. This was also the case for the rate ex -
cluding energy and food, which fell from 1.5% 
to 0.9%. Above all, this was driven by a statis -
tical effect in prices for package holidays, which 
is likely to have reduced the headline rate in the 
third quarter of 2019 by 0.4 percentage point 
and core inflation by as much as 0.6 percent -
age point.5Seasonally adjusted consumer prices were un -
changed on the month in October. For both 
energy and non- energy industrial goods, prices 
remained at roughly the same levels as in the 
previous month. By contrast, food became 
markedly cheaper, although prices for services 
saw a significant rise despite a marked drop in 
prices for travel. Headline inflation remained at 
0.9% overall in year-  on- year terms. Excluding 
energy and food, however, the rate increased 2019 wage 
round drawing 
to a close
One- off 
statistical  effect 
temporarily 
dampened 
consumer  price 
inflation in third 
quarter
Consumer 
prices stagnant 
in OctoberExport pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201996100104108
96100104108
96100104108
0123
+++2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2Producer prices1
%Log scale
96100104
Oct.Import prices
Oct.
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c). At 1.5%, the head -
line annual rate of consumer inflation according to the 
national  Consumer Price Index, which is not affected by 
this one- off effect, was significantly higher on an average 
of July and September.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
53

marginally from 1.0% to 1.1%, with the statis -
tical effect relating to package holidays now 
having only a slightly dampening effect. Leav -
ing aside not only energy and food but also 
the equally volatile price components of travel 
services and clothing, the rate of inflation, at 
1.5%, still stood at a heightened level.
HICP inflation is likely to exceed the 1% mark 
again in the coming months. Moreover, in No -
vember the statistical effect in the case of pack -
age holidays will no longer have a dampening 
effect on prices, but will push them up, before 
running its course in December.
Order books and outlook
The slowdown in the German economy will 
probably continue in the fourth quarter of 2019 
but is unlikely to intensify significantly. As things 
stand, overall economic output could more or 
less stagnate. The economy would thus largely 
be stalling on the whole in the second half of 
this year, too. However, from today’s vantage 
point, there is no reason to fear that Germany 
will slide into recession. On the contrary, lead -
ing economic indicators for industry are show -
ing the first tentative signs that the downturn 
in this economic sector could decelerate. Ac -
cording to the Ifo Institute, business expect -
ations in the manufacturing sector were be -
coming somewhat brighter towards the end of 
the period under review. There was also only a 
slight deterioration in industrial enterprises’ 
order situation in the third quarter. The under -
lying trend in terms of incoming orders has, in 
fact, remained constant for several months, 
albeit  at a low level. Export- oriented industry 
could therefore stabilise before the more 
domestically- oriented sectors are affected to a 
greater degree. Domestic economic activity will 
probably continue to provide momentum. Due 
to its high level of capacity utilisation, no strong 
rates of growth in output are to be expected in 
the booming construction sector. However, be -
cause the labour market is likely to remain fairly 
robust and wages are expected to grow con -Inflation likely 
to be above 1% 
again in coming 
months
German 
economy  could 
stagnate at the 
end of the yearDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20199095100105110115
–50+5+10
9095100105110115
95100 100105110
July-
Aug.July-
Aug.
9095100105110115120125130135
505101520
–++++Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scaleLin scale
Year-on-year change1Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1%
Main construction orders
%TotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
54

siderably, the outlook for households’ incomes 
should remain favourable. It is therefore to be 
assumed that private consumption demand will 
bolster economic activity in the current quarter 
as well.
There has been no further deterioration in sen -
timent in the German economy recently. Ac -
cording to the autumn survey of the Associ -
ation of German Chambers of Commerce, sen -
timent worsened again significantly compared 
with the survey of early summer, but according 
to the Ifo Institute, the Business Climate Index 
for Germany remained unchanged in October, 
after, in fact, increasing slightly in the previous 
month. The fairly widespread improvement in 
business expectations was the main reason for 
the recent stabilisation. Enterprises in the hard- 
hit manufacturing sector also looked to the 
future  with more confidence. However, there 
was a further downgrading in the assessment 
of the current business situation in most sec -
tors. In terms of the level, the split develop -
ment in the German economy remained par -
ticularly pronounced. While industrial enter -
prises are already assessing their business 
situation  as considerably weaker than on a 
longer- term average, enterprises in the retail 
and construction sectors still judged it as very 
good from a historical perspective.
Although the third quarter also saw a marked 
quarter- on- quarter decline in new orders for 
German industry, industrial enterprises’ order 
situation did not deteriorate as strongly as it 
had done at the beginning of the year. Disre -
garding large orders, which are generally re -
ceived on an irregular basis, the quarter- on- 
quarter decline in new orders slowed down 
considerably. There are even signs of a stabilisa -
tion since May, albeit at a depressed level. 
Broken down by region, demand from the euro 
area provided momentum in the third quarter. 
By contrast, significantly fewer domestic orders 
were received in quarter- on- quarter terms. 
New orders from non- euro area countries fell 
steeply in fact but this was mainly due to a lack 
of large orders. With regard to sectors, a con -siderable increase in demand was reported in 
mechanical engineering. Manufacturers of 
computer, electronic and optical products also 
experienced significant growth in new orders. 
In the other transport equipment sector, there 
was even a strong increase in the inflow of 
orders. Overall, however, producers of capital 
goods had to cope with a significant drop in 
demand. This was attributable to weak incom -
ing orders in the automotive industry. Accord -
ing to Ifo Institute data, the assessment of 
order books in the manufacturing sector indi -
cates that the demand situation for German in -
dustrial firms may even have eased marginally 
of late. Towards the end of the period under 
review, it showed a marked improvement for 
the first time in a long while, albeit from a low 
level.
The boom in the German construction sector is 
likely to continue in the final quarter of 2019 as 
well. However, this industry is probably still op -
erating close to full capacity. A steep rise in 
construction output is therefore not to be ex -
pected at the end of the year either. Widely-  
used economic indicators have, for some time 
now, been tending to move sideways fairly uni -
formly at a high level. These mainly include the 
survey variables which the Ifo Institute calcu -
lates for the main construction sector: capacity 
utilisation, the reach of order books, the per -
centage of construction companies affected by 
a shortage of skilled labour, and the business 
climate. By contrast, on an average of July and 
August – the point in time up to which statis -
tical data are available – orders received by the 
main construction sector were distinctly down 
on the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms, 
which means that the inflow of orders has 
been in decline since the beginning of the year. 
This is hardly cause for concern yet, as the de -
cline was from a very high level, which was 
achieved on the back of a large number of 
major orders. In the year to date, new orders 
have still been well up on the average for the 
previous year.Sentiment 
among 
enterprises  
stabilising 
Deterioration in 
orders not as 
strong as beforeCapacity 
utilisation  in 
construction 
sector remains 
highDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
55

Household consumption expenditure is set to 
increase in the final quarter of 2019 as well. 
The basis for this is the still quite robust labour 
market. Employment is likely to go on rising 
slightly and unemployment is expected to show 
no more than a marginal increase. Wages are 
likely to rise fairly substantially, which will boost 
consumers’ propensity to buy. This is also evi -dent in the GfK consumer confidence index, 
which, despite a number of downgrades, re -
mains at a very high level. This is consistent 
with the fact that the Ifo Institute’s assessment 
of the business situation in the retail sector was 
only marginally down on the peak it reached 
around the middle of the year.Private 
consumption  
probably still on 
growth path
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), The two- speed global economy, Monthly Report, November 2019, 
pp. 11-12.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), The weak state of the global car market, Monthly Report, May 
2019, pp. 12 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c), The dampening special effect in the HICP in July 2019, Monthly 
Report, August 2019, pp. 57 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
56

Public finances*
General government budget
The German government’s finances have re -
mained in good shape this year. The general 
government surplus is expected to decrease yet 
remain significant (1.9% of gross domestic 
product (GDP) in 2018). The debt ratio, i.e. gov -
ernment debt in relation to nominal GDP , de -
clined to 61.2% in the first half of the year 
(from 61.9% at the end of 2018). Going for -
ward, it is likely to fall rapidly again, under -
shooting the reference value of 60% by next 
year at the latest.1
Fiscal policy loosening is the chief factor driving 
down the surplus. It is especially apparent in 
the marked rise in spending on areas such as 
pensions and investment. Additionally, the 
positive cyclical effect is waning. Tax revenue, 
in particular, is thus seeing somewhat slower 
growth than in previous years. However, the 
economic slowdown is putting less of a strain 
on public finances than a glance at real GDP 
and the degree of capacity utilisation in isol -
ation might suggest. The reason for this is that 
wages and salaries, employment and un -
employment, and private consumption are de -
veloping comparatively favourably. Lower inter -
est expenditure and spending on bank support 
measures are easing the pressure on public fi -
nances. Although payments for Norddeutsche 
Landesbank (Nord/  LB) are expected this year, 
they will be significantly lower than those for 
HSH Nordbank last year.
It is foreseeable that the surplus will sink fur -
ther in the next two years. Cyclical develop -
ments are once again likely to play a role here 
in the coming year, with the additional working 
days having a positive impact (calendar effect). 
Furthermore, the fiscal policy stance will con -
tinue to be eased considerably. For 2020, for 
example, central government is planning to in -
crease spending on transport and digital infra -
structures, education and defence. There are also indications of continued high expenditure 
growth for pensions, healthcare and long- term 
care. On the revenue side, the Bundestag has 
resolved to partially abolish the solidarity sur -
charge in 2021. The new climate protection 
programme will also put a slight burden on the 
government budget on balance (for more in -
formation, see p. 62). Some of the additional 
revenue generated from CO2 pricing as from 
2021 is to be passed on to households and en -
terprises as relief to compensate for rising en -
ergy costs. Moreover, additional expenditure 
for the promotion of measures to reduce emis -
sions is already envisaged as of 2020.2
In structural terms, the surplus is likely to de -
cline considerably up to 2021. At the same 
time, there is still fiscal leeway within the 
budget rules. This leeway could potentially be 
used, for instance, to improve the conditions 
for growth and employment. For example, cen -
tral government could bring forward the reduc -
tion of the solidarity surcharge to the coming 
year. It still appears appropriate to completely 
abolish this surcharge in the foreseeable future, 
possibly embedding it in a more fundamental 
tax reform.3 State and local governments could 
reinforce their efforts to improve their educa -
tional opportunities and infrastructure. How -
ever, such endeavours will probably continue 
to be restricted by the limited amount of con -
struction projects which are ready to go ahead, Surplus fairly 
high again this 
year …
… but declining, 
chiefly due to 
looser fiscal 
policy 
Surplus set to 
sink further in 
the coming 
yearsMeasures 
conducive  to 
growth and 
employment 
could be 
accelerated 
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No data for the third quarter of 2019 are yet avail -
able for local government or the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes. These will be 
analysed in the short commentaries in subsequent issues of 
the Monthly Report.
1 The debt ratio is markedly higher overall, according to 
the latest data revisions. Most notably, nominal GDP was 
revised downwards.
2 At the federal level, the coalition government recently 
agreed on key points of the announced basic pension and 
other measures. Comprehensive information on budget 
effects  is not yet available.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), p. 67.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
57

as well as a shortage of construction and la -
bour market capacities. In this regard, it is also 
important to ensure that additional spending 
does not dissipate in the face of higher prices.
Germany is being called upon by some to 
launch a larger economic stimulus package. 
However, with regard to cyclical developments, 
this does not appear to be necessary at present. 
For the most part, the economic situation is re -
garded as being more or less within the normal 
range; the majority of forecasts envisage that 
economic growth will pick up again and do not 
foresee a much greater degree of slack. In this 
context, public finances are already stabilising 
Germany’s economic growth appreciably. As 
described above, the fiscal policy stance is 
already  expansionary – even in the absence of 
additional measures – and the automatic stabil -
isers are also operating. The considerable risks 
to the economic outlook, resulting primarily 
from the external environment, are nonetheless 
to be borne in mind. Should economic activity 
slump and aggregate capacity become sub -
stantially underutilised, fiscal policy would also 
be called upon to spur the economy (as was 
the case during the economic crisis of 20094). 
This is also in line with the fiscal rules and the 
escape clauses they include for economic 
downturns. The fact that the German govern -ment’s finances are sound would then facilitate 
a sizeable contribution to stability.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue5 growth in the third quarter was 
robust; it increased by 3½% on the year (see 
the adjacent chart and the table on p.  60). 
Wage tax growth remained dynamic, at 6½%. 
Child benefits, which are deducted from tax 
revenue, rose by €10 each month as of July, 
depressing the growth rate in the third quarter 
by around 1 percentage point. However, a ne -
gotiated special payment in the metal- working 
and electrical engineering industries had a bol -
stering effect. Progressive taxation was damp -
ened by tax relief measures, among them an 
adjustment to the tax scale to compensate for 
last year’s bracket creep. Profit- related taxes 
overall stagnated at a high level. Of these, as -
sessed income tax continued to record dynamic 
growth, and corporation tax also rose signifi -
cantly. By contrast, non- assessed taxes on earn -
ings (which mainly consist of investment in -
come tax on dividends) recorded a sharp de -
cline. In year- on- year terms, however, the fact 
that profit distribution shifts within the year 
repeatedly plays a role here, masking the 
underlying trend. The decrease in the third 
quarter offsets the sharp rise seen in the first 
half of the year. Withholding tax on interest in -
come and capital gains continued to decline. 
Turnover tax revenue, which is quite volatile 
over the course of the year, increased by 3%.
According to the latest official tax estimate, tax 
revenue (including local government taxes) is 
expected to rise by 2½% for 2019 as a whole. 
In the estimation model, the assumed macro -Public finances 
are supporting 
economic 
activity  , currently 
no need for eco -
nomic stimulus 
packagesContinued 
robust tax 
revenue  growth 
in Q3
Subdued rise 
in tax revenue 
in 2019 …Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20192024681012
–++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
4 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2010).
5 Here, tax revenue includes EU shares in German tax rev -
enue, but excludes receipts from local government taxes, 
which are not yet known for the quarter under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
58

Selected technical information on the oﬃ   cial tax estimate
The offi   cial tax estimate is drawn up by the 
Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates 
(Arbeitskreis Steuerschätzungen),  which is 
chaired by the Federal Ministry of Finance. 
It combines input from experts at the Fed-
eral Ministry for Economic Affairs and 
Energy , the federal states’ fi  nance minis-
tries, fi  ve economic research institutions, 
the Federal Statistical Offi   ce, the German 
Council of Economic Experts, the German 
Confederation of Local Authority Central 
Associations (Bundesvereinigung kom-
munaler Spitzenverbände) and the Bundes-
bank.1
Macroeconomic assumptions
The offi   cial tax estimate is based on the 
Federal Government’s latest macroeco-
nomic projection (see the table on p. 61). 
This comprises a short- term projection for 
the current year, the next year and (in the 
autumn) the year after, as well as a medium- 
term projection covering the years subse-
quent to that. In the medium- term projec-
tion, it is assumed that any output gap 
existing at the end of the short- term projec-
tion horizon will be closed by the fi  nal year 
of the medium- term projection. Uniform 
rates of economic growth are applied for 
these years.
Applicable tax legislation
The tax estimate is based on the tax legisla-
tion applicable at that time. This means, for 
instance, that revenue losses stemming 
from the partial abolition of the solidarity 
surcharge were not yet factored into the 
current estimate. The Family Relief Act (Fami-
lien entlastungsgesetz), for example, had a 
substantial impact on the current estimate , 
as it did on the May 2019 estimate. Amongst other objectives, this legislation is 
intended to offset bracket creep caused by 
infl  ation experienced in the previous year.
Impact of court rulings
In addition, the tax estimate factors in the 
impact of court rulings (some dating back 
quite a long time), which can have a signifi  -
cant effect on revenue growth. As in previ-
ous estimates, the current estimate con-
tains revenue losses resulting from such rul-
ings. As well as factoring in a ruling on VAT 
(see footnote 6 on p.  60), the estimate 
assumes  perceptibly decreased revenue in 
non- assessed taxes on earnings.2 Further-
more, the current estimate takes account  of 
revenue shortfalls stemming from an ad-
ministrative order issued in connection with 
a decision regarding interest paid on tax 
arrears .3
In terms of statistical recording, the effects 
of court rulings on government fi  nances are 
reported in different ways in the fi  nancial 
statistics (on which the tax estimate is 
based) and the national accounts. In the 
fi  nan cial statistics, court rulings reduce tax 
revenue when the repayments are made 
(cash basis accounting). In the national 
accounts , however, they are recorded as 
govern ment spending (capital transfers) as 
soon as the decision takes legal effect. This 
means that the point in time at which the 
effects are recorded in the national ac-
counts sometimes lies well in advance of 
the cash outfl  ow.
1 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2019) for more in-
formation.
2 Judgement of the European Court of Justice, 20 Oc-
tober 2011 (C-284/ 09).
3 Letter of the Federal Ministry of Finance dated 
14 June 2018 in conjunction with Federal Fiscal Court 
ruling IX B 21/ 18 of 25 April 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
59

economic growth, including progressive tax -
ation, makes for a slightly higher increase. 
However, this is dampened to a marked extent, 
on balance, by legislative changes. This primar -
ily concerns the Family Relief Act (Familienent -
lastungsgesetz),  which includes the above-  
mentioned compensation for bracket creep, 
amongst other things. Aside from this, though, 
other measures such as the raised immediate 
write- off threshold for low- value assets also re -
sult in shortfalls. In addition, repayments are 
expected in connection with a VAT ruling made 
some time ago.6
A 2½% increase in revenue is also expected for 
the coming year. Macroeconomic develop -
ments and legislative changes are forecast to 
have more or less the same impact overall as 
they did this year. While the Family Relief Act 
will dampen revenue growth by a little more 
than in 2019, other legislative changes will play 
a less important role.Revenue growth of 3½% is expected for each 
of the subsequent years up to 2024. This largely 
reflects the macroeconomic assumptions and 
progressive taxation. In net terms, revenue 
shortfalls from legislative changes and court 
rulings will weigh only marginally on growth. 
The tax ratio (as defined in the government fi -
nance statistics) is projected to increase to 
23.6% in 2024 (2018: 23.2%). By contrast, it 
would remain at more or less its current level if 
the specified measures that have not yet been 
included in the official estimate were to be 
taken into account (particularly the partial abo -
lition of the solidarity surcharge). In addition, 
the extension of compensation for bracket 
creep beyond 2020 and a further significant in -
crease in child benefits in 2021 were set out in 
the coalition agreement. These would cause 
the ratio to sink slightly.… and 2020Somewhat 
higher growth 
in subsequent 
yearsTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1-Q3Estimate 
for 2019 1Q3
2018 2019 2018 2019
Year-on-year changeYear- on- 
year 
change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 523.4 539.6 + 16.2 +  3.1 +  2.8 173.2 179.0 +  5.8 +  3.4
of which:
Wage tax 149.8 159.0 +  9.2 +  6.1 +  5.6 50.4 53.7 +  3.3 +  6.6
Profi  t-related taxes 96.3 95.4 –  0.9 –  1.0 –  0.9 27.7 27.6 –  0.1 –  0.5
Assessed income tax 3 45.2 47.1 +  1.9 +  4.3 +  3.5 12.7 13.6 +  0.9 +  7.3
Corporation tax 25.9 24.9 –  1.0 –  4.0 –  3.8 7.2 7.6 +  0.4 +  5.8
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 19.4 19.5 +  0.0 +  0.3 +  0.2 6.6 5.2 –  1.4 – 21.0
Withholding tax on 
interest income  and 
capital  gains 5.8 3.9 –  1.9 – 32.9 – 29.2 1.3 1.2 –  0.1 –  7.9
Turnover taxes 4 174.2 180.6 +  6.3 +  3.6 +  3.6 59.2 61.1 +  1.9 +  3.2
Other 
consumption-related 
taxes 5 64.9 65.0 +  0.1 +  0.2 +  0.2 22.8 22.8 –  0.0 –  0.2
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of October 2019. 2 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 4 Turn-
over tax and import turnover tax. 5  Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling 
wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 Application of the Federal Fiscal Court ruling on the VAT 
liability of property developers (Federal Fiscal Court ruling 
V R  37/ 10 and Federal Ministry of Finance letter dated 
24 January 2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
60

Compared with the May forecast, additional 
revenue of €2½ billion is envisaged for 2019. 
The favourable development of cash revenue in 
wage and income tax up to now is having a 
positive impact. The slight upward revision of 
the macroeconomic reference variables for tax 
revenue7 also partly explains the adjustment. 
The total revenue forecast for 2020, however, 
is €1½ billion lower than was estimated in the 
spring. This is attributable to the downward 
revision  of the macroeconomic assumptions. 
Carrying forward the increased revenue level 
from 2019 is having a supportive effect. The 
downward revision of the macroeconomic as -
sumptions is also a key factor for the revenue 
shortfalls in subsequent years. Legislative 
changes, such as tax deductions for the con -
struction of new rental accommodation, con -
stitute an additional burden. The downward 
revisions amount to between €2 billion (2021) 
and €3½ billion (2023) in total.
Central government budget
Central government recorded a surplus of €2 
billion in the third quarter, compared with a 
deficit of €4 billion one year previously. How -
ever, if interest expenditure had not been re -
corded ahead of time (in the second quarter), 
the result would have deteriorated by around €1 billion. Revenue rose by 1½%, chiefly on ac -
count of increased tax revenue (+2%, or €1½ 
billion, after deduction of additional transfers 
of €½ billion to the EU budget). Adjusted for 
the special effect on interest expenditure, 
spending growth somewhat exceeded revenue 
growth. Other operating expenditure (particu -
larly payments for military procurements) in -
creased especially strongly. In addition, current 
transfers (to the pension insurance scheme in 
particular) and capital transfers rose signifi -
cantly. By contrast, interest expenditure con -
tinued to decline significantly, even excluding 
the special effect.
After three quarters, the central government 
budget recorded a surplus of €8 billion, com -
pared with €14½ billion in the previous year. 
For the year as a whole, the budget plan envis -
ages a deficit of €6 billion (end-2018: surplus of 
€10½ billion). As things currently stand, a ra -
ther moderate deterioration and a much better 
annual result than planned can be expected. 
According to the latest tax estimate, revenue is 
set to exceed the budget estimate by €2 billion. 
Interest expenditure is easing the pressure yet Revenue expect -
ations from May 
slightly adjusted
Slightly poorer 
result in Q3, 
disregarding  
special effect 
on interest 
expenditureInterest expend -
iture, in particu -
lar, significantly 
more favourable 
than planned; 
another surplus 
possible for year 
as a wholeOﬃ   cial tax estimate fi  gures and Federal Government’s macroeconomic projection
Item 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Tax revenue1
€ billion 796.4 816.4 845.2 875.1 904.9 935.0
As % of GDP 23.2 23.1 23.2 23.3 23.5 23.6
Year-on-year change (%) 2.6 2.5 3.5 3.5 3.4 3.3
Revision of previous tax estimate (€ billion) 2.6 – 1.7 – 1.8 – 2.7 – 3.5 .
Real GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2019) 0.5 1.0 1.3 1.1 1.1 1.1
Spring projection (April 2019) 0.5 1.5 1.2 1.2 1.2 .
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2019) 2.8 2.9 3.1 2.8 2.8 2.8
Spring projection (April 2019) 2.8 3.5 3.0 3.0 3.0 .
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates (October 2019) and the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 1 Including 
EU shares in German tax revenue and receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank
7 Although the GDP growth rate from May was barely re -
vised (see the table above), the variables relevant to tax 
revenue saw a slight upward revision overall, particularly in 
private consumption and entrepreneurial and investment 
income.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
61

further; instead of rising by €1 billion as envis -
aged, it continues to fall sharply. By the end of 
September, it had decreased by €3½ billion 
altogether  . Other items, such as investment 
grants and repayments from the EU, are de -
veloping more favourably than accounted for 
in the budget. Overall, the central government 
budget is therefore expected to end the cur -
rent year with a surplus, too. Should this be the 
case, it would not be necessary to withdraw 
€5½ billion from the refugee reserve in order 
to avoid net borrowing, as was originally 
planned. Instead, a significant sum could again 
be set aside.
In the summer, Federal Government submitted 
the draft budget for 2020. It envisaged a rela -
tively large deficit of €9½ billion. This was in -
tended to be almost entirely covered by the 
refugee reserve in order to achieve a balanced 
budget with no net borrowing once more. In -
creased expenditure in areas such as national defence and family policy was largely offset in 
the budget plan by a global spending cut.
In October, Federal Government’s climate pol -
icy resolutions that would affect the budget 
were incorporated into parliamentary deliber -
ations. As of next year, additional Federal 
budget expenditure is planned. Supplementary 
climate policy actions and, in particular, annual 
capital injections of €1 billion into Deutsche 
Bahn are envisaged. This should allow Deutsche 
Bahn to extend its range of (relatively low-  
emission) transport services. Furthermore, the 
VAT charged for long- distance train tickets is to 
be reduced and air ticket taxes increased. From 
2021 onwards, allowances for CO2 emissions 
from transport and building heating are to be 
introduced. These will initially be available for 
purchase at a fixed price per tonne of CO2 
emitted. This price is intended to rise from an 
initial €10 to €35 in 2025. As of 2026, the max -
imum emissions volume, which is to be lowered 
in increments, will govern price formation – ini -
tially still within limits. Higher energy costs for 
households and enterprises are to be partially 
offset. There are also plans to temporarily ex -
pand the standard travel allowance within the 
income tax regime and to reduce the renew -
able energy (EEG) levy on electricity consump -
tion. Particularly hard- hit enterprises are set to 
receive compensation.
On balance, the climate programme will only 
burden the Federal budget to a limited extent. 
It will entail new costs, but transfers to the en -
ergy and climate fund will decrease from 2020 
onwards. The fund will receive all proceeds 
from the sale of the new emissions allowances 
and will initially draw more heavily on its re -
serves. The aim of the climate package is to 
reduce CO2 emissions, in line with the EU 
agreements. Many doubt that this package is 
sufficient for this purpose. However, a regular 
assessment is planned in order to respond to 
missed targets. Should Germany exceed its per -
mitted emissions volume, the Federal budget 
risks incurring financial penalties.Significant 
reduction in 
reserves planned 
in the 2020 
draft budgetClimate 
programme  …
… likely to 
entail limited 
additional 
burdens  at mostCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
1 Not adjusted for interest burdens recorded ahead of time (€7 
billion).
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q45051015
–+++
–50+5+10+15+20
2018
20172017Quarterly figures
2019Cumulated from start of year2019
2018€ billion
11
1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
62

Further adjustments were made to central gov -
ernment’s 2020 budget during final deliber -
ations. There was no need for major adjust -
ments in connection with October’s tax esti -
mate. Compared with the summer draft 
budget, though, tax revenue was revised 
downwards by €3 billion in order to factor in 
planned legislative changes. For example, cen -
tral government’s contributions towards the 
refugee costs incurred at the state and local 
government level have been extended. Turning 
to other revenue, return flows from guarantees 
were down. To balance the revenue shortfalls, 
a precautionary global revenue shortfall item of 
€3½ billion was dissolved. In addition to a ser -
ies of smaller- scale additional spending author -
isations, there were, in particular, higher bur -
dens associated with the basic allowance for 
job seekers on the expenditure side. Including 
another full refund of refugee- related spending 
on accommodation by local governments, add -
itional expenditure amounts to €1½ billion 
here. Over and above extra spending to cover 
the costs of the climate programme, invest -
ment expenditure was raised by €1 billion. The 
significant downward revision of the interest 
expenditure estimate (-€3 billion) only partially 
offsets additional spending. The bulk of the 
€11 billion deficit –  up by €1½ billion com -
pared with the draft budget – is to be covered 
by the refugee reserve. The objective of a bal -
anced budget with no net borrowing will thus 
be achieved.
The debt brake imposes limits on the level of 
structural net borrowing by central govern -
ment and on relevant off- budget entities’ def -
icits. Reserve withdrawals in the central govern -
ment budget therefore balance out the rela -
tively high planned deficits that it contains. Ef -
fects arising from financial transactions and 
economic conditions are factored out, which 
improves the structural outturn by €1 billion.8 
At last report, a deficit of €6 billion was esti -
mated for the off-  budget entities. All in all, 
structural net borrowing is thus likely to run up 
to around €5 billion. Thanks to the substantial reserve withdrawals, the €11½ billion ceiling 
will be significantly undershot.
Overall, the budget plans for 2020 appear to 
have been drawn up with less caution than in 
previous years. Despite this, expenditure could 
increase at a somewhat slower rate than im -
plied by the global spending cuts. Revenue 
could also develop more favourably. For ex -
ample, transfers to the EU budget appear to 
have been cautiously calculated. Based on past 
experience, return flows will also probably be 
higher than estimated. All things considered, 
budgeted figures could therefore be notably 
exceeded next year, too. Given the greater 
budgetary scope overall, it could be worth 
examining whether to scale back the solidarity 
surcharge as early as next year. On the whole, 
it would appear appropriate to completely 
abolish this surcharge and, if necessary, to 
combine this step with a more fundamental tax 
reform.9
According to data from the Federal Ministry of 
Finance, central government’s off- budget en -
tities recorded a surplus of €2 billion in the 
third quarter, compared with €3 billion in the 
same period last year.10 This lower figure is due 
in large part to the development of the energy 
and climate fund: its surplus was smaller fol -
lowing the €1 billion reduction in the transfer 
allocated to it in the central government 
budget.
The surplus for 2019 as a whole is expected to 
be somewhat lower than in 2018 (€6 billion). 
The main reason for this is that central govern -
ment transfers to the energy and climate fund Final deliber -
ations include 
continued 
commitment  
to balanced 
budget, but 
slightly higher 
deficit
Compliance 
with debt brake 
rules maintained 
by means of 
reserve with -
drawalsDevelopments 
once again 
more favourable 
than planned
Reduced surplus 
for central 
govern ment’s 
off- budget 
entities in Q3
Slightly lower 
surplus in 2019 
as a whole and 
deficit possible 
next year
8 For example, the capital injection given to Deutsche Bahn 
is classified as a financial transaction and thus does not 
count towards the structural outturn. However, a compar -
able payment in 2017 was classified in the national ac -
counts as a capital transfer rather than an acquisition of 
financial assets. The capital injection’s classification as a 
finan cial transaction in the central government budget 
therefore does not appear appropriate.
9 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), 
p. 67.
10 SoFFin is factored out here because the considerable 
financial resources it borrows to refinance central govern -
ment’s bad bank count towards the balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
63

and the digitalisation fund have been reduced 
by a total of €3½ billion. While the latter will 
receive the proceeds from the auction of 5G 
frequencies that came to an end in June (€6½ 
billion), these will be staggered due to a separ -
ate agreement on further network expansion. 
The absence of the €1 billion burden in 2018 
resulting from the redemption of an inflation-  
linked central government security will provide 
a slightly more significant counterweight. Next 
year’s balance will depend heavily on the ex -
tent to which funds are used for local invest -
ment and to combat climate change. In any 
event, the energy and climate fund’s reserves 
are set to be significantly reduced next year as 
part of the climate programme. As a result, the 
off- budget entities could even close the year 
with a slight deficit overall.State government budgets11
Core state government budgets posted a sur -
plus of €5½ billion in the third quarter, com -
pared with €4 billion in the same quarter last 
year. Revenue rose sharply by 6%, driven by the 
rise in tax revenue (5%). Transfers from public 
administrations grew slightly faster still. This 
was partly attributable to the fact that some of 
these were recorded at a later point in time 
than last year, which had led to a marked de -
cline in the second quarter. Expenditure rose at 
a slightly slower rate (5%) than revenue. In 
addition to other operating expenditure (6%), 
staff costs – a major spending component – 
rose sharply (6½%). The latter reflects rises in 
remuneration for salaried employees and pay 
for civil servants, as well as back- payments in 
connection with these. Staff increases probably 
also had a part to play. Growth in payments to 
administrations and the less significant expend -
iture on fixed asset formation was especially 
strong (14% and 14½%, respectively). By con -
trast, interest expenditure declined consider -
ably. Other expenditure was also down on the 
year. The main reason for this was that, in 
North Rhine-  Westphalia, payments to univer -
sities had been brought forward into the 
second quarter.
After three quarters, the surplus of the core 
budgets stood at €16½ billion and was thus 
€5½ billion lower than one year previously. As 
the final quarter of 2018 was marked by high 
payments for HSH Nordbank, the balance for 
the year as a whole could once again come 
close to the balance recorded in the previous 
year (+€15½ billion). The medium- term outlook 
for state government finances also remains 
bright. The expectation set out in the latest tax 
estimate is that medium-  term revenue growth 
will be somewhat lower than previously esti -
mated but will remain robust. Consequently, 
there should still be budgetary scope for, inter Year- on- year 
rise in surplus 
in Q3
High surplus 
foreseeable for 
year as a whole 
and outlook 
bright for 
medium term 
as wellState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q463036912
––++++
3691215182124
2018
20172017Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192019
2018€ billion
11 The following data are based, unless other sources are 
stated, on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
64

alia, higher investment in infrastructure or bet -
ter educational opportunities.
From 2020 onwards, the debt brake under Ger -
man Basic Law will apply to state government 
budgets. Under the debt brake, federal states 
will, as a rule, be required to balance their 
budgets with no net new borrowing. One par -
ticular area in which exceptions will apply is 
cyclical budget fluctuations. At the end of 
2018, the debt brake had yet to be incorpor -
ated into the state legislation of three federal 
states.12 During 2019, the state constitutions of 
Saarland and Brandenburg were amended 
accord  ingly and the provisions fleshed out in 
their state budgetary acts. In Berlin, the debt 
brake shall only be implemented in its budget -
ary act together with a corresponding imple -
menting act. Furthermore, Baden-  Württemberg 
and North Rhine-  Westphalia are reworking the 
debt brakes in their state budgetary acts. With 
respect to cyclical adjustment, for instance, the 
state legislators are amending their rules in line 
with Stability Council decisions.13 All federal 
states are thus planning to incorporate the 
debt brake into state legislation before the ban 
on new borrowing comes into force. The rules 
vary a great deal from one federal state to the 
next and differ in terms of how they are en -
shrined in law. It is very difficult to obtain an 
up- to- date overview. A summary of the main 
design features, references in the respective 
state legislation and information on amend -
ments that have been made in the meantime 
would be helpful. Such a summary could, for 
example, be provided and updated on a con -
tinuous basis by the Stability Council.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
As usual, the statutory pension insurance 
scheme recorded a deficit in the third quarter. 
At €2½ billion, it was €1 billion higher than a 
year ago. Although revenue increased sharply 
(+4½%) thanks to continued positive employ -ment and wage developments, expenditure 
rose at an even higher rate of 5½%. Of this 
increase, “mothers’ pensions”, which were ex -
panded at the start of the year, account for 
1½  percentage points (+€1 billion compared 
with the same quarter last year). Other factors 
that raised spending were the July 2019 pen -
sion adjustment (national average: +3½%) and 
a moderate rise in the number of pensions. The 
return to parity financing of the statutory health 
insurance scheme is also putting pressure on State- specific 
debt brake rules 
in all federal 
states; obtaining 
a detailed over -
view proves 
challenging
Slight deterior -
ation in result 
in Q3Finances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary  quarterly  figures  as  the  latter  are  not  revised  sub-
sequently.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201920182017
2018
201720192017 2018 201902468
2017 2018 201902468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
12 For a more detailed stocktake from last year, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).
13 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), pp. 93 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
65

the pension insurance scheme. Since the start 
of the year, the pension insurance scheme has 
been paying half of the supplementary contri -
butions for pension recipients.
Cumulated over the first three quarters, the 
deficit was €2 billion higher than in the previ -
ous year (-€½ billion). Nevertheless, a marked 
surplus should still be recorded for the year as 
a whole due to contribution receipts typically 
being higher in the last quarter of the year. 
While this is likely to fall far short of the surplus 
generated the year before (+€4½ billion), the 
outturn would still be a significant improve -
ment on the figure estimated in the Federal Government’s pension insurance report in the 
fourth quarter of 2018 (deficit of €1½ billion).
The favourable financial situation in which the 
statutory pension insurance scheme currently 
finds itself should not detract from the fact that 
demographically driven budgetary strains are 
looming.14 Rising deficits are on the cards in 
the years ahead. The Federal Government has 
announced a reform of the statutory pension 
insurance scheme for the period after 2025.
The Bundestag modified the annual pension 
adjustment formula with effect from 2020.15 
Pensions are based on changes in the level of 
income subject to compulsory insurance contri -
butions. However, these data are only available 
with a lag of almost one year. For this reason, 
the mid- year annual adjustment is initially car -
ried out using national accounts data available 
at that point in time (effectively on a temporary 
basis). Following major national accounts revi -
sions, annual pension adjustments could some -
times be quite erratic. The change in the rules 
was introduced in response to the most recent 
national accounts revision, according to which 
the level of gross wages and salaries per em -
ployee is currently around 2% higher. Under 
the rules previously in place, this would have 
led to wildly fluctuating pension adjustments: 
in mid-2020, the adjustment would have been 
equal to the level shift, i.e. it would have been 
around 2  percentage points higher, and this 
would then have been offset by a correspond -
ingly lower adjustment in mid-2021.16 Under 
the new rules, such a leap between two data -
sets no longer has any effect on annual pen -
sion adjustments. As previously, pensions are 
brought closer into line with changes in the Significant 
deterioration in 
result for year as 
a whole, but 
surplus still 
markedRising deficits on 
the cards
Pension adjust -
ment modifiedFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency *
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201920182017
2017
201920182017 2018 2019–12–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2017 2018 201912963036912
––––++++ Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
14 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c).
15 The change was added in the draft Act Amending the 
Act on the Establishment of the German Statutory Pension 
Insurance Scheme and German Pension Insurance for 
Miners, Railway and Maritime Workers (Gesetzentwurf zur 
Änderung des Gesetzes zur Errichtung der Deutschen Ren -
tenversicherung Bund und der Deutschen Rentenversiche -
rung Knappschaft- Bahn-  See).
16 For information on the relatively complex underlying 
reasons for this, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2014), pp. 75-
76.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
66

level of income subject to compulsory insur -
ance contributions once the relevant data be -
come available. Following the new method -
ology instead of the old, the pension adjust -
ments will be lower in 2020 and higher in 2021. 
The load on the reserves will thus be lightened 
by around €6 billion.
Federal Employment Agency
The third quarter saw the Federal Employment 
Agency post a surplus of €1 billion in the core 
budget.17 In a year- on- year comparison, how -
ever, the surplus was down by €1½ billion. 
Revenue declined by €1 billion, or 9%, on the 
back of the considerable contribution rate cut 
at the start of the year (by 0.5 percentage point 
to 2.5%). Wages and employment remained 
upbeat. Had the contribution rate remained 
unchanged, revenue would have risen by al -
most 4½%. Spending on unemployment bene -
fits increased by a very substantial 11½%. While 
registered unemployment as a whole (including 
unemployment among job seekers receiving 
the basic allowance) fell once more, the num -ber of unemployment benefit recipients went 
up again. The number of recipients remains at 
a very low level, however. As advanced voca -
tional training schemes have been expanded 
significantly since the start of this year, spend -
ing on active labour market policy measures 
rose by a considerable 5½%.
The main lines of development are likely to re -
main unchanged in the final quarter. This would 
make the surplus much smaller than in the pre -
vious year (2018: just over €6 billion). However, 
it is likely to be much higher than expected (€½ 
billion) on account of expenditure coming in 
way under budget. As a result, the free reserves 
will probably continue to build, and the thresh -
old of 0.65% of GDP – the point at which the 
Federal Government considers cutting the con -
tribution rate – will presumably be significantly 
exceeded. Overall, the planned additional small 
reduction of 0.1 percentage point for the years 
2020 to 2022 is viable.Significantly 
reduced surplus 
in Q3Marked surplus 
again for year 
as a whole, but 
much lower 
than in previous 
year
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), Public finances, Monthly Report, August 2019, pp. 62-71.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), Germany’s debt brake: surveillance by the Stability Council, 
Monthly Report, April 2019, pp. 91-98.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c), Long- term outlook for the statutory pension insurance scheme, 
Monthly Report, October 2019, pp. 53-81.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Implementation of the debt brake pursuant to Article 109 III of the 
German Basic Law: current status, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 44-47.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2014), Public finances, Monthly Report, November 2014, pp. 68-76.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2010), Germany in the financial and economic crisis: Fiscal policy, Monthly 
Report, October 2010, pp. 71-85.17 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are thus recorded as expenditure reducing the 
core budget balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
67

Federal Ministry of Finance (2019), Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates, https://www.
bundesfinanzministerium.de/Content/EN/Standardartikel/Topics/Taxation/Articles/
working-party-on-tax-revenue-estimates.html , 8 November 2019.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
68

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43 •
2. Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43 •
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
4. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
3•

6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  78 •
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ....................................................  78 •
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
8. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  81 •
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
November 2019
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 EONIA  5,7 EURIBOR  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2018         Jan. 8.8 5.2 4.6 4.5 3.5 2.9 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Feb. 8.4 4.8 4.2 4.1 3.3 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2         Mar. 7.5 4.3 3.6 3.9 2.8 2.4 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
         Apr. 7.1 4.2 3.8 3.8 2.9 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.37 − 0.33 1.0
         May 7.5 4.6 4.0 4.1 3.3 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 7.4 4.7 4.4 4.1 3.1 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1
         July 7.0 4.4 4.0 3.9 3.4 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.0
         Aug. 6.5 4.0 3.5 3.7 3.4 3.4 − 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1         Sep. 6.9 4.3 3.6 3.7 3.2 3.2 0.1 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2
         Oct. 6.8 4.4 3.9 3.7 2.9 2.9 0.6 − 0.37 − 0.32 1.3
         Nov. 6.7 4.3 3.8 3.9 2.7 2.8 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2         Dec. 6.6 4.3 4.1 3.9 2.8 3.0 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.31 1.1
2019         Jan. 6.2 4.0 3.7 4.0 2.7 2.9 0.9 − 0.37 − 0.31 1.0
         Feb. 6.6 4.5 4.1 4.1 3.0 3.2 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.9         Mar. 7.5 5.2 4.6 4.5 2.7 3.0 1.3 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
         Apr. 7.4 5.3 4.7 4.7 2.7 3.2 1.2 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
         May 7.2 5.2 4.8 4.6 2.2 2.8 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.7         June 7.2 5.0 4.5 4.8 2.3 3.1 2.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 0.4
         July 7.8 5.5 5.1 5.1 2.2 3.1 2.0 − 0.37 − 0.36 0.2
         Aug. 8.5 6.2 5.8 5.5 2.3 3.3 1.7 − 0.36 − 0.41 − 0.1         Sep. 7.9 5.9 5.5 ... 2.2 3.3 1.8 − 0.40 − 0.42 − 0.1
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.46 − 0.41 0.0
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, overnight index average. 6 Euro interbank offered rate. 7 See also footnotes to Table
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by VI.4, p. 43  .8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2. External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which: Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 EUR 1 = USD ...
2018         Jan. + 11,010 + 12,028 + 21,251 + 59,891 + 3,411 − 4,320 − 39,935 + 2,204 1.2200 99.4 93.9
         Feb. + 20,455 + 22,974 + 25,341 + 1,611 + 64,617 − 476 − 40,363 − 49 1.2348 99.6 93.9         Mar. + 47,330 + 35,297 + 45,441 + 69,181 − 57,335 − 738 + 25,174 + 9,159 1.2336 99.7 94.2
         Apr. + 34,014 + 24,472 + 6,125 + 20,929 + 29,106 + 13,878 − 54,127 − 3,662 1.2276 99.5 94.0
         May + 11,776 + 24,082 + 23,488 − 2,828 + 54,160 + 15,129 − 45,327 + 2,355 1.1812 98.1 92.7         June + 32,815 + 29,182 + 13,071 − 21,537 − 16,609 + 8,513 + 34,849 + 7,856 1.1678 97.9 92.6
         July + 32,722 + 26,210 + 9,976 + 4,165 + 9,247 + 14,052 − 13,207 − 4,281 1.1686 99.2 93.7
         Aug. + 29,634 + 19,052 + 44,246 − 3,070 + 70,419 + 14,263 − 40,563 + 3,197 1.1549 99.0 93.4         Sep. + 27,662 + 19,747 + 39,853 + 1,647 − 45,244 + 6,666 + 74,470 + 2,315 1.1659 99.5 93.9
         Oct. + 36,105 + 25,627 − 21,865 + 11,241 − 9,287 + 11,728 − 34,770 − 777 1.1484 98.9 93.4
         Nov. + 31,941 + 29,018 + 45,574 − 34,049 + 17,147 + 16,125 + 42,875 + 3,476 1.1367 98.3 92.9         Dec. + 43,189 + 26,685 + 40,129 − 86,030 + 122,183 + 1,747 − 858 + 3,087 1.1384 98.4 92.7
2019         Jan. + 8,581 + 10,561 + 9,550 + 7,184 − 20,863 − 47 + 25,788 − 2,512 1.1416 97.8 92.2
         Feb. + 18,722 + 27,582 − 4,232 + 20,972 − 21,243 − 3,058 − 1,259 + 356 1.1351 97.4 91.7         Mar. + 40,445 + 33,481 + 46,119 + 26,806 − 41,105 + 5,324 + 50,098 + 4,996 1.1302 96.9 91.1
         Apr. + 17,590 + 25,897 − 16,321 − 27,561 + 3,022 + 10,593 − 5,552 + 3,178 1.1238 96.7 91.0
         May + 4,829 + 30,136 + 12,181 − 7,098 − 60,761 + 12,555 + 65,722 + 1,763 1.1185 97.4 91.4         June + 19,873 + 28,400 + 41,185 − 24,620 + 15,960 + 7,075 + 45,064 − 2,293 1.1293 97.9 91.9
         July + 31,426 + 33,919 + 15,495 − 16,980 − 27,081 + 8,314 + 44,166 + 7,076 1.1218 97.5 p 91.3
         Aug. + 25,706 + 20,209 + 23,874 + 9,551 + 12,130 + 6,105 − 4,677 + 765 1.1126 98.1 p 91.9         Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1004 97.4 p 91.1
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1053 97.4 p 91.1
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary Tables XII.10 and 12, pp.
82-83   .2Including employee stock options. 3Against the
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 1Monthly averages, see also currencies of the EER-19 group. 4 Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2019
I. Key economic data for the euro area
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2016 1.9 1.5 2.2 2.6 2.6 1.1 − 0.2 3.7 1.3 1.8
2017 2.5 2.0 2.5 5.7 3.0 2.3 1.5 8.1 1.7 3.8
2018 1.9 1.5 1.5 4.8 1.7 1.7 1.9 8.2 0.8 4.6
2018         Q2 2.2 1.5 2.5 4.5 2.2 1.8 1.4 10.4 1.0 5.2
         Q3 1.6 1.4 1.1 4.7 1.5 1.7 2.4 7.4 0.5 4.6
         Q4 1.2 1.6 0.9 5.1 0.6 1.3 1.6 3.6 0.5 5.1
2019         Q1 1.3 1.3 0.9 5.0 0.5 1.0 0.5 7.4 − 0.2 3.0
         Q2 1.2 1.3 − 0.1 3.6 1.3 1.5 1.9 5.8 0.0 1.8
         Q3 1.2 ... 1.0 ... ... 1.6 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 2
 Annual percentage change
2016 1.6 4.5 1.2 3.0 4.2 0.6 2.6 1.8 1.9 4.7
2017 2.9 2.9 3.4 4.3 3.4 2.4 4.1 − 2.2 3.6 8.7
2018 0.9 1.2 1.0 4.2 3.6 0.2 1.8 − 0.1 0.6 2.0
2018         Q2 2.2 1.3 2.8 3.1 2.7 0.4 2.0 4.1 1.7 0.2
         Q3 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 3.8 3.4 0.1 2.5 5.9 − 0.3 2.9
         Q4 − 1.9 1.1 − 2.3 5.1 2.2 − 1.8 2.6 − 6.4 − 2.4 0.8
2019         Q1 − 0.5 3.1 − 2.7 3.3 0.7 0.5 1.7 2.6 − 0.6 − 0.8
         Q2 − 1.3 5.9 p − 5.1 − 0.6 3.3 1.4 1.0 4.0 − 1.1 1.3
         Q3 e − 2.1 ... p − 5.2 ... 3.1 − 0.5 − 0.3 ... − 1.5 ...
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 As a percentage of full capacity
2017 83.0 81.8 86.6 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 79.5 76.8 74.5
2018 83.9 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.4
2019 82.4 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.6 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2018         Q3 83.8 79.9 87.8 75.2 84.7 85.9 70.7 74.6 77.9 77.4
         Q4 83.6 80.8 87.1 73.0 84.1 85.7 70.9 77.0 77.9 75.9
2019         Q1 83.6 81.5 86.3 75.2 83.2 85.2 70.2 80.3 78.4 77.0
         Q2 82.8 81.3 85.3 73.5 80.8 85.1 71.7 76.9 77.5 76.9
         Q3 82.0 81.2 83.9 72.5 81.6 84.3 71.8 74.1 77.0 75.9
         Q4 81.2 80.7 82.6 69.9 78.6 83.7 72.1 78.0 76.8 75.5
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 4
 As a percentage of civilian labour force
2016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 8.4 11.7 9.7
2017 9.1 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.4 21.5 6.8 11.2 8.7
2018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 9.1 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.5
2019         May 7.6 5.5 3.1 5.0 6.7 8.5 17.2 5.2 9.9 6.4
         June 7.5 5.5 3.1 4.6 6.7 8.5 17.1 5.2 9.8 6.5
         July 7.6 5.5 3.1 4.2 6.7 8.5 16.9 5.1 9.9 6.5
         Aug. 7.5 5.5 3.1 3.9 6.7 8.5 16.7 4.9 9.6 6.4
         Sep. 7.5 5.6 3.1 ... 6.7 8.4 ... 4.9 9.9 6.3
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.8 ... ...Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2019
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
2017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2019         May 1.2 1.7 1.3 3.1 1.3 1.1 0.6 1.0 0.9 3.5
         June 1.3 1.3 1.5 2.6 1.1 1.4 0.2 1.1 0.8 3.1
         July 1.0 1.2 1.1 2.0 1.0 1.3 0.4 0.5 0.3 3.0
         Aug. 1.0 0.9 1.0 2.1 1.2 1.3 0.1 0.6 0.5 3.1
         Sep. 0.8 0.6 0.9 2.2 1.0 1.1 0.2 0.6 0.2 2.3
         Oct. e 0.7 0.2 0.9 1.4 0.9 e 0.9 − 0.3 0.6 e 0.2 2.2
 
 General government financial balance 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2016 − 1.4 − 2.4 1.2 − 0.5 − 1.7 − 3.5 0.5 − 0.7 − 2.4 0.1
2017 − 0.9 − 0.7 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 2.8 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.5
2018 − 0.5 − 0.7 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 2.5 1.0 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.7
 
 General government debt 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2016 90.0 104.9 69.2 10.2 62.6 98.0 178.5 73.9 134.8 40.2
2017 87.8 101.8 65.3 9.3 60.9 98.4 176.2 67.8 134.1 38.6
2018 85.9 100.0 61.9 8.4 59.0 98.4 181.2 63.6 134.8 36.4
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical are provisional. 1  Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted. 2  Manufacturing,
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations. 3  Manufacturing: quarterly

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2019
I. Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1
 Annual percentage change
2.6 4.6 5.7 2.2 2.1 2.0 2.1 3.1 3.0 6.8 20164.2 1.8 6.7 2.9 2.5 3.5 3.0 4.8 2.9 4.4 20173.6 3.1 6.8 2.6 2.4 2.4 4.0 4.1 2.3 4.1 2018
4.0 3.8 7.1 3.0 2.3 2.9 4.5 3.7 2.4 4.6 2018          Q2
3.2 2.8 7.7 2.5 1.6 2.4 4.6 4.6 2.0 4.2          Q33.9 1.2 7.1 2.2 2.5 1.8 3.4 3.8 2.4 3.4          Q4
4.2 1.0 5.4 1.7 1.9 2.1 3.8 3.3 2.4 3.2 2019          Q1
3.8 3.6 4.0 1.8 1.8 1.6 2.2 2.5 1.8 3.0          Q23.6 ... ... ... 1.5 ... ... ... 2.0 ...          Q3
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2.7 0.2 − 7.3 1.3 2.8 2.4 4.6 7.8 1.7 9.1 20166.8 3.7 8.7 1.3 5.5 3.5 3.3 8.4 3.3 7.5 20175.2 − 1.3 1.3 0.6 3.7 0.1 4.4 5.0 0.4 7.1 2018
5.2 − 2.2 0.8 1.5 5.1 0.9 5.9 6.9 1.3 10.5 2018          Q2
2.9 − 2.6 − 1.9 0.1 2.4 − 1.3 5.9 3.6 0.4 6.1          Q35.7 − 2.1 4.6 − 1.6 2.3 − 1.4 4.6 0.8 − 2.9 6.3          Q4
4.8 − 1.5 − 1.8 − 1.2 5.5 − 4.1 6.8 4.4 − 0.2 5.9 2019          Q1
5.4 − 1.5 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 2.2 3.0 3.0 1.3 1.8          Q24.2
p − 1.8 p 3.9 p − 0.5 ... ... − 2.8 p 2.3 p 0.8 ...          Q3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 201777.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 201877.3 ... 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
77.2 80.8 83.2 84.4 88.7 82.0 84.0 84.6 79.3 61.8 2018          Q3
77.4 79.0 79.1 84.0 88.5 81.2 87.6 85.6 78.6 62.5          Q4
77.5 80.1 77.1 84.4 87.0 77.8 88.2 85.2 80.8 61.5 2019          Q1
76.9 79.7 78.2 84.3 87.2 79.4 89.1 84.8 80.4 66.0          Q277.5 80.3 75.9 84.1 86.7 80.1 89.4 83.6 80.8 64.2          Q377.2 ... 78.0 84.0 85.3 77.4 84.1 83.8 79.3 63.6          Q4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
7.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.1 19.6 13.0 20167.1 5.6 4.0 4.9 5.6 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.3 11.1 20176.2 5.5 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 2018
6.1 5.7 3.5 3.3 4.6 6.6 5.8 4.3 14.1 7.2 2019          May
6.2 5.7 3.4 3.4 4.5 6.6 5.7 4.2 14.2 7.1          June
6.4 5.7 3.4 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.6 4.2 14.2 7.0          July
6.6 5.7 3.4 3.5 4.5 6.4 5.6 4.2 14.3 6.8          Aug.6.5 5.4 3.4 3.5 4.5 6.6 5.6 4.3 14.2 6.6          Sep.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Oct.Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2019
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
 Annual percentage change
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 20163.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 20172.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 2018
2.5 2.2 1.7 2.3 1.7 0.3 2.7 1.6 0.9 0.2 2019          May
2.4 1.5 1.8 2.7 1.6 0.7 2.7 1.9 0.6 0.3          June
2.5 1.6 1.8 2.6 1.4 − 0.7 3.0 2.0 0.6 0.1          July
2.5 1.4 1.9 3.1 1.5 − 0.1 3.0 2.4 0.4 0.6          Aug.2.0 1.1 1.6 2.7 1.2 − 0.3 3.0 1.7 0.2 − 0.5          Sep.
1.5 0.8 1.4 2.8 ... − 0.1
e 2.8 1.5 e 0.2 − 0.5          Oct.
General government financial balance 5
As a percentage of GDP
0.2 1.8 0.9 0.0 − 1.5 − 1.9 − 2.5 − 1.9 − 4.3 0.1 20160.5 1.4 3.4 1.3 − 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 0.0 − 3.0 1.7 20170.6 2.7 1.9 1.5 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 0.8 − 2.5 − 4.4 2018
General government debt 5
As a percentage of GDP
39.9 20.1 55.5 61.9 82.9 131.5 52.0 78.7 99.2 103.4 201639.3 22.3 50.3 56.9 78.3 126.0 51.3 74.1 98.6 93.9 201734.1 21.0 45.8 52.4 74.0 122.2 49.4 70.4 97.6 100.6 2018
data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter. 4Monthly data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5  According to Maastricht Treaty definition. 
data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
November 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2018         Feb. 5.6 1.5 − 0.3 4.2 20.8 − 10.6 46.9 57.5 − 16.4 − 0.8 − 0.5 − 13.3 − 1.8
         Mar. 68.2 63.2 1.5 4.9 6.9 79.7 − 65.9 − 145.6 13.4 − 6.0 − 0.4 1.9 17.8
         Apr. 69.3 68.2 52.6 1.1 − 0.7 − 74.5 42.0 116.5 − 5.6 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 1.5
         May 122.3 88.1 11.0 34.2 39.9 − 34.3 120.9 155.2 − 4.4 − 7.4 − 0.4 1.2 2.2
         June − 5.3 − 22.7 − 22.3 17.3 20.5 75.1 − 67.8 − 143.0 − 8.4 − 4.8 − 0.4 − 7.7 4.5
         July 67.4 66.6 19.9 0.8 3.4 − 24.4 41.6 66.0 10.4 6.1 − 0.6 − 8.3 13.2
         Aug. − 2.2 − 13.6 − 4.8 11.4 22.7 − 26.6 − 1.3 25.3 4.0 − 8.3 − 0.4 1.4 11.3
         Sep. 25.3 22.4 − 11.2 2.9 7.1 64.1 − 26.2 − 90.3 24.5 − 12.5 − 0.5 22.3 15.1
         Oct. 11.7 17.4 3.1 − 5.7 − 7.5 − 13.0 72.4 85.4 7.9 − 6.5 − 0.2 3.8 10.8
         Nov. 92.1 91.6 12.1 0.5 2.0 73.8 35.0 − 38.8 3.4 − 4.2 − 1.0 3.9 4.7
         Dec. − 90.5 − 69.9 − 21.6 − 20.6 − 22.6 − 3.1 − 162.5 − 159.5 9.4 16.4 0.1 − 3.1 − 4.0
2019         Jan. 125.8 70.0 14.8 55.8 44.4 − 0.8 196.2 197.0 19.9 − 8.7 0.1 26.0 2.5
         Feb. 53.2 42.4 17.3 10.9 24.5 20.6 − 32.8 − 53.3 20.5 0.6 − 0.1 25.7 − 5.7
         Mar. 15.3 41.5 2.1 − 26.2 − 26.2 71.3 − 0.6 − 71.9 8.6 − 1.8 0.0 − 4.6 15.0
         Apr. 68.8 89.8 26.7 − 21.0 − 20.6 − 6.4 114.4 120.8 − 16.3 − 5.2 0.2 − 9.9 − 1.4
         May 39.1 36.7 12.7 2.4 3.3 61.0 67.6 6.5 10.5 − 2.9 0.6 7.1 5.7
         June 1.6 22.7 − 13.8 − 21.1 − 20.3 80.7 − 12.0 − 92.7 45.7 20.0 1.1 8.7 15.9
         July 51.4 62.3 − 0.7 − 11.0 − 13.7 32.5 162.1 129.6 0.2 − 22.4 0.4 4.6 17.5
         Aug. 23.5 18.8 − 8.2 4.8 4.5 − 18.1 16.0 34.1 − 17.4 − 15.4 − 0.4 − 8.7 7.1
         Sep. 7.4 25.4 22.6 − 18.1 − 11.9 44.4 − 47.1 − 91.6 31.3 23.0 − 0.7 − 3.0 12.0
  
  
b) German contribution
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2018         Feb. 5.1 10.7 − 1.7 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 20.7 11.6 32.4 − 5.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 2.9
         Mar. 7.2 9.7 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.6 7.9 − 5.2 − 13.1 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 4.0 2.2
         Apr. 7.3 7.2 0.9 0.1 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 13.9 − 8.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.1 1.9
         May 19.2 21.2 5.0 − 2.1 2.4 − 10.7 29.8 40.6 − 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 4.1 − 4.6
         June 16.7 17.9 2.1 − 1.1 1.3 − 18.2 − 20.4 − 2.1 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 3.1 8.1
         July 12.7 9.7 0.0 2.9 0.9 26.0 − 0.3 − 26.3 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.7 5.9
         Aug. 4.1 5.7 − 8.7 − 1.6 2.8 − 8.5 − 11.6 − 3.1 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 1.7 1.8
         Sep. 19.3 18.3 1.8 1.0 4.1 − 4.1 7.9 12.0 12.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 7.6 7.8
         Oct. 7.0 8.7 1.4 − 1.7 − 5.0 34.2 2.8 − 31.4 1.6 0.1 − 0.5 4.1 − 2.0
         Nov. 20.0 18.5 0.9 1.5 2.5 15.1 − 3.7 − 18.8 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 3.0 − 1.4
         Dec. − 5.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 33.5 3.6 37.1 − 1.1 0.7 − 0.3 − 9.1 7.5
2019         Jan. 16.3 15.0 0.3 1.3 − 1.3 67.9 21.1 − 46.8 2.1 − 5.7 − 0.5 14.0 − 5.7
         Feb. 12.5 16.4 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 1.4 24.3 − 15.4 − 39.6 6.6 − 0.8 0.1 12.6 − 5.2
         Mar. 9.7 17.2 0.1 − 7.5 − 4.8 − 32.1 13.9 46.1 − 4.0 − 3.2 0.2 − 4.4 3.4
         Apr. 7.6 12.7 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 6.1 19.2 14.8 − 4.5 − 6.6 − 2.7 0.2 − 4.0 0.0
         May 19.3 19.8 0.5 − 0.5 1.4 11.8 2.4 − 9.3 9.1 − 1.7 0.6 7.5 2.6
         June 25.7 26.4 4.3 − 0.7 1.2 − 8.0 10.3 18.3 11.5 1.5 0.6 2.4 7.1
         July 9.5 7.8 0.0 1.6 − 0.8 42.6 6.3 − 36.4 0.8 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 4.4
         Aug. 25.2 19.9 1.0 5.2 5.5 − 13.6 2.4 16.0 − 6.2 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 3.7 2.3
         Sep. 6.9 13.1 − 0.7 − 6.2 − 1.3 − 2.8 − 24.2 − 21.3 4.2 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.2 5.3
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report, p. 30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
November 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 a) Euro area 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which: ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl. money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
13.8 8.5 − − 10.9 − 9.0 5.7 0.3 5.4 − 17.4 2.7 − 1.4 − 11.3 6.0 2018          Feb.
13.9 51.6 − 69.0 67.4 64.6 8.7 55.9 − 3.5 6.4 2.7 − 1.4 6.5          Mar.
− 19.9 − 32.3 − 52.5 30.0 48.7 4.2 44.5 − 20.7 2.0 − 4.3 11.3 1.5          Apr.
7.1 15.7 − 69.6 93.1 95.8 4.9 90.9 − 10.0 7.2 24.9 − 12.3 − 5.8          May
21.4 − 43.5 − 100.3 108.7 91.1 11.4 79.6 14.2 3.4 − 5.6 − 8.9 2.9          June
7.6 33.8 − − 8.8 − 9.5 − 6.0 6.7 − 12.8 − 8.1 4.6 6.7 10.3 − 6.3          July
2.9 − 41.0 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 2.9 − 3.0 − 6.7 5.2 3.8 − 1.6 1.9          Aug.
40.6 5.7 − 18.7 45.4 69.3 2.1 67.2 − 20.8 − 3.2 − 10.7 − 19.5 − 0.7          Sep.
− 38.8 − 5.4 − 35.0 13.3 8.0 1.8 6.3 8.3 − 3.0 − 10.2 23.8 − 2.2          Oct.
7.3 65.1 − 90.2 88.3 97.7 5.3 92.4 − 11.6 2.2 31.5 0.3 − 0.9          Nov.
− 59.9 − 93.9 − 50.8 50.2 49.2 18.0 31.3 − 4.4 5.4 − 14.2 0.6 5.2          Dec.
66.1 67.9 − − 28.8 − 21.5 − 39.0 − 13.1 − 25.9 3.3 14.2 15.6 − 3.9 − 7.1 2019          Jan.
18.6 − 3.2 − 37.9 45.6 39.4 3.2 36.2 − 0.4 6.6 0.2 − 8.4 − 0.4          Feb.
− 21.2 − 21.6 − 120.8 139.5 133.0 6.2 126.8 − 6.2 12.7 − 7.2 − 0.5 − 19.5          Mar.
− 33.5 35.9 − 76.2 56.0 46.8 7.4 39.4 2.4 6.8 22.2 15.5 0.4          Apr.
17.8 − 9.1 − 80.9 88.3 87.3 5.1 82.2 − 12.4 13.4 − 7.7 − 9.7 5.9          May33.6 − 69.7 − 72.8 87.3 98.3 7.5 90.7 − 14.4 3.4 − 20.7 − 11.5 − 3.0          June
− 13.0 45.7 − 51.0 31.1 25.7 9.0 16.7 1.3 4.0 17.9 22.7 − 5.7          July
6.3 − 93.3 − 109.8 109.8 85.6 1.3 84.3 19.0 5.2 4.7 15.1 − 13.6          Aug.5.9 52.5 − − 37.9 − 19.0 − 2.5 3.2 − 5.7 − 16.0 − 0.5 − 15.8 − 12.7 − 2.4          Sep.
 
 
  b) German contribution 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  10 
of which: Components of the money stockIntra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl. money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
9.2 − 21.2 2.0 − 0.3 1.7 5.2 − 4.4 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 0.7 2018          Feb.
8.3 0.6 6.9 − 1.5 3.1 − 0.5 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1          Mar.
− 15.2 14.5 1.3 1.9 5.3 14.7 − 8.6 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0          Apr.
11.7 − 42.5 5.4 − 0.1 39.3 38.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.1          May17.7 − 26.3 3.6 2.5 4.8 − 6.4 14.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.1 − 2.6          June
− 21.0 57.8 3.1 2.2 − 0.5 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.6 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.9          July
13.7 − 14.2 5.3 0.5 − 0.4 2.4 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 1.7          Aug.12.2 − 32.9 3.9 − 0.3 23.8 27.3 − 2.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.5          Sep.
− 17.8 43.5 3.8 0.1 13.8 11.1 − 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.0 2.3          Oct.
9.7 − 8.2 2.5 1.0 32.8 38.6 − 4.1 0.5 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.5          Nov.
− 5.4 − 27.6 4.0 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.3 − 3.3 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.8          Dec.
− 18.5 103.9 − 9.6 7.5 − 3.4 − 14.3 9.6 0.3 0.9 0.0 0.0 2019          Jan.
− 2.7 20.3 2.9 0.4 12.5 8.3 3.6 1.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7          Feb.
17.7 − 58.0 2.5 1.2 21.8 20.9 − 1.5 2.2 0.0 − 0.2 0.3          Mar.
− 15.2 33.9 3.9 2.1 14.7 17.9 − 3.7 0.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.6          Apr.
19.0 − 20.1 4.0 0.8 23.0 23.8 0.4 − 0.3 − 1.3 0.1 0.4          May
3.7 − 7.7 3.0 2.1 10.3 10.3 − 1.4 − 0.4 1.7 − 0.0 0.2          June
− 27.1 74.0 3.6 3.2 4.4 7.2 − 3.3 − 0.6 1.0 0.1 0.1          July
10.7 − 26.8 5.8 − 0.7 33.9 26.1 5.7 − 1.2 3.1 0.0 0.3          Aug.
9.9 − 7.3 4.9 0.8 − 2.6 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.7 1.1 0.1 1.5          Sep.
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
November 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2017         Aug. 26,683.9 17,609.7 13,086.5 10,852.9 1,443.9 789.6 4,523.3 1,054.6 3,468.6 5,199.9 3,874.3
         Sep. 26,562.4 17,656.1 13,130.9 10,905.8 1,434.2 790.9 4,525.1 1,046.0 3,479.1 5,171.5 3,734.8
         Oct. 26,760.5 17,733.1 13,189.4 10,968.3 1,422.9 798.2 4,543.7 1,046.2 3,497.5 5,292.7 3,734.6
         Nov. 26,790.1 17,846.2 13,271.9 11,037.5 1,430.7 803.7 4,574.3 1,038.3 3,536.0 5,247.3 3,696.6
         Dec. 26,320.8 17,707.9 13,166.9 10,942.4 1,425.5 798.9 4,541.0 1,028.7 3,512.3 5,065.9 3,547.0
2018         Jan. 26,414.7 17,897.5 13,319.7 11,069.2 1,448.8 801.7 4,577.8 1,041.6 3,536.2 5,253.9 3,263.3
         Feb. 26,379.4 17,897.8 13,316.5 11,070.0 1,456.5 790.0 4,581.2 1,025.2 3,556.0 5,342.9 3,138.7
         Mar. 26,373.2 17,959.2 13,358.1 11,111.2 1,466.5 780.4 4,601.1 1,023.3 3,577.8 5,257.8 3,156.2
         Apr. 26,515.4 18,032.8 13,432.8 11,127.7 1,490.0 815.1 4,599.9 1,025.1 3,574.8 5,335.0 3,147.6
         May 26,916.5 18,104.2 13,514.1 11,201.8 1,504.5 807.8 4,590.1 1,019.9 3,570.2 5,543.9 3,268.5
         June 26,772.3 18,099.2 13,482.5 11,193.8 1,501.6 787.1 4,616.7 1,016.8 3,599.9 5,455.9 3,217.3
         July 26,782.1 18,156.4 13,547.1 11,235.8 1,523.9 787.4 4,609.3 1,012.7 3,596.5 5,466.2 3,159.5
         Aug. 26,815.9 18,127.5 13,530.7 11,227.3 1,523.9 779.5 4,596.8 1,001.7 3,595.1 5,485.0 3,203.4
         Sep. 26,769.8 18,147.8 13,539.6 11,248.0 1,509.3 782.3 4,608.3 1,000.7 3,607.5 5,462.1 3,160.0
         Oct. 27,088.9 18,151.7 13,555.3 11,266.4 1,510.7 778.1 4,596.4 1,002.6 3,593.9 5,679.3 3,257.9
         Nov. 27,226.0 18,243.4 13,638.0 11,338.0 1,515.9 784.0 4,605.5 1,001.0 3,604.5 5,704.1 3,278.5
         Dec. 26,993.5 18,171.1 13,567.8 11,295.9 1,501.4 770.5 4,603.3 1,002.8 3,600.5 5,563.5 3,258.8
2019         Jan. 27,402.8 18,308.2 13,637.2 11,345.5 1,517.0 774.7 4,671.0 1,015.9 3,655.2 5,783.5 3,311.0
         Feb. 27,440.6 18,353.3 13,683.3 11,368.6 1,528.1 786.7 4,670.0 1,001.2 3,668.8 5,771.0 3,316.2
         Mar. 27,739.0 18,395.8 13,735.1 11,413.7 1,525.8 795.6 4,660.7 1,001.3 3,659.3 5,848.4 3,494.8
         Apr. 27,898.4 18,466.6 13,828.0 11,472.9 1,529.5 825.6 4,638.7 1,001.1 3,637.6 5,955.8 3,476.0
         May 28,194.7 18,495.2 13,853.0 11,494.6 1,548.7 809.7 4,642.1 1,000.3 3,641.8 6,038.9 3,660.7
         June 28,319.9 18,522.3 13,873.6 11,521.3 1,551.8 800.5 4,648.6 1,000.0 3,648.6 6,005.0 3,792.6
         July 28,781.9 18,601.6 13,938.7 11,584.1 1,550.5 804.1 4,662.9 1,002.8 3,660.0 6,218.8 3,961.4
         Aug. 29,371.3 18,657.1 13,960.3 11,612.9 1,548.8 798.6 4,696.8 1,003.1 3,693.6 6,310.7 4,403.5
         Sep. 29,209.6 18,669.0 13,987.1 11,615.7 1,566.8 804.5 4,681.9 996.7 3,685.2 6,298.1 4,242.5
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2017         Aug. 6,084.5 4,152.3 3,186.3 2,741.6 174.3 270.3 966.1 327.8 638.3 1,185.1 747.2
         Sep. 6,076.7 4,167.7 3,200.9 2,757.6 174.3 269.1 966.8 323.2 643.6 1,194.6 714.3
         Oct. 6,082.0 4,185.9 3,210.4 2,766.1 174.6 269.8 975.4 324.0 651.4 1,188.5 707.7
         Nov. 6,088.7 4,211.0 3,227.4 2,777.0 178.7 271.6 983.6 321.5 662.1 1,177.2 700.5
         Dec. 6,051.1 4,202.2 3,222.8 2,768.6 180.4 273.8 979.4 318.5 660.9 1,163.4 685.4
2018         Jan. 6,074.8 4,214.9 3,242.3 2,786.5 181.6 274.2 972.5 317.0 655.6 1,176.4 683.5
         Feb. 6,051.9 4,220.1 3,253.3 2,799.4 183.1 270.8 966.8 311.4 655.4 1,195.1 636.8
         Mar. 6,053.7 4,228.1 3,260.9 2,809.5 183.0 268.4 967.2 309.7 657.5 1,184.4 641.2
         Apr. 6,046.4 4,233.3 3,267.7 2,816.0 184.4 267.4 965.6 310.5 655.0 1,178.5 634.6
         May 6,148.1 4,248.4 3,280.8 2,824.1 186.8 269.8 967.6 306.5 661.1 1,226.7 673.0
         June 6,120.9 4,264.2 3,297.3 2,838.8 187.5 271.0 966.9 304.3 662.7 1,201.8 654.9
         July 6,089.3 4,274.2 3,307.9 2,849.4 187.0 271.5 966.3 304.9 661.4 1,194.2 620.9
         Aug. 6,121.9 4,279.7 3,313.6 2,863.9 183.8 265.9 966.0 300.5 665.5 1,189.8 652.4
         Sep. 6,119.7 4,295.4 3,331.0 2,880.3 184.8 265.9 964.4 297.5 666.9 1,194.5 629.8
         Oct. 6,154.2 4,303.6 3,339.1 2,888.2 185.3 265.6 964.5 300.8 663.7 1,208.1 642.4
         Nov. 6,177.4 4,323.4 3,356.8 2,905.6 188.1 263.0 966.7 299.8 666.9 1,202.7 651.3
         Dec. 6,194.1 4,317.4 3,353.6 2,903.7 187.8 262.2 963.7 296.4 667.3 1,208.5 668.2
2019         Jan. 6,252.9 4,333.5 3,366.6 2,917.4 188.8 260.4 966.9 299.2 667.7 1,232.6 686.9
         Feb. 6,243.9 4,343.3 3,382.0 2,932.6 189.2 260.2 961.3 296.6 664.7 1,221.0 679.6
         Mar. 6,392.0 4,373.9 3,414.7 2,963.7 189.7 261.3 959.2 293.9 665.3 1,265.4 752.8
         Apr. 6,408.7 4,379.3 3,427.3 2,976.4 189.1 261.9 951.9 294.8 657.1 1,278.2 751.2
         May 6,524.8 4,402.6 3,446.8 2,995.6 190.0 261.1 955.8 293.1 662.8 1,284.5 837.7
         June 6,619.8 4,431.8 3,473.1 3,017.0 194.4 261.7 958.6 291.2 667.5 1,294.2 893.7
         July 6,698.2 4,445.3 3,481.1 3,024.8 194.0 262.3 964.2 293.7 670.5 1,312.3 940.7
         Aug. 6,973.5 4,478.6 3,501.8 3,044.3 196.5 261.0 976.8 293.5 683.3 1,330.9 1,163.9
         Sep. 6,891.5 4,481.3 3,515.4 3,058.7 196.2 260.5 965.9 288.3 677.6 1,311.8 1,098.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12   ).
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
November 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which: up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,103.3 12,226.5 11,422.5 11,504.8 6,146.4 857.8 260.6 1,969.4 2,213.0 57.7 2017          Aug.
1,104.2 12,271.6 11,432.3 11,519.7 6,196.5 843.3 256.2 1,956.5 2,210.4 56.8          Sep.
1,106.2 12,217.1 11,420.3 11,507.4 6,216.9 846.4 250.5 1,929.6 2,207.7 56.2          Oct.
1,107.1 12,249.2 11,471.4 11,544.6 6,291.1 832.2 245.9 1,912.7 2,207.2 55.5          Nov.1,123.2 12,285.7 11,542.3 11,615.7 6,348.4 834.7 242.2 1,925.2 2,210.3 54.9          Dec.
1,108.0 12,318.0 11,527.5 11,608.4 6,347.5 840.6 236.7 1,915.1 2,212.7 55.8 2018          Jan.
1,108.3 12,329.7 11,524.1 11,601.3 6,351.7 831.3 232.1 1,915.9 2,215.2 55.1          Feb.1,117.0 12,393.6 11,579.9 11,659.1 6,416.1 831.5 226.4 1,908.9 2,221.4 54.8          Mar.
1,121.2 12,401.4 11,610.6 11,679.1 6,454.1 817.7 222.3 1,907.2 2,223.4 54.4          Apr.
1,126.1 12,502.5 11,690.4 11,761.7 6,547.6 810.6 217.7 1,900.9 2,230.9 54.0          May1,137.6 12,613.6 11,776.7 11,843.6 6,623.3 821.4 214.9 1,895.2 2,235.1 53.7          June
1,145.3 12,606.0 11,760.4 11,825.6 6,603.5 817.3 212.1 1,899.9 2,239.8 53.1          July
1,148.3 12,595.4 11,753.0 11,802.8 6,593.6 812.2 208.9 1,890.4 2,244.9 52.7          Aug.1,150.4 12,662.1 11,779.9 11,831.4 6,656.8 796.4 205.9 1,877.8 2,242.2 52.3          Sep.
1,152.2 12,639.5 11,788.4 11,848.4 6,668.9 812.9 203.6 1,872.0 2,239.0 52.1          Oct.
1,157.5 12,719.4 11,861.9 11,912.4 6,750.7 801.7 200.7 1,866.8 2,241.3 51.3          Nov.1,175.4 12,713.4 11,926.4 11,989.4 6,799.2 800.8 200.7 1,888.5 2,248.7 51.5          Dec.
1,162.4 12,765.3 11,909.0 11,974.7 6,778.5 798.3 199.4 1,885.1 2,262.1 51.3 2019          Jan.
1,165.6 12,830.6 11,958.0 12,003.9 6,807.0 795.6 196.8 1,885.4 2,268.0 51.2          Feb.1,171.7 12,947.7 12,078.6 12,135.4 6,931.8 786.3 199.6 1,885.8 2,280.4 51.3          Mar.
1,179.1 12,958.0 12,121.3 12,181.2 6,971.4 788.7 201.9 1,880.0 2,287.7 51.5          Apr.
1,184.2 13,059.0 12,198.7 12,257.5 7,050.3 775.9 201.5 1,876.2 2,301.4 52.1          May1,191.7 13,181.4 12,288.4 12,336.0 7,123.4 762.4 198.4 1,893.9 2,304.7 53.2          June
1,200.7 13,175.4 12,297.1 12,348.4 7,146.6 767.4 198.9 1,872.8 2,309.0 53.7          July
1,202.1 13,279.8 12,385.9 12,436.3 7,225.9 782.0 201.1 1,859.8 2,314.1 53.4          Aug.1,205.2 13,292.1 12,377.7 12,441.0 7,219.9 768.5 200.8 1,885.1 2,313.7 53.0          Sep.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
250.4 3,600.7 3,483.1 3,338.6 1,938.3 159.0 40.3 619.3 537.5 44.1 2017          Aug.
250.1 3,616.3 3,486.8 3,345.9 1,945.0 162.3 39.6 617.9 537.5 43.5          Sep.
250.9 3,606.4 3,490.8 3,352.9 1,958.5 158.8 38.6 616.2 538.0 42.7          Oct.
250.9 3,646.8 3,521.5 3,383.7 1,990.6 157.1 37.4 618.2 538.3 42.1          Nov.252.9 3,647.9 3,515.8 3,378.5 1,976.2 162.0 37.7 620.4 540.7 41.5          Dec.
250.1 3,632.5 3,522.3 3,390.7 1,994.6 161.5 36.4 616.5 539.5 42.2 2018          Jan.
249.8 3,642.4 3,523.0 3,388.4 1,995.9 160.2 35.3 615.5 540.0 41.5          Feb.248.3 3,652.2 3,524.1 3,389.6 1,998.1 164.6 34.2 612.1 539.4 41.0          Mar.
250.3 3,641.8 3,529.8 3,395.0 2,013.5 157.6 33.6 610.6 539.1 40.6          Apr.
250.2 3,693.8 3,568.4 3,425.0 2,048.0 154.6 33.0 610.2 539.0 40.3          May252.7 3,716.5 3,574.0 3,423.0 2,039.4 165.5 32.6 607.2 538.5 39.8          June
256.0 3,694.1 3,571.0 3,429.7 2,053.1 161.2 32.2 605.8 538.0 39.4          July
256.4 3,703.1 3,568.1 3,417.3 2,051.8 153.7 34.0 601.1 537.7 38.9          Aug.256.1 3,737.2 3,588.3 3,437.1 2,076.9 153.2 33.2 597.4 537.8 38.6          Sep.
256.3 3,730.6 3,595.8 3,453.9 2,092.2 155.1 33.6 596.9 538.0 38.1          Oct.
257.2 3,774.2 3,632.0 3,482.3 2,127.4 149.8 33.2 595.9 538.5 37.4          Nov.260.0 3,766.4 3,629.3 3,481.1 2,120.4 152.5 33.7 596.7 540.6 37.2          Dec.
267.6 3,737.2 3,622.2 3,471.2 2,113.7 154.3 33.5 592.1 540.9 36.7 2019          Jan.
268.0 3,747.2 3,634.2 3,474.2 2,117.5 153.9 33.2 591.0 541.8 36.7          Feb.269.1 3,785.8 3,652.3 3,490.2 2,136.2 152.2 33.0 587.7 544.0 37.1          Mar.
271.3 3,782.3 3,667.4 3,506.4 2,156.4 151.2 32.8 584.8 544.1 37.2          Apr.
272.1 3,824.2 3,689.1 3,523.2 2,176.6 149.4 32.7 582.9 543.7 37.9          May274.2 3,837.7 3,697.8 3,528.6 2,183.2 147.8 32.3 583.5 543.3 38.4          June
277.3 3,812.4 3,701.4 3,532.6 2,191.7 147.0 31.6 581.4 542.7 38.1          July
276.6 3,849.7 3,730.3 3,550.9 2,213.2 149.7 31.7 576.9 541.5 37.8          Aug.277.4 3,853.5 3,722.1 3,546.0 2,213.9 146.4 31.5 576.1 540.8 37.2          Sep.
volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra -Eurosystem
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability ite ms“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
November 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont’d)
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which: market of which:
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund Denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2017         Aug. 326.7 395.0 197.1 94.8 27.8 46.2 24.4 4.7 199.6 198.9 526.4 2,114.9 1,462.3
         Sep. 362.5 389.5 193.2 91.9 28.1 47.5 24.1 4.7 206.6 205.9 522.1 2,091.3 1,444.0
         Oct. 318.9 390.9 197.9 87.6 28.3 48.3 24.1 4.7 226.5 225.8 531.3 2,082.5 1,427.3
         Nov. 310.2 394.4 197.6 89.5 29.8 49.0 23.8 4.6 243.4 242.8 527.6 2,096.3 1,442.2
         Dec. 289.4 380.5 191.5 81.5 31.5 46.8 24.6 4.6 211.2 210.7 501.2 2,077.2 1,433.0
2018         Jan. 330.3 379.3 186.4 84.3 31.1 47.5 25.1 5.0 230.3 229.8 521.3 2,072.4 1,439.4
         Feb. 344.1 384.3 192.0 83.4 30.4 47.8 25.8 4.8 229.1 228.6 510.0 2,075.7 1,430.8
         Mar. 358.1 376.4 181.7 85.8 29.5 48.6 25.9 4.8 231.7 231.2 508.5 2,078.7 1,435.5
         Apr. 338.2 384.1 190.5 84.7 28.4 49.7 26.0 4.7 227.6 227.1 519.7 2,087.3 1,436.6
         May 345.3 395.4 196.6 87.2 29.8 51.0 26.1 4.7 253.0 252.5 507.4 2,100.4 1,439.3
         June 366.7 403.3 199.6 91.7 29.9 51.9 25.7 4.7 247.4 246.8 498.2 2,095.9 1,439.0
         July 374.6 405.8 203.3 88.4 30.9 52.8 25.7 4.7 254.0 253.5 508.7 2,077.3 1,432.6
         Aug. 377.4 415.2 208.7 90.6 31.0 54.4 25.9 4.6 257.8 257.3 507.1 2,084.1 1,439.3
         Sep. 414.4 416.3 211.2 87.8 32.4 54.8 25.5 4.6 247.2 246.7 487.6 2,109.6 1,457.2
         Oct. 375.6 415.5 213.2 84.0 32.3 55.7 25.8 4.5 237.4 236.9 511.4 2,164.5 1,474.0
         Nov. 383.0 423.9 218.9 85.1 33.6 56.3 25.7 4.3 268.8 268.4 511.7 2,164.1 1,469.6
         Dec. 322.5 401.4 203.7 78.6 34.2 56.9 23.8 4.3 254.5 254.2 512.5 2,158.3 1,472.0
2019         Jan. 388.6 402.0 196.7 85.8 34.9 55.8 24.2 4.5 270.1 269.6 513.3 2,176.3 1,484.6
         Feb. 407.3 419.4 207.3 92.1 34.2 56.3 25.1 4.5 270.5 269.7 505.0 2,204.6 1,506.2
         Mar. 385.8 426.5 212.0 92.5 35.4 56.7 25.5 4.4 272.8 272.4 506.5 2,184.4 1,490.0
         Apr. 352.4 424.4 212.1 91.2 34.5 56.9 25.3 4.4 295.0 294.6 521.8 2,174.2 1,487.9
         May 370.2 431.3 216.8 94.7 33.4 57.0 25.1 4.3 287.4 287.0 512.0 2,190.0 1,497.2
         June 403.7 441.8 224.3 94.6 35.1 58.1 25.2 4.4 266.0 265.7 500.4 2,182.5 1,494.3
         July 390.7 436.2 220.7 93.8 34.1 58.2 25.1 4.4 284.1 283.8 523.1 2,189.1 1,493.5
         Aug. 396.9 446.5 227.5 97.2 34.1 58.3 25.2 4.3 289.0 288.5 538.2 2,172.1 1,482.5
         Sep. 402.5 448.7 230.9 98.0 31.7 58.9 25.0 4.3 273.5 273.0 525.5 2,176.0 1,481.0
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2017         Aug. 49.7 212.4 64.0 81.0 23.6 40.1 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.4 2.3 534.4 267.8
         Sep. 59.5 210.9 63.2 78.5 24.3 41.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.3 529.1 264.0
         Oct. 45.3 208.2 64.4 73.5 24.7 41.9 3.0 0.7 2.3 2.3 2.0 521.8 252.3
         Nov. 51.7 211.4 65.5 73.0 26.2 43.1 2.9 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 518.3 251.1
         Dec. 61.7 207.7 69.3 66.3 27.8 40.6 2.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.7 512.7 256.4
2018         Jan. 37.4 204.4 61.6 70.3 27.5 41.4 2.8 0.8 4.3 4.3 1.7 518.8 262.8
         Feb. 46.7 207.4 66.3 69.2 26.8 41.5 3.0 0.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 522.7 263.8
         Mar. 55.0 207.6 63.2 72.7 25.8 42.3 3.0 0.6 2.9 2.9 2.2 523.5 265.6
         Apr. 39.7 207.0 63.1 72.5 24.4 43.3 3.0 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 524.1 270.0
         May 51.4 217.4 68.6 74.9 25.7 44.5 3.1 0.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 536.8 274.3
         June 69.1 224.5 70.7 79.2 25.6 45.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 2.0 531.3 274.8
         July 48.1 216.4 63.4 76.6 26.5 46.2 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.8 1.9 526.6 277.0
         Aug. 61.7 224.1 67.3 78.9 26.4 47.7 3.1 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.9 527.7 282.0
         Sep. 73.9 226.2 69.6 76.9 27.8 48.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.9 536.3 287.6
         Oct. 56.1 220.6 66.1 73.9 28.0 48.9 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 1.9 544.5 286.9
         Nov. 65.7 226.3 69.4 74.8 28.7 49.7 3.1 0.7 1.3 1.3 2.2 544.9 290.3
         Dec. 60.3 225.0 74.6 67.5 29.3 49.9 3.0 0.6 0.8 0.8 2.2 532.5 283.4
2019         Jan. 41.8 224.2 67.1 74.8 30.0 48.7 3.0 0.6 1.7 1.7 2.2 546.6 294.1
         Feb. 38.8 234.3 71.8 80.3 29.3 49.1 3.1 0.6 2.0 2.0 2.2 560.4 302.9
         Mar. 56.4 239.2 75.9 80.0 30.3 49.4 3.1 0.6 11.4 11.4 2.0 557.3 298.2
         Apr. 41.2 234.7 73.6 78.4 29.4 49.6 3.1 0.6 12.5 12.5 1.9 552.8 293.5
         May 60.3 240.7 77.4 81.7 28.3 49.6 3.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 2.0 560.1 300.1
         June 64.0 245.1 80.4 81.5 29.0 50.6 3.1 0.5 12.9 12.9 2.0 558.0 301.8
         July 36.9 242.9 79.6 80.7 28.2 50.8 3.1 0.5 13.9 13.9 2.0 559.4 296.9
         Aug. 47.6 251.2 84.7 83.8 28.1 50.9 3.2 0.5 16.9 16.7 2.0 557.3 295.0
         Sep. 57.3 250.3 84.6 85.0 25.8 51.1 3.1 0.5 18.0 17.8 2.2 563.5 297.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p. 10    ).9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
November 2019
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item:
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (from 2002 German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which: MonetaryIntra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
33.3 39.0 2,042.6 4,178.0 2,647.7 − 0.9 3,688.3 − 7,571.6 11,073.6 11,747.4 6,768.3 148.5 2017          Aug.
40.3 38.4 2,012.5 4,158.3 2,650.8 17.0 3,540.4 − 7,620.4 11,098.3 11,765.0 6,728.8 150.4          Sep.
34.7 36.6 2,011.2 4,339.5 2,666.1 13.3 3,577.9 − 7,646.1 11,114.4 11,785.1 6,716.0 148.7          Oct.
39.2 36.9 2,020.3 4,288.9 2,657.3 45.9 3,574.3 − 7,724.0 11,175.5 11,854.9 6,699.4 151.3          Nov.33.5 34.8 2,008.9 4,098.4 2,730.9 26.5 3,266.5 − 7,786.3 11,233.9 11,870.9 6,771.4 146.0          Dec.
26.5 28.8 2,017.1 4,415.2 2,714.8 0.3 3,034.4 − 7,767.2 11,220.5 11,867.6 6,755.3 148.1 2018          Jan.
34.8 27.3 2,013.6 4,505.1 2,708.1 13.5 2,899.8 − 7,777.1 11,217.7 11,863.9 6,745.3 147.5          Feb.40.7 27.1 2,010.8 4,349.2 2,721.1 50.4 2,923.2 − 7,840.1 11,282.8 11,929.6 6,749.0 147.5          Mar.
43.0 26.9 2,017.4 4,494.1 2,722.0 10.0 2,932.1 − 7,892.1 11,316.8 11,986.7 6,755.4 148.4          Apr.
38.2 26.8 2,035.4 4,707.9 2,701.2 13.9 3,004.2 − 7,994.8 11,419.6 12,067.5 6,747.1 147.0          May42.1 26.0 2,027.8 4,563.6 2,672.3 31.8 2,911.9 − 8,086.7 11,529.2 12,168.6 6,705.5 150.2          June
34.6 27.1 2,015.6 4,612.9 2,667.6 18.5 2,891.9 − 8,080.7 11,518.8 12,158.7 6,693.5 152.4          July
36.7 27.2 2,020.2 4,649.5 2,663.2 25.8 2,884.9 − 8,082.1 11,519.5 12,166.6 6,685.6 155.5          Aug.37.6 25.1 2,046.9 4,573.4 2,663.0 27.3 2,849.1 − 8,152.5 11,566.6 12,186.6 6,699.4 157.9          Sep.
35.9 26.5 2,102.1 4,705.7 2,708.7 − 2.6 2,972.2 − 8,164.0 11,585.4 12,229.3 6,795.1 153.6          Oct.
39.6 21.9 2,102.6 4,658.8 2,711.1 15.7 3,019.0 − 8,260.7 11,672.4 12,318.3 6,792.4 157.4          Nov.47.5 20.6 2,090.1 4,504.5 2,727.5 14.8 2,932.6 − 8,307.2 11,719.2 12,367.3 6,818.8 154.1          Dec.
36.3 23.9 2,116.2 4,707.8 2,752.8 24.0 3,030.9 − 8,264.8 11,694.0 12,338.6 6,865.7 151.7 2019          Jan.
32.8 26.1 2,145.8 4,672.5 2,740.4 22.8 3,028.5 − 8,305.8 11,742.0 12,378.2 6,883.5 150.4          Feb.15.2 22.5 2,146.8 4,662.4 2,766.3 29.4 3,197.8 − 8,443.1 11,887.3 12,505.3 6,911.3 151.9          Mar.
17.0 21.4 2,135.8 4,780.4 2,760.6 27.7 3,201.7 − 8,489.7 11,943.3 12,581.6 6,889.3 151.5          Apr.
23.5 22.2 2,144.3 4,786.8 2,774.3 37.7 3,363.4 − 8,576.8 12,032.9 12,665.2 6,908.4 149.7          May20.2 20.5 2,141.9 4,651.7 2,830.2 47.9 3,468.0 − 8,670.7 12,115.1 12,730.6 6,981.7 155.2          June
15.9 20.2 2,153.0 4,807.5 2,878.9 38.9 3,684.3 − 8,699.7 12,150.8 12,787.6 7,020.9 154.5          July
2.2 19.7 2,150.1 4,868.7 2,940.0 − 0.3 4,081.7 − 8,788.0 12,264.5 12,901.1 7,065.9 155.4          Aug.0.6 18.2 2,157.2 4,813.0 2,942.1 36.1 3,946.0 − 8,788.7 12,249.5 12,866.7 7,100.6 155.8          Sep.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
18.5 15.8 500.0 894.5 597.2 − 970.2 1,422.2 348.6 2,002.3 2,846.8 2,886.8 1,801.4 − 2017          Aug.
19.3 15.4 494.4 927.7 594.2 − 982.9 1,387.5 352.1 2,008.2 2,853.5 2,893.0 1,792.0 −          Sep.
18.6 15.7 487.5 913.6 596.3 − 946.7 1,386.3 354.2 2,023.0 2,859.6 2,898.2 1,785.4 −          Oct.
18.5 15.8 484.0 883.4 593.7 − 940.3 1,382.0 355.5 2,056.1 2,890.9 2,929.9 1,781.9 −          Nov.17.7 14.8 480.2 921.3 668.6 − 999.6 1,295.2 359.3 2,045.5 2,882.9 2,920.4 1,852.1 −          Dec.
16.0 14.2 488.5 931.6 656.8 − 974.7 1,303.7 359.3 2,056.2 2,894.2 2,930.5 1,846.2 − 2018          Jan.
16.7 14.3 491.6 968.4 653.3 − 1,003.8 1,263.2 361.3 2,062.1 2,896.6 2,933.5 1,844.1 −          Feb.16.0 13.9 493.6 953.5 657.7 − 1,016.5 1,278.1 368.2 2,061.3 2,901.1 2,936.2 1,847.4 −          Mar.
17.5 12.3 494.3 949.7 658.7 − 1,002.9 1,270.5 369.5 2,076.6 2,907.0 2,941.3 1,848.1 −          Apr.
19.0 13.1 504.7 997.9 662.3 − 1,044.2 1,297.9 374.9 2,116.6 2,946.8 2,982.4 1,862.6 −          May17.0 12.5 501.8 996.0 666.2 − 1,070.1 1,277.7 378.5 2,110.1 2,954.5 2,987.3 1,860.9 −          June
16.7 11.9 498.0 967.9 665.4 − 1,019.3 1,250.8 381.6 2,116.5 2,954.1 2,986.4 1,855.4 −          July
18.3 12.0 497.4 966.5 672.6 − 1,024.8 1,273.6 386.9 2,119.1 2,953.0 2,986.4 1,858.4 −          Aug.17.8 11.0 507.4 979.8 670.9 − 1,059.4 1,251.7 390.8 2,146.5 2,978.4 3,010.4 1,863.3 −          Sep.
20.2 11.0 513.2 952.8 676.1 − 1,031.2 1,277.1 394.6 2,158.3 2,990.0 3,025.5 1,873.8 −          Oct.
19.4 10.3 515.2 932.7 675.8 − 1,041.8 1,288.0 397.1 2,196.8 3,024.9 3,058.2 1,874.7 −          Nov.17.7 10.1 504.6 967.9 689.9 − 1,063.4 1,297.9 401.1 2,195.0 3,021.7 3,052.5 1,879.0 −          Dec.
18.2 9.6 518.7 920.7 690.0 − 971.6 1,326.1 391.5 2,180.7 3,017.3 3,049.1 1,886.9 − 2019          Jan.
19.1 8.2 533.2 882.8 684.4 − 966.0 1,330.9 394.4 2,189.4 3,030.9 3,062.3 1,895.1 −          Feb.19.2 8.3 529.8 958.7 695.9 − 1,031.3 1,412.2 396.9 2,212.1 3,054.7 3,095.5 1,900.4 −          Mar.
18.6 8.2 525.9 953.9 692.7 − 985.8 1,398.5 400.8 2,230.0 3,069.0 3,110.2 1,890.7 −          Apr.
18.9 8.4 532.9 944.9 702.5 − 1,016.3 1,496.1 404.8 2,254.0 3,093.0 3,133.5 1,906.3 −          May19.7 7.6 530.7 957.2 722.3 − 1,013.1 1,542.9 407.8 2,263.6 3,100.7 3,142.8 1,926.0 −          June
19.7 7.9 531.9 925.0 735.6 − 950.3 1,600.3 411.4 2,271.3 3,104.7 3,148.2 1,938.3 −          July
20.3 7.6 529.4 944.3 757.0 − 980.7 1,826.9 417.2 2,297.9 3,135.9 3,182.8 1,952.6 −          Aug.22.3 7.3 533.9 927.2 755.2 − 990.3 1,762.1 422.1 2,298.5 3,131.2 3,181.0 1,954.1 −          Sep.
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to three months (excluding central govern ments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to two years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the over two years and at agreed notice of over three months, debt securities w ith
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two maturities of over two years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
November 2019
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2017         July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2,076.1 595.3 0.0 1,136.3 229.8 379.4 1,169.2 2,900.8
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 639.0 5.5 768.6 0.3 2,150.2 611.4 0.0 1,142.5 181.8 385.1 1,242.7 2,996.7
         Oct. 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2,239.2 648.1 0.0 1,142.8 218.3 383.9 1,253.3 3,044.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 634.5 3.0 763.7 0.2 2,333.5 682.5 0.0 1,146.6 188.5 407.6 1,309.7 3,138.8
2018         Jan. 635.7 2.9 760.6 0.2 2,398.2 689.2 0.0 1,158.2 188.1 487.0 1,275.2 3,122.5
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 630.9 1.5 760.5 0.0 2,435.5 686.3 0.0 1,148.2 203.6 474.9 1,315.6 3,150.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 627.1 1.9 759.5 0.1 2,476.8 668.0 0.0 1,159.0 247.5 495.6 1,295.3 3,122.3
         June 625.2 1.8 757.3 0.1 2,519.9 659.5 0.0 1,170.4 218.0 502.5 1,353.9 3,183.8
         July 635.1 2.1 744.2 0.1 2,558.4 652.2 0.0 1,183.6 263.4 533.8 1,306.9 3,142.6
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 637.5 3.0 739.9 0.1 2,589.7 671.2 0.0 1,192.2 239.1 519.1 1,348.7 3,212.0
         Oct. 625.2 6.9 727.8 0.1 2,622.8 631.8 0.0 1,194.3 283.1 504.4 1,369.0 3,195.1
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 625.1 6.8 726.4 0.1 2,642.3 635.9 0.0 1,202.4 240.2 542.9 1,379.4 3,217.7
2019         Jan. 655.8 7.9 723.8 0.1 2,652.8 640.0 0.0 1,218.8 231.3 618.2 1,332.1 3,190.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 665.5 6.0 723.1 0.1 2,645.8 637.6 0.0 1,209.2 257.3 571.4 1,364.8 3,211.7
         Apr. 678.6 5.7 720.3 0.1 2,635.9 619.6 0.0 1,215.8 270.5 555.6 1,379.0 3,214.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 689.7 5.5 718.6 0.4 2,630.6 601.9 0.0 1,228.2 248.2 561.9 1,404.6 3,234.7
         July 710.3 4.6 700.1 0.0 2,620.4 570.8 0.0 1,240.8 295.9 592.2 1,335.7 3,147.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 720.2 3.0 692.5 0.0 2,612.4 555.7 0.0 1,251.1 268.5 621.2 1,331.5 3,138.3
         Oct. 758.5 2.0 668.5 0.0 2,608.7 456.6 0.0 1,252.7 298.6 641.3 1,388.5 3,097.8
Deutsche Bundesbank
2017         July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 155.2 0.3 94.9 0.0 463.2 165.5 0.0 269.9 52.4 − 192.6 418.5 853.9
         Oct. 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 154.2 0.5 94.8 0.0 501.4 187.5 0.0 270.3 56.0 − 218.6 455.8 913.6
2018         Jan. 155.5 0.9 93.3 0.0 514.7 204.4 0.0 272.8 54.9 − 192.2 424.5 901.7
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 151.5 0.6 93.4 0.0 522.9 207.9 0.0 271.0 56.8 − 221.3 453.9 932.8
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 150.7 1.1 93.3 0.0 530.6 190.8 0.0 273.8 61.1 − 191.3 440.9 905.5
         June 150.1 1.1 93.1 0.0 540.6 200.3 0.0 277.4 59.2 − 217.9 466.0 943.6
         July 151.9 0.4 91.8 0.0 547.6 196.8 0.0 280.0 69.4 − 194.1 439.6 916.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 152.1 0.4 91.5 0.0 556.2 192.9 0.0 282.0 65.2 − 178.9 439.0 913.9
         Oct. 148.1 0.5 88.5 0.0 563.5 160.0 0.0 282.6 81.3 − 183.4 460.0 902.6
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 146.9 0.6 88.1 0.0 570.0 148.0 0.0 283.6 69.6 − 185.2 489.5 921.2
2019         Jan. 155.8 1.7 87.6 0.1 570.4 153.1 0.0 293.4 60.5 − 144.9 453.7 900.1
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 158.3 0.6 87.6 0.0 569.5 163.3 0.0 294.3 49.3 − 157.0 466.0 923.7
         Apr. 160.8 0.6 86.7 0.0 563.7 172.5 0.0 296.1 61.2 − 199.4 481.6 950.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 163.6 0.6 86.1 0.0 565.2 166.3 0.0 299.6 58.0 − 213.6 505.3 971.1
         July 169.4 0.7 85.3 0.0 563.1 150.1 0.0 303.0 65.7 − 175.0 474.5 927.7
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 172.5 0.5 84.9 0.0 562.7 150.1 0.0 305.6 57.6 − 157.6 464.9 920.6
         Oct. 182.8 0.4 82.8 0.0 560.0 151.5 0.0 306.5 70.8 − 159.4 456.6 914.7
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
November 2019
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3 2017          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 17.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 74.1 + 16.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 48.0 + 5.7 + 73.5 + 95.9          Sep.
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 94.3 + 34.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 29.8 + 23.7 + 56.4 + 94.6          Dec.
+ 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 64.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 11.6 − 0.4 + 79.4 − 34.5 − 16.3 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 37.3 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 10.0 + 15.5 − 12.1 + 40.4 + 27.6          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 3.8 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 41.3 − 18.3 + 0.0 + 10.8 + 43.9 + 20.7 − 20.3 − 27.8          May
− 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 43.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 11.4 − 29.5 + 6.9 + 58.6 + 61.5          June
+ 9.9 + 0.3 − 13.1 + 0.0 + 38.5 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 13.2 + 45.4 + 31.3 − 47.0 − 41.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 2.4 + 0.9 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 31.3 + 19.0 + 0.0 + 8.6 − 24.3 − 14.7 + 41.8 + 69.4          Sep.
− 12.3 + 3.9 − 12.1 + 0.0 + 33.1 − 39.4 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 44.0 − 14.7 + 20.3 − 16.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 19.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 − 42.9 + 38.5 + 10.4 + 22.6          Dec.
+ 30.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 16.4 − 8.9 + 75.3 − 47.3 − 26.8 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 9.7 − 1.9 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 9.6 + 26.0 − 46.8 + 32.7 + 20.8          Mar.
+ 13.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 18.0 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 13.2 − 15.8 + 14.2 + 2.7          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 11.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 17.7 + 0.0 + 12.4 − 22.3 + 6.3 + 25.6 + 20.3          June
+ 20.6 − 0.9 − 18.5 − 0.4 − 10.2 − 31.1 + 0.0 + 12.6 + 47.7 + 30.3 − 68.9 − 87.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 9.9 − 1.6 − 7.6 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 15.1 + 0.0 + 10.3 − 27.4 + 29.0 − 4.2 − 9.1          Sep.
+ 38.3 − 1.0 − 24.0 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 99.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 30.1 + 20.1 + 57.0 − 40.5          Oct.
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6 2017          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 4.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 15.4 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 9.0 + 5.8 + 2.1          Sep.
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 16.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 9.9 − 21.0 + 33.1 + 50.4          Dec.
+ 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 13.3 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.1 + 26.4 − 31.3 − 11.9 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.2 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 1.9 − 29.1 + 29.4 + 31.1          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 − 17.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 4.2 + 30.0 − 13.0 − 27.3          May
− 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 10.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 3.6 − 1.8 − 26.6 + 25.1 + 38.1          June
+ 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 10.2 + 23.9 − 26.4 − 27.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 4.2 + 15.2 − 0.6 − 2.5          Sep.
− 4.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 32.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 16.1 − 4.5 + 21.1 − 11.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.6 − 12.0 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 11.7 − 1.8 + 29.5 + 18.5          Dec.
+ 8.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 + 9.7 − 9.2 + 40.2 − 35.9 − 21.1 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 11.2 − 12.0 + 12.3 + 23.6          Mar.
+ 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 12.0 − 42.5 + 15.6 + 26.5          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 6.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.2 − 14.2 + 23.7 + 21.0          June
+ 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 7.6 + 38.6 − 30.7 − 43.5          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 8.1 + 17.4 − 9.6 − 7.1          Sep.
+ 10.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 13.2 − 1.8 − 8.3 − 5.9          Oct.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
November 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claims
external loans residents with banks, arising from
As at Gold and other denominated security the credit
reporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
date assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2019 Apr.               12 4,701.8 402.2 342.2 80.5 261.7 19.4 16.5 16.5 −
                              19 4,707.9 402.1 343.5 80.5 263.0 19.3 19.6 19.6 −
                              26 4,697.6 402.1 344.6 80.5 264.1 18.5 18.1 18.1 −
         May                 3 4,683.9 402.1 344.1 80.5 263.7 19.0 19.3 19.3 −
                              10 4,685.4 402.1 344.1 80.6 263.6 19.3 18.4 18.4 −
                              17 4,684.9 402.1 344.5 80.6 263.9 18.6 16.6 16.6 −
                              24 4,692.6 402.1 345.6 80.6 265.0 20.1 19.4 19.4 −
                              31 4,686.0 402.1 344.8 80.6 264.2 19.2 18.3 18.3 −
         June                 7 4,690.4 402.1 344.8 80.6 264.2 20.1 23.7 23.7 −
                              14 4,681.4 402.1 345.9 80.6 265.3 20.4 20.8 20.8 −
                              21 4,682.7 402.1 344.4 80.5 263.9 20.4 20.8 20.8 −
                              28 4,692.6 431.8 340.4 79.6 260.8 20.4 21.0 21.0 −
         July                 5 4,677.5 431.8 339.0 79.6 259.5 21.0 20.6 20.6 −
                              12 4,684.4 431.9 341.1 79.6 261.6 20.3 20.9 20.9 −
                              19 4,688.2 431.9 345.2 80.5 264.7 20.2 21.6 21.6 −
                              26 4,685.7 431.9 347.0 80.6 266.4 20.5 19.7 19.7 −
2019 Aug.                 2 4,679.2 431.9 347.7 80.6 267.1 18.8 20.0 20.0 −
                                9 4,677.8 431.9 347.3 80.6 266.8 19.3 19.0 19.0 −
                              16 4,676.1 431.9 347.1 80.6 266.5 18.5 21.6 21.6 −
                              23 4,681.0 431.9 347.6 80.6 267.0 18.6 21.7 21.7 −
                              30 4,683.7 431.9 347.9 80.6 267.3 19.5 22.5 22.5 −
         Sep.                 6 4,681.6 431.9 346.5 80.6 265.9 19.0 25.3 25.3 −
                              13 4,674.6 431.9 345.9 80.6 265.4 20.3 21.8 21.8 −
                              20 4,663.0 431.9 342.2 80.5 261.7 20.5 20.2 20.2 −
                              27 4,638.1 431.9 341.9 80.5 261.4 21.5 18.6 18.6 −
         Oct.                 4 4,695.1 474.1 357.5 82.4 275.1 19.0 18.9 18.9 −
                              11 4,692.3 474.1 358.9 82.4 276.6 18.4 17.2 17.2 −
                              18 4,687.1 474.1 357.2 82.4 274.9 18.5 17.5 17.5 −
                              25 4,680.9 474.1 355.7 82.4 273.4 20.2 17.0 17.0 −
         Nov.                 1 4,676.3 474.1 356.3 82.4 273.9 19.3 16.4 16.4 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 Apr.               12 1,760.4 125.3 53.6 20.9 32.7 0.0 0.9 0.9 −
                              19 1,773.9 125.3 53.3 20.9 32.4 0.0 4.1 4.1 −
                              26 1,787.4 125.3 53.6 20.9 32.7 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
         May                 3 1,786.4 125.2 53.5 20.9 32.7 0.0 3.2 3.2 −
                              10 1,772.4 125.2 53.6 20.8 32.8 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
                              17 1,785.1 125.2 53.2 20.8 32.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 −
                              24 1,788.8 125.2 53.4 20.8 32.6 0.0 3.5 3.5 −
                              31 1,813.2 125.2 53.5 20.8 32.7 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
         June                 7 1,805.8 125.2 53.4 20.8 32.6 0.0 6.8 6.8 −
                              14 1,778.2 125.2 53.9 20.8 33.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 −
                              21 1,764.8 125.2 53.3 20.8 32.5 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
                              28 1,818.3 125.2 53.2 20.8 32.4 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
         July                 5 1,751.7 134.5 52.9 20.6 32.3 0.0 2.3 2.3 −
                              12 1,754.5 134.5 53.1 20.6 32.5 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
                              19 1,765.7 134.5 54.1 20.8 33.3 0.0 3.8 3.8 −
                              26 1,736.3 134.5 54.4 20.8 33.6 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
2019 Aug.                 2 1,756.5 134.5 53.6 20.8 32.8 0.0 2.9 2.9 −
                                9 1,756.1 134.5 53.3 20.7 32.5 0.0 1.2 1.2 −
                              16 1,768.1 134.5 53.3 20.7 32.6 0.0 3.4 3.4 −
                              23 1,764.5 134.5 53.6 20.8 32.8 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
                              30 1,779.5 134.5 54.0 20.8 33.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
         Sep.                 6 1,761.8 134.5 53.4 20.7 32.7 0.0 6.1 6.1 −
                              13 1,754.7 134.5 53.2 20.7 32.5 0.0 3.2 3.2 −
                              20 1,767.6 134.5 52.7 20.7 31.9 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
                              27 1,768.2 134.5 52.6 20.7 31.8 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
         Oct.                 4 1,768.6 147.6 55.3 21.2 34.1 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
                              11 1,758.7 147.6 55.0 21.2 33.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
                              18 1,763.7 147.6 54.6 21.2 33.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 −
                              25 1,737.7 147.6 54.5 21.2 33.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
         Nov.                 1 1,710.2 147.6 54.6 21.2 33.4 0.0 0.5 0.5 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrum ents are valued at the
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB. 
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
November 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for governmentfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    As atopera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
724.1 5.3 718.7 − − 0.1 − 39.9 2,873.0 2,634.9 238.1 23.9 260.7 2019 Apr.                12
727.8 5.4 718.7 − − 3.7 − 39.0 2,873.6 2,635.8 237.8 23.9 259.1                               19
724.7 6.0 718.6 − − 0.1 − 39.2 2,869.4 2,633.7 235.7 23.9 257.1                               26
724.3 5.7 718.6 − − − − 38.2 2,857.9 2,624.8 233.1 23.9 255.0          May                  3
724.0 5.4 718.6 − − − − 39.5 2,859.5 2,628.1 231.5 23.9 254.5                               10
724.0 5.4 718.6 − − − − 36.7 2,862.1 2,631.2 230.8 23.9 256.5                               17
723.5 4.9 718.6 − − 0.0 − 39.2 2,864.0 2,634.3 229.7 23.9 254.7                               24
724.9 6.1 718.7 − − 0.1 − 37.6 2,858.5 2,628.9 229.7 23.9 256.6                               31
724.0 5.3 718.7 − − − − 36.0 2,859.5 2,630.0 229.6 23.9 256.4          June                  7
724.7 6.0 718.7 − − − − 31.3 2,854.2 2,624.9 229.2 23.9 258.2                               14
724.9 6.2 718.7 − − 0.0 − 42.3 2,852.8 2,625.0 227.9 23.9 251.1                               21
699.1 6.4 692.6 − − 0.0 − 47.6 2,849.1 2,620.3 228.8 23.4 259.9                               28
697.7 5.1 692.6 − − − − 42.0 2,843.6 2,615.6 228.0 23.4 258.3          July                  5
695.6 2.9 692.6 − − − − 40.4 2,846.8 2,619.9 226.9 23.4 264.1                               12
695.5 2.9 692.6 − − − − 39.7 2,841.9 2,616.1 225.8 23.4 268.9                               19
695.6 2.9 692.6 − − 0.0 − 38.7 2,843.4 2,617.9 225.5 23.4 265.6                               26
696.2 3.6 692.6 − − 0.0 − 42.3 2,832.5 2,610.5 221.9 23.4 266.5 2019 Aug.                  2
696.0 3.4 692.6 − − − − 41.5 2,833.2 2,612.2 221.0 23.4 266.2                                 9
695.6 3.0 692.6 − − 0.0 − 39.6 2,834.1 2,613.0 221.2 23.4 264.3                               16
695.6 3.0 692.6 − − 0.0 − 36.0 2,835.5 2,613.7 221.7 23.4 270.8                               23
695.7 3.3 692.3 − − − − 35.1 2,835.5 2,614.2 221.3 23.4 272.3                               30
694.7 2.3 692.3 − − 0.0 − 35.7 2,833.0 2,612.6 220.3 23.4 272.2          Sep.                  6
694.7 2.3 692.3 − − 0.1 − 36.4 2,831.9 2,611.1 220.9 23.4 268.3                               13
694.3 2.0 692.3 − − − − 35.5 2,831.2 2,609.9 221.3 23.4 263.9                               20
666.6 2.8 663.8 − − 0.0 − 34.1 2,833.3 2,612.4 220.9 23.4 266.7                               27
665.6 1.8 663.8 − − − − 31.0 2,829.8 2,609.1 220.7 23.4 275.7          Oct.                  4
666.1 2.3 663.8 − − 0.0 − 30.0 2,830.7 2,609.9 220.7 23.4 273.6                               11
665.7 1.9 663.8 − − 0.1 − 30.8 2,827.3 2,606.5 220.8 23.4 272.6                               18
664.9 1.1 663.8 − − 0.0 − 31.9 2,820.4 2,604.7 215.7 23.4 273.3                               25
665.8 2.2 663.6 − − 0.0 − 33.9 2,817.1 2,602.0 215.1 23.4 270.0          Nov.                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
86.7 0.5 86.2 − − 0.1 − 6.9 560.7 560.7 − 4.4 922.0 2019 Apr.                12
86.8 0.7 86.2 − − 0.0 − 7.6 562.1 562.1 − 4.4 930.2                               19
86.9 0.6 86.1 − − 0.1 − 7.5 563.1 563.1 − 4.4 944.7                               26
86.7 0.5 86.1 − − − − 7.4 563.8 563.8 − 4.4 942.2          May                  3
86.7 0.5 86.1 − − − − 6.8 564.8 564.8 − 4.4 929.1                               10
86.8 0.6 86.1 − − − − 6.8 565.5 565.5 − 4.4 942.8                               17
86.7 0.5 86.1 − − 0.0 − 7.1 566.6 566.6 − 4.4 941.7                               24
87.2 1.0 86.1 − − 0.1 − 6.7 567.5 567.5 − 4.4 965.5                               31
86.6 0.5 86.1 − − − − 8.8 568.0 568.0 − 4.4 952.5          June                  7
86.6 0.5 86.1 − − − − 7.3 564.4 564.4 − 4.4 933.3                               14
86.7 0.6 86.1 − − 0.0 − 7.7 565.3 565.3 − 4.4 919.4                               21
85.6 0.7 84.9 − − 0.0 − 7.8 565.7 565.7 − 4.4 973.5                               28
85.5 0.6 84.9 − − − − 6.8 559.5 559.5 − 4.4 905.7          July                  5
85.6 0.7 84.9 − − − − 8.4 561.1 561.1 − 4.4 904.9                               12
85.6 0.6 84.9 − − 0.0 − 9.4 561.7 561.7 − 4.4 912.3                               19
85.8 0.8 84.9 − − 0.0 − 4.9 562.4 562.4 − 4.4 888.3                               26
85.5 0.6 84.9 − − 0.0 − 6.7 562.2 562.2 − 4.4 906.7 2019 Aug.                  2
85.6 0.7 84.9 − − − − 5.3 562.8 562.8 − 4.4 909.2                                 9
85.4 0.5 84.9 − − 0.0 − 7.4 562.6 562.6 − 4.4 917.1                               16
85.4 0.5 84.9 − − 0.0 − 7.5 563.1 563.1 − 4.4 913.2                               23
85.2 0.4 84.8 − − − − 6.7 563.4 563.4 − 4.4 928.2                               30
85.1 0.2 84.8 − − 0.0 − 7.2 563.7 563.7 − 4.4 907.2          Sep.                  6
85.3 0.5 84.8 − − − − 8.2 560.6 560.6 − 4.4 905.3                               13
85.2 0.4 84.8 − − − − 7.0 561.0 561.0 − 4.4 919.7                               20
82.9 0.5 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.2 561.6 561.6 − 4.4 925.3                               27
82.9 0.5 82.4 − − − − 4.6 561.5 561.5 − 4.4 910.4          Oct.                  4
83.1 0.7 82.4 − − 0.0 − 4.5 557.7 557.7 − 4.4 906.0                               11
82.8 0.4 82.4 − − 0.1 − 5.5 558.0 558.0 − 4.4 910.0                               18
82.5 0.1 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.5 559.1 559.1 − 4.4 882.9                               25
82.8 0.3 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.4 560.9 560.9 − 4.4 854.0          Nov.                  1

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
November 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro
(covering Fine- area credit
the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
As at Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
date liabilities lation  1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 3
 
2019 Apr.               12 4,701.8 1,221.2 2,028.3 1,396.8 631.5 − − 0.0 6.6 − 382.4 253.9 128.5
                              19 4,707.9 1,229.4 1,980.3 1,393.9 586.4 − − 0.0 6.5 − 416.5 285.8 130.7
                              26 4,697.6 1,228.5 1,989.6 1,378.8 610.6 − − 0.1 5.4 − 401.5 271.4 130.1
         May                 3 4,683.9 1,229.0 2,037.6 1,403.9 633.7 − − 0.1 5.1 − 325.4 203.1 122.2
                              10 4,685.4 1,226.6 2,041.2 1,435.9 605.3 − − − 5.2 − 328.4 206.8 121.6
                              17 4,684.9 1,225.4 1,986.7 1,393.7 593.1 − − − 4.9 − 389.4 264.0 125.3
                              24 4,692.6 1,224.9 1,967.3 1,396.0 571.3 − − 0.0 6.2 − 428.1 301.8 126.4
                              31 4,686.0 1,231.2 2,014.5 1,388.5 626.0 − − − 6.1 − 364.7 239.7 125.0
         June                 7 4,690.4 1,234.1 2,043.5 1,441.1 602.4 − − 0.0 8.4 − 337.1 210.4 126.7
                              14 4,681.4 1,234.4 2,003.1 1,419.2 583.8 − − 0.0 5.8 − 372.6 241.5 131.1
                              21 4,682.7 1,234.9 1,911.4 1,341.7 569.7 − − 0.0 5.4 − 457.1 325.1 132.0
                              28 4,692.6 1,239.3 1,891.4 1,312.0 579.4 − − 0.0 6.0 − 410.2 278.0 132.2
         July                 5 4,677.5 1,243.1 1,935.4 1,350.4 585.0 − − 0.0 4.5 − 388.1 257.3 130.8
                              12 4,684.4 1,245.1 1,909.2 1,327.2 582.0 − − 0.0 5.9 − 413.6 283.7 129.9
                              19 4,688.2 1,245.2 1,845.2 1,293.5 551.7 − − 0.0 6.9 − 469.1 333.4 135.7
                              26 4,685.7 1,247.1 1,848.7 1,307.3 541.3 − − 0.0 3.8 − 463.7 329.6 134.0
2019 Aug.                 2 4,679.2 1,252.4 1,916.3 1,349.5 566.8 − − 0.0 4.5 − 380.2 245.4 134.8
                                9 4,677.8 1,252.6 1,907.1 1,350.0 557.1 − − 0.0 4.0 − 382.2 251.6 130.6
                              16 4,676.1 1,253.9 1,865.8 1,323.6 542.2 − − 0.0 5.6 − 413.1 279.6 133.5
                              23 4,681.0 1,249.2 1,836.9 1,299.2 537.7 − − 0.0 5.6 − 450.9 316.0 134.9
                              30 4,683.7 1,250.8 1,873.2 1,318.4 554.7 − − 0.0 5.9 − 415.3 278.1 137.2
         Sep.                 6 4,681.6 1,251.6 1,916.9 1,335.6 581.2 − − 0.0 6.0 − 376.1 238.3 137.8
                              13 4,674.6 1,250.7 1,894.7 1,337.7 557.0 − − 0.0 5.2 − 406.2 264.4 141.8
                              20 4,663.0 1,249.4 1,859.4 1,394.9 464.4 − − 0.0 6.5 − 446.4 308.8 137.7
                              27 4,638.1 1,252.2 1,828.5 1,369.1 459.5 − − − 3.8 − 447.2 312.0 135.2
         Oct.                 4 4,695.1 1,254.9 1,863.6 1,407.1 456.5 − − − 5.4 − 406.3 268.6 137.7
                              11 4,692.3 1,254.7 1,851.9 1,393.1 458.8 − − − 4.2 − 420.4 280.6 139.8
                              18 4,687.1 1,254.2 1,832.5 1,393.8 438.7 − − − 4.5 − 447.5 308.0 139.5
                              25 4,680.9 1,253.3 1,846.2 1,393.6 452.5 − − − 5.1 − 433.0 294.8 138.2
         Nov.                 1 4,676.3 1,258.6 1,900.4 1,662.5 237.9 − − − 5.4 − 372.2 224.4 147.8
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 Apr.               12 1,760.4 298.1 675.4 496.0 179.3 − − 0.0 3.5 − 92.7 44.6 48.1
                              19 1,773.9 301.4 654.9 487.2 167.7 − − 0.0 3.3 − 112.1 62.9 49.2
                              26 1,787.4 301.1 657.4 482.5 174.9 − − 0.0 2.9 − 121.5 72.2 49.3
         May                 3 1,786.4 298.4 687.5 504.6 182.8 − − − 2.5 − 82.5 38.7 43.8
                              10 1,772.4 298.5 665.4 499.5 165.9 − − − 2.4 − 90.7 47.4 43.3
                              17 1,785.1 299.0 654.3 498.6 155.7 − − − 2.3 − 116.4 70.8 45.5
                              24 1,788.8 299.8 670.9 520.9 150.0 − − − 3.8 − 112.2 68.7 43.4
                              31 1,813.2 298.8 694.7 518.8 175.9 − − − 3.5 − 102.4 59.8 42.6
         June                 7 1,805.8 300.7 691.1 523.6 167.5 − − − 5.2 − 94.7 53.1 41.6
                              14 1,778.2 301.1 641.0 490.8 150.2 − − − 3.7 − 118.8 76.1 42.7
                              21 1,764.8 301.9 610.9 472.2 138.6 − − 0.0 3.1 − 130.5 88.7 41.8
                              28 1,818.3 300.8 659.5 485.2 174.3 − − 0.0 3.6 − 109.3 65.2 44.1
         July                 5 1,751.7 302.6 638.4 475.1 163.4 − − 0.0 2.2 − 79.5 38.2 41.3
                              12 1,754.5 304.3 621.5 469.4 152.1 − − 0.0 3.4 − 94.7 52.4 42.3
                              19 1,765.7 305.2 613.2 467.5 145.7 − − 0.0 4.3 − 108.8 67.8 41.0
                              26 1,736.3 306.0 594.1 462.6 131.5 − − 0.0 0.9 − 103.8 62.9 40.9
2019 Aug.                 2 1,756.5 304.8 631.0 474.2 156.8 − − 0.0 1.9 − 85.3 42.7 42.7
                                9 1,756.1 306.1 625.1 476.0 149.1 − − 0.0 1.1 − 86.9 46.8 40.1
                              16 1,768.1 307.1 606.9 463.4 143.4 − − 0.0 2.2 − 103.0 63.4 39.6
                              23 1,764.5 307.3 598.5 456.0 142.5 − − 0.0 2.7 − 109.9 67.7 42.2
                              30 1,779.5 303.6 627.8 462.3 165.4 − − 0.0 2.9 − 95.5 52.0 43.5
         Sep.                 6 1,761.8 304.6 618.7 457.4 161.3 − − 0.0 2.4 − 92.1 51.3 40.8
                              13 1,754.7 305.5 607.4 460.0 147.4 − − 0.0 2.5 − 106.6 65.9 40.7
                              20 1,767.6 306.2 611.6 455.5 156.1 − − 0.0 2.9 − 124.8 85.3 39.5
                              27 1,768.2 308.6 614.2 455.2 159.0 − − − 1.5 − 126.8 82.2 44.5
         Oct.                 4 1,768.6 305.9 616.5 467.4 149.1 − − − 2.0 − 105.4 60.0 45.4
                              11 1,758.7 306.3 617.3 463.1 154.1 − − − 1.7 − 99.0 54.8 44.2
                              18 1,763.7 307.2 602.4 457.6 144.8 − − − 1.3 − 121.9 76.1 45.9
                              25 1,737.7 307.4 592.8 447.2 145.6 − − − 1.9 − 114.1 70.0 44.1
         Nov.                 1 1,710.2 305.6 597.2 533.4 63.8 − − − 1.7 − 83.2 35.4 47.8
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8%
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1In accordance with the accounting value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
November 2019
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to  area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    As atdenominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    reporting credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
1 accounts reserves    date liabilities  2 
Eurosystem 3
 
230.5 5.9 11.7 11.7 − 57.5 253.3 − 397.3 107.2 2019 Apr.                12
239.6 7.1 10.9 10.9 − 57.5 255.6 − 397.3 107.2                               19
236.9 6.7 11.5 11.5 − 57.5 255.5 − 397.3 107.2                               26
248.5 5.9 12.2 12.2 − 57.5 258.3 − 397.3 107.2          May                  3
242.7 6.7 12.6 12.6 − 57.5 259.9 − 397.3 107.2                               10
240.5 6.8 11.4 11.4 − 57.5 257.8 − 397.3 107.2                               17
225.9 8.2 11.9 11.9 − 57.5 258.0 − 397.3 107.2                               24
234.8 6.5 11.7 11.7 − 57.5 254.4 − 397.3 107.2                               31
235.1 7.2 11.8 11.8 − 57.5 251.3 − 397.3 107.2          June                  7
232.3 7.8 12.4 12.4 − 57.5 251.0 − 397.3 107.2                               14
237.3 7.5 11.3 11.3 − 57.5 255.7 − 397.3 107.2                               21
277.4 5.4 10.4 10.4 − 56.8 262.8 − 425.7 107.2                               28
241.3 5.8 10.2 10.2 − 56.8 259.4 − 425.7 107.2          July                  5
242.8 6.7 10.7 10.7 − 56.8 260.7 − 425.7 107.2                               12
248.3 8.1 11.7 11.7 − 56.8 264.0 − 425.7 107.2                               19
245.8 10.3 11.4 11.4 − 56.8 265.3 − 425.7 107.2                               26
247.0 10.4 10.5 10.5 − 56.8 268.1 − 425.7 107.2 2019 Aug.                  2
254.0 10.8 10.5 10.5 − 56.8 266.8 − 425.7 107.2                                 9
263.1 10.2 10.3 10.3 − 56.8 264.4 − 425.7 107.2                               16
261.6 9.7 11.6 11.6 − 56.8 265.9 − 425.7 107.2                               23
260.9 10.2 11.4 11.4 − 56.8 266.4 − 425.7 107.2                               30
250.5 10.2 10.9 10.9 − 56.8 269.7 − 425.7 107.2          Sep.                  6
238.6 10.4 11.1 11.1 − 56.8 267.9 − 425.7 107.2                               13
225.8 7.4 10.6 10.6 − 56.8 267.8 − 425.7 107.2                               20
226.9 7.2 10.4 10.4 − 56.8 272.2 − 425.7 107.2                               27
230.1 7.4 11.1 11.1 − 58.1 272.8 − 478.3 107.2          Oct.                  4
227.7 8.5 11.2 11.2 − 58.1 270.1 − 478.3 107.2                               11
217.4 7.6 10.7 10.7 − 58.1 269.1 − 478.3 107.2                               18
208.9 8.4 9.6 9.6 − 58.1 272.7 − 478.3 107.2                               25
206.9 8.7 8.9 8.9 − 58.1 271.5 − 478.3 107.2          Nov.                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
120.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 29.7 396.9 123.1 5.7 2019 Apr.                12
131.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 29.9 396.9 123.1 5.7                               19
133.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 30.0 396.9 123.1 5.7                               26
140.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 30.1 400.8 123.1 5.7          May                  3
140.3 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 30.2 400.8 123.1 5.7                               10
138.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 30.3 400.8 123.1 5.7                               17
127.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 30.4 400.8 123.1 5.7                               24
134.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 30.5 404.8 123.1 5.7                               31
134.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 30.7 404.8 123.1 5.7          June                  7
133.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.9 31.0 404.8 123.1 5.7                               14
138.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.9 31.1 404.8 123.1 5.7                               21
162.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 31.3 407.8 123.1 5.7                               28
136.6 0.0 − − − 14.7 32.1 407.8 132.0 5.7          July                  5
137.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.7 32.1 407.8 132.0 5.7                               12
140.9 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.7 32.1 407.8 132.0 5.7                               19
137.7 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.7 32.2 407.8 132.0 5.7                               26
136.6 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.7 32.5 411.4 132.0 5.7 2019 Aug.                  2
140.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 32.5 411.4 132.0 5.7                                 9
151.8 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.7 32.6 411.4 132.0 5.7                               16
148.6 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.7 32.7 411.4 132.0 5.7                               23
145.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.7 32.7 417.2 132.0 5.7                               30
140.8 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.7 32.7 417.2 132.0 5.7          Sep.                  6
129.8 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.7 32.7 417.2 132.0 5.7                               13
119.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.7 33.0 417.2 132.0 5.7                               20
114.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.7 33.1 417.2 132.0 5.7                               27
115.9 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.1 32.6 422.1 146.6 5.7          Oct.                  4
111.8 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.1 32.8 422.1 146.6 5.7                               11
108.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 32.9 422.1 146.6 5.7                               18
99.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 33.1 422.1 146.6 5.7                               25
95.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 33.2 426.3 146.6 5.7          Nov.                  1
 
basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/li ability related to bank-
banknotes issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note issue“. 2For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DEM banknotes still in circu-
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according lation. 3 Source: ECB. 
to the aforementioned accounting procedure and the value of euro banknotes put

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2017         Dec. 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018         Jan. 7,817.2 29.2 2,296.1 1,891.0 1,624.5 266.5 405.1 280.3 124.9 3,813.9 3,407.5 2,930.5 2,622.5
         Feb. 7,790.8 29.6 2,298.1 1,892.3 1,627.0 265.2 405.9 280.6 125.2 3,814.1 3,406.5 2,938.1 2,633.4
         Mar. 7,746.6 35.1 2,254.6 1,852.5 1,585.3 267.1 402.1 274.9 127.2 3,814.9 3,410.8 2,946.8 2,644.4
         Apr. 7,781.1 33.8 2,300.8 1,892.1 1,625.1 267.0 408.7 280.6 128.0 3,818.5 3,417.4 2,956.1 2,650.7
         May 7,882.8 35.0 2,314.0 1,900.7 1,630.1 270.6 413.3 284.6 128.6 3,823.8 3,418.9 2,963.0 2,656.6
         June 7,804.7 35.0 2,266.6 1,853.0 1,584.7 268.2 413.6 285.5 128.1 3,832.7 3,430.8 2,979.9 2,672.2
         July 7,784.2 34.7 2,276.2 1,852.8 1,585.7 267.1 423.4 295.9 127.5 3,840.0 3,437.3 2,987.0 2,679.3
         Aug. 7,828.0 35.1 2,294.8 1,865.2 1,597.6 267.6 429.6 301.1 128.5 3,840.6 3,431.8 2,987.4 2,690.7
         Sep. 7,799.9 35.8 2,267.8 1,846.4 1,577.7 268.7 421.4 291.0 130.4 3,854.6 3,447.2 3,006.3 2,708.5
         Oct. 7,845.2 36.9 2,286.9 1,855.6 1,588.6 267.0 431.4 298.1 133.2 3,858.3 3,447.8 3,009.7 2,711.9
         Nov. 7,881.2 36.8 2,303.5 1,872.8 1,605.2 267.6 430.8 295.9 134.8 3,874.4 3,460.7 3,023.7 2,727.7
         Dec. 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 36.7 2,267.3 1,827.4 1,559.5 267.8 439.9 304.8 135.1 3,878.8 3,468.7 3,032.2 2,737.6
         Feb. 7,935.7 36.9 2,304.8 1,862.5 1,591.5 271.1 442.3 304.8 137.5 3,893.1 3,477.0 3,044.8 2,751.0
         Mar. 8,121.3 37.0 2,343.5 1,885.9 1,614.7 271.2 457.6 319.3 138.4 3,921.0 3,488.4 3,059.8 2,765.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 38.2 2,354.4 1,893.6 1,625.2 268.5 460.8 321.6 139.1 3,928.3 3,492.4 3,068.0 2,774.1
         May 8,280.9 37.9 2,376.8 1,919.0 1,648.5 270.5 457.8 317.9 139.9 3,944.5 3,509.1 3,085.5 2,790.5
         June 8,321.9 37.9 2,332.5 1,869.9 1,600.4 269.6 462.6 321.6 141.0 3,972.1 3,530.5 3,108.0 2,809.6
         July 8,372.1 37.4 2,311.4 1,845.2 1,575.0 270.2 466.2 324.2 142.0 3,984.9 3,539.6 3,114.5 2,815.1
         Aug. 8,645.5 38.3 2,327.7 1,857.2 1,589.6 267.6 470.5 327.6 142.9 4,009.7 3,554.6 3,127.0 2,827.3
         Sep. 8,551.1 38.0 2,305.3 1,835.9 1,569.5 266.4 469.4 325.9 143.5 4,019.4 3,562.6 3,139.4 2,839.6
 Changes 3
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 − 29.2 − 49.7 − 53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2018         Jan. 124.2 − 2.9 82.2 70.9 68.7 2.2 11.3 11.5 − 0.2 14.7 8.2 12.4 13.0
         Feb. 6.3 0.3 0.5 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.7 7.7 10.7
         Mar. − 37.4 5.5 − 42.9 − 39.5 − 41.4 1.9 − 3.4 − 5.3 2.0 2.7 5.6 10.1 12.3
         Apr. 28.9 − 1.3 45.6 39.7 39.9 − 0.2 5.9 5.1 0.9 4.0 7.1 9.8 6.3
         May 85.0 1.3 12.4 9.1 5.7 3.4 3.4 2.8 0.5 12.9 9.4 15.3 14.3
         June − 77.2 − 0.1 − 47.4 − 47.7 − 45.4 − 2.3 0.3 0.9 − 0.5 9.9 12.8 17.9 16.4
         July − 14.4 − 0.3 10.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 10.1 10.7 − 0.6 7.8 6.8 5.9 6.1
         Aug. 41.9 0.4 19.8 13.8 13.0 0.8 5.9 4.9 1.0 0.6 − 5.6 0.4 11.3
         Sep. − 30.4 0.8 − 27.3 − 18.9 − 19.9 1.0 − 8.4 − 10.4 1.9 14.2 15.9 19.2 18.2
         Oct. 36.4 1.1 15.0 8.5 10.3 − 1.8 6.5 6.1 0.4 3.8 0.5 3.4 3.2
         Nov. 38.5 − 0.1 17.2 17.6 16.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.0 1.6 16.7 13.4 14.4 16.1
         Dec. − 100.0 3.8 − 114.6 − 104.0 − 104.3 0.2 − 10.6 − 10.9 0.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 1.6 − 0.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 − 3.9 79.5 59.2 58.8 0.5 20.3 20.0 0.3 17.0 12.6 10.0 11.4
         Feb. 31.1 0.1 36.8 34.8 31.7 3.0 2.1 − 0.4 2.5 15.5 9.5 13.7 14.5
         Mar. 124.6 0.2 32.4 25.5 26.3 − 0.8 6.9 6.5 0.4 12.4 10.7 14.4 14.6
         Apr. 33.9 1.2 10.8 7.7 10.5 − 2.8 3.1 2.4 0.7 7.6 4.4 8.4 8.9
         May 124.6 − 0.3 22.1 25.4 23.2 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.9 0.7 16.3 16.3 17.4 16.2
         June 50.5 0.0 − 42.3 − 48.3 − 47.7 − 0.6 6.0 4.8 1.2 27.8 21.7 22.9 19.4
         July 49.8 − 0.5 − 23.0 − 25.4 − 26.0 0.6 2.4 1.5 0.9 12.1 9.1 6.8 5.6
         Aug. 265.9 0.8 14.8 11.4 14.2 − 2.8 3.4 2.7 0.7 23.9 14.6 12.3 11.9
         Sep. − 91.0 − 0.3 − 19.4 − 18.3 − 17.5 − 0.8 − 1.1 − 1.7 0.6 10.1 8.5 12.5 12.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro area
to non-banks in other Member States residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which: Secur- of which: Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017          Dec.
308.0 477.0 282.8 194.2 406.4 278.6 163.9 127.8 29.7 98.0 1,009.1 758.2 668.9 2018          Jan.
304.7 468.4 277.4 191.0 407.6 280.5 165.9 127.1 29.6 97.5 1,026.5 775.9 622.5          Feb.302.4 463.9 275.5 188.4 404.1 278.3 164.9 125.9 29.8 96.1 1,016.8 763.8 625.3          Mar.
305.4 461.2 276.2 185.0 401.2 275.1 165.1 126.0 29.9 96.2 1,009.2 757.3 618.9          Apr.
306.4 455.9 272.3 183.6 404.9 280.2 167.4 124.8 29.8 95.0 1,052.9 799.1 657.1          May307.7 450.8 270.0 180.8 402.0 278.4 166.4 123.6 29.9 93.7 1,032.5 777.4 637.9          June
307.7 450.3 270.8 179.5 402.7 281.2 169.9 121.5 29.7 91.8 1,028.8 770.8 604.5          July
296.8 444.3 266.4 178.0 408.9 286.1 173.1 122.8 29.7 93.1 1,021.0 762.2 636.6          Aug.297.8 440.9 263.4 177.5 407.4 283.7 171.7 123.6 29.6 94.0 1,028.7 770.3 613.1          Sep.
297.8 438.1 265.4 172.7 410.5 287.6 176.1 122.9 31.0 91.9 1,037.4 780.7 625.6          Oct.
296.0 437.0 264.5 172.5 413.7 290.8 177.8 122.9 30.9 92.1 1,032.1 777.3 634.5          Nov.297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2          Dec.
294.6 436.5 265.9 170.6 410.1 291.8 179.6 118.3 28.9 89.5 1,049.5 794.1 670.0 2019          Jan.
293.8 432.2 263.3 168.9 416.1 294.1 181.5 122.0 28.8 93.1 1,037.8 781.6 663.2          Feb.294.1 428.5 260.6 168.0 432.6 311.4 197.8 121.2 28.9 92.4 1,084.1 826.7 735.7          Mar.
293.8 424.5 260.8 163.7 435.9 315.7 202.0 120.2 29.6 90.5 1,099.5 840.3 734.2          Apr.
295.0 423.6 259.2 164.4 435.5 317.7 205.0 117.8 29.4 88.4 1,101.0 839.1 820.6          May298.5 422.5 257.7 164.7 441.6 320.9 207.2 120.7 29.0 91.7 1,103.8 841.8 875.6          June
299.4 425.0 260.2 164.8 445.3 322.2 209.5 123.1 29.0 94.1 1,114.6 851.7 923.8          July
299.7 427.6 260.2 167.4 455.1 330.1 216.8 125.0 28.9 96.1 1,122.3 857.7 1,147.5          Aug.299.8 423.1 255.1 168.1 456.8 331.9 219.0 124.9 28.8 96.1 1,106.7 841.9 1,081.7          Sep.
Changes 3
− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
− 9.8 − 46.2 − 19.1 − 27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 − 11.4 − 1.5 − 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
− 0.6 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 6.5 7.7 6.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.2 29.4 24.6 0.7 2018          Jan.
− 3.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 − 3.3 1.0 1.7 1.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 10.6 11.1 − 5.4          Feb.− 2.2 − 4.5 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 5.5 − 8.2 2.8          Mar.
3.5 − 2.6 0.7 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 3.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 13.2 − 11.9 − 6.2          Apr.
0.9 − 5.8 − 4.3 − 1.5 3.5 4.6 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 30.9 29.9 27.5          May1.5 − 5.0 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 20.4 − 21.8 − 19.2          June
− 0.2 0.9 2.2 − 1.3 0.9 3.1 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 31.6          July
− 10.9 − 6.0 − 4.5 − 1.5 6.2 4.9 3.1 1.3 0.0 1.2 − 11.0 − 11.5 32.1          Aug.
1.1 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.6 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 5.4 5.9 − 23.5          Sep.
0.2 − 2.9 1.9 − 4.8 3.3 4.5 4.1 − 1.2 1.4 − 2.6 4.0 3.5 12.6          Oct.
− 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 3.3 3.3 1.5 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 − 4.0 − 2.2 8.8          Nov.
1.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 3.5 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.3 − 1.5 3.5 3.5 16.1          Dec.
− 1.4 2.6 2.4 0.2 4.4 5.1 3.2 − 0.8 0.3 − 1.0 16.5 15.8 19.8 2019          Jan.
− 0.8 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 1.7 6.0 2.4 2.2 3.7 − 0.0 3.7 − 14.5 − 15.1 − 6.9          Feb.− 0.2 − 3.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 1.7 3.0 2.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 1.2 16.1 17.2 63.6          Mar.
− 0.4 − 4.0 0.2 − 4.2 3.1 4.2 4.3 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 15.8 14.1 − 1.5          Apr.
1.2 − 1.0 − 1.7 0.7 − 0.1 2.3 3.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 0.0 − 2.8 86.5          May3.5 − 1.2 − 1.5 0.3 6.1 3.4 2.7 2.6 − 0.4 3.1 10.5 9.9 54.5          June
1.2 2.2 2.5 − 0.2 3.0 1.3 2.1 1.7 − 0.0 1.8 4.4 4.1 56.8          July
0.4 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 9.3 7.5 7.0 1.8 − 0.1 1.9 2.6 1.2 223.7          Aug.0.1 − 4.0 − 4.7 0.7 1.6 1.7 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 15.6 − 15.9 − 65.8          Sep.
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home Member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country States Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2017         Dec. 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018         Jan. 7,817.2 1,249.4 1,060.8 188.6 3,539.8 3,419.1 1,944.5 892.2 276.8 582.4 539.7 110.6 46.4
         Feb. 7,790.8 1,246.9 1,058.2 188.8 3,536.8 3,416.5 1,945.4 888.9 273.3 582.1 540.4 109.7 47.1
         Mar. 7,746.6 1,238.1 1,057.5 180.6 3,537.7 3,413.3 1,944.1 888.1 274.7 581.2 539.9 115.3 48.7
         Apr. 7,781.1 1,233.9 1,053.5 180.4 3,551.3 3,430.7 1,967.4 882.9 270.2 580.4 539.6 108.8 46.7
         May 7,882.8 1,232.4 1,037.1 195.3 3,582.2 3,462.4 1,998.3 884.0 271.4 580.1 539.5 109.4 47.7
         June 7,804.7 1,224.7 1,035.7 189.0 3,582.9 3,463.7 1,991.4 893.1 281.1 579.2 539.1 109.0 44.0
         July 7,784.2 1,228.5 1,042.2 186.3 3,584.2 3,462.9 1,997.6 887.1 277.5 578.2 538.6 108.8 44.5
         Aug. 7,828.0 1,229.6 1,043.7 185.9 3,595.2 3,474.5 2,014.0 882.9 276.6 577.6 538.3 106.9 45.1
         Sep. 7,799.9 1,220.4 1,034.2 186.2 3,594.0 3,473.8 2,017.5 879.0 273.7 577.3 538.4 108.8 48.2
         Oct. 7,845.2 1,227.0 1,034.3 192.7 3,614.3 3,494.1 2,039.3 877.8 273.4 577.0 538.6 108.8 47.3
         Nov. 7,881.2 1,244.5 1,046.8 197.7 3,646.1 3,527.4 2,074.8 875.8 271.5 576.8 539.1 106.2 47.1
         Dec. 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 1,238.4 1,040.5 197.9 3,646.4 3,530.1 2,074.3 877.3 277.3 578.4 541.4 104.9 45.9
         Feb. 7,935.7 1,258.4 1,046.6 211.8 3,658.9 3,544.0 2,083.6 880.9 281.8 579.5 542.4 103.3 44.6
         Mar. 8,121.3 1,281.9 1,050.1 231.8 3,676.8 3,554.7 2,095.7 877.1 280.6 582.0 544.7 109.9 51.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 1,298.3 1,061.2 237.0 3,689.3 3,569.8 2,117.1 870.5 276.7 582.2 544.7 105.8 47.5
         May 8,280.9 1,291.2 1,057.1 234.1 3,721.9 3,599.3 2,147.3 869.5 277.3 582.5 544.4 108.1 50.1
         June 8,321.9 1,292.1 1,048.3 243.8 3,728.4 3,595.5 2,144.7 868.1 274.5 582.6 544.0 116.0 56.6
         July 8,372.1 1,291.9 1,055.1 236.8 3,728.8 3,605.7 2,160.6 863.3 271.9 581.8 543.4 110.3 51.1
         Aug. 8,645.5 1,306.3 1,062.2 244.1 3,754.1 3,626.8 2,182.9 863.7 276.0 580.2 542.2 114.6 54.3
         Sep. 8,551.1 1,283.3 1,038.3 244.9 3,745.4 3,618.4 2,179.8 859.6 273.9 579.0 541.5 114.8 55.7
 Changes 4
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 − 20.1 − 25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 − 18.8 − 6.5 − 4.3 1.2 − 4.3 2.3
2018         Jan. 124.2 17.6 13.1 4.5 12.2 9.1 8.7 0.9 3.2 − 0.5 0.2 2.4 4.0
         Feb. 6.3 − 3.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.5 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 0.2 0.4 − 1.1 0.7
         Mar. − 37.4 − 8.3 − 0.5 − 7.9 1.3 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 5.7 1.6
         Apr. 28.9 − 4.5 − 3.8 − 0.6 13.5 17.5 22.8 − 4.6 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 6.6 − 2.0
         May 85.0 − 3.5 − 17.3 13.9 29.2 30.2 29.9 0.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 0.9
         June − 77.2 − 7.8 − 1.5 − 6.3 0.7 1.2 − 6.9 9.0 9.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 3.8
         July − 14.4 4.7 7.2 − 2.5 1.8 − 0.4 6.5 − 5.9 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 41.9 2.0 2.6 − 0.6 10.7 11.3 16.1 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.0 0.6
         Sep. − 30.4 − 9.6 − 9.7 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 3.6 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 0.0 1.9 3.1
         Oct. 36.4 5.4 − 0.4 5.9 19.1 19.3 21.1 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.0
         Nov. 38.5 17.7 12.6 5.1 32.1 33.5 35.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.1 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.2
         Dec. − 100.0 − 30.3 − 24.8 − 5.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 1.3 − 3.1 − 4.2 1.7 2.0 − 1.7 − 2.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 24.8 18.9 6.0 3.6 3.0 − 1.2 4.4 10.1 − 0.2 0.3 0.4 1.0
         Feb. 31.1 19.6 5.6 13.9 12.0 13.3 9.0 3.2 4.1 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 − 1.4
         Mar. 124.6 19.3 2.7 16.6 15.7 9.5 11.1 − 4.1 − 1.4 2.5 2.2 5.7 6.3
         Apr. 33.9 16.4 11.2 5.2 12.6 15.1 21.4 − 6.6 − 3.9 0.2 0.1 − 4.1 − 4.3
         May 124.6 − 7.3 − 4.2 − 3.1 32.4 29.5 30.1 − 0.9 0.6 0.3 − 0.3 2.3 2.7
         June 50.5 2.1 − 8.2 10.3 7.3 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 2.8 0.2 − 0.4 7.9 6.6
         July 49.8 − 1.3 6.3 − 7.6 − 0.7 9.3 15.4 − 5.2 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 5.8 − 5.6
         Aug. 265.9 13.7 6.8 6.9 24.7 20.5 21.9 0.2 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 4.2 3.1
         Sep. − 91.0 − 20.5 − 21.4 0.8 − 8.8 − 8.9 − 3.1 − 4.5 − 2.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 0.6 1.4
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which: from Money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- repos with
of which: of which: central non-banks fund euro Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 201049.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 201663.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 201756.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017          Dec.
61.3 18.9 2.9 2.6 10.0 8.9 4.3 2.1 1,002.6 35.4 682.4 666.5 670.0 2018          Jan.
59.7 18.2 2.9 2.6 10.7 8.8 3.8 2.1 1,006.3 36.0 690.3 678.6 625.9          Feb.63.8 22.6 2.9 2.6 9.1 8.3 2.9 2.3 1,014.0 35.2 641.0 675.0 635.6          Mar.
59.2 18.0 2.9 2.5 11.7 8.4 2.4 2.2 1,016.6 34.7 672.9 677.3 624.6          Apr.
58.8 16.8 2.9 2.5 10.4 8.8 1.6 2.0 1,031.1 36.4 707.2 679.7 646.6          May62.2 21.7 2.9 2.5 10.2 9.3 1.3 2.1 1,022.2 33.7 670.8 680.2 620.5          June
61.5 19.0 2.9 2.5 12.4 10.0 1.8 2.0 1,016.9 33.1 681.9 682.2 586.7          July
58.9 16.4 2.8 2.5 13.9 10.6 1.2 2.0 1,021.2 35.0 690.5 684.5 603.8          Aug.57.8 17.4 2.8 2.5 11.5 9.2 1.3 2.0 1,034.7 33.9 681.7 687.2 578.7          Sep.
58.6 17.2 2.8 2.5 11.4 9.7 2.4 2.0 1,044.7 36.2 666.9 687.8 600.0          Oct.
56.3 15.0 2.8 2.5 12.5 10.0 1.3 2.4 1,048.3 34.6 643.3 688.1 607.3          Nov.56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7          Dec.
56.2 15.3 2.8 2.5 11.5 10.1 1.7 2.4 1,048.1 32.1 636.9 688.3 640.1 2019          Jan.
55.9 14.9 2.8 2.5 11.7 10.0 2.0 2.3 1,067.9 32.2 621.9 684.9 639.5          Feb.55.4 14.9 2.8 2.5 12.1 10.5 11.4 2.1 1,065.3 32.7 666.8 699.3 717.8          Mar.
55.5 15.0 2.8 2.5 13.7 11.2 12.5 2.0 1,060.0 32.1 698.4 696.3 697.8          Apr.
55.2 14.8 2.8 2.5 14.4 12.0 11.2 2.0 1,071.8 32.4 688.6 703.5 790.6          May56.6 16.1 2.8 2.5 17.0 14.0 12.9 2.0 1,071.1 33.1 676.3 706.6 832.5          June
56.4 15.6 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 13.9 2.1 1,075.3 33.4 667.9 709.9 882.4          July
57.5 17.4 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 16.9 2.2 1,072.7 33.9 676.2 713.0 1,103.9          Aug.56.4 14.9 2.7 2.4 12.2 10.9 18.0 2.3 1,077.8 35.7 671.4 718.8 1,034.1          Sep.
Changes 4
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
− 6.4 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 2.1 2.1 − 2.6 0.3 30.0 − 5.9 − 36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
− 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 15.8 − 2.2 84.0 − 17.5 11.0 2018          Jan.
− 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 5.0 10.8 − 1.0          Feb.
4.1 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 0.2 9.4 − 0.8 − 48.1 − 3.0 12.1          Mar.
− 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 28.0 1.7 − 8.4          Apr.
− 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 7.3 1.4 29.3 0.1 23.6          May
3.3 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.4 0.1 − 9.2 − 2.7 − 36.6 0.4 − 24.3          June
− 0.6 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.7 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 0.6 12.3 2.6 − 32.6          July
− 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 2.8 1.9 7.5 2.3 17.3          Aug.− 1.2 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 0.0 11.8 − 1.1 − 10.0 2.2 − 23.7          Sep.
0.8 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.1 5.5 2.2 − 18.1 − 0.7 24.1          Oct.
− 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.5 − 1.0 0.3 4.4 − 1.6 − 23.1 0.5 7.6          Nov.
0.5 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 0.5 − 0.6 0.0 − 12.7 − 2.6 − 66.2 8.0 4.7          Dec.
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.4 0.9 0.0 13.9 0.2 61.2 − 7.3 31.7 2019          Jan.
− 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 17.8 − 0.0 − 16.4 − 4.0 1.9          Feb.− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.6 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 0.4 15.8 11.6 68.4          Mar.
0.1 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 0.8 1.1 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.5 31.6 − 3.0 − 19.4          Apr.
− 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.0 11.8 0.2 − 10.4 7.2 92.3          May
1.4 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.5 2.0 1.7 0.0 3.4 0.9 − 8.2 4.8 39.5          June
− 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.0 − 4.2 − 2.8 1.0 0.1 1.0 0.2 − 11.7 2.2 59.2          July
1.1 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.1 0.1 − 5.4 0.4 5.8 2.3 221.7          Aug.
− 0.8 − 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 1.1 0.1 6.3 3.0 − 4.9 5.0 − 69.4          Sep.
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which: of which:
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2019         Apr. 1,578 8,205.5 546.2 2,470.0 1,981.4 485.0 4,236.8 385.1 3,178.3 0.5 665.2 113.2 839.3
         May 1,576 8,331.8 564.0 2,462.3 1,970.6 488.1 4,265.7 395.5 3,196.6 0.4 665.2 113.7 926.0
         June 1,572 8,371.8 523.0 2,471.9 1,978.5 489.2 4,283.3 405.3 3,197.4 0.5 672.2 113.5 980.1
         July 1,567 8,421.6 520.0 2,454.5 1,958.2 492.1 4,305.4 411.5 3,211.6 0.4 671.1 113.2 1,028.5
         Aug. 1,562 8,695.0 522.3 2,465.3 1,971.4 489.5 4,342.4 420.9 3,230.9 0.5 677.8 112.6 1,252.5
         Sep. 1,551 8,599.6 500.3 2,475.0 1,982.8 487.5 4,326.4 396.2 3,237.6 0.4 679.9 112.4 1,185.6
Commercial banks 6
2019         Aug. 262 3,714.2 306.3 1,023.2 932.9 89.6 1,405.7 259.3 931.1 0.4 210.2 50.9 928.0
         Sep. 260 3,607.9 281.8 1,037.3 950.8 85.8 1,366.6 233.0 919.6 0.3 208.6 51.1 871.1
   Big banks 7
2019         Aug. 4 2,278.5 113.0 603.2 566.5 36.7 658.2 137.9 406.7 0.1 110.1 44.8 859.3
         Sep. 4 2,186.1 93.5 594.5 560.6 33.9 647.8 127.9 406.6 0.1 109.7 44.8 805.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2019         Aug. 150 1,045.0 102.1 239.4 188.2 51.0 637.7 87.6 456.2 0.2 92.7 5.5 60.4
         Sep. 149 1,032.5 103.5 257.3 207.0 50.2 609.0 70.7 445.2 0.2 91.6 5.6 57.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2019         Aug. 108 390.7 91.2 180.7 178.2 1.9 109.9 33.7 68.3 0.1 7.4 0.7 8.2
         Sep. 107 389.3 84.8 185.5 183.2 1.8 109.8 34.4 67.7 0.1 7.3 0.7 8.4
Landesbanken
2019         Aug. 6 849.6 53.2 257.6 196.0 60.5 404.2 52.5 299.2 0.0 47.6 9.4 125.2
         Sep. 6 862.9 50.8 265.6 202.9 61.6 415.9 50.9 310.8 0.0 49.2 9.0 121.5
Savings banks
2019         Aug. 380 1,325.0 57.9 192.6 74.4 117.9 1,039.8 51.1 824.1 0.0 164.2 14.2 20.5
         Sep. 380 1,319.5 55.5 185.4 68.4 116.8 1,044.5 52.6 826.6 0.0 164.9 14.2 19.8
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2019         Aug. 867 965.7 22.4 178.2 71.1 106.8 727.4 34.4 578.6 0.0 114.2 17.4 20.4
         Sep. 858 964.2 23.2 172.6 66.2 106.1 730.5 35.9 580.6 0.0 113.9 17.4 20.5
Mortgage banks
2019         Aug. 10 235.3 3.7 27.8 18.3 9.5 194.7 2.7 172.1 − 19.9 0.2 9.0
         Sep. 10 235.1 2.3 28.2 18.7 9.5 195.7 2.7 173.1 − 19.8 0.2 8.8
Building and loan associations
2019         Aug. 19 238.5 1.7 53.4 37.2 16.2 178.8 1.1 151.8 . 25.8 0.3 4.2
         Sep. 19 235.8 1.7 49.5 33.3 16.3 179.7 1.1 152.8 . 25.9 0.3 4.5
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2019         Aug. 18 1,366.7 77.1 732.5 641.4 89.1 391.7 19.7 273.9 − 95.9 20.2 145.3
         Sep. 18 1,374.1 84.9 736.4 642.7 91.4 393.4 20.0 274.1 − 97.6 20.2 139.3
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2019         Aug. 143 1,244.6 153.7 393.4 353.4 39.3 557.9 108.9 354.5 0.3 92.9 3.4 136.2
         Sep. 142 1,242.4 151.1 415.4 374.7 40.0 540.8 90.7 354.0 0.3 94.4 3.4 131.7
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2019         Aug. 35 853.9 62.5 212.7 175.2 37.4 448.0 75.2 286.3 0.2 85.5 2.7 128.0
         Sep. 35 853.1 66.3 229.9 191.5 38.2 431.0 56.3 286.3 0.2 87.1 2.7 123.3
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,847.9 573.2 1,274.6 3,850.4 2,246.9 295.4 679.6 60.5 589.1 550.9 39.4 1,161.2 536.0 810.0 2019          Apr.
1,840.1 603.9 1,236.2 3,872.7 2,273.4 293.8 677.1 58.1 589.4 550.5 39.1 1,178.2 539.6 901.3          May1,834.3 593.8 1,240.4 3,875.2 2,277.6 290.2 679.1 52.4 589.5 550.1 38.8 1,174.8 544.3 943.3          June
1,822.4 584.0 1,238.4 3,879.8 2,292.6 284.1 675.8 59.8 588.6 549.5 38.7 1,179.0 545.3 995.2          July
1,840.9 563.7 1,277.2 3,912.6 2,316.1 298.9 671.9 67.2 587.0 548.3 38.6 1,178.3 545.8 1,217.5          Aug.1,844.1 561.9 1,282.2 3,873.7 2,308.5 271.8 669.3 36.9 585.7 547.6 38.4 1,185.4 546.5 1,149.9          Sep.
Commercial banks 6
910.6 412.1 498.5 1,588.2 1,011.8 185.5 272.3 64.8 102.5 93.6 16.1 169.3 197.6 848.4 2019          Aug.
906.5 390.8 515.6 1,547.9 1,010.5 158.8 260.6 34.5 101.9 93.3 16.1 166.7 198.2 788.7          Sep.
Big banks 7
475.5 201.2 274.3 788.4 479.4 109.5 109.7 50.0 86.3 78.3 3.6 119.3 110.2 785.0 2019          Aug.
460.4 169.7 290.8 770.1 483.5 90.1 107.2 33.7 85.6 78.0 3.6 118.8 110.2 726.6          Sep.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
215.4 84.6 130.7 649.1 425.7 53.7 141.3 14.8 16.0 15.0 12.4 49.0 78.3 53.2 2019          Aug.
230.5 95.0 135.5 624.4 418.8 45.0 132.2 0.8 16.0 15.0 12.4 47.1 78.8 51.7          Sep.
Branches of foreign banks
219.7 126.3 93.5 150.6 106.7 22.3 21.3 − 0.2 0.2 0.1 1.0 9.2 10.3 2019          Aug.
215.6 126.2 89.4 153.4 108.3 23.7 21.1 − 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.8 9.2 10.4          Sep.
Landesbanken
251.8 55.9 195.8 237.4 111.3 41.8 76.9 2.1 7.1 7.0 0.3 195.1 39.9 125.4 2019          Aug.
254.6 65.5 189.1 249.1 112.2 42.9 86.7 2.0 7.0 7.0 0.3 196.7 39.9 122.5          Sep.
Savings banks
133.7 3.1 130.6 1,006.7 666.9 18.7 15.2 − 290.1 268.3 15.9 18.4 122.4 43.8 2019          Aug.
134.5 4.2 130.3 1,001.0 663.4 17.4 15.0 − 289.6 268.0 15.7 17.9 122.4 43.7          Sep.
 
Credit cooperatives
 
119.6 1.1 118.5 723.0 483.8 33.7 13.9 − 186.9 178.9 4.7 10.2 83.4 29.5 2019          Aug.
119.7 2.0 117.7 720.0 481.2 33.5 13.8 − 186.8 178.9 4.7 10.3 83.5 30.7          Sep.
Mortgage banks
52.2 6.7 45.5 71.7 2.4 3.6 65.7 − − − . 94.4 10.2 6.9 2019          Aug.
50.8 6.5 44.3 70.8 2.3 3.6 65.0 − − − . 96.1 10.2 7.1          Sep.
Building and loan associations
24.3 2.5 21.8 186.9 3.2 2.4 180.9 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 3.1 12.0 12.1 2019          Aug.
22.2 2.5 19.7 187.3 3.1 2.4 181.2 − 0.5 0.5 0.1 1.8 12.0 12.6          Sep.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
348.6 82.2 266.4 98.7 36.8 13.3 47.2 0.3 − − . 687.8 80.3 151.3 2019          Aug.
355.8 90.3 265.5 97.5 35.8 13.3 47.0 0.4 − − . 695.9 80.3 144.6          Sep.
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
444.6 222.3 222.3 576.1 414.7 58.8 77.6 17.3 19.6 19.2 5.4 31.5 58.9 133.4 2019          Aug.
458.9 230.3 228.5 562.3 409.5 49.6 78.3 2.5 19.6 19.2 5.3 32.0 59.9 129.4          Sep.
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
224.9 96.0 128.9 425.6 308.0 36.6 56.4 17.3 19.4 19.0 5.3 30.5 49.8 123.1 2019          Aug.
243.3 104.1 139.2 408.8 301.2 25.9 57.1 2.5 19.3 19.0 5.2 31.2 50.7 119.1          Sep.
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to Ap ril 2018)
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Br anches (with
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking cat egories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2018         Apr. 33.5 464.4 1,405.8 1,159.9 0.0 0.8 245.1 3.6 3,348.5 2,926.7 0.2 1.6 420.0
         May 34.8 475.7 1,398.4 1,153.4 0.0 1.0 244.1 4.1 3,350.0 2,928.6 0.2 2.3 418.8
         June 34.7 437.6 1,388.9 1,146.3 0.0 1.0 241.6 4.5 3,361.8 2,941.9 0.2 1.8 417.7
         July 34.4 456.8 1,369.6 1,128.2 0.0 1.1 240.3 4.8 3,368.0 2,949.9 0.2 2.2 415.6
         Aug. 34.8 455.2 1,383.7 1,141.5 0.0 1.2 241.0 5.3 3,368.5 2,956.8 0.2 1.6 409.9
         Sep. 35.6 471.0 1,349.1 1,105.9 0.0 1.3 241.9 5.9 3,384.0 2,971.7 0.2 1.8 410.2
         Oct. 36.6 505.8 1,323.8 1,082.0 0.0 1.4 240.3 6.1 3,384.4 2,977.1 0.2 0.6 406.6
         Nov. 36.5 496.8 1,350.3 1,107.7 0.0 1.3 241.3 6.0 3,397.3 2,992.0 0.2 0.8 404.3
         Dec. 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019         Jan. 36.5 451.8 1,346.4 1,106.7 0.0 0.8 238.9 6.1 3,405.3 3,003.3 0.2 1.0 400.8
         Feb. 36.6 471.9 1,361.8 1,118.8 0.0 0.8 242.1 6.1 3,413.6 3,014.0 0.2 0.3 399.0
         Mar. 36.8 476.4 1,380.3 1,137.3 0.0 1.0 242.0 6.0 3,425.0 3,026.0 0.3 1.0 397.7
         Apr. 38.0 501.2 1,363.8 1,123.2 0.0 0.8 239.8 6.0 3,428.9 3,034.7 0.2 1.1 393.0
         May 37.7 517.6 1,371.8 1,129.7 0.0 0.8 241.3 5.5 3,445.6 3,049.5 0.2 1.5 394.4
         June 37.7 477.9 1,362.5 1,121.2 0.0 1.0 240.3 5.2 3,467.1 3,067.0 0.2 1.3 398.5
         July 37.2 460.1 1,355.5 1,113.6 0.0 0.9 241.0 5.1 3,476.1 3,075.1 0.2 2.3 398.6
         Aug. 38.0 462.1 1,365.8 1,126.4 0.0 0.9 238.4 4.8 3,491.7 3,087.2 0.2 2.9 401.4
         Sep. 37.8 452.7 1,354.2 1,115.8 0.0 0.8 237.6 4.7 3,499.7 3,094.4 0.2 3.8 401.3
Changes *
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.2
2018         Apr. − 1.3 + 23.6 + 16.8 + 16.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 6.4 + 7.1 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.3
         May + 1.3 + 11.4 − 5.8 − 4.9 − + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 10.4 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.2
         June − 0.1 − 38.1 − 9.5 − 7.1 − + 0.0 − 2.4 + 0.4 + 11.8 + 13.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
         July − 0.3 + 19.3 − 19.3 − 18.1 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 6.2 + 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.1
         Aug. + 0.4 − 1.6 + 15.6 + 14.8 − + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 7.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.8
         Sep. + 0.8 + 16.0 − 34.6 − 35.7 − + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 15.5 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
         Oct. + 1.1 + 34.7 − 25.4 − 23.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.6
         Nov. − 0.1 − 9.0 + 26.6 + 25.7 − − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 12.9 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.2
         Dec. + 3.9 − 80.6 − 26.9 − 24.0 − − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5
2019         Jan. − 3.9 + 35.6 + 23.0 + 23.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.8 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 3.1
         Feb. + 0.1 + 20.1 + 15.3 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 8.3 + 10.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.7
         Mar. + 0.2 + 3.8 + 22.0 + 22.7 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 12.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.8
         Apr. + 1.2 + 24.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.7
         May − 0.3 + 16.4 + 8.0 + 6.5 − − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 16.7 + 14.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.5
         June − 0.0 − 39.7 − 9.2 − 8.4 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 21.5 + 17.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 4.1
         July − 0.5 − 17.7 − 7.2 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0
         Aug. + 0.8 + 1.9 + 10.3 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.2 + 15.6 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 2.8
         Sep. − 0.2 − 9.4 − 9.1 − 8.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.1 + 7.2 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
− 18.8 89.2 1,052.8 118.2 934.6 0.0 5.0 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 580.5 41.3 31.9 2018          Apr.
− 18.8 93.8 1,035.9 107.1 928.9 0.0 5.0 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 580.2 40.9 32.4          May− 18.7 94.0 1,034.3 122.0 912.2 0.0 4.9 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 579.3 40.6 32.6          June
− 18.5 94.4 1,041.4 118.8 922.6 0.0 4.9 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 578.2 40.0 32.8          July
− 18.4 88.0 1,042.8 117.3 925.5 0.0 4.8 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 577.6 39.5 33.1          Aug.− 18.3 87.9 1,033.4 117.1 916.2 0.0 4.8 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 577.3 39.1 33.9          Sep.
− 17.9 87.9 1,032.9 111.3 921.6 0.0 4.8 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 577.0 38.6 33.7          Oct.
− 17.9 87.7 1,045.8 115.5 930.3 0.0 4.7 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 576.9 37.9 33.7          Nov.− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9          Dec.
− 17.8 90.8 1,039.4 114.9 924.6 0.0 4.7 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 578.5 36.7 33.8 2019          Jan.
− 17.8 90.8 1,045.6 118.2 927.4 0.0 4.7 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 579.5 36.1 34.0          Feb.− 17.6 90.9 1,049.4 122.3 927.1 0.0 4.7 3,565.3 2,101.1 846.4 582.0 35.8 33.9          Mar.
− 17.5 90.7 1,060.8 131.5 929.3 0.0 4.6 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 582.3 35.4 33.9          Apr.
− 17.5 91.2 1,056.4 121.5 934.9 0.0 4.6 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 582.5 35.2 33.7          May− 17.5 90.9 1,047.1 122.5 924.6 0.0 4.6 3,609.5 2,150.7 841.2 582.7 34.9 33.4          June
− 17.1 91.0 1,053.9 123.2 930.6 0.0 4.5 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 581.8 34.8 32.9          July
− 17.1 90.3 1,061.4 127.7 933.7 0.0 4.5 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 580.3 34.7 32.7          Aug.− 17.0 90.0 1,037.5 121.4 916.1 0.0 4.5 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 579.0 34.4 32.6          Sep.
Changes *
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018
− − 0.1 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 2018          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 4.6 − 16.9 − 11.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5          May− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 15.0 − 16.6 − − 0.1 + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3          June
− − 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.7 − 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2          July
− + 0.0 − 6.0 + 2.8 − 1.5 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5          Aug.− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 9.3 − − 0.0 − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6          Sep.
− − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2          Oct.
− − 0.0 − 0.2 + 13.0 + 4.2 + 8.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 3.2 − 24.9 − 8.9 − 16.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2          Dec.
− − 0.2 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 9.4 + 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2019          Jan.
− − − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Feb.− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.4 + 12.0 − 3.8 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Mar.
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 9.2 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.3 − 10.0 + 5.7 − + 0.0 + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          May− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.2 + 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.7 + 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5          July
− + 0.0 − 0.6 + 7.6 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 0.0 − + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2          Aug.− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 21.4 − 6.3 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          Sep.
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2018         Apr. 0.3 1,003.7 769.6 478.3 291.3 2.3 231.8 2.4 730.1 453.9 105.2 348.7 6.8 269.4
         May 0.3 1,030.6 796.6 501.0 295.6 2.3 231.7 2.5 749.9 470.2 112.9 357.2 5.3 274.4
         June 0.3 1,027.1 792.4 501.1 291.2 2.3 232.4 2.5 732.4 454.6 97.7 356.9 5.9 271.8
         July 0.2 1,031.9 795.4 502.7 292.7 2.3 234.2 2.6 740.4 464.1 103.9 360.2 6.1 270.2
         Aug. 0.2 1,027.9 789.8 496.9 292.9 2.3 235.8 2.6 748.7 469.5 107.6 362.0 6.5 272.7
         Sep. 0.3 1,028.7 787.7 496.7 291.1 2.3 238.6 2.7 742.5 464.0 102.4 361.6 5.3 273.2
         Oct. 0.3 1,013.0 772.7 492.7 280.0 2.1 238.1 2.8 772.5 495.4 115.8 379.6 6.0 271.1
         Nov. 0.3 1,007.9 765.4 491.4 274.0 1.5 241.0 2.9 776.4 500.3 117.6 382.7 5.9 270.2
         Dec. 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019         Jan. 0.2 1,031.6 787.8 518.2 269.6 1.3 242.5 3.1 784.3 511.1 119.4 391.8 6.0 267.2
         Feb. 0.2 1,031.8 785.3 511.5 273.7 1.7 244.8 3.2 782.0 504.5 110.6 393.9 5.9 271.5
         Mar. 0.2 1,092.9 845.1 565.9 279.2 2.0 245.8 3.2 799.2 519.8 122.8 397.0 7.8 271.6
         Apr. 0.2 1,106.2 858.3 579.0 279.3 2.8 245.2 3.3 807.9 529.0 130.3 398.7 6.6 272.2
         May 0.2 1,090.6 840.9 564.1 276.8 2.8 246.8 3.6 820.1 542.9 140.2 402.7 6.4 270.8
         June 0.2 1,109.3 857.3 578.3 279.0 3.1 248.9 3.8 816.2 535.9 135.8 400.1 6.6 273.6
         July 0.2 1,099.0 844.6 563.6 281.0 3.3 251.1 3.8 829.3 548.2 143.9 404.3 8.6 272.5
         Aug. 0.2 1,099.5 844.9 562.8 282.1 3.4 251.1 3.9 850.7 564.8 158.0 406.8 9.4 276.4
         Sep. 0.2 1,120.8 867.0 583.4 283.5 3.9 249.9 3.9 826.6 539.6 131.1 408.5 8.6 278.5
Changes *
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.7
2018         Apr. + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 4.3
         May − 0.0 + 16.9 + 17.3 + 17.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 14.7 + 12.1 + 7.0 + 5.1 − 1.5 + 4.2
         June + 0.0 − 4.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 17.4 − 15.4 − 15.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
         July − 0.0 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 10.4 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 0.1 − 1.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 6.4 − 7.9 − 7.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 7.3 + 4.7 + 3.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3
         Sep. + 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 − 7.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 − 1.3 − 1.1 + 0.3
         Oct. − 0.0 − 7.7 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 14.8 + 10.5 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
         Nov. + 0.0 − 4.9 − 6.5 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Dec. − 0.0 + 8.0 + 8.2 + 13.2 − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 9.5 − 17.4 + 7.9 − 2.0 − 2.0
2019         Jan. − 0.0 + 17.6 + 16.1 + 14.5 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 22.2 + 21.4 + 19.4 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.9
         Feb. + 0.0 − 1.8 − 4.4 − 7.7 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 8.3 − 9.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 4.2
         Mar. + 0.0 + 28.2 + 27.8 + 24.7 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 2.5 − 3.4 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 2.0
         Apr. + 0.0 + 13.7 + 13.5 + 13.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.6 + 7.7 + 1.9 − 1.1 + 0.7
         May − 0.0 − 17.6 − 19.4 − 16.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 12.1 + 13.9 + 10.0 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 1.6
         June + 0.0 + 23.8 + 21.3 + 15.8 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.4
         July − 0.0 − 15.1 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 7.7 + 2.2 + 2.0 − 1.6
         Aug. + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 19.0 + 14.5 + 13.9 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.7
         Sep. − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.6 − 11.3 − 10.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 1.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
12.3 23.6 685.3 410.6 274.7 188.3 86.4 0.0 282.6 138.4 144.2 85.2 59.0 0.3 2018          Apr.
12.2 23.7 730.1 452.6 277.4 188.0 89.4 0.0 285.8 140.5 145.4 86.9 58.5 0.3          May12.1 23.7 713.1 432.8 280.3 187.1 93.1 0.0 259.1 123.3 135.8 78.9 56.9 0.3          June
11.9 23.0 708.4 420.2 288.2 197.2 91.0 0.0 273.1 129.4 143.7 84.1 59.6 0.3          July
11.9 23.1 709.8 404.3 305.5 217.7 87.8 0.0 278.8 129.5 149.2 90.1 59.1 0.3          Aug.11.8 22.4 711.7 426.7 285.0 197.3 87.7 0.0 269.3 133.2 136.1 79.2 56.9 0.1          Sep.
11.8 22.5 702.4 413.6 288.9 200.1 88.8 0.0 271.0 129.8 141.2 82.8 58.4 0.1          Oct.
11.8 22.3 693.6 410.5 283.1 194.4 88.7 0.0 258.1 132.6 125.5 67.7 57.8 0.2          Nov.11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1          Dec.
11.7 21.5 674.5 405.5 269.1 182.9 86.1 0.0 268.4 132.7 135.8 77.9 57.9 0.1 2019          Jan.
11.8 21.7 699.2 430.9 268.3 181.1 87.3 0.0 241.7 110.2 131.5 73.6 57.8 0.1          Feb.13.0 21.5 762.8 464.1 298.7 209.1 89.6 1.3 259.1 113.8 145.3 87.7 57.6 0.1          Mar.
13.0 22.3 787.1 441.7 345.4 255.0 90.4 1.3 268.4 124.2 144.2 86.9 57.3 0.1          Apr.
13.0 22.3 783.6 482.4 301.2 210.0 91.2 1.3 261.3 120.7 140.6 83.6 57.0 0.1          May12.8 22.3 787.2 471.3 315.9 225.1 90.7 1.3 265.6 126.9 138.8 81.8 56.9 0.1          June
12.8 22.0 768.5 460.7 307.8 214.3 93.5 1.3 262.9 126.2 136.7 79.5 57.2 0.1          July
12.8 22.0 779.4 436.0 343.4 247.8 95.6 1.3 274.2 127.1 147.1 90.2 56.9 0.1          Aug.12.8 22.2 806.6 440.4 366.2 269.8 96.4 1.3 244.6 123.1 121.5 63.1 58.4 0.1          Sep.
Changes *
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.1 + 22.9 − 9.8 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.9 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 2018          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 39.7 + 40.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 2.3 − + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.0          May− 0.2 − − 17.3 − 19.9 + 2.7 − 1.0 + 3.7 − − 26.8 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 8.0 − 1.6 −          June
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 12.2 + 9.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − + 13.9 + 6.3 + 7.6 + 5.4 + 2.2 −          July
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 16.4 + 16.3 + 20.0 − 3.7 − + 5.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Aug.− 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 22.1 − 21.2 − 20.9 − 0.3 − − 9.8 + 3.6 − 13.3 − 11.2 − 2.2 − 0.2          Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 12.5 − 14.5 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − + 0.7 − 3.8 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 0.0          Oct.
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 2.8 − 5.4 − 5.4 − 0.0 − − 12.7 + 2.9 − 15.6 − 15.0 − 0.6 + 0.0          Nov.+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 49.1 − 40.2 − 8.9 − 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 22.3 − 4.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 31.6 + 34.9 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 0.7 − + 36.9 + 22.5 + 14.5 + 14.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2019          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 24.8 − 1.2 − 2.2 + 1.0 − − 27.2 − 22.6 − 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Feb.+ 1.3 − 0.2 + 32.9 + 22.7 + 10.2 + 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 1.6 + 3.5 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.8 + 24.4 − 22.2 + 46.6 + 45.9 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 10.4 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 −          Apr.
− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2 + 40.4 − 44.6 − 45.3 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 7.2 − 7.9 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.0 + 7.2 − 9.6 + 16.8 + 14.6 + 2.2 − + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          June
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 22.0 − 12.0 − 10.0 − 12.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 2.4 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 25.9 + 34.3 + 32.8 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.6 + 10.0 + 10.3 − 0.4 −          Aug.− 0.0 + 0.1 + 9.8 − 3.1 + 12.9 + 12.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 2.3 − 18.6 − 20.0 + 1.4 + 0.0          Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2018         Apr. 3,348.5 2,926.9 254.0 223.0 222.1 0.9 31.0 30.3 0.7 3,094.5 2,664.6
         May 3,350.0 2,928.9 254.5 226.6 225.4 1.2 27.9 26.8 1.1 3,095.5 2,667.7
         June 3,361.8 2,942.2 257.0 229.8 228.9 0.9 27.2 26.3 0.9 3,104.7 2,681.4
         July 3,368.0 2,950.1 256.7 225.4 224.7 0.7 31.3 29.8 1.5 3,111.3 2,692.5
         Aug. 3,368.5 2,957.0 250.5 223.9 223.1 0.8 26.6 25.7 0.9 3,118.0 2,700.6
         Sep. 3,384.0 2,971.9 255.9 232.3 231.6 0.7 23.6 22.5 1.1 3,128.1 2,711.1
         Oct. 3,384.4 2,977.3 252.6 228.0 227.4 0.6 24.6 24.7 − 0.1 3,131.8 2,718.7
         Nov. 3,397.3 2,992.2 251.7 227.9 227.4 0.5 23.9 23.6 0.3 3,145.6 2,732.7
         Dec. 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019         Jan. 3,405.3 3,003.5 255.8 230.8 230.3 0.5 25.0 24.5 0.5 3,149.4 2,738.4
         Feb. 3,413.6 3,014.2 257.6 235.4 234.9 0.5 22.2 22.4 − 0.2 3,156.0 2,746.4
         Mar. 3,425.0 3,026.3 261.6 241.0 240.4 0.6 20.6 20.2 0.4 3,163.4 2,755.8
         Apr. 3,428.9 3,034.9 256.3 235.0 234.3 0.7 21.4 21.0 0.4 3,172.6 2,769.9
         May 3,445.6 3,049.7 257.3 236.6 235.7 0.9 20.7 20.1 0.6 3,188.3 2,785.8
         June 3,467.1 3,067.2 271.3 249.8 249.2 0.6 21.5 20.8 0.7 3,195.8 2,795.2
         July 3,476.1 3,075.3 270.3 243.8 243.2 0.6 26.5 24.9 1.6 3,205.9 2,807.7
         Aug. 3,491.7 3,087.4 266.2 238.8 238.3 0.5 27.4 25.0 2.4 3,225.5 2,825.7
         Sep. 3,499.7 3,094.6 269.3 246.2 245.6 0.6 23.1 19.9 3.2 3,230.5 2,830.9
Changes *
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2018         Apr. + 6.4 + 7.0 + 0.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 11.7
         May + 10.4 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 9.9 + 12.4
         June + 11.8 + 13.3 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 9.3 + 13.6
         July + 6.2 + 7.9 − 0.3 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 9.9
         Aug. + 0.7 + 7.1 − 6.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 4.7 − 4.1 − 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.2
         Sep. + 15.5 + 14.9 + 5.6 + 8.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.3 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 10.3
         Oct. + 0.5 + 5.3 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 2.2 − 1.1 + 5.2 + 9.1
         Nov. + 12.9 + 14.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 13.8 + 14.0
         Dec. − 2.9 − 1.8 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 10.8 + 13.1 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 5.6
         Feb. + 8.3 + 10.7 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 6.5 + 8.0
         Mar. + 10.9 + 12.0 + 4.1 + 5.7 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.8
         Apr. + 3.8 + 8.5 − 4.7 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 13.4
         May + 16.7 + 14.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.7 + 16.0
         June + 21.5 + 17.6 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 13.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.4
         July + 9.2 + 8.2 − 1.0 − 6.1 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 10.2 + 12.9
         Aug. + 15.6 + 12.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 19.8 + 18.2
         Sep. + 8.1 + 7.2 + 3.1 + 7.4 + 7.3 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 5.1 + 0.8 + 5.0 + 4.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 2018
2,428.6 277.1 2,151.5 236.0 17.3 430.0 245.9 21.9 224.1 184.0 − 1.5 2018          Apr.
2,431.2 270.8 2,160.4 236.6 17.3 427.7 245.5 21.9 223.6 182.2 − 1.5          May2,443.3 275.3 2,168.0 238.1 17.2 423.4 243.7 21.0 222.7 179.7 − 1.5          June
2,454.6 277.7 2,176.9 237.9 17.0 418.7 241.0 20.3 220.8 177.7 − 1.5          July
2,467.5 279.3 2,188.2 233.1 17.0 417.4 240.6 21.1 219.5 176.8 − 1.3          Aug.2,476.9 280.1 2,196.8 234.1 16.9 417.1 241.0 20.5 220.5 176.1 − 1.3          Sep.
2,484.5 279.7 2,204.9 234.1 16.6 413.1 240.7 20.2 220.5 172.5 − 1.3          Oct.
2,500.3 284.2 2,216.1 232.4 16.6 412.9 240.9 20.0 220.9 171.9 − 1.3          Nov.2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4          Dec.
2,507.3 283.1 2,224.2 231.1 16.5 411.1 241.4 19.3 222.0 169.7 − 1.3 2019          Jan.
2,516.1 284.2 2,231.9 230.3 16.5 409.6 240.8 18.9 221.9 168.7 − 1.3          Feb.2,525.3 286.6 2,238.7 230.5 16.3 407.6 240.4 18.7 221.7 167.2 − 1.3          Mar.
2,539.8 291.3 2,248.5 230.0 16.2 402.7 239.8 18.4 221.4 162.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,554.8 293.7 2,261.1 231.0 16.3 402.5 239.1 18.2 220.9 163.4 − 1.3          May2,560.3 294.3 2,266.1 234.9 16.2 400.6 237.0 17.9 219.0 163.7 − 1.3          June
2,571.9 295.2 2,276.8 235.8 15.8 398.2 235.4 17.4 218.0 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,588.9 298.3 2,290.5 236.8 15.9 399.7 235.2 17.4 217.8 164.5 − 1.2          Aug.2,593.9 297.1 2,296.8 237.0 15.8 399.6 235.2 17.0 218.2 164.4 − 1.2          Sep.
Changes *
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018
+ 9.1 + 1.8 + 7.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 3.9 − − 0.0 2018          Apr.
+ 11.8 + 2.6 + 9.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.8 − + 0.0          May+ 12.1 + 4.5 + 7.6 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 2.6 − − 0.1          June
+ 10.1 + 2.5 + 7.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.9 − − 0.0          July
+ 13.1 + 1.6 + 11.5 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.9 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 9.2 + 0.5 + 8.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 9.2 + 1.0 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 15.8 + 4.6 + 11.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Nov.− 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 − + 0.2          Dec.
+ 8.0 + 0.5 + 7.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 − − 0.2 2019          Jan.
+ 8.7 + 1.1 + 7.6 − 0.7 − − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.0 − −          Feb.+ 9.1 + 2.1 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.5 − + 0.0          Mar.
+ 13.9 + 4.5 + 9.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 15.0 + 2.4 + 12.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − − 0.0          May+ 5.6 + 0.6 + 5.0 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.2 − − 0.0          June
+ 11.7 + 1.0 + 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 17.1 + 3.3 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 4.7 − 0.8 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2017 2,610.1 1,304.3 1,326.6 1,053.0 273.6 1,403.1 368.5 131.3 112.6 67.3 133.3 50.2 51.5 147.9
2018         Sep. 2,708.5 1,349.5 1,377.7 1,086.8 290.9 1,476.9 389.6 140.5 115.9 73.0 138.8 53.5 50.8 157.0
         Dec. 2,727.0 1,382.2 1,391.2 1,116.4 274.8 1,483.6 392.7 139.3 116.5 71.9 138.7 53.2 50.6 157.3
2019         Mar. 2,765.7 1,437.3 1,404.9 1,152.3 252.6 1,513.5 398.4 144.4 117.8 74.0 141.0 53.6 50.1 160.5
         June 2,809.5 1,469.6 1,427.8 1,182.8 244.9 1,539.7 405.2 150.3 120.5 76.2 140.5 54.4 50.5 161.5
         Sep. 2,839.6 1,487.2 1,450.4 1,197.0 253.4 1,551.7 411.6 150.1 118.6 77.4 139.9 54.8 50.1 166.2
 Short-term lending
2017 210.6 − 6.5 − 6.5 180.8 3.6 32.3 4.0 13.6 45.2 3.4 4.0 27.4
2018         Sep. 231.6 − 7.4 − 7.4 201.9 4.3 37.3 4.2 16.6 48.7 4.2 4.0 29.4
         Dec. 227.6 − 7.2 − 7.2 195.9 4.1 35.5 4.9 14.7 48.3 3.7 4.9 28.0
2019         Mar. 240.4 − 7.7 − 7.7 210.1 4.5 39.5 6.2 15.8 49.6 4.0 5.0 29.7
         June 249.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 217.3 4.6 42.9 7.2 16.5 48.6 4.7 5.2 29.3
         Sep. 245.6 − 8.4 − 8.4 213.6 5.0 41.1 5.3 16.7 48.0 4.4 4.5 30.1
 Medium-term lending
2017 273.5 − 34.0 − 34.0 193.1 14.0 23.6 5.1 11.3 18.2 4.3 10.3 46.7
2018         Sep. 280.1 − 35.6 − 35.6 199.4 15.6 24.9 4.4 12.2 18.3 4.4 11.1 48.0
         Dec. 282.6 − 35.4 − 35.4 202.5 15.4 24.9 4.5 12.5 19.0 4.5 10.6 49.0
2019         Mar. 286.6 − 35.1 − 35.1 206.0 15.4 25.4 4.5 12.9 19.3 4.5 10.4 49.1
         June 294.3 − 36.0 − 36.0 212.6 16.1 26.1 5.2 13.5 19.5 4.5 10.4 49.0
         Sep. 297.1 − 36.4 − 36.4 215.4 16.5 27.3 4.9 13.7 19.6 4.7 10.0 50.1
 Long-term lending
2017 2,125.9 1,304.3 1,286.1 1,053.0 233.1 1,029.2 351.0 75.4 103.5 42.4 70.0 42.4 37.2 73.8
2018         Sep. 2,196.9 1,349.5 1,334.6 1,086.8 247.8 1,075.6 369.7 78.4 107.4 44.2 71.8 44.9 35.7 79.6
         Dec. 2,216.8 1,382.2 1,348.6 1,116.4 232.2 1,085.2 373.2 78.9 107.2 44.7 71.4 45.0 35.1 80.3
2019         Mar. 2,238.7 1,437.3 1,362.1 1,152.3 209.8 1,097.4 378.5 79.5 107.2 45.3 72.1 45.0 34.6 81.7
         June 2,266.1 1,469.6 1,383.8 1,182.8 200.9 1,109.8 384.5 81.3 108.1 46.2 72.4 45.3 34.9 83.2
         Sep. 2,296.8 1,487.2 1,405.6 1,197.0 208.6 1,122.7 390.2 81.8 108.5 46.9 72.3 45.7 35.6 85.9
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2018         Q3 + 35.2 + 12.9 + 19.4 + 11.1 + 8.3 + 19.3 + 6.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 2.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 4.1
         Q4 + 18.5 + 10.8 + 15.2 + 8.9 + 6.2 + 6.8 + 4.8 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
2019         Q1 + 38.7 + 15.1 + 13.5 + 11.4 + 2.1 + 29.8 + 5.5 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 4.9
         Q2 + 43.8 + 16.3 + 20.1 + 13.5 + 6.7 + 26.8 + 6.9 + 5.8 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 1.0
         Q3 + 29.8 + 18.0 + 22.4 + 15.4 + 7.0 + 12.0 + 6.1 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 4.8
 Short-term lending
2018         Q3 + 2.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.9
         Q4 − 5.5 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.4
2019         Q1 + 12.9 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 14.3 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 3.5
         Q2 + 9.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Q3 − 3.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.3 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8
 Medium-term lending
2018         Q3 + 4.6 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.5
         Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9
2019         Q1 + 3.7 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Q2 + 7.4 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Q3 + 3.5 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.3
 Long-term lending
2018         Q3 + 27.8 + 12.9 + 18.2 + 11.1 + 7.1 + 13.5 + 5.3 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 2.7
         Q4 + 20.1 + 10.8 + 14.7 + 8.9 + 5.8 + 9.6 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5
2019         Q1 + 22.0 + 15.1 + 13.3 + 11.4 + 1.9 + 12.3 + 5.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.5
         Q2 + 27.0 + 16.3 + 18.9 + 13.5 + 5.5 + 12.7 + 6.1 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.5
         Q3 + 30.0 + 18.0 + 21.3 + 15.4 + 5.9 + 12.7 + 5.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.7
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
709.0 214.9 42.3 186.4 411.2 47.7 1,192.3 954.3 237.9 171.6 8.6 14.8 3.7 2017
747.4 231.0 48.2 194.9 430.6 48.6 1,216.6 984.4 232.2 172.2 8.4 15.0 3.7 2018          Sep.
756.0 237.0 47.3 196.9 432.6 48.0 1,228.4 994.8 233.7 172.9 8.3 15.0 3.7          Dec.
772.0 242.9 48.7 197.6 436.3 48.6 1,237.2 1,002.7 234.4 173.7 8.0 15.1 3.8 2019          Mar.
785.8 247.4 51.6 199.3 441.1 48.6 1,254.6 1,018.8 235.9 175.6 8.0 15.2 3.8          June794.7 252.9 50.9 200.6 444.7 48.3 1,272.5 1,035.0 237.5 176.4 8.5 15.4 3.8          Sep.
Short-term lending
50.9 10.1 6.8 10.3 23.3 5.0 29.3 2.9 26.4 1.6 8.6 0.5 0.0 201757.4 11.6 10.3 10.2 24.0 5.7 29.2 3.2 26.0 1.5 8.4 0.5 0.0 2018          Sep.
55.9 12.0 8.1 10.4 24.0 5.2 31.2 3.1 28.2 1.5 8.3 0.5 −          Dec.
60.1 12.1 9.3 10.4 24.4 5.8 29.8 3.2 26.5 1.5 8.0 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
63.0 12.5 10.2 10.6 24.6 5.6 31.3 3.4 28.0 1.9 8.0 0.5 0.0          June63.5 13.5 9.5 10.7 24.3 5.4 31.5 3.4 28.1 1.6 8.5 0.5 0.0          Sep.
Medium-term lending
73.5 12.1 9.3 18.3 32.7 3.6 79.9 20.0 59.9 55.2 − 0.6 0.0 201776.2 14.0 9.8 20.0 31.7 3.5 80.1 20.0 60.2 55.8 − 0.5 0.1 2018          Sep.
77.5 14.8 9.9 21.3 31.5 3.5 79.6 19.9 59.7 56.4 − 0.5 0.1          Dec.
80.0 15.4 9.6 21.8 31.7 3.5 80.1 19.6 60.5 57.2 − 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
84.4 16.6 11.0 22.4 32.2 3.6 81.2 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          June85.1 17.5 11.2 22.6 32.0 3.7 81.3 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          Sep.
Long-term lending
584.6 192.6 26.2 157.8 355.3 39.2 1,083.1 931.4 151.6 114.8 − 13.7 3.7 2017613.8 205.3 28.0 164.7 374.9 39.5 1,107.2 961.2 146.0 114.9 − 14.0 3.7 2018          Sep.
622.6 210.2 29.2 165.3 377.2 39.3 1,117.6 971.8 145.8 115.0 − 14.0 3.7          Dec.
631.9 215.4 29.8 165.4 380.3 39.3 1,127.2 979.9 147.4 115.1 − 14.1 3.7 2019          Mar.
638.5 218.3 30.3 166.3 384.3 39.4 1,142.0 995.5 146.5 115.8 − 14.2 3.8          June646.1 222.0 30.3 167.3 388.4 39.2 1,159.7 1,011.7 147.9 116.7 − 14.4 3.7          Sep.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 9.6 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.4 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 2018          Q3
+ 8.4 + 6.1 − 1.1 + 2.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 11.7 + 10.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 14.1 + 4.6 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.6 + 8.8 + 8.0 + 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 15.5 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 4.3 − 0.1 + 16.9 + 13.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 9.0 + 5.6 − 0.7 + 1.2 + 3.6 − 0.3 + 17.9 + 16.3 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
− 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 2018          Q3
− 1.8 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 3.5 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2018          Q3
+ 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.5 − + 0.0 −          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 4.3 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.8 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 6.9 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 14.2 + 13.0 + 1.2 + 1.7 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2018          Q3
+ 8.9 + 5.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 10.4 + 10.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 9.3 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 9.7 + 8.2 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 7.7 + 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 12.8 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 7.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 3.9 − 0.2 + 17.4 + 16.0 + 1.4 + 1.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2018         Oct. 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 210.3 633.4 55.1 578.3 577.0 38.6 33.7 14.9 0.7
         Nov. 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 208.1 635.0 55.8 579.2 576.9 37.9 33.7 14.9 0.4
         Dec. 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2019         Jan. 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 212.7 633.6 57.1 576.4 578.5 36.7 33.8 14.9 0.8
         Feb. 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 217.9 632.2 56.2 576.0 579.5 36.1 34.0 15.1 0.6
         Mar. 3,565.3 2,101.1 846.4 215.8 630.5 57.0 573.5 582.0 35.8 33.9 15.2 0.2
         Apr. 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 214.7 626.9 56.0 570.9 582.3 35.4 33.9 15.2 2.6
         May 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 216.3 624.7 54.9 569.8 582.5 35.2 33.7 15.2 1.6
         June 3,609.5 2,150.7 841.2 214.5 626.7 55.4 571.4 582.7 34.9 33.4 15.1 2.2
         July 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 210.7 623.2 54.0 569.2 581.8 34.8 32.9 14.9 0.2
         Aug. 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 214.7 619.7 54.1 565.5 580.3 34.7 32.7 14.9 0.6
         Sep. 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 214.8 615.5 51.8 563.7 579.0 34.4 32.6 15.2 0.3
Changes*
2017 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 24.7 − 2.8 + 10.1 − 12.8 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.8
2018 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 3.5 − 7.3 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 1.4 − 1.2
2018         Oct. + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Nov. + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
         Dec. + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 − 4.7 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 + 9.3 − 4.6 + 0.3 − 4.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 5.2 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2
         Mar. + 10.4 + 12.0 − 3.8 − 2.1 − 1.7 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr. + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 − 1.1 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 1.6 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.0
         June − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6
         July + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 3.8 − 3.7 − 1.4 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 2.0
         Aug. + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 + 4.0 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Sep. − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 4.2 − 2.4 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3
Domestic government End of year or month*
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2018         Oct. 216.5 57.5 151.1 73.8 77.3 27.3 50.0 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
         Nov. 224.6 62.6 154.0 74.8 79.1 27.9 51.2 3.8 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
         Dec. 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019         Jan. 221.7 59.2 154.7 74.8 79.8 29.2 50.6 3.7 4.2 25.2 2.2 −
         Feb. 230.4 63.0 159.5 80.1 79.4 28.4 51.0 3.8 4.1 25.2 2.2 −
         Mar. 232.2 64.0 160.3 79.8 80.5 29.3 51.2 3.8 4.1 25.1 2.2 −
         Apr. 229.6 62.3 159.5 79.7 79.8 28.4 51.4 3.7 4.1 25.0 2.2 1.4
         May 238.8 68.9 162.0 83.0 79.0 27.3 51.7 3.7 4.1 25.0 2.2 1.4
         June 240.8 68.3 164.6 84.1 80.5 28.1 52.4 3.7 4.2 24.8 2.2 2.0
         July 234.6 66.2 160.6 80.7 79.9 27.3 52.6 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.2 −
         Aug. 245.2 73.5 163.7 83.7 80.0 27.3 52.7 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.3 0.2
         Sep. 242.8 72.0 162.9 85.1 77.9 25.0 52.9 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.2 0.2
Changes*
2017 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 2.4 − 14.1 + 11.7 + 10.7 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0
2018 + 16.9 + 3.6 + 13.5 + 2.0 + 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2018         Oct. − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.7 − 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Nov. + 8.1 + 5.1 + 3.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Dec. − 5.7 + 0.1 − 5.7 − 6.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
2019         Jan. + 2.7 − 3.5 + 6.3 + 6.9 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb. + 8.7 + 3.8 + 4.9 + 5.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Mar. + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
         Apr. − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
         May + 9.1 + 6.6 + 2.5 + 3.3 − 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0
         June + 1.6 − 0.8 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.6
         July − 6.1 − 2.1 − 4.0 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Aug. + 10.5 + 7.3 + 3.2 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2
         Sep. − 2.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 + 1.1 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.92017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.62018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.5
2018         Oct. 3,287.5 1,987.2 692.6 136.5 556.1 27.8 528.3 573.3 34.4 8.4 12.7 0.7
         Nov. 3,312.8 2,017.0 689.1 133.3 555.8 27.8 528.0 573.1 33.7 8.4 12.7 0.4         Dec. 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.5
2019         Jan. 3,319.1 2,020.2 691.6 137.9 553.7 27.9 525.8 574.8 32.5 8.7 12.7 0.8
         Feb. 3,324.1 2,025.8 690.6 137.8 552.8 27.8 525.0 575.8 31.9 8.8 12.9 0.6         Mar. 3,333.1 2,037.1 686.0 136.0 550.0 27.7 522.3 578.3 31.7 8.8 13.0 0.2
         Apr. 3,352.4 2,060.4 682.1 135.1 547.1 27.5 519.5 578.5 31.3 8.9 13.0 1.1
         May 3,372.6 2,083.8 679.0 133.3 545.7 27.6 518.1 578.8 31.0 8.7 13.0 0.2         June 3,368.8 2,082.4 676.6 130.4 546.2 27.3 518.9 579.0 30.7 8.6 12.9 0.2
         July 3,382.3 2,100.3 673.3 130.0 543.3 26.7 516.6 578.1 30.6 8.2 12.7 0.2
         Aug. 3,393.3 2,115.6 670.6 131.0 539.7 26.8 512.8 576.5 30.5 8.0 12.7 0.4         Sep. 3,386.3 2,113.4 667.3 129.7 537.6 26.8 510.9 575.3 30.2 7.9 12.9 0.2
Changes*
2017 + 104.1 + 141.3 − 25.1 − 10.6 − 14.4 − 0.7 − 13.8 − 5.3 − 6.7 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.82018 + 100.8 + 135.7 − 24.3 − 5.5 − 18.8 − 1.3 − 17.5 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 4.1 − 1.3 − 1.2
2018         Oct. + 25.8 + 25.1 + 1.5 + 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Nov. + 25.3 + 29.8 − 3.6 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3         Dec. + 5.9 + 0.8 + 3.9 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 0.5 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 4.9 + 5.6 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 8.6 + 10.9 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr. + 19.3 + 23.3 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 20.2 + 23.3 − 3.1 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9         June − 3.6 − 1.2 − 2.3 − 3.1 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         July + 13.3 + 17.9 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1
         Aug. + 10.9 + 15.3 − 2.7 + 1.0 − 3.7 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3         Sep. − 6.5 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.92017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.62018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.5
2018         Oct. 1,039.7 586.7 434.0 86.6 347.4 16.4 331.0 7.1 11.8 2.6 10.3 0.7
         Nov. 1,040.8 590.9 431.3 84.2 347.1 16.5 330.6 7.1 11.6 2.6 10.3 0.4         Dec. 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.5
2019         Jan. 1,036.9 587.8 430.7 88.3 342.4 16.9 325.5 7.0 11.4 2.6 10.2 0.8
         Feb. 1,026.7 579.2 429.1 88.2 340.9 16.7 324.2 7.0 11.4 2.7 10.4 0.6         Mar. 1,028.2 585.5 424.2 86.2 338.0 16.6 321.4 7.1 11.4 2.6 10.5 0.2
         Apr. 1,035.7 596.5 420.7 85.6 335.1 16.5 318.6 7.1 11.4 2.6 10.5 1.1
         May 1,043.1 606.9 417.7 84.7 333.0 16.6 316.4 7.1 11.3 2.6 10.5 0.2         June 1,029.8 595.8 415.6 81.9 333.7 16.5 317.2 7.1 11.3 2.6 10.4 0.2
         July 1,035.2 604.4 412.5 81.7 330.8 15.9 314.9 7.1 11.2 2.2 10.2 0.2
         Aug. 1,036.6 608.6 409.7 83.1 326.7 15.8 310.8 7.1 11.2 2.2 10.2 0.4         Sep. 1,033.6 608.9 406.4 82.3 324.1 15.8 308.3 7.2 11.1 2.2 10.4 0.2
Changes*
2017 + 19.5 + 40.2 − 20.0 − 4.7 − 15.4 − 0.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.82018 − 3.2 + 25.1 − 27.2 − 5.9 − 21.3 + 0.3 − 21.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.2
2018         Oct. + 17.8 + 16.4 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Nov. + 1.1 + 4.1 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3         Dec. − 5.4 − 6.6 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 1.6 + 3.9 − 2.2 + 2.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. − 10.3 − 8.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 1.1 + 5.9 − 4.9 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr. + 7.4 + 11.0 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 7.5 + 10.4 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9         June − 13.1 − 10.9 − 2.1 − 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         July + 5.3 + 8.7 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1
         Aug. + 1.4 + 4.2 − 2.8 + 1.4 − 4.2 − 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3         Sep. − 2.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
2019         Apr. 2,316.7 1,463.9 1,425.9 253.6 1,015.6 156.8 37.9 261.4 247.8 21.6 189.5 36.7
         May 2,329.6 1,476.9 1,437.9 255.8 1,024.3 157.8 38.9 261.3 247.6 21.5 189.4 36.7
         June 2,339.0 1,486.6 1,447.7 252.7 1,036.8 158.2 38.9 261.0 247.5 21.6 189.2 36.7
         July 2,347.1 1,495.9 1,457.3 260.2 1,039.4 157.8 38.7 260.8 247.2 21.6 188.9 36.8
         Aug. 2,356.7 1,507.0 1,467.5 263.5 1,046.1 157.9 39.6 260.9 247.4 21.5 189.0 36.9
         Sep. 2,352.7 1,504.5 1,464.9 258.4 1,048.8 157.7 39.6 260.9 247.4 21.4 189.0 37.1
Changes*
2017 + 84.7 + 101.1 + 99.8 + 17.5 + 77.8 + 4.5 + 1.3 − 5.0 − 5.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 1.3
2018 + 104.0 + 110.5 + 109.7 + 20.3 + 83.1 + 6.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 5.8 − 0.3
2019         Apr. + 11.8 + 12.3 + 12.6 + 5.9 + 6.6 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2
         May + 12.7 + 13.0 + 12.0 + 2.3 + 8.6 + 1.1 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
         June + 9.5 + 9.8 + 9.8 − 3.2 + 12.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0
         July + 8.0 + 9.2 + 9.6 + 7.5 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. + 9.5 + 11.1 + 10.2 + 3.3 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
         Sep. − 4.0 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 5.1 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
 
 
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
2019         Apr. 229.6 11.2 5.0 2.3 3.9 0.1 12.2 54.3 13.0 27.2 12.9 1.1 12.8
         May 238.8 12.0 5.5 2.3 4.2 0.1 12.1 54.8 13.6 27.1 13.0 1.1 12.9
         June 240.8 14.0 6.1 3.6 4.2 0.1 11.9 57.8 15.1 28.5 13.1 1.1 12.9
         July 234.6 11.2 6.0 0.9 4.2 0.0 11.8 58.0 15.8 27.8 13.3 1.1 12.8
         Aug. 245.2 11.2 5.9 0.9 4.3 0.1 11.8 60.9 18.0 28.3 13.4 1.1 12.9
         Sep. 242.8 10.9 5.5 1.0 4.3 0.1 11.8 64.0 18.6 30.1 14.2 1.1 12.8
Changes*
2017 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 − 0.5
2018 + 16.9 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.5
2019         Apr. − 2.6 + 0.8 − 0.7 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0
         May + 9.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         June + 1.6 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 − + 0.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         July − 6.1 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Sep. − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.5 − − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 201614.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 201713.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 2018
13.6 49.4 212.0 11.1 200.9 571.4 563.9 7.5 20.0 6.2 2.5 − 2019          Apr.
13.7 48.6 212.7 11.0 201.7 571.7 564.2 7.5 19.7 6.1 2.5 −          May13.5 48.5 212.5 10.8 201.7 571.9 564.4 7.5 19.5 6.0 2.5 −          June
13.5 48.3 212.5 10.8 201.7 571.1 563.7 7.4 19.4 6.0 2.5 −          July
13.5 47.9 213.0 11.0 202.0 569.4 562.1 7.3 19.3 5.8 2.5 −          Aug.13.5 47.4 213.5 11.0 202.5 568.2 560.9 7.3 19.1 5.6 2.5 −          Sep.
Changes*
+ 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 2017− 0.2 + 0.4 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.2 − 4.5 − 3.9 − 0.6 − 5.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 2018
− 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2019          Apr.
− 0.0 − 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          May− 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          June
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 −          July
− 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Aug.− 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Sep.
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
56.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 201661.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 201765.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 2018
59.1 29.7 9.2 14.6 5.6 0.0 105.0 14.6 40.9 48.5 1.0 − 2019          Apr.
64.1 34.3 9.6 14.6 5.7 0.0 107.9 15.5 44.0 47.3 1.0 −          May61.7 31.8 9.8 14.5 5.6 0.0 107.3 15.3 42.2 48.7 1.0 −          June
57.5 28.4 9.3 14.2 5.6 0.0 108.0 16.0 42.7 48.2 1.1 −          July
64.6 35.4 9.7 13.8 5.6 0.0 108.6 14.2 44.8 48.4 1.1 −          Aug.61.3 32.1 9.8 13.9 5.6 0.0 106.6 15.7 44.2 45.5 1.2 −          Sep.
Changes*
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 11.8 +11.6 − 0.4 − 2017+ 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 +10.8 − 0.1 − 2018
− 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 1.1 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 2019          Apr.
+ 5.2 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.1 − + 2.8 + 0.9 + 3.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 −          May− 2.8 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.8 + 1.4 + 0.0 −          June
− 4.2 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 −          July
+ 7.1 + 7.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Aug.− 3.3 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.6 − 2.9 + 0.0 −          Sep.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturities
Special Special At 3 on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
2019         May 589.4 582.5 544.4 326.9 38.1 28.1 6.9 6.1 0.1 39.1 35.2 26.4 3.9
         June 589.5 582.7 544.0 326.5 38.6 28.6 6.8 6.1 0.1 38.8 34.9 26.2 3.9
         July 588.6 581.8 543.4 324.8 38.4 28.4 6.8 6.1 0.1 38.7 34.8 26.2 3.9
         Aug. 587.0 580.3 542.2 323.1 38.0 28.1 6.8 6.0 0.1 38.6 34.7 26.1 3.9
         Sep. 585.7 579.0 541.6 319.0 37.5 27.5 6.7 6.0 0.1 38.4 34.4 25.9 3.9
Changes*
2017 − 6.2 − 5.6 + 1.5 − 13.1 − 7.1 − 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 . − 7.2 − 6.7 − 4.4 − 0.5
2018 − 4.7 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 9.1 − 6.5 − 3.6 − 2.6
2019         May + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2.6 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
         June + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0
         July − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Aug. − 1.6 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Sep. − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 4.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
 
 
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
2019         May 1,147.8 136.0 31.8 377.6 91.1 113.7 2.9 25.0 5.4 1,009.1 0.9 0.6 30.4 0.4
         June 1,144.6 132.9 31.6 370.9 91.2 113.6 2.8 23.1 4.8 1,007.9 1.2 0.7 30.1 0.4
         July 1,147.8 130.6 30.0 377.1 92.7 113.6 2.8 23.4 4.8 1,010.7 1.2 0.7 31.2 0.4
         Aug. 1,147.2 127.9 30.1 377.6 95.0 116.0 2.7 23.4 4.9 1,007.8 1.4 0.7 31.1 0.4
         Sep. 1,154.4 125.6 30.2 383.0 96.6 118.6 2.7 24.7 4.7 1,011.1 1.1 0.7 31.1 0.4
Changes*
2017 − 30.8 − 29.7 − 2.1 − 36.7 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 − 22.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0
2018 + 33.6 − 7.8 + 1.5 − 14.3 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 10.5 − 0.3 + 45.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
2019         May + 16.5 − 0.5 + 1.0 + 5.6 + 4.7 + 5.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 11.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.3
         June − 3.7 − 3.1 − 0.2 − 6.6 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 1.7 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.2 −
         July + 3.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 + 6.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 1.0 −
         Aug. − 0.6 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Sep. + 7.2 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 1.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2017 20 229.2 41.8 0.0 15.8 12.3 104.4 24.8 25.1 2.6 23.0 168.6 9.5 3.0 11.0 83.6
2018 20 233.4 39.4 0.0 15.7 11.9 110.2 25.7 25.8 2.8 20.4 174.3 10.0 3.3 11.7 86.6
2019         July 19 237.2 38.3 0.0 16.4 11.7 113.9 26.6 25.8 2.9 20.9 176.6 9.8 3.1 12.0 7.5
         Aug. 19 238.5 39.0 0.0 16.2 11.7 114.5 26.8 25.8 2.9 21.4 176.9 10.0 3.1 12.0 7.3         Sep. 19 235.8 35.0 0.0 16.3 11.6 115.4 26.9 25.9 2.9 19.2 177.4 9.9 1.8 12.0 7.2
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         July 11 164.4 22.7 − 6.8 8.8 88.5 22.6 11.6 1.7 18.8 114.6 9.6 3.1 8.3 4.7
         Aug. 11 165.6 23.4 − 6.7 8.7 88.9 22.8 11.7 1.7 19.5 114.8 9.7 3.1 8.3 4.6         Sep. 11 162.8 19.5 − 6.7 8.7 89.7 22.9 11.7 1.7 17.4 115.1 9.6 1.8 8.3 4.5
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         July 8 72.8 15.6 0.0 9.6 2.9 25.5 4.0 14.2 1.2 2.1 62.0 0.3 − 3.7 2.8
         Aug. 8 72.9 15.6 0.0 9.5 2.9 25.6 4.0 14.2 1.2 1.9 62.2 0.3 − 3.7 2.8         Sep. 8 73.1 15.5 0.0 9.5 2.9 25.7 4.1 14.2 1.2 1.8 62.3 0.3 − 3.7 2.7
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2017 26.7 2.3 7.6 45.3 26.0 39.6 16.4 4.1 4.5 3.4 18.7 16.4 7.4 7.1 6.2 0.2
2018 27.0 2.1 7.4 45.2 25.1 40.2 15.9 4.3 4.8 3.7 19.5 16.6 6.8 6.6 5.5 0.2
2019         July 2.2 0.0 0.7 4.3 2.2 3.9 1.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.1 17.6 7.1 0.6 0.0
         Aug. 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.8 1.9 3.5 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.9 17.5 6.9 0.5 0.0         Sep. 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.6 1.9 3.4 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.9 17.5 6.9 0.6 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         July 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.3 1.6 3.0 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.7 12.6 3.8 0.5 0.0
         Aug. 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.8 1.3 2.7 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.5 12.5 3.6 0.4 0.0         Sep. 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.2 2.6 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.5 12.5 3.6 0.5 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         July 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.0 0.6 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.1 3.3 0.1 0.0
         Aug. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.0 3.3 0.1 0.0         Sep. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 5.0 3.3 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV.  Banks
  
13.  Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with of which:
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2016 51 192 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2017 52 188 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2018         Nov. 49 184 1,456.1 454.1 443.4 206.9 236.5 10.8 519.7 433.1 20.7 412.4 86.6 482.2 313.7
         Dec. 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019         Jan. 50 184 1,451.6 419.4 408.0 190.8 217.2 11.4 541.3 453.3 19.8 433.5 88.0 491.0 309.4
         Feb. 50 186 1,457.9 426.1 413.9 203.7 210.2 12.2 562.1 472.2 19.2 453.1 89.9 469.6 290.3
         Mar. 53 196 1,498.2 446.3 434.3 214.6 219.7 11.9 572.3 480.1 19.3 460.8 92.1 479.7 305.2
         Apr. 53 199 1,517.6 449.4 433.3 212.3 221.1 16.0 565.8 477.7 18.9 458.8 88.1 502.4 313.7
         May 52 198 1,573.6 442.1 425.4 213.1 212.3 16.7 575.5 483.3 19.5 463.9 92.1 556.0 383.3
         June 53 199 1,556.2 429.4 412.4 216.7 195.7 17.0 576.2 478.8 19.5 459.3 97.4 550.6 378.2
         July 53 199 1,564.2 426.9 410.4 222.3 188.0 16.5 572.8 476.9 19.8 457.1 95.9 564.5 390.5
         Aug. 53 199 1,694.2 454.9 437.3 235.0 202.3 17.5 565.3 471.6 19.9 451.7 93.7 674.1 506.9
Changes *
2017 + 1 − 4 − 216.7 − 52.5 − 49.4 − 7.9 − 41.5 − 3.1 − 10.9 − 10.0 − 1.4 − 8.6 − 0.9 − 74.6 − 60.4
2018 − 3 − 5 − 250.2 −101.0 −102.0 − 5.0 − 97.0 + 1.0 − 24.8 − 27.1 + 7.0 − 34.1 + 2.4 − 148.2 − 102.6
2018         Dec. − − 1 − 54.5 − 49.4 − 49.7 − 14.8 − 34.9 + 0.3 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 0.7 − 3.3 + 2.8 − 1.3 − 3.9
2019         Jan. + 1 + 1 + 50.5 + 15.5 + 15.2 − 1.3 + 16.5 + 0.3 + 24.1 + 25.4 − 0.2 + 25.6 − 1.3 + 10.5 + 0.4
         Feb. − + 2 + 5.8 + 5.6 + 4.8 + 12.8 − 8.0 + 0.8 + 18.5 + 17.0 − 0.7 + 17.7 + 1.4 − 21.7 − 20.0
         Mar. + 3 + 10 + 40.4 + 18.1 + 18.4 + 11.0 + 7.5 − 0.4 + 5.4 + 3.7 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 10.0 + 13.3
         Apr. − + 3 + 19.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 22.7 + 8.4
         May − 1 − 1 + 55.6 − 8.0 − 8.7 + 0.8 − 9.5 + 0.7 + 8.9 + 4.7 + 0.6 + 4.2 + 4.1 + 53.2 + 69.2
         June + 1 + 1 − 16.0 − 10.1 − 10.5 + 3.6 − 14.1 + 0.4 + 6.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 6.2 − 4.0 − 2.7
         July − − + 6.9 − 4.5 − 3.9 + 5.6 − 9.6 − 0.6 − 8.1 − 6.0 + 0.3 − 6.3 − 2.1 + 12.8 + 10.3
         Aug. − − + 129.1 + 26.3 + 25.3 + 12.7 + 12.7 + 1.0 − 11.5 − 8.7 + 0.1 − 8.8 − 2.8 + 108.6 + 114.9
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 −
2018         Nov. 17 45 239.8 51.0 45.0 20.4 24.7 6.0 136.8 110.8 13.6 97.2 26.1 52.0 −
         Dec. 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 −
2019         Jan. 16 42 234.8 49.0 42.8 18.1 24.6 6.2 135.4 109.4 13.9 95.4 26.0 50.5 −
         Feb. 16 42 236.0 50.6 44.6 19.0 25.6 5.9 134.3 108.5 13.9 94.6 25.8 51.2 −
         Mar. 16 42 246.1 53.9 48.3 19.2 29.1 5.6 141.2 114.2 13.8 100.5 27.0 51.1 −
         Apr. 17 43 245.6 53.9 48.5 19.9 28.6 5.4 142.6 116.0 14.0 102.0 26.6 49.1 −
         May 17 43 245.4 54.3 48.9 19.1 29.8 5.4 145.4 119.0 14.4 104.7 26.3 45.7 −
         June 17 43 249.3 57.4 51.9 19.1 32.7 5.6 146.8 120.5 14.3 106.2 26.3 45.1 −
         July 16 42 248.9 54.8 49.4 18.8 30.6 5.4 147.5 121.7 14.5 107.2 25.7 46.6 −
         Aug. 16 42 248.3 56.6 50.8 19.0 31.8 5.8 141.1 116.5 14.5 102.0 24.6 50.7 −
Changes *
2017 − − 3 − 33.3 − 4.9 − 2.4 + 3.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 8.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 20.2 −
2018 − 3 − 7 − 42.2 − 20.9 − 19.9 − 4.9 − 15.1 − 1.0 − 14.2 − 11.6 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 7.0 −
2018         Dec. − − 2 − 2.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.3 − 2.4 −
2019         Jan. − 1 − 1 − 2.2 − 2.1 − 2.5 − 2.0 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 2.4 + 1.3 + 0.8 −
         Feb. − − + 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 0.9 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.4 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.7 −
         Mar. − − + 6.0 + 2.8 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 − 0.5 + 6.5 + 5.3 − 0.1 + 5.4 + 1.2 − 3.3 −
         Apr. + 1 + 1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 2.0 −
         May − − − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.4 −
         June − − + 5.0 + 3.5 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 −
         July − 1 − 1 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 1.5 −
         Aug. − − − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 6.8 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.1 + 4.1 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
November 2019
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of which:paper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 20161,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
931.9 611.9 392.8 219.1 319.9 13.1 11.3 1.8 306.8 101.4 53.8 369.0 307.1 2018          Nov.
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6          Dec.
928.8 622.0 420.2 201.8 306.7 9.5 7.7 1.7 297.3 93.9 54.0 375.0 304.6 2019          Jan.
952.3 635.2 419.8 215.4 317.1 11.8 9.9 1.8 305.4 97.2 54.2 354.1 287.1          Feb.981.9 664.9 448.7 216.2 317.1 11.4 9.7 1.8 305.6 98.2 53.7 364.4 302.3          Mar.
994.1 675.5 467.6 207.9 318.6 10.8 8.4 2.4 307.9 100.2 54.0 369.3 303.1          Apr.
989.9 667.6 450.7 216.9 322.2 10.7 8.4 2.2 311.6 103.2 54.3 426.2 380.3          May979.6 670.4 468.5 201.8 309.2 12.0 9.4 2.6 297.2 94.4 54.4 427.8 376.0          June
960.5 660.0 451.8 208.2 300.5 13.5 10.8 2.7 287.0 105.8 53.7 444.2 390.6          July
964.6 659.6 455.0 204.6 305.0 16.3 13.6 2.7 288.7 101.9 53.9 573.9 508.6          Aug.
Changes *
− 97.3 − 80.7 − 52.1 − 28.6 − 16.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 17.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 86.5 − 58.1 2017− 113.1 − 84.7 + 56.0 −140.8 − 28.3 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 23.8 − 9.4 + 2.0 − 139.7 − 105.7 2018
− 33.9 − 4.0 + 36.0 − 40.0 − 29.9 − 1.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 28.2 − 9.8 + 0.1 − 10.1 − 3.7 2018          Dec.
+ 31.7 + 14.9 − 8.6 + 23.5 + 16.8 − 2.0 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 18.7 + 2.7 − 0.0 + 16.1 + 2.0 2019          Jan.
+ 22.7 + 12.4 − 0.4 + 12.8 + 10.3 + 2.3 + 2.2 + 0.1 + 8.0 + 3.0 + 0.2 − 20.9 − 17.5          Feb.+ 27.3 + 27.4 + 28.8 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 10.3 + 15.3          Mar.
+ 12.2 + 10.6 + 18.9 − 8.4 + 1.6 − 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 0.8          Apr.
− 5.1 − 8.6 − 16.9 + 8.3 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 56.9 + 77.2          May− 7.8 + 5.1 + 17.8 − 12.7 − 12.9 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 14.2 − 7.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 4.3          June
− 21.0 − 12.2 − 16.7 + 4.6 − 8.9 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 10.4 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 16.3 + 14.6          July
+ 2.4 − 2.0 + 3.2 − 5.3 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 2.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.2 + 129.7 + 118.0          Aug.
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 − 2018
172.2 72.6 35.7 37.0 99.5 9.1 5.5 3.6 90.4 13.7 22.5 31.4 − 2018          Nov.
171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 −          Dec.
168.3 70.9 35.5 35.4 97.4 7.0 4.3 2.7 90.4 16.1 21.8 28.7 − 2019          Jan.
168.3 69.6 35.4 34.2 98.7 7.9 5.2 2.7 90.8 16.1 21.8 29.8 −          Feb.174.4 75.1 37.8 37.3 99.3 7.5 4.8 2.7 91.7 16.5 21.8 33.4 −          Mar.
173.1 75.7 36.4 39.3 97.5 7.6 4.9 2.7 89.9 16.6 22.2 33.6 −          Apr.
172.7 74.8 36.0 38.8 97.9 7.4 4.6 2.8 90.5 16.5 22.3 33.9 −          May177.0 74.7 37.9 36.8 102.4 7.7 4.9 2.8 94.6 16.5 22.4 33.3 −          June
176.4 72.8 37.6 35.3 103.6 7.7 4.9 2.8 95.9 16.5 22.3 33.7 −          July
175.8 74.7 37.9 36.7 101.1 8.3 5.6 2.7 92.8 16.5 22.3 33.8 −          Aug.
Changes *
− 32.8 − 33.7 − 22.0 − 11.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2017− 37.4 − 25.8 − 13.7 − 12.0 − 11.7 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 8.8 + 1.3 − 1.8 − 4.3 − 2018
− 0.3 − 0.9 + 0.4 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.9 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 2018          Dec.
− 3.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.5 − 2.1 − 2.1 − − 0.4 + 1.8 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 2019          Jan.
− 0.3 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 1.0 −          Feb.+ 5.6 + 5.3 + 2.4 + 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Mar.
− 1.3 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 −          Apr.
− 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          May+ 5.2 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 1.5 + 4.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 −          June
− 1.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          July
− 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 −          Aug.
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
November 2019
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019         Aug. . . . . . .
         Sep.  p 13,359.8 133.6 133.2 1,388.5 1,255.3 0.0
         Oct.  p 13,452.0 134.5 134.1 ... ... ...
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019         Aug. . . . . . . .
         Sep.  p 3,703,927 27.7 37,039 36,889 456,618 419,729 0
         Oct.  p 3,733,456 27.8 37,335 37,185 ... ... ...
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019         Aug. 7,764 5,405 3,031 11,903 6,859 104 1,932
         Sep. 7,674 5,386 2,854 12,068 6,916 101 1,890
         Oct. 7,839 5,482 2,717 12,169 6,979 107 1,892
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019         Aug. 2,583,771 1,192 430,423 583,066 116,534
         Sep. 2,583,838 1,051 419,906 582,270 116,860
         Oct. 2,615,189 935 417,595 580,772 118,965
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
November 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
1. ECB interest rates 2. Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code  1 
2005 Dec.                 6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr.                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan.                1 2.57 2009 Jan.                1 1.62
         July               13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar.                 8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov.                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dec.                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan.                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug.                 9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct.               11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan.                1 0.12
         Dec.               13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan.                1 1.14
2013 May                 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan.                1 −0.13
2007 Mar.               14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov.                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan.                1 1.21
2014 June               11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan.                1 −0.63
2008 July                 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep.                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct.                 8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan.                1 1.37
         Oct.                 9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec.                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan.                1 −0.83
         Nov.               12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec.               10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar.                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan.                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July               1 3.19
2009 Jan.               21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2019 Sep.                18 −0.50 0.00 − 0.25
         Mar.               11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan.                1 3.32
         Apr.                 8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2019 Oct.                 9 2,289 2,289 0.0 0−−−7
         Oct.               16 1,882 1,882 0.0 0−−−7
         Oct.               23 1,070 1,070 0.0 0−−−7
         Oct.               30 2,236 2,236 0.0 0−−−7
         Nov.                 6 1,560 1,560 0.0 0−−−7
         Nov.               13 1,547 1,547 0.0 0−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2019 Aug.               29 1,138 1,138 2 0 . 0 0−−− 9 1
         Sep.               25 3,396 3,396 2 ... − − − 1,099
         Sep.               26 848 848 2 ... − − − 84
         Oct.               31 592 592 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4. Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR  2 
Monthlyaverage EONIA  
1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2019         Apr. − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.23 − 0.11
         May − 0.37 − 0.38 − 0.37 − 0.31 − 0.24 − 0.13         June − 0.36 − 0.40 − 0.38 − 0.33 − 0.28 − 0.19
         July − 0.37 − 0.40 − 0.40 − 0.36 − 0.35 − 0.28
         Aug. − 0.36 − 0.41 − 0.41 − 0.41 − 0.40 − 0.36         Sep. − 0.40 − 0.45 − 0.45 − 0.42 − 0.39 − 0.34
         Oct. − 0.46 − 0.50 − 0.46 − 0.41 − 0.36 − 0.30
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published v ia
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the Reuters. 2Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by
EURIBOR. 1Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for inter- Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
bank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
November 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Sep. 0.24 63,849 1.25 216,273 0.03 66,871 0.90 27,188
         Oct. 0.24 63,652 1.24 215,766 0.04 66,681 0.89 27,535
         Nov. 0.24 62,369 1.23 215,502 0.03 68,118 0.88 28,176
         Dec. 0.23 63,057 1.23 217,570 0.01 68,323 0.87 28,597
2019         Jan. 0.23 62,837 1.21 217,168 0.01 68,701 0.86 28,839
         Feb. 0.23 62,576 1.20 217,250 0.01 69,389 0.85 28,815
         Mar. 0.23 62,652 1.20 217,159 0.02 67,395 0.85 29,229
         Apr. 0.22 62,253 1.19 216,952 0.02 67,114 0.84 28,899
         May 0.21 60,966 1.18 217,558 0.03 66,325 0.83 28,799
         June 0.22 60,652 1.17 217,383 0.03 63,711 0.83 28,547
         July 0.22 60,326 1.16 217,260 0.03 63,826 0.85 27,984
         Aug. 0.22 60,071 1.15 217,527 0.02 66,066 0.84 27,809
         Sep. 0.21 59,625 1.15 217,918 0.01 65,179 0.85 27,581
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2018         Sep. 2.27 4,306 1.89 26,196 2.50 1,186,420 7.00 49,160 3.74 86,205 3.85 313,297
         Oct. 2.25 4,311 1.87 26,171 2.48 1,191,048 7.17 50,033 3.54 85,254 3.83 313,604
         Nov. 2.25 4,299 1.87 26,265 2.46 1,196,579 7.01 49,658 3.53 85,715 3.83 314,344
         Dec. 2.27 4,242 1.86 26,203 2.44 1,199,525 7.10 51,196 3.53 85,387 3.81 312,896
2019         Jan. 2.27 4,379 1.85 25,867 2.42 1,200,982 7.19 49,709 3.52 85,499 3.79 314,143
         Feb. 2.28 4,300 1.85 25,861 2.41 1,204,756 7.17 49,608 3.51 85,678 3.78 314,960
         Mar. 2.27 4,424 1.85 25,905 2.39 1,210,350 7.16 49,935 3.50 86,453 3.78 314,929
         Apr. 2.26 4,418 1.79 25,875 2.37 1,218,785 7.04 50,058 3.49 86,872 3.77 313,007
         May 2.26 4,534 1.79 26,212 2.35 1,224,628 7.13 49,275 3.49 87,410 3.76 314,341
         June 2.23 4,575 1.78 26,445 2.33 1,230,368 7.11 51,281 3.49 87,504 3.76 314,057
         July 2.22 4,643 1.77 26,544 2.31 1,236,461 7.06 50,115 3.48 86,724 3.74 315,493
         Aug. 2.16 4,658 1.76 26,765 2.29 1,243,945 7.08 49,280 3.46 87,412 3.74 316,798
         Sep. 2.16 4,636 1.75 26,538 2.27 1,250,520 7.23 51,134 3.46 87,317 3.71 315,908
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Sep. 2.22 150,891 1.74 144,942 2.10 691,969
         Oct. 2.21 147,714 1.73 147,743 2.08 696,222
         Nov. 2.20 148,399 1.72 151,603 2.07 702,286
         Dec. 2.24 146,721 1.72 150,727 2.06 703,722
2019         Jan. 2.22 151,176 1.70 152,824 2.04 707,410
         Feb. 2.22 154,912 1.70 154,061 2.03 712,194
         Mar. 2.21 159,432 1.69 155,413 2.02 713,389
         Apr. 2.20 157,460 1.66 159,372 2.00 716,684
         May 2.14 159,767 1.67 162,699 1.99 722,437
         June 2.14 167,044 1.66 164,225 1.98 722,521
         July 2.13 163,263 1.64 165,839 1.96 724,902
         Aug. 2.14 163,138 1.64 167,486 1.95 729,505
         Sep. 2.18 164,504 1.64 167,199 1.92 730,555
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined eff ective rates. Both
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans bu t not any
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administrat ion, preparation of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan a ssociations
corporations include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the re porting agents in
other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and
specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education, e tc.6Including overdrafts
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 on p. 47   ). 
are collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
November 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8  of
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2018         Sep. 0.01 1,391,356 0.31 4,831 0.40 476 0.64 645 0.15 537,477 0.25 38,579
         Oct. 0.01 1,399,998 0.28 4,853 0.38 772 0.70 803 0.15 537,728 0.25 38,051
         Nov. 0.02 1,425,632 0.30 4,599 0.39 752 0.65 752 0.15 538,222 0.25 37,420         Dec. 0.02 1,432,861 0.28 5,439 0.26 642 0.65 702 0.14 540,271 0.25 37,155
2019         Jan. 0.02 1,432,335 0.28 6,375 0.44 603 0.69 1,074 0.14 540,608 0.24 36,693
         Feb. 0.02 1,446,689 0.29 5,693 0.45 619 0.68 1,032 0.13 541,529 0.24 36,726         Mar. 0.01 1,451,707 0.29 5,595 0.34 837 0.73 978 0.13 543,711 0.25 37,036
         Apr. 0.01 1,464,110 0.29 5,357 0.33 485 0.72 868 0.14 543,806 0.25 37,197
         May 0.01 1,477,188 0.13 4,250 0.52 665 0.67 737 0.13 543,432 0.26 37,857         June 0.01 1,487,229 0.10 3,429 0.44 330 0.68 713 0.13 543,047 0.27 38,409
         July 0.01 1,496,476 0.12 3,834 0.49 378 0.79 965 0.13 542,420 0.27 38,137
         Aug. 0.01 1,507,758 0.15 3,511 0.39 522 0.73 907 0.12 541,175 0.26 37,798         Sep. 0.01 1,504,997 0.14 3,322 0.50 342 0.63 820 0.12 540,525 0.25 37,218
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Sep. − 0.02 433,078 − 0.10 9,835 0.07 347 0.23 375
         Oct. − 0.03 445,427 − 0.07 12,291 0.17 518 0.66 891
         Nov. − 0.03 448,301 − 0.08 12,192 0.13 376 0.78 1,035         Dec. − 0.03 445,954 − 0.07 15,012 0.14 308 0.55 1,109
2019         Jan. − 0.03 443,971 0.01 16,527 0.08 549 0.40 545
         Feb. − 0.03 439,934 0.02 15,774 0.11 277 0.31 238         Mar. − 0.03 443,524 0.01 15,807 0.07 389 0.65 299
         Apr. − 0.03 451,668 0.01 14,136 0.09 374 0.34 278
         May − 0.03 460,120 − 0.03 12,080 0.23 641 0.40 311         June − 0.03 448,314 − 0.09 10,189 0.19 421 0.25 190
         July − 0.03 460,551 − 0.08 11,503 0.00 86 0.66 442
         Aug. − 0.03 465,696 − 0.17 11,745 − 0.06 135 0.45 212         Sep. − 0.04 468,092 − 0.22 11,961 − 0.33 1,000
x . x .
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million
2018         Sep. 5.96 5.91 8,166 7.33 1,629 8.14 372 4.41 3,239 6.79 4,555
         Oct. 6.06 5.99 8,915 7.34 1,797 7.68 421 4.60 3,527 6.83 4,967
         Nov. 5.84 5.83 8,668 7.19 1,694 7.21 489 4.40 3,599 6.80 4,580         Dec. 5.80 5.81 6,514 7.04 1,133 7.58 518 4.45 2,820 6.72 3,176
2019         Jan. 5.98 5.98 9,985 7.13 2,196 8.08 544 4.53 3,696 6.72 5,745
         Feb. 5.80 5.83 9,354 6.98 1,934 7.98 486 4.44 3,556 6.55 5,312         Mar. 5.73 5.72 9,868 6.88 1,765 8.48 528 4.25 3,929 6.52 5,411
         Apr. 5.83 5.76 9,830 6.86 1,767 8.44 504 4.36 3,762 6.47 5,564
         May 5.86 5.80 9,893 6.79 1,839 8.80 428 4.46 3,770 6.45 5,695         June 6.06 5.98 8,345 7.01 1,554 9.23 425 4.52 3,222 6.68 4,698
         July 6.17 6.11 10,570 7.13 2,173 9.19 493 4.63 3,859 6.79 6,219
         Aug. 6.06 6.00 9,351 6.98 1,957 9.68 420 4.51 3,376 6.63 5,555         Sep. 5.92 5.87 8,929 6.72 1,837 9.15 475 4.46 3,167 6.42 5,288
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  .+For deposits with an agreed maturity and all means that all outstanding deposit and lending business at the end of the month has
loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business covers to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of inter est.7Estimated. The
all new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and the bank. volume of new business is extrapolated to form the underlying tota l using a
The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates of all new grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including
agreements concluded during the reporting month. For overnight deposits, deposits fidelity and growth premiums. 9Excluding overdrafts. 10Annual percentage rate of
redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business charge, which contains other related charges which may occur fo r enquiries,
is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the sake of simplicity. This administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
November 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans to households for other purposes  5  with an initial rate fixation of
of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
Loans to households
2018         Sep. 2.08 4,952 1.76 1,425 1.98 2,265 2.51 634 2.05 2,053
         Oct. 2.11 5,549 1.84 1,952 2.01 2,413 2.48 810 2.08 2,326
         Nov. 1.96 5,394 1.75 1,743 1.76 2,263 2.51 720 1.98 2,411
         Dec. 1.89 5,777 1.79 1,716 1.76 2,554 2.42 717 1.87 2,506
2019         Jan. 1.96 5,889 1.84 2,160 1.81 2,541 2.39 860 1.96 2,488
         Feb. 1.99 4,707 1.78 1,409 1.82 2,095 2.59 661 1.96 1,951
         Mar. 1.90 5,598 1.77 1,515 1.68 2,497 2.51 772 1.92 2,329
         Apr. 2.01 5,684 1.88 1,734 2.01 2,214 2.46 815 1.86 2,655
         May 1.90 5,259 1.75 1,397 1.79 2,312 2.44 813 1.82 2,134
         June 1.80 5,098 1.80 1,128 1.69 2,120 2.32 731 1.73 2,247
         July 1.84 5,915 1.78 1,869 1.80 2,429 2.43 876 1.69 2,610
         Aug. 1.79 4,740 1.71 1,047 1.76 1,855 2.53 657 1.60 2,228
         Sep. 1.78 4,755 1.73 1,279 1.82 2,154 2.34 628 1.55 1,973
of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2018         Sep. 2.04 3,403 . . 1.91 1,586 2.52 491 2.02 1,326
         Oct. 2.11 3,858 . . 2.04 1,691 2.49 597 2.04 1,570
         Nov. 1.96 3,869 . . 1.81 1,526 2.50 561 1.93 1,782
         Dec. 1.96 4,139 . . 1.94 1,777 2.42 546 1.83 1,816
2019         Jan. 2.00 4,236 . . 1.94 1,774 2.46 640 1.89 1,822
         Feb. 2.02 3,331 . . 1.94 1,502 2.61 504 1.89 1,325
         Mar. 1.99 3,895 . . 1.95 1,539 2.53 580 1.86 1,776
         Apr. 2.04 3,962 . . 2.09 1,654 2.46 619 1.83 1,689
         May 1.95 3,864 . . 1.91 1,705 2.54 593 1.76 1,566
         June 1.90 3,540 . . 1.94 1,397 2.43 515 1.70 1,628
         July 1.92 4,264 . . 1.99 1,719 2.43 676 1.68 1,869
         Aug. 1.91 3,192 . . 1.97 1,203 2.64 483 1.63 1,506
         Sep. 1.79 3,219 . . 1.80 1,458 2.42 449 1.57 1,312
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans  3  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) Renegotiated loans  9 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2018         Sep. 1.92 1.86 17,864 1.96 3,046 2.11 1,973 1.71 1,544 1.69 5,923 1.94 8,424
         Oct. 1.91 1.86 21,275 1.94 4,124 2.08 2,443 1.68 1,884 1.71 7,669 1.97 9,279
         Nov. 1.94 1.88 20,357 1.94 3,423 2.02 2,313 1.74 1,779 1.72 6,738 1.98 9,527
         Dec. 1.90 1.85 17,630 1.89 3,168 2.02 2,113 1.71 1,519 1.70 6,088 1.94 7,910
2019         Jan. 1.92 1.86 20,907 1.93 4,619 2.09 2,475 1.69 1,962 1.70 7,080 1.95 9,390
         Feb. 1.84 1.78 19,352 1.84 3,469 2.04 2,163 1.65 1,749 1.63 6,344 1.85 9,095
         Mar. 1.80 1.74 21,335 1.83 3,606 2.04 2,413 1.64 1,755 1.59 6,884 1.79 10,283
         Apr. 1.72 1.67 23,105 1.76 4,326 2.04 2,570 1.48 2,074 1.53 7,760 1.72 10,701
         May 1.68 1.63 22,629 1.74 3,609 2.00 2,560 1.50 2,030 1.46 7,324 1.67 10,715
         June 1.63 1.57 20,164 1.65 3,245 1.98 2,280 1.44 1,695 1.41 6,429 1.61 9,760
         July 1.54 1.49 25,672 1.64 4,571 1.98 2,743 1.43 2,107 1.34 8,473 1.49 12,348
         Aug. 1.43 1.38 22,520 1.53 3,272 1.86 2,529 1.38 1,684 1.23 6,856 1.36 11,450
         Sep. 1.34 1.28 21,803 1.45 3,348 1.88 2,182 1.38 1,613 1.14 6,714 1.24 11,294
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2018         Sep. . 1.82 7,495 . . 2.13 664 1.51 715 1.65 2,604 1.95 3,512
         Oct. . 1.81 9,201 . . 1.98 880 1.51 846 1.67 3,351 1.96 4,124
         Nov. . 1.83 8,504 . . 1.95 750 1.53 771 1.67 2,910 1.98 4,073
         Dec. . 1.79 7,242 . . 2.02 694 1.49 670 1.64 2,592 1.93 3,286
2019         Jan. . 1.81 9,238 . . 2.04 922 1.50 948 1.65 3,196 1.96 4,172
         Feb. . 1.72 8,040 . . 2.07 682 1.45 859 1.56 2,709 1.84 3,790
         Mar. . 1.68 8,615 . . 2.06 732 1.43 768 1.51 2,924 1.77 4,191
         Apr. . 1.63 9,886 . . 2.02 933 1.40 986 1.47 3,469 1.71 4,498
         May . 1.56 9,434 . . 1.90 945 1.30 879 1.39 3,118 1.65 4,492
         June . 1.52 8,277 . . 1.98 820 1.28 744 1.35 2,732 1.59 3,981
         July . 1.44 10,426 . . 1.96 944 1.24 935 1.30 3,493 1.48 5,054
         Aug. . 1.32 9,008 . . 1.90 732 1.19 762 1.17 2,860 1.35 4,654
         Sep. . 1.22 8,966 . . 1.89 689 1.19 689 1.08 2,919 1.21 4,669
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . For   
footnote 11, see p. 47   .  

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
November 2019
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12 Revolving loans  12 
and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 Extended and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 
Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 credit card debt Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Sep. 8.18 40,096 8.27 31,781 14.79 4,421 3.18 76,148 3.19 75,723
         Oct. 8.16 39,591 8.24 31,353 14.79 4,366 3.13 74,312 3.15 73,892
         Nov. 7.88 40,395 7.93 31,901 14.77 4,429 3.11 74,306 3.13 73,881         Dec. 7.86 41,799 7.96 32,782 14.75 4,585 3.14 73,787 3.16 73,380
2019         Jan. 8.01 40,499 7.96 32,586 14.78 4,389 3.09 76,006 3.10 75,622
         Feb. 7.99 40,394 7.99 32,324 14.76 4,384 3.09 78,104 3.10 77,717         Mar. 7.98 40,531 7.97 32,533 14.75 4,355 3.06 80,843 3.07 80,447
         Apr. 7.78 40,783 7.93 31,833 14.75 4,416 3.04 78,782 3.06 78,390
         May 7.90 39,977 7.92 31,720 14.76 4,369 2.98 78,903 2.99 78,496         June 7.86 41,429 7.92 32,848 14.77 4,421 2.92 84,632 2.94 84,230
         July 7.72 40,774 7.81 32,054 14.77 4,372 2.92 80,865 2.94 80,466
         Aug. 7.79 40,128 7.84 31,484 14.78 4,450 2.91 81,292 2.92 80,923         Sep. 7.91 41,962 7.91 33,243 15.08 4,561 2.97 82,840 2.99 82,421
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of
Renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2018         Sep. 1.26 76,448 1.40 22,010 2.04 9,668 2.49 1,315 1.94 1,180 0.98 53,010 1.78 3,023 1.66 8,252
         Oct. 1.28 78,085 1.39 21,850 2.04 10,699 2.50 1,580 1.92 1,403 0.98 52,918 1.64 3,158 1.72 8,327
         Nov. 1.27 74,844 1.47 18,178 2.05 9,884 2.46 1,578 1.91 1,400 0.96 50,045 1.80 3,422 1.63 8,515         Dec. 1.29 96,525 1.46 25,307 2.06 10,205 2.40 1,480 1.85 1,434 1.02 62,907 1.72 5,156 1.60 15,343
2019         Jan. 1.24 74,566 1.42 20,900 2.01 10,992 2.43 1,491 1.94 1,376 0.96 50,703 1.46 2,676 1.58 7,328
         Feb. 1.25 65,642 1.46 16,418 2.04 9,918 2.51 1,338 1.86 1,136 0.97 43,885 1.37 3,016 1.56 6,349         Mar. 1.29 77,548 1.41 22,154 2.05 11,060 2.56 1,534 1.85 1,391 1.05 52,989 1.49 2,834 1.43 7,740
         Apr. 1.21 81,708 1.38 21,675 2.10 10,283 2.46 1,606 1.76 1,464 0.95 55,315 1.26 3,354 1.44 9,686
         May 1.19 75,507 1.38 19,256 2.12 9,981 2.52 1,587 1.76 1,374 0.91 51,534 1.45 3,207 1.40 7,824         June 1.18 84,377 1.28 25,393 2.08 10,633 2.51 1,407 1.65 1,312 0.94 58,540 1.21 3,408 1.40 9,077
         July 1.19 85,200 1.32 22,605 2.08 10,553 2.52 1,630 1.59 1,640 0.91 56,383 1.69 4,920 1.24 10,074
         Aug. 1.13 70,037 1.32 19,327 2.02 8,816 2.54 1,375 1.55 1,248 0.88 47,954 1.71 3,280 1.17 7,364         Sep. 1.18 81,368 1.27 23,108 1.98 10,331 2.46 1,320 1.42 1,224 1.00 55,479 1.53 2,877 1.03 10,137
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2018         Sep. 1.56 10,319 . . 1.89 576 2.57 124 1.83 309 1.33 6,391 2.52 646 1.79 2,273
         Oct. 1.55 9,237 . . 1.96 640 2.64 138 1.84 376 1.32 5,296 1.77 627 1.80 2,160
         Nov. 1.61 9,181 . . 1.96 528 2.64 140 1.79 379 1.41 5,283 2.15 824 1.72 2,027         Dec. 1.50 16,695 . . 1.90 607 2.55 122 1.68 411 1.37 8,845 2.04 1,266 1.51 5,444
2019         Jan. 1.42 9,732 . . 1.83 630 2.46 149 1.84 429 1.20 5,503 1.90 464 1.57 2,557
         Feb. 1.42 7,982 . . 1.90 485 2.59 151 1.70 323 1.23 4,383 1.46 648 1.56 1,992         Mar. 1.49 11,158 . . 1.87 508 2.65 144 1.78 388 1.40 7,357 1.71 520 1.53 2,241
         Apr. 1.39 10,596 . . 1.81 620 2.43 162 1.60 417 1.25 5,977 1.95 533 1.41 2,887
         May
x . x . . . 1.94 565 x . x . 1.58 381 1.50 6,363 2.17 355 1.49 2,156
         June 1.47 10,380 . . 1.80 493 2.86 126 1.55 326 1.41 6,221 1.31 448 1.51 2,766
         July 1.34 11,662 . . 1.80 595 2.81 152 1.46 466 1.22 6,100 1.63 1,548 1.26 2,801
         Aug. 1.49 8,835 . . 1.96 474 2.53 152 1.28 357 1.45 4,757 2.16 957 1.15 2,138         Sep. 1.30 12,810 . . 1.86 487 2.80 113 1.26 378 1.27 7,570 1.95 1,093 1.03 3,169
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . debit balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
11For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between custome rs and the
if collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) bank. 14Including convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is
in at least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period betweenassigned. 12Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the payment transactions effected with the card during one billing cycle and the date at
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become due. 15The amount
giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.
decrease as funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; xDominated by the business of one or two banks. Therefore, the value cannot be
(d) there is no obligation of regular repayment of funds. 13Overdrafts are defined as published because of confidentiality. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
November 2019
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1. Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and fund Financial technical Non-financial Remaining
year/quarter Total deposits  1 securities Loans  2 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
 
2016         Q4 2,189.4 361.5 371.0 374.6 308.6 623.2 3.3 44.1 32.4 70.6
2017         Q1 2,189.7 355.4 377.5 367.7 297.7 635.8 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
         Q2 2,178.4 344.0 378.9 365.2 302.0 643.8 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6
         Q3 2,188.1 331.2 386.1 371.0 305.6 650.5 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.4
         Q4 2,212.2 320.9 387.0 354.3 336.1 671.3 2.9 48.2 34.3 57.3
2018         Q1 2,217.9 344.3 394.6 327.1 343.3 663.1 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.5
         Q2 2,226.3 347.5 400.2 320.1 347.1 668.0 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6
         Q3 2,224.8 327.3 401.2 328.7 350.5 675.0 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6
         Q4 2,213.2 318.2 400.4 330.4 349.8 665.7 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019         Q1 2,343.8 332.2 431.9 329.6 381.6 707.7 2.6 59.5 37.1 61.6
         Q2 2,406.3 336.8 449.3 338.5 388.2 734.8 3.6 57.8 37.1 60.3
Life insurance
2016         Q4 1,197.3 231.3 182.7 223.0 50.7 456.9 2.1 9.6 19.1 21.9
2017         Q1 1,170.5 223.8 185.3 217.2 37.2 462.6 1.8 8.2 19.1 15.3
         Q2 1,172.8 215.7 189.5 217.6 38.6 467.1 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3
         Q3 1,177.5 207.6 193.6 220.6 38.4 472.5 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0
         Q4 1,193.2 199.2 192.4 226.1 41.4 487.8 1.8 8.6 20.0 16.0
2018         Q1 1,187.6 213.0 199.0 207.0 43.1 480.9 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
         Q2 1,195.2 216.2 202.0 201.1 46.3 486.1 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
         Q3 1,194.1 201.0 202.2 209.8 47.4 491.2 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
         Q4 1,185.2 194.5 200.1 208.4 50.4 484.6 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019         Q1 1,237.8 202.8 213.4 205.9 52.7 516.7 1.6 10.4 20.2 14.1
         Q2 1,289.5 205.8 227.1 213.9 55.3 537.5 2.3 10.0 20.2 17.3
Non-life insurance
2016         Q4 583.5 118.9 98.6 91.8 56.8 152.0 0.5 26.8 9.0 29.0
2017         Q1 606.7 120.3 102.5 92.1 56.9 157.3 0.3 34.1 9.1 34.2
         Q2 603.7 116.8 103.9 91.2 58.5 160.4 0.4 33.3 9.1 30.1
         Q3 603.1 111.9 106.2 92.9 58.6 162.9 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4
         Q4 606.7 111.6 108.1 82.2 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.4 9.7 26.5
2018         Q1 623.1 120.1 112.5 75.1 72.3 166.9 0.3 34.6 9.8 31.4
         Q2 621.6 120.0 115.3 72.9 73.4 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
         Q3 618.0 116.2 115.6 72.9 74.4 168.8 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
         Q4 616.1 113.7 117.4 73.7 73.8 167.4 0.2 33.4 10.8 25.5
2019         Q1 655.5 119.2 128.0 74.2 75.7 177.0 0.3 38.3 11.1 31.6
         Q2 665.0 119.8 131.9 75.6 76.8 182.9 0.4 37.5 11.0 29.1
Reinsurance  3 
2016         Q4 408.6 11.3 89.7 59.7 201.0 14.3 0.7 7.7 4.3 19.7
2017         Q1 412.5 11.4 89.8 58.4 203.6 15.9 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
         Q2 401.9 11.6 85.5 56.5 204.8 16.3 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2
         Q3 407.5 11.7 86.3 57.5 208.6 15.1 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9
         Q4 412.3 10.2 86.5 45.9 223.9 17.6 0.7 8.2 4.7 14.7
2018         Q1 407.2 11.2 83.1 45.0 227.8 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
         Q2 409.5 11.3 82.9 46.1 227.4 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
         Q3 412.7 10.0 83.4 46.0 228.7 14.9 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
         Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019         Q1 450.5 10.2 90.5 49.5 253.1 14.0 0.7 10.8 5.8 15.9
         Q2 451.9 11.2 90.3 49.0 256.1 14.4 0.8 10.3 5.8 13.9
Pension funds  4 
2016         Q4 609.6 106.4 61.1 29.7 19.9 328.1 − 6.7 37.0 20.8
2017         Q1 617.0 103.4 60.3 30.1 20.3 337.7 − 6.7 37.5 20.9
         Q2 624.5 102.7 60.6 30.3 20.7 344.3 − 6.8 38.1 21.1
         Q3 633.7 100.6 61.7 30.3 21.2 353.1 − 7.0 38.6 21.3
         Q4 645.5 96.0 63.5 30.6 21.6 364.5 − 7.1 40.3 21.8
2018         Q1 646.8 94.8 63.1 31.0 22.0 366.1 − 7.2 40.6 21.9
         Q2 652.7 95.2 62.8 31.5 22.9 369.9 − 7.3 41.1 22.1
         Q3 656.4 92.0 62.6 31.6 23.3 376.3 − 7.3 41.5 21.9
         Q4 663.0 91.4 63.4 32.0 23.5 380.3 − 7.4 42.6 22.3
2019         Q1 680.4 89.4 67.6 32.1 24.2 393.2 − 7.5 43.6 22.8
         Q2 692.5 87.4 70.8 32.7 24.6 401.9 − 7.5 43.9 23.7
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- ed on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower s’ note loans and
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- registered Pfandbriefe. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by pri-
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. *Valuation of list- mary insurers, which is included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the insti-
ed securities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB’s securities data- tutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Accou nts. Pension funds
base. 1Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension sch emes for the
bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Including deposits retain- self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
November 2019
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2. Liabilities
  
 € billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life/
Debt claims on
End of securities Shares and pension fund Financial Remainingyear/quarter Total issued Loans  
1 other equity Total reserves  2 Non-life derivatives liabilities Net worth  5 
Insurance corporations
 
2016         Q4 2,189.4 30.7 70.3 441.0 1,494.4 1,313.3 181.1 2.3 150.7 −
2017         Q1 2,189.7 30.5 57.2 448.6 1,511.9 1,309.6 202.3 1.8 139.6 −
         Q2 2,178.4 28.6 57.0 450.8 1,505.5 1,308.5 197.0 2.1 134.3 −         Q3 2,188.1 28.5 58.4 455.6 1,513.1 1,317.2 195.9 2.3 130.2 −         Q4 2,212.2 28.3 62.6 466.0 1,521.6 1,334.2 187.4 2.2 131.6 −
2018         Q1 2,217.9 28.0 61.9 460.5 1,538.9 1,333.5 205.4 1.5 127.1 −
         Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 457.1 1,553.3 1,347.6 205.7 1.9 122.3 −         Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.6 1,545.0 1,343.7 201.4 2.0 122.5 −         Q4 2,213.2 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.1 1,332.3 197.8 1.6 124.6 −
2019         Q1 2,343.8 31.6 68.3 489.1 1,624.9 1,402.6 222.3 1.5 128.4 −
         Q2 2,406.3 31.9 69.3 489.6 1,685.0 1,463.7 221.3 1.8 128.7 −
Life insurance
2016         Q4 1,197.3 4.1 25.0 116.3 993.7 993.7 − 1.2 56.9 −
2017         Q1 1,170.5 4.1 12.5 116.3 991.8 991.8 − 0.9 44.8 −
         Q2 1,172.8 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.6 989.6 − 1.0 46.2 −         Q3 1,177.5 4.1 12.3 121.5 994.0 994.0 − 1.1 44.5 −         Q4 1,193.2 4.1 12.8 122.2 1,007.1 1,007.1 − 1.1 45.9 −
2018         Q1 1,187.6 4.0 13.3 119.8 1,007.0 1,007.0 − 0.7 42.7 −
         Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.6 1,017.0 1,017.0 − 0.8 40.8 −         Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.2 1,013.3 1,013.3 − 0.9 42.0 −         Q4 1,185.2 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.6 1,000.6 − 0.5 42.2 −
2019         Q1 1,237.8 4.1 14.3 120.8 1,057.4 1,057.4 − 0.4 40.8 −
         Q2 1,289.5 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,106.3 1,106.3 − 0.4 42.4 −
Non-life insurance
2016         Q4 583.5 1.1 6.3 130.4 390.1 300.5 89.7 0.2 55.4 −
2017         Q1 606.7 1.1 7.3 134.1 409.0 300.8 108.2 0.1 55.1 −
         Q2 603.7 1.1 6.8 135.7 406.8 302.5 104.3 0.1 53.1 −         Q3 603.1 1.1 6.9 137.5 406.8 305.8 101.1 0.1 50.7 −         Q4 606.7 1.1 6.7 141.2 405.7 309.7 96.0 0.1 51.9 −
2018         Q1 623.1 1.1 7.7 141.4 422.8 311.1 111.7 0.0 50.0 −
         Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 −         Q3 618.0 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 −         Q4 616.1 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.5 315.5 101.0 0.0 49.9 −
2019         Q1 655.5 1.1 9.3 144.5 449.6 329.5 120.1 0.0 50.9 −
         Q2 665.0 1.1 8.8 146.0 459.8 341.8 118.0 0.1 49.2 −
Reinsurance  3 
2016         Q4 408.6 25.5 39.0 194.3 110.5 19.1 91.4 0.9 38.3 −
2017         Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
         Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −         Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.9 1.1 35.0 −         Q4 412.3 23.1 43.1 202.6 108.8 17.4 91.4 1.0 33.8 −
2018         Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 −
         Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 −         Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 −         Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 −
2019         Q1 450.5 26.5 44.6 223.8 117.9 15.7 102.2 1.1 36.7 −
         Q2 451.9 26.6 46.1 221.8 118.9 15.6 103.3 1.3 37.2 −
Pension funds  4 
2016         Q4 609.6 − 6.8 6.9 546.0 546.0 − − 2.4 47.5
2017         Q1 617.0 − 6.9 7.0 552.9 552.9 − − 2.5 47.8
         Q2 624.5 − 6.9 7.1 558.7 558.7 − − 2.5 49.4         Q3 633.7 − 6.9 7.2 565.2 565.2 − − 2.5 51.9         Q4 645.5 − 7.1 7.4 576.1 576.1 − − 2.5 52.4
2018         Q1 646.8 − 7.2 7.4 579.5 579.5 − − 2.6 50.0
         Q2 652.7 − 7.3 7.5 585.7 585.7 − − 2.6 49.6         Q3 656.4 − 7.4 7.7 587.7 587.7 − − 2.6 51.0         Q4 663.0 − 7.6 7.8 597.2 597.2 − − 2.6 47.8
2019         Q1 680.4 − 7.7 7.9 606.0 606.0 − − 2.7 56.1
         Q2 692.5 − 7.7 8.0 610.9 610.9 − − 2.7 63.2
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- tor. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “pension
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. 1Including depo- funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company
sits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-emp loyed. Social se-
and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Insurance technical reserves “life“ taking account of curity funds are not included. 5Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and
transitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the “non-life insurance“ sec- the liability item “Shares and other equity“. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
November 2019
VIII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities ities  3 Total 4 Bundesbank sectors  6 residents  7 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  5 
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,379
2014 64,775 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 − 12,124 − 11,951 74,484 14,366
2015 33,024 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 − 66,330 121,164 61,657 − 83,471
2016 69,745 27,429 19,177 18,265 − 10,012 42,316 164,603 − 58,012 187,500 35,113 − 94,856
2017 53,710 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 42,147 141,177 − 71,454 161,012 51,620 − 87,470
2018 56,664 16,630 33,251 12,433 − 29,055 40,034 102,442 − 24,417 67,328 59,529 − 45,778
2018         Nov. 18,500 13,260 6,849 − 693 7,104 5,240 11,009 3,159 3,945 3,904 7,492
         Dec. − 39,633 − 31,356 − 9,339 − 2,127 − 19,890 − 8,277 − 106 − 6,873 3,343 3,424 − 39,527
2019         Jan. 34,314 20,326 8,377 1,319 10,630 13,988 9,297 1,486 − 1,700 9,511 25,018
         Feb. 25,646 13,718 16,833 2,035 − 5,150 11,928 12,638 7,239 − 1,984 7,383 13,008
         Mar. 17,631 18,264 4,492 2,581 11,191 − 633 − 5,323 − 1,709 − 4,425 811 22,954
         Apr. − 13,949 − 18,294 − 8,318 5,092 − 15,069 4,345 − 3,081 − 8,015 1,283 3,651 − 10,868
         May 44,585 42,665 20,104 1,599 20,962 1,920 16,191 4,099 4,010 8,082 28,395
         June 8,018 − 2,297 − 913 8,375 − 9,757 10,315 11,820 9,743 − 1,663 3,740 − 3,801
         July − 2,071 − 7,860 744 − 1,051 − 7,553 5,789 1,428 4,464 − 2,627 − 409 − 3,499
         Aug. 27,388 27,213 − 3,325 6,474 24,064 175 20,990 6,157 1,378 13,455 6,399
         Sep. 3,823 − 1,029 − 722 170 − 477 4,852 1,370 − 45 − 1,888 3,303 2,453
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total 10 tutions  5 Other sectors  11 residents  12 
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,195
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 − 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 − 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 31,881 4,409 27,472 30,525 − 5,143 35,668 1,356
2017 50,410 15,570 34,840 48,773 7,031 41,742 1,637
2018 61,212 16,188 45,024 50,020 − 11,184 61,204 11,192
2018         Nov. − 3,032 227 − 3,259 − 3,854 − 1,544 − 2,310 822
         Dec. 11,300 482 10,818 13,017 − 637 13,654 − 1,717
2019         Jan. 4,206 671 3,535 5,804 − 55 5,859 − 1,598
         Feb. 634 122 512 1,500 − 436 1,936 − 866
         Mar. − 1,529 948 − 2,477 138 − 867 1,005 − 1,667
         Apr. 5,466 243 5,223 6,315 − 360 6,675 − 849
         May 4,650 1,061 3,589 5,996 1,182 4,814 − 1,346
         June 989 475 514 181 − 295 476 808
         July 2,858 68 2,790 1,255 − 1,609 2,864 1,603
         Aug. − 490 75 − 565 756 − 616 1,372 − 1,246
         Sep. 5,372 124 5,248 4,540 − 1,145 5,685 832
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own 8Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices. 9Net pur-
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. chases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  re sidents;  
3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction transaction  values. 10Domestic and foreign shares. 11Residual; also including
values. 4Domestic and foreign debt securities. 5Book values; statistically adjusted. purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 12Net
6Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct in vestment) by
mutual funds. Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank. 7Net purchases or non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values. provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
November 2019
VIII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
  
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 
 
Debt securities
Corporate issued by special-
Mortgage Public purpose Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe debt securities (non-MFIs)  2 debt securities credit institutions
Gross sales
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,044 262,873
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,9742009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,421
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,3752012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,5302013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,8922014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
2016 
3 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
2017 3 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019         Jan. 127,454 77,489 6,215 3,057 58,545 9,672 5,380 44,585
         Feb. 123,547 81,698 5,742 1,909 57,017 17,030 5,091 36,758         Mar. 116,190 65,908 1,768 741 50,411 12,988 7,155 43,128
         Apr. 100,795 64,464 2,078 92 53,880 8,414 6,941 29,390
         May 115,749 71,690 7,035 15 53,641 10,998 5,146 38,914         June 88,671 50,607 1,469 37 38,478 10,623 13,573 24,491
         July 116,547 73,836 3,014 738 58,148 11,936 6,410 36,302
         Aug. 113,666 61,206 1,851 − 46,927 12,428 8,352 44,107         Sep. 106,888 66,644 3,242 1,877 53,588 7,936 10,787 29,457
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four  years 4
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,6592008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,4072009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,4312012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,8882013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,7652014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 
3 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017 3 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019         Jan. 46,309 24,508 5,786 750 15,779 2,194 4,264 17,538
         Feb. 42,078 23,849 3,661 1,726 13,196 5,266 3,505 14,723         Mar. 38,161 11,772 1,637 685 4,153 5,296 4,995 21,394
         Apr. 25,789 9,141 1,255 92 4,760 3,035 4,194 12,454
         May 34,546 17,220 3,914 15 8,131 5,160 2,831 14,495         June 30,682 11,412 1,015 35 7,578 2,784 11,093 8,177
         July 33,810 15,283 2,331 290 8,959 3,704 5,310 13,217
         Aug. 24,543 5,751 341 − 2,515 2,895 6,676 12,116         Sep. 35,985 18,536 2,075 1,877 11,581 3,003 7,100 10,349
Net sales 5
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,0932008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,3022009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,2892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,2982013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,4792014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 
3 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017 3 2,669 5,954 6,389 − 4,697 18,788 − 14,525 6,828 − 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 − 6,564 18,850 − 5,453 9,738 − 33,630
2019         Jan. 10,398 8,587 4,184 1,318 6,820 − 3,735 735 1,075
         Feb. 16,523 17,671 2,937 0 9,033 5,702 2,320 − 3,468         Mar. 13,397 3,874 − 910 − 280 5,369 − 306 1,676 7,847
         Apr. − 14,225 − 6,856 987 − 1,177 − 5,347 − 1,319 4,151 − 11,521
         May 39,075 19,156 4,826 − 1,099 13,377 2,052 317 19,601         June − 933 − 116 − 608 − 1,193 1,497 188 8,975 − 9,792
         July − 6,666 1,488 − 1,791 45 1,851 1,382 − 1,306 − 6,847
         Aug. 23,134 − 3,541 680 − 918 − 2,828 − 474 6,041 20,634         Sep. − 531 − 804 484 1,560 2,787 − 5,636 720 − 446
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Supplemen t 2 − Capital of debt securities. 4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 5 Gross
market statistics on pp. 23 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2 Including sales less redemptions. 
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3 Sectoral reclassification

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
November 2019
VIII. Capital market
 
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
 
 
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
 
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special-purpose Other bank bonds Public
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017 1 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019         Jan. 3,101,701 1,202,748 165,272 52,757 676,882 307,837 314,262 1,584,691
         Feb. 3,118,224 1,220,419 168,209 52,757 685,915 313,538 316,582 1,581,223
         Mar. 3,131,621 1,224,293 167,299 52,477 691,284 313,232 318,258 1,589,070
         Apr. 3,117,396 1,217,437 168,287 51,300 685,937 311,913 322,409 1,577,550
         May 2 3,154,821 1,236,593 173,113 50,201 699,314 313,965 2 321,076 1,597,151
         June 3,153,887 1,236,477 172,505 49,008 700,811 314,153 330,051 1,587,359
         July 3,147,222 1,237,965 170,714 49,054 702,662 315,535 328,744 1,580,512
         Aug. 3,170,356 1,234,424 171,394 48,135 699,834 315,061 334,785 1,601,147
         Sep. 3,169,825 1,233,620 171,879 49,695 702,621 309,425 335,505 1,600,700
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-September 2019 
1,009,501 454,270 41,053 15,037 293,580 104,600 61,723 493,508     less than  2
656,518 286,684 47,474 12,514 158,240 68,454 49,658 320,177 2 to less than  4
490,031 208,105 37,648 6,404 117,308 46,745 53,551 228,376 4 to less than  6
306,909 116,098 24,359 7,732 52,419 31,588 27,252 163,561 6 to less than  8
223,553 81,667 13,221 4,620 44,935 18,892 21,209 120,676 8 to less than 10
148,867 34,939 5,536 1,771 15,061 12,571 29,404 84,524 10 to less than 15
85,978 22,313 1,758 1,373 15,373 3,810 10,863 52,802 15 to less than 20
248,467 29,547 829 248 5,704 22,766 81,845 137,075 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for
reclassification of debt securities. 2Adjustments due to change of domicile of debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
issuers. 3Calculated from month under review until final maturity for debt securities
 
 
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments (market capita-
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  1 bonus shares real assets of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 − 457 − 661 − 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 − 1,055 − 1,111 − 946 1,634,155
2019         Jan. 180,090 − 97 223 − − − 2 − 8 − 310 1,726,959
         Feb. 180,116 26 116 − − − − 37 − 52 1,755,552
         Mar. 180,706 590 929 179 − − 486 2 − 34 1,722,937
         Apr. 180,744 38 127 21 19 − 29 − 9 − 90 1,833,023
         May 180,763 19 46 112 0 − 45 − 60 − 34 1,696,088
         June 180,375 − 389 420 84 8 22 − 59 − 864 1,784,783
         July 179,852 − 523 35 11 3 − 10 − 6 − 555 1,769,824
         Aug. 179,826 − 26 40 93 − − 36 − 7 − 116 1,745,136
         Sep. 182,330 2,504 71 1,918 488 − 65 145 − 54 1,799,024
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and Deutsche
out of company profits. 2All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based Börse AG. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
November 2019
 VIII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Corporate German German With a residual With a residual
maturity of bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share maturity of more
9 to (non- index share price index than 9 years and € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total up to 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1,000
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.322008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.202009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.062017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.642018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019         May 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 0.2 0.4 2.6 144.20 112.36 510.79 11,726.84
         June − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 144.73 113.54 535.23 12,398.80
         July − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.0 0.2 2.4 145.43 113.94 528.16 12,189.04
         Aug. − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 2.2 147.13 116.35 518.10 11,939.28         Sep. − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 2.3 145.93 114.98 535.82 12,428.08
         Oct. − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.1 2.4 144.91 113.34 554.98 12,866.79
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of standing of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthl y figures are calcula-
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt ted on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annu al figures
securities and similar, debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero coupon are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts out- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which:
Sales of which: of which:
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0352012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4372013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 − 1,745 143,256 44,266 − 3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,8712016 157,068 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,698 163,998 2,877 − 3,172 161,121 40,870 − 6,9312017 145,017 94,921 29,560 − 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 50,096 147,006 4,938 1,048 142,068 49,048 − 1,9912018 122,353 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 18,660 128,170 2,979 − 2,306 125,191 20,966 − 5,821
2019         Mar. 9,647 6,647 302 − 283 − 29 624 6,345 3,000 10,378 698 595 9,680 2,405 − 732
         Apr. 12,448 9,524 1,305 − 47 437 919 8,219 2,923 12,749 1,090 830 11,659 2,093 − 301
         May 2,417 3,715 1,386 3 449 979 2,329 − 1,298 3,744 − 2,014 − 2,357 5,758 1,059 − 1,327         June 10,963 4,257 2,040 10 790 1,164 2,218 6,705 10,282 − 150 − 505 10,432 7,210 681
         July 9,671 5,905 681 63 122 549 5,225 3,766 10,131 1,377 − 55 8,754 3,821 − 460
         Aug. 13,558 9,862 1,022 139 346 570 8,839 3,696 13,732 − 310 − 1,346 14,042 5,042 − 174         Sep. 12,521 9,233 2,629 164 1,645 831 6,604 3,288 13,103 907 64 12,196 3,224 − 582
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
November 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 35.08 48.76 24.92 − 16.13 − 0.40 9.97 31.48 − 18.86 − 13.43
Debt securities − 3.40 − 5.65 5.10 0.65 0.55 1.46 2.44 0.65 − 0.45
Short-term debt securities − 0.58 − 2.26 1.00 − 0.12 − 0.02 0.38 0.77 0.41 − 1.11
Long-term debt securities − 2.81 − 3.39 4.10 0.77 0.57 1.09 1.68 0.25 0.66
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 2.68 − 2.80 1.45 0.11 0.47 − 0.02 0.89 0.62 − 0.07
Non-financial corporations 0.67 − 0.56 0.51 − 0.01 0.32 − 0.13 0.33 0.74 − 0.27
Financial corporations − 2.53 − 0.41 1.18 0.19 0.31 0.08 0.61 − 0.10 0.12
General government − 0.82 − 1.82 − 0.25 − 0.07 − 0.15 0.03 − 0.05 − 0.03 0.07
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 0.72 − 2.85 3.66 0.54 0.08 1.48 1.56 0.04 − 0.38
Loans 18.11 52.72 − 23.70 − 2.42 − 9.88 − 0.55 − 10.86 14.29 − 5.51
Short-term loans 18.80 28.74 4.52 5.71 − 4.96 − 0.62 4.38 15.77 − 6.22
Long-term loans − 0.69 23.97 − 28.22 − 8.13 − 4.92 0.07 − 15.24 − 1.48 0.71
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 0.67 21.85 − 3.39 − 0.71 − 3.71 4.68 − 3.64 2.95 − 3.62
Non-financial corporations − 4.78 15.23 − 10.03 − 2.41 − 4.52 2.50 − 5.60 0.94 − 6.71
Financial corporations 5.25 6.26 6.29 1.60 0.72 2.10 1.87 2.01 3.10
General government 0.20 0.36 0.35 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.00 0.00
Loans to the rest of the world 17.44 30.86 − 20.32 − 1.71 − 6.17 − 5.23 − 7.22 11.34 − 1.89
Equity and investment fund shares 96.49 66.04 124.32 30.48 41.25 44.93 7.67 3.69 13.21
Equity 90.66 57.49 122.65 26.96 40.27 44.83 10.59 0.93 11.51
Listed shares of domestic sectors 22.91 − 3.82 18.82 21.74 − 2.70 − 1.34 1.12 1.82 − 3.34
Non-financial corporations 22.59 − 3.76 18.27 21.64 − 2.90 − 1.38 0.91 1.84 − 3.31
Financial corporations 0.31 − 0.06 0.55 0.10 0.20 0.04 0.21 − 0.02 − 0.03
Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.88 7.62 0.70 − 0.33 16.15 − 15.14 0.02 0.34 0.74
Other equity  1 56.88 53.69 103.13 5.55 26.82 61.31 9.45 − 1.23 14.11
Investment fund shares 5.83 8.55 1.67 3.52 0.98 0.10 − 2.93 2.76 1.70
Money market fund shares 0.36 − 0.46 − 0.53 − 0.63 − 0.03 − 0.14 0.27 − 0.03 0.23
Non-MMF investment fund shares 5.47 9.01 2.21 4.15 1.01 0.24 − 3.19 2.79 1.47
Insurance technical reserves 1.15 3.92 4.68 0.96 1.36 1.33 1.04 0.99 0.98
Financial derivatives 22.74 12.68 − 5.07 2.57 − 2.68 − 4.36 − 0.60 2.49 − 4.19
Other accounts receivable 7.17 163.67 4.51 33.60 9.05 − 0.44 − 37.71 29.07 − 26.66
Total 177.34 342.14 134.75 49.70 39.25 52.33 − 6.53 32.33 − 36.05
External financing
Debt securities 23.71 8.56 7.08 2.79 2.36 0.90 1.03 5.77 5.87
Short-term securities − 0.15 0.60 4.08 2.54 1.48 0.38 − 0.32 1.23 1.75
Long-term securities 23.85 7.95 3.00 0.24 0.89 0.53 1.35 4.54 4.12
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 10.82 7.13 3.80 2.48 1.65 − 0.94 0.61 4.11 0.13
Non-financial corporations 0.67 − 0.56 0.51 − 0.01 0.32 − 0.13 0.33 0.74 − 0.27
Financial corporations 10.06 9.13 3.27 2.19 1.38 − 0.54 0.24 2.48 0.92
General government 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 − 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.69 − 0.61
Households 0.08 − 1.45 0.01 0.29 − 0.05 − 0.27 0.04 0.20 0.09
Debt securities of the rest of the world 12.89 1.42 3.28 0.31 0.71 1.84 0.42 1.66 5.74
Loans 40.46 95.63 131.24 40.27 45.50 37.27 8.19 23.70 38.92
Short-term loans 14.98 21.62 68.51 27.06 21.86 23.48 − 3.89 18.42 18.63
Long-term loans 25.49 74.02 62.73 13.22 23.64 13.80 12.08 5.28 20.29
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 19.51 54.16 73.86 28.07 18.45 27.44 − 0.10 19.28 17.23
Non-financial corporations − 4.78 15.23 − 10.03 − 2.41 − 4.52 2.50 − 5.60 0.94 − 6.71
Financial corporations 21.90 39.70 82.87 30.67 22.47 24.13 5.59 23.24 24.31
General government 2.39 − 0.77 1.02 − 0.19 0.50 0.82 − 0.10 − 4.89 − 0.36
Loans from the rest of the world 20.95 41.47 57.38 12.21 27.05 9.83 8.29 4.41 21.69
Equity 16.09 13.41 14.80 2.40 11.38 − 1.03 2.06 3.76 2.77
Listed shares of domestic sectors 27.35 8.53 73.29 20.00 4.49 5.21 43.60 4.48 − 34.56
Non-financial corporations 22.59 − 3.76 18.27 21.64 − 2.90 − 1.38 0.91 1.84 − 3.31
Financial corporations − 2.06 11.14 46.76 − 5.05 4.52 4.11 43.19 − 0.24 − 32.74
General government 0.07 0.51 0.53 0.16 0.15 0.09 0.13 − 0.04 0.04
Households 6.74 0.65 7.72 3.26 2.71 2.38 − 0.63 2.92 1.45
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 25.83 − 4.20 − 32.01 8.73 6.18 − 4.82 − 42.09 − 4.24 2.58
Other equity  1 14.57 9.07 − 26.47 − 26.33 0.71 − 1.42 0.56 3.52 34.74
Insurance technical reserves 3.22 6.89 6.04 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 0.13 3.69 − 4.19 1.50 3.27 − 0.06 − 8.90 4.86 2.23
Other accounts payable 38.53 58.09 22.69 17.85 19.39 5.47 − 20.02 13.42 − 16.41
Total 121.87 186.27 177.65 66.32 83.40 44.06 − 16.13 53.01 34.89
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
November 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 512.9 556.2 568.4 524.5 536.1 535.4 568.4 536.0 518.6
Debt securities 44.8 38.8 43.1 39.2 39.7 41.0 43.1 44.4 44.3
Short-term debt securities 5.5 3.3 4.2 3.1 3.1 3.5 4.2 4.7 3.6
Long-term debt securities 39.3 35.6 38.8 36.0 36.6 37.5 38.8 39.7 40.8
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 20.8 18.2 19.2 18.2 18.7 18.6 19.2 20.1 20.2
Non-financial corporations 4.4 3.9 4.3 3.8 4.1 4.0 4.3 5.1 4.8Financial corporations 12.0 11.7 12.7 11.9 12.2 12.3 12.7 12.8 13.1General government 4.4 2.5 2.3 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 24.0 20.7 23.8 21.0 21.1 22.5 23.8 24.2 24.1
Loans 549.4 594.0 570.7 590.2 581.8 581.3 570.7 591.7 586.4
Short-term loans 450.7 475.0 480.0 480.1 476.0 475.5 480.0 502.0 496.2
Long-term loans 98.7 119.0 90.7 110.1 105.9 105.8 90.7 89.7 90.2
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 354.4 376.3 372.9 375.6 371.8 376.5 372.9 375.8 372.2
Non-financial corporations 282.6 297.8 287.8 295.4 290.9 293.4 287.8 288.7 282.0Financial corporations 62.0 68.2 74.5 69.8 70.5 72.6 74.5 76.5 79.6General government 9.9 10.3 10.6 10.3 10.4 10.5 10.6 10.6 10.6
Loans to the rest of the world 195.0 217.7 197.8 214.6 210.0 204.7 197.8 215.9 214.2
Equity and investment fund shares 2,030.4 2,187.0 2,145.4 2,179.5 2,227.1 2,259.3 2,145.4 2,235.6 2,246.6
Equity 1,870.5 2,016.9 1,981.1 2,008.6 2,054.2 2,085.5 1,981.1 2,061.3 2,067.9
Listed shares of domestic sectors 292.3 332.2 302.6 349.4 338.5 338.3 302.6 318.3 319.7
Non-financial corporations 286.2 325.3 296.0 342.2 330.9 330.4 296.0 311.3 312.1Financial corporations 6.1 6.8 6.6 7.1 7.6 7.9 6.6 7.0 7.7
Listed shares of the rest of the world 44.5 49.0 45.3 48.7 64.2 49.1 45.3 49.1 49.9
Other equity  
1 1,533.7 1,635.8 1,633.2 1,610.6 1,651.6 1,698.0 1,633.2 1,694.0 1,698.3
Investment fund shares 159.9 170.1 164.3 170.9 172.8 173.9 164.3 174.3 178.7
Money market fund shares 1.9 1.5 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 1.0 0.9 1.2Non-MMF investment fund shares 158.0 168.6 163.3 170.0 172.0 173.1 163.3 173.4 177.5
Insurance technical reserves 50.2 54.2 59.0 55.4 56.6 57.8 59.0 60.3 61.6Financial derivatives 60.1 49.3 43.7 48.7 42.8 41.4 43.7 49.2 48.4Other accounts receivable 1,006.1 1,116.7 1,149.2 1,174.7 1,184.8 1,184.6 1,149.2 1,191.9 1,172.7
Total 4,253.9 4,596.3 4,579.6 4,612.2 4,668.9 4,700.8 4,579.6 4,709.0 4,678.5
Liabilities
Debt securities 183.8 210.6 187.8 185.4 189.0 185.8 187.8 196.4 205.6
Short-term securities 2.9 3.4 6.1 5.9 7.4 6.5 6.1 7.4 9.1
Long-term securities 180.9 207.2 181.6 179.4 181.6 179.2 181.6 189.1 196.5
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 72.1 82.8 78.9 79.6 80.1 78.9 78.9 86.0 87.4
Non-financial corporations 4.4 3.9 4.3 3.8 4.1 4.0 4.3 5.1 4.8Financial corporations 51.9 64.3 60.6 61.2 61.5 60.6 60.6 65.8 67.9General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.2Households 15.7 14.4 13.9 14.4 14.3 14.1 13.9 14.3 14.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 111.7 127.8 108.9 105.8 108.9 106.9 108.9 110.4 118.2
Loans 1,511.7 1,606.7 1,726.7 1,643.9 1,687.7 1,719.3 1,726.7 1,757.4 1,794.5
Short-term loans 598.1 624.3 687.7 650.5 673.4 692.0 687.7 709.4 728.0
Long-term loans 913.6 982.4 1,038.9 993.5 1,014.3 1,027.3 1,038.9 1,048.0 1,066.5
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 1,157.8 1,207.2 1,273.2 1,233.3 1,247.8 1,274.2 1,273.2 1,287.8 1,304.0
Non-financial corporations 282.6 297.8 287.8 295.4 290.9 293.4 287.8 288.7 282.0Financial corporations 815.4 851.4 927.4 880.4 899.2 922.5 927.4 945.8 969.0General government 59.8 58.1 58.0 57.5 57.8 58.3 58.0 53.3 53.0
Loans from the rest of the world 353.9 399.4 453.5 410.6 439.9 445.1 453.5 469.6 490.4
Equity 2,785.3 3,062.0 2,684.8 2,957.4 2,978.5 2,942.3 2,684.8 2,782.7 2,869.3
Listed shares of domestic sectors 654.2 748.2 683.9 737.4 726.8 733.2 683.9 733.3 711.9
Non-financial corporations 286.2 325.3 296.0 342.2 330.9 330.4 296.0 311.3 312.1Financial corporations 144.8 171.8 180.2 155.4 156.3 160.2 180.2 193.2 165.7General government 44.4 51.8 48.7 48.7 49.0 52.1 48.7 54.1 55.5Households 178.7 199.2 159.0 191.1 190.7 190.5 159.0 174.7 178.7
Listed shares of the rest of the world 813.6 933.6 740.2 889.8 915.2 882.3 740.2 760.2 830.4
Other equity  
1 1,317.6 1,380.1 1,260.7 1,330.2 1,336.5 1,326.8 1,260.7 1,289.2 1,326.9
Insurance technical reserves 256.8 263.7 269.7 265.2 266.7 268.2 269.7 271.2 272.7Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 38.2 26.9 23.3 26.7 28.2 30.1 23.3 29.7 34.0
Other accounts payable 1,072.6 1,107.2 1,161.1 1,131.8 1,154.8 1,163.7 1,161.1 1,190.9 1,190.8
Total 5,848.4 6,276.9 6,053.3 6,210.4 6,304.8 6,309.3 6,053.3 6,228.4 6,366.9
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
November 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 114.91 106.23 140.31 14.02 40.59 27.35 58.34 20.10 43.23
Currency 21.18 19.73 32.27 3.67 7.57 7.05 13.98 − 0.89 9.40
Deposits 93.74 86.51 108.04 10.36 33.02 20.30 44.37 21.00 33.83
Transferable deposits 105.32 99.78 109.88 12.16 34.10 21.40 42.22 17.18 34.39
Time deposits 1.28 − 4.03 6.79 1.15 1.99 1.43 2.23 1.86 − 0.79
Savings deposits
(including savings certificates) − 12.87 − 9.24 − 8.63 − 2.95 − 3.06 − 2.53 − 0.08 1.95 0.23
Debt securities − 12.80 − 8.14 1.81 − 1.00 0.52 1.71 0.58 0.52 0.66
Short-term debt securities − 0.16 − 0.20 − 0.13 − 0.37 − 0.01 − 0.02 0.26 − 0.22 − 0.13
Long-term debt securities − 12.63 − 7.93 1.94 − 0.63 0.53 1.72 0.32 0.74 0.79
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 4.14 − 5.09 2.29 − 0.01 0.16 1.18 0.96 0.71 0.28
Non-financial corporations − 0.01 − 1.43 − 0.09 0.08 − 0.23 − 0.12 0.19 0.22 0.04
Financial corporations − 2.48 − 2.68 2.83 0.07 0.61 1.36 0.79 0.58 0.30
General government − 1.65 − 0.99 − 0.46 − 0.17 − 0.22 − 0.06 − 0.02 − 0.09 − 0.07
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 8.66 − 3.05 − 0.48 − 0.98 0.36 0.53 − 0.38 − 0.19 0.39
Equity and investment fund shares 45.78 55.13 39.42 17.73 8.06 11.79 1.84 11.41 11.48
Equity 21.65 14.69 18.92 7.35 2.79 7.01 1.76 6.76 4.21
Listed shares of domestic sectors 9.37 0.90 9.47 4.27 2.55 2.63 0.02 4.29 1.56
Non-financial corporations 6.09 0.54 6.33 3.12 1.63 2.27 − 0.69 2.52 1.43
Financial corporations 3.28 0.36 3.14 1.15 0.92 0.37 0.70 1.78 0.13
Listed shares of the rest of the world 6.93 9.65 4.41 1.47 − 0.83 2.82 0.95 0.93 1.52
Other equity  1 5.35 4.13 5.04 1.61 1.07 1.57 0.79 1.54 1.12
Investment fund shares 24.13 40.44 20.51 10.38 5.27 4.77 0.08 4.65 7.27
Money market fund shares − 0.53 − 0.28 − 0.33 − 0.40 − 0.03 − 0.06 0.16 − 0.12 − 0.02
Non-MMF investment fund shares 24.66 40.72 20.84 10.79 5.29 4.83 − 0.07 4.77 7.29
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 15.58 20.23 16.93 4.22 4.24 4.21 4.26 4.51 4.49
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 24.79 37.68 32.65 11.79 8.20 7.46 5.19 8.15 6.16
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 32.00 30.32 19.92 3.81 4.34 4.01 7.76 5.31 4.38
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  2 − 15.96 − 19.53 − 1.76 25.71 − 7.18 − 0.89 − 19.40 33.56 − 5.41
Total 204.31 221.92 249.28 76.29 58.77 55.64 58.58 83.57 64.99
  External financing
Loans 47.46 55.55 68.46 10.81 20.12 22.48 15.05 15.89 23.84
Short-term loans − 4.31 − 2.19 2.44 − 0.02 0.11 1.83 0.53 0.47 0.87
Long-term loans 51.76 57.74 66.02 10.83 20.01 20.66 14.52 15.42 22.97
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 41.92 47.41 57.47 9.00 15.79 19.58 13.11 9.09 16.63
Consumer loans 9.78 11.25 11.14 1.78 4.34 2.36 2.67 6.15 6.56
Entrepreneurial loans − 4.24 − 3.11 − 0.14 0.04 − 0.01 0.55 − 0.73 0.65 0.66
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 42.87 49.99 61.72 11.00 17.65 19.41 13.67 12.51 21.22
Loans from other financial institutions 4.59 5.57 6.74 − 0.19 2.47 3.07 1.38 3.38 2.62
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable − 0.23 0.53 0.07 0.22 0.01 − 0.05 − 0.11 0.44 0.12
Total 47.23 56.09 68.53 11.03 20.13 22.43 14.94 16.33 23.96
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
November 2019
IX. Financial accounts
  
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,209.4 2,314.4 2,456.4 2,328.4 2,369.0 2,398.1 2,456.4 2,476.6 2,519.8
Currency 174.4 194.1 226.3 197.8 205.3 212.3 226.3 225.4 234.8
Deposits 2,035.0 2,120.3 2,230.1 2,130.7 2,163.7 2,185.8 2,230.1 2,251.1 2,285.0
Transferable deposits 1,188.6 1,288.4 1,398.0 1,300.5 1,334.6 1,355.8 1,398.0 1,415.2 1,449.6Time deposits 248.7 245.4 252.4 246.6 248.6 250.2 252.4 254.3 253.5Savings deposits(including savings certificates) 597.7 586.5 579.7 583.6 580.5 579.8 579.7 581.6 581.9
Debt securities 127.4 120.5 115.7 117.7 118.1 119.3 115.7 119.4 121.3
Short-term debt securities 2.7 2.5 2.1 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.1 1.9 1.8
Long-term debt securities 124.7 118.0 113.6 115.6 116.0 117.3 113.6 117.5 119.5
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 85.6 82.5 79.9 81.2 81.4 82.5 79.9 83.1 84.2
Non-financial corporations 13.9 12.5 12.1 12.4 12.1 12.1 12.1 12.4 12.5Financial corporations 66.7 66.1 64.4 65.1 65.7 67.0 64.4 67.3 68.4General government 5.0 3.9 3.4 3.7 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 41.8 37.9 35.9 36.4 36.7 36.9 35.9 36.3 37.1
Equity and investment fund shares 1,107.8 1,216.7 1,140.0 1,196.4 1,215.5 1,239.4 1,140.0 1,231.7 1,265.3
Equity 590.0 640.6 584.3 624.3 629.2 643.8 584.3 634.8 651.5
Listed shares of domestic sectors 200.8 226.4 183.0 217.3 214.2 217.2 183.0 202.6 209.0
Non-financial corporations 169.8 190.3 151.0 182.5 180.8 180.8 151.0 166.0 170.1Financial corporations 31.0 36.1 32.0 34.8 33.4 36.5 32.0 36.6 38.9
Listed shares of the rest of the world 86.8 101.0 98.2 97.7 102.9 111.4 98.2 114.2 117.8
Other equity  
1 302.4 313.2 303.2 309.3 312.1 315.2 303.2 318.0 324.8
Investment fund shares 517.8 576.2 555.7 572.1 586.3 595.7 555.7 596.9 613.8
Money market fund shares 2.8 2.7 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.1 2.3 2.2 2.2Non-MMF investment fund shares 515.0 573.5 553.4 569.8 584.1 593.5 553.4 594.7 611.6
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 339.9 360.1 377.0 364.3 368.6 372.8 377.0 381.5 386.0
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 947.8 991.4 1,025.7 1,003.6 1,012.2 1,020.1 1,025.7 1,033.8 1,040.0
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 810.9 841.1 861.0 844.9 849.2 853.2 861.0 866.3 870.7
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 32.6 31.1 31.5 31.5 31.8 31.8 31.5 32.6 33.6
Total 5,575.8 5,875.3 6,007.3 5,886.8 5,964.4 6,034.7 6,007.3 6,141.9 6,236.7
  Liabilities
Loans 1,654.7 1,711.9 1,775.9 1,722.6 1,737.9 1,760.8 1,775.9 1,791.6 1,816.5
Short-term loans 56.6 54.4 58.1 54.4 54.5 56.3 58.1 58.5 59.4
Long-term loans 1,598.1 1,657.5 1,717.7 1,668.2 1,683.4 1,704.5 1,717.7 1,733.1 1,757.1
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 1,195.8 1,247.4 1,308.1 1,257.4 1,275.0 1,295.0 1,308.1 1,317.1 1,337.6Consumer loans 201.8 211.8 218.1 212.8 213.4 215.5 218.1 224.1 229.7Entrepreneurial loans 257.0 252.7 249.7 252.5 249.5 250.4 249.7 250.4 249.2
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,558.3 1,610.0 1,667.2 1,620.9 1,633.7 1,653.5 1,667.2 1,679.6 1,701.8Loans from other financial institutions 96.4 101.9 108.7 101.8 104.2 107.3 108.7 112.1 114.7Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.9 17.0 17.2 18.3 17.9 18.3 17.2 19.0 19.2
Total 1,670.6 1,728.9 1,793.1 1,741.0 1,755.8 1,779.0 1,793.1 1,810.7 1,835.7
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2013 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 2.5 + 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014 + 17.0 + 15.5 + 2.0 − 3.9 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 + 28.6 + 16.6 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 37.1 + 13.6 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 8.6 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 40.3 + 8.1 + 11.3 + 9.9 + 11.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
2018 p + 62.4 + 20.1 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 15.9 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
2017         H1  p + 23.6 + 2.8 + 6.8 + 6.7 + 7.3 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  p + 16.7 + 5.3 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2
2018         H1  p + 51.7 + 18.7 + 15.8 + 8.0 + 9.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.6
         H2  p + 10.7 + 1.4 − 3.0 + 5.7 + 6.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2019         H1  pe + 45.3 + 17.7 + 12.7 + 7.1 + 7.7 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2013 2,213.0 1,390.1 663.6 175.4 1.3 78.7 49.4 23.6 6.2 0.0
2014 2,215.2 1,396.1 657.8 177.8 1.4 75.7 47.7 22.5 6.1 0.0
2015 2,185.1 1,372.2 654.7 177.7 1.4 72.1 45.3 21.6 5.9 0.0
2016 p 2,169.0 1,366.4 637.7 179.2 1.1 69.2 43.6 20.3 5.7 0.0
2017 p 2,119.0 1,350.9 610.5 175.9 0.8 65.3 41.6 18.8 5.4 0.0
2018 p 2,069.0 1,323.5 596.1 167.6 0.7 61.9 39.6 17.8 5.0 0.0
2017         Q1  p 2,144.6 1,350.6 629.5 178.1 1.2 67.7 42.7 19.9 5.6 0.0
         Q2  p 2,139.6 1,353.2 623.2 178.1 0.9 67.2 42.5 19.6 5.6 0.0
         Q3  p 2,134.5 1,352.6 622.4 176.6 0.8 66.5 42.1 19.4 5.5 0.0
         Q4  p 2,119.0 1,350.9 610.5 175.9 0.8 65.3 41.6 18.8 5.4 0.0
2018         Q1  p 2,095.8 1,338.3 599.8 174.7 1.0 64.1 40.9 18.3 5.3 0.0
         Q2  p 2,081.2 1,330.0 596.2 173.2 0.9 63.0 40.3 18.1 5.2 0.0
         Q3  p 2,081.3 1,336.2 595.2 167.9 0.8 62.7 40.2 17.9 5.1 0.0
         Q4  p 2,069.0 1,323.5 596.1 167.6 0.7 61.9 39.6 17.8 5.0 0.0
2019         Q1  p 2,078.7 1,324.9 606.8 166.5 0.7 61.7 39.3 18.0 4.9 0.0
         Q2  p 2,069.6 1,320.8 605.4 165.3 0.7 61.2 39.0 17.9 4.9 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2013 1,264.7 650.9 465.4 148.4 1,263.5 666.6 220.5 141.8 61.0 51.5 122.2 + 1.1 1,120.6
2014 1,313.9 673.0 482.3 158.5 1,296.9 691.3 227.5 147.1 60.5 47.1 123.4 + 17.0 1,160.0
2015 1,363.1 704.2 501.2 157.7 1,334.5 722.0 233.0 149.7 64.6 42.7 122.5 + 28.6 1,212.4
2016 p 1,425.6 738.6 524.3 162.7 1,388.5 754.3 240.7 158.6 68.2 37.8 128.9 + 37.1 1,269.8
2017 p 1,481.7 772.7 549.5 159.6 1,441.4 784.8 250.0 162.9 71.9 34.3 137.5 + 40.3 1,328.9
2018 p 1,552.9 807.7 572.5 172.7 1,490.5 806.1 259.3 169.4 78.4 31.7 145.7 + 62.4 1,387.3
As a percentage of GDP
2013 45.0 23.2 16.6 5.3 44.9 23.7 7.8 5.0 2.2 1.8 4.3 + 0.0 39.9
2014 44.9 23.0 16.5 5.4 44.3 23.6 7.8 5.0 2.1 1.6 4.2 + 0.6 39.6
2015 45.0 23.2 16.5 5.2 44.0 23.8 7.7 4.9 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 0.9 40.0
2016 p 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.3 24.1 7.7 5.1 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.5
2017 p 45.7 23.8 16.9 4.9 44.4 24.2 7.7 5.0 2.2 1.1 4.2 + 1.2 41.0
2018 p 46.4 24.2 17.1 5.2 44.6 24.1 7.8 5.1 2.3 0.9 4.4 + 1.9 41.5
Percentage growth rates
2013 + 2.5 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 1.0 − 18.9 + 7.9 . + 2.7
2014 + 3.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.8 − 8.4 + 1.0 . + 3.5
2015 + 3.7 + 4.6 + 3.9 − 0.5 + 2.9 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 6.7 − 9.4 − 0.7 . + 4.5
2016 p + 4.6 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 3.1 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.0 + 5.5 − 11.6 + 5.3 . + 4.7
2017 p + 3.9 + 4.6 + 4.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 2.7 + 5.4 − 9.3 + 6.7 . + 4.7
2018 p + 4.8 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 8.2 + 3.4 + 2.7 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 9.0 − 7.4 + 5.9 . + 4.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  
Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 + 17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.3 642.3 + 14.0 1,490.9 1,430.7 + 60.2
2017         Q1  p 216.0 180.4 0.9 199.6 62.9 80.3 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 16.4 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 338.0 326.4 + 11.6
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.6 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.7 + 13.4
         Q3  p 219.6 180.4 3.5 215.9 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 3.8 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 346.1 343.2 + 2.8
         Q4  p 243.8 196.3 2.1 244.4 69.8 84.7 6.9 19.2 4.1 − 0.6 168.2 158.0 + 10.2 383.4 373.8 + 9.6
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
         Q4  p 255.2 203.9 2.2 262.1 73.1 89.7 6.2 20.3 9.6 − 6.9 174.6 163.4 + 11.2 400.7 396.4 + 4.3
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 230.4 71.0 88.5 11.5 10.1 3.3 + 10.5 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 366.8 + 7.5
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 233.4 67.5 87.0 12.2 13.1 2.6 + 22.8 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 371.9 + 24.3
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2017         Q1  p 88.2 82.9 + 5.3 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.0 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
         Q3  p 88.6 93.6 − 5.0 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
         Q4  p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.7 109.2 − 4.5 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 113.4 118.5 − 5.1 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 99.4 + 6.2 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 97.5 + 8.5 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2017         Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
         Q2 177,090 149,915 76,391 66,605 6,918 27,631 − 456 6,825
         Q3 180,407 155,250 82,576 66,718 5,957 25,517 − 361 7,467
         Q4 195,537 170,139 92,507 71,019 6,613 34,060 − 8,662 6,471
2018         Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
         Q2 194,715 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 29,064 − 540 6,592
         Q3 189,015 161,683 84,952 69,414 7,317 27,579 − 248 7,579
         Q4 203,128 177,157 92,363 76,459 8,335 35,492 − 9,521 6,206
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 202,383 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 29,784 + 37 6,179
         Q3 ... 166,676 86,117 72,677 7,882 ... ... 7,402
2018         Sep. . 63,890 33,539 27,810 2,541 . . 2,260
2019         Sep. . 67,409 34,984 29,786 2,639 . . 2,201
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2017         Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
         Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121
         Q3 165,923 75,218 47,253 12,720 6,034 9,211 56,481 42,571 13,911 2,214 25,114 5,580 1,315 10,673
         Q4 182,288 82,077 54,707 14,873 6,843 5,654 58,128 43,846 14,282 3,868 31,587 5,384 1,243 12,149
2018         Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
         Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912
         Q3 173,202 78,105 50,368 12,683 7,192 7,862 59,169 43,951 15,218 2,315 26,424 5,797 1,391 11,519
         Q4 190,161 86,001 58,409 15,204 7,513 4,876 60,581 44,994 15,587 4,257 31,936 6,109 1,276 13,004
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770
         Q3 179,020 81,267 53,668 13,614 7,607 6,379 61,057 45,976 15,081 2,221 26,654 6,485 1,336 12,344
2018         Sep. 68,972 38,504 15,677 13,784 7,650 1,393 19,184 14,171 5,013 2 8,956 1,846 480 5,083
2019         Sep. 72,852 40,248 16,460 14,743 7,574 1,471 20,915 16,081 4,834 1 9,139 2,092 458 5,443
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2018: 49.6:47.2:3.2. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2018: 22.7:77.3. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,017
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,3772014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,203
2017         Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
         Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 − 5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 18,113 13,881 3,832         Q3 10,497 4,144 3,867 2,669 2,132 1,628 502 −324 3,394 1,497 417 273 16,698 12,443 3,824         Q4 15,622 4,677 4,261 2,070 1,906 1,786 538 727 3,257 1,438 456 233 17,118 13,670 3,082
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
         Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 18,827 14,548 3,853         Q3 10,423 4,353 3,886 2,752 2,128 1,677 531 674 3,592 1,463 464 278 18,128 13,764 3,919         Q4 15,436 4,860 4,543 2,197 1,956 1,650 545 749 3,645 1,752 481 231 17,224 13,713 3,140
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 17,959 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 19,163 14,869 3,881         Q3 10,519 4,624 3,667 2,770 2,251 1,639 515 668 3,923 1,824 474 264 ... ... ...
2018         Sep. 3,472 2,144 1,081 639 654 565 171 230 1,136 471 137 102 . . .
2019         Sep. 3,671 2,248 923 670 689 541 174 224 1,298 546 158 90 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,097 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,315
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,2502014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,008
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115         Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −
         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −
         Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −
         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −
         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −
         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,654
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298
         Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415
         Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264
         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934
         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. 
sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 5672014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 4,778 12,951 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,315
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400         Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999         Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,202 3,251 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,229 3,251 2,835 561 384 − 510
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 1,198 3,232 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 1,205 3,237 2,868 588 449 + 983
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which: of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,227,419 12,126 655,104 199,132 59,660 1,301,397
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,213,009 12,438 662,788 190,555 43,616 1,303,6122014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,215,168 12,774 634,012 190,130 44,576 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,185,113 85,952 621,220 186,661 44,630 1,246,650
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,168,989 205,391 598,282 179,755 41,318 1,144,2432017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,118,963 319,159 551,834 175,617 38,502 1,033,8522018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018  
p 2,069,007 364,731 500,938 181,077 37,475 984,786
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1 2,144,575 239,495 585,209 178,219 40,475 1,101,176
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2 2,139,642 265,130 571,563 176,810 41,255 1,084,885         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941          Q3 2,134,509 290,214 559,524 176,646 42,855 1,065,270         Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95          Q4 2,118,963 319,159 551,834 175,617 38,502 1,033,852
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1  
p 2,095,754 329,387 529,176 176,495 37,450 1,023,246
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2  p 2,081,161 344,279 513,563 179,856 36,980 1,006,483
         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3  p 2,081,326 356,899 501,892 180,464 37,428 1,004,642
         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4  p 2,069,007 364,731 500,938 181,077 37,475 984,786
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1  p 2,078,699 359,884 498,281 179,512 36,368 1,004,654
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2  p 2,069,640 361,032 491,757 178,681 36,727 1,001,442
         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
 
 
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other government
or quarter) Total and deposits  1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2012 2,227,419 9,742 106,945 1,441,406 124,280 545,046 . .
2013 2,213,009 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 100,535 545,347 . .
2014 2,215,168 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,833 533,074 . .
2015 2,185,113 14,303 65,676 1,499,098 85,121 520,914 . .
2016 2,168,989 15,845 69,715 1,484,378 91,300 507,752 . .
2017         Q1 2,144,575 12,891 60,798 1,479,171 89,093 502,622 . .
         Q2 2,139,642 15,196 54,362 1,486,822 83,528 499,734 . .
         Q3 2,134,509 16,161 48,197 1,489,440 82,720 497,992 . .
         Q4 2,118,963 14,651 48,789 1,484,573 82,662 488,288 . .
2018         Q1  p 2,095,754 12,472 48,431 1,479,589 70,141 485,122 . .
         Q2  p 2,081,161 12,636 54,932 1,465,767 67,050 480,776 . .
         Q3  p 2,081,326 15,607 59,989 1,465,858 64,601 475,271 . .
         Q4  p 2,069,007 14,833 52,572 1,456,512 72,044 473,046 . .
2019         Q1  p 2,078,699 15,635 64,225 1,460,757 66,795 471,288 . .
         Q2  p 2,069,640 12,811 56,259 1,462,928 70,647 466,994 . .
Central government
2012 1,387,361 9,742 88,372 1,088,796 88,311 112,140 1,465 11,354
2013 1,390,061 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,970 122,474 2,696 10,303
2014 1,396,124 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,383 1,202 12,833
2015 1,372,206 14,303 49,512 1,139,039 45,256 124,095 2,932 13,577
2016 1,366,416 15,845 55,208 1,124,445 50,004 120,914 2,238 8,478
2017         Q1 1,350,579 12,891 45,510 1,124,430 48,082 119,666 2,465 7,469
         Q2 1,353,204 15,196 40,225 1,132,686 44,682 120,415 2,547 8,136
         Q3 1,352,593 16,161 34,216 1,136,873 45,235 120,108 2,674 10,160
         Q4 1,350,925 14,651 36,297 1,132,542 47,761 119,673 2,935 10,603
2018         Q1  p 1,338,267 12,472 35,923 1,133,372 37,211 119,290 2,867 9,887
         Q2  p 1,330,010 12,636 42,888 1,120,497 35,048 118,941 2,835 10,693
         Q3  p 1,336,199 15,607 46,614 1,119,053 36,633 118,293 2,614 10,260
         Q4  p 1,323,503 14,833 42,246 1,107,702 42,057 116,666 2,540 9,959
2019         Q1  p 1,324,917 15,635 50,032 1,103,095 39,126 117,028 2,437 11,528
         Q2  p 1,320,783 12,811 42,752 1,109,478 38,851 116,890 2,464 13,768
State government
2012 684,222 − 18,802 355,756 12,314 297,351 13,197 2,968
2013 663,615 − 6,847 360,706 11,862 284,200 12,141 2,655
2014 657,819 − 8,391 361,916 19,182 268,330 14,825 2,297
2015 654,712 − 16,169 362,376 18,707 257,460 15,867 4,218
2016 637,673 − 14,515 361,996 16,116 245,046 11,408 3,376
2017         Q1 629,540 − 15,308 356,769 15,938 241,526 10,407 3,446
         Q2 623,182 − 14,167 356,521 14,792 237,702 11,180 3,417
         Q3 622,430 − 14,021 355,153 16,358 236,899 13,313 3,338
         Q4 610,535 − 12,543 354,688 15,112 228,192 14,326 3,539
2018         Q1  p 599,835 − 12,548 349,682 13,137 224,468 13,301 3,409
         Q2  p 596,174 − 12,073 348,833 13,485 221,782 14,271 3,579
         Q3  p 595,241 − 13,392 350,399 10,953 220,498 14,008 3,531
         Q4  p 596,147 − 10,332 352,376 14,307 219,132 14,385 3,331
2019         Q1  p 606,791 − 14,198 361,513 14,003 217,077 15,530 3,458
         Q2  p 605,391 − 13,512 357,673 20,096 214,109 17,948 3,353
Local government
2012 172,451 − − 423 24,682 147,346 3,124 802
2013 175,405 − − 646 25,325 149,435 2,523 530
2014 177,782 − − 1,297 26,009 150,476 1,959 734
2015 177,727 − − 2,047 26,887 148,793 2,143 463
2016 179,222 − − 2,404 26,414 150,403 1,819 566
2017         Q1 178,144 − − 2,645 25,452 150,047 1,966 697
         Q2 178,051 − − 2,672 25,263 150,116 1,963 819
         Q3 176,593 − − 2,687 24,477 149,429 1,871 927
         Q4 175,852 − − 3,082 23,952 148,818 1,881 1,064
2018         Q1  p 174,654 − − 2,427 22,778 149,450 1,811 1,072
         Q2  p 173,177 − − 2,561 22,443 148,172 1,977 1,090
         Q3  p 167,850 − − 2,703 20,503 144,644 2,132 1,123
         Q4  p 167,626 − 1 3,046 19,730 144,849 2,019 1,147
2019         Q1  p 166,536 − 1 2,960 19,092 144,483 2,285 1,153
         Q2  p 165,325 − 1 2,969 18,993 143,363 2,173 1,175
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2019
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2012 1,171 − − − 195 976 − 2,661
2013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,8722014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,1222015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,6852016 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2017         Q1 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,226
         Q2 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,318         Q3 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,433         Q4 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2018         Q1  
p 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,610
         Q2  p 883 − − − 383 500 − 3,721
         Q3  p 790 − − − 400 390 − 3,841
         Q4  p 674 − − − 372 302 − 4,506
2019         Q1  p 707 − − − 437 270 − 4,114
         Q2  p 726 − − − 541 185 − 4,289
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 983,807 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,548
2008 1,015,846 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 74,6262009 1,082,101 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,048
2010 1,333,467 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 238,558
2011 1,343,515 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 211,7562012 1,387,361 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,4512013 1,390,061 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,4442014 1,396,124 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 177,771
2015 1,372,206 14,303 1,070 1,188,551 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,351
2016 1,366,416 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 170,9192017 1,350,925 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4352018 
p 1,323,503 14,833 921 1,149,948 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,723
2017         Q1 1,350,579 12,891 995 1,169,939 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 167,748
         Q2 1,353,204 15,196 986 1,172,911 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,097         Q3 1,352,593 16,161 977 1,171,089 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,344         Q4 1,350,925 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,435
2018         Q1  
p 1,338,267 12,472 951 1,169,295 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,501
         Q2  p 1,330,010 12,636 941 1,163,385 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,989
         Q3  p 1,336,199 15,607 932 1,165,667 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,925
         Q4  p 1,323,503 14,833 921 1,149,948 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,723
2019         Q1  p 1,324,917 15,635 902 1,153,128 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,155
         Q2  p 1,320,783 12,811 852 1,152,230 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,742
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
November 2019
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2017   2018   2019
  2016   2017   2018   2016   2017   2018   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2015 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 104.3 107.6 109.0 4.3 3.2 1.3 4.4 2.2 3.7 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 4.7
Construction 102.0 101.4 104.8 2.0 − 0.6 3.4 − 0.4 1.3 3.5 3.3 4.9 6.6 2.8
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and restaurant
services 101.4 104.4 106.2 1.4 2.9 1.8 2.6 2.2 3.0 0.8 1.2 2.1 1.2
Information and communication 102.8 106.4 109.7 2.8 3.5 3.1 3.6 2.6 2.9 3.9 2.9 3.2 3.3
Financial and insurance
activities 96.5 100.2 100.1 − 3.6 3.8 − 0.1 3.0 0.5 − 0.0 − 1.0 0.3 1.8 2.6
Real estate activities 100.0 99.0 100.1 − 0.1 − 1.0 1.1 − 0.5 1.3 1.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 1.5
Business services  1 101.9 105.7 108.0 1.9 3.7 2.2 4.3 2.7 3.4 1.8 1.0 1.3 0.5
Public services, education and
health 104.2 107.7 109.0 4.2 3.4 1.2 3.5 1.5 1.2 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.2
Other services 98.0 98.9 99.0 − 2.0 0.8 0.1 0.8 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.6 1.2 1.0
Gross value added 102.2 104.8 106.4 2.2 2.5 1.5 2.9 1.8 2.5 0.9 0.8 0.8 − 0.1
Gross domestic product  2 102.2 104.8 106.4 2.2 2.5 1.5 2.8 1.6 2.5 1.1 0.9 0.8 0.0
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 102.3 103.6 105.0 2.3 1.3 1.3 1.2 1.8 1.4 0.6 1.3 1.0 1.5
Government consumption 104.1 106.6 108.1 4.1 2.4 1.4 2.2 1.5 1.9 1.2 1.1 1.9 1.9
Machinery and equipment 103.0 107.1 111.8 3.0 4.0 4.4 4.7 5.0 5.9 3.4 3.4 2.7 1.5
Premises 103.8 104.6 107.2 3.8 0.7 2.5 − 0.1 0.6 2.7 2.6 4.0 6.6 2.2
Other investment  4 105.2 109.6 114.3 5.2 4.2 4.3 6.8 3.9 4.6 4.8 3.8 3.0 2.7
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.1 0.5 0.3 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4
Domestic demand 103.0 105.5 107.7 3.0 2.4 2.1 2.1 1.7 2.0 2.4 2.4 1.7 1.3
Net exports  6 . . . − 0.6 0.3 − 0.4 0.8 0.1 0.6 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.1
Exports 102.4 107.4 109.7 2.4 4.9 2.1 5.2 3.0 4.4 1.3 − 0.1 2.1 − 0.8
Imports 104.3 109.8 113.7 4.3 5.2 3.6 4.3 3.4 3.7 4.3 3.1 4.3 1.8
Gross domestic product  2 102.2 104.8 106.4 2.2 2.5 1.5 2.8 1.6 2.5 1.1 0.9 0.8 0.0
At current prices ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,649.8 1,697.0 1,743.7 3.0 2.9 2.8 2.5 3.1 2.8 2.2 3.0 2.2 3.1
Government consumption 620.0 644.3 665.6 4.6 3.9 3.3 4.3 3.3 3.7 3.3 3.0 4.0 4.1
Machinery and equipment 214.1 224.2 235.3 3.5 4.7 4.9 5.9 5.2 6.4 4.1 4.2 3.6 2.5
Premises 307.9 320.7 344.3 5.7 4.2 7.3 3.9 4.8 7.2 7.8 9.3 12.0 7.1
Other investment  4 114.4 121.0 128.1 6.1 5.8 5.9 8.4 5.5 6.2 6.6 5.5 4.7 4.4
Changes in inventories  5 − 2.9 7.4 21.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,903.3 3,014.5 3,138.3 3.7 3.8 4.1 3.9 3.4 3.9 4.2 4.8 3.6 3.3
Net exports 230.8 230.4 206.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,442.4 1,538.0 1,585.8 1.6 6.6 3.1 6.3 3.2 4.8 2.9 1.6 3.5 0.1
Imports 1,211.6 1,307.6 1,379.7 1.8 7.9 5.5 6.0 3.6 4.9 7.6 5.9 5.5 2.6
Gross domestic product  2 3,134.1 3,245.0 3,344.4 3.4 3.5 3.1 4.2 3.2 4.0 2.3 2.8 2.8 2.1
IV. Prices (2015 = 100)
Private consumption 100.7 102.2 103.7 0.7 1.5 1.5 1.2 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.2 1.6
Gross domestic product 101.2 102.2 103.8 1.2 1.0 1.5 1.4 1.6 1.4 1.2 1.9 1.9 2.0
Terms of trade 101.7 100.8 99.9 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.0 0.2 0.2
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,625.1 1,694.7 1,771.3 3.9 4.3 4.5 4.3 4.5 4.4 4.9 4.3 4.4 4.5
Entrepreneurial and property
income 721.0 735.8 731.8 3.8 2.1 − 0.5 4.7 0.8 2.8 − 4.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.9
National income 2,346.1 2,430.5 2,503.1 3.8 3.6 3.0 4.4 3.3 4.0 1.8 3.0 2.9 2.7
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,211.3 3,328.0 3,437.9 3.6 3.6 3.3 4.3 3.4 4.2 2.6 3.0 2.8 2.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2019. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
November 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
2. Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015 = 100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.59 29.45 36.98 2.27 10.89 10.31 9.95 12.73 14.16
Period
2015 99.7 99.6 100.0 99.7 99.8 99.7 99.6 99.8 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.6
2016 101.5 105.3 98.5 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.6 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.12017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.7 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.22018
2 105.8 2 108.9 97.4 105.9 105.5 106.0 106.1 106.9 107.3 108.9 106.5 103.5
 
2018         Q3 106.3 116.0 93.3 105.6 106.7 103.1 104.1 111.4 107.9 110.3 105.1 96.5
         Q4 107.7 121.9 99.9 105.8 101.8 109.3 106.3 105.0 104.8 110.3 115.7 97.7
2019         Q1 100.9 92.9 102.4 102.2 104.3 100.8 108.4 100.1 106.5 104.4 100.3 98.0
         Q2 x 102.5 112.4 83.6 102.2 103.2 101.8 103.5 100.3 105.5 103.3 102.4 95.3
         Q3 x,p 102.0 118.1 81.9 100.7 101.4 99.7 103.4 101.8 102.8 105.2 101.8 88.9
 
2018         Sep. 111.2 119.0 91.6 111.4 108.8 112.1 118.8 114.3 111.7 116.5 112.6 108.5
         Oct. 110.0 120.2 97.5 109.2 109.2 108.5 112.2 110.9 112.2 112.4 108.7 104.3
         Nov. 111.3 122.0 99.0 110.5 107.3 113.5 112.0 108.4 112.0 114.7 113.4 107.8         Dec. 101.8 123.6 103.1 97.8 88.9 105.8 94.8 95.6 90.2 103.7 124.9 80.9
2019         Jan. 92.8 75.1 109.5 94.6 100.1 88.6 100.8 98.5 100.7 97.6 88.3 84.9
         Feb. 98.3 92.6 96.6 99.4 100.7 99.4 105.3 94.6 103.1 99.7 97.1 99.5         Mar. 111.7 111.1 101.1 112.7 112.2 114.3 119.1 107.1 115.8 115.8 115.4 109.7
         Apr.
x 101.5 111.6 88.1 100.7 103.5 98.8 102.0 99.5 105.8 101.4 99.4 92.6
         May x 101.3 109.8 84.2 101.2 102.8 100.0 101.6 100.5 104.1 101.8 98.9 96.2
         June x 104.6 115.8 78.4 104.7 103.4 106.6 106.8 101.0 106.6 106.6 108.9 97.2
         July 3,x 103.0 121.1 81.7 101.5 102.7 100.5 99.9 101.7 104.3 103.2 102.8 90.7
         Aug. 3,x 96.5 112.7 80.5 95.0 98.3 91.0 95.3 99.5 97.5 101.6 93.9 76.7
         Sep. x,p 106.4 120.4 83.5 105.7 103.2 107.6 114.9 104.1 106.6 110.9 108.6 99.3
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2015 + 0.9 − 2.3 + 5.0 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.8 + 5.7 − 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.52017 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 0.4 + 3.6 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.02018
2 + 0.9 2 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 − 1.6
 
2018         Q3 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 − 2.0 + 5.9 + 0.2 + 0.7 + 2.0 − 8.3
         Q4 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 4.6 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 1.8 − 3.0 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 6.7
2019         Q1 − 1.6 + 6.2 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 1.4 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 4.1 − 0.3 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 10.2
         Q2 x − 4.0 + 2.0 − 8.2 − 4.8 − 4.1 − 5.3 − 1.8 − 6.0 − 3.8 − 3.6 − 2.3 − 13.8
         Q3 x,p − 4.0 + 1.8 − 12.2 − 4.6 − 5.0 − 3.3 − 0.7 − 8.6 − 4.8 − 4.6 − 3.2 − 7.9
 
2018         Sep. − 0.3 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 5.4 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 6.5
         Oct. + 0.5 − 0.5 − 5.4 + 1.1 − 0.5 + 2.1 − 1.5 + 2.5 + 0.3 + 2.6 + 5.5 − 3.4
         Nov. − 4.1 − 1.1 − 5.1 − 4.4 − 3.9 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 2.3 − 2.2 − 11.9         Dec. − 2.4 + 0.7 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 4.2 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 2.9 − 3.3
2019         Jan. − 2.8 − 0.5 + 2.8 − 3.7 − 2.1 − 5.3 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.9 + 0.6 − 14.2
         Feb. − 0.4 + 11.4 − 5.3 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.2 + 0.1 − 5.1         Mar. − 1.5 + 6.9 − 6.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.7 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 11.2
         Apr.
x − 2.8 + 5.0 − 5.4 − 4.1 − 2.1 − 6.3 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 2.1 − 0.8 − 17.4
         May x − 4.4 − 1.0 − 7.2 − 4.9 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 1.1 − 7.7 − 4.5 − 3.5 − 2.7 − 10.9
         June x − 4.7 + 2.0 − 12.1 − 5.5 − 5.6 − 5.2 − 3.1 − 7.3 − 4.7 − 5.2 − 3.2 − 13.1
         July 3,x − 3.9 + 2.3 − 12.6 − 4.6 − 5.3 − 3.6 + 1.5 − 7.5 − 4.5 − 5.2 − 1.8 − 9.8
         Aug. 3,x − 3.9 + 1.8 − 15.1 − 4.0 − 4.4 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 9.5 − 5.2 − 3.7 − 4.3 − 4.6
         Sep. x,p − 4.3 + 1.2 − 8.8 − 5.1 − 5.1 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 8.9 − 4.6 − 4.8 − 3.6 − 8.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, Office. 3Influenced by a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; estimated and ad-
see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to justed in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Pro-
II.12. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of duction Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry,
the production sector in the base year 2015. 2As of January 2018 weights in respectively. 
structural and civil engineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
November 2019
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
3. Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
Total
2014 97.8 + 2.7 100.6 + 0.6 96.2 + 3.9 96.8 + 4.6 95.8 + 0.6 97.1 + 5.9
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.8
2016 100.7 + 0.9 98.9 − 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.1 − 0.7
2017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.1
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2018         Sep. 109.8 − 0.5 109.2 + 0.3 109.7 − 1.9 113.1 + 5.7 125.4 − 0.6 109.1 + 8.3
         Oct. 111.6 − 1.1 113.9 + 0.4 110.7 − 1.9 108.9 − 0.6 127.4 − 0.4 102.8 − 0.8
         Nov. 112.4 − 2.1 111.3 − 5.8 114.0 + 0.8 105.7 − 5.2 121.6 − 6.2 100.4 − 4.7
         Dec. 111.6 − 3.1 96.8 − 6.4 122.9 − 1.8 95.8 + 1.5 109.6 + 0.9 91.3 + 1.8
2019         Jan. 108.0 − 2.4 110.0 − 5.0 106.8 − 0.6 108.3 − 3.0 118.6 + 3.7 104.9 − 5.2
         Feb. 102.8 − 7.0 104.5 − 5.0 101.4 − 8.5 106.5 − 4.7 114.9 + 3.5 103.8 − 7.3
         Mar. 115.9 − 4.7 113.9 − 6.0 117.3 − 4.2 115.5 − 0.4 131.2 + 6.8 110.4 − 2.9
         Apr. 104.3 − 4.1 104.9 − 8.5 103.6 − 1.9 105.9 + 1.0 115.6 + 1.7 102.8 + 1.0
         May 101.2 − 7.7 102.1 − 9.7 100.3 − 7.0 104.2 − 2.3 113.7 − 6.0 101.0 − 0.9
         June 108.9 − 3.0 105.1 − 8.3 111.4 + 0.9 107.6 − 6.6 120.6 − 1.6 103.3 − 8.4
         July 103.0 − 4.5 102.2 − 10.0 102.7 + 0.0 109.8 − 9.0 120.9 + 0.8 106.2 − 12.2
         Aug. 92.7 − 6.3 94.6 − 8.3 90.3 − 4.6 103.5 − 5.8 119.8 + 2.7 98.2 − 8.7
         Sep. p 104.7 − 4.6 99.4 − 9.0 107.6 − 1.9 106.8 − 5.6 133.9 + 6.8 97.9 − 10.3
From the domestic market
2014 98.1 + 1.1 101.7 − 1.1 95.2 + 3.1 97.1 + 2.0 100.4 + 0.0 96.0 + 2.8
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.9 + 2.2 98.1 − 1.7 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.8 101.6 + 3.6 108.6 + 5.3 99.3 + 3.1
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 − 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.6 98.9 − 0.4
2018         Sep. 107.9 + 0.4 107.5 + 1.5 109.3 − 0.1 100.7 − 3.6 119.1 − 1.6 94.5 − 4.4
         Oct. 106.8 − 3.8 110.4 − 1.7 103.7 − 5.9 107.4 − 1.1 120.5 − 6.2 102.9 + 1.1
         Nov. 112.2 − 0.4 111.0 − 2.7 113.8 + 1.9 108.2 − 3.0 121.3 − 1.5 103.8 − 3.6
         Dec. 101.4 + 0.1 91.6 − 6.9 111.4 + 5.0 90.9 + 5.5 99.0 + 11.2 88.1 + 3.4
2019         Jan. 107.2 − 0.6 106.3 − 6.2 108.9 + 4.7 101.1 − 1.2 109.3 + 1.8 98.3 − 2.3
         Feb. 104.3 − 0.6 102.6 − 4.3 105.4 + 2.1 106.9 + 3.0 112.6 + 4.2 105.0 + 2.5
         Mar. 112.3 − 6.2 109.4 − 8.5 115.2 − 5.3 109.7 + 1.5 134.6 + 10.9 101.3 − 2.2
         Apr. 100.1 − 4.0 100.3 − 7.0 100.3 − 2.1 97.4 + 0.7 111.9 − 1.2 92.5 + 1.5
         May 99.2 − 6.4 99.6 − 8.6 99.3 − 4.0 96.8 − 8.6 105.9 − 16.8 93.7 − 5.1
         June 101.3 − 5.9 99.6 − 10.2 103.3 − 2.4 97.6 − 3.9 104.4 − 9.6 95.3 − 1.7
         July 102.4 − 6.6 100.4 − 11.1 103.9 − 3.1 103.5 − 2.6 112.6 + 3.4 100.4 − 4.7
         Aug. 91.2 − 6.6 91.4 − 10.0 90.2 − 3.4 97.3 − 5.6 105.7 − 7.9 94.5 − 4.7
         Sep. p 100.2 − 7.1 95.2 − 11.4 104.3 − 4.6 100.9 + 0.2 121.0 + 1.6 94.1 − 0.4
From abroad
2014 97.5 + 3.8 99.5 + 2.5 96.7 + 4.2 96.5 + 6.6 92.0 + 1.1 97.9 + 8.3
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.4 + 0.6 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.0 + 7.2 101.1 + 1.3
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.5 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.8 104.4 + 3.3
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 111.9 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 − 0.5 113.3 + 8.5
2018         Sep. 111.2 − 1.2 111.0 − 1.0 109.9 − 2.9 122.8 + 12.7 130.5 + 0.2 120.3 + 17.8
         Oct. 115.3 + 1.0 117.6 + 2.3 114.9 + 0.4 110.1 − 0.2 133.0 + 4.4 102.7 − 2.1
         Nov. 112.6 − 3.3 111.7 − 9.0 114.1 + 0.2 103.7 − 6.9 121.9 − 9.8 97.8 − 5.7
         Dec. 119.4 − 5.0 102.5 − 5.8 129.8 − 5.0 99.6 − 1.2 118.1 − 5.0 93.7 + 0.5
2019         Jan. 108.6 − 3.7 113.9 − 3.9 105.5 − 3.6 113.9 − 4.2 126.1 + 5.0 110.0 − 7.2
         Feb. 101.7 − 11.4 106.5 − 5.8 99.0 − 14.1 106.2 − 9.9 116.7 + 2.9 102.9 − 13.8
         Mar. 118.7 − 3.5 118.7 − 3.6 118.5 − 3.7 120.0 − 1.8 128.4 + 3.5 117.3 − 3.5
         Apr. 107.4 − 4.3 109.8 − 10.1 105.6 − 1.9 112.5 + 1.4 118.6 + 3.9 110.6 + 0.5
         May 102.7 − 8.6 104.8 − 10.9 100.9 − 8.8 109.9 + 2.6 120.0 + 3.5 106.6 + 2.2
         June 114.7 − 0.9 111.1 − 6.3 116.3 + 2.7 115.3 − 8.3 133.6 + 4.1 109.5 − 12.4
         July 103.5 − 2.9 104.2 − 8.8 101.9 + 1.9 114.7 − 13.0 127.6 − 1.0 110.6 − 16.7
         Aug. 93.9 − 5.9 98.0 − 6.8 90.4 − 5.3 108.3 − 5.9 131.2 + 10.9 101.0 − 11.5
         Sep. p 108.1 − 2.8 104.0 − 6.3 109.6 − 0.3 111.4 − 9.3 144.2 + 10.5 100.8 − 16.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex-   
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics,  
Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
November 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2015 99.9 + 4.7 99.9 + 4.9 99.9 + 12.9 99.9 − 2.1 99.8 + 8.7 99.9 + 4.5 99.9 + 0.7 99.8 + 4.9
2016 114.4 + 14.5 115.0 + 15.1 116.9 + 17.0 114.9 + 15.0 108.8 + 9.0 113.7 + 13.8 111.7 + 11.8 116.0 + 16.22017 122.4 + 7.0 123.1 + 7.0 123.0 + 5.2 123.4 + 7.4 121.8 + 11.9 121.6 + 6.9 119.8 + 7.3 125.0 + 7.82018 134.7 + 10.0 131.2 + 6.6 136.6 + 11.1 127.9 + 3.6 125.2 + 2.8 138.8 + 14.1 135.7 + 13.3 132.5 + 6.0
 
2018         Aug. 128.7 + 10.5 119.8 + 5.5 125.7 + 13.2 116.5 + 2.6 112.3 − 8.5 139.0 + 16.0 127.3 + 13.0 132.0 + 6.4
         Sep. 139.7 + 14.2 143.6 + 16.9 155.9 + 28.7 130.4 + 9.0 152.2 + 8.5 135.3 + 11.1 134.8 + 13.9 135.6 + 6.2
         Oct. 132.1 + 15.8 128.6 + 11.6 141.3 + 14.3 122.2 + 14.8 110.8 − 7.7 136.1 + 20.5 134.4 + 24.0 123.8 + 7.7
         Nov. 128.6 + 13.9 125.6 + 6.6 139.5 + 23.0 117.1 − 6.8 111.8 + 9.2 131.9 + 23.0 136.7 + 10.0 112.5 + 13.2         Dec. 150.5 + 12.4 145.7 − 2.1 166.6 + 12.1 135.1 − 14.2 116.5 − 1.1 156.1 + 34.0 164.1 + 15.3 125.2 + 8.5
2019         Jan. 117.3 + 18.2 120.8 + 19.8 123.8 + 21.3 123.7 + 19.6 99.7 + 15.0 113.3 + 16.3 126.5 + 19.6 102.8 + 14.3
         Feb. 132.9 + 7.1 129.4 + 9.7 119.0 + 5.5 134.4 + 7.8 145.1 + 31.7 137.0 + 4.4 132.4 − 2.9 141.9 + 21.3         Mar. 171.7 + 17.9 163.9 + 16.8 170.3 + 22.9 158.4 + 15.6 163.1 + 3.2 180.9 + 19.2 166.5 + 21.1 178.7 + 12.2
         Apr. 153.1 + 12.7 149.0 + 14.0 149.8 + 6.2 151.6 + 20.5 136.8 + 19.6 157.9 + 11.3 145.5 + 14.6 163.9 + 14.8
         May 147.7 + 3.4 144.6 + 5.6 146.8 + 12.3 148.8 + 4.1 121.6 − 9.9 151.4 + 1.2 148.0 + 3.7 148.0 − 1.5         June 162.2 + 10.3 161.7 + 14.1 158.3 + 11.1 164.1 + 20.6 164.0 + 2.7 162.7 + 6.1 166.2 + 21.5 159.9 − 1.1
         July 153.8 + 8.2 147.8 + 4.0 154.6 + 8.6 141.8 − 1.4 147.9 + 9.6 160.8 + 12.9 152.2 + 5.4 155.2 + 11.1
         Aug. 134.7 + 4.7 135.6 + 13.2 139.3 + 10.8 131.3 + 12.7 139.3 + 24.0 133.6 − 3.9 137.2 + 7.8 128.9 − 2.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; exclu- adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13). 1Excluding
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement − Seasonally housing construction orders. 2 Including road construction. 
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of which:In stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2015 3 100.1 + 3.7 3 100.1 + 3.8 100.1 + 2.9 100.2 + 0.3 100.2 + 1.0 100.2 + 2.7 100.0 + 5.3 3 100.0 + 20.0
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.2 + 2.1 101.7 + 1.6 101.0 + 0.8 99.9 − 0.3 101.5 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.82017 107.6 + 5.0 105.8 + 3.5 105.9 + 4.1 108.2 + 7.1 106.2 + 6.3 103.0 + 1.5 107.7 + 3.7 120.4 + 9.72018
4 110.6 + 2.8 107.5 + 1.6 109.6 + 3.5 105.5 − 2.5 106.9 + 0.7 103.1 + 0.1 112.4 + 4.4 127.7 + 6.1
 
2018         Sep. 107.8 + 1.9 103.9 + 0.2 105.5 + 2.6 108.6 − 8.4 108.0 + 5.4 98.9 − 0.3 110.5 + 4.1 125.5 + 7.4
         Oct. 114.3 + 3.5 110.0 + 1.9 110.8 + 4.4 116.3 − 2.2 107.7 − 1.3 108.3 − 0.6 115.3 + 5.9 137.0 + 12.6
         Nov. 118.8 + 3.5 114.6 + 2.1 109.3 + 0.9 112.1 − 0.3 131.5 + 6.9 112.1 + 2.1 118.1 + 4.2 162.7 + 7.7         Dec. 128.8 − 0.5 125.1 − 1.2 126.4 + 0.5 121.9 − 4.7 157.2 − 2.8 109.6 − 2.3 124.5 + 0.9 154.1 − 0.3
2019         Jan. 103.8 + 3.7 101.3 + 3.2 102.1 + 2.9 87.5 − 2.5 112.0 + 1.9 92.1 + 1.9 113.3 + 5.3 130.6 + 9.9
         Feb. 101.5 + 5.5 98.6 + 4.7 101.3 + 3.1 82.6 + 5.5 94.2 + 1.8 94.5 + 4.8 110.1 + 6.0 120.3 + 11.3         Mar. 115.7 + 4.4 112.1 + 4.1 113.9 + 3.4 104.2 + 4.1 105.6 + 1.6 114.8 + 7.4 117.3 + 4.3 133.5 + 5.9
         Apr. 115.0 + 1.6 110.7 + 0.8 113.4 + 0.6 109.9 − 8.2 93.8 + 3.4 114.9 + 1.1 116.4 + 3.2 134.5 + 9.0
         May 113.2 + 2.4 108.8 + 1.6 111.8 − 0.4 103.0 − 5.7 94.1 + 5.6 110.2 + 4.1 115.3 + 7.0 127.7 + 6.0         June 114.9 + 4.6 110.8 + 3.9 115.4 + 3.0 116.5 + 9.2 97.3 − 2.3 106.5 + 4.7 114.4 + 4.4 131.9 + 14.0
         July 115.3 + 4.2 111.6 + 3.0 113.9 + 2.8 105.5
+ 0.0 95.4 − 0.6 108.6 + 5.7 119.4 + 3.1 136.8 + 10.1
         Aug. 110.7 + 3.9 107.3 + 3.4 110.9 + 3.4 99.7 + 1.5 101.5 + 4.7 101.0 + 4.9 113.6 + 3.3 124.1 + 6.5         Sep. 111.6 + 3.5 107.4 + 3.4 106.6 + 1.0 111.5 + 2.7 107.1 − 0.8 103.3 + 4.4 117.4 + 6.2 137.0 + 9.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value added online retail sales-based enterprise that founded a business establishment in Germany
tax;  for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement 4 − Seasonally adjusted busi- in May 2015. 4As of January 2018 figures are provisional, in some cases revised, and
ness statistics, Table II.24. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Including stalls and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports. 
markets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3As of May 2015 integration of a larger

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
November 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legal
category
Solely of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary social Unem- Temporary Security
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies,  4, 6 
Thou- percentage Thou- rate 4, 5 thou- percentage
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2014 42,721 + 0.9 30,197 + 1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,122 + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,655 + 1.2 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 44,248 + 1.4 32,234 + 2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,854 + 1.4 32,964 + 2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2016         Q3 43,830 + 1.2 31,593 + 2.1 9,056 21,431 858 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682
         Q4 44,091 + 1.3 32,014 + 2.2 9,137 21,770 866 4,781 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017         Q1 43,720 + 1.4 31,790 + 2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734 7 987 6.2 671
         Q2 44,153 + 1.3 32,064 + 2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 5.6 717
         Q3 44,436 + 1.4 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763
         Q4 44,684 + 1.3 32,759 + 2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 82 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1 44,380 + 1.5 32,563 + 2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 325 24 2,525 909 5.7 760
         Q2 44,776 + 1.4 32,802 + 2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 5.1 794
         Q3 45,016 + 1.3 33,040 + 2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
         Q4 45,244 + 1.3 33,452 + 2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019         Q1 r 44,889 r + 1.1 33,214 + 2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
         Q2 r 45,221 r + 1.0 8 33,385 8 + 1.8 8 9,455 8 22,931 8 750 8 4,616 ... 8 469 2,227 778 9,10 4.9 795
         Q3 11 45,372 11 + 0.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,276 827 5.0 794
2016         June 43,703 + 1.2 31,443 + 2.2 9,010 21,339 846 4,865 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665
         July 43,697 + 1.1 31,378 + 2.1 9,007 21,273 853 4,863 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674
         Aug. 43,768 + 1.2 31,675 + 2.2 9,076 21,486 865 4,802 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685
         Sep. 44,024 + 1.2 32,007 + 2.2 9,157 21,729 869 4,768 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687
         Oct. 44,102 + 1.2 32,045 + 2.2 9,154 21,773 871 4,767 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691
         Nov. 44,154 + 1.2 32,069 + 2.2 9,147 21,807 876 4,794 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681
         Dec. 44,016 + 1.3 31,848 + 2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan. 43,640 + 1.4 31,707 + 2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777 7 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb. 43,692 + 1.4 31,774 + 2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
         Mar. 43,829 + 1.4 31,930 + 2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr. 43,999 + 1.4 32,013 + 2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
         May 44,168 + 1.3 32,131 + 2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 5.6 714
         June 44,291 + 1.3 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July 44,330 + 1.4 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
         Aug. 44,371 + 1.4 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765
         Sep. 44,606 + 1.3 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
         Oct. 44,678 + 1.3 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
         Nov. 44,749 + 1.3 32,830 + 2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772
         Dec. 44,625 + 1.4 32,609 + 2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 194 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan. 44,326 + 1.6 32,504 + 2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 287 23 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb. 44,358 + 1.5 32,551 + 2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 359 23 2,546 927 5.7 764
         Mar. 44,456 + 1.4 32,660 + 2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778
         Apr. 44,632 + 1.4 32,782 + 2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
         May 44,812 + 1.5 32,857 + 2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 5.1 793
         June 44,885 + 1.3 32,870 + 2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
         July 44,918 + 1.3 32,844 + 2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
         Aug. 44,968 + 1.3 33,131 + 2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
         Sep. 45,161 + 1.2 33,422 + 2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
         Oct. 45,249 + 1.3 33,488 + 2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
         Nov. 45,312 + 1.3 33,513 + 2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
         Dec. 45,170 + 1.2 33,286 + 2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019         Jan. r 44,837 r + 1.2 33,156 + 2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
         Feb. r 44,877 r + 1.2 33,199 + 2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
         Mar. r 44,954 r + 1.1 33,286 + 1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
         Apr. r 45,117 r + 1.1 33,383 + 1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
         May r 45,256 r + 1.0 8 33,426 8 + 1.7 8 9,460 8 22,965 8 748 8 4,630 ... 8 519 2,236 772 9,10 4.9 792
         June r 45,289 r + 0.9 8 33,405 8 + 1.6 8 9,454 8 22,949 8 750 8 4,649 ... 8 46 2,216 766 4.9 798
         July r 45,299 r + 0.8 8 33,367 8 + 1.6 8 9,451 8 22,908 8 757 8 4,652 ... 8 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
         Aug. r 45,318 r + 0.8 8 33,620 8 + 1.5 8 9,509 8 23,110 8 750 8 4,581 ... 8 54 2,319 848 5.1 795
         Sep. 11 45,499 11 + 0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,234 808 4.9 787
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,204 795 4.8 764
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and ployment Agency. In 2017 and 2018, the estimated values for Germany deviated
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official from the final data by a maximum of 0.2% for employees subjec t to social contribu-
figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: end tions, by a maximum of 0.4% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contribu-
of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the total tions, and by a maximum of 70.0% for cyclically induced short-time
civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seaso- work. 9Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the legal
nal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From January 2017 persons receiving category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II). 10From May 2019,
additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 11Initial preliminary estimate by
the same time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book the basis of the Federal Statistical Office. 
the Social Security Code (SGB III) 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Em-

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
November 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
7. Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which:  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  7 
prices ofindustrial
of which:
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Actual Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy rents struction the prices  of price index
Energy Services for (national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial
Total 2 Food 3 4, 5 2, 4 concept) index market  6 Exports Imports Energy  8 products  6 goods  4 housing materials  9 
Period 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.1 101.2 100.5 101.9 98.4 98.7 99.0 96.7 83.2 98.42017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.12018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.2
 
2017         Dec. 102.7 105.5 102.7 98.5 102.8 103.6 102.6 101.9 108.9 100.8 100.8 113.7 103.6
2018         Jan. 101.7 106.2 101.7 98.9 100.8 103.9 102.0 102.4 105.2 101.1 101.4 115.9 105.4
         Feb. 102.2 106.2 102.1 98.5 101.9 104.0 102.3 108.3 102.3 104.8 101.0 100.9 108.7 106.0         Mar. 103.0 106.4 103.1 97.9 102.9 104.1 102.9 102.4 105.8 101.1 100.8 109.5 104.9
         Apr. 103.2 106.8 103.3 99.5 102.8 104.3 103.1 102.8 105.6 101.3 101.4 116.7 106.1
         May 104.3 106.9 103.2 101.9 104.6 104.4 103.9 109.4 103.3 104.4 101.8 102.9 129.9 112.5         June 104.4 106.9 102.8 102.4 104.9 104.5 104.0 103.7 104.6 102.1 103.4 130.5 111.3
         July 105.2 106.6 101.7 102.3 107.4 104.7 104.4 103.9 107.1 102.2 103.3 129.9 105.8
         Aug. 105.2 106.4 102.3 103.1 107.0 104.8 104.5 111.0 104.2 110.5 102.4 103.3 130.5 105.7         Sep. 105.3 107.1 103.8 105.1 105.6 104.9 104.7 104.7 111.6 102.4 103.7 140.8 102.7
         Oct. 105.4 107.1 104.1 106.1 105.5 105.0 104.9 105.0 111.4 102.6 104.7 144.7 105.5
         Nov. 104.2 107.0 104.1 108.0 102.4 105.1 104.2 112.0 105.1 111.7 102.5 103.7 123.7 105.2         Dec. 104.4 107.0 103.8 103.5 104.0 105.2 104.2 104.7 111.6 102.1 102.4 111.4 103.2
2019         Jan. 103.4 107.4 102.9 101.5 102.9 105.4 103.4 105.1
10 111.5 102.2 102.2 112.3 104.4
         Feb. 103.9 107.9 103.4 101.7 103.6 105.6 103.8 114.0 105.0 112.1 102.3 102.5 114.3 109.4         Mar. 104.4 107.7 103.9 102.4 104.1 105.7 104.2 104.9 113.0 102.4 102.5 115.2 108.3
         Apr. 105.4 107.9 104.6 104.4 105.3 105.8 105.2 105.4 115.5 102.6 102.8 119.2 108.8
         May 105.7 108.3 104.6 106.1 105.3 105.9 105.4 115.0 105.3 115.7 102.5 102.7 116.6 106.6         June 106.0 108.4 104.1 104.9 106.6 106.1 105.7 104.9 115.1 102.3 101.3 102.8 108.6
         July 106.4 108.7 103.3 104.7 107.9 106.2 106.2 105.0 114.3 102.4 101.1 105.7 113.0
         Aug. 106.3 108.8 103.4 103.8 107.8 106.3 106.0 115.8 104.5 112.5 102.3 100.5 100.2 106.0         Sep. 106.2 108.8 104.7 103.8 106.9 106.4 106.0 104.6 110.0 102.4 101.1 105.9 107.5
         Oct. 106.3 108.6 105.0 103.8 106.9 106.6 106.1 ... ... ... ... 105.7 107.1
Annual percentage change  
  
2015 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 2.5 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 1.9 − 5.3 + 0.9 − 2.8 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 16.8 − 1.62017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 10.0 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 19.7 + 8.82018 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 25.1 − 0.8
 
2017         Dec. + 1.5 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 2.3 + 3.4 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 6.7 − 9.1
2018         Jan. + 1.5 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 2.1 − 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 6.4 − 9.1
         Feb. + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 4.2 + 1.8 − 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 10.8         Mar. + 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 9.8 − 9.9
         Apr. + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 16.2 − 3.6
         May + 2.5 + 3.3 + 0.5 + 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 4.3 + 2.5 − 6.5 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 39.5 + 8.0         June + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 6.7 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 52.3 + 10.9
         July + 2.2 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 6.7 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 4.2 + 1.7 + 4.8 + 50.2 + 2.8
         Aug. + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 7.1 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 1.7 + 2.1 + 4.8 + 44.8 + 2.3         Sep. + 2.2 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 7.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 4.4 + 46.2 − 0.1
         Oct. + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 4.8 + 42.4 + 2.7
         Nov. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 9.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 5.2 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 3.1 + 12.1 + 1.3         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.4
2019         Jan. + 1.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 2.6
10 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.9
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 7.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 3.2         Mar. + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 6.8 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 3.2
         Apr. + 2.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.5
         May + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 5.1 + 1.9 + 10.8 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 10.2 − 5.2         June + 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 21.2 − 2.4
         July + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 18.6 + 6.8
         Aug. + 1.0 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 23.2 + 0.3         Sep. + 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.4
+ 0.0 − 2.5 − 24.8 + 4.7
         Oct. + 0.9 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.1 ... ... ... ... − 27.0 + 1.5
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on basis of the five digit structure set out in the European Classifi cation of Individual
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Consumption according to Purpose (ECOICOP). 5Electricity, gas and other fuels as
Materials: HWWI. 1Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. 2With well as transport fuels and lubricants, from January 2017 excluding lubricants. 6Exclu-
effect from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of ding value added tax. 7For the euro area, in euro. 8Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natu-
package holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series. 3Including alcoholic be- ral gas. 9Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 10From
verages and tobacco. 4Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the January 2019 onwards provisional figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
November 2019
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- As
age age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2011 1,103.5 4.9 746.4 4.0 371.1 − 1.3 1,117.5 2.2 1,628.1 3.3 163.1 0.5 10.0
2012 1,150.0 4.2 776.1 4.0 376.8 1.5 1,152.9 3.2 1,668.4 2.5 161.0 − 1.3 9.7
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 − 2.5 9.3
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.2 4.1 1,273.5 4.0 1,781.5 2.7 179.2 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.9 3.9 425.6 3.7 1,322.4 3.8 1,836.2 3.1 186.4 4.0 10.2
2017 1,394.0 4.2 932.0 3.9 441.5 3.7 1,373.4 3.9 1,894.4 3.2 197.4 5.9 10.4
2018 1,460.9 4.8 975.5 4.7 451.8 2.3 1,427.3 3.9 1,958.2 3.4 214.5 8.6 11.0
2018         Q1 340.2 4.7 227.6 4.6 113.9 2.1 341.5 3.8 492.5 3.8 70.8 8.1 14.4
         Q2 355.8 4.8 232.3 4.6 111.6 2.3 343.9 3.9 482.3 3.4 50.2 9.0 10.4
         Q3 361.7 5.1 246.5 5.0 113.6 2.4 360.1 4.2 486.0 2.8 45.1 9.1 9.3
         Q4 403.3 4.6 269.0 4.4 112.8 2.5 381.8 3.9 497.5 3.5 48.4 8.7 9.7
2019         Q1 354.7 4.3 238.5 4.8 117.5 3.2 356.0 4.2 503.8 2.3 73.0 3.2 14.5
         Q2 371.2 4.3 243.5 4.8 117.1 4.9 360.6 4.9 497.1 3.1 51.8 3.1 10.4
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2019. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2011 90.3 1.7 90.5 1.7 90.4 1.7 90.3 1.7 89.8 3.5
2012 92.7 2.6 92.9 2.6 92.9 2.8 92.8 2.8 92.4 2.9
2013 95.0 2.5 95.1 2.5 95.2 2.5 95.1 2.5 94.4 2.2
2014 97.8 2.9 97.8 2.8 97.8 2.7 97.7 2.7 97.2 3.0
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.2 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.9
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.5
2017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.1 104.3 2.2 104.6 2.3 105.1 2.6
2018 107.2 2.9 107.2 2.9 107.2 2.7 107.4 2.7 108.4 3.1
2018         Q2 101.0 3.3 101.0 3.3 100.7 3.0 107.5 3.0 105.9 3.1
         Q3 109.6 2.9 109.6 2.9 109.7 2.9 108.0 2.8 107.2 3.6
         Q4 119.3 2.9 119.3 2.9 119.2 2.8 108.3 2.8 118.5 3.1
2019         Q1 101.9 2.9 101.9 2.9 101.9 3.0 109.1 3.0 105.0 2.9
         Q2 103.1 2.1 103.1 2.1 102.9 2.2 109.9 2.2 109.1 3.1
         Q3 114.3 4.3 114.2 4.2 112.5 2.6 110.5 2.4 . .
2019         Mar. 101.8 2.2 101.8 2.2 102.0 2.8 109.2 2.8 . .
         Apr. 103.0 2.3 103.0 2.3 103.1 2.5 109.8 2.6 . .
         May 103.0 1.3 103.0 1.3 103.1 2.1 109.8 2.0 . .
         June 103.2 2.6 103.2 2.6 102.6 1.9 110.0 2.0 . .
         July 136.2 7.0 136.1 6.9 131.0 2.8 110.4 2.4 . .
         Aug. 103.4 2.7 103.3 2.6 103.2 2.4 110.5 2.4 . .
         Sep. 103.2 2.5 103.2 2.4 103.3 2.4 110.6 2.4 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such August 2019. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
November 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
  
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
Non- Trade of which:
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2015 2,226.8 1,395.1 470.7 565.7 273.1 831.8 215.5 190.5 136.1 633.5 1,593.4 861.4 466.2 732.0 222.8 180.3
2016 2,367.7 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.82017 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.72018 
p,3 2,595.6 1,539.2 542.4 611.3 290.2 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.5 792.4 1,803.2 927.6 560.2 875.6 257.4 205.1
2017         H1 2,385.4 1,471.8 502.9 584.4 288.6 913.5 238.2 220.8 149.9 701.7 1,683.6 888.0 498.3 795.7 246.2 194.9
         H2 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2018         H1  3 2,551.8 1,533.0 541.7 602.5 289.8 1,018.8 250.1 236.1 143.3 775.6 1,776.2 909.4 541.0 866.7 254.7 210.2
         H2  p 2,595.6 1,539.2 542.4 611.3 290.2 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.5 792.4 1,803.2 927.6 560.2 875.6 257.4 205.1
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 62.7 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.1
2016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.12017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.22018 
p,3 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.2 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
2017         H1 100.0 61.7 21.1 24.5 12.1 38.3 10.0 9.3 6.3 29.4 70.6 37.2 20.9 33.4 10.3 8.2
         H2 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2018         H1  3 100.0 60.1 21.2 23.6 11.4 39.9 9.8 9.3 5.6 30.4 69.6 35.6 21.2 34.0 10.0 8.2
         H2  p 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.2 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2015 1,782.4 1,077.8 304.0 447.3 259.0 704.6 198.8 147.1 104.4 485.2 1,297.2 690.4 354.0 606.8 198.4 127.52016 1,910.1 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.92017 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.42018 
p,3 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.7
2017         H1 1,923.5 1,138.9 325.9 465.1 273.1 784.6 224.2 171.9 125.4 550.6 1,372.9 709.7 379.4 663.2 224.4 153.2
         H2 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.4
2018         H1  3 2,072.0 1,177.0 360.2 460.4 277.5 895.0 232.7 185.6 115.2 604.9 1,467.0 727.9 411.2 739.2 229.5 167.5
         H2  p 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.7
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.5 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.9 34.1 11.1 7.2
2016 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.42017 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.72018 
p,3 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
2017         H1 100.0 59.2 16.9 24.2 14.2 40.8 11.7 8.9 6.5 28.6 71.4 36.9 19.7 34.5 11.7 8.0
         H2 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2018         H1  3 100.0 56.8 17.4 22.2 13.4 43.2 11.2 9.0 5.6 29.2 70.8 35.1 19.9 35.7 11.1 8.1
         H2  p 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.72016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.92017 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.32018 
p,3 502.4 365.4 183.1 148.4 12.7 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.2 322.2 185.7 131.9 136.5 26.2 54.4
2017         H1 461.9 332.9 177.0 119.3 15.5 129.0 14.0 48.8 24.5 151.1 310.7 178.3 118.9 132.5 21.8 41.8
         H2 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2018         H1  3 479.8 356.0 181.4 142.1 12.3 123.8 17.4 50.5 28.1 170.7 309.2 181.6 129.8 127.6 25.2 42.7
         H2  p 502.4 365.4 183.1 148.4 12.7 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.2 322.2 185.7 131.9 136.5 26.2 54.4
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.32017 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.22018 
p,3 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.5 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.7 35.9 64.1 37.0 26.3 27.2 5.2 10.8
2017         H1 100.0 72.1 38.3 25.8 3.4 27.9 3.0 10.6 5.3 32.7 67.3 38.6 25.7 28.7 4.7 9.0
         H2 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2018         H1  3 100.0 74.2 37.8 29.6 2.6 25.8 3.6 10.5 5.9 35.6 64.4 37.8 27.1 26.6 5.2 8.9
         H2  p 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.5 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.7 35.9 64.1 37.0 26.3 27.2 5.2 10.8
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. 3From this point onwards: significant
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with p revious periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
November 2019
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciation
and amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
Annual Annual change in Annual change in
per- per- per- per- per-
centage centage centage centage centage
Period change  4 change  4 % points  4 % % % change  4 % points  4 %%% € billion  3 € billion  3 € billion  3 
Total
2011 1,414.3 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.7 11.1 17.4 93.9 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 − 0.4 5.4 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 2.0 6.1 11.0
2013 1,541.1 − 0.6 187.2 − 2.8 12.2 − 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.5 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 2.0 5.9 11.1
2014 1,565.7 1.0 198.9 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.5 109.4 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.2
2015 1,635.4 6.9 196.2 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 18.1 91.7 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.7 11.6
2016 1,626.1 − 0.4 214.9 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.5 18.1 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,721.7 5.1 243.9 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.3 33.2 8.3 1.7 2.5 6.9 12.2
2018 p,6 1,709.6 0.7 233.5 − 0.9 13.7 − 0.2 6.3 10.6 17.8 129.8 − 6.1 7.6 − 0.6 2.3 6.5 11.9
2014         H1 757.3 − 0.9 97.3 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.8 9.6 16.2 57.9 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.1 5.3 10.7
         H2 808.8 2.9 101.7 5.3 12.6 0.3 5.6 11.0 19.2 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.8 7.1 12.1
2015         H1 815.3 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 5.0 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.3 − 0.5 1.2 5.9 10.9
         H2 831.4 5.1 93.6 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.5 32.7 − 36.6 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.2 11.7
2016         H1 782.7 − 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 6.1 10.5 18.0 65.7 2.9 8.4 0.4 1.7 6.4 11.4
         H2 843.4 1.1 103.1 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.2 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.6 12.5
2017         H1 845.0 6.8 125.9 14.5 14.9 1.0 5.8 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.3 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.7
         H2 879.8 3.5 117.7 14.7 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.4 63.2 38.3 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.5 12.4
2018         H1  6 849.5 − 0.0 120.7 − 2.5 14.2 − 0.4 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.9 − 5.2 8.6 − 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
         H2  p 870.9 1.4 115.3 0.9 13.2 − 0.1 6.5 11.2 18.3 58.4 − 7.3 6.7 − 0.6 2.2 6.8 12.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector  5 
 
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.6 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 4.9 6.9 − 1.1 2.4 6.9 11.5
2012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.8 10.3 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.9 6.1 9.8
2013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.8 − 2.6 11.8 − 0.2 5.1 10.3 15.7 74.5 − 5.8 6.3 − 0.3 1.6 5.8 10.5
2014 1,197.4 1.0 148.1 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.6 10.0 15.5 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.5 5.9 10.3
2015 1,282.5 7.0 144.0 − 2.7 11.2 − 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.0 65.2 − 20.2 5.1 − 1.8 2.1 6.5 10.3
2016 1,267.1 − 1.0 156.5 6.0 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 80.6 4.3 6.4 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,362.9 5.5 181.6 16.8 13.3 1.3 6.8 10.9 15.6 108.0 41.0 7.9 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
2018 p,6 1,334.9 1.0 169.1 − 1.6 12.7 − 0.3 6.8 10.6 15.6 95.5 − 7.0 7.2 − 0.6 2.7 6.8 10.9
2014         H1 584.4 − 1.1 74.3 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.9 9.7 15.2 46.3 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.6 5.5 9.7
         H2 613.1 3.0 73.8 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.4 9.8 16.0 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.4 10.8
2015         H1 636.4 8.7 80.1 7.8 12.6 − 0.1 5.4 10.2 15.5 48.8 4.8 7.7 − 0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 646.7 5.3 63.9 − 13.3 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.6 16.4 − 52.4 2.5 − 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.7
2016         H1 611.3 − 2.6 84.0 1.3 13.7 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.8 50.7 − 6.5 8.3 − 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.0
         H2 655.9 0.5 72.6 11.9 11.1 1.1 6.2 11.3 16.4 29.9 34.7 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.6
2017         H1 678.7 7.2 98.5 18.7 14.5 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 64.0 37.5 9.4 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
         H2 684.9 3.9 83.1 14.7 12.1 1.2 6.9 11.7 16.5 44.0 46.4 6.4 1.9 3.4 7.2 10.8
2018         H1  6 665.8 − 0.1 90.9 − 3.8 13.7 − 0.5 6.5 10.8 16.7 57.1 − 5.8 8.6 − 0.5 2.9 6.6 11.5
         H2  p 678.8 2.1 80.6 1.0 11.9 − 0.1 6.2 11.1 15.9 39.8 − 8.5 5.9 − 0.7 1.9 6.4 10.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2011 335.3 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 6.0 10.4 20.7 19.7 − 0.7 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.2 13.8
2012 359.1 2.8 48.0 − 3.3 13.4 − 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 − 47.2 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.2
2013 362.0 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.4 13.4 − 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.4 5.9 12.5
2014 368.3 1.1 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.1 6.2 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.2 4.8 14.8 − 0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 1.6 7.5 − 0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.4 58.4 14.6 16.3 1.8 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 24.7 8.8 1.5 2.5 8.3 15.5
2017 358.7 3.4 62.3 7.5 17.4 0.7 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 9.9 9.6 0.5 2.4 7.5 15.1
2018 p,6 374.7 − 0.6 64.4 1.6 17.2 0.4 5.7 10.5 24.7 34.3 − 3.0 9.2 − 0.2 1.7 5.9 16.6
2014         H1 172.9 − 0.5 23.0 7.7 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.7 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
         H2 195.6 2.5 27.8 − 2.2 14.2 − 0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.5 8.1 − 0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 − 2.2 12.7 − 1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 15.7 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.6 29.7 10.8 16.1 0.9 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 187.4 3.6 30.6 4.6 16.3 0.2 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.7 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2017         H1 166.3 4.8 27.4 − 0.2 16.5 − 0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 − 0.8 8.8 − 0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
         H2 195.0 2.0 34.7 14.6 17.8 2.0 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.2 19.9 9.9 1.5 3.0 8.2 17.9
2018         H1  6 183.7 0.5 29.8 3.0 16.2 0.4 4.0 9.7 22.9 15.8 − 1.8 8.6 − 0.2 − 0.9 5.1 15.5
         H2  p 192.1 − 1.7 34.7 0.4 18.1 0.4 7.0 13.3 25.7 18.5 − 3.9 9.6 − 0.2 2.7 7.3 18.0
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement stati stics, p. 3.
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly 4Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical S upplement 4 −
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 5Including groups in agriculture and forest-
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted ry. 6From this point onwards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing com-
return on sales. 3Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year parability with previous periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
November 2019
XII. External sector
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2018 2019
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug.  p
Current account + 351,638 + 352,504 + 358,653 + 111,235 + 67,748 + 42,292 + 19,873 + 31,426 + 25,706A.
1. Goods
Exports 2,117,444 2,264,983 2,341,520 615,933 593,996 601,397 194,451 211,445 183,306Imports 1,755,461 1,918,079 2,047,144 534,602 522,372 516,964 166,051 177,526 163,097
Balance + 361,983 + 346,904 + 294,374 + 81,330 + 71,624 + 84,433 + 28,400 + 33,919 + 20,209
2. Services
Receipts 816,213 881,422 921,174 241,289 216,869 242,259 85,707 86,056 81,642Expenditure 773,162 808,893 806,284 220,218 193,766 241,067 83,302 81,520 72,922
Balance + 43,051 + 72,529 + 114,889 + 21,071 + 23,102 + 1,191 + 2,405 + 4,536 + 8,721
3. Primary income
Receipts 678,649 720,431 770,184 209,114 182,170 202,007 68,538 61,113 56,842Expenditure 593,046 651,832 670,499 157,410 155,667 217,073 67,702 55,773 48,145
Balance + 85,602 + 68,601 + 99,684 + 51,704 + 26,503 − 15,067 + 835 + 5,339 + 8,697
4. Secondary income
Receipts 102,506 108,370 115,124 29,935 27,336 29,408 9,822 8,339 7,047Expenditure 241,503 243,897 265,423 72,804 80,818 57,672 21,589 20,707 18,968
Balance − 139,000 − 135,529 − 150,296 − 42,869 − 53,483 − 28,267 − 11,768 − 12,368 − 11,921
Capital account + 1,517 − 19,705 − 33,594 − 42,345 − 4,209 − 15,231 − 4,757 + 1,127 + 1,132B.
Financial account (increase: +) + 359,977 + 336,437 + 292,630 + 63,838 + 51,437 + 37,045 + 41,185 + 15,495 + 23,874C.
1. Direct investment + 98,164 + 3,252 + 21,151 − 108,838 + 54,962 − 59,279 − 24,620 − 16,980 + 9,551
By resident units abroad + 440,418 + 260,276 − 256,841 − 303,884 + 90,648 − 47,296 − 77,715 − 14,612 − 21,016By non-resident units in the euro area + 342,251 + 257,022 − 277,990 − 195,045 + 35,685 + 11,983 − 53,095 + 2,369 − 30,566
2. Portfolio investment + 563,066 + 331,228 + 241,815 + 130,043 − 83,211 − 41,779 + 15,960 − 27,081 + 12,130
By resident units abroad + 380,010 + 660,992 + 202,687 − 28,172 + 58,612 + 49,529 + 57,622 + 48,646 + 28,701
Equity and
investment fund shares + 9,157 + 203,579 + 46,344 − 30,223 − 2,933 + 3,906 + 10,685 + 11,796 − 16,437
Long-term debt securities + 363,257 + 382,122 + 195,713 + 1,319 + 63,397 + 89,615 + 49,027 + 34,587 + 22,732Short-term debt securities + 7,596 + 75,287 − 39,370 + 732 − 1,852 − 43,992 − 2,090 + 2,263 + 22,406
By non-resident units in the euro area − 183,058 + 329,761 − 39,128 − 158,215 + 141,823 + 91,310 + 41,663 + 75,727 + 16,571
Equity and
investment fund shares + 109,924 + 454,379 + 117,319 + 24,477 − 11,278 + 51,819 + 32,451 + 48,166 + 46,746
Long-term debt securities − 319,442 − 135,583 − 76,187 − 105,010 + 129,187 + 49,998 + 22,711 + 29,861 − 20,181Short-term debt securities + 26,462 + 10,967 − 80,259 − 77,682 + 23,915 − 10,510 − 13,500 − 2,300 − 9,994
3. Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 20,809 + 25,389 + 96,567 + 29,600 + 2,219 + 30,223 + 7,075 + 8,314 + 6,105
4. Other investment − 337,384 − 22,360 − 91,782 + 7,247 + 74,627 + 105,234 + 45,064 + 44,166 − 4,677
Eurosystem − 152,902 − 176,851 − 132,123 − 148,797 + 141,226 + 6,200 − 44,536 + 30,939 + 726General government + 14,097 + 25,710 − 5,719 + 14,030 − 9,636 + 5,187 + 7,408 − 4,867 + 1,037MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 126,603 + 149,885 + 88,741 + 169,428 − 16,094 + 116,949 + 113,400 + 15,138 + 14,031Enterprises and households − 71,973 − 21,101 − 42,683 − 27,416 − 40,869 − 23,103 − 31,209 + 2,956 − 20,472
5. Reserve assets + 15,322 − 1,073 + 24,880 + 5,786 + 2,840 + 2,648 − 2,293 + 7,076 + 765
Net errors and omissions + 6,823 + 3,639 − 32,425 − 5,053 − 12,101 + 9,983 + 26,069 − 17,059 − 2,964D.
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary  
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
November 2019
XII. External sector
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.)  1 
of which:
Supple-
mentary Balance of of which: Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2004 + 102,270 + 152,851 − 7,174 − 35,201 + 14,577 − 29,957 − 119 + 112,867 − 1,470 + 10,715
2005 + 106,942 + 156,563 − 6,515 − 37,580 + 19,300 − 31,341 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 8,172
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 − 4,687 − 31,777 + 40,499 − 32,014 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 20,796
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 − 1,183 − 32,465 + 35,620 − 33,390 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 − 3,947 − 29,122 + 24,063 − 34,147 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 − 6,605 − 17,642 + 54,524 − 34,764 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 − 6,209 − 25,255 + 51,306 − 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 − 9,357 − 29,930 + 69,087 − 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 − 11,388 − 30,774 + 65,658 − 38,703 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 43,882
2013 + 184,274 + 203,802 − 12,523 − 39,399 + 63,284 − 43,413 − 563 + 225,371 + 838 + 41,660
2014 + 210,735 + 219,629 − 14,296 − 25,873 + 57,858 − 40,880 + 2,936 + 240,117 − 2,564 + 26,446
2015 + 259,920 + 248,394 − 15,405 − 19,242 + 69,262 − 38,494 − 48 + 234,404 − 2,213 − 25,467
2016 + 265,489 + 252,581 − 19,010 − 21,814 + 75,590 − 40,868 + 2,138 + 259,720 + 1,686 − 7,908
2017 + 261,894 + 253,111 − 14,069 − 21,938 + 80,276 − 49,554 − 1,947 + 282,947 − 1,269 + 23,000
2018 r + 246,031 + 222,670 − 24,490 − 20,686 + 91,666 − 47,619 + 1,858 + 228,848 + 392 − 19,041
2016         Q4 + 69,437 + 55,640 − 8,359 − 2,048 + 28,269 − 12,425 + 2,844 + 90,452 − 43 + 18,171
2017         Q1 + 69,906 + 63,678 − 1,365 − 2,653 + 22,781 − 13,901 + 562 + 69,234 − 360 − 1,234
         Q2 + 52,671 + 64,258 − 3,660 − 5,301 + 5,673 − 11,959 − 2,624 + 67,523 + 385 + 17,476
         Q3 + 64,060 + 65,296 − 3,113 − 12,334 + 21,991 − 10,893 + 766 + 62,836 + 152 − 1,990
         Q4 + 75,257 + 59,879 − 5,931 − 1,651 + 29,831 − 12,802 − 652 + 83,353 − 1,446 + 8,749
2018         Q1  r + 71,153 + 62,406 − 3,973 − 2,203 + 25,279 − 14,329 + 4,003 + 67,340 + 699 − 7,816
         Q2  r + 60,648 + 60,154 − 8,201 − 2,804 + 8,504 − 5,205 − 2,563 + 56,803 − 374 − 1,281
         Q3  r + 47,987 + 47,644 − 7,861 − 13,139 + 25,305 − 11,823 − 1,050 + 39,839 − 493 − 7,098
         Q4  r + 66,244 + 52,467 − 4,455 − 2,540 + 32,578 − 16,262 + 1,467 + 64,866 + 560 − 2,845
2019         Q1 + 66,737 + 59,927 − 1,896 − 2,309 + 25,733 − 16,615 + 1,408 + 35,415 − 63 − 32,731
         Q2 + 59,916 + 58,364 − 2,487 − 3,680 + 11,389 − 6,156 − 522 + 49,254 + 444 − 10,140
         Q3  p + 64,055 + 63,003 − 3,483 − 13,710 + 27,004 − 12,242 + 525 + 18,625 − 349 − 45,955
2017         Apr. + 15,315 + 19,080 − 763 − 1,286 + 5,841 − 8,319 − 384 + 17,461 − 2 + 2,529
         May + 14,767 + 21,701 − 2,429 − 1,721 − 4,343 − 869 + 20 + 10,532 − 47 − 4,256
         June + 22,588 + 23,477 − 468 − 2,293 + 4,175 − 2,770 − 2,260 + 39,530 + 434 + 19,202
         July + 18,800 + 19,876 − 203 − 4,325 + 7,632 − 4,383 + 483 + 18,879 + 463 − 404
         Aug. + 17,949 + 20,316 − 2,098 − 5,515 + 6,576 − 3,427 + 130 + 9,684 − 912 − 8,395
         Sep. + 27,311 + 25,104 − 812 − 2,494 + 7,783 − 3,082 + 154 + 34,273 + 602 + 6,808
         Oct. + 19,647 + 20,060 − 767 − 4,091 + 7,853 − 4,175 − 270 + 16,992 + 1,176 − 2,385
         Nov. + 27,382 + 23,893 − 1,960 − 345 + 8,266 − 4,432 − 521 + 30,390 − 270 + 3,530
         Dec. + 28,228 + 15,926 − 3,204 + 2,785 + 13,712 − 4,195 + 139 + 35,971 − 2,353 + 7,604
2018         Jan.  r + 21,436 + 17,953 − 1,544 − 367 + 8,866 − 5,016 + 3,772 + 27,335 − 121 + 2,127
         Feb.  r + 19,854 + 19,507 − 883 − 772 + 6,465 − 5,346 + 324 + 13,905 + 583 − 6,273
         Mar.  r + 29,862 + 24,946 − 1,546 − 1,064 + 9,948 − 3,967 − 92 + 26,100 + 236 − 3,670
         Apr.  r + 22,846 + 20,355 − 2,447 + 89 + 4,958 − 2,556 + 301 + 30,453 − 670 + 7,305
         May  r + 13,028 + 19,093 − 2,380 − 1,360 − 4,851 + 146 − 27 + 20,458 + 83 + 7,457
         June  r + 24,773 + 20,706 − 3,373 − 1,533 + 8,396 − 2,795 − 2,838 + 5,892 + 213 − 16,044
         July  r + 13,858 + 15,271 − 1,892 − 4,865 + 8,090 − 4,638 − 231 + 6,482 + 266 − 7,145
         Aug.  r + 15,185 + 15,923 − 2,680 − 5,693 + 8,565 − 3,610 + 97 + 21,233 − 640 + 5,952
         Sep.  r + 18,944 + 16,450 − 3,289 − 2,581 + 8,651 − 3,576 − 915 + 12,124 − 119 − 5,904
         Oct.  r + 20,301 + 19,922 − 512 − 4,338 + 9,005 − 4,287 − 822 + 4,021 + 700 − 15,458
         Nov.  r + 23,610 + 19,439 − 2,015 + 521 + 9,185 − 5,534 − 489 + 26,596 − 124 + 3,475
         Dec.  r + 22,332 + 13,107 − 1,928 + 1,277 + 14,389 − 6,440 + 2,779 + 34,248 − 17 + 9,137
2019         Jan. + 18,777 + 15,790 − 1,006 − 1,088 + 9,112 − 5,036 + 2,133 + 9,673 + 158 − 11,238
         Feb. + 17,328 + 18,983 − 546 − 544 + 6,868 − 7,979 + 224 + 15,413 + 112 − 2,139
         Mar. + 30,631 + 25,154 − 344 − 677 + 9,754 − 3,600 − 949 + 10,329 − 333 − 19,354
         Apr. + 22,840 + 19,192 − 972 − 516 + 7,789 − 3,625 + 79 + 25,075 + 547 + 2,156
         May + 16,233 + 21,559 − 1,048 − 791 − 5,274 + 739 − 435 + 6,257 + 182 − 9,541
         June + 20,843 + 17,612 − 467 − 2,373 + 8,875 − 3,271 − 166 + 17,923 − 285 − 2,755
         July + 21,256 + 22,866 − 1,457 − 5,612 + 8,567 − 4,565 + 259 − 390 + 348 − 21,904
         Aug. + 17,317 + 17,242 − 1,080 − 4,929 + 9,238 − 4,235 + 858 + 5,919 + 755 − 12,256
         Sep.  p + 25,483 + 22,894 − 946 − 3,169 + 9,199 − 3,442 − 591 + 13,097 − 1,452 − 11,795
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions resulting from the difference between the balance on the finan cial account
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account . 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
November 2019
 XII. External sector
 
 3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
  by country and group of countries*
 
 € million
 2019
Group of countries/country  2016  2017  2018 May June July Aug. Sep.  p Jan./Sep.  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,203,833 1,278,958 1,317,440 997,122 114,213 106,066 115,191 101,571 114,160
Imports 954,917 1,031,013 1,088,720 828,335 93,562 89,517 93,631 85,122 93,022Balance + 248,916 + 247,946 + 228,720 + 168,787 + 20,651 + 16,549 + 21,560 + 16,448 + 21,138
I. Exports 818,644 872,427 900,141 679,822 77,276 73,449 75,403 67,905 78,950European countries
Imports 657,753 699,677 744,575 562,976 64,111 62,147 62,538 56,028 62,830Balance + 160,891 + 172,749 + 155,566 + 116,847 + 13,164 + 11,302 + 12,865 + 11,877 + 16,120
Exports 705,548 749,850 778,644 585,945 66,191 63,476 64,204 57,821 68,409 1. EU Member States (28)
Imports 551,344 586,071 623,458 475,982 54,181 53,273 52,783 47,280 53,616Balance + 154,204 + 163,780 + 155,186 + 109,962 + 12,010 + 10,203 + 11,420 + 10,541 + 14,793
Euro area (19) Exports 441,092 471,213 492,469 371,925 42,210 40,479 41,277 35,459 43,277
countries Imports 358,848 378,700 405,810 310,511 35,775 34,880 34,754 30,259 34,434
Balance + 82,244 + 92,513 + 86,659 + 61,415 + 6,436 + 5,598 + 6,523 + 5,200 + 8,843
of which:
Austria Exports 59,778 62,656 65,027 49,835 5,815 5,351 5,533 4,959 5,550
Imports 38,543 40,686 42,994 33,453 3,977 3,723 3,906 3,125 3,729Balance + 21,235 + 21,970 + 22,033 + 16,382 + 1,838 + 1,627 + 1,627 + 1,834 + 1,821
Belgium and Exports 46,931 50,071 50,389 39,132 4,535 4,329 4,206 3,889 4,571
Luxembourg Imports 40,960 43,689 49,315 35,848 3,965 4,165 3,608 3,694 3,819
Balance + 5,971 + 6,381 + 1,074 + 3,284 + 570 + 164 + 598 + 195 + 752
France Exports 101,106 105,687 105,359 80,844 8,989 8,705 9,064 7,518 9,407
Imports 65,651 64,329 65,024 49,756 5,726 5,590 5,674 4,489 5,779Balance + 35,454 + 41,359 + 40,335 + 31,088 + 3,263 + 3,116 + 3,390 + 3,029 + 3,628
Italy Exports 61,265 65,422 69,813 51,419 5,986 5,778 5,922 4,267 6,038
Imports 51,737 55,342 60,223 42,866 4,874 5,081 5,077 3,995 4,785Balance + 9,528 + 10,080 + 9,591 + 8,553 + 1,111 + 697 + 845 + 272 + 1,254
Netherlands Exports 78,433 84,661 91,061 69,356 7,610 7,226 7,606 7,113 8,285
Imports 83,142 90,597 97,709 75,139 8,607 8,107 8,224 7,920 8,324Balance − 4,709 − 5,935 − 6,649 − 5,783 − 997 − 882 − 617 − 808 − 39
Spain Exports 40,497 43,067 44,184 33,663 3,852 3,909 3,714 2,920 3,865
Imports 27,870 31,396 32,399 25,364 3,362 2,998 2,893 2,095 2,665Balance + 12,627 + 11,671 + 11,785 + 8,299 + 489 + 911 + 821 + 826 + 1,199
Other EU Member Exports 264,456 278,638 286,175 214,019 23,980 22,998 22,927 22,362 25,132
States Imports 192,496 207,371 217,647 165,472 18,406 18,393 18,030 17,021 19,182
Balance + 71,960 + 71,267 + 68,527 + 48,547 + 5,574 + 4,605 + 4,897 + 5,341 + 5,950
of which:
United Exports 85,939 85,440 82,164 59,966 6,508 5,977 6,252 5,958 6,889Kingdom Imports 35,654 36,820 37,025 27,593 2,706 3,054 3,178 3,108 2,931
Balance + 50,285 + 48,620 + 45,139 + 32,373 + 3,802 + 2,924 + 3,073 + 2,850 + 3,959
Exports 113,096 122,576 121,497 93,878 11,085 9,973 11,200 10,084 10,541 2. Other European
Imports 106,409 113,607 121,117 86,993 9,931 8,874 9,755 8,748 9,214 countries
Balance + 6,687 + 8,969 + 380 + 6,885 + 1,154 + 1,099 + 1,445 + 1,336 + 1,328
of which:
Switzerland Exports 50,161 53,913 54,021 42,255 4,900 4,271 4,877 4,583 4,841
Imports 43,896 45,689 45,913 34,425 4,150 3,678 3,959 3,545 3,717Balance + 6,265 + 8,224 + 8,108 + 7,830 + 750 + 593 + 918 + 1,038 + 1,124
II. Exports 382,486 403,490 413,483 314,567 36,607 32,313 39,455 33,346 34,904Non-European
Imports 297,164 328,606 342,980 264,064 29,313 27,143 30,918 28,938 29,976 countries
Balance + 85,322 + 74,884 + 70,503 + 50,502 + 7,294 + 5,170 + 8,537 + 4,408 + 4,928
Exports 24,434 25,431 22,524 18,091 2,130 1,920 2,280 1,894 1,951 1. Africa
Imports 16,675 20,428 22,542 17,989 2,095 1,848 2,320 1,792 2,225Balance + 7,759 + 5,003 − 18 + 101 + 35 + 72 − 40 + 102 − 274
Exports 147,542 154,644 158,952 124,938 14,221 12,789 15,764 13,738 13,874 2. America
Imports 83,499 89,927 92,444 74,001 8,499 7,842 8,516 7,986 8,241Balance + 64,043 + 64,717 + 66,508 + 50,937 + 5,721 + 4,947 + 7,248 + 5,752 + 5,633
of which:
Exports 106,822 111,805 113,341 89,305 10,201 9,242 11,273 9,766 9,902 United States
Imports 57,968 61,902 64,493 52,771 6,022 5,398 6,113 5,733 6,006Balance + 48,855 + 49,903 + 48,847 + 36,534 + 4,179 + 3,844 + 5,160 + 4,034 + 3,896
Exports 200,158 212,070 219,716 162,953 19,302 16,728 20,202 16,840 18,181 3. Asia
Imports 193,979 214,393 224,355 169,177 18,303 17,158 19,701 18,796 19,271Balance + 6,179 − 2,323 − 4,639 − 6,224 + 999 − 430 + 501 − 1,955 − 1,090
of which:
Middle East Exports 36,659 33,104 29,144 20,159 2,492 2,340 2,674 2,236 2,253
Imports 6,581 6,963 8,156 5,638 614 670 710 585 605Balance + 30,079 + 26,141 + 20,989 + 14,521 + 1,878 + 1,670 + 1,964 + 1,651 + 1,647
Japan Exports 18,307 19,546 20,436 15,820 1,658 1,599 2,041 1,581 1,860
Imports 21,922 22,955 23,710 18,138 2,110 1,839 2,030 1,920 2,093Balance − 3,615 − 3,410 − 3,275 − 2,318 − 452 − 239 + 11 − 339 − 234
Exports 76,046 86,141 93,004 70,967 8,164 7,220 8,735 7,392 7,679 People‘s Republic
Imports 94,172 101,837 106,065 80,615 8,661 8,028 9,482 9,254 9,360 of China  
2 
Balance − 18,126 − 15,695 − 13,061 − 9,647 − 497 − 807 − 747 − 1,862 − 1,681
Exports 51,921 53,425 54,995 40,341 4,867 4,069 4,987 4,136 4,465 New industrial countries
Imports 42,966 50,873 52,945 39,077 4,204 4,065 4,614 4,026 4,381 and emerging markets
Balance + 8,955 + 2,552 + 2,050 + 1,263 + 663 + 4 + 373 + 110 + 84 of Asia  3 
Exports 10,352 11,344 12,291 8,585 954 876 1,209 873 898 4. Oceania and
Imports 3,011 3,857 3,639 2,897 415 295 381 364 239 polar regions
Balance + 7,341 + 7,487 + 8,652 + 5,689 + 539 + 580 + 828 + 509 + 659
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of K orea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
November 2019
XII. External sector
 
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2014 − 25,873 − 6,867 − 37,653 + 6,712 + 3,549 + 1,280 + 555 + 2,971 + 1,184 + 55,783 + 891
2015 − 19,242 − 5,203 − 36,595 + 8,621 + 5,354 + 2,601 − 1,216 + 3,161 + 1,114 + 68,506 − 358
2016 − 21,814 − 5,978 − 38,247 + 8,607 + 6,779 + 1,536 − 1,716 + 3,093 + 441 + 76,218 − 1,070
2017 − 21,938 − 3,669 − 43,558 + 10,726 + 5,930 + 1,349 + 39 + 2,138 − 702 + 82,270 − 1,292
2018 − 20,686 − 2,500 − 44,543 + 10,044 + 7,453 + 1,597 − 353 + 3,209 − 1,118 + 93,548 − 765
2018         Q1 − 2,203 − 811 − 6,977 + 2,590 + 1,077 − 68 + 43 + 824 + 374 + 25,736 − 831
         Q2 − 2,804 − 249 − 9,153 + 2,093 + 1,998 + 804 − 225 + 906 − 469 + 11,098 − 2,125
         Q3 − 13,139 − 654 − 18,219 + 1,777 + 1,604 + 287 + 326 + 822 − 918 + 27,163 − 939
         Q4 − 2,540 − 786 − 10,194 + 3,585 + 2,774 + 574 − 497 + 656 − 104 + 29,552 + 3,130
2019         Q1 − 2,309 − 686 − 6,978 + 2,272 + 2,154 − 157 − 454 + 760 + 329 + 26,232 − 828
         Q2 − 3,680 + 329 − 9,899 + 2,530 + 1,790 + 632 − 1,152 + 817 − 466 + 13,997 − 2,142
         Q3  p − 13,710 + 190 − 19,214 + 2,682 + 3,433 − 2,276 − 479 + 826 − 962 + 29,269 − 1,303
2018         Nov. + 521 − 164 − 2,309 + 1,510 + 1,645 − 496 − 410 + 162 − 51 + 9,534 − 298
         Dec. + 1,277 − 333 − 1,813 + 1,135 + 492 + 1,137 − 6 + 257 − 6 + 10,429 + 3,966
2019         Jan. − 1,088 − 337 − 1,739 + 762 + 218 − 119 − 362 + 244 + 119 + 9,207 − 214
         Feb. − 544 − 368 − 2,106 + 731 + 1,078 − 170 − 216 + 249 + 125 + 7,029 − 285
         Mar. − 677 + 18 − 3,133 + 779 + 858 + 132 + 124 + 267 + 85 + 9,996 − 328
         Apr. − 516 + 185 − 1,830 + 936 + 512 − 240 − 601 + 278 − 152 + 8,365 − 425
         May − 791 + 89 − 3,401 + 706 + 1,080 − 130 − 6 + 267 − 157 − 3,630 − 1,487
         June − 2,373 + 55 − 4,668 + 888 + 198 + 1,002 − 545 + 272 − 157 + 9,262 − 230
         July − 5,612 + 53 − 6,098 + 883 + 773 − 993 − 740 + 252 − 337 + 9,306 − 402
         Aug. − 4,929 + 42 − 6,814 + 938 + 1,331 − 844 − 222 + 284 − 328 + 10,028 − 461
         Sep.  p − 3,169 + 95 − 6,302 + 860 + 1,328 − 440 + 483 + 290 − 297 + 9,935 − 439
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001 the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which: of which:
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which: resident and Non-produced
international non-resident Workers’ Capital income, wealth, non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2014 − 40,880 − 28,146 − 6,419 + 8,105 − 12,734 − 3,477 − 3,451 + 2,936 + 2,841 + 95
2015 − 38,494 − 24,087 − 6,805 + 10,455 − 14,406 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 48 + 1,787 − 1,835
2016 − 40,868 − 25,232 − 11,516 + 10,627 − 15,636 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 2,138 + 3,208 − 1,070
2017 − 49,554 − 21,979 − 9,852 + 10,446 − 27,576 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 1,947 + 2,502 − 4,449
2018 − 47,619 − 27,748 − 9,880 + 10,351 − 19,871 − 5,152 − 5,142 + 1,858 + 5,375 − 3,517
2018         Q1 − 14,329 − 9,218 − 2,234 + 1,698 − 5,111 − 1,291 − 1,286 + 4,003 + 3,390 + 613
         Q2 − 5,205 − 347 − 1,260 + 6,233 − 4,858 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 2,563 − 48 − 2,515
         Q3 − 11,823 − 7,249 − 1,926 + 1,225 − 4,574 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 1,050 − 297 − 753
         Q4 − 16,262 − 10,934 − 4,461 + 1,195 − 5,328 − 1,287 − 1,286 + 1,467 + 2,329 − 862
2019         Q1 − 16,615 − 12,096 − 2,756 + 2,015 − 4,519 − 1,360 − 1,358 + 1,408 + 845 + 563
         Q2 − 6,156 − 543 − 1,352 + 6,600 − 5,613 − 1,361 − 1,358 − 522 − 288 − 233
         Q3  p − 12,242 − 7,672 − 1,905 + 1,563 − 4,570 − 1,361 − 1,358 + 525 + 1,292 − 767
2018         Nov. − 5,534 − 3,195 − 999 + 180 − 2,339 − 429 − 429 − 489 − 313 − 176
         Dec. − 6,440 − 4,556 − 2,388 + 843 − 1,885 − 429 − 429 + 2,779 + 3,237 − 458
2019         Jan. − 5,036 − 3,623 − 1,286 + 278 − 1,413 − 453 − 453 + 2,133 + 1,831 + 302
         Feb. − 7,979 − 6,374 − 1,056 + 927 − 1,605 − 453 − 453 + 224 − 241 + 465
         Mar. − 3,600 − 2,099 − 413 + 811 − 1,501 − 453 − 453 − 949 − 745 − 203
         Apr. − 3,625 − 1,072 − 371 + 1,138 − 2,553 − 454 − 453 + 79 + 305 − 226
         May + 739 + 2,424 − 333 + 4,352 − 1,685 − 453 − 453 − 435 − 554 + 119
         June − 3,271 − 1,895 − 648 + 1,109 − 1,375 − 454 − 453 − 166 − 39 − 127
         July − 4,565 − 2,898 − 814 + 376 − 1,668 − 453 − 453 + 259 + 668 − 409
         Aug. − 4,235 − 2,674 − 629 + 368 − 1,561 − 454 − 453 + 858 + 891 − 33
         Sep.  p − 3,442 − 2,100 − 462 + 819 − 1,341 − 454 − 453 − 591 − 267 − 324
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
November 2019
XII. External sector
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2019
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3  p July Aug. Sep.  p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 401,354 + 376,599 + 352,485 + 123,539 + 100,445 + 28,247 − 51,895 + 51,221 + 28,920
1. Direct investment + 99,180 + 123,084 + 132,671 + 44,205 + 30,482 + 24,656 + 4,298 + 3,914 + 16,444
Equity + 83,199 + 76,326 + 140,071 + 24,175 + 29,812 + 22,375 + 2,155 + 9,401 + 10,819
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 32,535 + 24,572 + 31,689 + 12,762 + 12,576 + 14,913 + 3,254 + 6,055 + 5,603
Debt instruments + 15,981 + 46,758 − 7,400 + 20,030 + 670 + 2,281 + 2,143 − 5,487 + 5,625
2. Portfolio investment + 96,969 + 106,469 + 68,098 + 36,459 + 27,839 + 20,910 + 10,627 + 3,027 + 7,256
Shares  2 + 16,954 + 14,229 + 9,406 + 481 + 2,928 − 656 + 1,073 − 845 − 884
Investment fund shares  3 + 37,698 + 50,094 + 18,658 + 10,695 + 8,330 + 10,751 + 3,766 + 3,696 + 3,288
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 48,544 + 44,184 + 44,648 + 17,978 + 17,011 + 13,634 + 6,963 + 655 + 6,016
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 6,227 − 2,038 − 4,613 + 7,304 − 430 − 2,818 − 1,174 − 480 − 1,164
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 29,053 + 11,618 + 23,253 + 6,184 + 11,240 + 3,493 + 2,944 + 2,151 − 1,602
4. Other investment  7 + 174,467 + 136,697 + 128,070 + 36,754 + 30,440 − 20,464 − 70,112 + 41,374 + 8,274
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 18,509 − 20,986 + 49,856 + 51,097 + 34,381 − 3,609 + 7,786 + 10,899 − 22,295
Long-term + 44,861 + 19,641 + 4,456 + 12,324 + 7,842 + 1,276 + 2,040 + 345 − 1,108Short-term − 26,353 − 40,627 + 45,400 + 38,773 + 26,540 − 4,885 + 5,747 + 10,555 − 21,187
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 13,510 + 5,039 + 30,233 + 6,210 − 5,403 + 6,085 − 5,898 − 4,993 + 16,977
Long-term − 3,237 − 2,062 + 10,456 − 14 + 2,627 + 2,480 + 1,100 + 394 + 986Short-term − 10,273 + 7,102 + 19,777 + 6,225 − 8,030 + 3,606 − 6,998 − 5,387 + 15,991
General government − 1,022 − 3,993 − 8,814 + 1,764 − 453 + 6,326 − 427 + 8,507 − 1,753
Long-term − 7,408 − 4,408 − 1,097 − 358 − 1,514 − 340 − 148 + 1 − 192Short-term + 6,386 + 415 − 7,717 + 2,122 + 1,061 + 6,666 − 279 + 8,506 − 1,561
Bundesbank + 170,491 + 156,637 + 56,795 − 22,318 + 1,915 − 29,266 − 71,574 + 26,961 + 15,346
5. Reserve assets + 1,686 − 1,269 + 392 − 63 + 444 − 349 + 348 + 755 − 1,452
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(increase: +) + 141,635 + 93,652 + 123,637 + 88,124 + 51,191 + 9,621 − 51,505 + 45,303 + 15,824
1. Direct investment + 56,018 + 74,395 + 89,151 + 8,953 + 26,472 + 31,110 + 9,981 + 5,784 + 15,345
Equity + 13,883 + 21,255 + 13,396 + 8,138 + 2,857 + 5,844 + 1,738 + 1,797 + 2,308
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 2,188 + 8,115 + 4,531 + 4,062 + 1,216 + 4,192 + 824 + 1,918 + 1,449
Debt instruments + 42,135 + 53,140 + 75,755 + 815 + 23,615 + 25,266 + 8,243 + 3,987 + 13,036
2. Portfolio investment − 102,008 − 90,176 − 44,980 + 53,202 + 11,356 + 5,309 − 2,355 + 4,978 + 2,687
Shares  2 − 221 − 715 + 6,618 − 3,977 − 1,422 + 1,173 + 1,603 − 1,247 + 816
Investment fund shares  3 − 6,932 − 1,991 − 5,821 − 3,801 − 948 − 1,216 − 460 − 174 − 582
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 95,327 − 70,432 − 47,593 + 38,800 + 20,460 − 2,664 − 6,032 + 1,050 + 2,318
Short-termdebt securities  
5 + 471 − 17,039 + 1,815 + 22,179 − 6,734 + 8,016 + 2,533 + 5,349 + 135
3. Other investment  7 + 187,625 + 109,433 + 79,466 + 25,969 + 13,362 − 26,798 − 59,131 + 34,541 − 2,208
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 86,742 + 17,476 − 35,965 + 102,619 + 34,768 − 12,898 − 25,737 + 19,531 − 6,693
Long-term + 5,774 + 7,541 − 8,496 + 1,223 + 3,349 + 5,416 + 2,481 + 1,115 + 1,820Short-term + 80,968 + 9,935 − 27,469 + 101,396 + 31,419 − 18,314 − 28,218 + 18,416 − 8,512
Enterprises and
households  
9 − 4,658 + 23,541 + 15,750 + 26,964 + 831 − 1,926 − 6,834 − 10,280 + 15,187
Long-term + 78 + 8,855 + 8,259 + 3,091 + 3,182 + 3,829 + 3,095 − 425 + 1,159Short-term − 4,736 + 14,687 + 7,491 + 23,873 − 2,351 − 5,755 − 9,928 − 9,855 + 14,028
General government − 5,309 − 8,719 + 2,890 + 6,805 − 620 + 5,048 − 892 + 6,326 − 386
Long-term − 4,682 − 3,723 + 660 − 1 − 101 − 307 − 91 − 85 − 131Short-term − 626 − 4,996 + 2,230 + 6,807 − 519 + 5,356 − 801 + 6,411 − 255
Bundesbank + 110,849 + 77,135 + 96,792 − 110,419 − 21,617 − 17,021 − 25,668 + 18,963 − 10,317
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 259,720 + 282,947 + 228,848 + 35,415 + 49,254 + 18,625 − 390 + 5,919 + 13,097
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
November 2019
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col. 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  1 col. 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan.  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,475
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,652 474,193
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 765,813 444,168
2017         Feb. 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,216 451,678
         Mar. 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,524 451,515
         Apr. 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 601,492 487,652
         May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 601,093 497,785
         June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 623,914 474,966
         July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 612,871 479,898
         Aug. 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 620,273 469,611
         Sep. 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 618,496 496,703
         Oct. 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 600,416 485,499
         Nov. 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 576,550 515,282
         Dec. 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,652 474,193
2018         Jan. 1,114,774 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,665 882,043 53,165 617,024 497,750
         Feb. 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 636,717 511,262
         Mar. 1,158,983 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 939,229 923,466 53,924 678,829 480,155
         Apr. 1,139,056 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 917,971 902,364 54,115 633,679 505,377
         May 1,198,995 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 973,323 956,150 54,203 656,506 542,489
         June 1,213,511 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 991,577 976,266 54,857 701,075 512,436
         July 1,147,878 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 930,107 913,270 54,463 666,362 481,515
         Aug. 1,145,283 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 929,073 912,448 53,864 644,650 500,633
         Sep. 1,189,175 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,380 956,487 54,717 686,357 502,818
         Oct. 1,167,004 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 943,644 927,555 55,089 662,976 504,029
         Nov. 1,184,703 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 960,478 941,130 56,026 671,196 513,507
         Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 765,813 444,168
2019         Jan. 1,123,169 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,039 645,348 477,822
         Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 632,447 495,008
         Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 655,643 534,773
         Apr. 1,167,188 177,378 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,482 935,563 919,696 54,247 621,907 545,280
         May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 608,076 578,317
         June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 633,849 567,192
         July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 609,370 524,979
         Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 627,395 546,245
         Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 617,201 567,941
         Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 590,827 512,267
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to respective country designation), since November 2000 also bal ances with non-euro
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad. 4See
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5Euro opening
valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
November 2019
XII. External sector
 
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2015 876,992 264,561 612,431 416,692 195,739 181,240 14,499 1,018,628 152,364 866,264 681,975 184,289 112,668 71,6212016 877,132 245,991 631,141 420,851 210,290 196,110 14,180 1,051,138 132,151 918,987 722,253 196,734 124,129 72,6052017 892,379 218,372 674,007 450,147 223,860 210,204 13,657 1,087,106 138,289 948,818 750,318 198,500 128,892 69,6072018 914,056 233,402 680,654 450,943 229,712 215,637 14,075 1,174,527 138,328 1,036,199 832,342 203,857 133,440 70,417
2019         Apr. 947,991 226,267 721,725 485,109 236,616 221,914 14,702 1,221,073 155,616 1,065,457 866,481 198,976 126,167 72,809
         May 945,779 221,210 724,569 487,822 236,747 222,353 14,394 1,238,781 158,729 1,080,052 881,048 199,005 127,163 71,842         June 953,789 228,595 725,194 488,559 236,636 222,043 14,592 1,245,781 160,979 1,084,802 882,811 201,991 129,420 72,571
         July 949,485 222,692 726,793 490,374 236,419 221,761 14,657 1,249,534 152,679 1,096,855 895,379 201,476 128,362 73,114
         Aug. 939,690 223,425 716,265 488,701 227,564 212,747 14,817 1,241,867 151,174 1,090,693 896,515 194,179 120,323 73,856         Sep. 963,419 228,368 735,051 498,301 236,750 221,725 15,026 1,272,417 162,094 1,110,323 902,613 207,710 133,377 74,333
Industrial countries 1
 
2015 768,263 260,659 507,604 374,690 132,915 119,868 13,047 919,095 147,507 771,588 644,558 127,030 91,119 35,9112016 760,622 242,112 518,510 378,804 139,705 127,025 12,680 946,894 128,163 818,731 685,120 133,611 96,436 37,1742017 773,242 214,321 558,921 406,982 151,939 139,749 12,190 982,241 131,450 850,792 711,976 138,816 104,054 34,7622018 789,499 228,170 561,329 406,279 155,050 142,678 12,372 1,058,150 125,576 932,574 792,349 140,225 105,662 34,563
2019         Apr. 820,716 221,574 599,142 437,295 161,847 148,697 13,150 1,105,485 139,858 965,627 827,612 138,015 102,103 35,912
         May 819,654 216,486 603,168 441,245 161,924 149,117 12,806 1,121,023 139,328 981,695 842,151 139,544 104,462 35,082         June 826,620 223,823 602,796 441,001 161,795 148,751 13,044 1,122,439 136,566 985,872 844,066 141,806 105,516 36,290
         July 819,880 218,048 601,832 442,666 159,166 146,057 13,109 1,130,203 135,769 994,433 854,699 139,734 103,805 35,929
         Aug. 812,639 218,319 594,319 441,499 152,820 139,628 13,192 1,131,268 143,046 988,222 854,933 133,289 97,127 36,162         Sep. 833,463 223,535 609,928 450,500 159,428 146,125 13,303 1,146,222 142,768 1,003,453 860,526 142,927 106,764 36,163
EU Member States 1
 
2015 631,596 242,588 389,007 294,555 94,452 83,957 10,495 752,188 136,630 615,558 531,136 84,422 58,673 25,7492016 614,938 224,194 390,744 293,305 97,439 87,421 10,018 770,003 118,015 651,988 563,776 88,212 61,312 26,9012017 612,266 194,340 417,927 311,482 106,445 96,562 9,882 807,572 115,034 692,538 596,293 96,244 71,297 24,9472018 629,920 207,625 422,295 314,364 107,932 98,242 9,689 865,713 108,560 757,153 661,338 95,816 71,623 24,192
2019         Apr. 654,450 200,962 453,489 341,586 111,902 101,852 10,050 909,613 121,585 788,027 692,216 95,812 70,297 25,515
         May 653,493 195,672 457,820 345,009 112,812 103,166 9,645 919,425 120,876 798,549 700,934 97,615 73,058 24,557         June 661,551 203,487 458,064 345,445 112,618 102,746 9,872 922,542 118,963 803,579 704,592 98,987 73,459 25,528
         July 651,073 197,839 453,234 344,308 108,926 99,124 9,802 927,964 117,661 810,304 713,498 96,805 71,670 25,135
         Aug. 644,989 198,380 446,609 342,550 104,059 94,227 9,832 923,467 121,405 802,062 711,365 90,697 65,532 25,166         Sep. 665,158 204,103 461,055 350,157 110,898 101,019 9,879 932,280 120,139 812,140 714,057 98,083 72,826 25,257
of which: Euro area 2
 
2015 469,103 195,348 273,755 212,286 61,469 54,890 6,579 606,161 94,619 511,542 458,734 52,808 38,164 14,6442016 450,353 171,625 278,728 214,125 64,603 57,876 6,727 616,804 75,803 541,001 484,967 56,034 41,167 14,8672017 449,892 150,351 299,541 227,981 71,560 64,102 7,458 642,801 74,554 568,248 503,475 64,773 49,432 15,3422018 461,247 155,715 305,532 234,656 70,875 63,734 7,141 702,037 67,366 634,671 569,246 65,425 49,682 15,743
2019         Apr. 475,064 152,528 322,536 249,339 73,198 65,877 7,321 734,333 75,778 658,555 593,264 65,292 48,849 16,443
         May 475,158 151,513 323,645 249,843 73,803 66,678 7,124 742,927 75,513 667,414 602,524 64,890 49,627 15,263         June 480,893 154,754 326,139 252,678 73,461 66,321 7,140 752,044 73,642 678,402 610,770 67,632 51,210 16,421
         July 471,794 148,940 322,854 251,226 71,628 64,280 7,348 757,800 73,172 684,628 618,830 65,798 49,581 16,217
         Aug. 464,767 146,759 318,008 249,512 68,496 61,098 7,398 753,671 75,022 678,649 617,365 61,284 44,981 16,303         Sep. 475,433 152,179 323,255 251,090 72,165 64,812 7,353 753,681 75,686 677,995 611,915 66,080 49,667 16,413
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2015 107,753 3,094 104,659 42,003 62,656 61,204 1,452 95,363 886 94,477 37,218 57,259 21,549 35,7102016 115,100 2,632 112,468 42,031 70,437 68,937 1,500 101,101 1,061 100,039 36,933 63,107 27,693 35,4142017 117,488 2,618 114,871 43,097 71,774 70,307 1,467 98,839 1,101 97,738 38,142 59,596 24,838 34,7582018 122,483 3,445 119,038 44,535 74,503 72,800 1,703 104,630 1,236 103,394 39,793 63,601 27,778 35,823
2019         Apr. 125,298 3,200 122,098 47,477 74,621 73,069 1,552 100,796 1,238 99,559 38,669 60,890 24,030 36,860
         May 124,128 3,238 120,890 46,232 74,658 73,070 1,587 99,326 1,242 98,085 38,696 59,388 22,665 36,723         June 125,168 3,285 121,883 47,212 74,672 73,123 1,549 99,891 1,233 98,658 38,545 60,113 23,865 36,248
         July 127,636 3,192 124,444 47,362 77,082 75,534 1,548 103,413 1,249 102,163 40,480 61,683 24,520 37,163
         Aug. 125,106 3,683 121,423 46,854 74,569 72,943 1,626 103,563 1,366 102,198 41,382 60,816 23,156 37,659         Sep. 128,010 3,409 124,600 47,453 77,147 75,425 1,723 108,176 1,576 106,599 41,887 64,712 26,575 38,137
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
November 2019
XII. External sector
 
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2018         June 1.5579 1.5327 7.5512 7.4493 128.53 9.4746 10.2788 1.1562 0.87886 1.1678
         July 1.5792 1.5356 7.8504 7.4523 130.23 9.4975 10.3076 1.1622 0.88726 1.1686
         Aug. 1.5762 1.5063 7.9092 7.4558 128.20 9.6161 10.4668 1.1413 0.89687 1.1549
         Sep. 1.6189 1.5211 7.9930 7.4583 130.54 9.6205 10.4426 1.1286 0.89281 1.1659
         Oct. 1.6158 1.4935 7.9481 7.4597 129.62 9.4793 10.3839 1.1413 0.88272 1.1484
         Nov. 1.5681 1.4998 7.8880 7.4611 128.79 9.6272 10.2918 1.1377 0.88118 1.1367
         Dec. 1.5849 1.5278 7.8398 7.4653 127.88 9.8055 10.2766 1.1293 0.89774 1.1384
2019         Jan. 1.5975 1.5196 7.7504 7.4657 124.34 9.7631 10.2685 1.1297 0.88603 1.1416
         Feb. 1.5895 1.4995 7.6485 7.4627 125.28 9.7444 10.4986 1.1368 0.87264 1.1351
         Mar. 1.5959 1.5104 7.5868 7.4625 125.67 9.7181 10.4999 1.1311 0.85822 1.1302
         Apr. 1.5802 1.5035 7.5489 7.4650 125.44 9.6233 10.4819 1.1319 0.86179 1.1238
         May 1.6116 1.5058 7.6736 7.4675 122.95 9.7794 10.7372 1.1304 0.87176 1.1185
         June 1.6264 1.5011 7.7937 7.4669 122.08 9.7465 10.6263 1.1167 0.89107 1.1293
         July 1.6061 1.4693 7.7151 7.4656 121.41 9.6587 10.5604 1.1076 0.89942 1.1218
         Aug. 1.6431 1.4768 7.8581 7.4602 118.18 9.9742 10.7356 1.0892 0.91554 1.1126
         Sep. 1.6162 1.4578 7.8323 7.4634 118.24 9.9203 10.6968 1.0903 0.89092 1.1004
         Oct. 1.6271 1.4581 7.8447 7.4693 119.51 10.1165 10.8023 1.0981 0.87539 1.1053
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 − Exchange rate statistics.    
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
November 2019
XII.  External sector
 
12.  Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
Q1 1999 = 100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  4 
In real terms In real terms
of which: based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selectedconsumer domestic national consumer Euro
 area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 56 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.1 96.1 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.6 95.9 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.0 85.6 88.0 85.8 92.0 97.5 85.4 91.0 93.0 92.1 91.0
2001 87.8 87.0 86.5 86.3 90.6 86.8 91.8 96.5 86.3 90.3 93.1 91.5 90.92002 90.1 90.0 89.4 89.6 95.2 90.4 92.5 95.7 88.8 90.8 93.6 92.0 91.72003 100.7 101.1 100.4 100.9 107.1 101.2 96.0 94.8 98.0 95.1 97.0 96.6 96.72004 104.6 104.8 103.2 104.2 111.7 104.9 96.2 93.6 100.4 95.4 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.3 100.9 102.3 109.6 102.3 94.9 92.1 99.3 93.0 98.4 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.2 100.2 101.0 109.6 101.5 93.7 90.5 98.8 91.3 98.6 96.5 95.82007 106.1 105.8 102.0 103.3 113.0 103.4 94.6 89.7 102.7 91.6 100.9 97.9 97.12008 109.3 107.9 103.3 106.7 117.1 105.4 94.8 88.4 105.9 90.7 102.2 97.8 97.12009 110.7 108.7 104.2 111.8 120.2 106.4 95.2 89.2 105.4 91.4 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.0 96.0 103.6 111.6 97.4 92.6 88.8 98.9 87.5 98.7 93.6 92.0
2011 103.3 99.9 93.9 102.1 112.3 96.9 92.2 88.5 98.2 86.6 98.2 92.8 91.32012 97.7 94.7 88.4 96.0 107.2 92.1 90.2 88.4 93.0 83.9 95.9 89.8 88.32013 101.0 97.5 91.1 98.7 111.8 94.9 92.5 88.9 98.3 85.8 98.2 91.5 90.22014 101.4 97.1 91.2 99.6 114.1 95.3 93.1 89.7 98.6 86.5 98.3 91.7 90.8
2015 91.7 87.6 83.0 89.3 105.7 87.0 90.1 90.4 89.7 82.7 94.7 87.0 86.3
2016 94.4 89.5 85.2
p 90.2 109.7 p 88.9 90.9 90.7 91.1 84.0 95.3 88.0 p 87.5
2017 96.6 91.4 86.0 p 90.6 112.0 p 90.0 91.9 90.6 93.8 84.7 96.6 89.1 p 88.3
2018 98.9 93.4 87.4 p 91.5 117.9 p 93.8 92.9 90.5 96.5 85.4 97.9 90.3 p 90.4
2016         Nov. 94.6 89.7 84.8 p 89.7 109.6 p 88.6 90.8 90.6 91.0 83.8 95.4 88.0 p 87.4
         Dec. 93.7 89.0 108.6 p 87.8 95.3 87.9 p 87.1
2017         Jan. 93.9 89.1 109.0 p 88.0 95.2 87.7 p 87.0
         Feb. 93.4 88.9 83.5 p 88.8 108.1 p 87.4 90.4 90.4 90.2 83.2 95.0 87.6 p 86.7
         Mar. 94.0 89.2 108.5 p 87.5 95.3 87.7 p 86.7
         Apr. 93.7 89.0 108.2 p 87.2 95.1 87.6 p 86.5
         May 95.6 90.5 85.0 p 89.7 110.5 p 88.8 91.3 90.7 92.2 84.1 96.0 88.6 p 87.6
         June 96.3 91.1 111.4 p 89.5 96.4 88.9 p 88.0
         July 97.6 92.3 113.3 p 90.9 97.1 89.7 p 89.0
         Aug. 99.0 93.6 87.8 p 92.2 115.0 p 92.3 92.9 90.8 96.1 85.7 97.9 90.4 p 89.8
         Sep. 99.0 93.6 115.0 p 92.3 97.9 90.5 p 89.9
         Oct. 98.6 93.1 114.8 p 91.9 97.5 89.9 p 89.4
         Nov. 98.5 93.1 87.6 p 91.8 115.0 p 92.0 93.0 90.7 96.6 85.6 97.9 90.2 p 89.7
         Dec. 98.8 93.3 115.3 p 92.2 98.1 90.3 p 89.8
2018         Jan. 99.4 93.9 116.1 p 92.7 98.3 90.4 p 89.9
         Feb. 99.6 93.9 88.0 p 92.1 117.3 p 93.6 93.4 90.4 98.0 85.7 98.4 90.4 p 90.1
         Mar. 99.7 94.2 117.7 p 94.0 98.4 90.6 p 90.3
         Apr. 99.5 94.0 117.9 p 94.0 98.6 90.6 p 90.5
         May 98.1 92.7 87.0 p 91.2 116.6 p 93.1 93.0 90.5 96.7 85.2 98.0 90.0 p 89.9
         June 97.9 92.6 116.7 p 93.0 97.8 89.9 p 90.0
         July 99.2 93.7 118.2 p 94.2 97.6 90.3 p 90.4
         Aug. 99.0 93.4 87.5 p 91.8 119.0 p 94.6 92.6 90.4 96.0 85.4 97.5 90.2 p 90.6
         Sep. 99.5 93.9 120.4 p 95.5 98.0 90.8 p 91.5
         Oct. 98.9 93.4 119.0 p 94.4 97.7 90.4 p 90.8
         Nov. 98.3 92.9 86.9 p 91.0 117.9 p 93.5 92.6 90.8 95.5 85.4 97.6 90.3 p 90.5
         Dec. 98.4 92.7 118.0 p 93.4 97.5 90.0 p 90.3
2019         Jan. 97.8 92.2 117.3 p 92.7 97.0 89.5 p 89.7
         Feb. 97.4 91.7 p 85.7 p 89.6 116.6 p 92.0 92.1 90.5 94.6 p 84.6 96.9 89.3 p 89.4
         Mar. 96.9 91.1 116.2 p 91.6 96.5 88.8 p 88.9
         Apr. 96.7 91.0 116.1 p 91.4 96.9 89.1 p 89.2
         May 97.4 91.4 p 85.5 p 89.3 117.0 p 91.9 92.0 90.7 94.0 p 84.5 97.0 89.4 p 89.6
         June 97.9 91.9 117.4 p 92.2 97.1 89.6 p 89.7
         July 97.5 p 91.3 116.5 p 91.3 97.0 p 89.4 p 89.3
         Aug. 98.1 p 91.9 ... ... 117.6 p 92.0 ... ... ... ... 96.9 p 89.6 p 89.6
         Sep. 97.4 p 91.1 116.7 p 91.2 96.6 p 89.3 p 89.3
         Oct. 97.4 p 91.1 116.6 p 91.2 p 96.6 p 89.2 p 89.2
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the group EER-19 (see footnote 1) and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Bra zil, Chile,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zeala nd,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailan d, Turkey and
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Venezuela. Due to the redenomination of the Venezuelan bolívar on2001, pp.  50-53, May 2007, pp.  31-35 and August 2017, pp.  41-43). For more 20  August  2018, the spot rate from 17  August  2018 is used since t hen. 3Annual
detailed information on methodology, see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from
(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, fr om 2015
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Austra- including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norw ay, Sweden,
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro area countries
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-1 9.6Euro area
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai- countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the gro up EER-38 (see
lable, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2000 and 2018 see the index attached 
to the January 2019 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
December 2018
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2019 and 2020 and 
an outlook for 2021
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2017
– Germany’s international investment position: 
amount, profitability and risks of cross-  
border assets
January 2019
– The impact of an interest rate normalisation 
on the private non- financial sector in the 
euro area from a balance sheet perspective– Price competitiveness in individual euro area 
countries: developments, drivers and the in -
fluence of labour market reforms
– Financial cycles in the euro area
– IFRS 9 from the perspective of banking super -
vision
February 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2019
– German balance of payments in 2018
– Cash demand in the shadow economy
April 2019
– Household wealth and finances in   Germany: 
results of the 2017 survey
– Interest rate pass- through in the low interest  
rate environment
– European Stability and Growth Pact: 
individual  reform options
– Germany’s debt brake: surveillance by the 
Stability Council
May 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2019
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2019 and 2020 and 
an outlook for 2021Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
85•

– The European banking package – revised 
rules in EU banking regulation
– Payment services in transition: instant pay -
ments, PSD2 and new competitors
– The costs of payment methods in the retail 
sector
July 2019
– Parallels in the exchange rate movements of 
major currencies
– Crypto tokens in payments and securities 
settlement
August 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2019
– The impact of wages on prices in Germany:  
evidence from selected empirical analyses
– State government budgets: analysis of de -
tailed results for 2018
– Longer- term changes in the unsecured inter -
bank money market
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2018
October 2019
– The sustainable finance market: a stocktake
– The European market for investment funds 
and the role of bond funds in the low inter -
est rate environment
– Long- term outlook for the statutory pension 
insurance scheme
– Structural reforms in the euro area
November 2019
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20133
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
86•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20192, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification ,  
January 20192
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2013 to 
2018, July 20192
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2017, 
June 20192
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2014 bis 2015 , 
May 20182, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, October 20132
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
June 20191, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
31/2019  
A novel housing price misalignment indicator 
for Germany
32/2019  
Price trends over the product life cycle and the 
optimal inflation target
33/2019  
When old meets young? Germany’s population 
ageing and the current account
34/2019  
Expectation formation, sticky prices, and the 
ZLB
35/2019  
Estimating regional wealth in Germany: How 
different are east and west really?
36/2019  
Uncertainty shocks and financial crisis indicators
37/2019  
Statistical governance and FDI in emerging 
economies
38/2019  
The real effects of bank distress: evidence from 
bank bailouts in Germany
39/2019  
Foreign exchange dealer asset pricing
40/2019  
Cross-country differences in homeownership: 
A cultural phenomenon?
41/2019  
Nowcasting GDP with a large factor model 
space
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since 
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
87•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2019  
88•

