Monthly Report
February 2019
Vol. 71
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
2
Deutsche Bundesbank
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14
60431 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02 Publishing schedules for selected statistics can
60006 Frankfurt am Main be downloaded from our website. The statis-
Germany tical data are also published on the website.
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512 The Monthly Report is published by the
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is
Internet: www.bundesbank.de available to interested parties free of charge.
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. This is a translation of the original German
language version, which is the sole authorita-
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition) tive text.
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report
went to press at 11 a.m. on 15 February 2019.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
3
Contents
The current economic situation in Germany ................................................ 5
Overview ........................................................................................................................ 6
Global and European setting .................................................................................. 10
The macroeconomic effects of the government shutdown in the United States .................. 14
Unemployment and labour shortages in the euro area ...................................................... 18
Monetary policy and banking business .............................................................. 22
Money market management and liquidity needs ................................................................ 23
Financial markets ........................................................................................................ 35
The German economy ............................................................................................... 44
The weakness of German motor vehicle production in the second half of 2018 ................. 47
Housing prices in Germany in 2018 .................................................................................... 53
Public finances ............................................................................................................. 58
The structural development of German public finances – results of the disaggregated
framework for 2018 ............................................................................................................ 59

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
4
Statistical Section.................................................................................................... 1•
Key economic data for the euro area .................................................................................. 5•
Overall monetary survey in the euro area ............................................................................ 8•
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem ............................................................ 16•
Banks .................................................................................................................................. 20•
Minimum reserves ............................................................................................................... 42•
Interest rates ....................................................................................................................... 43•
Insurance corporations and pension funds .......................................................................... 48•
Capital market .................................................................................................................... 50•
Financial accounts ............................................................................................................... 54•
Public finances in Germany ................................................................................................. 58•
Economic conditions in Germany ........................................................................................ 66•
External sector .................................................................................................................... 75•
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank .......................... 85•
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
5
The current economic situation
in Germany

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
6
Overview
German economy growing icy in the major currency areas would turn out
at subdued underlying pace to be more accommodative than previously ex-
pected. This was especially the case for the
Only moderate Global economic growth in the final quarter of United States, where there are now hardly any
global economic
2018, too, is unlikely to have matched the pace expectations of further policy rate increases by
growth in
autumn recorded in the first half of the year. This is true the Federal Reserve (Fed). Following the termin-
of both the advanced economies and the ation of net purchases under the asset pur-
emerging market economies, although very chase programme (APP) at the end of 2018,
pronounced differences exist between the indi- expectations of a first rate hike in the euro area
vidual countries. While the previously strong were pushed further into the future. Addition-
macroeconomic growth seen in the United ally, financial analysts reduced their expect-
States was probably only slightly weaker in au- ations for future corporate profits on both sides
tumn, gross domestic product (GDP) in the of the Atlantic more strongly than their growth
euro area again increased by only a moderate forecasts. On the stock markets, which react
amount. China’s gradual slowdown in growth particularly sensitively to changes in expect-
continued. On the whole, following a period of ations and altered risk assessments, significant
stronger growth from end-2016 to mid-2018, price losses have been recorded on balance as
the global economy now appears to be on a from end- September, although prices recovered
more moderate expansionary path once more. slightly in the new year. By contrast – as is
often the case in periods of heightened uncer-
IMF reduces Against the backdrop of this slowdown, the tainty – demand for safe government bonds
global growth
International Monetary Fund revised its global increased and the yields on these securities de-
projections
only slightly; growth forecast somewhat downwards in its clined worldwide. The developments described
downside risks
January update to the World Economic Out- here had a remarkably minor impact on events
dominant
look, deeming the short- term prospects for the in the foreign exchange markets. Exchange
euro area to be less favourable than in October. rate volatility between the major currencies
On account of considerably lower oil prices, it thus remained relatively low. The exchange rate
also scaled back its growth forecasts for crude of the euro against the US dollar, for example,
oil- exporting countries slightly. The outlook for has moved within a comparatively narrow band
most of the other economies, on the other since mid- October. Overall, on a weighted
hand, did not change significantly. Overall, average against the currencies of 19 major
therefore, the IMF anticipates only marginally trading partners, the euro slipped slightly on
slower global economic expansion than in balance compared with the end of September.
2018 for the current year and the year there-
after. In its outlook, however, risks are tilted to At its December meeting, the ECB Governing Monetary
policy: net asset
the downside. In addition, the recent con- Council decided, as expected, to end its net
purchases under
tinued deterioration of global sentiment and purchases under the APP after December 2018. the APP brought
to an end
leading indicators suggests that the IMF’s latest At the same time, it enhanced its forward guid-
projection may overstate global economic mo- ance on the future development of reinvest-
mentum. ment. According to its new guidance, the Gov-
erning Council intends to continue reinvesting,
Economic Potential downside risks to the global economy in full, the principal payments from maturing
downside risks
were also at the heart of international financial securities purchased under the APP for an ex-
shaping finan-
cial market market developments. As a result, the markets tended period of time past the date when it
developments
were increasingly assuming that monetary pol- starts raising the key interest rates, and in any

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
7
case for as long as necessary to maintain fa- vices sector probably bolstered the rise in eco-
vourable liquidity conditions and an ample de- nomic activity in the final quarter of 2018. The
gree of monetary accommodation. degree of aggregate capacity utilisation de-
clined once again, but is likely to have remained
Underlying mon- The broad monetary aggregate M3 saw con- considerably above its longer-t erm average.
etary dynamics
tinued robust growth in the euro area in the
in the euro area
still driven by fourth quarter of 2018, although the Eurosys- Although in autumn goods exports offset the Demand
loan growth impulses weak
tem further reduced its monthly net asset pur- decline of the preceding quarter, no additional
chases. Among the counterparts, loans to the momentum was built up. Coupled with enter-
domestic private sector were once again the prises’ subdued expectations, this is likely to
dominant driver of monetary expansion. De- have weighed on business investment, which
mand for such loans was bolstered by the still probably expanded only slightly at best. In spite
favourable financing conditions, high levels of of robust employment growth and more
capacity utilisation and the positive labour mar- steeply rising earnings, private consumption
ket situation in the euro area. However, as both also remained largely listless. The strong up-
cyclical momentum and economic sentiment ward price trend for energy products in particu-
deteriorated noticeably, flows in lending to lar may have dampened consumers’ purchas-
non- financial corporations did not accelerate ing appetite. Government consumption, by
further in 2018. By contrast, the upward contrast, is expected to have expanded mark-
growth trend in loans to households continued edly once more. Negative impulses are likely to
into the reporting quarter. The bank managers have emanated from investment in inventories
responding to the bank lending survey (BLS) in- following a phase of substantial restocking
dicated that their credit standards for loans to around the middle of the year.
the private sector had remained broadly un-
changed in the fourth quarter of 2018. Lending by German banks to the domestic pri- German banks’
lending to
vate sector perceptibly lost momentum over
domestic private
German econ- Economic activity in Germany remained feeble the second half of 2018. This was mainly due sector less lively
omy at a stand-
up to the end of the year. According to the to the slowdown in lending to non- financial
still in Q4 2018
Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real corporations, which was a reflection of weaker
GDP in the final quarter of 2018, after seasonal economic activity. Loans to households, on the
and calendar adjustment, remained at the level other hand, recorded similarly high inflows in
of the preceding quarter, in which it had the reporting quarter as in the preceding quar-
dropped by 0.2% (primarily on account of a ters. Again, this stemmed from lively demand
one- off effect in the automotive industry). It for housing loans and consumer credit, driven
was up by 0.6% on the year in calendar- by the still favourable financing conditions, per-
adjusted terms. The fact that the economy sistently robust consumer confidence and the
failed to pick up any steam following the set- positive outlook for the housing market.
back in the third quarter was mainly due to
persistently weak industrial activity. For in- Despite a weaker economy, the labour market Labour market
in very good
stance, it took considerably longer than initially remained in very good shape at the end of
shape
expected to overcome production stoppages in 2018. The fourth quarter was marked by a solid
the automotive sector, which were linked to rise in employment and a slight fall in under-
the new EU- wide standard for measuring ex- employment. Employment went up primarily
haust emissions. In addition, output in other on the back of sustained growth in the number
industrial sectors was reduced. Furthermore, of new jobs subject to social security contribu-
there was probably no additional stimulus from tions. Unemployment continued to decrease
the construction sector, either, which is operat- noticeably in the reporting quarter. Although
ing close to full capacity. By contrast, the ser- the number of job vacancies did not increase

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
8
further, it remains very high. The weak senti- sectors according to surveys by the Ifo Institute
ment in a number of sectors was reflected to a and the German Chamber of Industry and
certain degree in the leading indicators, al- Commerce (DIHK) also lends weight to this.
though demand for labour remained expan- This will probably curb propensity to invest. Al-
sionary overall. though this suggests that the underlying pace
of economic growth is likely to remain sub-
Negotiated pay Negotiated pay rates remained on a clear up- dued, at least in the first half of the year, there
rates continuing
ward trajectory at the end of 2018. Looking at is no evidence that the deceleration will be-
to rise signifi-
cantly the individual sectors, growth in the production come a downturn. For one thing, some of the
sector (including construction) significantly out- negative one- off factors from the third quarter
stripped growth in the services sector. The rise of last year will peter out. For instance, looking
in actual earnings in the economy as a whole is at the automotive industry, after a dip in the
likely to have been remarkably strong in the summer, there are signs of at least a gradual
fourth quarter, as in the three preceding return to normal activity in the production and
periods. export of motor vehicles. For another, the still
very favourable labour market situation and the
Another sharp In the final quarter of 2018, consumer prices strong developments in wage growth suggest
climb in con-
(HICP) continued the distinct rise seen in the that private consumption will pick up again
sumer prices
in Q4 2018 third quarter, climbing by 0.6% in seasonally and counterbalance the dampening effects, in
adjusted terms. Despite the marked decline in contrast to the second half of 2018. Further
crude oil prices, energy became considerably support will be provided by the fiscal measures
more expensive. Increased transport costs re- introduced at the start of 2019.
sulting from the low water level in the Rhine
and other rivers probably played a key role Germany’s public finances improved signifi- Significant
improvement in
here. By contrast, food prices, which had also cantly last year, with the general government
government
risen significantly in previous quarters, largely surplus rising to 1.7% of GDP according to pro- finances in 2018
came to a standstill. Prices for other goods, visional data. This was largely due to dynamic
which had gone up sharply in the third quarter, growth in tax and social contribution receipts.
accelerated further. Prices for clothing and In addition, interest expenditure continued to
footwear, in particular, were considerably fall. The debt ratio declined to 61.0% at the
higher. Finally, services prices continued to end of the third quarter of 2018.
show a moderate rise. Annual HICP inflation, at
2.1% on average over the quarter, matched its This year, too, public finances are likely to Shrinking surplus
this year,
level of the third quarter. However, it dropped benefit from a reduction in the interest burden.
accompanied by
to 1.7% in December as lower crude oil prices The Federal Government anticipates a weaker fiscal loosening
were partially passed on to consumers. Exclud- but nonetheless favourable economic situation.
ing energy and food, average inflation for the By contrast, the looser fiscal policy will put no-
final quarter of the year increased from 1.1% to ticeable pressure on the budget. Its impact on
1.3%. the expenditure side will be particularly pro-
nounced. For instance, considerable spending
Underlying cyc- The underlying cyclical trend will probably also increases are planned for pensions, internal
lical trend likely
remain subdued after the start of the new year. and external security, education and infrastruc-
to remain sub-
dued for time For instance, the decline in new orders in the ture. On the income side, tax cuts will be offset
being
manufacturing sector, with the exception of by additional tax receipts due, in part, to
the automotive sector, indicates that industrial bracket creep. Overall, the surplus is expected
activity will barely pick up momentum again to shrink.
during the first quarter. The strong deterior-
ation in business expectations in key economic

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
9
Loosening set to Fiscal policy is subsequently set to remain loose forecast, which was scaled back slightly in … a better
continue over result for 2019
and surpluses are set to fall. At the same time, comparison to the budget plans, will put pres-
medium term also appears
and safety as things stand, structural surpluses also appear sure on the budget. However, as things now possible, despite
buffer for unex- slower growth
likely in the medium term. The debt ratio is ex- stand, the improved starting situation is likely
pected negative
developments pected to drop significantly below 60%, mean- to far outweigh this. All in all, it therefore ap-
likely to remain
ing that the general government budget rules pears that a balanced budget will again be pos-
will be adhered to comfortably. Generally sible without the envisaged withdrawals from
speaking, the rules permit cyclical burdens to the reserve.
have an impact on the budgets. However, flat-
ter growth often leads to a reassessment of the In March 2019, the Federal Cabinet will adopt Benchmark fig-
ures likely to be
structural budgetary situation, making correc- the benchmark figures for the 2020 budget
accompanied by
tions necessary. Buffers built up in good times and the fiscal plan up to 2023. At present, further easing
therefore reduce the risk that procyclical con- smaller revenue growth is expected here, too,
solidation will be needed in the next economic as a result of a gloomier economic outlook.
downturn. However, the government is likely to use up the
additional funds in the refugee reserve and the
Central govern- The central government budget also ended favourable situation is set to continue. This
ment budget:
2018 with a large surplus. The refugee reserve means that central government, too, will still
After an
improved out- was topped up further and the debt brake was have room for manoeuvre in the medium term.
turn in 2018, …
undershot by a clear margin. The outturn thus However, the planned fiscal loosening is likely
clearly exceeded the budget plan, which stipu- to gradually worsen its financial situation. In
lated that net borrowing was to be avoided by the longer term, this will be compounded, in
making withdrawals from the reserve. particular, by growing burdens resulting from
demographic developments which will require
The draft budget for 2019 likewise does not larger central government grants to the statu-
provide for any net borrowing. The growth tory pension insurance scheme.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
10
Global and European setting
Global economic likely to have expanded at only moderate pace.
developments Russian and Indian GDP, on the other hand,
could have risen slightly more sharply again.
Only moderate Global economic growth in the final quarter of On the whole, following a period of stronger
global economic
2018 is unlikely to have matched its pace of the growth from end-2016 to mid-2018, the global
growth in Q4
first half of the year. This is true of both the ad- economy now appears to be returning to a
vanced economies and the emerging market more moderate expansionary path.
economies, although pronounced differences
exist between the individual countries. While Against the backdrop of this slowdown, the IMF global
growth projec-
the previously strong macroeconomic growth International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised its
tions down
seen in the United States was probably merely global growth projection slightly downwards in only slightly;
risks tilted to
slightly weaker in the fourth quarter, real gross its regular January update to the World Eco-
downside
domestic product (GDP) in the euro area again nomic Outlook, deeming the short- term out-
increased by only a moderate amount. The up- look for the euro area to be less favourable
turn in the United Kingdom lost considerable than in October. On account of the consider-
momentum in the final quarter of the year. By able drop in oil prices, it also lowered its projec-
contrast, the Japanese economy recovered tions for crude oil- exporting countries slightly.
from the weather-i nduced setback in the sum- By contrast, the outlook for other economies
mer. China’s gradual slowdown in growth con- – with the exception of Turkey, whose growth
tinued. In Brazil, overall economic output is expectations have been revised substantially
downwards – have not changed to any consid-
erable degree. On this basis, the IMF is expect-
Sectoral Purchasing Managers’ Indices
for the global economy* ing just slightly slower overall global economic
growth in the current and coming year than
Seasonally adjusted, quarterly averages
was seen in 2018. In its outlook, however, the
Services
54 risks are tilted to the downside. In addition, the
53 recent continued deterioration of global senti-
ment indicators and leading indicators indi-
52
cates that the IMF’s latest projection may over-
51 Manufacturing
industry state global economic momentum.
50
Manufacturing industry sub-components So far, the deceleration of global economic Damper on
global industrial
Producers of: 55 growth has been apparent primarily in the in-
activity; drivers
Consumer goods
dustrial sector, which had already lost consider- of economic
Intermediate goods 54
Capital goods able upward momentum over the course of growth in
services sector
53
2018 with the slowdown in global investment remain intact,
52 activity. As a result, on average in the months however
51 of October and November, output in the pro-
duction sector slightly surpassed the monthly
50
average of the third quarter, in which it had
49
also risen just moderately. At the beginning of
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 the year, sentiment amongst enterprises in the
Sources: IHS Markit and JP Morgan. * Values greater than 50 manufacturing sector deteriorated further. In
indicate growth in business activities compared with the pre-
vious period. • Latest figures: January 2019. January, the Bundesbank leading indicator for
Deutsche Bundesbank
the global economy hovered close to its previ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
11
ous low of March 2016. The sectoral break-
World market prices for crude oil,
down of the global Purchasing Managers’
industrial commodities and food
Index for the manufacturing sector shows that, and beverages
during the course of 2018, sentiment among
Monthly averages, log scale
producers of intermediate and capital goods
Crude oil (Brent) 120
worsened in particular. By contrast, indicators in US$ per barrel 110
for the consumer goods industry and the ser- 100
90
vices sector held firm at elevated levels. This
80
suggests that drivers of growth outside the
70
capital goods production sector are likely to
have remained intact. 60
50
Recent slight Against the background of increased global
recovery in oil production and recent weaker demand world- 40
prices following
sharp decline wide, crude oil prices fell considerably last 35
quarter. In December, a barrel of Brent crude US dollar basis, 30
2012 = 100
oil cost an average of US$56 on the spot mar- 100 Industrial commodities
90
ket, representing a reduction of around 30%
80
compared with October. In January, the price
70
of crude oil rose slightly, supported by the pro-
duction cutbacks amongst OPEC members and 60
other countries that were adopted in Decem-
50
ber and have since been partially implemented.
Food and beverages
100
As this report went to press, a barrel of Brent
90
crude oil cost US$64. Despite the recovery,
80
crude oil prices were 14% down on the year in
70
January. At present, the futures curve is indica-
60
tive of marginal medium and long- term dis-
counts. The prices of non-e nergy commodities, 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19
as measured by the HWWI price index, likewise Sources: Bloomberg Finance LP and HWWI. • Latest figures:
average of 1 to 8 February 2019, or 1 to 14 February 2019 for
declined in the final quarter of 2018, albeit to a
crude oil.
considerably lesser extent than oil prices. The Deutsche Bundesbank
prices of industrial commodities and food and
beverages rose somewhat in January. However, ber. The underlying inflationary pressures thus
monthly average prices remained markedly remained subdued.
below the previous year’s levels.
Inflation in The considerable drop in crude oil prices was Selected emerging market
industrial coun-
reflected in falling consumer prices for refined economies
tries markedly
below 2% at petroleum products in industrial countries. The
end of year due
year- on- year change in energy prices decreased In China, economic growth slowed further to Chinese eco-
to falling energy
nomic growth
prices by around 7 percentage points to just under 6.4% year-o n- year in the final quarter of 2018.1
continuing to
3% from October to December. Accordingly, However, private and government consump- slow
headline consumer price inflation also fell from tion appeared to be fairly brisk on the whole,
2.3% in October to 1.6% in December. At the
same time, core inflation (which excludes en-
ergy and food) persisted at 1.6% until Decem- 1 In 2018 as a whole, China’s GDP grew by 6.6%. This
means that the country’s rate of economic growth has
been in constant decline since 2010.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
12
although sales of passenger cars fell sharply. quarter, real GDP admittedly rose by a season- Brazilian econ-
omy still lacking
Alongside the end of government purchasing ally adjusted 0.8% on the quarter. However,
momentum
incentives, tightened environmental restrictions annual GDP growth was a paltry 1.3%. In add-
are likely to have played a role in this. Invest- ition, the pace of growth is likely to have de-
ment again gained some additional momen- clined again somewhat in the autumn. This is
tum, but only saw moderate growth. Further- suggested by the low values of the Central
more, foreign trade weakened considerably of Bank of Brazil’s monthly activity indicators for
late. In US dollar terms, both imports and ex- October and November. At 12.4% in seasonally
ports rose by only around 4% year- on- year in adjusted terms, the fourth- quarter unemploy-
the fourth quarter of 2018. This was chiefly due ment rate was also somewhat higher again
to sharp declines in December. Imports from than in the preceding quarters. By contrast,
the United States were reduced to an especially positive signals came in the form of improved
large extent, with the new tariffs in bilateral survey responses among consumers and pur-
trade likely to have been a key factor.2 Senti- chasing managers. In the final quarter of 2018,
ment among purchasing managers in the consumer prices were 4.1% higher than one
manufacturing sector continued to deteriorate year previously. The Central Bank of Brazil kept
in the final quarter, worsening to a consider- its policy rate unchanged at 6.5%.
ably greater degree in January 2019. On the
year, headline consumer price inflation fell Despite oil price movements that initially Russia saw
moderate
slightly in the fourth quarter to 2.2%; inflation worked to Russia’s favour, its economy only
growth in 2018
excluding energy and food dropped to 1.8%. saw moderate growth last year. According to
the initial estimate from the Russian Federal
Growth in India In India, the underlying trend of economic State Statistics Service, real GDP rose by 2.3%
probably strong
growth remained strong. It appears that overall in 2018.3 Specific data for the fourth quarter
economic growth picked up pace again at the are not yet available. Significant increases in ac-
end of the year after the annual growth rate tivity in the mining and quarrying industries as
had fallen slightly in the third quarter to 7.1%. well as the recovery in the agricultural sector
This is suggested by at least some short- term are indicative of a slightly higher pace of
indicators. One of these, the Purchasing Man- growth. However, this contrasted with listless
agers’ Index for the manufacturing sector, rose growth in manufacturing output and the con-
markedly in the fourth quarter, bucking the siderable drop in oil prices as of October. Con-
global trend. Industrial production likewise re- sumer price inflation climbed to 3.9% in the
corded distinct growth. Private consumption is fourth quarter. Inflation expectations were
likely to have been boosted by food prices, raised by the marked depreciation of the Rus-
which fell last quarter, as well as decelerating sian rouble in the past year as well as the antici-
growth in energy prices. For these reasons, pated increase in the VAT rate from 18% to
year- on- year consumer price inflation abated 20% at the beginning of 2019. As a result, the
to 2.6% in the fourth quarter despite a persist- Russian central bank raised its policy rate by 25
ently high rate of core inflation. This meant basis points to 7.75% in December.
that the rate of inflation was close to the lower
boundary of the target corridor set by the Re-
serve Bank of India, which refrained from any
further tightening of monetary policy. In fact,
2 Simulations using the NiGEM global economic model
the central bank lowered its policy rate in Feb- show that these measures may put somewhat of a brake
ruary by 25 basis points to 6.25%. on Chinese economic growth in the current year, too. See
Deutsche Bundesbank, The potential global economic im-
pact of the USA- China trade dispute, Monthly Report, No-
vember 2018, pp. 11-13.
The recovery of the Brazilian economy is still
3 This suggests an upward revision of the GDP data for the
proceeding at a sluggish pace. In the third previous quarters.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
13
United States Japan
Persistently In the United States, a government shutdown At the end of 2018, the Japanese economy re- Japanese econ-
brisk economic omy growing
caused delays in the collection and provision of covered from the weather- induced setback
activity again after set-
statistical data. As a result, a GDP estimate for during the summer months. Preliminary esti- back in summer
the final quarter of 2018 was not yet available mates by the Japanese Cabinet Office indicate
at the time of publication of this report. The that seasonally adjusted real GDP was up by
available monthly indicators, however, suggest 0.3% from the third quarter. The countermove-
that the brisk overall economic upturn con- ment arose from a considerable increase in do-
tinued, driven not least by fiscal stimuli.4 In this mestic demand. Private consumption, in par-
context, private consumption is likely to have ticular, recorded marked growth. Business in-
proven to be a key pillar of economic activity vestment also saw distinct expansion. A marked
once again. Higher wage growth and a moder- rise in exports was offset by strong growth in
ate increase in the overall cost of living due to imports, meaning that, on balance, foreign
a rise in energy prices are likely to have boosted trade had a downward impact again. In the
the prospectively strong expansion of real con- fourth quarter, the unemployment rate con-
sumer spending. At the same time, also owing tinued to be exceedingly low. Despite increas-
to the weak momentum in the oil industry, ing shortages on the labour market, domestic
there are signs that expansion in business in- inflationary pressures remained subdued. In
vestment has been only moderate. It also ap- December, annual CPI inflation (excluding en-
pears that there was little stimulus from foreign ergy and food) remained unchanged at 0.1%.
business in the final quarter. On average for the Against this backdrop, the Bank of Japan main-
months of October and November, goods ex- tained its accommodative stance.
ports only marginally surpassed their third-
quarter level in price- adjusted terms. On the
Chinese market, it seems that there has even United Kingdom
been a substantial drop in the sales figures for
US products. At the start of the year, the situ- The pace of growth in the United Kingdom has Considerable
slowdown in
ation on the US labour market remained per- slowed down considerably of late. After adjust-
pace of growth
sistently good. Admittedly, in January, the un- ment for the usual seasonal variations, the pro-
employment rate rose slightly for the second visional estimate indicates that aggregate out-
month in a row. However, this was largely due put increased by just 0.2% in the fourth quarter
to the temporary furloughing of public sector of 2018 compared with the previous period, in
employees as a consequence of the US Federal which it had gone up by 0.6%. On the one
Government shutdown, which is likely to have hand, this sluggish economic activity was due
put a slight damper on GDP growth in the first to a major decline in manufacturing output,
quarter as well (see also the box on pp. 14f.). which had still been on the rise in the summer
While the rate of inflation, as measured by the quarter. On the other hand, the loss of mo-
consumer price index (CPI), fell to 1.6% in Janu- mentum in the expansion of the significant ser-
ary, the core rate excluding energy and food vices sector continued. Furthermore, construc-
held steady at 2.2%. Under these circum- tion output slowed down somewhat from its
stances, the US Federal Reserve again raised its high level in the third quarter. The annual aver-
policy rate by 25 basis points in December and
is now striving for a target corridor of 2¼% to
2½%. At the same time, the members of the 4 According to Bundesbank simulations using the NiGEM
global economic model, real GDP growth is likely to have
Federal Open Market Committee signalled that increased by 0.7 percentage point last year solely as a re-
sult of the US tax reform. See Deutsche Bundesbank, The
they see only limited need for a further tighten-
potential macroeconomic impact of US tax reform, Monthly
ing of monetary policy at present. Report, February 2018, pp. 14-16.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
14
The macroeconomic effects of the government shutdown
in the United States
From 22 December 2018 until 25 January of States. This is because the US Bureau of
the current year, work was partially sus- Economic Analysis (BEA) also relies on hours
pended at numerous federal authorities and worked at government agencies when esti-
agencies in the United States. Only fi ve of a mating government consumption.2 If the
total of 12 appropriations bills were passed latest government shutdown is compared
prior to the beginning of the new fi scal year with similar shutdowns in the past, the as-
on 1 October 2018. These bills ensure the sociated direct dampening effect should re-
continued operation of certain major de- main manageable. Although the hours
partments, including the Departments of worked by federal employees declined con-
Defense, Labor and Education. Upon expiry siderably, both during the 26- day govern-
of stopgap fi nancing, all non- essential ac- ment shutdown in the half- year period from
tivities elsewhere were discontinued and Q4 1995 to Q1 1996 and in the aftermath
380,000 federal employees temporarily fur- of the last relatively lengthy shutdown in
loughed. Another 420,000 employees ini- October 2013,3, 4 the BEA quantifi ed the
tially worked without pay.1 negative effect on the annualised quarterly
GDP growth rate at only around 0.3 per-
The furloughs in the government sector are centage point for each event.5 This winter,
set to have weighed directly on fi rst-q uarter the direct hit to growth will probably have
gross domestic product (GDP) in the United
Indicators of US economic activity
before, during, and after government
shutdowns 1 Employee fi gures are based on trade union estimates
published in the fi rst few days of the government shut-
Seasonally adjusted, quarter-on-quarter percentage change down.
2 See BEA, How will the federal government shut-
+3 Hours worked at US Federal Government agencies 1 down be refl ected in the methodologies used for esti-
mating GDP for the fourth quarter of 2013?, FAQ entry
+2
of 23 January 2014, available at http://www.bea.gov/
+1 help/faq/1032
3 In order to assess the economic impact, the two
0 government shutdowns that occurred in 1995 (from
13 to 19 November 1995 and from 15 December 1995
–1 to 6 January 1996) will be looked at collectively below.
Two further brief shutdowns occurred in 2018; how-
–2
ever, as one lasted only a long weekend and the other
Government shutdown in
–3 Q4 2013 just a few hours, they are unlikely to have had any
Q4 1995 meaningful economic impact. See Congressional Re-
–4 search Service, Shutdown of the Federal Government:
Real final sales to private domestic purchasers Causes, Processes, and Effects, updated 10 December
(Enlarged scale) 1.5 2018.
4 It should be noted that both shutdowns occurred
1.0 while the US Federal Government was in the process
of slashing its real consumption expenditure.
0.5
5 The data for 1995 derive implicitly from the contri-
0 bution to the quarterly change in price- adjusted offi cial
– 4 – 3 – 2 – 1 0 +1 +2 +3 +4 data with comments. See R. Moran, R. W. Morris and
Number of quarters before / after a government shutdown D. Y. Sieff (1996), Business Situation, BEA Survey of
Current Business, Vol. 76, March, pp. 1-6, and
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Haver Analytics and
Bundesbank calculations. 1 Approximated by real compensa- L. S. Mataloni (2014), GDP and the Economy – Ad-
tion of US federal employees as defined in the national ac- vance Estimates for the Fourth Quarter of 2013,
counts.
BEA Survey of Current Business, Vol. 94, February,
Deutsche Bundesbank
pp. 1-6.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
15
been only marginally more severe.6 Even in a cooling- down of what had recently been
the event that a renewed budget freeze lively economic activity. At the same time,
should occur in the current quarter, the sig- however, the current discord in the US Con-
nifi cance of lost hours worked in the gov- gress once again highlights the importance
ernment sector, all other things being equal, of political risks for future economic devel-
would likely be insuffi cient to cause GDP opments in the United States.11
growth in the United States to sputter.7
However, concerns are being expressed
that the government shutdown could have
hit overall economic activity in the United
6 Although the latest government shutdown, at 35
States relatively hard.8 A slowdown in
days, was the longest in US history, the relatively small
household consumption growth, for ex- number of furloughed federal employees is likely to
keep the immediate economic costs within historical
ample, appears plausible owing to tempor-
parameters.
ary income losses among government em- 7 Interim funding for the agencies affected by the re-
cent government shutdown was set to expire at mid-
ployees. In addition, owing to the absence
night on 16 February 2019. As this report went to
of government contracts and heightened press, no new appropriations bills had been passed.
8 The chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers,
uncertainty about the future, private sector
Kevin Hassett, is on the record as assuming that the
companies could have slashed their budgets government shutdown could have reduced annualised
economic growth in the fi rst quarter by 0.13 percent-
for investment and laid off staff. Lastly, vari-
age point for every week that it lasted. This means that
ous sovereign functions were temporarily the economy could have lost a total of 0.5 percentage
point of growth. See, for instance, J. Tankersley, Strain
performed on only a limited scale, poten-
of Shutdown Is Spreading As Hot Economy Loses Its
tially resulting in additional frictions.9 Steam, in The New York Times, 16 January 2019. The
Congressional Budget Offi ce thinks that similar losses
are probable. See Congressional Budget Offi ce, The Ef-
As things now stand, it is not possible to fects of the Partial Shutdown Ending in January 2019,
report published on 28 January 2019.
conclusively assess the impact of these add-
9 The US Chamber of Commerce has complained, for
itional drags on growth. Judging by experi- instance, of small and medium-s ized businesses being
unable to receive assistance, regulatory delays in fi rms’
ence of the recent past, however, tempor-
ability to raise additional capital or in the review of
ary budget freezes do not appear to have mergers and acquisitions, inability to receive approvals
to sell new products, hindrances to the processing of
had any notable impact on real fi nal sales to
imports and delays of mortgage approvals. During the
private domestic purchasers. Even in this 2013 government shutdown, the US Offi ce of Man-
agement and Budget (OMB) reported similar con-
latest dispute, the prospect of retrospective
straints. See N. L. Bradley, Ending the Shutdown and
payment of all federal employees’ wages Reopening the Federal Government, letter to the
members of the United States Congress, 8 January
could have cushioned the drag on private 2019, available at https://www.uschamber.com/letter/
consumption.10 Strong employment growth us-chamber-of-commerce-ending-the-shutdown-and-
reopening-the-federal-government and OMB, Impacts
in January likewise appears to indicate that and Costs of the October 2013 Federal Government
the hit taken by the private sector was ini- Shutdown, November 2013.
10 Consistent with procedure during earlier govern-
tially only marginal. Lastly, it remains to be ment shutdowns, the Government Employee Fair
noted that the direct and indirect impacts Treatment Act of 2019, adopted in mid- January 2019,
ensured that all US federal employees’ salaries would
of the government shutdown are likely to be paid retrospectively. Had this act not been passed,
have temporarily dampened GDP. As in the furloughed employees would have had to forgo com-
pensation for this period.
past, normalisation and – to a limited ex- 11 Thus, a decision on whether to raise, suspend or
tent – catching- up effects are to be ex- rescind the debt ceiling, which under current legisla-
tion will take effect as from 2 March, must be made
pected following the resumption of activity. during the current year. If a bipartisan compromise is
not reached, the US Federal Government is in danger
A potential damper to growth in the fi rst
of partially defaulting on its obligations once extraor-
quarter should therefore not be equated to dinary measures are exhausted.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
16
age GDP growth rate declined from 1.8% in Macroeconomic trends
2017 to 1.4% in 2018. Nevertheless, the labour in the euro area
market situation remained favourable. The
average unemployment rate for the September The euro area still only saw moderate eco- Euro area
economic
to November 2018 period remained unchanged nomic growth in the final quarter of 2018, and
growth still
at its cyclical low of 4%. Annual Harmonised leading indicators do not augur an improve- only moderate
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) inflation went ment in the first quarter of 2019, either. Euro-
down once again in January to 1.8%. Against stat’s flash estimate indicates that real GDP in
the backdrop of continued uncertainty sur- the fourth quarter of 2018, as in the third quar-
rounding the outcome of the withdrawal ter, grew by just 0.2% from the previous quar-
negotiations with the EU, sentiment among ter after seasonal adjustment. As a result, the
households and enterprises has recently deteri- annual growth rate dropped to 1.2% and was
orated noticeably. One indicator, the Purchas- thus below the estimated growth rate of po-
ing Managers’ Index for the whole economy, tential output. Moreover, sentiment amongst
was only just above the expansion threshold in enterprises and consumers became even
January. The Bank of England maintained its gloomier in the final months of 2018. This was
monetary policy stance at the beginning of likely a reflection of specific problems in the
February and warned of the risks of a “no deal” euro area, such as domestic tensions in certain
withdrawal from the EU. Member States. The ongoing uncertainty sur-
rounding the outcome of the withdrawal ne-
gotiations between the EU and the United
Poland Kingdom, as well as other external economic
factors, probably put a strain on business con-
Weaker eco- The strong economic growth in Poland weak- fidence, too. Nevertheless, the underlying con-
nomic growth,
ened in the final quarter of 2018. Real GDP ditions for continuing economic expansion
moderate
consumer price grew by 0.5% on the quarter after seasonal ad- within the euro area are still in place. Financing
inflation
justment. For 2018 as a whole, GDP growth of conditions are still favourable, the labour mar-
5.1% was achieved, following 4.8% in 2017. ket situation has improved, and a number of
Short- term indicators suggest that the eco- Member States have rather expansionary fiscal
nomic expansion in the fourth quarter of 2018 policy stances. With the external environment
was driven particularly by buoyant investment providing moderate stimuli, the euro area’s
activity and strong growth in private consump- economic output will likely continue to pick up,
tion. The latter continues to be bolstered by though probably without much momentum for
the extremely favourable labour market. The the time being.
unemployment rate reached a new cyclical low
of 3.5% after seasonal adjustment in the fourth Private consumption is likely to have shown Private
consumption
quarter, and average gross wages and salaries somewhat stronger growth in the fourth quar-
up again
were up by almost 8%. Consumer price infla- ter than in the previous period. In any case, the
tion decreased markedly on the year to 1.1%, seasonally and price- adjusted volume of retail
which was mainly attributable to the significant sales increased distinctly following a slight de-
decline in energy prices. Core inflation (exclud- cline in the third quarter. New car registrations
ing energy and food) increased slightly to 0.5%. also firmed again during the final quarter of
Given the significant simultaneous rise in prod- 2018 following the dislocations associated with
uctivity, the strong wage growth had hardly the introduction of a new standard for measur-
any impact on prices. In light of Poland’s mod- ing exhaust emissions. That said, they still re-
erate consumer price inflation, the National mained clearly below the level of the third
Bank of Poland left its policy rate unchanged. quarter. Households’ propensity to purchase
continued to benefit from the favourable in-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
17
come outlook on account of the improved la-
Sentiment indicators for the euro area
bour market situation. Furthermore, the easing
Percentage balances of positive and negative responses,
of inflationary pressures and the prospect of seasonally adjusted, monthly data
higher minimum wages in a number of coun- +20
Business confidence
tries at the start of 2019 are also likely to have
+15
brought additional impetus.
+10 Services sector
+ 5
Weaker invest- Investment activity probably weakened to-
0
ment activity
wards the end of 2018. Spending on new ma-
– 5
chinery and equipment likely rose only margin- Manufacturing
–10 industry
ally after price adjustment. While the produc-
–15
tion of capital goods saw a steep decline in the
–20 Construction
fourth quarter, imports of capital goods were
–25
probably higher. Capacity utilisation in manu-
–30
facturing still significantly exceeded its longer-
0
term average in January. Given the deteriorat-
Consumer confidence
– 5
ing economic outlook, no major capacity ex-
pansion was undertaken. Construction invest- –10
ment also lost steam in the fourth quarter, at –15
least going by the stagnation in construction –20
output in October and November. Moreover, –25
sentiment surveys by the European Commis- 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19
sion for the construction sector also point to a
Source: European Commission.
certain slowdown in business activity in the Deutsche Bundesbank
fourth quarter.
industrial sectors. The production of capital
Exports to non- Like in the third quarter, exports to non-e uro goods saw a steep decline in the fourth quar-
euro area coun-
area countries rose markedly in value terms in ter, even though motor vehicle production,
tries up again
noticeably the final quarter of 2018 according to foreign which had been heavily scaled back in the third
trade statistics. Besides deliveries to the United quarter in connection with the introduction of
States and China, exports to the United King- the new standard for measuring exhaust emis-
dom have now also shown strong increases. By sions, had picked up again somewhat. The
contrast, exports to Turkey continued to shrink downward trend in the production of inter-
considerably. Since export prices decreased no- mediate and consumer goods continued.
ticeably, the volume of exports is likely to have
gone up significantly. Imports from non- euro While several Member States recorded a slow- Mixed develop-
ments across
area countries saw moderate growth after down in growth in the second half of 2018,
Member States
price adjustment. A sharp increase had been some countries largely maintained their previ-
recorded in the previous quarter, primarily on ous pace of expansion. In France, Q4 economic
the back of a steep rise in imports of capital growth, at 0.3%, remained unchanged on the
goods. Foreign trade between euro area coun- quarter and higher than in the first half of the
tries remained lacklustre in the fourth quarter. year. Growth in domestic demand has none-
theless waned considerably of late, with the
Industrial pro- Industrial production fell considerably in the protests of the “yellow vest” movement having
duction squeez-
final quarter of 2018 after moving sideways in potentially contributed to this decline. Private
ing economic
growth the previous two quarters. This was also a clear consumption spending remained unchanged at
decrease compared with the previous year, and the level of the preceding quarter despite dis-
this sluggishness was broadly based across all posable income rising markedly, and there was

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
18
Unemployment and labour shortages in the euro area
Labour shortages1 in the euro area have in- propriate indicator for the euro area, given
creased signifi cantly over the past two that it has a far longer time series than the
years, reaching a level at mid- year that was job vacancy rate. What is more, the job va-
unprecedented in the history of monetary cancy rate is not calculated using a harmon-
union. The unemployment rate contracted ised method by all Member States. How-
noticeably as the economy recovered, but ever, both sets of statistics present quite a
at around 8%, it was still rather high, par- similar picture in most countries.
ticularly when compared with other eco-
nomic areas. A situation where labour A euro area unemployment rate at the level
shortages are unusually high while a very recorded for the fourth quarter of 2018
large number of people are out of work would, ten years ago, have been accom-
raises the question of the structural state of panied by labour shortages of a much
the euro area labour market. smaller magnitude. This would suggest that
the process of matching labour market sup-
Mounting labour shortages are evident not ply and demand has become increasingly
only in the European Commission’s business diffi cult over time, and is shown by a right
surveys but also in the job vacancy rate shift in the Beveridge curve. The decline in
published by Eurostat. The relation between the unemployment rate on the back of an
the job vacancy rate and the unemploy- economy that has been in recovery since
ment rate is usually negative, and it is traced the middle of 2013 has been refl ected by
using the Beveridge curve. Shifts along a movements along the shifted Beveridge
Beveridge curve are an indication of cyclical curve. Over the past two quarters, the mag-
changes.2 Thus, an upswing will tend to nitude of labour shortages diminished
push up job vacancy numbers and depress somewhat, and the unemployment rate
unemployment, while a downturn has the continued its gentle decline.
opposite effect, lowering the number of va-
cant positions and driving up joblessness. All four large euro area countries have seen
the cyclical labour market recovery lead to a
Another thing which the Beveridge curve decline in the rate of unemployment, and
can reveal is structural changes in the la-
bour market. For instance, if the Beveridge
curve shifts over time, this can point to 1 “Shortage of labour force” is one possible response
in the European Commission’s business survey to the
changes in the geographical, sectoral and question “What main factors are currently limiting your
skill mismatch of labour supply and demand production?”. The shortage of labour in manufacturing
is surveyed in the fi rst month of every quarter and ex-
or a change in reallocation effi ciency. If the pressed as the percentage of enterprises that consider
curve shifts to the left, it shows that labour this factor to be a limit to production. The quarterly
value is computed as the average of the labour short-
market matching has improved; a shift to age in the fi rst month of the respective quarter and in
the right shows that it has deteriorated. the fi rst month of the following quarter.
2 One model which can help interpret movements in
the relation between job vacancies and the unemploy-
This box presents the Beveridge curve based ment rate can be found in O. J. Blanchard, P. Diamond,
R. E. Hall and J. Yellen (1989), The Beveridge Curve,
not on the job vacancy rate but the Euro- Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, pp. 1-76.
pean Commission’s indicator of labour 3 See B. Bonthuis, V. Jarvis and J. Vanhala (2016), Shifts
in euro area Beveridge curves and their determinants,
shortages in manufacturing.3 This is an ap- IZA Journal of Labor Policy 5:20.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
19
since spring 2017, at least, this has coin-
Euro area Beveridge curve
cided with mounting labour shortages.
Seasonally adjusted quarterly data
However, differences of a greater magni-
Labour shortage in manufacturing as a percentage of
tude come to light over the question of surveyed enterprises 1
18
whether there has been a structural change
in the matching effi ciency of the labour 16
Q4 2018
market, i.e. the direction of a shift in the
14
Beveridge curve. In Germany, there are clear
signs of an improvement in labour market 12
matching effi ciency since 2008 – the Beve-
10 Q1
ridge curve can be seen to have shifted to 2008
Q2
8 2001
the left. Labour shortages have risen dra-
Q2 2011
matically since the beginning of 2017, but 6
the unemployment rate was at a very low
Q2
4 2013
level compared not just with other coun- Q1 1998
Q1 2004
tries but also over time. In France, by con- 2
trast, there are signs of a right- shift in the
0
Beveridge curve compared to where it
7 8 9 10 11 12 13
stood immediately prior to the onset of the Unemployment rate (%)
fi nancial and economic crisis.4 Italy’s Beve- Sources: European Commission, Eurostat and Bundesbank cal-
culations. 1 Quarterly value computed as the average of the la-
ridge curve appears to have barely changed, bour shortage in the first month of the respective quarter and
in the first month of the following quarter.
while shifts in Spain’s labour shortage indi-
Deutsche Bundesbank
cator are diffi cult to interpret on account of
strong fl uctuations in the time series. For labour market supply and demand appears
Spain, a Beveridge curve based on the job to be more diffi cult than it was at the time
vacancy rate indicates a tendency towards the fi nancial and economic crisis erupted.
improved labour market matching effi ciency This presents a challenge for economic and
as the economy improved in recent years.5 labour market policymakers.
Labour shortages in all four large euro area
countries have been easing over the last
two to three quarters. In Italy, this coincided
with an increase in the unemployment rate
in the fourth quarter. France, meanwhile,
saw its unemployment rate rise in the third 4 This is consistent with the estimates made by
quarter of 2018 and remain unchanged in Bonthuis et al., whose analysis uses data up to the fi rst
quarter of 2014. They fi nd that, since the crisis, the
the last three months of the year. Develop- Beveridge curve has shifted to the right in the euro
ments in these two countries can be seen area, France and Spain, and to the left in Germany.
Their fi ndings for Italy are inconclusive. See B. Bonthuis,
as evidence of a deterioration in cyclical la- V. Jarvis and J. Vanhala (2016), op. cit.
bour market conditions. 5 Boscá et al. (2017) combine the job vacancy data
which Eurostat has been publishing for Spain since
2010 with older time series taken from other sources.
All in all, there are indications that the la- They demonstrate that the Beveridge curve shifted to
the right between 2008 and the middle of 2009 and
bour market in the euro area is still experi- that this shift contributed to the increase in the un-
encing pronounced structural problems. employment rate. Between 2014 and 2016, the Beve-
ridge curve shifted to the left towards its pre- crisis pos-
While it is true that euro area unemploy- ition. See J. E. Boscá, R. Doménech, J. Ferri and
J. R. García (2017), Shifts in the Beveridge curve in
ment diminished over the course of the
Spain and their macroeconomic effects, Revista de
economic recovery, the process of matching Economía Aplicada 75 (Vol. XXV), pp. 5-27.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
20
real GDP increased substantially, while Belgium
Aggregate output in the euro area *
and Austria achieved only moderate growth.
Price and seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
112
Labour market conditions continued to im- Further improve-
110 prove in the euro area, albeit to a lesser extent ment in the
labour market
108 than in previous periods. The number of un-
106 2010 = 100, log scale employed people in the fourth quarter fell by
GDP
146,000 compared to the third quarter of
104
2018, after seasonal adjustment, and by 1.2
102
million on the year. As a result, the standard-
100
ised unemployment rate came down slightly to
98 7.9% by December. Thus, the unemployment
rate was only 0.6 percentage point higher than
Lin scale
%
Quarter-on-quarter change during the cyclical low prior to the onset of the
+1
financial and economic crisis. Since then, the
0 rate has even reached 12.1%. According to Eu-
rostat’s flash estimate, the number of people in
–1
employment rose more slowly again in the
–2 fourth quarter than in the first half of 2018, at
0.3% on the quarter. The labour shortage in
–3
manufacturing and the services sectors also
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2018
continued to drop slightly, although it still re-
Source: Eurostat. * Affected by a level shift in Irish GDP from
mained at a high level. The coexistence of size-
Q1 2015 onwards.
Deutsche Bundesbank able unemployment and a significant labour
shortage suggests there are problems relating
hardly any growth in gross fixed capital forma- to the functioning of the euro area labour mar-
tion. By contrast, exports increased sharply, kets (see the box on pp. 18f. for more informa-
boosted by aircraft deliveries. On the other tion). Year- on- year wage growth as measured
hand, inventory stocks contracted. In Italy, by gross wages per employee continued its
overall economic output declined for the climb in the third quarter to 2.6%.
second quarter in succession, with economic
activity being depressed by domestic demand. Consumer prices in the euro area in the fourth Q4 consumer
price inflation
Private consumption spending had likely ex- quarter of 2018 rose by a seasonally adjusted
a little weaker
panded somewhat in line with the price- 0.3% on the quarter, which was not as steep due to volatile
components
adjusted moderate rise in retail sales, but in- an increase as in the previous quarters. The
vestment probably fell again. Economic activity growth in energy prices, in particular, initially
was bolstered by foreign business; Italian ex- decelerated on the back of the decline in crude
ports of goods climbed significantly in the oil prices, even moving into negative territory
fourth quarter, while goods imports were up at the end of the quarter. Much the same was
only moderately. In Spain, the economic upturn true for food, especially unprocessed food
even accelerated slightly again in the fourth products, which had become significantly more
quarter due to lively demand on the part of expensive in the summer on account of the ex-
households and general government as well as tremely dry weather. Service price inflation was
the strong rise in exports. On the other hand, also somewhat weaker, whilst, on the other
gross fixed capital formation was unable to hand, the prices for industrial goods excluding
fully maintain the high level reached in the pre- energy picked up moderately, as in the preced-
vious quarter. In the Netherlands and Portugal, ing quarters. Accordingly, annual headline HICP
inflation contracted from 2.1% in the third

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
21
quarter to 1.9%, while the rate excluding en-
Consumer prices in the euro area by
ergy and food remained unchanged at 1.0%.
component
According to the Eurostat flash estimate, an-
Year-on-year change
nual headline HICP inflation in January 2019
HICP Components (contributions):
likely fell to 1.4%, mainly on account of the on- Percentage change Percentage points
+3.0
going deceleration in energy price inflation. Energy
Food
Industrial goods excl. energy
+2.5 Services
Average annual Average annual consumer price inflation in
inflation in 2018
2018 rose slightly to 1.7%, up from 1.5% in
at 1.7% +2.0
2017. Like last year, consumer prices excluding
energy and food were only up by 1.0%. How-
+1.5
ever, this figure obscures considerable differ-
ences in how the prices of sub-c omponents are
+1.0
developing. One such sub-component, non-
durable goods price inflation, increased in par- +0.5
ticular, while the prices of travel services accel-
erated less strongly than one year earlier. 0
Deterioration The trajectory of sentiment indicators in recent –0.5
in business
months suggests that economic growth in the
and consumer
sentiment euro area is likely to continue, though at a –1.0
more subdued rate. The Purchasing Managers’ 2010 20112012 20132014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Index for the whole economy dropped in Janu-
Sources: Eurostat and the ECB.
ary to its lowest level in over five years, remain- Deutsche Bundesbank
ing only just above the expansion threshold.
The same is also true of the manufacturing and in January, except for the construction sector
services sub- indices. The European Commis- indicator. Nonetheless, industrial and consumer
sion’s indicators of business and consumer sen- confidence remained above their long- term
timent also declined considerably in most cases average.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
22
Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money The ECB Governing Council kept the key inter- … and leaves
key interest rates
market developments est rates unchanged in the reporting period.
unchanged
The main refinancing rate thus remains at 0%,
ECB Governing As it had announced at previous meetings, the while the rate of the marginal lending facility
Council decides
ECB Governing Council decided at its Decem- stands at 0.25% and the deposit facility rate at
to end net asset
purchases … ber meeting to end net purchases under the -0.40%. In the context of its forward guidance
expanded asset purchase programme (APP) on the key interest rates, the Governing Coun-
after December 2018. At the same time, it en- cil continues to expect them to remain at their
hanced its forward guidance on the future de- present levels at least through the summer of
velopment of reinvestments. According to the 2019, and in any case for as long as necessary
new wording, the Governing Council intends to ensure the continued sustained convergence
to continue reinvesting, in full, the principal of inflation to levels that are below, but close
payments from maturing securities purchased to, 2% over the medium term.
under the APP for an extended period of time
past the date when it starts raising the key In addition, the ECB Governing Council an- ECB Governing
Council adopts
interest rates, and in any case for as long as nounced various technical parameters for re-
technical par-
necessary to maintain favourable liquidity con- investments.1 It intends, inter alia, to maintain ameters for
reinvestment
ditions and an ample degree of monetary ac- the size of its cumulative net purchases under
commodation. each constituent programme of the APP at
their respective end- December 2018 levels.
However, limited temporary deviations in the
overall size and composition of the APP may
Money market interest rates
in the euro area occur during the reinvestment phase for oper-
ational reasons. The principal payments from
maturing securities are to be reinvested over
% Marginal lending rate
+0.6 Main refinancing rate the year in line with the principle of market
Three-month EURIBOR 1
EONIA 1 neutrality. In the case of the public sector pur-
Deposit facility rate
+0.4 chase programme (PSPP), the allocation of
securities across eligible euro area jurisdicitons
+0.2
will continue to be guided by the respective
national central banks’ (NCBs) subscription to
0
the ECB capital key, as amended over time. As
a rule, therefore, redemptions will be reinvested
–0.2
in the jurisdiciton in which the principal repay-
–0.4 ments are made, but the portfolio allocation
Basis across jurisdicitons will continue to be adjusted
Money market risk premium: points
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1, 2 20 with a view to bringing the share of the PSPP
portfolio into closer alignment with the re-
10 spective NCBs’ subscription to the ECB capital
key, as amended over time. These adjustments
0
to the portfolio’s composition will be made
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Sources: ECB and Bloomberg. 1 Monthly averages. 2 Three-
month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. • Average
1 The technical parameters agreed upon by the ECB Gov-
1 to 14 February 2019.
erning Council were published in an ECB press release on
Deutsche Bundesbank
13 December 2018.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
23
Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve periods between 31 October liquidity was reduced by the decrease in gen-
2018 and 29 January 2019 saw euro area li- eral government deposits with the Eurosys-
quidity needs stemming from autonomous tem, which amounted to an average of
factors increase slightly again (see the table €231.3 billion over the December 2018-
below). At €1,412.6 billion in the December January 2019 period. This was €51.8 billion
2018- January 2019 reserve period, they stood lower than the average for the period from
€55.9 billion above the average of the period September to October 2018. The minimum
preceding the periods under review reserve requirement stood at €127.4 billion in
(September- October 2018). Over the two re- the December-January reserve period, repre-
porting periods, the sum of the autonomous senting an overall decline of €0.7 billion.
factors fl uctuated between €1,310.1 billion
and €1,532.0 billion. The increase in liquidity The outstanding tender volume changed only
needs was mainly due to the liquidity- very slightly during the reporting period. In
absorbing decline in the combined total of the December- January reserve period, it aver-
net foreign assets and other factors, which aged around €732 billion, putting it just short
are considered together as a result of liquidity- of €3 billion below the corresponding fi gure
neutral valuation effects. In aggregate terms, for the September- October 2018 period (see
these fell by €83.2 billion. A seasonal increase the lower chart on p. 25). The decrease
of €24.5 billion in banknotes in circulation to stemmed mainly from voluntary early repay-
€1,218.8 billion over the year- end period also ments of the second series of targeted longer-
pushed up liquidity needs (see the upper chart term refi nancing operations (TLTRO-II), which
on p. 25). On the other hand, demand for came to around €3 billion. This translates into
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
2018/2019
31 October 19 December
to to
Item 18 December 29 January
I Provision (+) or absorption (–) of c entral bank balances due to changes
in autonomous factors
1 Banknotes in circulation (increase: –) – 8.1 – 16.4
2 Government deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 42.9 + 8.9
3 Net foreign assets1 – 0.1 + 30.7
4 Other factors1 – 38.5 – 75.3
Total – 3.8 – 52.1
II Monetary policy o perations of the Eurosystem
1 Open market operations
(a) Main refi nancing operations – 0.1 + 1.1
(b) Longer-term refi nancing o perations – 1.4 – 2.6
(c) Other operations + 19.5 + 10.5
2 Standing facilities
(a) Marginal lending facility + 0.0 + 0.0
(b) Deposit facility (increase: –) – 4.1 – 4.1
Total + 13.9 + 4.9
III Change in credit i nstitutions’ c urrent accounts (I + II) + 10.4 – 47.3
IV Change in the m inimum reserve requirement (i ncrease: –) – 0.1 – 0.6
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14• and 15• of the Statistical Section of this Monthly
Report . 1 Including end-of-q uarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
24
rose to €7.9 billion on average during the
Central bank interest rates, money
market rates and excess liquidity period December- January (+€1.0 billion, con-
trasted with the period September- October
Daily data
2018). At the same time, comparing averages
% p.a.
0 for the same periods, the outstanding volume
Main refinancing rate
of three- month tenders rose by €1.3 billion to
–0.1
EONIA €5.0 billion.
Deposit facility rate
–0.2
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
ECB basket
–0.3 ECB EXTended basket The bulk of the central bank liquidity con-
tinued to be provided by the Eurosystem
–0.4
through the monetary policy asset purchase
–0.5 programmes, which accounted for around
–0.6 78% of the total liquidity made available
Excess liquidity1 € bn through open market operations in the re-
2,000
porting period. The average balance sheet
1,800 holdings of all purchase programmes in the
Mean value for the reserve
maintenance period 2 December- January period stood at €2,653 bil-
1,600
lion, representing an increase of €30 billion
0
compared to the corresponding average hold-
Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb.
2018 2019 ings during the September- October 2018 re-
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cur- serve period (see the adjacent table).
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still on-
going.
The abovementioned increase in autonomous
Deutsche Bundesbank
factors prevented a further rise in the level of
Eurosystem purchase programmes excess liquidity, as had been the case through-
out 2018. It reached an average value of
€ billion
€1,845 billion during the December- January
Change Balance sheet reserve period, thus dropping by €29 billion
across the holdings as
two reserve at 8 February compared to the September- October 2018
Programme periods 2019
period. In the intervening period, excess li-
Active programmes
PSPP + 14.2 2,102.8 quidity came in slightly higher, averaging
CBPP3 + 2.0 262.0
€1,889 billion, before falling again, mainly on
CSPP + 4.1 177.9
ABSPP 1 – 0.2 26.7 account of the increased liquidity needs from
Completed programmes
SMP 2 + 0.2 69.1 autonomous factors over Christmas and New
CBPP1 – 0.1 4.2
Year.
CBPP2 – 0.0 4.0
1 Decline mainly due to maturities that were higher than
In view of the very favourable liquidity condi-
the purchases with value date in this period. 2 Increase
due to use of amortised cost accounting at end of quarter. tions, overnight rates continued to be geared
Deutsche Bundesbank
to the rate on the deposit facility (see the
chart above). In the December 2018- January
a total of approximately €719 billion still out- 2019 reserve period, the EONIA stood at
standing in the four TLTRO-II operations. The -0.37% on average, as it had in the period
overall volume of standard tenders changed September- October 2018. At €2.5 billion
only marginally during the period under con- (€3.0 billion in the period September- October
sideration, with modest increases being re- 2018), the underlying EONIA turnover for
corded for the main refi nancing operation unsecured overnight deposits remained low.
and the three- month tenders. For instance, Secured overnight deposits, on the other
demand for the main refi nancing operation hand, mainly traded below the deposit facility

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
25
rate. On the GC Pooling platform, overnight
Autonomous factors in the Eurosystem
trades in the ECB basket were again executed
€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
at -0.42% on average in the two periods con-
sidered. Overnight money in the EXTended + 750
basket, with its larger set of eligible securities, + 500 Net foreign assets1
traded at -0.38% on average in the December + 250
Government deposits
2018- January 2019 period. In the same period, 0 with the Eurosystem
at €7.0 billion on average, aggregate turnover – 250
across both segments remained below the – 500 Other factors1
figure of €8.5 billion recorded in the – 750
September- October 2018 period. Over the –1,000 Banknotes in circulation
year- end period, given the low trading vol- –1,250
umes, only minor and temporary price move- 2017 2018 2019
ments were observed on the money market; Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Including end-
of-quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
at -0.45%, the rate for secured overnight de-
Deutsche Bundesbank
posits in the ECB basket was 6 basis points
lower on the last day of the year than on the
previous day. The EONIA, by contrast, was
practically unchanged at the end of the year
at -0.36%.
Outstanding liquidity broken down by open market operations in the euro area
€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
3,300
Main refinancing operations
3,000 Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
2,700
Second series of targeted longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)
2,400 First series of targeted longer-term
refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)
2,100 Purchase programmes
1,800
1,500
1,200
900
600
300
0
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
26
gradually and calibrated appropriately in order 8 February. The build-u p of APP holdings ended
to safeguard orderly market conditions. when net purchases were discontinued as from
1 January 2019. Nevertheless, the holdings re-
Confidence In December 2018, the ECB Governing Council corded in the balance sheet may vary; this is
prevails that
decided to end net asset purchases given that, due, on the one hand, to the smoothing over
inflation will rise
even after net despite data being somewhat weaker than ex- time of reinvestments as part of the agreed
asset purchases
pected of late, the underlying strength of do- technical parameters and, on the other hand,
end
mestic demand continues to support euro area to APP holdings being carried at amortised
growth and a gradual rise in inflationary pres- cost.2
sures. This explains the confidence that the sus-
tained convergence of inflation to its aim will The tendency towards low repayments under Repayments
under TLTRO-II
proceed and will be maintained even after the the voluntary repayment options for the second
still low
end of net asset purchases under the APP. series of targeted longer- term refinancing op-
erations (TLTRO-II) also continued in December.
Weaker short- At its January meeting, the Governing Council A further option to make repayments in three
term growth
found that the current data continued to be operations on 19 December was used by Euro-
momentum, but
wage pressures weaker than expected. Lower demand from system counterparties only to the extent of
building
abroad and a range of country and sector- around €3.1 billion. At present, a TLTRO-II vol-
specific factors were cited as the reasons for ume of around €719 billion is still outstanding.
this. Against this backdrop, the short- term
growth momentum is likely to be weaker than From mid- November, excess liquidity declined Slight overall
decline in excess
anticipated, although, at the same time, do- slightly overall, amounting to €1,854 billion at
liquidity
mestic demand will continue to be under- last count. At year- end, an increase in liquidity-
pinned by supportive financing conditions, fa- absorbing autonomous factors induced by sea-
vourable labour market dynamics and rising sonal movements caused a temporary dip in
wage growth. With regard to inflation, the excess liquidity to €1,725 billion (see the box
Governing Council stressed the importance on pp. 23ff.). Now that net asset purchases
that labour cost pressures gain in strength and under the APP have ended, the main driver of
breadth in a setting of high capacity utilisation recent increases in excess liquidity no longer
and tightening labour markets. This, according exists. In the months ahead, the development
to the Governing Council, will nurture confi- of excess liquidity is therefore likely to depend
dence in the continued sustained convergence primarily on autonomous factors.
of inflation to levels that are below, but close
to, 2% over the medium term. With the exception of a temporary increase to- Money market
rates stable,
wards the end of 2018, the unsecured o vernight
except for
End to expan- On 8 February 2019, the Eurosystem’s asset money market rate (EONIA) kept within a range fluctuations
sion in securities at year- end
holdings under the APP stood at €2,569.4 bil- of between -0.36% and -0.37%. Although the
portfolio
lion. At €2,102.8 billion, the largest share of secured overnight rate (STOXX GC Pooling) also
asset holdings was attributable to the PSPP. exhibited a small degree of volatility at the end
Most recently, the average residual maturity of of the year, it remained just below the deposit
the PSPP portfolio fell slightly to 7.3 years. The facility rate. The three- month EURIBOR went
outstanding amounts acquired to date under up marginally in the reporting period, standing
the third covered bond purchase programme at -0.31% at last report.
(CBPP3) and the asset- backed securities pur-
chase programme (ABSPP) amounted to €262.0
billion and €26.7 billion respectively. Holdings 2 In particular, the difference between the acquisition value
and the redemption value is spread over the residual ma-
under the corporate sector purchase pro-
turity of a security, treated as part of interest income and
gramme (CSPP) totalled €177.9 billion as at measured at amortised cost.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
27
Money market The monetary policy decisions taken by the ECB
Monetary aggregates and counterparts
forward rates
Governing Council in December 2018 had no
in the euro area
record distinct
decline in direct impact on the money market forward Year-on-year change,
December rates derived from the EONIA swap curve. end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
However, a marked decline in forward rates M3 and components
Contribution of components in percentage points
began in the days after the meeting. At present, +8
M3 – M2 Percentage growth
a higher deposit facility rate is thus – depend- M2 – M1 in M3
ing on the assumed size of the first interest rate +6 M1
hike – only factored into forward rates in the
+4
period from the second quarter of 2020 to the
middle of 2021.3 Recent surveys also indicate
+2
that the expected time for an initial policy rate
increase has been moved somewhat further 0
into the future than at the beginning of De-
cember. It still applies that money market for- –2
M3 and counterparts
ward rates derived from the EONIA swap curve Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points +12
tend to indicate a later date for an initial inter-
Remaining counterparts
est rate hike than surveys.4 Securities-based lending to
general government +10
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Net external assets
The change in market participants’ interest rate Credit to the + 8
private sector 2
expectations was probably triggered by the
Percentage growth
downward revisions of their expectations re- in M3 + 6
garding the economic outlook, both globally
+ 4
and in the euro area. The changed assessment
was attributable, on the one hand, to weaker-
+ 2
than- expected economic data in December
and, on the other hand, to the persistent un- 0
certainty in connection with geopolitical fac-
tors and the risks to economic activity emanat- – 2
ing from protectionist tendencies.
– 4
+8 of which:
Monetary developments Loans to selected sectors
Contribution of sectors in percentage points
in the euro area +6
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Loans to private In the fourth quarter of 2018, the broad mon- +4 Households 5
sector remain
etary aggregate M3 again recorded robust Percentage change in loans
key driver of +2 to the private sector 2
monetary growth despite the Eurosystem further redu-
growth
cing the volume of its monthly net asset pur-
0
chases. The annual growth rate of M3 stood at
–2
3 Estimates as to how large the first interest rate increase
might plausibly be can be derived from surveys on policy 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
rate expectations and currently range from 10 to 25 basis
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se,
points. an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
4 For more information on the discrepancy between the curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash
point in time of the first interest rate hike derived from pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial
money market forward rates and from interest rate surveys corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions
respectively, see also Deutsche Bundesbank, Monetary pol-
serving households.
icy and banking business, Monthly Report, August 2018,
Deutsche Bundesbank
p. 26.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
28
Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Assets Q4 2018 Q3 2018 Liabilities Q4 2018 Q3 2018
Credit to private non-MFIs Holdings against central government2 – 24.2 76.4
in the euro area 69.6 105.2
Loans 63.8 91.1 Monetary aggregate M3 165.6 75.4
Loans, adjusted1 93.8 88.2 of which components:
Securities 5.9 14.0 Currency in circulation and
overnight deposits (M1) 115.7 131.9
Credit to general government Other short-term deposits
in the euro area 39.6 47.9 (M2-M1) 12.3 – 37.7
Loans 3.5 – 16.1 Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 37.7 – 18.8
Securities 36.0 64.2
Longer-term fi nancial liabilities 23.4 29.7
of which:
Net external assets 38.4 39.7 Capital and reserves 21.2 28.3
Other longer-term fi nancial
Other counterparts of M3 17.3 – 11.6 liabilities 2.1 1.3
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
just over 4% at year- end, i.e. only ½ percent- corporations have shown no signs – amidst
age point lower than at the end of 2017. Loans relatively weak financial asset formation over-
to the domestic private sector remained the all – of sustainable shifts into other deposit
key driver of monetary growth. Demand for types or other domestic or foreign assets.5 By
loans was bolstered by the still favourable fi- contrast, households continued their strong ac-
nancing conditions, high levels of capacity util- cumulation of overnight deposits. Given their
isation and the positive labour market situation pronounced aversion to risk and the persist-
in the euro area. However, the considerable ently low level of interest rate spreads between
contraction in economic activity and the associ- the various deposit types, households con-
ated marked deterioration in economic senti- tinued to prefer extremely liquid forms of in-
ment should explain why loan growth in the vestment. In addition to a build-u p of overnight
euro area has not accelerated further since deposits, monetary growth in the reporting
mid-2018. According to the latest Bank Lend- quarter was amplified by a continued increase
ing Survey (BLS), the euro area bank managers in short- term savings deposits as well as by
questioned stated that they had eased their higher inflows to marketable instruments.
lending policies only marginally on balance in
the reporting quarter. Individual countries re- Among the counterparts, the granting of loans Loans to private
sector represent
ported credit standards and conditions being to the euro area private sector, adjusted for
largest contribu-
tightened. loan sales and securitisation, again represented tion to monet-
ary growth
the largest contribution to monetary growth.
M3 growth In the fourth quarter of 2018, monetary growth The ongoing recovery of loans to households
driven by house-
once again stemmed primarily from the rise in and enterprises seen over the past four years
holds’ sustained
build-u p of over- overnight deposits. However, these inflows de- thus continued in 2018, though without accel-
night deposits
clined perceptibly over the last few quarters, erating further in the second half of the year.
mainly due to the waning interest of enter- This was due to the fact that bank lending to
prises in this type of deposit. This process, non- financial corporations did not grow as dy-
which – in the case of non- financial corpor- namically in the autumn months as in the pre-
ations – was generally observed across all four
large euro area countries, was also supported
by the gradual increase in interest rates for
5 Financial accounts data for the fourth quarter of 2018
longer- term deposits of late. Thus far, however, are not yet available.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
29
ceding quarters, while lending to households
Loans to non-financial corporations
rose slightly once more. in the euro area*
€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data,
Loans to house- Loans to households thus continued on the up- seasonally adjusted
holds still pre-
ward trajectory observed since the end of 2014, +60
dominantly for Extended by the euro area MFI sector 1
house purchase with their annual growth rate up again slightly
+50
of which: MFIs in ...
to 3.3%. The largest net inflows stemmed from
+40 ... France
banks in France and Germany, although Italy ... Italy
and a number of smaller countries recorded +30 ... Spain
... Germany
perceptible inflows as well. Once again, loans +20
for house purchase made by far the largest +10
contribution to growth in loans to households;
0
in fact, it was even somewhat higher than in
–10
the previous three- month period. Growth in
–20
consumer credit, which is less substantial in
–30
quantitative terms, slowed down somewhat in
recent quarters. –40
–50
Financing The continued rise in bank lending for house –60
conditions for
purchase reflects the marked increase in the
enterprises and 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
households demand among households for loans as re-
remain Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculation. * Loans to non-fin-
ported by the euro area banks surveyed in the ancial corporations and quasi-corporations, adjusted for loan
favourable sales and securitisation. 1 Also adjusted for positions arising
BLS for the final quarter of 2018. According to
from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
these banks, together with the persistently low Deutsche Bundesbank
general level of interest rates, housing market
Securities-based lending to general
prospects and price developments had a posi- government in the euro area
tive impact on demand in this loan segment.
€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Consumer confidence also helped to push up
+700 Extended by the euro area MFI sector
demand, though to a lesser extent than in pre- of which
+600
Eurosystem
vious quarters. The euro area banks surveyed as
+500 Other MFIs
part of the BLS barely revised their credit stand-
+400
ards for lending for house purchase, leaving +300
them virtually unchanged, while overall credit +200
conditions were eased somewhat. +100
0
No further Net inflows in loans to non- financial corpor- –100
acceleration of –200
ations in the fourth quarter proved more mod-
growth in loans
to non- financial erate than in the second and third quarters. As 13 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
corporations
a result, the annual growth rate declined Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank
slightly to stand at 4.0% at the end of Decem-
ber while still remaining well above its level one
year earlier. In the opinion of the bank man- sources, when viewed in isolation, once again
agers who responded to the BLS, demand for had a dampening effect on demand. With re-
loans by euro area non- financial corporations spect to their lending policies, bank managers
during the reporting quarter was chiefly attrib- reported next to no change in their credit
utable to the low general interest rate level, standards and only a marginal net easing of
coupled with elevated financing needs for fixed credit conditions for the euro area as a whole.
investment. Enterprises’ internal financing re- Individual countries, including Italy, in fact saw

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
30
domestic banks in the fourth quarter of the
Interest rates on bank deposits
in Germany* year stagnated again following four consecu-
tive quarters characterised by sizeable inflows.
% p.a., monthly data
This was probably attributable to the marked
Time deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
... up to 2 years slowdown in the economy. The Spanish econ-
... over 2 years
omy, on the other hand, kept up its pace of
4 Overall volume1
growth. In this case, the renewed net outflows
Savings deposits redeemable
at notice of ... in this credit segment probably arose mainly
3 ... up to 3 months
... over 3 months from a persistently strong reliance of firms on
equity finance.
2
Besides loans, MFIs’ holdings of government Securitised lend-
1 bonds again played a part in fostering monet- ing to general
government’s
ary growth. However, this counterpart’s contri- contribution to
Overnight deposits M3 growth
0 bution to M3 growth over the past two years
slackens further
New business2 gradually slackened to stand at just 1 percent-
3 age point at the end of 2018. This resulted
from a gradual scaling back of the Eurosystem’s
monthly net purchases of securities (see the
2
chart on p. 29). Inflows to securitised lending
to the euro area private sector were negligible
1
in the fourth quarter.
0
The net external position of the MFI sector Monetary
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 2018 served as a further pillar of monetary growth in growth also
supported by
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations. 1 Ac- the past two quarters, buoyed by the persist- net external
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
position
weighted interest rates across sectors. Interest rate levels for ently high current account surplus prevailing in
overnight and savings deposits may also be interpreted as new
business due to potential daily changes in interest rates. 2 Ac- the euro area. On top of this, net capital out-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Volume-
weighted interest rates across sectors and maturities. Unlike flows in portfolio investment by the non- MFI
the overall volume of contracts (i.e. deposit contracts on the
balance sheet at the end of the month), the volume of new sector recently came to a halt. In particular, do-
business (i.e. all contracts concluded in the course of a month)
mestic investors’ demand for securities invest-
is explicitly recorded for time deposits only.
Deutsche Bundesbank ments in non- euro area countries receded sub-
stantially in the course of the year. At the same
a tightening of credit conditions, emanating time, non- resident investors continued to ex-
inter alia from increased refinancing costs and hibit a somewhat muted interest in euro area
banks’ balance sheet constraints. securities. While the Eurosystem further re-
duced its purchases of securities, and in so
Growth in loans The differences at the national level were more doing probably strengthened the net demand
to non- financial
clearly perceptible for loans to non- financial from these investors per se, the persistently
corporations
accounted for corporations, in contrast to loans to house- negative yield spread in the euro area relative
by banks in
holds. Growth in this credit segment was again to most other economic areas, as well as the
Germany and
France mainly driven by the contributions of banks heightened degree of political uncertainty in
domiciled in Germany and France (see the chart some parts of the euro area, likely served to
on p. 29). In this context, German-b ased banks weaken foreign investors’ demand for euro
bolstered their lending to non- financial corpor- area securities overall.
ations domiciled in other euro area countries,
while growth in lending to domestic enter- In the quarter under review, a dampening ef-
prises waned (see p. 31). In Italy, net lending by fect on monetary growth emanated from mon-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
31
Decline in mon- etary capital, with significant net inflows being
Lending and deposits of monetary
etary capital
recorded for the second consecutive quarter
comes to a halt fi nancial institutions in Germany*
after years of decline. Given the continued top-
ping up of capital and reserves by banks, this
can largely be explained by the fact that the
reduction in non- banks’ holdings of bank debt
securities with longer maturities gradually fell
away. This was particularly true of debt secur-
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl ows, end-of-quarter data,
ities issued by banks in Germany and France, seasonally adjusted
but also, of late, in Spain and – to a lesser ex- 2018
tent – Italy. It is likely that banks’ interest in this Item Q3 Q4
form of financing is gradually picking up again, Deposits of domestic non-MFIs1
for two reasons; first, in order to lock in interest Overnight 29.6 41.0
With an agreed maturity of
rates, and second, on account of the declining up to 2 years – 6.1 – 3.2
maturities of the Eurosystem’s longer- term refi- over 2 years – 6.4 – 0.5
Redeemable at notice of
nancing operations.
up to 3 months 0.3 – 0.3
over 3 months – 1.2 – 1.5
Lending
to domestic general government
German banks’ deposit and
Loans – 5.5 – 0.1
Securities – 5.8 – 5.8
lending business with
to domestic enterprises and
domestic customers households
Loans2 29.1 23.4
of which: to households3 15.0 16.5
Deposit growth German banks’ deposit business with domestic
to non-fi nancial
still dominated
customers regained considerable momentum corporations4 10.7 7.2
by overnight
deposits in the final quarter of 2018. Once again, cur- Securities – 4.9 – 2.6
rent growth was fuelled by strong expansion in * As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but
overnight deposits, with households, in par- excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi nancial institutions
(MFIs) here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter
ticular, showing a renewed strong appetite for
data, adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enter-
overnight deposits. The ongoing heightened prises, households and general government excluding central
government. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 In-
interest in overnight deposits in this sector is
cluding non-profi t institutions serving households. 4 Non-
probably due to the sustained increase in dis- fi nancial corporations and quasi-c orporations.
posable income, combined with the low yield Deutsche Bundesbank
advantages to be had on alternative secure de-
posit types. Alongside households, other finan- curities issued by domestic non-b anks. For one
cial corporations – a sector which also encom- thing, from the autumn of 2015, the banks
passes mutual funds – likewise greatly boosted continued to scale back their stocks of domes-
their holdings of overnight deposits. This devel- tic sovereign bonds. For another, they also re-
opment is likely to have been attributable, not duced their holdings of securities issued by the
least, to the temporarily high level of uncer- private sector, primarily shedding domestic en-
tainty in the European capital markets. terprises’ shares in the final quarter of 2018.
Moderate Banks’ lending business with the domestic non- Reflecting the economic slowdown, lending to Less vibrant
increase in lending on the
bank sector again expanded moderately in the the domestic private sector in the second half
lending business whole
with non- banks reporting quarter, this growth being driven – as of 2018 also lost a great deal of momentum.
on balance
in previous quarters – by lending to the domes- This was due, in particular, to a pronounced
tic private sector. By contrast, on the back of deceleration in the growth rate of loans to
falling share prices and dwindling bond yields, non- financial corporations. During the fourth
banks further reduced their net holdings of se- quarter, this downturn mainly applied to short-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
32
large- volume loans in the long-t erm segment,
Loans* by German banks to the domestic
while interest on short- term loans stood at
private non-financial sector
2.1% and 1.0% respectively of late (see the
Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data,
seasonally adjusted chart on p. 33).
Non-financial corporations1
+6
Maturity contributions in percentage points
The answers provided in the latest BLS do not Lending policies
+5 Up to 1 year remain favour-
Over 1 year and up to 5 years point to any major changes in lending policies
Over 5 years able
+4 for loans to enterprises. The results for Ger-
+3 Total percentage many indicate that the surveyed institutions
growth rate
marginally eased their credit standards in the
+2
fourth quarter of 2018, just as in the preceding
+1 four quarters. On the back of a perceptible-t o-
considerable narrowing of margins on loans to
0
borrowers of average quality in preceding
–1
quarters, the banks reduced their margins in
–2 this risk category only slightly in the reporting
period, whereas the margins on riskier loans
–3
were modestly raised.
Households2
Loan contributions in percentage points
Other lending Total percentage +5 In the third quarter, loans to households re- Continued brisk
Consumer credit growth rate demand for
Loans for house purchase +4 corded similarly high inflows to those in pre- housing
ceding quarters. As a consequence, this seg- loans, …
+3
ment again made the largest contribution to
+2 the increase in lending business. The brisk de-
mand for loans for house purchase was once
+1
more a decisive factor in this context. Indeed,
0
growth in this credit segment accelerated
–1 slightly again in the reporting quarter, with the
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 year- on- year growth rate rising to 4.6% as at
* Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 1 Non-financial the end of December.
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank In addition to the persistently very favourable … spurred on
by advanta-
income and asset situation of German house-
geous financing
term loans, while longer- term lending to non- holds, the prevailing exceptionally favourable conditions …
financial corporations saw renewed significant financing conditions may also have been help-
expansion. ful here. According to MFI interest rate statis-
tics, the average interest rate on long- term
Rise in financing The BLS results suggest that the strong demand loans for house purchase remained unchanged
needs for fixed
for loans with longer maturities was largely at 1.9% in the reporting quarter, keeping it
investment,
according to BLS generated by greater financing needs for fixed close to its all-t ime low.
investment. According to the BLS, additional
positive stimulus to demand for loans derived The latest BLS results provide evidence of fur- … and banks’
continued
from the financing needs of enterprises for refi- ther influencing factors. Aside from the low
favourable lend-
nancing, restructuring and renegotiating as general level of interest rates, the respondents ing policies
well as the general low level of interest rates. cited the positive outlook for the housing mar-
For example, at the end of December, domestic ket and the trend in housing prices as further
enterprises paid interest amounting, on aver- key factors behind the renewed, somewhat
age, to 1.8% for small- volume and 1.6% for stronger growth in demand for loans for house

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
33
Banking conditions in Germany
Credit to non-financial corporations Credit to households1
% p.a. Bank interest rates for loans to enterprises2... Bank interest rates for consumer credit2... % p.a.
5,0 9,5
... with an initial rate fixation of
4,5 up to one year ... 9,0
... with an initial rate fixation of
4,0 8,5
over five years
3,5 ... up to €1 million 8,0
3,0 7,5
2,5 7,0
2,0 6,5
... with an initial rate
1,5 6,0
fixation of over one year
and up to five years
1,0 5,5
0,5 5,0
4,5
4,0
... with an initial rate fixation of
5,0 over five years ... 3,5
4,5 3,0
4,0 ... up to €1 million 2,5
3,5 2,0
Bank interest
rates on loans for
3,0 house purchase2 1,5
with an initial rate fixation of over ten years
2,5 %
Change in credit standards3 for ...
2,0 +30
... consumer credit
1,5 0
4
... over €1 million
1,0 –30
... loans for house purchase
+30
% 0
Change in credit standards3 4
+30 for loans to enterprises –30
Change in margins3 for ...
0
4 ... consumer credit
–30 Riskier loans +30
0
Change in margins3
+60 for loans to enterprises –30
Average loans
+30 Riskier loans
... loans for house purchase
0 Riskier loans +30
–30 0
Average loans
–60 Average loans –30
2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 2019
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. Until
May 2010, the aggregate interest rate was calculated as the average rate weighted by the reported volume of new business. As of June
2010, an interest rate weighted by the reported volume of new business is first calculated for each level. The aggregate interest rate is
calculated by weighting the interest rates for the levels by the extrapolated volumes. 3 According to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit
standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened considerably” and “tightened somewhat” and the num-
ber of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a percentage of the responses given; for margins: differ-
ence between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and “widened somewhat” and the number of respondents
reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q1 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
34
purchase. In addition, robust consumer confi- The January BLS round contained ad hoc ques- NPL ratio and
regulatory and
dence was also reported as having contributed tions on banks’ funding conditions, on the im-
supervisory
to the increase in demand. At the same time, pact of the new regulatory and supervisory ac- activities have
no impact on
lending to households for house purchase in tivities and on the effect of non- performing
lending policies
the reporting quarter was supported by banks’ loans on banks’ lending policies. Regarding overall
lending policies. Although the banks participat- funding conditions, and viewed in the context
ing in the BLS did not relax their credit stand- of the situation on the financial markets, the
ards for housing loans further in the fourth surveyed German banks reported that their
quarter, they tightened their margins for both funding situation had seen very little change
average- risk and riskier loans markedly. compared with the previous quarter. In the
wake of the new regulatory and supervisory ac-
Demand for Mirroring the positive situation on the labour tivities,6 banks continued to strengthen their
consumer credit
market and the favourable income situation of capital position in the second half of 2018.
likewise buoyant
German households, banks also recorded sub- During the same period, the size of the NPL
stantial inflows again in the consumer credit ratio (percentage ratio of gross NPLs on banks’
segment. The banks participating in the BLS ac- balance sheets to the gross book value of
cordingly reported a perceptible rise in demand loans) did not affect changes in the lending
in the fourth quarter of 2018. According to the policies of the surveyed banks. Furthermore,
bank managers surveyed, this stemmed largely looking ahead to the next six months, the
from the stability of households’ propensity to banks do not expect the NPL ratio to have any
purchase, robust consumer confidence and the appreciable effect.
low general interest rate levels. Lending policies
in the consumer credit segment remained un-
changed on the whole in the fourth quarter of 6 These include the capital requirements set forth in CRR/
CRD IV and the requirements resulting from the compre-
the year, according to the BLS. hensive assessment.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
35
Financial markets
Financial market setting Exchange rates
Financial market In global financial markets, market participants’ The euro fell to US$1.13 in the first half of No- Euro down
developments against the
attention in the fourth quarter of 2018 and at vember, its lowest level since June 2017, and
shaped by US dollar, …
economic the beginning of 2019 focused on possible subsequently fluctuated for a time with no dis-
downside risks
downside risks to the global economy. The un- cernible trend. It then appreciated slightly for a
resolved trade disputes between the United somewhat longer spell as of mid-D ecember. Al-
States and China and the still unclear exit pro- though the interest rate hike carried out at this
cedure of the United Kingdom from the Euro- time by the Fed had already been largely priced
pean Union contributed to these risks at times. into market participants’ expectations before
Therefore, markets increasingly assumed that the meeting of the Federal Open Market Com-
monetary policy in the major currency areas mittee (FOMC), the wording at the press con-
would turn out to be looser than previously ex- ference on possible further policy rate hikes
pected. This was especially the case for the was more cautious than before. This and the
United States, where expectations of further budget freeze in the United States weighed on
policy rate increases by the Federal Reserve Sys- the US dollar on a broad basis. In addition, the
tem (Fed) have now all but evaporated. Follow- euro was buoyed when the European Commis-
ing the termination of net purchases under the sion’s looming excessive deficit procedure
expanded asset purchase programme (APP) at against Italy was averted.
the end of 2018, a first interest rate hike in the
euro area is now expected to take place later At the beginning of January, the negative sales
than previously anticipated. Additionally, finan- figures reported by a US technology company
cial analysts reduced their expectations for fu- and a surprisingly clear decline in the ISM Pur-
ture corporate profits on both sides of the At- chasing Managers’ Index further weakened the
lantic more strongly than the growth forecasts. US currency initially. Furthermore, the minutes
In equity markets, which react particularly sen- of the aforementioned meeting of the FOMC
sitively to changes in expectations and shifting bolstered expectations of a comparatively slow
risk assessments, prices fell significantly on bal- pace of interest rate hikes. However, in the
ance compared to the end of September. By second week of January, after the publication
contrast, and as is often the case in periods of of unexpectedly upbeat US labour market fig-
heightened uncertainty, demand for safe gov- ures, sentiment in foreign exchange markets
ernment bonds increased, and the yields on temporarily shifted back in favour of the US
these securities declined worldwide as a result. dollar, especially as a raft of economic data re-
The developments described here had a re- leased for the euro area at the same time – in-
markably minor impact on events in foreign ex- cluding consumer confidence figures and a
change markets. Exchange rate volatility be- business climate index – fell short of market
tween the major currencies thus remained participants’ expectations. After the latest
relatively low. The exchange rate of the euro meeting of the FOMC at the end of January,
against the US dollar, for example, mainly the euro initially appreciated once more against
hovered within a comparatively narrow band the US dollar. This was primarily driven by com-
of between US$1.13 and US$1.15 as of mid- ments made by Fed Chairman Jerome Powell,
October. Overall, on a weighted average which were interpreted by markets as indicat-
against the currencies of 19 major trading part- ing more of a wait- and- see monetary policy
ners, the euro slipped slightly on balance com- stance and heralded a more flexible balance
pared with the end of September. sheet policy. However, after the publication of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
36
growing uncertainty. The end of the year
Exchange rate of the euro
brought fresh momentum to the exchange rate
Daily data, log scale
as data on Japanese industrial production
against the ...
US$ turned out better than expected. At the begin-
... US dollar
1.25 ning of January, amid thin trading, the afore-
1.20 mentioned sales warning by a US technology
company led to an abrupt appreciation of the
1.15
Launch exchange
rate: US$1.17891 yen on a broad basis. Following the announce-
1.10
¥ ment by the Japanese government that it
... yen
140
would, where necessary, take measures in for-
135 Launch exchange rate: ¥133.731 eign exchange markets if the yen appreciated
130 in deviation from the fundamentals, the euro
125 was able to make up some of the ground it had
120 previously lost. As this report went to press, the
£
... pound sterling euro was trading at ¥125, down 4.7% on its
0.90
value at the start of the fourth quarter of 2018.
0.85
The exchange rate developments of the euro … and against
0.80 pound sterling
against the pound sterling during the reporting
period were driven by market participants’
0.75
shifting assessments of the general conditions
Launch exchange rate: £0.71111
for the United Kingdom’s planned withdrawal
0.70
Nominal effective exchange rate2 from the EU. The euro appreciated markedly
Q1 1999 = 100
against the pound sterling up until the turn of
105 Launch exchange rate: 103.121
the year. Increasing doubts as to whether the
100
UK Parliament would approve the withdrawal
95 agreement negotiated with the EU, following
O N D J F M A M J J A S O N D J F M postponement of the vote from December to
2017 2018 2019
January, evidently intensified concerns in this
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur- period about a no- deal Brexit and the severe
rencies of 19 countries. An increase indicates an appreciation
burdens this could place on the UK economy,
of the euro.
Deutsche Bundesbank and weakened the pound sterling on a broad
basis. When, in January, it became increasingly
new, surprisingly weak economic data from the clear that no majority in Parliament could be
euro area, the euro relinquished the gains it found for the withdrawal agreement that had
had made. At the end of the reporting period, been negotiated with the EU and that a no-
it was trading at US$1.13, down 2.7% on its deal Brexit was not wanted either, there was a
level at the end of September. reversal of sentiment in foreign exchange mar-
kets, which saw the euro fall markedly against
… against the Following no more than minor fluctuations in the British pound. As this report went to press,
Japanese yen …
the exchange rate between the euro and the the euro stood at £0.88, down 0.9% on its
yen in the first part of the reporting period, the level at the end of September.
euro began to depreciate markedly as of mid-
December in connection with the aforemen- On a weighted average against the currencies Effective euro
exchange rate
tioned mounting economic concerns world- of 19 major trading partners, the euro depreci-
weaker
wide. This should be seen in light of the yen’s ated on balance by 1.7% in this period. The
traditional role as a debt currency for carry price competitiveness of euro area suppliers im-
trades, which tend to be unwound in times of proved somewhat as a result of the euro’s de-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
37
preciation, but in terms of the long-t erm aver-
Bond yields* in the euro area and
age their competitive position can currently still
selected countries
be regarded as neutral.
% p. a., daily data
+3.3
Securities markets and +3.0
portfolio investment +2.7 United States
+2.4
Yields down Yields on government bonds fell considerably
around the
in the various currency areas during the period +2.1
world in
response to US under review. In the United States, the yield on
monetary policy +1.8
US Treasuries with a residual maturity of ten United
and increased Kingdom
risk aversion years fell on balance by 41 basis points to +1.5
2.7%. While the Fed increased the target fed-
+1.2
eral funds range in December 2018 as expected
+0.9
by 25 basis points to 2.25% to 2.5%, expect- Euro area
ations of further interest rate rises have since +0.6 Germany
weakened considerably. The change in the
+0.3
Fed’s language led to both revised analyst sur-
veys and a fall in the yield on two- year US Treas- 0
Japan
uries, which due to their short maturity provide
2017 2018 2019
a fairly direct reflection of expected monetary
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
policy. Currently, such short- dated bonds are
turity of ten years.
yielding 2.5%, which is at the upper end of the Deutsche Bundesbank
target range, in an indication that the market is
pricing in a very flat path for policy rates. In De- notice had been largely expected and thus did
cember, the interest rates on two- year bonds not have any perceptible impact on yields. The
were, by contrast, still at a ten-y ear high of just downside risks to the economy that came into
under 3%. The safe haven flows into assets sharper focus – also in the euro area – and the
with steady and reliable disbursement profiles aforementioned political imponderables also
induced by the increased uncertainty are also led to safe haven flows into Federal securities
evident from the lower term premium in ten- and put pressure on long-t erm yields, as in the
year US yields.1 United States. Furthermore, the scarcity and li-
quidity premia of Bunds increased, thus widen-
Yield on ten-y ear The yield on ten-y ear Federal bonds (Bunds) fell ing the spread between yields on ten- year
Bunds also
by a similar magnitude since the end of Sep- Bunds and those on comparably safe bonds
down
tember, taking it to the lowest level since the from the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW).
fourth quarter of 2016 (-37 basis points to At the end of the period under review, the
0.1%). The changed monetary policy expect- interest rate spread between US and German
ations for the euro area also contributed to this government bonds in the ten- year maturity
development, but to a slightly weaker degree category remained virtually unchanged overall
than in the United States. The point in time at against its value at the end of September at
which the first interest rate hike is expected has roughly 260 basis points.
thus been pushed back. Meanwhile, the deci-
sion by the ECB Governing Council to discon-
tinue the net asset purchases under the APP
and to continue fully reinvesting the principal 1 Market participants receive this premium in exchange for
holding securities with longer rather than shorter matur-
payments from maturing securities until further ities in their portfolios.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
38
ments. As this report went to press, bonds with
Yield curve in the German bond market*
a residual maturity of up to eight years were
% p.a.
thus once again negative- yielding and those
+0.6
with a maturity of up to four years were yield-
+0.4
28 September 2018 ing below the deposit facility rate.
+0.2
0 The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and Yield spreads
over Bunds
–0.2 ten- year government bonds of other euro area
in euro area
–0.4 countries (GDP- weighted average) widened by predominantly
wider
–0.6 14 February 2019 9 basis points overall to 115 basis points by the
end of the period under review, amid substan-
–0.8
tial volatility at times. The dispute between the
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Residual maturity in years European Commission and the Italian govern-
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds (Svensson ment over Italy’s budget deficit and the down-
method), based on listed Federal securities. 1 Current interest
grading of Italy’s sovereign credit rating by the
rate on the deposit facility in place since 15 March 2016.
Deutsche Bundesbank rating agencies Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s
initially led to a significant widening of the yield
Spreads of ten-year government bonds
over German Bunds spread of ten- year Italian bonds over Federal
securities with the same maturity up to mid-
Basis points, daily data
November. With the compromise that emerged
800 Greece
Portugal in December, the yield spread narrowed tem-
Italy
porarily, but widened again recently in light of
Spain
700
Ireland domestic discussions about the institutional
France
role of the Italian central bank. At the end of
600
the period under review, the yield differential
of Italian government bonds remained virtually
500
unchanged overall on its level at the end of
September at around 270 basis points. In the
400
other euro area countries, the fall in ten- year
yields was less pronounced than in Germany,
300
leading to a slight widening of the respective
yield spreads.2 In France, higher government
200
spending in response to the protests by the
“yellow vest” movement is likely to have
100
weighed on French government bonds, with
the spread widening by 10 basis points to 43
0
basis points. At the end of January, after the
2017 2018 2019 situation in financial markets had eased some-
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations. what, Greece issued a five- year bond for the
Deutsche Bundesbank
first time since the conclusion of the third as-
sistance programme, placing a total volume of
German yield The yield curve derived from yields on Federal €2.5 billion via a consortium of banks.
curve flatter
securities became flatter as of the end of Sep-
tember under the impact of the aforemen-
tioned monetary and real economic influences.
While yields in the short- term maturity seg-
ment changed little on balance, they fell in the 2 In addition, a change in benchmark bonds played a de-
cisive role in the widening spread in a number of smaller
medium- term and long- term maturity seg- countries.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
39
Yields down in The yield on ten- year UK gilts followed the Bund yields brought about by the safe haven
the United King-
international trend and, at last count, was just flows was a dominant factor in this outcome,
dom and Japan
over 43 basis points down on the end of Sep- while credit risk as measured by CDS spreads
tember at 1.2%. Market participants’ assess- barely changed (ten- year iTraxx 125: +6 basis
ments as to the prospective course of the with- points). In absolute terms, against the back-
drawal negotiations between the United King- drop of the low risk- free interest rate, financing
dom and the EU only sporadically affected the conditions for European enterprises can still be
prices of UK debt securities. The yield on ten- termed relatively favourable.
year Japanese government bonds, meanwhile,
dropped by 15 basis points to just under 0%. Gross issuance in the German bond market in Net redemptions
of German debt
This meant that it stayed within a corridor the the fourth quarter of 2018 was well down on
securities
boundaries of which the Bank of Japan has not the previous quarter. Overall, German borrow-
made public but that market participants esti- ers sold paper worth €264½ billion, compared
mate as lying roughly between -0.2% and with €310 billion in the previous three- month
0.2%. period. Net of redemptions and changes in is-
suers’ own holdings, domestic issuers reduced
Forward infla- Amid falling crude oil prices, euro area forward their capital market borrowing by €10½ billion.
tion rate down
inflation rates derived from inflation swaps for The outstanding volume of foreign debt secur-
while survey-
based inflation a period of five years starting in five years’ time ities in the German market fell by €8 billion in
expectations
decreased by 27 basis points to 1.4%. Both the fourth quarter. On balance, the total out-
steady
market- based and survey- based deflation prob- standing volume of bonds in Germany thus
abilities for the coming years remain low, how- shrank by €18 billion in the period under re-
ever. The forward inflation rates referred to view.
above did not react in any systematic way to
predominantly negative inflation surprises dur- The public sector capitalised on its favourable Fall in govern-
ment’s capital
ing the reporting period. This indicates that, fiscal situation to redeem debt instruments to-
market debt
against the backdrop of safe haven flows in the talling €20 billion net in the final quarter of
bond market, the decline in medium- term for- 2018. In particular, central government (includ-
ward inflation rates was driven more by scarcity ing the resolution agency which is classified as
and liquidity premia than by inflation expect- belonging to it) scaled back its capital market
ations and inflation risk premia.3 Long-t erm in- debt markedly, redeeming mainly five-y ear Fed-
flation expectations derived from Consensus eral notes (Bobls; €11½ billion), but also two-
Economics surveys remained largely unchanged year Federal Treasury notes (Schätze; €5 billion)
at just over 1.9%. and Treasury discount paper (Bubills; €4½ bil-
lion). This contrasted with net issuance of ten-
Corporate bond On balance, yields on European corporate year and 30-y ear Bunds in the amount of €4½
yields somewhat
bonds have fallen slightly since the end of the billion and €2 billion, respectively. State and
lower
third quarter. Bonds issued by BBB- rated local governments redeemed debt securities
financial corporations with a residual maturity worth €3 billion on balance.
of between seven and ten years were yielding
2.6% as this report went to press. Yields on In the quarter under review, domestic enter- Net issuance of
corporate bonds
non- financial corporate bonds of equivalent prises issued bonds worth a net €1½ billion.
maturity dipped slightly to 1.8%. There was On balance, this was exclusively long- term
more substantial movement in yield spreads paper. There was net issuance of debt secur-
over Bunds, however, with those of both finan-
cial and non- financial corporations increasing
overall by around 30 basis points each, peaking 3 Scarcity premia in the bond market can shift to inflation
swaps on account of the arbitrage relationship between
at one point at a multi- year high. The fall in inflation- indexed bonds and inflation swaps.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
40
credit institutions disposed of fixed-i ncome se-
Investment activity
curities to the tune of €26½ billion and €12
in the German securities markets
billion net, respectively.
€ billion
2017 2018
Equity market
Item Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents 38.8 39.4 8.4 An earnings outlook dimmed by the prospect Less brisk global
Credit institutions – 13.5 0.5 – 12.0
economy weighs
of which: of less brisk global growth combined with ele-
on equity
Foreign debt securities – 3.6 8.9 – 2.8
vated political and economic risks weighed markets
Deutsche Bundesbank 35.6 18.0 10.9
Other sectors 16.7 20.8 9.5 heavily on equity markets in the fourth quarter
of which:
of 2018. But as the new year got underway,
Domestic debt securities 11.9 9.3 16.0
Non-residents – 42.9 – 6.8 – 26.6 the view that US monetary policy would re-
Shares spond flexibly and less restrictively to economic
Residents 19.2 8.4 8.4
developments helped prices to recover again
Credit institutions 4.8 – 2.1 – 3.4
of which: somewhat worldwide. Markets were also
Domestic shares 5.3 0.0 – 2.7
Non-banks 14.4 10.5 11.9 buoyed in the fourth quarter by surprisingly up-
of which:
beat figures for the US labour market and
Domestic shares – 4.1 0.7 3.3
Non-residents 0.0 0.3 1.4 profits of US firms which exceeded expect-
ations in some cases.
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 24.1 16.1 34.1
Investment in retail funds 5.2 3.6 0.6
of which: In spite of this, at last count, the US S&P 500
Equity funds 0.8 0.6 – 3.0
was still 5.8% down on the end of September
Deutsche Bundesbank 2018, on balance. The trade disputes between
the United States and China took a particular
ities by non-fi nancial corporations in particular, toll on IT hardware firms, and their share prices
but also by insurance companies, albeit on a registered above- average losses (-17.6%). By
smaller scale. contrast, the government shutdown in the
United States, which lasted almost a month,
Growing capital The final quarter of 2018 saw domestic credit scarcely affected the US equity market.
market debt
institutions increase their capital market debt
among credit
institutions by €8 billion. Other bank securities that can be Measured in terms of the broad EURO STOXX Significant losses
in European
structured flexibly and mortgage Pfandbriefe index, European equities have lost 7.1% of their
equity markets,
accounted for the lion’s share of net issuance value since the end of September. The banking too
(€7 billion and €4½ billion, respectively). This sector continued to face heavier pressure in
contrasted with debt securities of specialised European equity markets, with share prices fall-
credit institutions and public Pfandbriefe, ing by 16.1%. One major factor here was the
where redemptions dominated, to the tune of sustained burden which non-p erforming loans
€1½ billion net in each case. are placing on banks’ balance sheets in some
euro area countries. At a loss of 9.9%, the Ger-
Purchases of The Bundesbank was the chief net purchaser of man equity market (CDAX) saw even sharper
debt securities
debt securities in the fourth quarter of 2018, losses than the EURO STOXX in what appears
acquiring a net total of €11 billion, principally to be a strong response to potential downside
under the Eurosystem’s asset purchase pro- risks to the global economy. The UK equity
grammes. The majority of these debt securities market shrugged off Parliament’s rejection of
were German government bonds. Domestic the proposed deal for the United Kingdom’s
non- banks acquired bonds for €9½ billion net. withdrawal from the EU (FTSE All- Share: -4.7%).
By contrast, foreign investors and domestic Considerable losses were also registered by the

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
41
Japanese equity market (Nikkei 225: -12.4%) as
Equity market
the Japanese economy is highly sensitive to un-
Daily data
certainty surrounding world trade.
Beginning of 2016 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
Downward revi- Overall, the declines in equity prices went hand Euro area (EURO STOXX)
sion of earnings United States (S&P 500)
expectations on in hand with a downward revision of earnings 150 Japan (Nikkei 225)
both sides of the expectations on both sides of the Atlantic. Ex- 140
Atlantic
pected company profits over a one-y ear hori-
130
zon took a far sharper dip for European enter-
120
prises than for their US counterparts, while
110
longer- term earnings growth expectations
(over three to five years) fell by a similar degree 100
in both markets. On balance, the price/ earn-
90
ings ratio declined in both markets (meaning Lin scale
Implied volatility1 %
that the earnings yield rose), indicating a lower
Euro area (VSTOXX)
valuation than at the end of the third quarter United States (VIX) 40
of 2018.4 A further indicator that can be used
30
to assess stock market valuation is the implied
20
equity risk premium, which is derived from a
10
dividend discount model. Unlike the price/ earn-
ings ratio, this risk premium is a relative meas- 2017 2018 2019
ure that takes account of alternative invest- Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cal-
culated using the prices of index options. For the euro area,
ments in government bonds and can therefore
calculated using options on the EURO STOXX 50.
be interpreted as a premium that investors de- Deutsche Bundesbank
mand for a risky investment over a safe one.
Equity market valuations
The equity risk premium increased for both the
% p.a., data since January 2004
EURO STOXX and the S&P 500. As a result, in
Maximum
16
both markets, it exceeded its respective five-
75th percentile
year average. Again, this is not suggestive of an Current level
Median level
especially high equity market valuation. 14
25th percentile
Minimum
Stock market On balance, funding in the German stock mar- 12
funding
ket totalled €2 billion in the reporting quarter.
The volume of foreign shares in the German
10
market rose by €8 billion over the same period.
Domestic non- banks were, on balance, by far
8
the main purchasers of equities (€12 billion),
followed some distance behind by foreign in-
6
vestors (€1½ billion). German credit institu-
tions, meanwhile, reduced their equity port-
folios by €3½ billion, primarily by offloading 4
domestic paper, on balance.
2
Euro area (EURO STOXX) S&P 500
Domestic investment companies recorded in-
EY CE RP EY CE RP
flows of €34½ billion in the final quarter of
Sources: Thomson Reuters I/B/E/S, Bundesbank calculations.
Earnings yields (EY) plotted as an inverted price/earnings ratio;
implied cost of equity (CE) and equity risk premium (RP) derived
from the dividend discount model.
4 The earnings yield is the inverse of the price/ earnings
Deutsche Bundesbank
ratio.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
42
2018. On balance, the bulk of the fresh funds Sales and
Major items of the balance of payments
purchases of
was channelled to specialised funds reserved
mutual fund
for institutional investors (€34 billion). Of the shares
various asset classes, mixed securities funds, in
€ billion particular, registered significant inflows of cap-
ital (€12½ billion), as did, albeit to a lesser ex-
2017 2018
Item Q4 Q3 Q4p tent, bond funds (€8 billion), funds of funds
I. Current account + 74.4 + 52.2 + 61.5 (€7½ billion) and open- end real estate funds
1. Goods1 + 65.2 + 56.1 + 51.7
2. Services2 – 1.4 – 11.2 – 1.2 (€6 billion). The outstanding volume of foreign
3. Primary income + 25.1 + 19.3 + 26.4 mutual fund shares in Germany fell by €½ bil-
4. Secondary income – 14.5 – 12.0 – 15.4
lion in the period under review. On balance,
II. Capital account – 1.0 – 1.0 + 0.7
mutual fund shares were bought exclusively by
III. Financial account
domestic non- banks, which added paper worth
(increase: +) + 85.6 + 49.0 + 44.3
1. Direct investment + 15.3 + 9.7 – 13.7 €36½ billion to their portfolios in net terms.
Domestic investment
abroad + 27.4 + 24.2 + 13.4 Most of this paper was issued by domestic mu-
Foreign investment in the
reporting country + 12.0 + 14.5 + 27.1 tual funds. By contrast, German credit institu-
2. Portfolio investment + 69.9 + 37.3 + 18.1
tions and non- resident investors sold paper to-
Domestic investment in
foreign securities + 23.3 + 28.4 – 8.8 talling €2 billion and €½ billion net respectively.
Shares3 + 5.7 + 3.9 – 0.5
Investment fund shares4 + 14.7 + 4.1 – 0.4
of which:
Money market fund
shares + 1.8 – 1.6 + 4.9
Long-term debt Direct investment
securities5 + 7.6 + 21.1 – 2.2
of which:
Denominated in euro6 + 4.3 + 18.8 + 2.9 In contrast to cross- border portfolio invest- Direct invest-
Short-term debt
securities7 – 4.7 – 0.6 – 5.6 ment, which saw net outflows totalling €18 bil- ment sees
Foreign investment in capital imports
domestic securities – 46.6 – 8.8 – 26.9 lion in the fourth quarter of 2018, direct invest-
Shares3 – 0.8 – 1.6 + 0.4
Investment fund shares – 2.9 – 0.3 – 0.7 ment transactions generated net capital im-
Long-term debt
ports of €13½ billion.
securities5 – 40.4 – 8.5 – 20.2
of which:
Issued by the public
sector8 – 22.6 – 7.9 – 18.8 Foreign direct investment in Germany came to Capital inflows
Short-term debt
resulting from
securities7 – 2.4 + 1.6 – 6.3 a net €27 billion. At €19½ billion, intra- group
transactions
3. Financial derivatives9 + 4.0 + 10.0 + 0.5
credit transactions accounted for the lion’s by foreign
4. Other investment10 – 2.2 – 7.6 + 38.8
Monetary fi nancial share of this activity, primarily in the form of enterprises
institutions11 + 16.8 – 7.3 + 110.4
Enterprises and reverse flows – financial credits channelled to
households12 – 12.8 + 6.8 + 7.1
General government + 13.2 – 8.8 + 5.2 German parent companies by affiliates domi-
Bundesbank – 19.4 + 1.8 – 83.9
ciled abroad. Foreign enterprises boosted their
5. Reserve assets – 1.4 – 0.5 + 0.6
equity capital in Germany by a further €7½ bil-
IV. Errors and omissions13 + 12.3 – 2.2 – 17.9
lion. In terms of the countries of origin of for-
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including eign direct investment, the Netherlands (€11½
participation certifi cates. 4 Including reinvested earnings. 5 Long-
billion), the United States (€7 billion) and Ire-
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited.
6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: land (€4 billion) were among the principal
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi ce and the sources.
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from
options and fi nancial futures contracts as well as employee
stock options. 10 Includes in particular fi nancial and trade
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11 Excluding the Bun- German enterprises also stepped up their direct Direct invest-
desbank. 12 Includes the following sectors: fi nancial corpor- ment by German
investment abroad between October and De-
ations (excluding monetary fi nancial institutions) as well as enterprises, too
non- fi nancial corporations, households and non- profi t institu- cember 2018, by a net €13½ billion. In the first
tions serving households. 13 Statistical errors and omissions,
resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi nan- instance, they significantly increased the equity
cial account and the balances on the current account and the
capital account. capital of their foreign affiliates, to the tune of
Deutsche Bundesbank
€23½ billion. Conversely, they received funds

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
43
totalling €10 billion through the intra- group (€3 billion), while German enterprises scaled
credit channel. Much of German direct invest- back their direct investment in the United King-
ment abroad went to Ireland (€9 billion), Lux- dom (€5 billion) and the Netherlands (€3½ bil-
embourg (€4½ billion) and the United States lion).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
44
The German economy
Macroeconomic situation other industrial sectors was scaled back. The
construction sector, which is operating at close
German econ- The German economy cooled further in the to full capacity, is unlikely to have generated
omy stagnated
final quarter of 2018. According to the Federal any additional stimulus. By contrast, commer-
in Q4 2018
Statistical Office’s flash estimate, after seasonal cial services are expected to have buoyed eco-
and calendar adjustment, real gross domestic nomic output in the final quarter of 2018. Ag-
product (GDP) in the final quarter of 2018 re- gregate capacity utilisation showed a further
mained at the same level as in the previous decline, but is probably still well above its
quarter, in which there had been a 0.2% de- longer- term average.
cline due chiefly to a one-o ff effect in the auto-
motive sector. In calendar-a djusted terms, the Although exports of goods in the fourth quar- Weak demand
impulses
figure was 0.6% up on the year. The economy’s ter offset the preceding quarter’s decline, they
failure to gain additional momentum following did not create any additional momentum. To-
the setback in the third quarter was mainly the gether with enterprises’ gloomier expectations,
result of persistently weak industrial activity. For this is likely to have weighed down business in-
instance, it took considerably longer than ini- vestment, which probably expanded only
tially expected to overcome production stop- slightly at most. Despite robust employment
pages in the automotive sector, which were growth and accelerating earnings growth, pri-
linked to the new EU-w ide standard for meas- vate consumption, too, remained largely list-
uring exhaust emissions. In addition, output in less; a sharp increase in prices, especially for
energy products, may have dampened con-
sumer appetite. And, finally, inventory changes
Overall output
are likely to have had a negative impact, as
2010 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
there had been an exceptionally strong build-
116
up of inventories around the middle of the
114 year. Government consumption, by contrast, is
Log scale likely to have seen a further marked expansion.
112 GDP
110 German exports of goods rose perceptibly in Exports reverse
decline of
real terms in the final quarter of 2018. How-
previous quarter
108
ever, this only meant that they largely made
106 good the decline of the third quarter, which
was driven mainly by the large- scale losses of
104
production in the automotive industry. Apart
Lin scale from certain bounce- back effects in the case of
%
Year-on-year change 1 motor vehicle exports, the statistical informa-
+3
tion available up to November shows that only
+2
intermediate goods saw an increase in inter-
+1
national sales. In regional terms, export growth
0 was driven chiefly by demand from non- euro
–1 area countries. Deliveries to euro area coun-
tries, by contrast, experienced only moderate
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
growth. With regard to sales to non- euro area
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only
calendar adjusted. countries, German enterprises reported a sub-
Deutsche Bundesbank
stantial increase for the United Kingdom, al-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
45
though this did come after an extremely sharp
Foreign trade
drop in the third quarter. Motor vehicle exports
Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
are likely to be the key factor behind this vola-
2015 = 100, log scale
tility. Business with Russia and the South and
110 Exports of goods
East Asian emerging market economies also ex- Price adjusted1
panded sharply in terms of value. More goods 100 Total
were likewise exported to China, the United
90
States and to central and eastern European
of which:
countries. Demand for German products from to non-euro area 110
countries
Japan and the newly industrialised Asian econ-
100 100
omies, meanwhile, dropped considerably.
90
120
Investment Business investment in machinery and equip-
activity remains to euro area countries 110
ment is likely to have grown slightly in the
muted
fourth quarter of 2018. Investment activity is 100
being dampened by the marked slowdown in
90
manufacturing, as is reflected in capacity util-
isation which has been falling for some time, 120 Imports of goods
Price adjusted 1
and the gloomier outlook for the economy. For 110
instance, manufacturers of capital goods – ex-
100
cluding the auto industry – were able to boost
domestic sales only to some extent in value 90
terms. The automotive industry did record a 85 € bn
Lin scale
sharp rise in domestic sales; even so, commer- Foreign trade balance 80
cial vehicle registrations were still down consid- 60
erably on the previous quarter, in which front- 40
loading and a very high number of registrations
20
by dealers themselves had, however, played a
0
considerable part. The fact that fewer capital
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
goods were imported had a dampening effect,
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Ad-
however.
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Construction Construction investment in the final quarter of
investment
2018 continued its upward trend, as is indi- adjusted terms. Online and mail order sales
remains on
the up cated by the data – available up to November – provided the main positive stimuli in retail. By
for sales in the main construction sector, which contrast, high street demand for textiles, ap-
showed a substantial rise again in the reporting parel, shoes and leather goods was down com-
period. Whereas investment in commercial pared with the third quarter. Consumer de-
buildings is likely to have remained buoyant, mand for IT and telecommunications equip-
private housing investment is likely to have ex- ment was also lower in the reporting period.
panded at a noticeably slower pace. Passenger car sales recovered somewhat. Al-
though registrations of brand new cars in the
Private con- Households’ consumption probably showed no final three months of last year were lower than
sumption likely
more than moderate growth in the final quar- in the preceding quarter, the number of ve-
only slightly
higher at ter of 2018. This is suggested mainly by retail hicles registered by dealers themselves in the
year-end
sales, which – including the preliminary, very third quarter was exceptionally high. This sug-
weak figures for December – were only mar- gests that some private demand was probably
ginally higher than in the third quarter in price-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
46
Sectoral trends
Output in industry and
in construction
Industrial output declined sharply in the fourth Output weak-
2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly, log scale
ness in industry
quarter of 2018, which meant that the down-
continues
110
ward movement of the third quarter continued
virtually unabated. In seasonally adjusted terms,
105 Industry
output was down by 1¼% on the quarter. One
100
major reason why the decline was so large was
a one- off factor in the pharmaceutical industry,
95 120
where production was suddenly cut back by
115
more than one- fifth after undergoing a steady
110 and sharp expansion in the preceding months.
Construction1 Meanwhile, positive impulses came from the
105
automotive sector, which gradually recovered
100 from its output losses in the third quarter due
to difficulties switching to the new worldwide
95 harmonised light vehicles test procedure (WLTP)
(see also the box on pp. 47f.). However, even
Main construction 90
excluding these two sectors and their excep-
tional movements, industrial output showed a
85
marked fall (-¾%). This decline was relatively
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
broad- based across sectors. For example,
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main
mechanical engineering and manufacturers of
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank computers, electronic and optical products all
recorded a significant drop in output.
satisfied by the sale of these vehicles at a later
date. In line with weak industrial output, ifo Institute Capacity
utilisation in
data also show a further fall in capacity utilisa-
the industrial
Import demand Given subdued aggregate demand, German tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing in sector continues
unchanged to decline
imports of goods in the final quarter of 2018 the fourth quarter of 2018. Capacity utilisation
are likely to have remained unchanged on the in all major sectors of industry fell, with the
quarter in real terms. It should be noted that intermediate and consumer goods industries
imports had risen sharply during the summer being hardest hit. Manufacturers of capital
months despite the decline in aggregate out- goods, meanwhile, reported no more than a
put. A not insignificant portion of these im- slight dip in capacity utilisation; however, cap-
ports was probably used to restock inventories, acity utilisation had already dropped sharply in
which likely further dampened demand for for- the third quarter as a result of the problems
eign products in the quarter under review. In a experienced by the car industry in connection
regional breakdown, there was less demand in with WLTP. Nonetheless, utilisation of tangible
Germany mainly for products from euro area fixed assets in the industrial sector as a whole
partner countries. Non- euro area producers, remains well above its longer- term average.
meanwhile, benefited from significantly higher
sales in Germany. Seasonally adjusted construction output in the Construction
output lower
fourth quarter of 2018 (-½%) did not quite
match the level of the previous quarter. Con-
struction activity declined in both the main
construction sector and the finishing trades,
though the decrease in the main construction

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
47
The weakness of German motor vehicle production
in the second half of 2018
The German automotive industry experi- of a largely foreign origin, for instance be-
enced considerable output losses in the cause Chinese consumers’ interest in Ger-
second half of 2018. In the third quarter, man cars is waning.
production of motor vehicles and motor ve-
hicle parts fell by 8% on the quarter in sea- That said, developments in new passenger
sonally adjusted terms. Although output did car registrations as a key economic indicator
rise again somewhat (+1¼%) in the fourth of domestic demand for cars does point to
quarter of last year, fi gures were still far WLTP- related bottlenecks as the main rea-
short of the high level recorded in the son for the slump in output. After these
second quarter. It would seem reasonable problems, demand for passenger cars had
to assume that the decline in production is already largely recovered by the end of 2018
related to the introduction of a new emis- (see chart below). In December, the monthly
sions test, the Worldwide harmonised Light vehicle registration fi gures bounced back to
Vehicles Test Procedure (WLTP), which has the level prior to the drop.2 Although regis-
been in place in the European Union for tration numbers for individual car makers
new motor vehicle registrations since Sep- show that the share of domestic group
tember 2018.1 Numerous models evidently brands fell quite substantially during the
could not be certifi ed under this new stand- third quarter, it did outpace the third- quarter
ard on time. The unexpectedly hesitant re- fi gure by the end of the year. Thus, the mar-
covery in output in the closing months of ket share held by domestic group brands
last year gave rise to fears, however, that
besides these temporary supply- side pro- Output in the automotive industry and
passenger car registrations in Germany
duction bottlenecks, a persistent drop in
demand might have played a substantial Seasonally adjusted, quarterly averages
part in the slump in production. This weak- Manufacture of motor vehicles and
109 motor vehicle parts1
ness in demand could be of domestic ori- Industrial output,
106 2015 = 100, log scale
gin, for example on account of the growing
103
number of court- imposed bans on older
100
diesel vehicles in cities with particularly high
Per month
97
emissions levels. A general loss of confi - Thous.
dence in the German automotive industry
Lin scale 350
might also have been partly responsible. Passenger car registrations 2
300
However, the weak demand could also be
% 250
1 See, for example, M. Kallweit and N. Jannsen, Aus- 75 200
wirkungen des neuen WLTP- Prüfverfahrens, Wirt-
schaftsdienst 2018/ 11, pp. 831-832.
70
2 Registrations peaked in August 2018 because motor
vehicle traders increased the number of one- day regis- Domestic group brands’
share of new registrations 3
trations of vehicles. This enabled them to sell brand
65
new vehicles as used cars in the following months
under old registration rules. The sharp slump in new
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 19
registrations in September 2018 could have been due
to both WLTP- related delivery problems and the in- 1 Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.
crease in motor tax connected with the new emissions 2 Source of unadjusted figures: German Association of the
Automotive Industry (VDA). 3 Source: Bundesbank calculations.
test procedure. See, for example, Deutsche Bundes-
Deutsche Bundesbank
bank, Monthly Report, November 2018, p. 46.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
48
Looking at the passenger car output levels
German exports of motor vehicles and
motor vehicle parts of individual German brands, it is striking
that the overall decline in motor vehicle
€ billion, nominal, quarterly totals, seasonally adjusted
production was chiefl y driven by the stop-
35 monthly 1
Exports to the EU pages at one German manufacturer. This
30
ties in with data from the ADAC (German
25
Exports to the world excluding the EU
Automobile Association) about certifi cation
20
times of various models with respect to the
15
10 of which Euro 6d TEMP or 6d emissions standards,
Exports to China
5 and suggests that the introduction of the
0 WLTP was the main reason for the produc-
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 tion losses.4 The ADAC’s data show that it
Sources of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office; Bundes- was the same German manufacturer that
bank calculations and seasonal adjustment. 1 Quarterly adjusted
data. had its model range certifi ed much later
Deutsche Bundesbank than other groups.
continued the slight recovery that has been In summary, the indicators analysed in these
ongoing for just under two years.3 At fi rst, comments primarily point to diffi culties re-
their share of the market receded signifi - lated to the introduction of the new WLTP
cantly after the emissions scandal broke in standard for measuring exhaust emissions
the late summer of 2015. as the explanation for the drop in motor
vehicle output in the second half of 2018.
Developments in German automotive ex- Although, according to data of the VDA
ports also point to WLTP- related supply con- (German Association of the Automotive In-
straints as the main reason for the latest dip dustry), the seasonally adjusted number of
in production in this sector. In the third cars produced in January 2019 fell sharply
quarter of 2018, the value of exported motor once again, this renewed slump was prob-
vehicles and motor vehicle parts dropped ably mainly due to strike action at an en-
heavily by 5¾% from the preceding quarter gine plant in Hungary. However, the large
after seasonal adjustment. This was primar- discrepancy between the most recent pro-
ily attributable to exports of motor vehicles duction fi gures and the new orders received
to the EU, i.e. to those countries which by the automotive sector – which in the
introduced the new emissions standard at fourth quarter of 2018 were up by a hefty
the same time as Germany (see the above 10¼% on the previous quarter in seasonally
chart). By contrast, weak domestic demand adjusted terms – suggests that this setback
should not impact on car exports. And in is probably only temporary.
the case of a general fall in foreign demand,
motor vehicle exports should be dampened
fairly evenly across the board (with exports
to China potentially being particularly af- 3 The renewed decline in January 2019 is primarily re-
fected). Whereas exports to the European lated to the production stoppages caused by the strike
at an engine plant in Hungary, for which reason the
Union saw an especially sharp decline, plun- decline is also likely to be only temporary.
ging by 12¾%, exports to non- EU countries 4 As at year- end (December 2018), a total of around
1,300 models of different manufacturers were in-
rose in value terms by 1¾%. In this period, volved. See ADAC (2018), Pkw-M odelle mit der Abgas-
norm Euro 6d- TEMP, https://www.adac.de/infotestrat/
supplies of motor vehicles and motor vehicle
umwelt-und-innovation/abgas/modelle_mit_euro_6d_
parts to China climbed by as much as 3½%. temp/

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
49
sector was somewhat more pronounced,
Labour market
which was primarily due to a substantial cut-
Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
back in building construction. At the same
Million
time, the economic indicators do not suggest
45.0
that the construction boom in Germany is com- Employed
44.5
ing to an end. According to the ifo Institute,
capacity utilisation in the main construction 44.0
Total
sector remained exceptionally high. The same 43.5
applies to the reach of orders in this sector.
43.0
Moreover, a significant percentage of construc-
42.5
tion firms still say that staff shortages are a
major factor hampering production. This sug- 42.0 Thousand
gests that the construction sector is still operat- Year-on-year change1 1,000
ing at close to full capacity.
500
0
Services sector Looking at the services sectors, the overall pic-
is likely to have
ture was fairly positive in the final quarter of Million
grown percep-
Jobs subject to social security
tibly on the 2018. Although retailers were able to increase 33.0
contributions
whole
their sales only slightly in real terms, price-
32.5 Oct./
adjusted sales in the wholesale trade showed a Nov.
32.0
substantial rise. Added to this was a further
marked increase in motor vehicle sales, which 31.5
had been dampened in the third quarter by 31.0 Occupied positions
one- off effects in connection with the new
30.5
emissions testing procedure. Business activity in
30.0
the other services sectors is also likely to have
been quite favourable. According to the ifo 29.5
Institute , business expectations in this sector 29.0 Thousand
were lowered markedly; even so, they re- Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2 800
mained at a very elevated level. Jan.
600
400
Labour market Million
Unemployed
3.0
Labour market Despite the weaker pace of economic activity,
2.8
in very good
the labour market remained in very good shape
shape Registered unemployed
2.6
at the end of 2018. The fourth quarter was
marked by a sound rise in employment and a 2.4 Jan.
slight fall in underemployment. Employment
2.2
went up primarily thanks to sustained strong Thousand
Year-on-year change1 +200
growth in the number of new jobs subject to
0
social security contributions. Unemployment
fell perceptibly again in the reporting quarter. –200
Jan.
Although there was no further increase in the
number of job vacancies, the figure is still very 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 201819
high. The muted sentiment in a number of sec- Sources of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office and
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
tors was reflected to a certain degree in the cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
50
As before, the strongest growth in jobs subject … across
Nationality of employees subject to
almost all
to social security contributions was seen in
social security contributions
sectors, but
business services such as IT and logistics. Com- sharp decline
Thousand persons, year-on-year growth (monthly)
in temporary
pared with the same month of the previous
employment
German
year, the increase was a hefty 5% and 4% re-
Rest of the world
Western Balkan countries 1 spectively. In absolute terms, employment
Eight main countries of origin of asylum seekers
Central and Eastern European EU11 countries 2 growth was strongest in manufacturing, busi-
800
ness and support services (not including tem-
porary agency workers) as well as in health and
700
social care; growth was slightly above average
600
in each of these three relatively large sectors.
The same applies to the construction sector,
500
which is suffering from labour shortages. In
400 nearly all other sectors, too, more people were
hired than left their jobs. Finance and insurance
300
was the only sector in which staff numbers
200 showed a slight fall; additionally, in temporary
agency employment, the number of employees
100
subject to social security contributions con-
0 tracted sharply by more than one- tenth within
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 the space of 12 months.
Source: Federal Employment Agency. 1 Serbia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Kosovo, North Macedonia and Albania. 2 Joined
in 2004. Demand for labour at the end of the period Immigration
Deutsche Bundesbank under review still significantly exceeded the do- supports
employment
mestic supply of labour. Although unemploy- growth
leading indicators, although demand for labour ment was continuing to decline and un-
remained expansionary overall. employed persons were active in the labour
market, in arithmetical terms only 45% of the
Sharp rise in In the final quarter of 2018, seasonally adjusted persons who took one of the 666,000 add-
jobs subject to
domestic employment went up by 110,000 itional jobs subject to social security contribu-
social security
contributions … persons, or 0.2%. This is roughly in line with tions during the past 12 months had German
the increase in the third quarter. This growth nationality. Labour- related immigration is sub-
was driven solely by the expansion of employ- stantial, albeit showing a slightly diminishing
ment subject to social security contributions. trend.1 On the other hand, the integration of
According to the Federal Employment Agency’s migrants in the labour market is still progress-
initial estimate, in the first two months of the ing quickly. It was possible to fill roughly one in
reporting quarter alone such employment in- seven of the additionally created jobs with a
creased by as much as 127,000, or 0.4%, com- person from the eight main countries of origin
pared with the average of the third quarter. of asylum seekers.
Persons in low- paid part- time employment or
temporary agency employment as well as the After seasonal adjustment, registered un-
self- employed are using the tight labour market employment in autumn 2018 continued its
situation to move into jobs with full social se-
curity coverage. There was a noticeable decline 1 According to migration statistics published by the Federal
in the number of persons in all three alternative Statistical Office, the migration balance between Germany
and other countries was as high as 500,000 persons in
forms of employment. 2016; it declined to 416,000 in 2017 and totalled 315,000
persons in the first nine months of 2018, which, when tak-
ing the seasonal pattern into account, suggests just below
400,000 for the year as a whole.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
51
Decline in marked decline. On an average of the reporting
Rates of pay and wage drift
unemployment
period, there were 44,000 fewer unemployed
solely among Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
persons receiv- persons than in the previous quarter. The un-
ing the basic employment rate fell by 0.1 percentage point % Actual earnings
welfare +3.5 Negotiated rates of pay
allowance to 5.0%. The decline is entirely due to a reduc-
+3.0
tion in the number of unemployed persons re-
ceiving the basic welfare allowance. This is +2.5
chiefly attributable to the very low probability +2.0
at present of becoming unemployed over the
+1.5
long term and in need of assistance. There are
+1.0
therefore relatively few newly unemployed per-
sons receiving the basic welfare allowance, +0.5
while the prospects of such persons finding a 0
job have improved slightly. Moreover, the num-
Percentage
Wage drift
ber of unemployed persons claiming insurance points
+1.5
benefits is already very low. There was barely
any decline in registered unemployment in +1.0
January. However, this is probably mainly due +0.5
to the end of the “Social inclusion in the labour
0
market” programme, while the number of par-
–0.5
ticipants on the basis of the new “Participation
20112012 20132014 20152016 2017 2018
opportunity law” is rising only slowly. Total
Sources: Federal Statistical Office (actual earnings) and
underemployment, which is unaffected by
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay).
changes in active labour market policy, even re- Deutsche Bundesbank
corded a quite significant fall in January.
Demand for According to the leading indicators, enterprises Wages and prices
labour still
are still planning to create new jobs. Both the
expansionary
despite setback labour market barometer of the Institute for Negotiated pay rates remained on a clear up- Negotiated pay
rates continue
Employment Research (IAB) and the Federal ward trajectory at the end of 2018. Including
to rise signifi-
Employment Agency’s BA- X job index main- ancillary agreements, there was a year-o n- year cantly
tained their very high level over the past few increase of 2.8% in the fourth quarter of 2018,
months. The ifo employment barometer, which which was on much the same scale as in the
enquires about the recruitment plans of trade third quarter. Looking at the individual sectors,
and industry over the next three months, de- collective wage growth in the production sec-
clined markedly towards the end of the period tor (including construction) significantly out-
under review. This suggests a slower rise in the stripped growth in the services sector. The rise
demand for labour. In view of the prevailing la- in actual earnings in the economy as a whole is
bour shortage, it is nevertheless uncertain likely to have been remarkably strong in the
whether the current muted sentiment and the fourth quarter, as in the preceding three quar-
slower pace of economic activity will place an ters.
additional constraint on employment growth.
The leading indicator for unemployment in the On an annual average in 2018, negotiated pay Substantial
growth in
IAB labour market barometer was down some- rates were clearly up with an increase of 2.8%
agreed pay
what at the end of the period under review on the year; the rise was thus significantly rates and actual
earnings in 2018
and was only just in positive territory, which higher than the 2.1% to 2.2% growth rates of
points to a decline in registered unemployment the period from 2015 to 2017. The much higher
in the next three months. new pay settlements agreed in the previous

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
52
branches of industry such as the steel and
Import, export, producer and
chemical industries. Overall, collective negoti-
consumer prices
ations will be conducted for around eight mil-
2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly
lion employees. Trade unions’ wage demands
Log scale
110 published so far amount to between 5½% and
6%, which is on a scale similar to last year. As
105
in the two preceding years, the individual
Import prices
100 Einfuhrpreise choices between more leisure time and the size
of the pay rises are likely to have played a
95
prominent role in some sectors. In addition, the
105 return to parity funding of health insurance in
Export prices
the statutory health insurance system and the
100
resulting surge in costs for enterprises might
95 have a dampening effect on the size of the
wage settlements. At the beginning of the
105
year, the general statutory minimum wage was
100 Producer prices1 raised by 35 cents to €9.19 per hour.
95
In the final quarter of 2018, consumer prices Consumer prices
105
climbed steeply
Consumer prices 2 (HICP) continued their distinct rise from the
in Q4 2018 …
100 third quarter, going up by 0.6% in seasonally
adjusted terms. Energy became considerably
95
% more expensive despite the marked decline in
Lin scale
+3 Year-on-year change 3 crude oil prices. Increased transport costs re-
+2 sulting from the low water level of the Rhine
+1 and other rivers probably played a key role in
this respect. By contrast, food prices, which
0
had also risen significantly prior to this, largely
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
came to a standstill. Prices for other goods,
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Pro-
ducer price index for industrial products in domestic sales. which had gone up sharply in the third quarter,
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
accelerated further. Prices for clothing and
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank footwear, in particular, were raised consider-
ably. Other industrial goods excluding energy
year were gradually coming into effect, while saw above- average price increases, as in the
smaller incremental wage increases from older previous quarter. An additional factor behind
wage agreements were progressively becom- this was that the import of these goods was
ing less important. Given largely positive eco- continuing to become more expensive owing
nomic activity and continuing labour market to the sustained depreciation of the euro
shortages, actual earnings showed a noticeably against the US dollar; this led to quite signifi-
strong rate of growth at 3.2% last year accord- cant mark- ups in domestic industrial producer
ing to the first preliminary annual result, which prices. Finally, prices for services were continu-
was also higher than the growth rates in the ing to rise moderately, although there were
years before. At around ½ percentage point, marginal price reductions in the important area
wage drift was up strongly. of travel services. Annual HICP inflation, at
2.1% on an average of the quarter, was just as
2019 pay This year’s pay round mainly covers services strong as in the third quarter, but dropped to
round mainly
sectors such as the public sector of the Federal 1.7% in December, as lower crude oil prices
for services
states, trade and financing, as well as individual

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
53
Housing prices in Germany in 2018
Housing prices rose sharply again last year crease on much the same scale as on an
with price increases on a broad front re- average of the previous three years.2 The
gionally. While there was something of an same goes for the price dynamics of hous-
easing of the still very strong upward pres- ing in seven big cities with an average price
sure on the prices of housing in German rise of 9½% in 2018.3 In both the cities
towns and cities, residential property prices overall and the sub- sector of the big cities,
outside the urban areas were going up at a owner- occupied apartments continued to
faster pace than in the years before. The ex- generate the strongest impulses, even
pansion in the supply of housing is likely to though price dynamics in this hitherto
have exceeded its heightened level of the extremely attractive segment weakened
previous year and to have now reached a slightly. Housing prices in urban areas in-
considerable scale, but – given growing creased noticeably more strongly in 2018
interest in housing outside towns and cit- than in previous years, however. In view of
ies – has failed to keep pace with the con- what is now the extremely high price level
tinuing strong demand. While price dynam- for owner- occupied apartments and houses
ics, from a macroeconomic perspective, in towns and cities, the fact that part of the
were largely consistent with developments demand for housing shifted to the sur-
in the supply and demand- side variables, rounding areas and that prices were tend-
housing prices in towns and cities were still ing to increase more strongly there is con-
well above the level that appears justifi ed sistent with the overall picture.
by the longer- term economic and demo-
graphic determinants.1 Developments in rents for apartments also
support the fi nding that demand for hous-
The increase in the price index of the Asso- ing has become broader in regional terms.
ciation of German Pfandbrief Banks (Ver- Price adjustment pressure decreased some-
band deutscher Pfandbriefbanken, vdp) for what on the urban rental housing markets.
owner- occupied housing was considerably Figures based on bulwiengesa AG data indi-
stronger last year, at 7¾%, than in 2017 cate that the increase in rents for new let-
(+5¾%). On an average of the fi rst three tings in towns and cities in 2018, at 3¾%,
quarters of 2018, the house price index of was clearly down on the previous year’s
the Federal Statistical Offi ce, with a year- rate of growth and below the annual aver-
on- year growth of 5½%, likewise shows a age rate for the previous three years. In the
higher rate of increase than in the previous seven big cities, the increase in rents for
year. Hypoport AG’s Europace house price new tenancies, at 4%, was also much more
index (EPX) indicates a 6¾% increase in moderate than in 2017 – a year that marked
housing prices in Germany in 2018, which a peak in rent rises in the current boom in
was also larger than in the year before.
In German towns and cities overall, upward 1 These comments relate to how price developments
pressure on the prices of housing eased in the housing market are to be seen in the context of
the real economy. For an assessment from a fi nancial
somewhat in 2018 after a number of years
stability perspective, it is also necessary to take a look
when the rates were increasing. The rate of at developments in lending and credit standards in
price increase was nevertheless clearly housing funding. See Deutsche Bundesbank. Financial
Stability Review, November 2018.
higher than in Germany as a whole. Ac-
2 The data for towns and cities overall are based on
cording to fi gures based on bulwiengesa information provided by bulwiengesa AG on prices in
127 German towns and cities.
AG data, prices for urban residential real es-
3 The seven big cities are Berlin, Cologne, Düsseldorf,
tate went up by 8½%, which was an in- Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stuttgart.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
54
demand on the housing market. In line with
Price indices for housing
price developments in owner- occupied
2010 = 100, annual data, log scale
housing, rents outside the urban areas were
200 accelerating. According to the vdp data on
190 new lettings in multiple- family houses in
180 Deutsche Bundesbank 1 Germany as a whole, rent adjustments, at
170 Total 4¾%, were signifi cantly stronger than in
127 towns and cities
160 of which the previous year.
7 major cities 2
150
Last year, too, much of the ongoing strong
140
housing demand was due to households’
130 positive outlook for incomes and the ex-
tremely favourable labour market condi-
120
tions. Added to this was the fact that the
110 average rate of interest on mortgage loans
in 2018, at 1.9%, was only slightly up on its
100
prior- year level. As in 2017, adjusted for the
95
expected rate of infl ation in Germany over
150
the longer term, no more than extremely
140 low interest costs were charged on average
130 for acquiring housing. Even so, rates of
interest on mortgage loans – which re-
vdp price index for
120
owner-occupied housing mained virtually unchanged since 2016 –
110 are unlikely to have continued generating
Quarterly data any additional price- driving impulse in the
100 reporting year through relief for households
95 when purchasing residential property. As
160 the macroeconomic price- to- income ratio
150 showed a marked rise in 2018 compared
with the previous year, households’ average
140 Hypoport AG composite index
interest burden from new loans taken up
130
for house purchase is also likely to have in-
120 creased as a share of disposable income.4
110
The housing supply continued to expand in
the reporting year. The number of com-
100
pleted dwellings in 2018 is likely to have
95
been up on the year again, although it was
140
probably still below the level reached on an
Destatis house price index 130 average of the period since German reunifi -
cation.5 Building permits last year are un-
120
110
4 See the Deutsche Bundesbank’s system of indicators
100 for the German residential property market at https://
www.bundesbank.de/en/statistics/enterprises-and-
95
households/system-of-indicators-for-the-german-
residential-property-market
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
5 On an average of the period from 1990 to 2017,
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on some 330,000 dwellings were completed. This admit-
price data provided by bulwiengesa AG. 2 Berlin, Cologne, tedly includes the overshooting construction activity in
Düsseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich, Stuttgart.
the preceding housing boom in the mid-1990s, which
Deutsche Bundesbank
increases the reference fi gure in arithmetical terms.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
55
likely to have exceeded the previous year’s in the towns and cities were still between
level of around 350,000 units. This might 15% and 30%.6 Further standard indicators
be connected with the increasing lack of for assessing housing price developments
land available for building in the regions likewise point to ongoing marked price ex-
which are in particular demand. According aggerations in the urban housing markets.
to Federal Statistical Offi ce fi gures, prices of For example, the price- rent ratio for apart-
building land continued to rise sharply at ments in towns and cities increased again in
7¾% in the fi rst half of 2018. Moreover, the reporting year and was more than 20%
capacity utilisation in the construction sec- above its multi- year mean since reunifi ca-
tor was very high in the reporting year. tion; in the seven big cities it was 30%
Construction prices went up considerably higher.
by 4.4% and thus signifi cantly more sharply
than construction costs. Construction fi rms,
given the extremely good orders situation in 6 These fi gures are based on updated results of a re-
gionally differentiated estimation model. They refer to
the sector, were evidently able to expand
an estimated fundamental residential property price,
their margins substantially. which is conceptually based on the sustainable com-
ponents of economic and sociodemographic variables.
See F. Kajuth, T. Knetsch and N. Pinkwart, Assessing
Last year, too, the overall price dynamics of
House Prices in Germany: Evidence from a Regional
housing in Germany are likely to have been Dataset, Journal of European Real Estate Research,
largely a refl ection of developments in Vol. 9 No 3, pp. 286-307, 2016. Regionally differenti-
ated price data for 2018 were available at the time of
housing supply and demand. According to
publication only for urban districts. The estimates on
current estimates, which also incorporate which the current fi gures for overvaluations are based
refer to the reference period until 2017; district-s pecifi c
revised fi gures for the regionally specifi c ex-
price information for Germany as a whole is currently
planatory factors, upward price deviations available up to that date.
were partially passed on to consumers.2 Exclud- also played a part in this context. The rise in
ing energy and food, the average rate of infla- housing rents continued at an unchanged pace
tion in the final quarter of the year went up (for developments in housing prices in 2018,
from 1.1% to 1.3%. According to provisional see the box on pp. 53ff.).
figures, consumer prices (HICP) in January 2019
were 1.7% higher than in the same month of
20183. Order books and outlook
… and were Owing to continuing steep increases in energy The underlying cyclical trend is probably also Underlying
again up more cyclical trend
and food prices and somewhat stronger dy- still subdued after the start of the new year. For
sharply on aver- likely to remain
age in 2018 namics in prices for services, inflation on an instance, the decline in new manufacturing subdued for
time being
average of 2018, at 1.9%, was, in fact, slightly orders, aside from the automotive sector, indi-
higher than in the year before when a figure of cates that industrial activity will barely pick up
1.7% had been recorded. Although the core in- momentum again during the first quarter. This
flation rate, i.e. the rise in consumer prices ex- is also suggested by the much gloomier busi-
cluding energy and food, was, at 1.2%, above ness expectations in major economic sectors,
its longer- term average in line with the overuti- as is indicated in surveys conducted by the ifo
lisation of aggregate production capacity, it did
not show any further increase on the year. 2 The CPI rate went up in the fourth quarter from +2.1% to
Price- dampening effects, such as the partial +2.2%.
3 The CPI figure was +1.4%. On account of the change-
abolition of childcare centre fees, the appreci- over in the consumer price index base year from 2010 to
2015 and the associated revisions, more precise informa-
ation of the euro, which lasted into spring, and
tion on price developments in January 2019 will not be
substantial reductions on clothing and shoes, available until the end of February.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
56
Institute and the German Chambers of Industry
Demand for industrial goods and
and Commerce (DIHK). This will probably curb
construction services
the propensity to invest. A large number of fac-
Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
tors are weighing on business sentiment at
Log scale
115 present. These include uncertainty relating to
Industrial orders
110 Brexit, political developments in some euro
105 area countries and the continued smouldering
Total
trade conflict between the United States and
100
China. However, there are no indications that
95
the slowdown will lead to a downturn. For one
90 thing, some of the negative one- off factors
Lin scale %
Year-on-year change1 +10 from the third quarter of last year are resolving
themselves. Looking at the automotive indus-
+ 5
try, for instance, following a downturn in sum-
0
mer, there are signs of at least a gradual return
– 5
to normal activity in motor vehicle production
115 Log scale and exports. For another thing, the still very
110 favourable labour market situation and strong
105 International wage growth suggest that private consump-
tion is picking up again and, unlike in the
100
second half of 2018, counterbalancing the
95
dampening effects. Further support will be pro-
90 110 vided by the fiscal measures introduced at the
start of 2019.
Domestic 105
100
Sentiment in the German economy became Stronger
95 deterioration
much gloomier at the turn of 2018-19. Accord-
in sentiment
90 ing to surveys by the ifo Institute and the Ger-
125 Main construction orders man Chambers of Industry and Commerce
Oct.-
120 Nov. (DIHK), this downward slide was due to a
115 marked deterioration in business expectations.
Confidence fell on a broad front, meaning that
110
enterprises in all the major sectors of the econ-
105
omy were looking to the future with less opti-
100
mism. By contrast, the assessment of the busi-
95 ness situation showed no more than a minor
90 deterioration. According to the ifo Institute,
%
Lin scale +20 short- term expectations for manufacturing out-
Year-on-year change1 put were also defying the pessimistic senti-
+15
Oct.- ment. This contrasted with a further decline in
Nov.+10
both short- term export expectations as sur-
+ 5
veyed by the ifo Institute as well as export ex-
0 pectations for the next 12 months as shown by
– 5 the DIHK survey, which meant they were below
their respective long- term average.
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.
1 Only calendar-adjusted. Industrial orders were up slightly in the final
Deutsche Bundesbank
quarter of 2018. A significant role was played

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
57
Sharp decline in by the automotive sector, which had suffered a time now, only slightly below their peak up to
inflow of orders
significant decline, mainly in export orders, in this point in time. Given the high level of cap-
excluding the
automotive the third quarter and was now experiencing acity utilisation in the main construction sector
sector
quite substantial order growth. This was espe- and the considerable shortage of suitably
cially the case for export orders, but the sector skilled workers, it is nevertheless not very likely
also reported sharp growth in domestic orders. that the construction sector will be able to step
By contrast, the orders situation deteriorated up its output perceptibly in the short term.
significantly in the other sectors of industry and
also on a broad front. In line with this, ifo Insti- The conditions are in place for private con- Additional
impetus for
tute surveys reveal a distinctly worse assess- sumption – which was tending to weakness in
private con-
ment of the backlog of manufacturing orders, the second half of 2018 – to expand at a faster sumption
although the figures were still clearly above the pace again in the first quarter of 2019. Along-
multi- year average despite the downgrading. side the ongoing favourable employment
growth and substantial pay rises, additional
Construction The boom in the construction sector is likely to stimulus is being provided by various fiscal
boom continues
have continued at the beginning of 2019. This measures which entered into force at the start
is indicated by the ongoing excellent orders of 2019 and give relief, in particular, to employ-
situation in the sector. New orders received by ees. This positive situation is reflected in con-
the main construction sector on an average of sumer sentiment. The consumer climate index
October and November 2018 – data are avail- calculated by the Gesellschaft für Konsum-
able up to this time – showed a substantial in- forschung (GfK) has thus risen somewhat from
crease compared with the third quarter. In line an already very high level. Consumers’ income
with this, enterprises reported that the reach of expectations also showed a clear rise, reaching
their orders books was still at an exceptionally a level last recorded in the third quarter of
high level, with them having been, for some 2017.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
58
Public finances*
General government budget and tax revenue continued to rise dynamically.
Overall, these alleviating factors significantly
Government Germany’s government finances improved sig- outweighed the spending increases, some of
budget ran high
nificantly last year, with the surplus growing to which were sharp (see also pp. 59f.). The debt
surplus in 2018
1.7% of gross domestic product (GDP), accord- ratio had declined to 61.0% by the end of the
ing to provisional data. The surplus posted by third quarter of 2018, down from 63.9% at the
the social security funds rose again thanks to end of 2017.
favourable developments in wages and the
labour market. Moreover, central government This year, the setting for government finances Shrinking surplus
this year due to
did not have to repay nuclear fuel tax pay- is expected to be advantageous. The Federal
fiscal loosening
ments, unlike in the previous year. In addition, Government is anticipating weaker but still
interest expenditure saw a renewed decline, positive economic conditions. There are no
notable temporary burdens on the horizon at
General government fiscal ratios * present, and interest expenditure will continue
to fall. All the same, the surplus is likely to
As a percentage of GDP
shrink perceptibly. This is mainly due to mark-
45.5 edly looser fiscal policy. The fiscal burden,
measured as revenue from taxes and social
45.0 Revenue contributions relative to GDP, will probably de-
cline only a little. Tax cuts will be offset by add-
44.5 itional revenue stemming from tax progression,
and the overall lower contribution rates for em-
44.0
ployees by higher rates for enterprises. How-
ever, significant spending increases are planned
43.5 Expenditure
in many areas, such as pensions, internal and
Taxes and social contributions 1 41 external security, education and infrastructure.
40 Fiscal policy is set to be loosened further in the Fiscal loosening
in medium term,
medium term. In many cases, it is likely to take
too, …
39 some time before the firmed- up projects affect
expenditure more strongly. This is true of infra-
+2.0
structure expansion, for example, or increased
Fiscal balance
staffing at schools and in police forces. Further
+1.5
measures have also been agreed upon. For ex-
ample, the solidarity surcharge is to be partially
+1.0
abolished and all- day childcare for children of
primary school age is to be boosted signifi-
+0.5
cantly. Moreover, given that budget outturns
0
* The section entitled “General government budget” re-
–0.5
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas-
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report-
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat-
* As defined in the national accounts. 1 Taxes and social con- istics). No data for the fourth quarter of 2018 are yet avail-
tributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single
able for local government or the statutory health and
Resolution Fund.
public long- term care insurance schemes. These will be
Deutsche Bundesbank
analysed in upcoming issues of the Monthly Report.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
59
The structural development of German public fi nances –
results of the disaggregated framework for 2018*
Germany’s general government budget re- the opposite effect, slightly overcompensat-
corded a surplus again in 2018. According ing for fi scal drag1 in net terms. While the
to preliminary data, the surplus amounted cuts chiefl y concerned income tax, contri-
to 1.7% of gross domestic product (GDP) bution rates for social security funds were
and was far higher than in the previous year also affected. By contrast, corporation tax
(1.0% of GDP). The role played by cyclical generated additional revenue due to the re-
infl uences and major temporary effects is funds of corporation tax credit stemming
established using the disaggregated frame- from the system switcho ver in 2001 coming
work for analysing public fi nances. The to an end.
framework also shows the determinants of
any other changes – which are classifi ed as The structural expenditure ratio remained
structural – in the expenditure and revenue unchanged. The interest expenditure ratio
ratios. did indeed dip slightly in view of continued
highly favourable follow- up fi nancing con-
In addition to reaping the benefi ts of a ditions and a decline in the debt ratio, but
healthy economy, public fi nances also im- the ratio of other structural expenditure
proved thanks to a decline in burdens stem- (primary expenditure) rose in equal meas-
ming from one- off measures. There was a ure. Above all, fi xed asset formation re-
surge in calls on guarantees in the wake of corded a sharp increase, and more funding
HSH Nordbank’s privatisation. However, – compared with the unusually low previ-
there was no repeat of the nuclear fuel tax ous year’s level – was allocated to the EU
repayment made in 2017, and there were budget.
infl ows of funds in connection with fi nes on
emissions from diesel vehicles. All in all, the Overall, the German government budget
structural surplus ratio improved markedly, has recorded a clear structural surplus since
though to a far lesser extent than the un- 2014. While pressure on the budget has
adjusted ratio. been eased by dynamic growth in revenue
from taxes and social contributions coupled
On balance, the structural improvement with lower interest expenditure, structural
can be fully explained by developments on primary expenditure has risen at a much
the revenue side, particularly the high faster rate than GDP.
growth in profi t-r elated taxes. Adjusted for
legislative changes and the effects of tax
progression, income growth was once
again greater than can be accounted for by * The analysis is based on national accounts data.
Aside from data revisions, adjustments to the macro-
its macroeconomic reference variable of economic outlook may also result in changes. For
entrepreneurial and investment income. methodological notes on the framework, see Deutsche
Bundesbank, A disaggregated framework for analysing
This can be discerned from the reported re- public fi nances: Germany’s fi scal track record between
sidual. Added to this was a revenue- rich 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, pp. 61-
76.
growth structure. Gross wages and salaries, 1 The term “fi scal drag” encompasses the revenue ef-
fect of bracket creep in income taxation and the coun-
in particular, increased relatively sharply.
tervailing impact of the fact that specifi c excise duties
Cuts in taxes and social contributions had are largely independent of prices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
60
Structural development of the government budget*
Year-on-year change in the ratio to nominal trend GDP in percentage points
Total
2009 to
Item 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2018
Unadjusted fi scal balance1 – 3.1 – 1.0 3.3 0.9 – 0.1 0.7 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.7 1.9
Cyclical component1 – 1.6 0.2 0.8 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.1 – 0.6
Temporary effects1 0.2 – 1.0 1.1 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.3 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.2 0.2
Fiscal balance – 1.4 – 0.3 1.3 1.0 0.3 1.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 2.4
Interest payable – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.8
Owing to change in
average interest rate – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2 … – 2.0
Owing to change in debt
level 0.1 0.3 0.2 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2 … 0.1
Primary balance – 1.7 – 0.4 1.4 0.8 – 0.0 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.2 0.0 0.3 0.5
Revenue – 0.9 – 0.2 1.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 0.1 0.4 0.2 0.4 1.3
Taxes and social
contributions – 1.0 – 0.4 0.7 0.1 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.5 0.4 0.3 1.1
Fiscal drag3 0.1 – 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.8
Decoupling of macro-
economic reference
variables from GDP – 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2
Legislative changes – 0.3 – 0.6 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.4
Residual – 0.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.5 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.3 1.5
of which:
Profi t- related taxes4 – 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.1 – 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.3 0.2 1.1
Non-tax revenue5 0.2 0.2 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.1 0.3
Primary expenditure 0.8 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.8 0.2 – 0.5 0.3 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.8
Social payments 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.3 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2
Subsidies 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2
Compensation of
employees 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.0
Intermediate consumption 0.2 0.2 0.1 – 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.7
Gross fi xed capital
formation 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2
Other expenditure6 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 0.6 – 0.4 0.2 0.0 – 0.1 0.1 0.3
Memo item:
Pension expenditure7 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.5
Healthcare expenditure8 0.2 0.1 0.0 – 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.7
Labour market expenditure9 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 0.0 – 0.0 – 1.1
Long-term care
expenditure 10 0.0 0.0 – 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.4
* The structural fi gures are derived by adjusting for cyclical infl uences and specifi c temporary effects. 1 Year- on- year change in
the ratio to nominal GDP. 2 The breakdown of the change in the interest expenditure ratio is not shown for 2018 as the debt
ratio for the year’s end is not yet available. 3 The term “fi scal drag” encompasses the revenue effect of bracket creep in income
taxation and the countervailing impact of the fact that specifi c excise duties are largely independent of prices. 4 Assessed in-
come tax, corporation tax, local business tax, investment income tax. 5 Other current transfers receivable, sales and total
capital revenue. 6 Other current transfers payable, other net acquisitions of non-fi nancial assets and capital transfers payable.
7 Spending by the statutory pension insurance scheme, spending on civil servant pensions as well as payments by the Post
Offi ce Pension Fund and the Federal Railways Fund. 8 Spending by the statutory health insurance scheme and assistance to-
wards civil servants’ healthcare costs. 9 Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the reintegration payment
paid to central government (from 2009 to 2013)) and central government expenditure on unemployment benefi t II and on
labour market reintegration measures. 10 Spending by the public long-term care insurance scheme.
Deutsche Bundesbank

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
61
were better than planned, additional measures
Tax revenue*
can be expected. All in all, a shrinking surplus is
Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly data
on the cards in the coming years as well.
+12
… but fiscal Nonetheless, structural surpluses are currently +10
rules still met by
likely in the medium term, too, and the debt + 8
some margin
from today’s ratio should drop well below 60%.1 Thus, the + 6
perspective
general government fiscal rules will be met by
+ 4
some margin despite the loose fiscal stance.
+ 2
Generally speaking, the rules permit unfavour-
0
able cyclical developments to have an impact
on the budgets. However, flatter growth often – 2
leads to a reassessment of the structural 2016 2017 2018
budgetary situation, which may make fiscal Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
policy corrections necessary. Buffers built up in
ment taxes.
good times therefore reduce the risk that pro- Deutsche Bundesbank
cyclical consolidation will be needed in the
event of an economic downturn.
Budgetary development
Heed long- term At the same time, given the current outlook, of central, state and local
challenges and
the debt burden will be reduced, thus making
make burden- government
sharing trans- provision for the demographic challenges that
parent
lie ahead. What is problematic, however, is if Tax revenue
new, permanent benefit commitments are
funded by drawing exclusively on finite reserves Tax revenue3 rose by just under 6% in 2018 Dynamic rise
in tax revenue
and are therefore covered just temporarily.2 The (see the above chart and the table on p. 62).
in 2018
structural gaps this leaves then have to be This growth was driven by income- related
plugged further down the line, when demo- taxes, with the dynamic increase in wage tax
graphic burdens are simultaneously mounting. receipts chiefly reflecting positive employment
At the end of the day, sustainable public fi- and wage developments. A large part of the
nances can only be secured if the long- term revenue increase stemming from bracket creep
outlook is heeded as well. Greater transparency in income taxation was offset by shortfalls
about the burdens and how they will be shared
would be a welcome move. On that note, the
pension package that came into force at the
start of the year should be viewed critically. The 1 The Federal Ministry of Finance also included this expect-
statutory pension insurance scheme will be ation in its projection for the Stability Council in December
2018. The Independent Advisory Board considers this pro-
saddled with additional expenditure in good jection to be acceptable; see Independent Advisory Board
times, with no clarification as to how this will of the Stability Council, Tenth statement regarding compli-
ance with the upper limit for the structural general govern-
be financed in the long term. ment budget deficit pursuant to Section 51(2) of the
Budgetary Principles Act (HGrG), December 2018. Given
the slightly less favourable macroeconomic expectations,
the Federal Government is likely to lower its fiscal projec-
tion somewhat, but, as things stand, there will be no sub-
stantial change in the budgetary situation.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: the use of reserves
and off- budget entities by central and state government,
Monthly Report, August 2018, pp. 69ff.
3 Including transfers to the EU budget – which are de-
ducted from German tax revenue – but excluding receipts
from local government taxes, which are not yet known for
the quarter under review.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
62
Tax revenue
Year as a whole Estimate Q4
for 2018 as
2017 2018 a whole1,2 2017 2018
Year- on-
year
Year-on-year change change Year-on-year change
Type of tax € billion € billion % % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total2 674.6 713.6 + 39.0 + 5.8 + 5.6 182.3 190.2 + 7.9 + 4.3
of which:
Wage tax 195.5 208.2 + 12.7 + 6.5 + 6.3 54.7 58.4 + 3.7 + 6.8
Profi t-related taxes 116.9 123.9 + 7.0 + 6.0 + 6.2 27.4 27.6 + 0.2 + 0.8
Assessed income tax3 59.4 60.4 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 14.9 15.2 + 0.3 + 2.2
Corporation tax 29.3 33.4 + 4.2 + 14.2 + 13.9 6.8 7.5 + 0.7 + 9.8
Investment income
tax4 28.3 30.1 + 1.8 + 6.4 + 8.6 5.7 4.9 – 0.8 – 13.8
Turnover taxes5 226.4 234.8 + 8.4 + 3.7 + 3.7 58.1 60.6 + 2.5 + 4.2
Other consumption-
related taxes6 92.2 92.7 + 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.7 27.6 27.8 + 0.2 + 0.7
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi cial tax estimate of October 2018. 2 Including EU
shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 4 With-
holding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax. 6 Taxes on
energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting
and lottery, beer, fi re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
owing to legislative changes.4 Revenue from However, the Federal Government has since Subdued rev-
enue growth
profit- related taxes saw another dynamic rise lowered its growth expectations slightly, pri-
expected in
(see also pp. 59f.), with the exception of with- marily for 2019. Moreover, legislative changes 2019, picking up
again in 2020
holding tax on interest income and capital agreed in the meantime will reduce the in-
gains. Turnover tax revenue increased markedly crease this year by ½ percentage point. Next
in step with domestic demand. In addition, the year, this dampening effect will be somewhat
lapsing repayment of nuclear fuel tax had a stronger still. A notable factor here is the Family
positive effect year on year.5 Relief Act (Familienentlastungsgesetz), which
entails income tax cuts applicable from the
2018 revenue Revenue was thus somewhat higher than pro- start of this year and of next year. This will in-
slightly higher
jected in the last official estimate of October crease the basic tax allowance and child tax al-
than October
estimate 2018 (+€1 billion). This was mainly thanks to lowance. The tax scale will also be adjusted
wage tax. By contrast, receipts from withhold- with the intention of compensating for the ef-
ing tax on interest income and capital gains fect of bracket creep attributable to inflation in
were surprisingly poor. In particular, this could the respective previous year. Child benefits will
be down to a drop in capital gains in the quar- also go up in the middle of this year. As things
ter just ended (as against the same quarter of now stand, revenue growth could thus be
the previous year) amid stock market losses,
some of them considerable. 4 The basic tax allowance and child tax allowance as well
as the other income tax brackets and child benefits were
raised slightly.
The official estimate shows average revenue 5 In 2017, the Federal Government repaid all nuclear fuel
tax receipts following a ruling by the Federal Constitutional
growth (including local government taxes) of
Court (with interest: €7½ billion or 1% of total tax rev-
around 4% this year and in the years thereafter. enue).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
63
dampened overall this year, but pick up again
Central government fiscal balance *
distinctly in 2020.
€ billion
Quarterly figures
+15
Central government budget
2018
+10
2017
Significantly According to preliminary data, the central gov- 2016
+ 5
larger surplus
ernment budget recorded a surplus of €11 bil-
in 2018
lion in 2018. This constitutes a significant im- 0
provement of €6 billion on 2017. Revenue rose
– 5
by 4½%. Tax revenue grew at the somewhat
Cumulated from start of year
weaker pace of 3½% (€12½ billion). The nu- +20
clear fuel tax repayment lapsed, but extra funds
of a similar amount were transferred to the EU 2018 +15
budget. There was a large increase of €4 billion
+10
2016
in non- tax receipts. Alongside the higher Bun-
desbank profit distribution, this was not least + 5
2017
attributable to additional receipts from the
0
heavy goods vehicle toll, which was extended
to all federal trunk roads in the middle of the – 5
year, and from loan repayments. At 3%, ex- Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
penditure growth was much weaker than Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
growth in revenue. A €1 billion drop in interest
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects.
payments was the chief source of relief. Deutsche Bundesbank
Result again The fiscal balance was therefore up by €13 bil- that was transferred to state government to
much better
lion on the budget plan just approved in July cover refugee- related expenses would have to
than planned;
worth examin- 2018. As in the previous two years, the envis- be added to this figure. Provision was made for
ing purpose of
aged withdrawal from the refugee reserve was this in the budget with a global revenue short-
reserve
not necessary. On the contrary, €11 billion was fall item (i.e. a lump- sum reduction in non- tax
added to the reserve at budget outturn, taking receipts). The budget account therefore in-
the total to €35 billion. The Federal Court of cludes corresponding additional non- tax rev-
Auditors criticised the repeated topping-u p of enue. Furthermore, a sum larger than esti-
the reserve, especially as it undermines the mated was transferred from the EU, an un-
budgetary principle of annuality.6 In reality, budgeted dividend was distributed by Deutsche
more or less free use is now made of this spe- Bahn and more loans were repaid. Receipts
cial reserve, which was originally created to from the resolution of the dispute over the
cover refugee- related burdens. This harbours delayed introduction of the heavy goods ve-
the risk of structural gaps being opened up, hicle toll in 2005 probably also contributed to
without it becoming sufficiently transparent. It the increase.
would be worth considering setting aside a re-
serve exclusively to cover unexpected deterior- Expenditure was €7 billion lower than the … and expend-
iture lower
ations in the budget position.7 amount envisaged in the budget. Interest ex-
Revenue signifi- Revenue was €6 billion higher than planned
6 See Bemerkungen 2018 des Bundesrechnungshofes zur
cantly higher
(excluding the envisaged reserve withdrawals). Haushalts- und Wirtschaftsführung des Bundes, p. 108.
than budget
estimates … Taxes contributed just €1 billion to this. How- 7 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: the use of reserves
and off- budget entities by central and state government,
ever, the turnover tax revenue of €1½ billion op. cit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
64
Key central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
€ billion
2017 2018 2019
Provisional
Item Actual Budget actual Budget
1. Fiscal balance 5.0 – 1.9 10.9 – 5.8
2. Coin seigniorage 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
3. Transfer to (–)/withdrawal from (+) reserves – 5.3 1.6 – 11.2 5.5
4. Net borrowing (1.+2.+3.) – – – –
5. Balance of fi nancial transactions – 0.8 0.3 0.7 0.7
6. Cyclical component in the budget procedure 2.1 4.2 1 – 2.0 4.4
7. Balance of incorporated off-budget entities – 1.4 0.9 4.0 – 3.6
Digitalisation fund (from 2018) – 2.4 2.4 – 0.2
Energy and climate fund – 0.2 0.0 2.9 – 0.7
Flood assistance fund – 0.7 – 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.7
Fund to promote municipal investment – 0.5 – 1.1 – 0.7 – 1.9
8. Structural net borrowing (4.–5.–6.+7.)
(repayment: +; borrowing: –) – 2.7 – 3.6 5.3 – 8.7
9. Structural balance (8.–2.–3.) 2.3 – 5.5 16.2 – 14.5
10. Structural balance adjusted for updated estimate of potential
output2 – 1.6 – 7.0 8.5 – 12.9
11. Debt brake ceiling (–0.35% of GDP3) – 10.6 – 11.4 – 11.4 – 11.5
* For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public fi nances, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68f. 1 Simplifi ed procedure
based on the national accounts fi gures published in February 2019. 2 Potential output and GDP based on Federal Government’s 2019
Annual Economic Report. 3 Here, this refers to GDP in the year before the budget is prepared.
Deutsche Bundesbank
penditure accounted for €1½ billion of this. On of GDP. Despite the transfer to reserves, there
balance, this was attributable to the premiums will still be a high credit entry on the control
(premiums on the sale price of Federal secur- account (€16½ billion).10
ities with coupons above the market interest
rate) fully deducted from this item. These were The 2019 Federal budget was adopted in No- Improved
starting position
again very extensive, at €3½ billion.8 The rest vember 2018, again with no authorisation for
allows for better
of the difference was largely down to current net borrowing. In its latest Annual Economic 2019 result than
planned, despite
grants. Investment spending was €1½ billion Report, the Federal Government projects some-
slower growth
lower than estimated. what weaker nominal GDP growth in 2019
than envisaged in the budget plan. The budget
Debt brake: The structural balance under the debt brake will thus come under pressure, but as things
surplus and high
stands at almost +0.2% of GDP. The surplus in now stand, this burden will probably be far
credit entry on
control account the core budget was neutralised by the reserve outweighed by the improved starting position.
despite reserve
top-up (no net borrowing).9 A minor surplus
top- up
from financial transactions had to be deducted. 8 For details of a less volatile accounting procedure that
However, because nominal GDP growth was conforms with the national accounts, see Deutsche Bun-
desbank, Distortive accounting of premiums and discounts
lower than envisaged, a cyclical burden of sorts in the Federal budget, Monthly Report, July 2017, pp. 43f.
was determined in spite of the overall very fa- 9 The way in which changes in reserves are accounted for
differs from the EU budget rules, compliance with which
vourable setting. Together with the surplus was intended to be ensured by means of the debt brake.
posted by the relevant off- budget entities, the Excluding the reserve top- up, the amount credited to the
control account would have been correspondingly higher.
overall outcome was +€5½ billion (budget esti- Its use would be much more limited.
mate: -€3½ billion). There was thus a margin 10 The provisional balance for the 2018 budget will be
booked at the start of March. The balance (accrued from
of ½% of GDP below the threshold of -0.35% previous years) currently stands at €19 billion.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
65
It therefore appears possible to achieve a bal- The off- budget entities’ surplus may be some- … and outlook
is positive for
anced budget without the planned withdrawal what lower in 2019. While the precautionary
2019, too
from the reserve. fund for redemption payments for inflation-
linked Federal securities is not due to make any
Benchmark In March, the Federal Government will adopt repayments, and the energy and climate fund
figures again
the benchmark figures for the 2020 budget may benefit from higher CO certificate prices
include fiscal 2
space, but add- and for the fiscal plan up to 2023. They will be on an annual average, the latter will receive
itional burdens
based on a tax estimate updated in line with lower central government transfers and will
foreseeable
the Annual Economic Report. GDP growth is have to foot the bill for rising expenditure on its
now considered to be weaker, but the reserve programme. A further dampening effect is
is €13 billion larger than previously planned, likely to come from higher outflows from the
and the more favourable starting position will fund to promote municipal investment, which
continue to make itself felt. According to the has given advance notice of a large number of
coalition agreements, additional fiscal space projects. In addition, the digitalisation fund will
should be used to increase spending on the no longer be prefinanced by central govern-
armed forces and development aid. On top of ment, and the first outflows are on the horizon.
this, there are plans to continue compensating However, the auction of mobile phone fre-
for bracket creep attributable to inflation and quencies planned for this year could enable the
to use central government grants to cushion fund to generate a significant surplus again.
the exit from coal power. There are also discus- This may even mean that the off- budget en-
sions about abolishing the solidarity surcharge tities as a whole are able to improve their over-
completely. This seems worthy of consider- all result.
ation, generally speaking; remaining financing
needs could then be funded from regular tax
revenue.11 Looking ahead, however, central State government budgets12
government’s financial position will worsen
considerably, as the central government grants State government finances improved in 2018, Higher surplus
in 2018 despite
to the statutory pension insurance scheme will too. The surplus posted by the state govern-
one- off burden
increase sharply due to demographic develop- ment core budgets (before the closing entries)
ments alone. grew again, by €1½ billion to just over €15½
billion. Excluding the one- off burden in the
Central Central government’s off- budget entities (ex- fourth quarter stemming from settling guaran-
government’s
cluding bad banks and other entities that use tees in connection with the privatisation of
off- budget
entities record commercial double- entry bookkeeping) con- HSH Nordbank (€5 billion), the result would
high surplus in
cluded 2018 with a high surplus of €6 billion, have been even more favourable. Overall, rev-
2018 …
compared with €3 billion in 2017. Some €2½ enue went up by 5½%. Tax revenue recorded
billion of this came from central government’s dynamic growth (+6%), while growth in trans-
transfer to prefinance the new digitalisation fers from other administrations was only mod-
fund. The energy and climate fund benefited erate. Of the other revenue, the absence of the
from both a much higher central government capital repayment from Bayern LB recorded in
transfer than in the previous year and a very 2017 was more than offset by fines from car
sharp rise in the prices of CO certificates. By manufacturers on emissions from diesel ve-
2
contrast, inflation compensation payments re- hicles. As a result of the one-o ff burden relat-
lated to the repayment of an inflation- indexed ing to HSH Nordbank, expenditure rose almost
seven- year Federal note (Bobl) (€1 billion) put
noticeable pressure on the off- budget entities. 11 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, Public finances, Monthly
Report, November 2018, p. 60.
12 The following figures are based on the monthly cash
statistics on the core budgets.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
66
cial system. As a result, transfers to local gov-
State government fiscal balance*
ernment as well as expenditure on staff, other
€ billion
operating expenditure and investment are set
Quarterly figures
+12 to increase considerably. As substantial growth
+ 9 2018 in pension burdens is expected for a number of
2017
2016 years yet, surpluses are likely to decline in the
+ 6
future.
+ 3
0
At the end of last year, the Bundestag ruled on Parliamentary
– 3 mediation com-
a constitutional amendment to extend central
– 6 mittee to debate
government financial assistance, in particular reform of Ger-
Cumulated from start of year 24 many’s Basic
for investment in education by state and local
Law with a view
21
government. The Bundesrat referred the pro- to increasing
2018 18 posed amendment, including, not least, a mixed financing
15 greater financial contribution from state gov-
12 ernment, to the parliamentary mediation com-
2017 9 mittee. In principle, stepping up mixed finan-
6 cing blurs the responsibilities of the various
3 government levels and weakens federal states’
2016
individual responsibility. This may also increase
0
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 the likelihood of funds being used inefficiently.
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from In view of the high level of surpluses overall,
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets
most states are likely to have own funds avail-
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche Bundesbank able to allocate more funding to individual
areas.13 If additional central government funds
as sharply as revenue on the whole. Staff costs do indeed seem to be necessary, it would be
and transfers to local government were up worth considering adjusting the distribution of
markedly. Fixed asset formation recorded far revenue in the tax system. In any case, agree-
stronger growth, but it is a much smaller ex- ing on common minimum standards and
penditure item. By contrast, interest expend- meaningful comparisons of performance is es-
iture continued to fall. sential to let the federal states compete with
each other for the best solutions in the area of
Positive outlook In the current year and the medium term, the education.14
for current year
outlook for state government as a whole re-
and medium
term mains positive. Tax revenue is forecast to grow
markedly, even in the Federal Government’s
watered- down macroeconomic projection. The
latest income tax cuts will be covered by
progression- related increases. Furthermore,
turnover tax revenue is no longer to be for-
warded to central government to service the
debts of the “German Unity Fund” now that 13 Given the current cyclically driven increase in the degree
they have been repaid in imputed terms. On of aggregate capacity utilisation, the unadjusted surplus
overstates the financial scope. In the context of the debt
top of this, additional revenue is expected as of brake, the federal states use different cyclical adjustment
2020 from the reform of the federal financial procedures, and the per capita cyclical components some-
times vary a great deal from one federal state to the next.
equalisation scheme. However, expenditure This has an impact on their budgetary leeway.
will also be stepped up in areas such as child- 14 See also Deutsche Bundesbank, State government
finances : comparison of developments, debt brakes and
care, education, internal security and the judi- fiscal surveillance, Monthly Report, October 2018, p. 38.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
67
Local government finances15
Local government fiscal balance
€ billion
Little change in In the third quarter of 2018, the surplus of local
surplus in Q3 Quarterly figures
government and its off- budget entities (just
2018 +8 Core budgets
over €1½ billion) hardly changed compared Off-budget entities
+6
with the same period of the year before. Rev-
enue went up by 4½%, driven mainly by taxes +4
2016
(+7½%), particularly local business tax. How- +2 2017
2018
ever, at 5%, expenditure rose at a somewhat 0
stronger pace than revenue. A major contribu- –2
tion was made by personnel expenditure –4 +12
(+7½%). This was chiefly due to the fact that
–6 +10
the wage increases from spring were paid out
Cumulated from beginning 2017 + 8
at a later date, but probably also reflects a fur- of year (core budgets and
off-budget entities) + 6
ther rise in staffing levels. Growth in fixed asset
+ 4
formation (+13½%) and other operating ex-
+ 2
penditure (+5½%) was also high. Decreases 2018
were recorded for interest expenditure and, in 0
particular, social benefits (-1½%). While spend- 2016 – 2
ing on social assistance continued to increase, – 4
accommodation costs for recipients of un- – 6
employment benefit II and benefits for asylum Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
seekers fell sharply.
Source: Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Large surplus At the end of the first three quarters of 2018,
likely for 2018
the surplus stood at the same level as in the falls over the course of the year, declined, in
as a whole,
and prospects previous year (€2½ billion), and the result for particular. The main reason for this was that
favourable in
the year as a whole is not expected to deviate the federal state of Hesse used its new “Hes-
medium term,
too significantly from that of the year before. As senkasse” fund to assume the bulk of its local
things currently stand, local government is ex- governments’ cash advances (€3½ billion). In
pected to continue posting a marked rise in tax return, the local authorities are required to con-
revenue for the current year and in the medium tribute to repayments, and the budgetary rules
term. Once the increased share of local busi- have been tightened in order to avoid higher
ness tax will no longer have to be transferred outstanding cash advances in the future. Over-
to state government as of 2020, the burden on all, local government debt in Germany
local government will ease by €4 billion. How- amounted to €136½ billion at the end of Sep-
ever, as in the case of state government, tember. Of this, €92½ billion is attributable to
stronger increases in expenditure are expected. credit market debt, €40½ billion to cash ad-
It is thus likely that the high surpluses will tail
off for local government, too. Nevertheless, the 15 This section describes the developments up to the third
local government budgetary rules are likely to quarter of 2018; the figures were not available in time for
the usual analysis in the January 2019 Monthly Report.
require certain surpluses for a longer period.16 16 This also stems from the fact that the rules are often
based on double- entry bookkeeping. In this type of book-
keeping, depreciation and new pension provisions are de-
Local govern- At €5 billion, debt attributable to local govern- ducted from the result, whereas investment expenditure
ment debt fell ment core budgets and off- budget entities fell and pension entitlements are not. In many local govern-
sharply in Q3 ments, depreciation exceeds investment and new pension
2018 due to sharply in the third quarter of 2018 compared provisions exceed entitlements paid out. As a result, a bal-
new “Hessen- anced budget in the case of double- entry bookkeeping re-
with the end of June. Cash advances, which are
kasse” fund quires a surplus when recorded in the government finance
actually only intended to bridge liquidity short- statistics analysed in this article.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
68
2018. At €4 billion, the surplus was €3½ billion
Finances of the German statutory
higher than in the previous year. In the final
pension insurance scheme
quarter of 2017, a slight deficit was still planned
for 2018.
Year-on-year percentage change
6 Revenue Expenditure 6
Revenue was up by 4%. Despite the slight cut Considerable
4 4 revenue growth
in the contribution rate from 18.7% to 18.6%
with more mod-
at the beginning of the year, contributions rose erate increase in
2 2
expenditure
at a somewhat faster pace on the back of very
0 0 favourable employment and wage develop-
ments. At 3%, expenditure growth was much
2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018
weaker. This is due to an average annual pen-
€ billion Fiscal balance, quarterly figures sion increase of just over 2½%17 and only a
+4 moderate increase in the number of pensions.
2016
2017
+2
2018 Despite very high reserves, the introduction of Result expected
0 to be signifi-
the new pension package18 meant that the
cantly lower
–2 contribution rate was not lowered. In the cur- in 2019
rent year, revenue is thus set to rise in parallel
–4
€ billion
with employment and wages, which are both
+4
expected to continue faring well. However,
Cumulated from start of year +2 growth in expenditure is likely to be much
steeper, driven, above all, by the further exten-
2018 2017 0
sion of child- raising periods for children born
–2
before 1992 (“mothers’ pensions”). Further-
–4 more, the mid- year pension increase is also ex-
2016
–6 pected to make a marked contribution to this
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 rise. Overall, therefore, despite favourable rev-
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche enue growth, a deficit already looks likely.
Rentenversicherung Bund). Preliminary quarterly figures. The fi-
nal annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub-
sequently. In the longer term, the funds needed by the Increasing finan-
Deutsche Bundesbank statutory pension insurance scheme will grow cial pressure
on scheme’s
at an increasingly faster pace. The deficits will finances
vances and €3½ billion to liabilities to the pub- rise until the reserve reaches its lower bound.
lic sector. Adjusted for the “Hessenkasse”, out- The statutory pension insurance scheme will
standing cash advances fell by just under €1 come under severe pressure when, as of the
billion, mainly in North Rhine- Westphalia. Per mid-2020s, the baby boomer generation enters
capita, however, the level in that state, in retirement. According to the pension insurance
Rhineland-P alatinate and, in particular, in Saar- report of November 2018, which includes the
land is still very high. most recent benefit increases, the contribution
rate is to jump by 1.3 percentage points to
19.9% in 2024. In 2025, it is forecast to reach
Social security funds the ceiling of 20% (which applies until that
Pension insurance scheme
17 This is made up of the average pension increases in Ger-
many in the middle of 2017 (just over 2%) and 2018 (just
over 3%).
Higher surplus The finances of the statutory pension insurance
18 For more details, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public fi-
in 2018
scheme saw very favourable development in nances, Monthly Report, August 2018, pp. 66f.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
69
date). Larger central government special- pur-
Finances of the
pose grants will be needed after that. Federal Employment Agency *
Announced The guarantees for the pension level and con-
Year-on-year percentage change
pension reform
tribution rate will come to an end in 2025. As
must balance +12 Revenue Expenditure +12
finances in the law stands, the central government budget
+ 9 + 9
long term
will then no longer function as a temporary
+ 6 + 6
buffer. After that, the contribution rate would
+ 3 + 3
have to rise rapidly, which, together with the
0 0
ever more unfavourable age structure, would
– 3 – 3
rein in pension increases. A pensions commis-
– 6 – 6
sion has been appointed to put forward funda-
– 9 – 9
mental reform proposals by March 2020. It
would be a logical move to consider longer life 2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018
expectancy when defining the statutory retire-
€ billion Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
ment age. Tethering the retirement age to ris- +3
2016
ing life expectancy is currently only the case +2 2017
2018
until 2031, up to which point the retirement +1
age is to be gradually put up to 67 years. Set- 0
ting the retirement age higher provides scope –1 € billion
to increase individual pension levels.19 Cumulated from start of year +6
+5
2016
+4
Federal Employment Agency 2017 +3
+2
Surplus high In 2018, the Federal Employment Agency +1
again in 2018
posted a surplus of just over €6 billion for its
2018 0
core budget.20 Compared to the previous year,
–1
the result even picked up slightly, although Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
more funds were again transferred to the civil Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Federal Employment
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’
servants’ pension fund.21 The budget target
pension fund.
(surplus of €2½ billion) was again exceeded by Deutsche Bundesbank
a considerable margin. The reserve for the core
budget stood at €23½ billion (0.7% of GDP) at The Federal Employment Agency expects a Surplus expected
to be much
the end of the year.22 much lower surplus of €½ billion for 2019. In
lower in 2019
its Annual Economic Report, the Federal Gov- due to cut in
contribution rate
Dynamic growth Revenue grew by 4% overall. Growth in contri- ernment has since lowered its growth forecast
in revenue;
bution receipts was steeper (+5%), while rev-
expenditure
grew only due enue from insolvency benefit contributions fell
to higher trans- 19 See Deutsche Bundesbank, Excursus: longer- term pen-
somewhat as a result of cutting the contribu- sion developments, Monthly Report, August 2016,
fer to civil ser-
vants’ pension tion rate. Growth in expenditure was only pp. 68ff.
fund 20 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to
slightly weaker. However, excluding the higher the fund are recorded as expenditure and thus reduce the
special transfer to the civil servants’ pension core budget balance.
21 With a total of €2 billion, transfers were up by almost
fund, expenditure would have fallen by ½%. €1½ billion on the previous year. The aim of this special
The most notable declines were recorded for transfer is to ensure that future civil servant pension obliga-
tions are covered earlier than originally planned.
expenditure on unemployment benefit (-2%) 22 Further reserves include the insolvency benefit and win-
ter compensation reserve (totalling just under €2½ billion)
and on active labour market policy (-1½%).
and a reserve of €8½ billion in the civil servants’ pension
fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
70
somewhat; however, it made little change to its most one- third higher than in the previous
expectations for wages and employment. The year. Since there have not yet been any clear
report expects the contribution base to con- signs of a change in policy, this appears to be
tinue to develop favourably. The cut in the con- far too high. All in all, in 2019, the Federal Em-
tribution rate from 3.0% to 2.5% at the begin- ployment Agency’s surplus is again expected to
ning of the year, however, is likely to generate be much larger than planned.
revenue shortfalls of around €6 billion. The
number of benefit recipients upon which the In the medium term, too, the conditions for the Medium- term
outlook is
budget plan is based roughly corresponds to Federal Employment Agency’s finances appear
positive
the number recorded in 2018. As per capita favourable from today’s perspective. According
benefit rates are rising roughly in line with re- to the forecasts available, the unemployment
muneration, more funds have been earmarked rate is expected to fall somewhat further still. In
for unemployment benefits in 2019. The figure spite of the lower contribution rate, significant
budgeted for active labour market policy is al- surpluses are thus on the cards.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
1•
Statistical
Section

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
2•
Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates .................................................................. 5•
2. External transactions and positions .............................................................................. 5•
3. General economic indicators ....................................................................................... 6•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts ......................................................................... 8•
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) ........................... 10•
3. Banking system’s liquidity position ............................................................................... 14•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets .......................................................................................................................... 16•
2. Liabilities ..................................................................................................................... 18•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)
in Germany ................................................................................................................. 20•
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks .......... 24•
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents .............................. 26•
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents ....................... 28•
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................... 30•
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households,
housing loans, sectors of economic activity ................................................................. 32•
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany ..................... 34•
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in
Germany ..................................................................................................................... 36•
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group........ 36•
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to
non-banks (non-MFIs).................................................................................................. 38•
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany ...... 38•
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany ........................................................ 39•
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of
German banks (MFIs) ................................................................................................... 40•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
3•
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area ......................................................................... 42•
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany ................................................................................ 42•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates ........................................................................................................ 43•
2. Base rates .................................................................................................................... 43•
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders ................................ 43•
4. Money market rates, by month ................................................................................... 43•
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of
German banks (MFIs) ................................................................................................... 44•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets .......................................................................................................................... 48•
2. Liabilities ..................................................................................................................... 49•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany ..................................... 50•
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents .................................................................. 51•
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents......................................... 52•
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents ....................................................................... 52•
5. Yields and indices on German securities ...................................................................... 53•
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany ............................................... 53•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations ..... 54•
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations ......................................... 55•
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households ............................ 56•
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households ................................................................ 57•
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty .. 58•
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the
national accounts ........................................................................................................ 58•
3. General government: budgetary development ............................................................. 59•
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development ..................................... 59•
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue ........................................................ 60•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
4•
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type ................... 60•
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes .................................................. 61•
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets ...................... 61•
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development ................................................. 62•
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development ....................................... 62•
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development .......................... 63•
12. Central government: borrowing in the market ............................................................. 63•
13. General government: debt by creditor ......................................................................... 63•
14. Maastricht debt by instrument..................................................................................... 64•
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category ............................ 65•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income ........................... 66•
2. Output in the production sector .................................................................................. 67•
3. Orders received by industry ......................................................................................... 68•
4. Orders received by construction .................................................................................. 69•
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles ............................................................... 69•
6. Labour market ............................................................................................................. 70•
7. Prices .......................................................................................................................... 71•
8. Households’ income .................................................................................................... 72•
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy) ....................................................................... 72•
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups ........................................... 73•
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups .................................... 74•
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area ........................................... 75•
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany .............. 76•
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and
group of countries ....................................................................................................... 77•
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany ................................ 78•
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany ............................................... 78•
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany.................................................... 78•
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany ................................................. 79•
8. External position of the Bundesbank............................................................................ 80•
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis
non-residents .............................................................................................................. 81•
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies ............................. 82•
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of
Economic and Monetary Union ................................................................................... 82•
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price
competitiveness ........................................................................................................... 83•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
5
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions 1,2 Determinants of the money stock 1 Interest rates
M3 3
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
moving average MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation 4 EONIA 5,7 EURIBOR 6,7 outstanding 8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2 0 1 7 Apr. 9.2 5.1 4.8 5.0 4.5 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
May 9.2 5.0 4.9 4.9 4.3 2.6 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
June 9.6 5.2 4.9 4.8 4.1 2.8 − 1.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
July 9.3 5.0 4.6 4.8 3.8 2.6 − 1.0 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2
Aug. 9.6 5.4 5.1 4.9 3.8 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
Sep. 9.8 5.3 5.1 5.1 3.9 2.4 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.0
Oct. 9.5 5.4 5.0 5.0 3.7 2.5 − 1.3 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
Nov. 9.1 5.2 4.9 4.9 3.9 2.9 − 1.3 − 0.35 − 0.33 0.9
Dec. 8.8 5.2 4.6 4.7 3.6 2.6 − 1.1 − 0.34 − 0.33 0.9
2 0 1 8 Jan. 8.8 5.2 4.6 4.5 3.5 2.9 − 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
Feb. 8.4 4.8 4.3 4.2 3.3 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.2
Mar. 7.5 4.3 3.6 3.9 2.8 2.4 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
Apr. 7.1 4.2 3.8 3.8 2.8 2.7 − 0.6 − 0.37 − 0.33 1.0
May 7.5 4.6 4.0 4.0 3.2 3.2 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1
June 7.4 4.7 4.3 4.1 3.1 2.8 − 1.0 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1
July 7.0 4.4 4.0 3.9 3.4 3.3 − 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.0
Aug. 6.5 4.0 3.5 3.7 3.3 3.3 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1
Sep. 6.8 4.3 3.6 3.6 3.1 3.2 − 0.1 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2
Oct. 6.8 4.4 3.9 3.7 2.8 2.9 0.5 − 0.37 − 0.32 1.3
Nov. 6.7 4.3 3.7 3.9 2.6 2.8 0.5 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2
Dec. 6.6 4.3 4.1 ... 2.7 3.0 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.31 1.1
2 0 1 9 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.37 − 0.31 1.0
/
1 Source:ECB.2 Seasonallyadjusted.3 Excludingmoneymarketfundsharesunits, overnightindexaverage.6 Eurointerbankofferedrate.7 SeealsofootnotestoTable
moneymarketpaperanddebtsecuritieswithamaturityofuptotwoyearsheldby VI.4, p. 43 . 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates 1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate 3
of which: Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment derivatives 2 investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real 4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ...Q1 1999 = 100
2 0 1 7 Apr. + 15,732 + 23,526 + 11,654 + 33,533 + 12,873 + 1,671 − 32,265 − 4,157 1.0723 93.7 89.0
May + 9,418 + 28,729 + 30,753 + 55,198 − 32,047 + 3,696 + 2,780 + 1,126 1.1058 95.6 90.5
June + 32,930 + 33,636 + 64,006 − 2,410 + 18,146 − 6,631 + 53,327 + 1,573 1.1229 96.3 91.2
July + 36,880 + 30,903 + 33,595 + 1,887 + 25,558 − 2,681 + 14,023 − 5,193 1.1511 97.6 92.4
Aug. + 34,968 + 24,500 − 999 − 25,778 + 73,088 − 5,530 − 42,106 − 674 1.1807 99.0 93.6
Sep. + 47,857 + 33,429 + 80,034 + 27,186 + 29,500 − 2,104 + 19,039 + 6,413 1.1915 99.0 93.6
Oct. + 38,780 + 29,413 + 26,775 + 13,316 + 52,427 − 613 − 35,660 − 2,695 1.1756 98.6 93.1
Nov. + 37,960 + 35,178 + 7,142 − 53,071 + 26,721 + 508 + 26,821 + 6,164 1.1738 98.5 93.1
Dec. + 46,060 + 32,404 + 96,101 + 47,972 − 23,523 + 4,570 + 68,687 − 1,604 1.1836 98.8 93.3
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 9,678 + 11,114 + 8,202 + 40,981 + 4,365 + 5,951 − 45,377 + 2,282 1.2200 99.4 93.9
Feb. + 24,534 + 24,878 + 19,822 + 8,167 + 59,680 + 356 − 48,262 − 119 1.2348 99.6 93.9
Mar. + 46,322 + 37,311 + 93,285 + 91,353 − 68,220 − 3,188 + 64,126 + 9,213 1.2336 99.7 94.2
Apr. + 33,686 + 26,757 − 1,613 + 26,101 + 31,563 + 11,865 − 67,514 − 3,629 1.2276 99.5 p 93.9
May + 14,290 + 26,442 + 23,770 + 1,004 + 45,707 + 14,857 − 40,132 + 2,334 1.1812 98.1 p 92.7
June + 34,107 + 31,977 + 40,473 + 359 − 37,803 + 11,286 + 58,769 + 7,862 1.1678 97.9 p 92.6
July + 32,976 + 26,200 + 2,869 + 6,131 + 7,437 + 12,826 − 19,174 − 4,351 1.1686 99.2 p 93.8
Aug. + 28,946 + 20,215 + 30,063 − 11,123 + 71,348 + 14,120 − 47,550 + 3,269 1.1549 99.0 p 93.3
Sep. + 28,456 + 20,962 + 59,870 + 25,173 − 43,994 + 6,381 + 70,064 + 2,246 1.1659 99.5 p 93.9
Oct. + 30,389 + 21,224 + 20,391 + 73,790 − 14,853 + 1,740 − 39,536 − 750 1.1484 98.9 p 93.4
Nov. + 23,247 + 22,428 + 23,104 − 27,074 − 9,592 + 13,641 + 42,890 + 3,239 1.1367 98.3 p 92.9
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1384 98.4 p 92.7
2 0 1 9 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1416 97.8 p 92.1
*Source:ECB,accordingtotheinternationalstandardsoftheInternationalMonetary TablesXII.10and12,pp.82-83 .2Includingemployeestockoptions.3Againstthe
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 1 Monthly averages, see also currencies of the EER-19 group. 4 Based on consumer price indices.

DDeeuuttsscchhee BBuunnddeessbbaannkk
MMoonntthhllyy RReeppoorrtt
FFeebbrruuaarryy 22001199
66
I. Key economic data for the euro area
3. General economic indicators
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2016 1.9 1.5 2.2 3.5 2.8 1.2 − 0.2 5.0 1.1 2.1
2017 2.4 1.7 2.2 4.9 2.7 2.2 1.5 7.2 1.6 4.6
2018 ... ... 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2 0 1 7 Q3 2.8 1.4 2.2 3.9 2.1 2.5 2.4 13.2 1.3 5.5
Q4 2.7 1.9 2.2 4.8 2.4 2.8 2.1 6.5 1.3 4.3
2 0 1 8 Q1 2.4 1.5 1.4 3.3 2.3 2.0 2.2 9.0 1.2 4.0
Q2 2.2 1.5 2.3 3.8 2.5 1.7 1.5 8.7 1.5 5.3
Q3 1.6 1.6 1.1 4.2 2.3 1.5 2.4 4.9 0.7 4.6
Q4 1.2 ... 0.9 ... ... 1.0 ... ... ... ...
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2016 1.6 4.5 1.1 3.0 3.9 0.3 2.6 1.8 1.9 4.9
2017 3.0 2.9 3.4 8.0 3.9 2.4 4.8 − 2.2 3.6 8.4
2018 e 1.0 ... p 1.0 4.3 4.0 0.6 1.2 p − 0.1 0.7 2.0
2 0 1 7 Q3 4.0 4.2 4.3 4.3 2.5 3.2 4.5 3.4 4.6 11.4
Q4 4.2 1.9 5.0 4.9 4.7 4.1 1.9 0.5 4.0 4.9
2 0 1 8 Q1 3.1 2.7 4.0 5.6 5.3 2.2 − 0.5 − 2.2 3.4 4.5
Q2 2.4 1.3 3.1 2.5 4.3 1.1 1.7 4.1 1.9 0.2
Q3 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.1 4.1 3.5 0.7 1.8 5.9 − 0.2 3.0
Q4 e − 1.9 ... p − 2.7 5.0 2.9 − 1.4 1.6 p − 6.5 − 2.2 0.9
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
2016 81.6 80.0 84.6 73.6 78.0 83.2 67.6 78.3 76.3 72.6
2017 83.0 81.8 86.6 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 79.5 76.8 74.5
2018 83.9 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.4
2 0 1 7 Q4 83.8 82.9 87.7 74.8 83.6 85.2 71.2 78.9 77.6 74.2
2 0 1 8 Q1 84.2 82.1 88.2 75.5 83.1 86.2 70.4 77.0 78.3 75.8
Q2 84.0 81.2 87.8 73.9 84.3 85.9 71.2 76.1 78.1 76.3
Q3 83.8 79.9 87.8 75.2 84.7 85.9 70.7 74.6 77.9 77.4
Q4 83.6 80.8 87.1 73.0 84.1 85.7 70.9 77.0 77.9 75.9
2 0 1 9 Q1 83.6 81.5 86.3 75.2 83.2 85.4 70.2 80.3 78.4 77.0
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
2016 10.0 7.8 4.1 6.8 8.8 10.1 23.6 8.4 11.7 9.6
2017 9.1 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.4 21.5 6.7 11.2 8.7
2018 8.2 5.9 3.4 ... 7.4 9.1 ... 5.7 ... 7.4
2 0 1 8 Aug. 8.0 5.7 3.4 5.4 7.3 9.1 18.9 5.6 10.1 7.1
Sep. 8.0 5.5 3.4 5.7 7.1 9.1 18.7 5.6 10.4 6.9
Oct. 8.0 5.5 3.3 5.2 7.0 9.1 18.7 5.5 10.6 6.9
Nov. 7.9 5.5 3.3 4.6 6.9 9.1 18.5 5.4 10.5 7.0
Dec. 7.9 5.5 3.2 ... 6.8 9.1 ... 5.3 10.3 7.1
2 0 1 9 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.3 ... ...
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2016 0.2 1.8 0.4 0.8 0.4 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 0.1
2017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2018 1.7 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2 0 1 8 Aug. 2.0 2.6 1.9 3.5 1.4 2.6 0.9 0.9 1.6 2.8
Sep. 2.1 2.8 2.2 3.5 1.4 2.5 1.1 1.2 1.5 3.3
Oct. 2.2 3.2 2.4 4.5 1.7 2.5 1.8 1.1 1.7 3.2
Nov. 1.9 2.9 2.2 3.2 1.4 2.2 1.1 0.8 1.6 2.9
Dec. 1.6 2.2 1.7 3.3 1.3 1.9 0.6 0.8 1.2 2.5
2 0 1 9 Jan. e 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... e 0.9 ...
General government financial balance 5
As a percentage of GDP
2016 − 1.6 − 2.4 0.9 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 3.5 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.5 0.1
2017 − 1.0 − 0.9 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 2.7 0.8 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.6
2018 ... ... 1.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
General government debt 5
As a percentage of GDP
2015 89.9 106.5 70.8 9.9 63.6 95.6 175.9 76.8 131.6 36.8
2016 89.1 106.1 67.9 9.2 63.0 98.2 178.5 73.4 131.4 40.3
2017 86.8 103.4 63.9 8.7 61.3 98.5 176.1 68.4 131.2 40.0
Sources:Eurostat,EuropeanCommission,EuropeanCentralBank,FederalStatistical areprovisional.1 Euroarea:quarterlydataseasonallyadjusted.2 Manufacturing,
Office,Bundesbankcalculations.Latestdataarepartlybasedonpressreportsand miningandenergy:adjustedforworking-dayvariations.3 Manufacturing:quarterly

DDeeuuttsscchhee BBuunnddeessbbaannkk
MMoonntthhllyy RReeppoorrtt
FFeebbrruuaarryy 22001199
77
I. Key economic data for the euro area
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2.4 2.4 5.7 2.2 2.0 1.9 3.1 3.1 3.2 4.8 2016
4.1 1.5 6.6 2.9 2.6 2.8 3.2 4.9 3.0 4.2 2017
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2018
3.7 0.6 7.6 2.8 2.5 2.7 3.0 4.2 2.7 4.6 2 0 1 7 Q3
3.8 2.8 4.9 2.7 2.4 2.4 3.7 6.3 3.2 3.6 Q4
3.7 3.4 4.8 2.8 3.7 1.8 3.7 4.7 2.8 3.9 2 0 1 8 Q1
3.8 3.2 6.2 3.1 2.7 2.4 4.5 4.0 2.5 3.9 Q2
2.6 3.2 7.5 2.4 2.2 1.9 4.6 4.8 2.3 3.7 Q3
... ... ... ... 2.3 ... ... ... 2.5 ... Q4
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
2.8 − 0.0 − 4.7 1.3 2.9 2.4 4.6 7.8 1.7 9.2 2016
6.8 2.6 3.9 1.3 5.4 3.5 3.4 8.3 3.3 7.5 2017
5.1 p − 0.7 p − 1.9 p 1.4 ... − 0.1 4.5 p 4.6 p 0.4 ... 2018
8.7 4.8 4.7 1.9 6.8 5.6 3.3 8.5 3.1 7.1 2 0 1 7 Q3
7.0 5.7 1.6 2.3 6.5 2.4 3.9 10.9 5.4 6.7 Q4
7.1 2.6 − 3.5 3.1 4.9 2.0 1.5 8.1 2.9 3.5 2 0 1 8 Q1
5.3 − 1.5 − 0.9 1.9 5.1 0.4 5.8 6.3 1.2 8.8 Q2
2.5 − 2.5 − 3.7 1.6 2.4 − 1.4 6.7 3.5 0.3 4.0 Q3
5.7 p − 1.4 p 0.6 p − 0.9 ... − 1.3 4.3 p 0.8 p − 2.8 ... Q4
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
75.9 76.9 79.1 81.7 84.3 80.2 84.5 83.5 78.6 59.8 2016
77.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 2017
77.5 81.4 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 2018
77.4 81.1 82.8 83.1 88.0 81.7 83.0 85.2 79.1 59.1 2 0 1 7 Q4
77.8 83.1 81.1 83.9 88.8 81.6 83.7 85.0 79.7 60.4 2 0 1 8 Q1
77.5 82.0 77.6 83.6 88.7 81.4 86.3 86.0 80.3 60.9 Q2
77.2 80.8 83.2 84.4 88.7 82.0 84.0 84.6 79.3 61.8 Q3
77.4 79.7 79.1 84.0 88.5 81.2 87.6 85.6 78.6 62.5 Q4
77.5 80.1 77.1 84.4 87.0 77.8 88.2 85.2 80.8 61.5 2 0 1 9 Q1
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
7.9 6.3 4.7 6.0 6.0 11.2 9.7 8.0 19.6 13.0 2016
7.1 5.6 4.0 4.9 5.5 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.2 11.1 2017
6.4 5.3 3.8 3.8 4.9 7.0 6.6 5.4 15.3 8.7 2018
6.3 5.4 3.7 3.9 4.9 6.9 6.4 5.2 15.0 8.3 2 0 1 8 Aug.
6.6 5.2 3.6 3.7 4.9 6.6 6.3 5.2 14.8 8.5 Sep.
6.3 5.2 3.6 3.7 4.8 6.6 6.2 5.3 14.6 8.5 Oct.
6.2 5.0 3.8 3.5 4.7 6.7 6.1 5.3 14.4 8.9 Nov.
6.3 4.9 3.8 3.6 4.7 6.7 6.1 5.2 14.3 8.8 Dec.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 0 1 9 Jan.
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
0.7 0.0 0.9 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.2 2016
3.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 2017
2.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 2018
1.8 2.4 2.4 1.9 2.3 1.3 2.9 2.0 2.2 1.7 2 0 1 8 Aug.
2.4 2.7 2.5 1.6 2.1 1.8 2.7 2.2 2.3 1.7 Sep.
2.8 2.8 2.1 1.9 2.4 0.8 2.5 2.3 2.3 1.9 Oct.
2.4 2.6 1.4 1.8 2.3 0.9 2.0 2.1 1.7 1.6 Nov.
1.8 1.9 1.2 1.9 1.7 0.6 1.9 1.4 1.2 1.0 Dec.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 0 1 9 Jan.
General government financial balance 5
As a percentage of GDP
0.3 1.6 0.9 0.0 − 1.6 − 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 4.5 0.3 2016
0.5 1.4 3.5 1.2 − 0.8 − 3.0 − 0.8 0.1 − 3.1 1.8 2017
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2018
General government debt 5
As a percentage of GDP
42.6 22.2 58.6 64.6 84.8 128.8 52.2 82.6 99.3 108.0 2015
39.9 20.7 56.3 61.9 83.0 129.2 51.8 78.7 99.0 105.5 2016
39.4 23.0 50.9 57.0 78.3 124.8 50.9 74.1 98.1 96.1 2017
dataseasonallyadjusted.Datacollectionatthebeginningofthequarter.4Monthly data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5 According to Maastricht Treaty definition.
data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
8
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Securities Total Securities Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net) 2 reserves 3
2 0 1 7 May 48.4 24.0 16.3 24.4 35.1 0.9 − 4.0 − 4.9 18.0 − 7.7 − 0.3 17.0 9.0
June 24.1 29.4 0.4 − 5.3 − 5.3 58.4 − 108.4 − 166.8 − 3.3 − 12.1 − 0.1 − 6.3 15.2
July 6.9 − 0.1 15.2 7.0 9.4 5.6 105.8 100.1 − 6.7 − 7.8 − 0.9 − 2.6 4.5
Aug. 12.1 − 20.4 − 15.7 32.4 38.5 − 27.0 − 2.9 24.1 7.5 − 5.8 − 0.8 − 3.0 17.0
Sep. 55.6 44.0 − 12.8 11.6 17.1 6.5 − 35.6 − 42.1 − 24.2 − 12.0 − 0.9 − 30.0 18.7
Oct. 64.0 52.3 − 10.3 11.7 11.5 − 68.4 88.2 156.6 − 30.3 − 27.0 − 0.6 − 7.2 4.6
Nov. 127.6 99.0 22.0 28.6 34.8 18.4 − 1.0 − 19.4 5.3 4.5 − 0.8 − 1.5 3.0
Dec. − 107.2 − 89.3 − 8.7 − 17.9 − 8.6 16.7 − 151.9 − 168.6 − 4.4 11.3 − 0.6 − 8.0 − 7.1
2 0 1 8 Jan. 124.7 83.9 26.4 40.8 27.6 − 42.8 152.3 195.1 13.3 − 7.6 − 0.1 22.2 − 1.1
Feb. 4.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 5.0 20.8 − 11.5 46.9 58.3 − 20.0 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 13.4 − 5.4
Mar. 65.9 61.4 1.7 4.5 6.9 80.4 − 66.3 − 146.6 14.8 − 5.6 − 0.4 2.0 18.8
Apr. 66.1 65.0 52.2 1.1 − 0.7 − 76.1 41.8 117.9 − 7.0 − 1.8 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 2.3
May 122.4 88.2 11.1 34.2 39.9 − 35.7 120.5 156.2 − 6.1 − 7.2 − 0.4 1.1 0.4
June − 5.1 − 22.5 − 22.2 17.3 20.5 77.6 − 67.6 − 145.2 − 8.1 − 4.9 − 0.4 − 7.7 4.9
July 67.5 66.9 19.7 0.6 3.2 − 24.4 41.5 66.0 10.5 6.2 − 0.6 − 8.5 13.4
Aug. − 2.2 − 13.8 − 4.8 11.5 22.7 − 26.4 − 1.4 24.9 4.1 − 8.3 − 0.4 1.4 11.4
Sep. 25.2 22.3 − 11.3 2.9 7.1 64.7 − 25.9 − 90.6 23.6 − 12.5 − 0.5 22.3 14.2
Oct. 11.8 18.3 3.8 − 6.5 − 8.0 − 5.8 61.9 67.7 8.4 − 6.4 − 0.3 4.0 11.0
Nov. 91.3 90.5 11.7 0.8 2.4 66.4 32.2 − 34.2 1.6 − 4.1 − 1.0 3.8 2.9
Dec. − 86.1 − 65.7 − 21.4 − 20.3 − 22.1 2.4 − 158.9 − 161.3 13.3 16.0 0.1 − 7.7 4.9
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Securities Total Securities Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net) 2 reserves 3
2 0 1 7 May 13.8 13.3 3.5 0.6 7.9 7.1 − 13.0 − 20.1 2.7 − 0.1 − 0.4 1.8 1.4
June 11.8 11.5 6.2 0.4 2.6 22.7 16.2 − 6.4 6.0 − 2.0 − 0.4 2.8 5.6
July 18.1 12.8 1.8 5.3 3.5 − 10.3 − 23.0 − 12.7 − 4.0 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 − 0.5
Aug. 13.6 10.2 − 0.6 3.4 8.3 14.7 − 13.8 − 28.5 4.5 0.1 − 0.8 3.5 1.7
Sep. 17.8 14.1 − 1.8 3.7 8.0 − 22.3 9.2 31.5 − 5.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 7.3 2.3
Oct. 15.9 8.6 0.4 7.3 6.5 6.1 − 11.4 − 17.5 − 11.4 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 9.5 − 0.1
Nov. 27.2 16.7 6.4 10.5 11.2 23.1 − 2.6 − 25.7 2.6 3.3 − 0.6 0.1 − 0.1
Dec. − 5.4 − 3.5 4.3 − 1.8 1.0 − 48.9 − 8.1 40.8 2.6 − 0.3 − 0.6 − 1.9 5.3
2 0 1 8 Jan. 19.1 21.3 2.0 − 2.2 − 1.3 10.1 28.1 18.0 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7 14.2 − 5.6
Feb. 5.1 10.7 − 1.7 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 20.7 11.6 32.4 − 5.3 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 2.9
Mar. 7.2 9.7 − 2.2 − 2.5 − 0.6 7.9 − 5.2 − 13.1 3.1 − 2.6 − 0.4 4.0 2.2
Apr. 7.3 7.2 0.9 0.1 − 0.7 − 5.0 − 13.9 − 8.9 − 2.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 3.1 1.9
May 19.2 21.2 5.0 − 2.1 2.4 − 10.7 29.8 40.6 − 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 4.1 − 4.6
June 16.7 17.9 2.1 − 1.1 1.3 − 18.2 − 20.4 − 2.1 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 3.1 8.1
July 12.7 9.7 0.0 2.9 0.9 26.0 − 0.3 − 26.3 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.7 5.9
Aug. 4.1 5.7 − 8.7 − 1.6 2.8 − 8.5 − 11.6 − 3.1 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 1.7 1.8
Sep. 19.3 18.3 1.8 1.0 4.1 − 4.1 7.9 12.0 12.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 7.6 7.8
Oct. 7.0 8.7 1.4 − 1.7 − 5.0 34.2 2.8 − 31.4 1.6 0.1 − 0.5 4.1 − 2.0
Nov. 20.0 18.5 0.9 1.5 2.5 15.1 − 3.7 − 18.8 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 3.0 − 1.4
Dec. − 5.3 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 32.8 4.3 37.1 − 1.1 0.7 − 0.3 − 9.0 7.5
*Thedatainthistablearebasedontheconsolidatedbalancesheetofmonetary MFIs’portfolios.3Afterdeductionofinter-MFIparticipations.4Includingthecounter-
financialinstitutions(MFIs)(TableII.2);statisticalbreakshavebeeneliminatedfrom parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5 Including the monetary
theflowfigures(seealsothe“Notesonthefigures“inthe“Explanatorynotes“inthe liabilitiesofcentralgovernments(PostOffice,Treasury).6InGermany,onlysavings
StatisticalSupplement1totheMonthlyReport,p.30 ).1Source:ECB.2Excluding deposits. 7 Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
9
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which: ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up to
liability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl. money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market
central gov- banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares paper)
ernments Total 4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits 5 2 years 5 months 5,6 tions (net) 2,7,8 (net) 2,7 Period
13.4 − 13.2 − 31.1 28.0 42.0 0.4 41.6 − 21.0 7.0 − 11.7 − 4.6 6.3 2 0 1 7 May
20.4 21.4 − 44.1 73.1 82.7 9.5 73.2 − 11.9 2.3 − 16.6 − 20.6 − 0.1 June
− 7.7 − 15.7 − 42.7 31.5 35.9 6.0 29.9 − 6.2 1.8 − 24.1 12.9 − 3.5 July
− 18.3 − 59.8 − 55.8 45.5 30.9 − 2.3 33.2 8.1 6.4 2.6 9.4 − 5.4 Aug.
41.3 23.3 − 21.6 23.3 47.9 0.9 47.0 − 21.5 − 3.0 7.0 − 4.1 11.6 Sep.
− 43.4 54.0 − 15.3 12.1 22.7 1.9 20.8 − 7.9 − 2.8 19.8 9.0 − 7.9 Oct.
− 8.8 72.3 − 77.3 73.2 81.7 0.9 80.8 − 7.7 − 0.9 17.2 − 3.8 0.1 Nov.
− 21.2 − 86.5 − 21.6 63.0 65.6 16.1 49.5 − 6.7 4.1 − 31.8 − 26.5 − 6.9 Dec.
40.9 17.7 − 10.0 − 1.8 − 19.1 −15.2 − 3.9 5.6 11.7 − 7.8 20.1 − 11.6 2 0 1 8 Jan.
13.9 11.7 − − 12.5 − 9.4 5.2 0.3 4.9 − 17.3 2.7 − 4.8 − 11.3 4.9 Feb.
13.9 47.6 − 70.0 67.6 64.8 8.7 56.1 − 3.5 6.3 8.2 − 1.4 7.3 Mar.
− 19.8 − 31.6 − 48.5 29.9 48.6 4.2 44.4 − 20.7 2.0 − 3.8 11.3 0.4 Apr.
7.1 17.0 − 68.7 93.0 95.7 4.9 90.8 − 10.0 7.2 24.9 − 12.3 − 6.6 May
21.4 − 43.5 − 102.7 108.8 91.2 11.4 79.7 13.9 3.8 − 5.6 − 8.9 5.2 June
7.6 33.8 − − 8.9 − 9.8 − 6.3 6.7 − 13.0 − 8.2 4.7 6.7 10.3 − 6.0 July
2.8 − 41.2 − 5.7 − 1.4 − 0.0 2.9 − 3.0 − 6.6 5.3 3.8 − 1.6 2.3 Aug.
40.7 6.4 − 19.3 45.4 69.3 2.1 67.2 − 20.7 − 3.1 − 10.7 − 19.5 − 0.2 Sep.
− 38.9 − 0.8 − 37.3 13.4 8.1 1.8 6.3 8.5 − 3.2 − 10.1 24.3 − 0.5 Oct.
7.3 63.1 − 85.7 88.2 97.1 5.3 91.8 − 11.3 2.4 31.5 − 1.5 − 3.6 Nov.
− 59.8 − 85.8 − 48.6 47.0 48.0 18.0 30.0 − 6.3 5.2 − 16.7 1.8 7.5 Dec.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V ) 10
of which: Components of the money stock
Intra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits with
liability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 years
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl. money
central gov- banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac- shares market
ernments Total issue 9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months 6 tions (net) 7,8 paper)(net) 7 Period
7.7 − 8.7 2.9 − 0.7 19.2 18.3 1.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 0.8 2 0 1 7 May
7.1 0.7 4.7 0.9 20.7 20.6 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.1 0.6 June
2.5 14.8 2.1 2.1 − 5.6 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.4 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 July
7.4 5.1 3.7 − 1.3 11.2 14.7 − 2.9 − 0.3 0.1 0.2 − 0.5 Aug.
9.6 − 14.2 3.5 − 0.3 5.9 5.6 0.8 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 0.3 Sep.
− 14.2 43.1 2.1 0.8 4.5 14.3 − 9.3 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 Oct.
6.2 8.7 1.2 − 0.0 32.7 33.8 − 1.7 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.2 Nov.
10.0 − 58.0 3.8 2.0 − 8.8 − 10.1 0.4 2.4 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.8 Dec.
− 24.3 35.5 − 0.0 − 2.8 13.1 11.5 2.4 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 2 0 1 8 Jan.
9.2 − 21.2 2.0 − 0.3 1.7 5.2 − 4.4 0.3 − 0.5 0.3 0.7 Feb.
8.3 0.6 6.9 − 1.5 3.1 − 0.5 6.0 − 0.5 − 0.9 0.2 − 1.1 Mar.
− 15.2 14.5 1.3 1.9 5.3 14.7 − 8.6 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 Apr.
11.7 − 42.5 5.4 − 0.1 39.3 38.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.1 May
17.7 − 26.3 3.6 2.5 4.8 − 6.4 14.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.1 − 2.6 June
− 21.0 57.8 3.1 2.2 − 0.5 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.6 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 July
13.7 − 14.2 5.3 0.5 − 0.4 2.4 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 1.7 Aug.
12.2 − 32.9 3.9 − 0.3 23.8 27.3 − 2.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.5 Sep.
− 17.8 43.5 3.8 0.1 13.8 11.1 − 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.0 2.3 Oct.
9.7 − 8.2 2.5 1.0 32.8 38.6 − 4.1 0.5 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.5 Nov.
− 5.4 − 26.6 4.0 2.8 − 5.1 − 1.3 − 3.3 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.9 Dec.
8 Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro area MFIs. 9 Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11 The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10 The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordancewiththeaccountingregimechosenbytheEurosystem(seealsofootnote
monetaryaggregatesandarethereforenotcomparablewiththeerstwhileGerman 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
10
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities 2 equities Total Loans securities 3 residents assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2 0 1 6 Nov. 27,162.6 17,295.8 12,983.5 10,830.1 1,383.5 770.0 4,312.2 1,089.2 3,223.0 5,454.2 4,412.7
Dec. 26,715.5 17,273.1 12,963.7 10,810.3 1,372.2 781.2 4,309.4 1,079.7 3,229.7 5,208.3 4,234.1
2 0 1 7 Jan. 26,797.1 17,356.0 12,994.9 10,815.3 1,393.4 786.2 4,361.1 1,097.6 3,263.5 5,377.8 4,063.3
Feb. 27,058.5 17,417.4 13,033.2 10,845.9 1,398.4 788.9 4,384.2 1,076.5 3,307.8 5,497.7 4,143.4
Mar. 27,009.9 17,549.9 13,115.7 10,902.1 1,423.7 789.8 4,434.2 1,073.0 3,361.1 5,418.3 4,041.8
Apr. 27,100.8 17,594.8 13,130.3 10,897.5 1,429.9 803.0 4,464.5 1,075.7 3,388.8 5,450.8 4,055.1
May 27,016.5 17,632.4 13,145.3 10,895.9 1,451.2 798.2 4,487.1 1,062.5 3,424.6 5,361.1 4,023.1
June 26,693.5 17,611.0 13,132.7 10,895.2 1,441.3 796.2 4,478.3 1,063.1 3,415.2 5,196.2 3,886.2
July 26,650.5 17,603.8 13,118.6 10,865.9 1,460.1 792.5 4,485.3 1,060.3 3,425.0 5,229.0 3,817.6
Aug. 26,683.4 17,610.2 13,087.0 10,853.0 1,444.3 789.7 4,523.2 1,054.6 3,468.6 5,199.5 3,873.7
Sep. 26,562.1 17,655.8 13,130.8 10,905.5 1,434.3 791.0 4,525.1 1,046.0 3,479.1 5,171.1 3,735.2
Oct. 26,760.7 17,733.3 13,189.6 10,968.3 1,423.0 798.3 4,543.6 1,046.2 3,497.4 5,292.7 3,734.7
Nov. 26,790.2 17,846.3 13,272.2 11,037.5 1,431.0 803.7 4,574.1 1,038.2 3,535.9 5,247.3 3,696.6
Dec. 26,320.9 17,708.3 13,167.2 10,942.7 1,425.7 798.9 4,541.0 1,028.7 3,512.3 5,065.8 3,546.8
2 0 1 8 Jan. 26,336.6 17,819.1 13,241.2 10,990.6 1,449.1 801.5 4,577.9 1,041.6 3,536.3 5,253.9 3,263.6
Feb. 26,299.7 17,821.4 13,239.8 10,992.9 1,456.6 790.2 4,581.6 1,025.6 3,556.0 5,342.8 3,135.6
Mar. 26,292.2 17,880.6 13,279.5 11,032.0 1,466.9 780.6 4,601.1 1,023.3 3,577.8 5,257.5 3,154.1
Apr. 26,515.5 18,033.0 13,433.0 11,127.8 1,490.1 815.1 4,599.9 1,025.1 3,574.8 5,334.9 3,147.7
May 26,916.4 18,104.5 13,514.3 11,201.9 1,504.6 807.7 4,590.2 1,019.9 3,570.3 5,543.5 3,268.4
June 26,772.1 18,099.3 13,482.4 11,193.5 1,501.8 787.0 4,616.9 1,016.8 3,600.1 5,455.7 3,217.1
July 26,781.9 18,156.4 13,547.1 11,235.9 1,524.0 787.2 4,609.3 1,012.7 3,596.5 5,465.9 3,159.6
Aug. 26,815.4 18,127.5 13,530.7 11,227.3 1,524.0 779.3 4,596.8 1,001.7 3,595.1 5,484.6 3,203.4
Sep. 26,769.5 18,147.7 13,539.4 11,248.0 1,509.3 782.1 4,608.3 1,000.7 3,607.5 5,461.9 3,159.9
Oct. 27,089.3 18,151.6 13,555.7 11,266.5 1,511.2 778.0 4,595.9 1,002.5 3,593.4 5,679.1 3,258.6
Nov. 27,222.6 18,242.5 13,637.2 11,337.3 1,515.9 784.0 4,605.3 1,001.0 3,604.3 5,700.9 3,279.1
Dec. 27,010.0 18,171.0 13,567.5 11,294.8 1,502.1 770.6 4,603.5 1,002.7 3,600.8 5,563.2 3,275.9
German contribution (€ billion)
2 0 1 6 Nov. 6,186.1 4,046.1 3,107.1 2,680.4 165.0 261.7 939.0 355.5 583.5 1,243.2 896.8
Dec. 6,131.1 4,037.0 3,099.2 2,671.7 164.0 263.6 937.8 345.2 592.6 1,234.7 859.4
2 0 1 7 Jan. 6,131.6 4,054.1 3,112.0 2,682.7 165.0 264.3 942.1 345.2 596.8 1,260.2 817.4
Feb. 6,196.5 4,075.7 3,124.9 2,691.3 168.1 265.5 950.8 344.6 606.2 1,281.9 839.0
Mar. 6,176.3 4,089.6 3,136.8 2,701.2 169.6 266.0 952.8 340.6 612.3 1,281.0 805.7
Apr. 6,174.4 4,103.1 3,143.3 2,709.1 170.4 263.9 959.8 342.3 617.5 1,264.2 807.1
May 6,160.2 4,114.5 3,157.3 2,719.6 172.6 265.0 957.2 332.2 624.9 1,234.6 811.2
June 6,106.3 4,120.6 3,165.9 2,722.5 173.2 270.2 954.7 330.8 623.9 1,238.6 747.1
July 6,069.0 4,135.9 3,176.7 2,731.5 175.2 269.9 959.2 332.6 626.7 1,201.4 731.7
Aug. 6,084.5 4,152.3 3,186.3 2,741.6 174.3 270.3 966.1 327.8 638.3 1,185.1 747.2
Sep. 6,076.7 4,167.7 3,200.9 2,757.6 174.3 269.1 966.8 323.2 643.6 1,194.6 714.3
Oct. 6,082.0 4,185.9 3,210.4 2,766.1 174.6 269.8 975.4 324.0 651.4 1,188.5 707.7
Nov. 6,088.7 4,211.0 3,227.4 2,777.0 178.7 271.6 983.6 321.5 662.1 1,177.2 700.5
Dec. 6,051.1 4,202.2 3,222.8 2,768.6 180.4 273.8 979.4 318.5 660.9 1,163.4 685.4
2 0 1 8 Jan. 6,074.8 4,214.9 3,242.3 2,786.5 181.6 274.2 972.5 317.0 655.6 1,176.4 683.5
Feb. 6,051.9 4,220.1 3,253.3 2,799.4 183.1 270.8 966.8 311.4 655.4 1,195.1 636.8
Mar. 6,053.7 4,228.1 3,260.9 2,809.5 183.0 268.4 967.2 309.7 657.5 1,184.4 641.2
Apr. 6,046.4 4,233.3 3,267.7 2,816.0 184.4 267.4 965.6 310.5 655.0 1,178.5 634.6
May 6,148.1 4,248.4 3,280.8 2,824.1 186.8 269.8 967.6 306.5 661.1 1,226.7 673.0
June 6,120.9 4,264.2 3,297.3 2,838.8 187.5 271.0 966.9 304.3 662.7 1,201.8 654.9
July 6,089.3 4,274.2 3,307.9 2,849.4 187.0 271.5 966.3 304.9 661.4 1,194.2 620.9
Aug. 6,121.9 4,279.7 3,313.6 2,863.9 183.8 265.9 966.0 300.5 665.5 1,189.8 652.4
Sep. 6,119.7 4,295.4 3,331.0 2,880.3 184.8 265.9 964.4 297.5 666.9 1,194.5 629.8
Oct. 6,154.2 4,303.6 3,339.1 2,888.2 185.3 265.6 964.5 300.8 663.7 1,208.1 642.4
Nov. 6,177.4 4,323.4 3,356.8 2,905.6 188.1 263.0 966.7 299.8 666.9 1,202.7 651.3
Dec. 6,195.3 4,317.4 3,353.6 2,903.7 187.8 262.2 963.7 296.4 667.3 1,208.5 669.4
*Monetaryfinancialinstitutions(MFIs)comprisebanks(includingbuildingandloan enterprises. 3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national generalgovernment.4Eurocurrencyincirculation(seealsofootnote8onp.12 ).
centralbanks(theEurosystem).1Source:ECB.2Includingmoneymarketpaperof Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
11
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 6
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which: up to up to over up to over End of
circulation 4 Total in euro 5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,071.2 11,883.1 11,108.4 11,213.1 5,780.3 926.8 303.3 2,014.3 2,121.8 66.6 2 0 1 6 Nov.
1,087.5 11,929.6 11,211.6 11,321.5 5,826.7 913.8 293.2 2,049.7 2,172.6 65.6 Dec.
1,075.6 11,985.1 11,191.6 11,306.4 5,823.9 914.2 286.6 2,034.5 2,182.1 65.0 2 0 1 7 Jan.
1,078.5 11,994.0 11,210.5 11,330.1 5,849.1 919.5 284.5 2,028.8 2,183.6 64.6 Feb.
1,082.9 12,103.6 11,279.9 11,422.6 5,945.0 912.9 284.5 2,027.9 2,188.3 64.1 Mar.
1,089.7 12,141.3 11,323.3 11,456.5 6,022.2 888.7 278.2 2,013.7 2,190.1 63.7 Apr.
1,090.2 12,151.7 11,338.9 11,444.1 6,044.4 862.7 272.6 2,003.3 2,199.0 62.0 May
1,099.7 12,214.1 11,384.0 11,483.6 6,113.6 854.2 265.6 1,986.8 2,201.6 61.9 June
1,105.6 12,209.8 11,392.9 11,476.5 6,123.8 848.8 262.8 1,976.5 2,206.2 58.4 July
1,103.3 12,226.8 11,422.8 11,505.1 6,146.8 857.8 260.6 1,969.7 2,212.6 57.7 Aug.
1,104.2 12,271.6 11,432.3 11,519.7 6,196.9 843.3 256.2 1,956.4 2,210.0 56.8 Sep.
1,106.2 12,217.2 11,420.3 11,507.4 6,217.3 846.5 250.5 1,929.6 2,207.3 56.2 Oct.
1,107.1 12,249.3 11,471.5 11,544.7 6,291.5 832.2 245.9 1,912.8 2,206.7 55.5 Nov.
1,123.2 12,285.5 11,542.6 11,617.5 6,349.2 834.7 242.2 1,925.2 2,211.3 54.9 Dec.
1,108.0 12,318.4 11,528.3 11,610.5 6,348.8 840.6 236.7 1,915.0 2,213.6 55.8 2 0 1 8 Jan.
1,108.3 12,329.9 11,524.5 11,603.2 6,352.6 831.3 232.1 1,915.9 2,216.1 55.1 Feb.
1,117.0 12,394.1 11,580.8 11,661.0 6,417.0 831.7 226.4 1,909.0 2,222.2 54.8 Mar.
1,121.2 12,401.4 11,610.9 11,680.6 6,455.0 817.8 222.3 1,906.9 2,224.2 54.4 Apr.
1,126.1 12,502.7 11,691.0 11,763.4 6,548.1 811.1 217.7 1,900.8 2,231.7 54.0 May
1,137.6 12,613.9 11,777.3 11,845.3 6,623.8 821.5 214.9 1,895.1 2,236.3 53.7 June
1,145.3 12,606.1 11,760.9 11,827.3 6,603.9 817.3 212.1 1,899.9 2,241.0 53.1 July
1,148.3 12,595.5 11,753.5 11,804.8 6,594.2 812.2 208.9 1,890.4 2,246.4 52.7 Aug.
1,150.4 12,662.5 11,780.5 11,833.6 6,657.5 796.4 205.9 1,877.7 2,243.7 52.3 Sep.
1,152.2 12,639.8 11,788.6 11,848.9 6,669.2 813.1 203.6 1,871.9 2,239.0 52.1 Oct.
1,157.5 12,719.7 11,862.1 11,913.0 6,750.4 802.3 200.6 1,866.9 2,241.5 51.3 Nov.
1,175.5 12,710.9 11,924.4 11,987.2 6,803.5 799.5 200.8 1,887.1 2,245.0 51.4 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
245.7 3,536.5 3,424.0 3,288.1 1,857.7 171.0 37.4 636.6 533.7 51.7 2 0 1 6 Nov.
248.1 3,517.1 3,419.8 3,284.1 1,851.0 171.5 38.4 635.6 536.3 51.3 Dec.
245.4 3,526.3 3,439.3 3,306.3 1,873.8 174.0 38.7 632.1 537.1 50.6 2 0 1 7 Jan.
246.6 3,532.6 3,448.3 3,313.4 1,881.5 175.3 38.8 630.0 537.9 50.0 Feb.
247.7 3,549.3 3,449.2 3,318.1 1,886.4 177.4 39.9 628.4 536.5 49.5 Mar.
249.3 3,540.9 3,447.5 3,317.0 1,895.9 170.7 40.0 624.7 536.6 49.0 Apr.
248.6 3,566.1 3,465.8 3,327.4 1,910.5 167.5 40.2 624.1 536.4 48.7 May
249.5 3,590.5 3,482.0 3,339.9 1,928.7 165.5 40.3 621.4 535.7 48.3 June
251.6 3,583.1 3,472.8 3,333.0 1,927.8 162.6 40.3 619.5 537.9 44.9 July
250.4 3,600.7 3,483.1 3,338.6 1,938.3 159.0 40.3 619.3 537.5 44.1 Aug.
250.1 3,616.3 3,486.8 3,345.9 1,945.0 162.3 39.6 617.9 537.5 43.5 Sep.
250.9 3,606.4 3,490.8 3,352.9 1,958.5 158.8 38.6 616.2 538.0 42.7 Oct.
250.9 3,646.8 3,521.5 3,383.7 1,990.6 157.1 37.4 618.2 538.3 42.1 Nov.
252.9 3,647.9 3,515.8 3,378.5 1,976.2 162.0 37.7 620.4 540.7 41.5 Dec.
250.1 3,632.5 3,522.3 3,390.7 1,994.6 161.5 36.4 616.5 539.5 42.2 2 0 1 8 Jan.
249.8 3,642.4 3,523.0 3,388.4 1,995.9 160.2 35.3 615.5 540.0 41.5 Feb.
248.3 3,652.2 3,524.1 3,389.6 1,998.1 164.6 34.2 612.1 539.4 41.0 Mar.
250.3 3,641.8 3,529.8 3,395.0 2,013.5 157.6 33.6 610.6 539.1 40.6 Apr.
250.2 3,693.8 3,568.4 3,425.0 2,048.0 154.6 33.0 610.2 539.0 40.3 May
252.7 3,716.5 3,574.0 3,423.0 2,039.4 165.5 32.6 607.2 538.5 39.8 June
256.0 3,694.1 3,571.0 3,429.7 2,053.1 161.2 32.2 605.8 538.0 39.4 July
256.4 3,703.1 3,568.1 3,417.3 2,051.8 153.7 34.0 601.1 537.7 38.9 Aug.
256.1 3,737.2 3,588.3 3,437.1 2,076.9 153.2 33.2 597.4 537.8 38.6 Sep.
256.3 3,730.6 3,595.8 3,453.9 2,092.2 155.1 33.6 596.9 538.0 38.1 Oct.
257.2 3,774.2 3,632.0 3,482.3 2,127.4 149.8 33.2 595.9 538.5 37.4 Nov.
260.0 3,766.3 3,629.3 3,481.1 2,120.4 152.5 33.7 596.7 540.6 37.2 Dec.
volumeofeurobanknotesputintocirculationbytheBundesbankinaccordancewith Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra-Eurosystem
theaccountingregimechosenbytheEurosystem(seealsofootnote2onbanknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability items“). 5 Excluding
circulationinTableIII.2).Thevolumeofcurrencyactuallyputintocirculationbythe central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
12
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont’d)
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of 2
Money
over of which: market of which:
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund Denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net) 3 Total in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2 0 1 6 Nov. 300.4 369.6 178.7 98.8 21.1 44.2 21.6 5.2 264.9 264.2 519.5 2,233.8 1,503.4
Dec. 253.0 355.1 168.6 93.9 21.5 43.3 22.6 5.1 268.9 268.2 511.5 2,221.3 1,501.1
2 0 1 7 Jan. 316.7 362.0 169.5 99.5 21.3 43.4 22.9 5.5 250.1 249.5 525.9 2,199.8 1,485.6
Feb. 299.9 364.1 175.0 96.2 20.2 44.1 23.1 5.4 241.7 241.0 521.9 2,211.1 1,491.1
Mar. 324.0 357.0 165.4 96.5 21.5 44.6 23.6 5.4 256.5 255.8 534.0 2,184.3 1,478.2
Apr. 318.6 366.2 176.4 92.4 23.7 44.7 23.5 5.5 250.4 249.7 529.6 2,156.2 1,465.1
May 332.1 375.5 181.6 94.5 25.3 45.2 24.2 4.7 238.5 237.8 524.9 2,164.5 1,489.6
June 352.5 378.0 181.2 95.7 26.6 45.8 24.0 4.7 221.7 221.0 504.1 2,148.0 1,477.8
July 345.0 388.3 191.0 95.2 26.7 46.2 24.4 4.8 197.4 196.8 517.0 2,126.1 1,469.2
Aug. 326.7 395.0 197.1 94.8 27.8 46.2 24.4 4.7 199.6 198.9 526.4 2,111.0 1,461.9
Sep. 362.5 389.5 193.2 91.9 28.1 47.5 24.1 4.7 206.6 205.9 522.1 2,092.5 1,446.5
Oct. 318.9 390.9 197.9 87.6 28.3 48.3 24.1 4.7 226.5 225.8 531.3 2,083.2 1,429.2
Nov. 310.2 394.4 197.6 89.5 29.8 49.0 23.8 4.6 243.4 242.8 527.6 2,096.5 1,444.2
Dec. 289.0 379.1 191.1 81.5 31.5 46.8 23.5 4.6 211.2 210.7 501.2 2,076.1 1,432.9
2 0 1 8 Jan. 329.9 378.0 186.1 84.3 31.1 47.5 24.1 5.0 203.0 202.5 521.3 2,072.0 1,440.3
Feb. 343.9 382.8 191.5 83.4 30.4 47.8 24.8 4.8 198.5 198.0 510.0 2,074.2 1,431.7
Mar. 357.8 375.3 181.4 85.8 29.5 48.6 25.1 4.8 206.7 206.1 508.5 2,078.0 1,435.7
Apr. 337.9 383.0 190.3 84.7 28.4 49.7 25.1 4.7 227.6 227.1 519.7 2,085.4 1,436.9
May 345.0 394.3 196.4 87.2 29.8 51.0 25.2 4.7 253.0 252.5 507.4 2,097.5 1,439.5
June 366.4 402.2 199.3 91.7 29.9 51.9 24.8 4.7 247.4 246.8 498.2 2,095.4 1,439.3
July 374.2 404.6 203.1 88.4 30.9 52.8 24.8 4.7 254.0 253.5 508.7 2,076.7 1,433.4
Aug. 377.0 413.7 208.3 90.6 31.0 54.4 24.8 4.6 257.8 257.3 507.1 2,083.9 1,440.4
Sep. 414.1 414.8 210.8 87.8 32.4 54.8 24.4 4.6 247.2 246.7 487.6 2,109.9 1,457.9
Oct. 375.4 415.4 213.2 84.0 32.3 55.7 25.7 4.5 237.4 236.9 511.8 2,166.0 1,475.5
Nov. 382.8 423.9 218.9 85.1 33.6 56.3 25.7 4.3 268.8 268.4 510.4 2,162.8 1,469.8
Dec. 322.3 401.4 203.6 78.7 34.2 56.9 23.7 4.3 252.1 251.7 512.1 2,158.4 1,473.3
German contribution (€ billion)
2 0 1 6 Nov. 47.4 201.0 59.5 84.2 16.1 37.3 3.3 0.6 3.0 3.0 2.3 542.1 251.4
Dec. 33.8 199.1 61.6 80.5 16.6 36.6 3.3 0.6 2.2 2.2 2.3 541.3 250.6
2 0 1 7 Jan. 21.2 198.8 55.1 86.6 16.4 36.9 3.2 0.6 4.8 4.8 2.2 553.4 261.4
Feb. 17.5 201.8 61.5 83.2 15.7 37.7 3.1 0.6 4.5 4.5 2.2 556.7 262.6
Mar. 31.6 199.5 58.7 82.5 16.5 38.2 3.1 0.6 2.6 2.6 2.1 551.8 263.6
Apr. 25.0 198.9 59.0 79.4 18.8 38.2 3.0 0.6 3.5 3.5 2.1 546.7 264.9
May 32.7 206.1 61.6 81.6 20.6 38.7 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 542.6 263.2
June 39.8 210.9 63.4 82.6 22.0 39.3 3.0 0.6 1.8 1.8 2.1 542.7 266.0
July 42.3 207.8 60.3 81.5 22.6 39.8 3.0 0.7 3.3 3.3 2.1 534.5 264.9
Aug. 49.7 212.4 64.0 81.0 23.6 40.1 3.0 0.7 3.4 3.4 2.3 534.4 267.8
Sep. 59.5 210.9 63.2 78.5 24.3 41.2 3.0 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.3 529.1 264.0
Oct. 45.3 208.2 64.4 73.5 24.7 41.9 3.0 0.7 2.3 2.3 2.0 521.8 252.3
Nov. 51.7 211.4 65.5 73.0 26.2 43.1 2.9 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 518.3 251.1
Dec. 61.7 207.7 69.3 66.3 27.8 40.6 2.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.7 512.7 256.4
2 0 1 8 Jan. 37.4 204.4 61.6 70.3 27.5 41.4 2.8 0.8 4.3 4.3 1.7 518.8 262.8
Feb. 46.7 207.4 66.3 69.2 26.8 41.5 3.0 0.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 522.7 263.8
Mar. 55.0 207.6 63.2 72.7 25.8 42.3 3.0 0.6 2.9 2.9 2.2 523.5 265.6
Apr. 39.7 207.0 63.1 72.5 24.4 43.3 3.0 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 524.1 270.0
May 51.4 217.4 68.6 74.9 25.7 44.5 3.1 0.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 536.8 274.3
June 69.1 224.5 70.7 79.2 25.6 45.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 2.0 531.3 274.8
July 48.1 216.4 63.4 76.6 26.5 46.2 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.8 1.9 526.6 277.0
Aug. 61.7 224.1 67.3 78.9 26.4 47.7 3.1 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.9 527.7 282.0
Sep. 73.9 226.2 69.6 76.9 27.8 48.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.9 536.3 287.6
Oct. 56.1 220.6 66.1 73.9 28.0 48.9 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 1.9 544.5 286.9
Nov. 65.7 226.3 69.4 74.8 28.7 49.7 3.1 0.7 1.3 1.3 2.2 544.9 290.3
Dec. 60.3 225.0 74.6 67.5 29.3 49.9 3.0 0.6 0.8 0.8 2.2 532.6 283.5
*Monetaryfinancialinstitutions(MFIs)comprisebanks(includingbuildingandloan paper. 5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6 After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFIparticipations.7TheGermancontributionstotheEurosystem’smonetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1 Source: ECB. 2 In Germany, only savings aggregatesshouldonnoaccountbeinterpretedasnationalmonetaryaggregates
deposits. 3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding andarethereforenotcomparablewiththeerstwhileGermanmoneystocksM1,M2
GermanMFIs’portfoliosofsecuritiesissuedbyMFIsintheeuroarea.4InGermany, or M3. 8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bankdebtsecuritieswithmaturitiesofuptooneyearareclassedasmoneymarket p. 10 ). 9 For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
13
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Memo item:
Other liability items Monetary aggregates 7
(from 2002 German contribution
issued (net) 3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which: Monetary
Intra- liabilities
Eurosystem- of central
liability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments
1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of
1 year 4 2 years 2 years residents 5 reserves 6 liabilities Total 8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 Treasury) 14 year/month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
48.9 38.6 2,146.3 4,327.8 2,662.6 − 56.1 4,255.9 − 7,146.0 10,660.0 11,336.8 6,939.2 136.4 2 0 1 6 Nov.
43.4 37.7 2,140.2 4,049.3 2,654.2 − 42.3 4,035.5 − 7,194.1 10,735.8 11,391.2 6,958.0 135.4 Dec.
38.9 41.4 2,119.5 4,252.5 2,646.2 − 16.2 3,878.0 − 7,183.7 10,734.7 11,414.4 6,914.2 139.1 2 0 1 7 Jan.
43.7 42.8 2,124.6 4,383.6 2,696.4 − 20.3 3,951.5 − 7,218.4 10,769.9 11,448.5 6,963.9 140.1 Feb.
41.9 44.5 2,097.9 4,322.7 2,677.0 − 3.1 3,852.1 − 7,309.1 10,860.5 11,554.2 6,916.9 140.0 Mar.
29.3 41.1 2,085.8 4,405.4 2,662.9 1.0 3,864.2 − 7,406.4 10,927.1 11,601.9 6,876.2 142.1 Apr.
36.3 41.4 2,086.8 4,338.1 2,659.2 3.0 3,846.5 − 7,437.3 10,939.5 11,618.1 6,861.2 145.0 May
37.6 39.8 2,070.6 4,139.0 2,631.1 9.8 3,725.9 − 7,516.1 11,007.6 11,656.5 6,800.8 145.5 June
34.8 37.9 2,053.4 4,185.6 2,616.1 9.4 3,683.6 − 7,544.5 11,032.5 11,691.3 6,755.4 148.0 July
30.2 37.9 2,042.9 4,182.2 2,647.6 − 0.9 3,687.4 − 7,572.0 11,073.6 11,743.2 6,768.7 148.5 Aug.
39.4 38.3 2,014.8 4,159.3 2,650.6 17.0 3,538.1 − 7,620.8 11,098.3 11,764.0 6,730.9 150.4 Sep.
33.3 36.5 2,013.4 4,341.0 2,665.6 13.3 3,576.3 − 7,646.5 11,114.4 11,783.7 6,717.8 148.7 Oct.
37.1 36.8 2,022.6 4,291.1 2,657.3 45.9 3,572.0 − 7,724.4 11,175.5 11,852.7 6,701.8 151.3 Nov.
32.5 34.7 2,008.9 4,099.3 2,731.0 26.2 3,267.2 − 7,786.7 11,234.1 11,870.1 6,771.4 146.0 Dec.
25.3 29.3 2,017.4 4,415.8 2,714.9 − 44.3 3,027.4 − 7,768.2 11,221.3 11,867.7 6,755.6 148.1 2 0 1 8 Jan.
32.5 27.8 2,013.9 4,506.6 2,708.2 − 28.8 2,892.8 − 7,777.5 11,218.0 11,862.4 6,745.8 147.5 Feb.
39.7 27.1 2,011.1 4,349.9 2,720.0 − 8.3 2,926.4 − 7,840.8 11,283.6 11,929.3 6,748.3 147.5 Mar.
40.5 27.2 2,017.7 4,496.1 2,720.7 10.0 2,933.4 − 7,892.7 11,317.5 11,985.2 6,754.1 148.4 Apr.
35.0 26.9 2,035.6 4,710.9 2,699.7 13.4 3,005.6 − 7,995.1 11,420.3 12,065.0 6,745.8 147.0 May
41.3 26.0 2,028.0 4,564.3 2,670.0 31.4 2,914.0 − 8,087.0 11,530.0 12,168.5 6,703.4 150.2 June
32.7 28.4 2,015.6 4,613.3 2,665.5 18.4 2,893.8 − 8,080.9 11,519.3 12,158.7 6,691.6 152.4 July
34.9 28.7 2,020.3 4,649.6 2,661.2 25.6 2,886.5 − 8,082.4 11,520.1 12,166.9 6,683.7 155.5 Aug.
36.7 26.4 2,046.9 4,573.0 2,660.2 27.2 2,851.5 − 8,152.8 11,567.3 12,187.6 6,696.5 157.9 Sep.
35.7 28.0 2,102.3 4,703.8 2,706.0 − 3.2 2,975.5 − 8,164.3 11,585.9 12,231.6 6,792.5 153.6 Oct.
37.2 23.0 2,102.6 4,661.3 2,706.6 13.6 3,022.0 − 8,260.4 11,672.9 12,316.0 6,788.0 157.4 Nov.
45.8 21.8 2,090.8 4,504.0 2,730.9 10.7 2,955.4 − 8,309.6 11,716.7 12,361.4 6,821.4 152.3 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
22.7 14.6 504.7 905.9 578.4 − 918.6 1,536.5 323.9 1,917.2 2,762.9 2,805.6 1,809.3 − 2 0 1 6 Nov.
23.1 14.2 504.0 878.8 580.3 − 897.1 1,506.3 327.3 1,912.6 2,759.2 2,801.0 1,808.4 − Dec.
22.8 14.4 516.2 930.2 575.5 − 926.5 1,465.7 328.3 1,928.9 2,784.9 2,829.2 1,811.9 − 2 0 1 7 Jan.
22.2 15.2 519.2 972.2 587.9 − 944.3 1,484.8 330.1 1,943.0 2,797.0 2,841.1 1,825.3 − Feb.
19.5 15.9 516.4 979.6 586.5 − 957.7 1,462.2 331.9 1,945.1 2,801.0 2,841.1 1,819.5 − Mar.
17.7 16.9 512.1 985.8 597.9 − 965.5 1,463.1 335.2 1,954.8 2,803.4 2,843.5 1,822.6 − Apr.
18.4 16.8 507.4 957.7 595.0 − 967.6 1,461.9 338.1 1,972.1 2,821.5 2,861.2 1,814.4 − May
19.3 16.4 507.0 946.6 591.5 − 981.1 1,412.1 342.8 1,992.1 2,841.2 2,880.9 1,808.1 − June
18.8 16.2 499.5 926.1 589.1 − 975.5 1,406.4 345.0 1,988.1 2,835.9 2,876.2 1,793.6 − July
18.5 15.8 500.0 894.5 597.2 − 970.2 1,422.2 348.6 2,002.3 2,846.8 2,886.8 1,801.4 − Aug.
19.3 15.4 494.4 927.7 594.2 − 982.9 1,387.5 352.1 2,008.2 2,853.5 2,893.0 1,792.0 − Sep.
18.6 15.7 487.5 913.6 596.3 − 946.7 1,386.3 354.2 2,023.0 2,859.6 2,898.2 1,785.4 − Oct.
18.5 15.8 484.0 883.4 593.7 − 940.3 1,382.0 355.5 2,056.1 2,890.9 2,929.9 1,781.9 − Nov.
17.7 14.8 480.2 921.3 668.6 − 999.6 1,295.2 359.3 2,045.5 2,882.9 2,920.4 1,852.1 − Dec.
16.0 14.2 488.5 931.6 656.8 − 974.7 1,303.7 359.3 2,056.2 2,894.2 2,930.5 1,846.2 − 2 0 1 8 Jan.
16.7 14.3 491.6 968.4 653.3 −1,003.8 1,263.2 361.3 2,062.1 2,896.6 2,933.5 1,844.1 − Feb.
16.0 13.9 493.6 953.5 657.7 −1,016.5 1,278.1 368.2 2,061.3 2,901.1 2,936.2 1,847.4 − Mar.
17.5 12.3 494.3 949.7 658.7 −1,002.9 1,270.5 369.5 2,076.6 2,907.0 2,941.3 1,848.1 − Apr.
19.0 13.1 504.7 997.9 662.3 −1,044.2 1,297.9 374.9 2,116.6 2,946.8 2,982.4 1,862.6 − May
17.0 12.5 501.8 996.0 666.2 −1,070.1 1,277.7 378.5 2,110.1 2,954.5 2,987.3 1,860.9 − June
16.7 11.9 498.0 967.9 665.4 −1,019.3 1,250.8 381.6 2,116.5 2,954.1 2,986.4 1,855.4 − July
18.3 12.0 497.4 966.5 672.6 −1,024.8 1,273.6 386.9 2,119.1 2,953.0 2,986.4 1,858.4 − Aug.
17.8 11.0 507.4 979.8 670.9 −1,059.4 1,251.7 390.8 2,146.5 2,978.4 3,010.4 1,863.3 − Sep.
20.2 11.0 513.2 952.8 676.1 −1,031.2 1,277.1 394.6 2,158.3 2,990.0 3,025.5 1,873.8 − Oct.
19.4 10.3 515.2 932.7 675.8 −1,041.8 1,288.0 397.1 2,196.8 3,024.9 3,058.2 1,874.7 − Nov.
17.7 10.1 504.8 967.9 689.9 −1,063.4 1,299.1 401.1 2,195.0 3,021.6 3,052.4 1,879.0 − Dec.
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in yearsandatagreednoticeofuptothreemonths(excludingcentralgovernments’
accordancewiththeaccountingregimechosenbytheEurosystem(seealsofootnote deposits)and(fortheeuroarea)centralgovernments’monetaryliabilitieswithsuch
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10 Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities.12M2plusrepotransactions,moneymarketfundshares,moneymarket
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paperanddebtsecuritiesuptotwoyears.13Depositswithagreedmaturitiesof
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the over two years and at agreed notice of over three months, debt securities with
consolidatedbalancesheet.11M1plusdepositswithagreedmaturitiesofuptotwo maturities of over two years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
14
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
3. Banking system’s liquidity position *
Stocks
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility operations 3 facility operations 4 circulation 5 deposits (net) 6 reserves) 7 money 8
ending in 1
Eurosystem 2
2 0 1 6 July 666.1 47.6 471.6 0.1 1,227.1 323.1 0.0 1,087.1 175.5 169.4 657.5 2,067.7
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 685.0 43.5 483.7 0.0 1,339.7 355.1 0.0 1,096.2 137.8 214.0 748.8 2,200.2
Oct. 687.8 37.4 503.5 0.1 1,447.0 387.3 0.0 1,094.7 168.3 248.0 777.4 2,259.4
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 687.4 34.0 511.8 0.2 1,570.2 439.4 0.0 1,103.1 159.7 277.6 823.9 2,366.3
2 0 1 7 Jan. 674.7 34.6 548.9 0.2 1,670.8 434.4 0.0 1,119.1 143.1 313.6 919.0 2,472.6
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 662.4 29.0 554.3 0.3 1,787.5 479.2 0.0 1,110.8 160.3 322.2 960.9 2,550.9
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 678.6 18.5 707.4 0.3 1,905.3 550.0 0.0 1,118.4 182.0 378.8 1,081.1 2,749.4
June 683.1 13.7 767.4 0.2 1,995.0 593.7 0.0 1,126.0 163.6 397.4 1,178.7 2,898.5
July 656.9 9.4 767.4 0.2 2,076.1 595.3 0.0 1,136.3 229.8 379.4 1,169.2 2,900.8
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 639.0 5.5 768.6 0.3 2,150.2 611.4 0.0 1,142.5 181.8 385.1 1,242.7 2,996.7
Oct. 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2,239.2 648.1 0.0 1,142.8 218.3 383.9 1,253.3 3,044.2
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 634.5 3.0 763.7 0.2 2,333.5 682.5 0.0 1,146.6 188.5 407.6 1,309.7 3,138.8
2 0 1 8 Jan. 635.7 2.9 760.6 0.2 2,398.2 689.2 0.0 1,158.2 188.1 487.0 1,275.2 3,122.5
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 630.9 1.5 760.5 0.0 2,435.5 686.3 0.0 1,148.2 203.6 474.9 1,315.6 3,150.1
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 627.1 1.9 759.5 0.1 2,476.8 668.0 0.0 1,159.0 247.5 495.6 1,295.3 3,122.3
June 625.2 1.8 757.3 0.1 2,519.9 659.5 0.0 1,170.4 218.0 502.5 1,353.9 3,183.8
July 635.1 2.1 744.2 0.1 2,558.4 652.2 0.0 1,183.6 263.4 533.8 1,306.9 3,142.6
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 637.5 3.0 739.9 0.1 2,589.7 671.2 0.0 1,192.2 239.1 519.1 1,348.7 3,212.0
Oct. 625.2 6.9 727.8 0.1 2,622.8 631.8 0.0 1,194.3 283.1 504.4 1,369.0 3,195.1
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 625.1 6.8 726.4 0.1 2,642.3 635.9 0.0 1,202.4 240.2 542.9 1,379.4 3,217.7
2 0 1 9 Jan. 655.8 7.9 723.8 0.1 2,652.8 640.0 0.0 1,218.8 231.3 618.2 1,332.1 3,190.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 0 1 6 July 163.3 2.7 44.7 0.0 263.4 89.8 0.0 257.4 47.2 − 117.0 196.6 543.9
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 168.3 1.9 44.0 0.0 288.2 90.8 0.0 258.7 36.2 − 112.6 229.3 578.9
Oct. 168.7 1.5 50.6 0.0 311.9 105.2 0.0 258.6 50.5 − 125.2 243.6 607.4
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 167.7 0.9 54.0 0.0 339.2 129.7 0.0 260.3 43.7 − 141.9 270.0 660.0
2 0 1 7 Jan. 163.8 0.9 62.0 0.0 361.5 132.7 0.0 264.2 35.4 − 146.1 302.0 698.9
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 159.4 0.8 63.5 0.0 386.6 153.7 0.0 262.3 23.1 − 169.8 341.0 757.0
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 164.4 1.0 86.0 0.1 412.4 181.4 0.0 264.1 29.7 − 185.3 374.0 819.5
June 165.8 0.3 95.0 0.0 431.8 181.2 0.0 266.2 32.4 − 204.9 418.0 865.4
July 159.6 0.5 95.0 0.0 447.9 170.1 0.0 269.0 52.7 − 201.6 412.7 851.9
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 155.2 0.3 94.9 0.0 463.2 165.5 0.0 269.9 52.4 − 192.6 418.5 853.9
Oct. 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 154.2 0.5 94.8 0.0 501.4 187.5 0.0 270.3 56.0 − 218.6 455.8 913.6
2 0 1 8 Jan. 155.5 0.9 93.3 0.0 514.7 204.4 0.0 272.8 54.9 − 192.2 424.5 901.7
Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mar. 151.5 0.6 93.4 0.0 522.9 207.9 0.0 271.0 56.8 − 221.3 453.9 932.8
Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
May 150.7 1.1 93.3 0.0 530.6 190.8 0.0 273.8 61.1 − 191.3 440.9 905.5
June 150.1 1.1 93.1 0.0 540.6 200.3 0.0 277.4 59.2 − 217.9 466.0 943.6
July 151.9 0.4 91.8 0.0 547.6 196.8 0.0 280.0 69.4 − 194.1 439.6 916.4
Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Sep. 152.1 0.4 91.5 0.0 556.2 192.9 0.0 282.0 65.2 − 178.9 439.0 913.9
Oct. 148.1 0.5 88.5 0.0 563.5 160.0 0.0 282.6 81.3 − 183.4 460.0 902.6
Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Dec. 146.9 0.6 88.1 0.0 570.0 148.0 0.0 283.6 69.6 − 185.2 489.5 921.2
2 0 1 9 Jan. 155.8 1.7 87.6 0.1 570.4 153.1 0.0 293.4 60.5 − 144.9 453.7 900.1
Discrepanciesmayarisefromrounding.*Thebankingsystem’sliquiditypositionis figuresareavailableinsuchcases.2Source:ECB.3Includesliquidityprovidedunder
definedasthecurrentaccountholdingsineuroofeuroareacreditinstitutionswith theEurosystem’sassetpurchaseprogrammes.4FromAugust2009includesliquidity
theEurosystem.Amountsarederivedfromtheconsolidatedfinancialstatementof absorbedasaresultoftheEurosystem’sforeignexchangeswapoperations.5From
theEurosystemandthefinancialstatementoftheBundesbank.1Figuresaredailyav- 2002eurobanknotesandotherbanknoteswhichhavebeenissuedbythenational
eragesforthereservemaintenanceperiodendinginthemonthindicated.Following centralbanksoftheEurosystemandwhicharestillincirculation.Inaccordancewith
thechangeoverinthefrequencyofGoverningCouncilmonetarypolicymeetingstoa theaccountingprocedurechosenbytheEurosystemfortheissueofeurobanknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
15
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Flows
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserve
and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenance
currency operations operations facility operations 3 facility operations 4 circulation 5 deposits (net) 6 reserves) 7 money 8 period
ending in 1
Eurosystem 2
+ 25.8 − 6.3 + 15.3 − 0.1 + 121.8 + 14.1 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 51.6 + 46.6 + 33.7 + 58.3 2 0 1 6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 18.9 − 4.1 + 12.1 − 0.1 + 112.6 + 32.0 + 0.0 + 9.1 − 37.7 + 44.6 + 91.3 + 132.5 Sep.
+ 2.8 − 6.1 + 19.8 + 0.1 + 107.3 + 32.2 + 0.0 − 1.5 + 30.5 + 34.0 + 28.6 + 59.2 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
− 0.4 − 3.4 + 8.3 + 0.1 + 123.2 + 52.1 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 8.6 + 29.6 + 46.5 + 106.9 Dec.
− 12.7 + 0.6 + 37.1 + 0.0 + 100.6 − 5.0 + 0.0 + 16.0 − 16.6 + 36.0 + 95.1 + 106.3 2 0 1 7 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
− 12.3 − 5.6 + 5.4 + 0.1 + 116.7 + 44.8 + 0.0 − 8.3 + 17.2 + 8.6 + 41.9 + 78.3 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+ 16.2 − 10.5 + 153.1 + 0.0 + 117.8 + 70.8 + 0.0 + 7.6 + 21.7 + 56.6 + 120.2 + 198.5 May
+ 4.5 − 4.8 + 60.0 − 0.1 + 89.7 + 43.7 + 0.0 + 7.6 − 18.4 + 18.6 + 97.6 + 149.1 June
− 26.2 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 81.1 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 10.3 + 66.2 − 18.0 − 9.5 + 2.3 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
− 17.9 − 3.9 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 74.1 + 16.1 + 0.0 + 6.2 − 48.0 + 5.7 + 73.5 + 95.9 Sep.
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
− 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 94.3 + 34.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 29.8 + 23.7 + 56.4 + 94.6 Dec.
+ 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 64.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 11.6 − 0.4 + 79.4 − 34.5 − 16.3 2 0 1 8 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
− 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 37.3 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 10.0 + 15.5 − 12.1 + 40.4 + 27.6 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
− 3.8 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 41.3 − 18.3 + 0.0 + 10.8 + 43.9 + 20.7 − 20.3 − 27.8 May
− 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 43.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 11.4 − 29.5 + 6.9 + 58.6 + 61.5 June
+ 9.9 + 0.3 − 13.1 + 0.0 + 38.5 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 13.2 + 45.4 + 31.3 − 47.0 − 41.2 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 2.4 + 0.9 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 31.3 + 19.0 + 0.0 + 8.6 − 24.3 − 14.7 + 41.8 + 69.4 Sep.
− 12.3 + 3.9 − 12.1 + 0.0 + 33.1 − 39.4 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 44.0 − 14.7 + 20.3 − 16.9 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 19.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 − 42.9 + 38.5 + 10.4 + 22.6 Dec.
+ 30.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 16.4 − 8.9 + 75.3 − 47.3 − 26.8 2 0 1 9 Jan.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 6.9 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 26.2 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 10.2 + 10.1 + 15.4 2 0 1 6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 24.8 + 1.0 + 0.0 + 1.3 − 11.0 + 4.4 + 32.7 + 35.0 Sep.
+ 0.4 − 0.5 + 6.6 + 0.0 + 23.7 + 14.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 14.3 − 12.6 + 14.2 + 28.5 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
− 0.9 − 0.5 + 3.3 + 0.0 + 27.3 + 24.4 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 6.8 − 16.7 + 26.5 + 52.6 Dec.
− 4.0 − 0.1 + 8.1 − 0.0 + 22.3 + 3.0 + 0.0 + 3.9 − 8.3 − 4.3 + 31.9 + 38.8 2 0 1 7 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
− 4.4 − 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 25.1 + 21.0 + 0.0 − 1.9 − 12.2 − 23.6 + 39.0 + 58.1 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
+ 4.9 + 0.1 + 22.6 + 0.0 + 25.9 + 27.7 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 6.6 − 15.6 + 33.0 + 62.5 May
+ 1.5 − 0.7 + 9.0 − 0.1 + 19.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.6 − 19.6 + 44.0 + 45.9 June
− 6.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 16.1 − 11.1 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 20.3 + 3.3 − 5.3 − 13.6 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
− 4.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 15.4 − 4.6 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 + 9.0 + 5.8 + 2.1 Sep.
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 16.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 9.9 − 21.0 + 33.1 + 50.4 Dec.
+ 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 13.3 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.1 + 26.4 − 31.3 − 11.9 2 0 1 8 Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Feb.
− 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.2 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 1.9 − 29.1 + 29.4 + 31.1 Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Apr.
− 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 − 17.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 4.2 + 30.0 − 13.0 − 27.3 May
− 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 10.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 3.6 − 1.8 − 26.6 + 25.1 + 38.1 June
+ 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 10.2 + 23.9 − 26.4 − 27.2 July
. . . . . . . . . . . . Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 4.2 + 15.2 − 0.6 − 2.5 Sep.
− 4.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 32.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 16.1 − 4.5 + 21.1 − 11.2 Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . . Nov.
− 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.6 − 12.0 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 11.7 − 1.8 + 29.5 + 18.5 Dec.
+ 8.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 + 9.7 − 9.2 + 40.2 − 35.9 − 21.1 2 0 1 9 Jan.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”.From2003eurobanknotesonly.6Remainingitemsintheconsolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the
banknotesincirculationisallocated,likewiseonamonthlybasis,totheNCBs,with Bundesbank. 7 Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factorsandthesumofliquidity-absorbingfactors.8Calculatedasthesumofthe
correspondingtoitspaid-upshareintheECB’scapital.Thedifferencebetweenthe “Depositfacility”,“Banknotesincirculation”and“Creditinstitutions’currentaccount
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”.
banknoteswhichthatNCBhasputintocirculationislikewiseshownunder“Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
16
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated Claims on non-euro area
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
banks, security Claims on
investments, euro area Balances Claims
external loans residents with banks, arising from
As at Gold and other denominated security the credit
reporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
date assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
Eurosystem 1
20 1 8 J u l y 20 4,605.0 373.2 313.5 73.9 239.6 22.9 18.0 18.0 −
27 4,612.0 373.2 314.2 73.8 240.4 24.0 17.3 17.3 −
A u g . 3 4,602.3 373.2 314.9 74.0 240.8 23.2 18.2 18.2 −
10 4,608.1 373.2 316.5 74.0 242.5 21.9 18.2 18.2 −
17 4,614.0 373.2 315.9 74.0 242.0 21.4 16.9 16.9 −
24 4,619.4 373.2 316.9 74.0 243.0 22.8 17.4 17.4 −
31 4,621.4 373.2 316.8 73.9 242.9 20.8 18.0 18.0 −
S e p . 7 4,634.0 373.2 317.0 74.0 243.0 20.7 19.2 19.2 −
14 4,638.8 373.2 317.8 74.0 243.8 20.7 19.3 19.3 −
21 4,645.8 373.2 318.1 73.9 244.2 20.3 18.4 18.4 −
28 4,619.8 355.5 319.4 73.8 245.6 18.4 20.0 20.0 −
O c t . 5 4,625.0 355.5 320.0 73.8 246.2 18.5 17.7 17.7 −
12 4,632.9 355.5 320.7 73.8 246.9 18.2 19.4 19.4 −
19 4,628.3 355.5 320.0 73.8 246.2 19.6 18.7 18.7 −
26 4,624.8 355.5 318.7 73.8 244.9 19.4 19.5 19.5 −
20 1 8 N o v . 2 4,622.2 355.5 318.7 74.9 243.9 20.2 19.1 19.1 −
9 4,626.2 355.5 319.8 74.8 245.0 20.0 19.8 19.8 −
16 4,638.3 355.5 321.4 74.9 246.5 19.6 19.5 19.5 −
23 4,646.9 355.5 323.1 74.9 248.2 18.5 20.6 20.6 −
30 4,660.3 355.5 324.7 74.9 249.8 17.7 22.2 22.2 −
D e c . 7 4,663.0 355.5 326.1 74.9 251.2 17.2 22.2 22.2 −
14 4,668.1 355.5 325.4 73.8 251.5 17.5 20.9 20.9 −
21 4,674.9 355.5 328.4 76.2 252.2 20.7 20.9 20.9 −
28 4,669.0 355.5 329.2 76.3 252.8 20.6 20.3 20.3 −
20 1 9 J a n . 4 4,694.4 389.8 329.0 76.9 252.0 16.3 20.9 20.9 −
11 4,703.4 389.8 327.9 76.9 250.9 17.2 19.3 19.3 −
18 4,705.9 389.8 327.6 76.9 250.7 18.8 18.1 18.1 −
25 4,708.9 389.8 327.9 77.0 251.0 20.8 19.0 19.0 −
F e b . 1 4,695.5 389.8 326.9 76.9 250.0 21.7 22.3 22.3 −
Deutsche Bundesbank
20 1 8 J u l y 20 1,744.8 116.3 50.7 19.2 31.5 0.1 3.1 3.1 −
27 1,745.0 116.3 51.1 19.2 31.9 0.1 1.5 1.5 −
A u g . 3 1,753.5 116.3 51.3 19.2 32.1 0.1 2.1 2.1 −
10 1,729.5 116.3 51.1 19.2 32.0 0.1 2.9 2.9 −
17 1,744.6 116.3 50.7 19.2 31.5 0.1 1.3 1.3 −
24 1,737.9 116.3 50.5 19.2 31.4 0.0 2.1 2.1 −
31 1,768.2 116.3 50.4 19.2 31.3 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
S e p . 7 1,741.9 116.3 50.4 19.2 31.2 0.0 3.7 3.7 −
14 1,739.5 116.3 50.4 19.2 31.3 0.0 3.5 3.5 −
21 1,753.9 116.3 50.6 19.2 31.4 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
28 1,817.3 116.3 50.3 19.2 31.1 0.0 4.4 4.4 −
O c t . 5 1,762.5 110.8 51.3 19.1 32.1 0.0 2.1 2.1 −
12 1,749.4 110.8 51.3 19.1 32.2 0.0 3.3 3.3 −
19 1,763.5 110.8 51.2 19.1 32.1 0.0 3.0 3.0 −
26 1,766.4 110.8 50.6 19.1 31.5 0.0 3.5 3.5 −
20 1 8 N o v . 2 1,769.2 110.8 51.0 19.4 31.6 0.0 2.2 2.2 −
9 1,783.8 110.8 51.1 19.5 31.6 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
16 1,790.8 110.8 51.3 19.5 31.9 0.0 2.1 2.1 −
23 1,784.2 110.8 50.8 19.5 31.4 0.0 3.5 3.5 −
30 1,807.8 110.8 50.9 19.5 31.4 0.0 4.1 4.1 −
D e c . 7 1,785.4 110.8 50.8 19.5 31.3 0.0 4.3 4.3 −
14 1,797.0 110.8 50.4 19.1 31.3 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
21 1,808.6 110.8 50.9 19.7 31.1 1.6 2.7 2.7 −
28 1,822.3 110.8 50.9 19.7 31.1 1.6 1.1 1.1 −
20 1 9 J a n . 4 1,794.5 121.4 51.6 19.9 31.7 0.0 2.4 2.4 −
11 1,766.7 121.4 51.6 19.9 31.8 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
18 1,772.0 121.4 51.6 19.9 31.8 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
25 1,737.6 121.4 52.1 19.9 32.2 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
F e b . 1 1,745.8 121.4 51.9 19.8 32.0 0.0 6.5 6.5 −
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial itemsforforeigncurrency,securities,goldandfinancialinstrumentsarevaluedatthe
statementoftheEuropeanCentralBank(ECB)andthefinancialstatementsofthe end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB.
nationalcentralbanksoftheeuroareaMemberStates(NCBs).Thebalancesheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
17
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
Other
claims on
euro area
Longer- Fine- credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for government
financing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno- As at
opera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets date
Eurosystem 1
744.0 2.0 742.0 − − 0.1 − 30.8 2,827.4 2,568.6 258.8 24.5 250.7 20 1 8 J u l y 20
742.6 2.0 740.5 − − 0.1 − 29.4 2,835.4 2,577.2 258.2 24.5 251.4 27
743.3 2.5 740.5 − − 0.3 − 30.3 2,827.4 2,572.4 255.0 24.5 247.2 A u g . 3
743.3 2.7 740.5 − − 0.0 − 26.1 2,834.2 2,579.2 255.0 24.5 250.3 10
743.3 2.7 740.5 − − 0.1 − 30.8 2,838.7 2,583.5 255.2 24.5 249.3 17
743.3 2.8 740.5 − − 0.1 − 30.4 2,843.6 2,588.4 255.2 24.5 247.4 24
741.6 2.5 739.0 − − 0.0 − 30.9 2,848.5 2,593.0 255.5 24.5 247.1 31
742.7 3.6 739.0 − − 0.0 − 31.4 2,858.1 2,602.6 255.5 24.5 247.2 S e p . 7
743.3 4.2 739.0 − − 0.1 − 31.5 2,863.2 2,607.7 255.5 24.5 245.4 14
744.0 5.0 739.0 − − 0.0 − 33.7 2,868.7 2,613.6 255.1 24.5 244.8 21
732.1 6.4 725.5 − − 0.1 − 29.8 2,869.2 2,615.1 254.1 24.4 251.0 28
732.8 7.2 725.5 − − 0.1 − 28.4 2,877.5 2,623.2 254.2 24.4 250.4 O c t . 5
732.8 7.3 725.5 − − 0.1 − 29.6 2,879.5 2,625.9 253.6 24.4 252.7 12
733.4 7.9 725.5 − − 0.0 − 34.2 2,877.3 2,626.2 251.1 24.4 245.3 19
733.4 7.7 725.5 − − 0.2 − 30.8 2,879.8 2,630.0 249.8 24.4 243.4 26
734.3 8.0 726.2 − − 0.1 − 26.9 2,878.7 2,629.9 248.8 24.4 244.3 20 1 8 N o v . 2
732.8 6.6 726.2 − − 0.0 − 21.8 2,883.3 2,634.3 249.0 24.4 248.8 9
733.0 6.7 726.2 − − 0.1 − 27.8 2,888.7 2,639.5 249.2 24.4 248.5 16
732.9 6.4 726.2 − − 0.4 − 25.1 2,892.4 2,642.9 249.5 24.4 254.4 23
733.5 6.5 726.7 − − 0.3 − 26.0 2,892.8 2,643.8 249.1 24.4 263.5 30
733.3 6.6 726.7 − − 0.0 − 25.0 2,899.1 2,650.8 248.3 24.0 260.8 D e c . 7
733.8 7.1 726.7 − − 0.1 − 25.2 2,903.5 2,655.6 247.9 24.0 262.4 14
733.5 9.6 723.8 − − 0.0 − 25.4 2,909.0 2,660.0 249.0 24.0 257.6 21
733.5 9.6 723.8 − − 0.1 − 19.9 2,907.4 2,658.5 248.9 24.0 258.7 28
732.1 8.2 723.8 − − 0.1 − 29.1 2,892.6 2,645.7 246.9 23.9 260.8 20 1 9 J a n . 4
731.2 7.3 723.8 − − 0.0 − 33.6 2,898.4 2,651.3 247.2 23.9 262.0 11
730.2 6.3 723.8 − − 0.1 − 35.0 2,898.0 2,651.2 246.8 23.9 264.5 18
730.5 6.6 723.8 − − 0.0 − 38.5 2,899.1 2,651.9 247.3 23.9 259.3 25
730.0 6.6 723.3 − − 0.1 − 35.5 2,890.2 2,644.5 245.7 23.9 255.3 F e b . 1
Deutsche Bundesbank
92.1 0.5 91.6 − − − − 6.3 549.5 549.5 − 4.4 922.2 20 1 8 J u l y 20
92.1 0.6 91.5 − − 0.0 − 6.2 552.3 552.3 − 4.4 921.0 27
92.1 0.5 91.5 − − 0.1 − 6.0 552.2 552.2 − 4.4 929.0 A u g . 3
91.9 0.4 91.5 − − − − 4.4 553.5 553.5 − 4.4 905.0 10
91.9 0.4 91.5 − − − − 5.7 554.6 554.6 − 4.4 919.6 17
91.9 0.4 91.5 − − 0.0 − 4.8 555.9 555.9 − 4.4 911.9 24
92.0 0.4 91.5 − − − − 4.7 557.0 557.0 − 4.4 941.4 31
91.8 0.3 91.5 − − − − 6.8 559.9 559.9 − 4.4 908.4 S e p . 7
92.2 0.7 91.5 − − − − 5.7 558.9 558.9 − 4.4 908.1 14
92.0 0.5 91.5 − − 0.0 − 6.9 561.1 561.1 − 4.4 919.4 21
88.5 0.5 87.9 − − 0.1 − 3.5 564.4 564.4 − 4.4 985.3 28
88.5 0.5 87.9 − − − − 5.0 564.7 564.7 − 4.4 935.7 O c t . 5
88.6 0.6 87.9 − − − − 6.7 562.3 562.3 − 4.4 922.0 12
88.5 0.5 87.9 − − 0.0 − 7.3 562.7 562.7 − 4.4 935.5 19
88.2 0.3 87.9 − − 0.0 − 6.8 564.9 564.9 − 4.4 937.1 26
88.4 0.3 88.1 − − 0.0 − 5.8 566.8 566.8 − 4.4 939.8 20 1 8 N o v . 2
88.4 0.4 88.1 − − − − 6.1 567.9 567.9 − 4.4 952.6 9
88.5 0.4 88.1 − − 0.0 − 6.9 569.1 569.1 − 4.4 957.7 16
88.3 0.3 88.1 − − − − 7.2 569.6 569.6 − 4.4 949.5 23
88.6 0.5 88.1 − − − − 7.0 569.8 569.8 − 4.4 972.1 30
88.8 0.7 88.1 − − − − 6.2 573.4 573.4 − 4.4 946.7 D e c . 7
89.5 1.4 88.1 − − 0.0 − 6.4 571.9 571.9 − 4.4 961.0 14
89.6 1.9 87.6 − − 0.0 − 4.3 573.3 573.3 − 4.4 971.1 21
89.6 1.9 87.6 − − 0.1 − 0.6 573.3 573.3 − 4.4 989.9 28
90.3 2.6 87.6 − − − − 6.2 567.2 567.2 − 4.4 951.0 20 1 9 J a n . 4
89.8 2.1 87.6 − − 0.0 − 6.6 568.9 568.9 − 4.4 921.9 11
88.4 0.8 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.5 570.2 570.2 − 4.4 927.1 18
88.8 1.2 87.6 − − 0.0 − 7.7 569.4 569.4 − 4.4 890.8 25
88.2 0.6 87.6 − − 0.0 − 6.8 569.6 569.6 − 4.4 896.9 F e b . 1

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
18
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro
(covering Fine- area credit
the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
As at Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse related to deno- certifi- General
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
date liabilities lation 1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
Eurosystem 3
20 1 8 J u l y 20 4,605.0 1,187.0 1,931.6 1,299.0 632.5 − − 0.2 6.5 − 445.7 305.9 139.8
27 4,612.0 1,188.6 1,949.7 1,314.5 635.1 − − 0.1 6.4 − 441.4 301.9 139.4
A u g . 3 4,602.3 1,192.0 2,032.7 1,380.8 651.6 − − 0.3 5.9 − 332.7 198.9 133.8
10 4,608.1 1,192.9 2,035.9 1,354.1 681.6 − − 0.1 4.4 − 335.1 215.1 120.0
17 4,614.0 1,194.4 1,999.3 1,317.2 681.6 − − 0.4 6.7 − 370.2 252.6 117.7
24 4,619.4 1,190.3 1,979.4 1,314.9 663.8 − − 0.7 5.8 − 398.2 280.3 117.8
31 4,621.4 1,193.0 2,024.8 1,355.3 668.8 − − 0.7 5.2 − 359.7 241.2 118.5
S e p . 7 4,634.0 1,193.7 2,048.0 1,356.4 691.4 − − 0.2 8.4 − 350.6 224.9 125.7
14 4,638.8 1,192.7 2,013.2 1,351.0 662.1 − − 0.2 6.1 − 384.7 261.3 123.4
21 4,645.8 1,191.8 1,987.9 1,333.5 654.5 − − 0.0 9.7 − 420.2 292.7 127.5
28 4,619.8 1,194.8 1,951.4 1,311.9 639.5 − − 0.0 7.4 − 409.3 284.2 125.1
O c t . 5 4,625.0 1,196.4 2,023.1 1,381.6 641.4 − − 0.1 6.4 − 386.2 265.4 120.8
12 4,632.9 1,195.7 2,033.7 1,378.9 654.7 − − 0.0 7.0 − 383.3 261.7 121.6
19 4,628.3 1,194.0 1,999.4 1,379.7 619.7 − − 0.0 8.1 − 416.9 293.2 123.8
26 4,624.8 1,195.4 1,997.1 1,405.5 591.5 − − 0.1 6.3 − 412.8 288.2 124.6
20 1 8 N o v . 2 4,622.2 1,200.7 2,050.7 1,433.0 617.4 − − 0.2 4.8 − 342.6 217.9 124.7
9 4,626.2 1,198.6 2,054.1 1,403.2 650.8 − − 0.2 5.7 − 338.8 213.9 124.9
16 4,638.3 1,197.3 1,986.1 1,362.1 623.8 − − 0.2 6.9 − 401.9 267.6 134.3
23 4,646.9 1,197.2 1,982.3 1,353.3 628.8 − − 0.2 6.8 − 408.2 279.2 129.0
30 4,660.3 1,203.3 2,007.5 1,352.5 654.8 − − 0.2 7.0 − 375.3 245.5 129.8
D e c . 7 4,663.0 1,209.6 2,029.9 1,375.5 654.2 − − 0.2 9.6 − 348.2 216.7 131.5
14 4,668.1 1,214.0 1,995.1 1,364.1 630.8 − − 0.1 9.4 − 371.4 237.9 133.5
21 4,674.9 1,227.9 1,978.6 1,364.7 613.9 − − 0.0 10.7 − 327.5 201.8 125.7
28 4,669.0 1,231.5 1,913.4 1,299.7 613.6 − − 0.1 20.4 − 324.3 201.4 122.9
20 1 9 J a n . 4 4,694.4 1,224.7 1,971.6 1,304.8 666.4 − − 0.3 12.9 − 321.3 197.8 123.5
11 4,703.4 1,215.8 2,026.4 1,356.6 669.5 − − 0.2 7.6 − 334.2 213.5 120.8
18 4,705.9 1,209.9 1,988.3 1,350.4 637.8 − − 0.1 8.6 − 387.7 258.3 129.4
25 4,708.9 1,206.4 1,985.1 1,344.8 640.2 − − 0.1 8.4 − 404.3 281.7 122.6
F e b . 1 4,695.5 1,209.2 2,015.1 1,341.9 673.0 − − 0.2 8.5 − 356.3 230.6 125.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
20 1 8 J u l y 20 1,744.8 281.4 616.2 433.2 183.0 − − 0.0 3.9 − 137.6 72.3 65.3
27 1,745.0 282.6 618.1 432.0 186.1 − − 0.0 4.0 − 141.8 76.6 65.2
A u g . 3 1,753.5 281.1 649.1 465.3 183.7 − − 0.0 3.7 − 108.4 45.3 63.0
10 1,729.5 281.9 629.0 428.1 200.9 − − 0.0 2.3 − 104.9 56.6 48.3
17 1,744.6 283.3 621.5 425.5 196.0 − − 0.0 4.3 − 120.7 72.2 48.5
24 1,737.9 283.7 615.3 428.2 187.1 − − 0.0 3.2 − 119.6 70.8 48.7
31 1,768.2 280.6 661.0 457.6 203.4 − − 0.0 3.0 − 107.9 58.5 49.3
S e p . 7 1,741.9 281.4 645.3 448.9 196.4 − − 0.0 5.3 − 101.8 56.6 45.2
14 1,739.5 282.0 598.0 419.7 178.3 − − 0.0 3.9 − 140.2 94.8 45.4
21 1,753.9 282.9 596.4 426.1 170.2 − − 0.0 7.1 − 156.5 95.5 61.0
28 1,817.3 281.0 644.0 473.4 170.6 − − 0.0 3.9 − 143.2 76.6 66.5
O c t . 5 1,762.5 282.1 629.3 466.6 162.7 − − 0.0 3.5 − 138.4 72.1 66.3
12 1,749.4 282.4 621.7 458.0 163.7 − − 0.0 4.8 − 129.4 64.0 65.4
19 1,763.5 282.6 619.8 460.1 159.6 − − 0.0 5.6 − 146.1 87.4 58.6
26 1,766.4 284.3 621.0 481.9 139.1 − − 0.0 4.3 − 142.6 84.2 58.5
20 1 8 N o v . 2 1,769.2 282.5 652.4 500.8 151.6 − − 0.0 2.9 − 106.8 48.8 57.9
9 1,783.8 282.5 656.9 507.7 149.3 − − 0.0 3.5 − 111.8 53.2 58.5
16 1,790.8 282.7 637.5 497.4 140.1 − − 0.0 4.1 − 138.1 79.1 59.0
23 1,784.2 283.2 627.3 492.6 134.7 − − 0.0 4.1 − 139.1 79.2 59.9
30 1,807.8 283.0 658.0 500.3 157.7 − − 0.0 4.0 − 128.1 64.9 63.3
D e c . 7 1,785.4 285.3 638.6 475.9 162.7 − − 0.0 4.9 − 123.9 58.5 65.4
14 1,797.0 287.4 597.9 455.6 142.3 − − 0.0 4.5 − 163.8 99.5 64.3
21 1,808.6 293.5 609.7 451.8 157.9 − − 0.0 2.9 − 137.2 79.3 57.9
28 1,822.3 293.5 593.9 440.3 153.6 − − 0.0 5.9 − 123.1 65.1 57.9
20 1 9 J a n . 4 1,794.5 295.9 616.6 456.1 160.5 − − 0.1 7.5 − 101.0 38.8 62.3
11 1,766.7 293.8 615.2 462.6 152.6 − − 0.0 3.9 − 105.6 51.5 54.1
18 1,772.0 292.7 622.7 472.0 150.7 − − 0.0 4.5 − 118.5 60.8 57.7
25 1,737.6 292.1 607.5 456.5 150.9 − − 0.0 4.6 − 104.0 55.0 48.9
F e b . 1 1,745.8 293.6 625.4 453.2 172.2 − − 0.0 4.6 − 87.6 39.4 48.2
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial procedurechosenbytheEurosystemfortheissueofeurobanknotes,ashareof8%
statementoftheEuropeanCentralBank(ECB)andthefinancialstatementsofthe ofthetotalvalueoftheeurobanknotesincirculationisallocatedtotheECBona
nationalcentralbanksoftheeuroareaMemberStates(NCBs).Thebalancesheet monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an
itemsforforeigncurrency,securities,goldandfinancialinstrumentsarevaluedat “Intra-Eurosystemliabilityrelatedtoeurobanknoteissue".Theremaining92%ofthe
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1 In accordance with the accounting value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
19
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Intra-
Eurosystem
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability
to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to
area residents residents balances from the drawing euro Capital As at
denominated in foreign and other credit facility rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and reporting
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF liabilities 2 issue 1 accounts reserves date
Eurosystem 3
267.2 4.8 11.5 11.5 − 56.1 229.7 − 360.4 104.4 20 1 8 J u l y 20
257.1 6.8 11.3 11.3 − 56.1 229.8 − 360.4 104.4 27
269.1 6.4 11.3 11.3 − 56.1 231.3 − 360.4 104.4 A u g . 3
267.3 7.1 11.2 11.2 − 56.1 233.3 − 360.4 104.4 10
271.6 6.5 10.5 10.5 − 56.1 233.8 − 360.4 104.4 17
271.8 9.1 10.1 10.1 − 56.1 233.8 − 360.4 104.4 24
267.5 6.9 10.2 10.2 − 56.1 233.0 − 360.4 104.4 31
257.4 7.3 10.0 10.0 − 56.1 237.6 − 360.4 104.4 S e p . 7
265.7 6.8 11.0 11.0 − 56.1 237.6 − 360.4 104.4 14
258.3 6.2 11.3 11.3 − 56.1 239.4 − 360.4 104.4 21
301.8 4.4 11.0 11.0 − 56.0 237.0 − 342.3 104.4 28
256.7 4.7 11.8 11.8 − 56.0 237.0 − 342.3 104.4 O c t . 5
255.9 5.4 11.5 11.5 − 56.0 237.7 − 342.3 104.4 12
255.6 5.4 11.8 11.8 − 56.0 234.3 − 342.3 104.4 19
263.4 5.5 10.1 10.1 − 56.0 231.4 − 342.3 104.4 26
269.6 5.2 10.0 10.0 − 56.0 235.9 − 342.3 104.4 20 1 8 N o v . 2
274.9 5.9 10.1 10.1 − 56.0 235.4 − 342.3 104.4 9
288.5 5.3 10.4 10.4 − 56.0 239.1 − 342.3 104.4 16
291.7 5.3 10.3 10.3 − 56.0 242.4 − 342.3 104.4 23
299.0 5.0 10.9 10.9 − 56.0 249.6 − 342.3 104.4 30
301.2 4.5 11.2 11.2 − 56.0 246.1 − 342.3 104.4 D e c . 7
311.9 4.7 11.0 11.0 − 56.0 247.9 − 342.3 104.4 14
364.0 4.8 11.1 11.1 − 56.0 247.6 − 342.3 104.4 21
412.3 4.3 10.8 10.8 − 56.0 249.2 − 342.3 104.4 28
364.1 4.3 10.4 10.4 − 56.5 248.1 − 376.2 104.4 20 1 9 J a n . 4
317.6 4.5 10.2 10.2 − 56.5 250.1 − 376.1 104.5 11
305.6 5.1 10.2 10.2 − 56.5 253.8 − 376.1 104.3 18
296.0 6.0 11.1 11.1 − 56.5 254.7 − 376.1 104.2 25
298.2 7.2 9.7 9.7 − 56.5 254.6 − 376.1 104.2 F e b . 1
Deutsche Bundesbank
164.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.6 29.0 378.5 112.9 5.7 20 1 8 J u l y 20
157.3 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.6 29.0 378.5 112.9 5.7 27
166.5 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.6 29.3 381.6 112.9 5.7 A u g . 3
166.6 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.6 29.3 381.6 112.9 5.7 10
170.3 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.6 29.3 381.6 112.9 5.7 17
171.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.6 29.4 381.6 112.9 5.7 24
166.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.6 29.4 386.9 112.9 5.7 31
158.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.6 29.5 386.9 112.9 5.7 S e p . 7
165.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.6 29.5 386.9 112.9 5.7 14
160.7 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.6 29.8 386.9 112.9 5.7 21
191.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.6 29.8 390.8 112.9 5.7 28
160.3 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.5 29.4 390.8 107.5 5.7 O c t . 5
162.0 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.5 29.6 390.8 107.5 5.7 12
160.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.5 29.7 390.8 107.5 5.7 19
165.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.5 29.8 390.8 107.5 5.7 26
172.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.5 30.1 394.6 107.5 5.7 20 1 8 N o v . 2
176.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.5 30.1 394.6 107.5 5.7 9
175.5 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.5 30.1 394.6 107.5 5.7 16
177.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 30.2 394.6 107.5 5.7 23
178.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.5 30.6 397.1 107.5 5.7 30
177.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.5 30.5 397.1 107.5 5.7 D e c . 7
188.1 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.5 30.6 397.1 107.5 5.7 14
209.7 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.5 30.9 397.1 107.5 5.7 21
250.2 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 14.5 30.9 397.1 107.5 5.7 28
211.7 0.0 − − − 14.7 31.2 391.9 118.5 5.7 20 1 9 J a n . 4
186.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.7 31.2 391.9 118.5 5.7 11
171.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.7 31.2 391.9 118.5 5.7 18
166.4 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.7 31.7 392.0 118.5 5.7 25
171.9 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 31.9 391.5 118.5 5.7 F e b . 1
basis,totheNCBs,witheachNCBshowinginitsbalancesheettheshareoftheeuro intocirculationisalsodisclosedasan“Intra-Eurosystemclaim/liabilityrelatedtobank-
banknotes issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The noteissue“.2FortheDeutscheBundesbank:includingDEMbanknotesstillincircu-
differencebetweenthevalueoftheeurobanknotesallocatedtotheNCBaccording lation. 3 Source: ECB.
totheaforementionedaccountingprocedureandthevalueofeurobanknotesput

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
20
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total 1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month
2009 7,436.1 17.2 2,480.5 1,813.2 1,218.4 594.8 667.3 449.5 217.8 3,638.3 3,187.9 2,692.9 2,357.5
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2 0 1 7 Mar. 7,926.1 23.6 2,237.5 1,797.8 1,513.2 284.6 439.7 306.9 132.7 3,776.8 3,351.3 2,828.1 2,533.8
Apr. 7,954.6 24.7 2,276.6 1,847.6 1,563.1 284.6 428.9 298.2 130.8 3,780.1 3,357.1 2,836.6 2,541.1
May 7,947.0 25.6 2,286.5 1,864.4 1,579.4 285.0 422.1 290.1 132.0 3,782.1 3,360.7 2,847.3 2,552.6
June 7,849.7 27.3 2,245.7 1,830.9 1,548.9 282.1 414.8 284.2 130.6 3,780.7 3,364.7 2,859.4 2,559.7
July 7,818.7 26.6 2,258.5 1,840.3 1,560.2 280.0 418.2 289.0 129.2 3,787.1 3,370.5 2,867.1 2,567.3
Aug. 7,807.7 27.5 2,243.1 1,828.2 1,553.7 274.5 415.0 286.9 128.0 3,792.2 3,377.0 2,876.6 2,576.3
Sep. 7,811.3 28.4 2,262.7 1,847.3 1,578.3 269.0 415.4 288.4 127.0 3,799.4 3,385.3 2,890.2 2,589.5
Oct. 7,825.7 28.4 2,285.3 1,873.3 1,604.0 269.2 412.1 285.1 127.0 3,804.7 3,393.5 2,899.1 2,598.2
Nov. 7,849.9 28.0 2,312.8 1,901.5 1,633.0 268.5 411.3 285.5 125.8 3,818.1 3,411.2 2,919.0 2,612.6
Dec. 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2 0 1 8 Jan. 7,817.2 29.2 2,296.1 1,891.0 1,624.5 266.5 405.1 280.3 124.9 3,813.9 3,407.5 2,930.5 2,622.5
Feb. 7,790.8 29.6 2,298.1 1,892.3 1,627.0 265.2 405.9 280.6 125.2 3,814.1 3,406.5 2,938.1 2,633.4
Mar. 7,746.6 35.1 2,254.6 1,852.5 1,585.3 267.1 402.1 274.9 127.2 3,814.9 3,410.8 2,946.8 2,644.4
Apr. 7,781.1 33.8 2,300.8 1,892.1 1,625.1 267.0 408.7 280.6 128.0 3,818.5 3,417.4 2,956.1 2,650.7
May 7,882.8 35.0 2,314.0 1,900.7 1,630.1 270.6 413.3 284.6 128.6 3,823.8 3,418.9 2,963.0 2,656.6
June 7,804.7 35.0 2,266.6 1,853.0 1,584.7 268.2 413.6 285.5 128.1 3,832.7 3,430.8 2,979.9 2,672.2
July 7,784.2 34.7 2,276.2 1,852.8 1,585.7 267.1 423.4 295.9 127.5 3,840.0 3,437.3 2,987.0 2,679.3
Aug. 7,828.0 35.1 2,294.8 1,865.2 1,597.6 267.6 429.6 301.1 128.5 3,840.6 3,431.8 2,987.4 2,690.7
Sep. 7,799.9 35.8 2,267.8 1,846.4 1,577.7 268.7 421.4 291.0 130.4 3,854.6 3,447.2 3,006.3 2,708.5
Oct. 7,845.2 36.9 2,286.9 1,855.6 1,588.6 267.0 431.4 298.1 133.2 3,858.3 3,447.8 3,009.7 2,711.9
Nov. 7,881.2 36.8 2,303.5 1,872.8 1,605.2 267.6 430.8 295.9 134.8 3,874.4 3,460.7 3,023.7 2,727.7
Dec. 7,777.2 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.2 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
Changes 3
2010 − 136.3 − 0.7 − 111.6 − 15.6 58.5 − 74.1 − 95.9 − 80.9 − 15.1 96.4 126.0 − 13.7 0.7
2011 54.1 − 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 − 33.0 − 26.0 − 12.1 − 13.9 − 51.8 − 35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2 0 1 7 Apr. 40.0 1.1 41.0 50.7 50.5 0.2 − 9.7 − 7.8 − 1.9 4.7 6.8 9.4 8.2
May 8.8 0.9 12.6 18.0 17.1 0.9 − 5.4 − 6.8 1.4 4.0 4.6 9.0 9.9
June − 85.4 1.7 − 38.0 − 31.5 − 29.2 − 2.3 − 6.5 − 5.2 − 1.4 0.5 5.3 13.2 8.0
July − 14.3 − 0.7 14.5 10.5 12.2 − 1.7 4.0 5.2 − 1.2 8.6 7.1 8.9 8.6
Aug. − 4.7 0.9 − 14.3 − 11.6 − 6.3 − 5.3 − 2.8 − 1.6 − 1.2 5.6 6.8 9.9 9.3
Sep. 4.8 0.9 21.8 21.5 26.0 − 4.5 0.3 1.2 − 0.9 6.9 7.1 12.0 13.5
Oct. 8.6 0.1 21.9 25.5 25.4 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.7 0.1 4.6 8.0 8.6 8.6
Nov. 33.4 − 0.4 28.9 28.8 29.4 − 0.6 0.0 1.2 − 1.1 14.8 18.7 19.0 13.5
Dec. − 126.4 4.1 − 90.1 − 74.7 − 72.0 − 2.7 − 15.4 − 15.0 − 0.4 − 15.2 − 10.0 0.1 − 2.4
2 0 1 8 Jan. 124.2 − 2.9 82.2 70.9 68.7 2.2 11.3 11.5 − 0.2 14.7 8.2 12.4 13.0
Feb. 6.3 0.3 0.5 0.6 2.0 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 0.3 0.2 − 0.7 7.7 10.7
Mar. − 37.4 5.5 − 42.9 − 39.5 − 41.4 1.9 − 3.4 − 5.3 2.0 2.7 5.6 10.1 12.3
Apr. 28.9 − 1.3 45.6 39.7 39.9 − 0.2 5.9 5.1 0.9 4.0 7.1 9.8 6.3
May 85.0 1.3 12.4 9.1 5.7 3.4 3.4 2.8 0.5 12.9 9.4 15.3 14.3
June − 77.2 − 0.1 − 47.4 − 47.7 − 45.4 − 2.3 0.3 0.9 − 0.5 9.9 12.8 17.9 16.4
July − 14.4 − 0.3 10.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 10.1 10.7 − 0.6 7.8 6.8 5.9 6.1
Aug. 41.9 0.4 19.8 13.8 13.0 0.8 5.9 4.9 1.0 0.6 − 5.6 0.4 11.3
Sep. − 30.4 0.8 − 27.3 − 18.9 − 19.9 1.0 − 8.4 − 10.4 1.9 14.2 15.9 19.2 18.2
Oct. 36.4 1.1 15.0 8.5 10.3 − 1.8 6.5 6.1 0.4 3.8 0.5 3.4 3.2
Nov. 38.5 − 0.1 17.2 17.6 16.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.0 1.6 16.7 13.4 14.4 16.1
Dec. − 101.5 3.8 − 115.2 − 104.3 − 104.5 0.2 − 10.9 − 11.2 0.2 − 8.8 − 1.3 1.8 0.1
*Thistableservestosupplementthe“Overallmonetarysurvey“inSectionII.Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
theothertablesinSectionIV,thistableincludes−inadditiontothefiguresreported funds.1Seefootnote1inTableIV.2.2Includingdebtsecuritiesarisingfromthe

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
21
IV. Banks
euro area Claims on
non-euro area
to non-banks in other Member States residents
General Enterprises and General
government households government
Secur- Secur- of which: Secur- of which: Other
ities Total Loans ities 2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets 1 Period
End of year or month
335.4 495.0 335.1 160.0 450.4 322.2 162.9 128.2 23.5 104.7 1,062.6 821.1 237.5 2009
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
294.3 523.2 307.1 216.1 425.5 290.8 167.2 134.7 29.0 105.7 1,097.1 847.5 791.1 2 0 1 7 Mar.
295.5 520.5 307.9 212.6 423.0 287.1 167.8 135.8 29.9 105.9 1,080.7 832.2 792.5 Apr.
294.6 513.4 298.9 214.6 421.4 288.5 166.8 132.9 28.9 103.9 1,056.3 808.0 796.5 May
299.7 505.4 296.4 208.9 416.0 283.4 162.6 132.6 29.9 102.6 1,064.9 817.0 731.1 June
299.8 503.4 298.3 205.1 416.6 285.0 164.1 131.7 29.9 101.8 1,028.5 780.9 717.9 July
300.4 500.4 293.4 207.0 415.2 283.8 165.2 131.4 30.0 101.4 1,011.0 765.3 733.9 Aug.
300.7 495.1 289.0 206.1 414.1 283.0 167.9 131.1 29.8 101.3 1,021.2 776.3 699.6 Sep.
301.0 494.4 289.2 205.3 411.2 281.6 167.7 129.6 30.4 99.2 1,014.2 768.9 693.0 Oct.
306.4 492.2 287.3 205.0 406.8 276.8 164.2 130.0 29.8 100.2 1,005.3 759.4 685.6 Nov.
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 Dec.
308.0 477.0 282.8 194.2 406.4 278.6 163.9 127.8 29.7 98.0 1,009.1 758.2 668.9 2 0 1 8 Jan.
304.7 468.4 277.4 191.0 407.6 280.5 165.9 127.1 29.6 97.5 1,026.5 775.9 622.5 Feb.
302.4 463.9 275.5 188.4 404.1 278.3 164.9 125.9 29.8 96.1 1,016.8 763.8 625.3 Mar.
305.4 461.2 276.2 185.0 401.2 275.1 165.1 126.0 29.9 96.2 1,009.2 757.3 618.9 Apr.
306.4 455.9 272.3 183.6 404.9 280.2 167.4 124.8 29.8 95.0 1,052.9 799.1 657.1 May
307.7 450.8 270.0 180.8 402.0 278.4 166.4 123.6 29.9 93.7 1,032.5 777.4 637.9 June
307.7 450.3 270.8 179.5 402.7 281.2 169.9 121.5 29.7 91.8 1,028.8 770.8 604.5 July
296.8 444.3 266.4 178.0 408.9 286.1 173.1 122.8 29.7 93.1 1,021.0 762.2 636.6 Aug.
297.8 440.9 263.4 177.5 407.4 283.7 171.7 123.6 29.6 94.0 1,028.7 770.3 613.1 Sep.
297.8 438.1 265.4 172.7 410.5 287.6 176.1 122.9 31.0 91.9 1,037.4 780.7 625.6 Oct.
296.0 437.0 264.5 172.5 413.7 290.8 177.8 122.9 30.9 92.1 1,032.1 777.3 634.5 Nov.
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 651.4 Dec.
Changes 3
− 14.3 139.7 83.4 56.3 − 29.6 − 36.4 0.2 6.8 3.1 3.7 − 74.1 − 61.9 − 46.3 2010
− 18.0 − 74.0 − 59.1 − 14.9 − 16.6 − 13.8 − 5.5 − 2.7 8.0 − 10.7 − 39.5 − 34.9 112.9 2011
− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
1.2 − 2.6 0.8 − 3.4 − 2.1 − 3.3 1.1 1.2 0.9 0.3 − 8.2 − 7.4 1.4 2 0 1 7 Apr.
− 0.8 − 4.4 − 6.4 2.0 − 0.6 2.3 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 2.0 − 12.7 − 13.1 4.0 May
5.2 − 7.9 − 2.3 − 5.6 − 4.8 − 3.5 − 2.7 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.3 15.6 15.3 − 65.2 June
0.3 − 1.7 2.0 − 3.7 1.4 2.4 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 24.4 − 24.9 − 12.3 July
0.6 − 3.0 − 4.9 1.9 − 1.2 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.4 0.0 − 0.4 − 12.9 − 11.3 16.0 Aug.
− 1.5 − 4.9 − 4.2 − 0.7 − 0.2 0.2 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 8.3 9.0 − 33.1 Sep.
0.1 − 0.7 0.2 − 0.9 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.6 0.6 − 2.2 − 11.3 − 11.3 − 6.6 Oct.
5.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 4.3 − 3.1 0.4 − 0.6 1.0 − 2.5 − 3.6 − 7.3 Nov.
2.5 − 10.1 − 2.8 − 7.2 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 5.4 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.9 − 8.3 − 9.5 − 16.9 Dec.
− 0.6 − 4.1 − 0.8 − 3.3 6.5 7.7 6.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.2 29.4 24.6 0.7 2 0 1 8 Jan.
− 3.0 − 8.4 − 5.2 − 3.3 1.0 1.7 1.7 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 10.6 11.1 − 5.4 Feb.
− 2.2 − 4.5 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.4 − 5.5 − 8.2 2.8 Mar.
3.5 − 2.6 0.7 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 3.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 13.2 − 11.9 − 6.2 Apr.
0.9 − 5.8 − 4.3 − 1.5 3.5 4.6 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 30.9 29.9 27.5 May
1.5 − 5.0 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 20.4 − 21.8 − 19.2 June
− 0.2 0.9 2.2 − 1.3 0.9 3.1 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 31.6 July
− 10.9 − 6.0 − 4.5 − 1.5 6.2 4.9 3.1 1.3 0.0 1.2 − 11.0 − 11.5 32.1 Aug.
1.1 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.6 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 5.4 5.9 − 23.5 Sep.
0.2 − 2.9 1.9 − 4.8 3.3 4.5 4.1 − 1.2 1.4 − 2.6 4.0 3.5 12.6 Oct.
− 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 3.3 3.3 1.5 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 − 4.0 − 2.2 8.8 Nov.
1.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 1.9 − 7.5 − 3.7 − 1.3 − 3.8 − 2.3 − 1.5 1.7 1.4 16.9 Dec.
exchange of equalisation claims. 3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
22
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home Member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total 1 Total country States Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
End of year or month
2009 7,436.1 1,589.7 1,355.6 234.0 2,818.0 2,731.3 997.8 1,139.1 356.4 594.4 474.4 63.9 17.7
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2 0 1 7 Mar. 7,926.1 1,259.8 1,077.3 182.5 3,433.9 3,334.5 1,813.5 934.4 296.4 586.6 537.0 91.2 39.6
Apr. 7,954.6 1,254.1 1,075.4 178.8 3,452.0 3,352.3 1,840.8 925.4 290.7 586.2 536.9 91.2 41.7
May 7,947.0 1,259.3 1,079.9 179.4 3,463.2 3,360.6 1,848.6 926.4 292.7 585.7 536.8 93.5 44.2
June 7,849.7 1,235.2 1,054.2 181.0 3,477.7 3,362.0 1,865.6 911.8 290.3 584.6 536.2 107.1 44.8
July 7,818.7 1,239.8 1,062.3 177.5 3,470.9 3,353.4 1,862.3 907.6 287.9 583.4 538.2 107.5 45.8
Aug. 7,807.7 1,243.3 1,065.8 177.4 3,486.1 3,368.4 1,880.5 905.5 285.7 582.4 537.9 108.3 47.5
Sep. 7,811.3 1,256.2 1,071.9 184.3 3,494.8 3,371.4 1,886.8 902.8 284.3 581.8 537.9 114.7 50.7
Oct. 7,825.7 1,272.0 1,081.9 190.1 3,505.8 3,388.0 1,912.7 893.9 277.3 581.5 538.4 109.2 46.3
Nov. 7,849.9 1,275.5 1,081.0 194.5 3,542.9 3,417.4 1,939.9 896.5 276.9 581.0 538.6 113.6 52.1
Dec. 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2 0 1 8 Jan. 7,817.2 1,249.4 1,060.8 188.6 3,539.8 3,419.1 1,944.5 892.2 276.8 582.4 539.7 110.6 46.4
Feb. 7,790.8 1,246.9 1,058.2 188.8 3,536.8 3,416.5 1,945.4 888.9 273.3 582.1 540.4 109.7 47.1
Mar. 7,746.6 1,238.1 1,057.5 180.6 3,537.7 3,413.3 1,944.1 888.1 274.7 581.2 539.9 115.3 48.7
Apr. 7,781.1 1,233.9 1,053.5 180.4 3,551.3 3,430.7 1,967.4 882.9 270.2 580.4 539.6 108.8 46.7
May 7,882.8 1,232.4 1,037.1 195.3 3,582.2 3,462.4 1,998.3 884.0 271.4 580.1 539.5 109.4 47.7
June 7,804.7 1,224.7 1,035.7 189.0 3,582.9 3,463.7 1,991.4 893.1 281.1 579.2 539.1 109.0 44.0
July 7,784.2 1,228.5 1,042.2 186.3 3,584.2 3,462.9 1,997.6 887.1 277.5 578.2 538.6 108.8 44.5
Aug. 7,828.0 1,229.6 1,043.7 185.9 3,595.2 3,474.5 2,014.0 882.9 276.6 577.6 538.3 106.9 45.1
Sep. 7,799.9 1,220.4 1,034.2 186.2 3,594.0 3,473.8 2,017.5 879.0 273.7 577.3 538.4 108.8 48.2
Oct. 7,845.2 1,227.0 1,034.3 192.7 3,614.3 3,494.1 2,039.3 877.8 273.4 577.0 538.6 108.8 47.3
Nov. 7,881.2 1,244.5 1,046.8 197.7 3,646.1 3,527.4 2,074.8 875.8 271.5 576.8 539.1 106.2 47.1
Dec. 7,777.2 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
Changes 4
2010 − 136.3 − 75.2 − 99.4 24.2 72.3 59.7 88.7 − 53.0 − 52.2 24.0 38.3 − 4.4 2.2
2011 54.1 − 48.4 − 28.8 − 19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 − 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2 0 1 7 Apr. 40.0 − 4.4 − 1.3 − 3.1 19.1 18.7 27.8 − 8.7 − 5.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.2 2.2
May 8.8 6.7 5.3 1.5 12.7 9.5 8.7 1.3 2.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 2.5 2.6
June − 85.4 − 22.2 − 24.3 2.1 15.3 11.1 17.5 − 5.4 − 2.3 − 1.0 − 0.7 4.7 0.7
July − 14.3 5.3 8.9 − 3.5 − 5.3 − 7.4 − 2.4 − 3.9 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.4 0.7 1.1
Aug. − 4.7 4.1 3.8 0.3 15.8 15.5 18.5 − 1.9 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 0.9 1.7
Sep. 4.8 3.0 − 3.8 6.7 8.4 2.9 6.1 − 2.6 − 1.5 − 0.6 0.0 6.4 3.2
Oct. 8.6 15.2 9.8 5.5 10.3 16.0 25.5 − 9.1 − 7.1 − 0.3 0.5 − 5.6 − 4.4
Nov. 33.4 4.6 − 0.3 4.9 37.9 30.2 27.9 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.5 0.2 4.6 5.9
Dec. − 126.4 − 36.9 − 27.7 − 9.2 − 13.1 − 5.7 − 3.0 − 4.6 − 2.6 1.9 2.4 − 4.9 − 9.6
2 0 1 8 Jan. 124.2 17.6 13.1 4.5 12.2 9.1 8.7 0.9 3.2 − 0.5 0.2 2.4 4.0
Feb. 6.3 − 3.6 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.5 0.2 − 3.5 − 3.7 − 0.2 0.4 − 1.1 0.7
Mar. − 37.4 − 8.3 − 0.5 − 7.9 1.3 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 0.8 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.5 5.7 1.6
Apr. 28.9 − 4.5 − 3.8 − 0.6 13.5 17.5 22.8 − 4.6 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 6.6 − 2.0
May 85.0 − 3.5 − 17.3 13.9 29.2 30.2 29.9 0.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 0.9
June − 77.2 − 7.8 − 1.5 − 6.3 0.7 1.2 − 6.9 9.0 9.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 3.8
July − 14.4 4.7 7.2 − 2.5 1.8 − 0.4 6.5 − 5.9 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.5
Aug. 41.9 2.0 2.6 − 0.6 10.7 11.3 16.1 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.0 0.6
Sep. − 30.4 − 9.6 − 9.7 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 3.6 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 0.0 1.9 3.1
Oct. 36.4 5.4 − 0.4 5.9 19.1 19.3 21.1 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.0
Nov. 38.5 17.7 12.6 5.1 32.1 33.5 35.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.1 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.2
Dec. − 101.5 − 30.7 − 25.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 0.4 1.1 − 3.2 − 4.3 1.7 2.0 − 1.7 − 2.1
*Thistableservestosupplementthe“Overallmonetarysurvey“inSectionII.Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from money market
theothertablesinSectionIV,thistableincludes−inadditiontothefiguresreported funds. 1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2 Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
23
IV. Banks
Debt securities
issued 3
in other Member States 2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilities
maturities notice arising
of which: from Money of which: Liabilities
domestic repos with market with to non-
of which: of which: central non-banks fund maturities euro Capital
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued 3 Total 2 years 3 residents reserves Liabilities 1 Period
End of year or month
43.7 17.0 2.5 2.0 22.8 22.2 80.5 11.4 1,500.5 146.3 565.6 454.8 415.6 2009
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
48.6 19.9 3.0 2.6 8.3 7.9 2.6 2.2 1,045.7 45.9 730.2 594.1 857.6 2 0 1 7 Mar.
46.6 18.3 3.0 2.6 8.5 7.6 3.5 2.2 1,042.1 43.9 749.0 598.3 853.4 Apr.
46.4 17.2 3.0 2.6 9.1 7.8 2.4 2.1 1,042.5 44.6 724.9 603.2 849.4 May
59.3 20.1 3.0 2.6 8.6 7.9 1.8 2.2 1,039.2 44.8 689.8 610.2 793.5 June
58.8 19.1 3.0 2.6 10.0 7.9 3.3 2.2 1,029.2 43.9 684.2 606.2 782.9 July
57.8 18.3 3.0 2.6 9.4 7.9 3.4 2.4 1,024.7 42.6 643.1 608.1 796.7 Aug.
61.0 20.5 2.9 2.6 8.7 8.0 2.6 2.4 1,015.2 42.2 669.5 612.4 758.2 Sep.
59.9 18.3 2.9 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.3 2.2 1,008.9 40.7 667.9 612.7 753.9 Oct.
58.6 16.7 2.9 2.6 11.8 8.3 2.6 2.2 1,004.7 40.1 664.4 609.8 747.9 Nov.
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 Dec.
61.3 18.9 2.9 2.6 10.0 8.9 4.3 2.1 1,002.6 35.4 682.4 666.5 670.0 2 0 1 8 Jan.
59.7 18.2 2.9 2.6 10.7 8.8 3.8 2.1 1,006.3 36.0 690.3 678.6 625.9 Feb.
63.8 22.6 2.9 2.6 9.1 8.3 2.9 2.3 1,014.0 35.2 641.0 675.0 635.6 Mar.
59.2 18.0 2.9 2.5 11.7 8.4 2.4 2.2 1,016.6 34.7 672.9 677.3 624.6 Apr.
58.8 16.8 2.9 2.5 10.4 8.8 1.6 2.0 1,031.1 36.4 707.2 679.7 646.6 May
62.2 21.7 2.9 2.5 10.2 9.3 1.3 2.1 1,022.2 33.7 670.8 680.2 620.5 June
61.5 19.0 2.9 2.5 12.4 10.0 1.8 2.0 1,016.9 33.1 681.9 682.2 586.7 July
58.9 16.4 2.8 2.5 13.9 10.6 1.2 2.0 1,021.2 35.0 690.5 684.5 603.8 Aug.
57.8 17.4 2.8 2.5 11.5 9.2 1.3 2.0 1,034.7 33.9 681.7 687.2 578.7 Sep.
58.6 17.2 2.8 2.5 11.4 9.7 2.4 2.0 1,044.7 36.2 666.9 687.8 600.0 Oct.
56.3 15.0 2.8 2.5 12.5 10.0 1.3 2.4 1,048.3 34.6 643.3 688.1 607.3 Nov.
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.7 611.8 Dec.
Changes 4
− 6.8 − 5.8 0.3 0.3 17.0 16.5 6.2 − 1.6 − 106.7 − 63.2 54.4 − 7.1 − 78.6 2010
− 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.7 10.0 − 3.7 − 76.9 − 6.6 − 80.5 13.7 137.8 2011
− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012
− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013
− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
− 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.0 0.0 0.2 − 0.3 0.9 − 0.0 1.4 − 1.8 22.7 5.6 − 5.3 2 0 1 7 Apr.
− 0.1 − 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.0 7.8 0.9 − 18.5 7.0 − 5.7 May
4.0 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.1 − 0.6 0.1 1.0 0.3 − 31.9 8.9 − 56.0 June
− 0.5 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 1.4 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 10.6 July
− 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 0.1 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.2 − 39.0 2.7 13.0 Aug.
3.2 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 0.0 − 0.7 0.0 − 10.2 − 0.5 25.3 4.7 − 25.6 Sep.
− 1.2 − 2.2 − 0.0 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 9.6 − 1.6 − 3.8 − 0.5 − 2.6 Oct.
− 1.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.0 0.3 0.3 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 7.1 Nov.
4.7 3.0 0.0 0.0 − 2.4 0.3 0.7 − 0.0 − 7.3 − 2.3 − 59.2 5.6 − 16.1 Dec.
− 1.5 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.2 1.0 − 0.0 15.8 − 2.2 84.0 − 17.5 11.0 2 0 1 8 Jan.
− 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.5 0.6 5.0 10.8 − 1.0 Feb.
4.1 4.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.6 − 0.4 − 0.9 0.2 9.4 − 0.8 − 48.1 − 3.0 12.1 Mar.
− 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 28.0 1.7 − 8.4 Apr.
− 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 7.3 1.4 29.3 0.1 23.6 May
3.3 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.4 0.1 − 9.2 − 2.7 − 36.6 0.4 − 24.3 June
− 0.6 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.7 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 0.6 12.3 2.6 − 32.6 July
− 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 2.8 1.9 7.5 2.3 17.3 Aug.
− 1.2 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 0.0 11.8 − 1.1 − 10.0 2.2 − 23.7 Sep.
0.8 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.1 5.5 2.2 − 18.1 − 0.7 24.1 Oct.
− 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.5 − 1.0 0.3 4.4 − 1.6 − 23.1 0.5 7.6 Nov.
0.4 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 0.5 − 0.6 0.0 − 14.8 − 3.2 − 67.3 8.1 7.0 Dec.
governments.3InGermany,debtsecuritieswithmaturitiesofuptooneyearare publishedtogetherwithmoneymarketfundshares.4Statisticalbreakshavebeen
classedasmoneymarketpaper;uptotheJanuary2002MonthlyReporttheywere eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
24
IV. Banks
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
of which: of which:
Loans
Cash in
hand and
credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances Securities up to and for Securities Partici-
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total 1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets 1
All categories of banks
2 0 1 8 July 1,604 7,830.5 498.7 2,401.5 1,923.5 474.5 4,108.4 357.9 3,055.8 0.5 685.9 117.6 704.3
Aug. 1,601 7,875.6 497.7 2,411.7 1,931.3 476.8 4,117.2 355.9 3,070.1 0.5 682.6 111.3 737.7
Sep. 1,591 7,848.1 518.2 2,377.8 1,893.6 480.6 4,126.4 355.9 3,079.5 0.5 683.4 110.6 715.1
Oct. 1,583 7,893.2 560.9 2,336.7 1,854.7 478.4 4,156.9 367.3 3,104.8 0.5 677.7 110.6 728.0
Nov. 1,581 7,928.3 550.1 2,358.2 1,873.0 482.3 4,173.7 368.0 3,124.0 0.6 674.6 110.1 736.0
Dec. 1,583 7,823.7 464.0 2,337.5 1,855.6 480.1 4,156.4 348.6 3,130.8 0.6 671.9 113.3 752.4
Commercial banks 6
2 0 1 8 Nov. 264 3,135.2 348.5 935.7 856.7 78.3 1,277.5 207.6 867.1 0.4 200.4 48.1 525.4
Dec. 267 3,138.9 288.5 952.8 870.6 81.6 1,299.4 196.3 899.8 0.5 202.1 52.0 546.2
Big banks 7
2 0 1 8 Nov. 4 1,836.7 148.0 555.9 524.0 31.9 615.5 118.9 387.3 0.1 107.9 42.5 474.9
Dec. 4 1,796.9 109.7 549.1 518.0 31.1 601.8 104.2 392.6 0.1 104.9 45.7 490.6
Regional banks and other commercial banks
2 0 1 8 Nov. 149 905.5 101.1 192.6 148.3 43.9 564.0 56.9 421.5 0.3 84.9 5.0 42.7
Dec. 151 946.4 85.6 206.7 158.2 48.1 600.1 60.8 448.8 0.3 89.9 5.6 48.4
Branches of foreign banks
2 0 1 8 Nov. 111 393.0 99.3 187.2 184.4 2.5 98.0 31.7 58.3 0.1 7.5 0.7 7.9
Dec. 112 395.6 93.2 197.0 194.3 2.5 97.5 31.3 58.4 0.1 7.3 0.7 7.2
Landesbanken
2 0 1 8 Nov. 8 899.2 63.1 279.5 209.6 69.5 465.5 56.5 349.1 0.1 57.3 10.2 80.9
Dec. 6 762.2 47.8 240.9 179.8 60.6 391.6 45.2 296.6 0.1 48.1 9.1 72.8
Savings banks
2 0 1 8 Nov. 385 1,241.7 48.4 178.7 63.9 114.6 983.2 47.9 775.0 0.0 160.2 14.1 17.4
Dec. 386 1,287.1 51.3 187.9 68.7 119.0 1,014.6 51.5 798.2 0.0 164.8 14.4 19.0
Credit cooperatives
2 0 1 8 Nov. 875 932.2 21.0 174.3 66.6 107.1 700.4 33.4 554.2 0.0 112.6 17.1 19.4
Dec. 875 933.8 23.0 172.2 65.0 106.7 702.2 34.4 554.8 0.0 112.8 17.2 19.3
Mortgage banks
2 0 1 8 Nov. 11 226.3 3.6 28.1 18.0 10.2 187.5 2.5 163.9 − 21.1 0.1 7.0
Dec. 11 231.5 4.1 29.3 19.1 10.2 190.7 2.6 166.3 − 21.7 0.2 7.3
Building and loan associations
2 0 1 8 Nov. 20 233.6 1.1 55.0 39.1 15.9 172.6 1.2 145.7 . 25.8 0.3 4.6
Dec. 20 233.4 1.0 54.1 38.4 15.7 173.5 1.1 146.6 . 25.8 0.3 4.4
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2 0 1 8 Nov. 18 1,260.0 64.5 706.9 619.2 86.7 387.0 18.9 269.0 − 97.3 20.1 81.4
Dec. 18 1,236.6 48.3 700.4 614.0 86.3 384.4 17.5 268.6 − 96.7 20.2 83.3
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2 0 1 8 Nov. 145 1,119.6 162.4 365.3 328.7 35.9 498.2 78.0 335.0 0.4 84.2 3.3 90.5
Dec. 146 1,103.3 144.8 367.1 331.0 35.6 496.4 76.3 334.5 0.4 84.6 3.2 91.7
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2 0 1 8 Nov. 34 726.6 63.1 178.1 144.3 33.5 400.2 46.3 276.7 0.3 76.7 2.6 82.6
Dec. 34 707.7 51.5 170.1 136.7 33.1 398.9 45.0 276.1 0.3 77.2 2.6 84.5
*Assetsandliabilitiesofmonetaryfinancialinstitutions(MFIs)inGermany.Theassets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
andliabilitiesofforeignbranches,ofmoneymarketfunds(whicharealsoclassified InstitutionAccountingRegulation(VerordnungüberdieRechnungslegungderKredit-
asMFIs)andoftheBundesbankarenotincluded.Forthedefinitionsoftherespective institute)areclassifiedunder"Otherassetsandliabilities"asoftheDecember2010
items,seethefootnotestoTableIV.3.1OwingtotheActModernisingAccounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law (Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement1totheMonthlyReport−Bankingstatistics,inTablesI.1toI.3.2For
financialinstrumentsinthetradingportfolio(tradingportfolioderivatives)withinthe buildingandloanassociations:includingdepositsundersavingsandloancontracts
meaningofSection340e(3)sentence1oftheGermanCommercialCode(Handels- (seeTableIV.12).3Includedintimedeposits.4Excludingdepositsundersavingsand

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
25
IV. Banks
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
including
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits 2 Savings deposits 4 partici-
pation
Memo rights
item: Bearer capital,
for for Liabilities of which: debt funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank securities general Other
Sight Time Sight including than from months’ savings out- banking liabi- End of
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year 2 repos 3 Total notice bonds standing 5 risks lities 1 month
All categories of banks
1,749.9 539.0 1,210.9 3,746.3 2,132.1 296.1 688.8 72.9 585.4 544.9 44.0 1,110.8 524.8 698.7 2 0 1 8 July
1,752.7 521.6 1,231.0 3,763.8 2,149.5 298.9 687.2 83.4 584.7 544.6 43.5 1,116.1 524.5 718.6 Aug.
1,745.1 543.8 1,201.3 3,752.1 2,155.7 283.9 685.3 66.8 584.3 544.6 43.0 1,126.6 526.3 698.0 Sep.
1,735.3 524.9 1,210.5 3,775.0 2,174.5 286.9 687.1 72.3 584.0 544.8 42.5 1,140.4 526.5 715.8 Oct.
1,739.4 526.0 1,213.5 3,795.6 2,212.2 269.6 688.1 61.7 583.9 545.3 41.8 1,143.7 527.1 722.5 Nov.
1,664.0 476.4 1,187.6 3,769.1 2,190.3 260.8 691.2 38.8 585.6 547.3 41.2 1,130.3 531.3 729.0 Dec.
Commercial banks 6
830.8 368.3 462.5 1,511.0 967.9 158.4 268.7 51.5 99.0 92.4 17.0 160.9 182.6 449.9 2 0 1 8 Nov.
798.2 331.5 466.7 1,518.0 955.4 164.5 282.3 36.3 99.1 92.6 16.7 170.2 190.7 461.9 Dec.
Big banks 7
442.4 167.5 274.9 763.6 464.3 95.4 118.1 51.3 82.3 76.8 3.5 121.7 106.7 402.2 2 0 1 8 Nov.
412.2 142.8 269.4 743.9 446.9 92.2 118.9 36.3 82.4 77.0 3.5 121.0 109.9 409.9 Dec.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
174.4 69.9 104.4 588.4 392.4 38.5 127.6 0.2 16.4 15.4 13.5 38.8 66.8 37.0 2 0 1 8 Nov.
170.1 62.6 107.5 614.5 398.1 46.4 140.4 0.0 16.4 15.4 13.2 48.6 71.0 42.1 Dec.
Branches of foreign banks
214.0 130.9 83.1 159.0 111.3 24.5 23.0 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.4 9.0 10.8 2 0 1 8 Nov.
215.9 126.1 89.7 159.5 110.4 25.9 23.0 − 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.5 9.8 9.9 Dec.
Landesbanken
268.0 63.8 204.2 290.5 135.4 48.8 93.6 6.9 12.3 12.2 0.3 200.8 50.8 89.1 2 0 1 8 Nov.
236.4 56.2 180.2 223.2 104.3 31.4 79.7 2.1 7.4 7.3 0.3 184.0 42.4 76.2 Dec.
Savings banks
128.2 2.9 125.3 942.8 608.5 14.4 14.9 − 287.2 263.8 17.8 14.4 114.9 41.4 2 0 1 8 Nov.
131.2 4.2 127.0 974.2 633.4 15.0 15.8 − 292.5 269.3 17.5 19.0 117.1 45.6 Dec.
Credit cooperatives
116.9 1.1 115.8 695.3 457.4 33.6 14.2 − 185.0 176.5 5.1 9.7 79.3 31.0 2 0 1 8 Nov.
116.2 1.2 115.0 696.9 458.2 33.3 14.2 − 186.1 177.7 5.1 9.9 79.4 31.5 Dec.
Mortgage banks
43.9 3.2 40.7 75.0 3.0 3.0 68.9 − − − . 91.2 8.8 7.4 2 0 1 8 Nov.
47.1 3.7 43.4 75.7 2.2 3.1 70.3 − − − . 91.1 10.6 7.1 Dec.
Building and loan associations
24.8 3.8 21.0 182.0 3.3 2.3 175.8 − 0.5 0.4 0.1 3.3 11.6 12.0 2 0 1 8 Nov.
23.2 3.1 20.1 184.3 3.3 2.1 178.2 − 0.5 0.4 0.1 3.3 11.7 10.9 Dec.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
326.8 82.8 244.0 99.0 36.6 9.0 51.9 3.2 − − . 663.4 79.2 91.6 2 0 1 8 Nov.
311.7 76.5 235.2 97.1 33.4 11.4 50.8 0.4 − − . 652.8 79.3 95.7 Dec.
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
397.9 208.8 189.1 552.5 396.8 51.0 78.5 6.6 20.1 19.6 6.1 27.2 52.6 89.4 2 0 1 8 Nov.
381.7 192.9 188.8 554.8 398.9 49.4 80.4 6.3 20.0 19.6 6.0 26.5 53.6 86.7 Dec.
of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
183.9 77.9 106.1 393.6 285.6 26.5 55.5 6.6 19.9 19.4 6.1 26.8 43.6 78.6 2 0 1 8 Nov.
165.9 66.8 99.1 395.2 288.5 23.5 57.4 6.3 19.9 19.4 6.0 26.0 43.8 76.8 Dec.
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Nov.2009),CommerzbankAG,UniCreditBankAG(formerlyBayerischeHypo-und
IV.12). 3 Included in time deposits. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan VereinsbankAG)andDeutschePostbankAG.8Sumofthebanksmajority-ownedby
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5 Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt foreignbanksandincludedinothercategoriesofbanksandthecategory”Branches
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6 Commercial banks (withdependentlegalstatus)offoreignbanks”.9Separatepresentationofthebanks
comprisethesub-groups”Bigbanks”,”Regionalbanksandothercommercialbanks” majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking categories.
and”Branchesofforeignbanks”.7DeutscheBankAG,DresdnerBankAG(upto

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
26
IV. Banks
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
(euro area balances market Memo money mar- Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper Securities item: ket paper issued
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks 1
End of year or month *
2009 16.9 78.9 1,711.5 1,138.0 − 31.6 541.9 2.2 3,100.1 2,691.8 0.8 4.0 403.5
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.4 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 238.9 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2 0 1 7 July 26.4 420.0 1,398.0 1,139.4 0.0 1.4 257.2 1.7 3,302.5 2,865.2 0.3 1.0 436.0
Aug. 27.3 421.3 1,384.2 1,131.4 0.0 1.4 251.3 1.7 3,308.9 2,869.4 0.2 0.8 438.5
Sep. 28.1 409.2 1,416.1 1,168.3 0.0 1.3 246.5 1.7 3,317.6 2,878.2 0.3 0.7 438.4
Oct. 28.1 472.7 1,378.5 1,130.6 0.0 0.9 247.0 1.7 3,326.1 2,887.0 0.3 0.8 438.0
Nov. 27.7 457.1 1,422.2 1,175.1 0.0 0.8 246.3 1.8 3,343.7 2,899.6 0.2 1.2 442.6
Dec. 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2 0 1 8 Jan. 29.0 448.1 1,421.7 1,176.0 0.0 0.7 245.1 2.5 3,339.3 2,904.9 0.3 1.0 433.1
Feb. 29.3 460.7 1,409.5 1,165.3 0.0 0.8 243.3 2.9 3,338.3 2,910.6 0.2 1.2 426.4
Mar. 34.8 440.7 1,389.5 1,143.5 0.0 0.9 245.2 3.2 3,342.5 2,919.6 0.3 1.0 421.7
Apr. 33.5 464.4 1,405.8 1,159.9 0.0 0.8 245.1 3.6 3,348.5 2,926.7 0.2 1.6 420.0
May 34.8 475.7 1,398.4 1,153.4 0.0 1.0 244.1 4.1 3,350.0 2,928.6 0.2 2.3 418.8
June 34.7 437.6 1,388.9 1,146.3 0.0 1.0 241.6 4.5 3,361.8 2,941.9 0.2 1.8 417.7
July 34.4 456.8 1,369.6 1,128.2 0.0 1.1 240.3 4.8 3,368.0 2,949.9 0.2 2.2 415.6
Aug. 34.8 455.2 1,383.7 1,141.5 0.0 1.2 241.0 5.3 3,368.5 2,956.8 0.2 1.6 409.9
Sep. 35.6 471.0 1,349.1 1,105.9 0.0 1.3 241.9 5.9 3,384.0 2,971.7 0.2 1.8 410.2
Oct. 36.6 505.8 1,323.8 1,082.0 0.0 1.4 240.3 6.1 3,384.4 2,977.1 0.2 0.6 406.6
Nov. 36.5 496.8 1,350.3 1,107.7 0.0 1.3 241.3 6.0 3,397.3 2,992.0 0.2 0.8 404.3
Dec. 40.4 416.1 1,323.4 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 238.9 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
Changes *
2010 − 0.9 + 0.6 − 19.3 + 61.5 + 0.0 − 24.0 − 56.8 − 0.3 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 0.0 + 23.8 + 28.0
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.1 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.5 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.2
2 0 1 7 July − 0.7 + 2.2 + 6.9 + 9.0 − + 0.2 − 2.2 − + 5.6 + 9.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
Aug. + 0.9 + 1.3 − 13.8 − 8.0 − + 0.0 − 5.9 + 0.0 + 6.4 + 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.6
Sep. + 0.8 − 12.1 + 34.1 + 38.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 + 7.3 + 8.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.5
Oct. + 0.1 + 63.5 − 37.6 − 37.6 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 8.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
Nov. − 0.4 − 15.6 + 43.7 + 44.4 − − 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 17.7 + 12.7 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 4.6
Dec. + 4.1 − 64.6 − 10.3 − 7.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 11.1 − 5.6 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.1
2 0 1 8 Jan. − 2.9 + 55.6 + 13.7 + 12.1 − + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 11.0 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 4.4
Feb. + 0.3 + 12.7 − 12.3 − 10.7 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 5.6 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 6.7
Mar. + 5.5 − 20.0 − 19.9 − 21.9 − + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 4.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 4.7
Apr. − 1.3 + 23.6 + 16.8 + 16.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 6.4 + 7.1 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.3
May + 1.3 + 11.4 − 5.8 − 4.9 − + 0.1 − 1.1 + 0.5 + 10.4 + 10.8 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.2
June − 0.1 − 38.1 − 9.5 − 7.1 − + 0.0 − 2.4 + 0.4 + 11.8 + 13.3 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.0
July − 0.3 + 19.3 − 19.3 − 18.1 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 6.2 + 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.1
Aug. + 0.4 − 1.6 + 15.6 + 14.8 − + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 7.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.8
Sep. + 0.8 + 16.0 − 34.6 − 35.7 − + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 15.5 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
Oct. + 1.1 + 34.7 − 25.4 − 23.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.6
Nov. − 0.1 − 9.0 + 26.6 + 25.7 − − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 12.9 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.2
Dec. + 3.9 − 80.6 − 27.0 − 24.0 − − 0.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisationclaims(seealsofootnote2).2Includingdebtsecuritiesarisingfromthe
changes.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional. exchangeofequalisationclaims.3Includingliabilitiesarisingfromregistereddebt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities,registeredmoneymarketpaperandnon-negotiablebearerdebtsecurities;
specially marked. 1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of includingsubordinatedliabilities.4Includingliabilitiesarisingfrommonetarypolicy

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
27
IV. Banks
Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs) 3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-
pating
interests
in
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:
tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciary
claims 2 loans enterprises Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits 7 bonds 8 loans Period
End of year or month *
− 43.9 106.1 1,355.1 128.9 1,226.2 0.0 35.7 2,829.7 1,029.5 1,102.6 594.5 103.2 43.4 2009
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011
− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012
− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013
− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016
− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017
− 18.0 91.0 1,020.9 105.7 915.1 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018
− 19.6 88.5 1,061.7 125.0 936.6 0.0 5.4 3,361.5 1,866.0 866.0 583.5 46.0 29.9 2 0 1 7 July
− 19.6 88.9 1,065.1 121.2 943.9 0.0 5.4 3,376.5 1,884.2 864.4 582.4 45.4 30.0 Aug.
− 19.5 88.1 1,071.5 120.2 951.3 0.0 5.3 3,380.7 1,891.7 861.9 581.8 45.3 30.0 Sep.
− 19.4 87.9 1,081.0 122.8 958.2 0.0 5.3 3,396.5 1,916.8 853.4 581.5 44.8 29.9 Oct.
− 19.4 88.1 1,079.8 125.9 953.9 0.0 5.3 3,426.8 1,944.0 857.5 581.0 44.3 30.1 Nov.
− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 Dec.
− 18.9 88.2 1,060.1 116.0 944.1 0.0 5.0 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 582.4 42.9 30.4 2 0 1 8 Jan.
− 19.0 88.5 1,056.6 110.3 946.4 0.0 5.0 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 582.2 42.3 30.9 Feb.
− 18.9 88.5 1,056.3 118.6 937.7 0.0 5.0 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 581.3 41.8 31.5 Mar.
− 18.8 89.2 1,052.8 118.2 934.6 0.0 5.0 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 580.5 41.3 31.9 Apr.
− 18.8 93.8 1,035.9 107.1 928.9 0.0 5.0 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 580.2 40.9 32.4 May
− 18.7 94.0 1,034.3 122.0 912.2 0.0 4.9 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 579.3 40.6 32.6 June
− 18.5 94.4 1,041.4 118.8 922.6 0.0 4.9 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 578.2 40.0 32.8 July
− 18.4 88.0 1,042.8 117.3 925.5 0.0 4.8 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 577.6 39.5 33.1 Aug.
− 18.3 87.9 1,033.4 117.1 916.2 0.0 4.8 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 577.3 39.1 33.9 Sep.
− 17.9 87.9 1,032.9 111.3 921.6 0.0 4.8 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 577.0 38.6 33.7 Oct.
− 17.9 87.7 1,045.8 115.5 930.3 0.0 4.7 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 576.9 37.9 33.7 Nov.
− 18.0 91.0 1,020.9 105.7 915.1 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 Dec.
Changes *
− − 2.1 − 9.2 − 96.5 + 22.3 − 119.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 77.8 + 76.0 − 18.9 + 24.0 − 3.3 − 1.7 2010
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011
− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012
− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013
− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016
− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017
− − 1.0 + 3.2 − 25.0 − 2.8 − 22.2 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 7.8 − 0.5 + 8.3 − − 0.0 − 8.8 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.2 2 0 1 7 July
− − 0.0 + 0.4 + 3.5 − 3.9 + 7.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 15.0 + 18.2 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 Aug.
− − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 1.0 − 2.3 − − 0.1 + 4.3 + 7.5 − 2.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 Sep.
− − 0.1 − 0.1 + 9.5 + 2.6 + 6.9 − + 0.0 + 15.7 + 25.1 − 8.5 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 Oct.
− − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.0 + 3.1 − 4.2 − + 0.0 + 30.3 + 27.2 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.1 Nov.
− − 0.3 + 0.5 − 27.3 − 15.0 − 12.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 3.0 − 4.2 + 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.1 Dec.
− − 0.1 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 5.2 + 6.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 2 0 1 8 Jan.
− − 0.0 + 0.4 − 3.5 − 5.8 + 2.3 − + 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5 Feb.
− − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 8.3 − 8.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5 Mar.
− − 0.1 + 0.7 − 3.0 + 0.3 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 Apr.
− + 0.0 + 4.6 − 16.9 − 11.2 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 May
− − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 15.0 − 16.6 − − 0.1 + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3 June
− − 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.7 − 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 July
− + 0.0 − 6.0 + 2.8 − 1.5 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 Aug.
− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 9.3 − − 0.0 − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6 Sep.
− − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 Oct.
− − 0.0 − 0.2 + 13.0 + 4.2 + 8.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 Nov.
− + 0.1 + 3.3 − 24.9 − 8.6 − 16.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 Dec.
operations with the Bundesbank. 5 Own acceptances and promissory notes depositsundersavingsandloancontracts(seealsofootnote8).8Includingliabilities
outstanding.6SincetheinclusionofbuildingandloanassociationsinJanuary1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
includingdepositsundersavingsandloancontracts(seeTableIV.12).7Excluding

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
28
IV. Banks
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable Loans and bills negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
2009 0.3 1,277.4 986.1 643.5 342.6 6.2 285.0 2.9 815.7 469.6 116.9 352.7 9.8 336.3
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2 0 1 7 July 0.3 1,018.5 788.2 493.2 295.0 2.3 227.9 2.1 751.5 458.0 102.6 355.4 6.1 287.4
Aug. 0.2 1,000.5 772.3 478.4 293.9 2.2 226.0 2.1 743.9 454.3 104.0 350.3 6.0 283.6
Sep. 0.3 1,007.0 780.1 484.7 295.4 1.9 225.1 2.1 743.3 457.8 107.9 349.9 6.7 278.8
Oct. 0.3 996.7 769.4 473.5 295.9 1.9 225.3 2.1 739.9 457.9 104.8 353.1 6.5 275.6
Nov. 0.3 988.3 761.0 467.6 293.4 1.4 225.9 2.2 736.5 454.9 105.5 349.3 6.4 275.2
Dec. 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2 0 1 8 Jan. 0.3 985.4 758.1 466.7 291.4 1.8 225.5 2.2 735.1 450.6 105.6 345.0 5.5 279.1
Feb. 0.3 999.3 770.8 477.7 293.1 2.1 226.3 2.3 742.5 459.1 111.5 347.7 6.2 277.2
Mar. 0.3 993.3 759.8 469.7 290.0 2.2 231.3 2.4 736.2 456.1 108.7 347.4 6.5 273.6
Apr. 0.3 1,003.7 769.6 478.3 291.3 2.3 231.8 2.4 730.1 453.9 105.2 348.7 6.8 269.4
May 0.3 1,030.6 796.6 501.0 295.6 2.3 231.7 2.5 749.9 470.2 112.9 357.2 5.3 274.4
June 0.3 1,027.1 792.4 501.1 291.2 2.3 232.4 2.5 732.4 454.6 97.7 356.9 5.9 271.8
July 0.2 1,031.9 795.4 502.7 292.7 2.3 234.2 2.6 740.4 464.1 103.9 360.2 6.1 270.2
Aug. 0.2 1,027.9 789.8 496.9 292.9 2.3 235.8 2.6 748.7 469.5 107.6 362.0 6.5 272.7
Sep. 0.3 1,028.7 787.7 496.7 291.1 2.3 238.6 2.7 742.5 464.0 102.4 361.6 5.3 273.2
Oct. 0.3 1,013.0 772.7 492.7 280.0 2.1 238.1 2.8 772.5 495.4 115.8 379.6 6.0 271.1
Nov. 0.3 1,007.9 765.4 491.4 274.0 1.5 241.0 2.9 776.4 500.3 117.6 382.7 5.9 270.2
Dec. 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
Changes *
2010 + 0.1 − 141.5 − 116.2 − 47.3 − 68.9 − 4.8 − 20.4 − 0.2 − 62.0 − 24.5 − 12.6 − 11.9 + 0.4 − 38.0
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.7
2 0 1 7 July − 0.0 − 16.8 − 16.1 − 18.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1
Aug. − 0.0 − 19.5 − 17.7 − 15.3 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 3.0 + 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 3.5
Sep. + 0.1 + 5.0 + 6.5 + 5.6 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 + 3.4 − 1.4 + 0.7 − 3.5
Oct. + 0.0 − 13.4 − 13.6 − 12.3 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 5.3 − 1.5 − 3.4 + 2.0 − 0.2 − 3.6
Nov. − 0.0 − 3.2 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.9 + 1.0 − 1.9 − 0.0 + 0.1
Dec. − 0.0 − 21.1 − 19.6 − 25.1 + 5.5 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 10.7 − 11.1 − 11.9 + 0.8 − 2.2 + 2.5
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 0.0 + 30.6 + 28.8 + 29.7 − 0.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 15.8 + 12.3 + 12.8 − 0.6 + 1.3 + 2.3
Feb. − 0.0 + 8.4 + 7.4 + 8.2 − 0.8 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 4.9 + 6.5 + 5.4 + 1.1 + 0.7 − 2.3
Mar. − 0.0 − 3.1 − 8.3 − 6.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 0.1 − 5.1 − 2.1 − 2.6 + 0.5 + 0.4 − 3.4
Apr. + 0.0 + 6.0 + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 8.2 − 4.1 − 3.9 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 4.3
May − 0.0 + 16.9 + 17.3 + 17.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 14.7 + 12.1 + 7.0 + 5.1 − 1.5 + 4.2
June + 0.0 − 4.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 − 4.7 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 17.4 − 15.4 − 15.2 − 0.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
July − 0.0 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 10.4 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 0.1 − 1.4
Aug. − 0.0 − 6.4 − 7.9 − 7.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 7.3 + 4.7 + 3.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3
Sep. + 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 − 7.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 − 1.3 − 1.1 + 0.3
Oct. − 0.0 − 7.7 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 14.8 + 10.5 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
Nov. + 0.0 − 4.9 − 6.5 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0
Dec. − 0.0 + 8.0 + 8.2 + 13.2 − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 9.5 − 17.4 + 7.9 − 2.0 − 2.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not
changes.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional. specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
29
IV. Banks
Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bank
interests savings bonds) savings bonds)
in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memo
item: and and item: and item:
Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciary
loans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans Period
End of year or month *
32.1 45.4 652.6 213.6 439.0 307.4 131.6 0.2 216.3 78.1 138.2 73.7 64.5 1.9 2009
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 2010
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 2011
32.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 2012
30.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 2013
14.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 2016
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 2017
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 2018
12.5 24.4 692.4 441.0 251.4 165.5 85.9 0.0 282.5 137.7 144.8 84.4 60.5 0.6 2 0 1 7 July
12.4 24.4 648.0 389.2 258.9 174.0 84.9 0.0 286.0 133.1 152.9 92.5 60.4 0.5 Aug.
12.4 24.8 691.5 430.5 261.0 176.6 84.3 0.0 279.1 133.5 145.7 84.3 61.4 0.5 Sep.
12.3 24.8 687.6 433.6 254.0 169.4 84.7 0.0 282.8 132.3 150.5 87.9 62.6 0.4 Oct.
12.4 24.7 694.2 428.8 265.4 179.7 85.7 0.0 284.4 140.6 143.8 81.7 62.1 0.4 Nov.
12.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 Dec.
12.0 24.2 711.8 450.8 261.0 172.7 88.3 0.0 275.0 130.5 144.6 82.2 62.3 0.3 2 0 1 8 Jan.
12.1 23.7 715.7 441.2 274.5 185.5 89.0 0.0 279.6 134.8 144.8 85.5 59.3 0.3 Feb.
12.2 24.0 668.6 385.6 283.0 196.4 86.5 0.0 272.9 126.3 146.6 87.8 58.8 0.3 Mar.
12.3 23.6 685.3 410.6 274.7 188.3 86.4 0.0 282.6 138.4 144.2 85.2 59.0 0.3 Apr.
12.2 23.7 730.1 452.6 277.4 188.0 89.4 0.0 285.8 140.5 145.4 86.9 58.5 0.3 May
12.1 23.7 713.1 432.8 280.3 187.1 93.1 0.0 259.1 123.3 135.8 78.9 56.9 0.3 June
11.9 23.0 708.4 420.2 288.2 197.2 91.0 0.0 273.1 129.4 143.7 84.1 59.6 0.3 July
11.9 23.1 709.8 404.3 305.5 217.7 87.8 0.0 278.8 129.5 149.2 90.1 59.1 0.3 Aug.
11.8 22.4 711.7 426.7 285.0 197.3 87.7 0.0 269.3 133.2 136.1 79.2 56.9 0.1 Sep.
11.8 22.5 702.4 413.6 288.9 200.1 88.8 0.0 271.0 129.8 141.2 82.8 58.4 0.1 Oct.
11.8 22.3 693.6 410.5 283.1 194.4 88.7 0.0 258.1 132.6 125.5 67.7 57.8 0.2 Nov.
11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 Dec.
Changes *
+ 0.2 + 1.4 + 895.4 + 42.0 + 542.4 + 38.1 + 136.8 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 6.0 − 7.6 − 3.3 − 4.4 − 0.4 2010
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011
− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012
− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013
+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016
− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 23.9 − 19.7 − 4.2 − 3.7 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 24.0 + 14.4 + 9.6 + 9.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 2 0 1 7 July
− 0.1 + 0.0 − 42.9 − 51.2 + 8.3 + 9.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 4.6 − 4.0 + 8.6 + 8.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 Aug.
− 0.0 + 0.4 + 42.4 + 41.0 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.7 − − 7.2 + 0.2 − 7.4 − 8.4 + 0.9 + 0.0 Sep.
− 0.1 − 0.0 − 5.9 + 2.4 − 8.3 − 8.3 + 0.0 − + 3.0 − 1.4 + 4.4 + 3.4 + 1.1 − 0.1 Oct.
+ 0.1 − 0.0 + 9.4 − 3.6 + 13.0 + 11.6 + 1.4 − + 2.3 + 8.6 − 6.2 − 5.9 − 0.4 − 0.0 Nov.
− 0.3 − 0.4 − 33.3 − 38.4 + 5.1 + 3.5 + 1.5 − − 42.5 − 31.0 − 11.6 − 13.4 + 1.8 − 0.1 Dec.
− 0.1 − 0.0 + 57.4 + 63.5 − 6.1 − 5.0 − 1.1 − + 35.0 + 21.4 + 13.6 + 14.4 − 0.8 − 0.0 2 0 1 8 Jan.
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 1.1 − 10.9 + 12.0 + 11.7 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 4.0 − 0.2 + 3.0 − 3.2 + 0.0 Feb.
+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 45.8 − 55.0 + 9.1 + 11.5 − 2.3 − − 6.4 − 8.3 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 Mar.
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 13.1 + 22.9 − 9.8 − 9.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 11.9 − 2.8 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.1 + 39.7 + 40.1 − 0.4 − 2.7 + 2.3 − + 1.9 + 1.4 + 0.5 + 1.2 − 0.7 + 0.0 May
− 0.2 − − 17.3 − 19.9 + 2.7 − 1.0 + 3.7 − − 26.8 − 17.2 − 9.6 − 8.0 − 1.6 − June
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 12.2 + 9.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − + 13.9 + 6.3 + 7.6 + 5.4 + 2.2 − July
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 16.4 + 16.3 + 20.0 − 3.7 − + 5.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 Aug.
− 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 22.1 − 21.2 − 20.9 − 0.3 − − 9.8 + 3.6 − 13.3 − 11.2 − 2.2 − 0.2 Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 12.5 − 14.5 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − + 0.7 − 3.8 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 Oct.
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 2.8 − 5.4 − 5.4 − 0.0 − − 12.7 + 2.9 − 15.6 − 15.0 − 0.6 + 0.0 Nov.
+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 49.1 − 40.2 − 8.9 − 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 22.3 − 4.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
30
IV. Banks
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
2009 3,100.1 2,692.6 347.3 306.3 306.2 0.1 41.0 37.1 3.9 2,752.8 2,299.7
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2 0 1 7 July 3,302.5 2,865.5 249.4 210.2 209.5 0.7 39.2 38.8 0.3 3,053.1 2,589.2
Aug. 3,308.9 2,869.6 242.8 207.6 207.0 0.6 35.2 35.0 0.2 3,066.1 2,601.2
Sep. 3,317.6 2,878.5 246.2 214.1 213.5 0.6 32.2 32.0 0.2 3,071.3 2,608.7
Oct. 3,326.1 2,887.3 248.0 215.3 214.7 0.6 32.7 32.6 0.2 3,078.1 2,616.7
Nov. 3,343.7 2,899.8 248.0 215.4 214.9 0.5 32.6 31.9 0.7 3,095.6 2,636.3
Dec. 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2 0 1 8 Jan. 3,339.3 2,905.2 249.7 217.4 216.8 0.6 32.3 31.9 0.4 3,089.6 2,645.2
Feb. 3,338.3 2,910.8 247.6 219.8 219.3 0.6 27.8 27.1 0.6 3,090.7 2,650.4
Mar. 3,342.5 2,919.9 253.5 225.6 224.9 0.7 27.9 27.6 0.2 3,089.0 2,653.3
Apr. 3,348.5 2,926.9 254.0 223.0 222.1 0.9 31.0 30.3 0.7 3,094.5 2,664.6
May 3,350.0 2,928.9 254.5 226.6 225.4 1.2 27.9 26.8 1.1 3,095.5 2,667.7
June 3,361.8 2,942.2 257.0 229.8 228.9 0.9 27.2 26.3 0.9 3,104.7 2,681.4
July 3,368.0 2,950.1 256.7 225.4 224.7 0.7 31.3 29.8 1.5 3,111.3 2,692.5
Aug. 3,368.5 2,957.0 250.5 223.9 223.1 0.8 26.6 25.7 0.9 3,118.0 2,700.6
Sep. 3,384.0 2,971.9 255.9 232.3 231.6 0.7 23.6 22.5 1.1 3,128.1 2,711.1
Oct. 3,384.4 2,977.3 252.6 228.0 227.4 0.6 24.6 24.7 − 0.1 3,131.8 2,718.7
Nov. 3,397.3 2,992.2 251.7 227.9 227.4 0.5 23.9 23.6 0.3 3,145.6 2,732.7
Dec. 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
Changes *
2010 + 130.5 + 78.7 + 80.4 − 23.4 − 23.5 + 0.1 + 103.8 + 80.1 + 23.7 + 50.1 + 14.9
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2 0 1 7 July + 5.6 + 9.4 − 1.8 − 3.9 − 4.0 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 7.4 + 11.4
Aug. + 6.4 + 4.1 − 6.6 − 2.6 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 0.1 + 13.0 + 12.0
Sep. + 7.3 + 8.9 + 3.5 + 6.5 + 6.5 − 0.0 − 3.0 − 3.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 5.8
Oct. + 8.6 + 8.8 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 8.0
Nov. + 17.7 + 12.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.5 + 17.6 + 17.8
Dec. − 11.1 − 5.5 − 6.4 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 4.7 + 3.6
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 6.9 + 11.0 + 8.0 + 6.5 + 6.1 + 0.3 + 1.6 + 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 4.7
Feb. − 1.0 + 5.5 − 2.1 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.5 − 4.8 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 5.0
Mar. + 4.2 + 9.2 + 5.9 + 5.8 + 5.7 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 2.9
Apr. + 6.4 + 7.0 + 0.5 − 2.6 − 2.8 + 0.2 + 3.1 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 5.9 + 11.7
May + 10.4 + 10.8 + 0.5 + 3.6 + 3.3 + 0.3 − 3.1 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 9.9 + 12.4
June + 11.8 + 13.3 + 2.5 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 9.3 + 13.6
July + 6.2 + 7.9 − 0.3 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 9.9
Aug. + 0.7 + 7.1 − 6.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 4.7 − 4.1 − 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.2
Sep. + 15.5 + 14.9 + 5.6 + 8.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.3 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 10.3
Oct. + 0.5 + 5.3 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 2.2 − 1.1 + 5.2 + 9.1
Nov. + 12.9 + 14.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 13.8 + 14.0
Dec. − 2.9 − 1.8 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1 Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional. equalisationclaims(seealsofootnote2).2Includingdebtsecuritiesarisingfromthe
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
31
IV. Banks
lending
prises and households to general government
Loans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term Securities loans Total Total term term ities 1 claims 2 loans Period
End of year or month *
2,051.3 242.7 1,808.6 248.4 39.6 453.1 298.0 32.2 265.8 155.1 − 4.3 2009
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 2010
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 2011
2,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 2012
2,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 2013
2,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 2016
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 2017
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 2018
2,357.7 268.3 2,089.4 231.5 18.0 463.9 259.4 23.1 236.3 204.5 − 1.6 2 0 1 7 July
2,369.2 269.4 2,099.8 232.0 18.0 464.9 258.4 22.9 235.5 206.5 − 1.6 Aug.
2,376.0 269.6 2,106.3 232.7 17.9 462.7 257.0 22.4 234.6 205.7 − 1.6 Sep.
2,383.4 270.9 2,112.5 233.2 17.8 461.4 256.6 22.7 234.0 204.8 − 1.6 Oct.
2,397.7 274.4 2,123.3 238.6 17.8 459.3 255.4 22.8 232.6 204.0 − 1.6 Nov.
2,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 Dec.
2,405.7 274.8 2,130.8 239.5 17.4 444.4 250.9 22.0 228.9 193.6 − 1.5 2 0 1 8 Jan.
2,414.1 275.1 2,139.0 236.3 17.5 440.3 250.3 21.9 228.4 190.1 − 1.5 Feb.
2,419.5 275.2 2,144.2 233.8 17.4 435.8 247.9 22.1 225.8 187.9 − 1.6 Mar.
2,428.6 277.1 2,151.5 236.0 17.3 430.0 245.9 21.9 224.1 184.0 − 1.5 Apr.
2,431.2 270.8 2,160.4 236.6 17.3 427.7 245.5 21.9 223.6 182.2 − 1.5 May
2,443.3 275.3 2,168.0 238.1 17.2 423.4 243.7 21.0 222.7 179.7 − 1.5 June
2,454.6 277.7 2,176.9 237.9 17.0 418.7 241.0 20.3 220.8 177.7 − 1.5 July
2,467.5 279.3 2,188.2 233.1 17.0 417.4 240.6 21.1 219.5 176.8 − 1.3 Aug.
2,476.9 280.1 2,196.8 234.1 16.9 417.1 241.0 20.5 220.5 176.1 − 1.3 Sep.
2,484.5 279.7 2,204.9 234.1 16.6 413.1 240.7 20.2 220.5 172.5 − 1.3 Oct.
2,500.3 284.2 2,216.1 232.4 16.6 412.9 240.9 20.0 220.9 171.9 − 1.3 Nov.
2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 Dec.
Changes *
+ 18.6 − 4.0 + 22.6 − 3.8 − 1.7 + 35.2 + 3.5 + 3.5 − 0.0 + 31.7 − − 0.3 2010
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012
+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013
+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016
+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017
+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018
+ 11.4 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 4.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − + 0.0 2 0 1 7 July
+ 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.4 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 2.0 − − 0.0 Aug.
+ 6.6 + 0.2 + 6.4 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − − 0.0 Sep.
+ 7.4 + 1.3 + 6.1 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.9 − − 0.0 Oct.
+ 12.4 + 3.5 + 9.0 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.8 − − Nov.
+ 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 2.0 − 0.4 − 8.3 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 7.1 − + 0.1 Dec.
+ 5.7 + 1.6 + 4.2 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 5.9 − 2.5 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 3.4 − − 0.1 2 0 1 8 Jan.
+ 8.2 + 0.3 + 8.0 − 3.2 − 0.0 − 3.9 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5 − − 0.0 Feb.
+ 5.4 + 0.2 + 5.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 4.6 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 2.2 − + 0.0 Mar.
+ 9.1 + 1.8 + 7.3 + 2.5 − 0.1 − 5.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.8 − 3.9 − − 0.0 Apr.
+ 11.8 + 2.6 + 9.3 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.8 − + 0.0 May
+ 12.1 + 4.5 + 7.6 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 2.6 − − 0.1 June
+ 10.1 + 2.5 + 7.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.9 − − 0.0 July
+ 13.1 + 1.6 + 11.5 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.9 − + 0.0 Aug.
+ 9.2 + 0.5 + 8.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 − − 0.0 Sep.
+ 9.2 + 1.0 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − − 0.0 Oct.
+ 15.8 + 4.6 + 11.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − − 0.0 Nov.
− 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 − + 0.2 Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
32
IV. Banks
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
sectors of economic activity *
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities portfolios) 1
of which:
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
Electricity, sale and
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
2016 2,512.0 1,259.7 1,276.6 1,016.5 260.1 1,347.5 354.1 125.1 104.7 62.2 128.2 50.6 57.0 139.7
2 0 1 7 Dec. 2,610.1 1,304.3 1,326.6 1,053.0 273.6 1,403.1 368.5 131.3 112.6 67.3 133.3 50.2 51.5 147.9
2 0 1 8 Mar. 2,644.4 1,317.6 1,338.2 1,061.5 276.7 1,429.5 373.4 136.0 115.2 69.4 137.5 50.1 51.2 151.4
June 2,672.2 1,333.8 1,357.5 1,074.2 283.3 1,445.5 380.1 139.2 114.2 71.9 136.5 50.5 51.0 152.8
Sep. 2,708.5 1,349.5 1,377.7 1,086.8 290.9 1,476.9 389.6 140.5 115.9 73.0 138.8 53.5 50.8 157.0
Dec. 2,727.0 1,382.2 1,391.2 1,116.4 274.8 1,483.6 392.7 139.3 116.5 71.9 138.7 53.2 50.6 157.3
Short-term lending
2016 205.5 − 6.9 − 6.9 174.3 3.7 29.7 4.4 11.8 43.2 3.6 4.4 29.3
2 0 1 7 Dec. 210.6 − 6.5 − 6.5 180.8 3.6 32.3 4.0 13.6 45.2 3.4 4.0 27.4
2 0 1 8 Mar. 224.9 − 6.8 − 6.8 195.3 3.8 36.6 5.0 14.9 48.4 3.5 4.2 29.1
June 228.9 − 7.1 − 7.1 199.2 4.0 36.7 4.8 16.6 47.3 3.9 4.2 28.5
Sep. 231.6 − 7.4 − 7.4 201.9 4.3 37.3 4.2 16.6 48.7 4.2 4.0 29.4
Dec. 227.6 − 7.2 − 7.2 195.9 4.1 35.5 4.9 14.7 48.3 3.7 4.9 28.0
Medium-term lending
2016 264.1 − 34.5 − 34.5 186.4 13.5 23.6 5.5 10.5 17.2 4.5 11.2 41.8
2 0 1 7 Dec. 273.5 − 34.0 − 34.0 193.1 14.0 23.6 5.1 11.3 18.2 4.3 10.3 46.7
2 0 1 8 Mar. 275.2 − 34.0 − 34.0 194.0 14.4 23.3 5.0 11.7 18.6 4.2 10.4 47.0
June 275.3 − 34.7 − 34.7 195.1 15.0 25.5 4.4 11.8 18.2 4.2 10.4 47.5
Sep. 280.1 − 35.6 − 35.6 199.4 15.6 24.9 4.4 12.2 18.3 4.4 11.1 48.0
Dec. 282.6 − 35.4 − 35.4 202.5 15.4 24.9 4.5 12.5 19.0 4.5 10.6 49.0
Long-term lending
2016 2,042.4 1,259.7 1,235.1 1,016.5 218.6 986.8 336.9 71.8 94.8 39.9 67.7 42.5 41.4 68.6
2 0 1 7 Dec. 2,125.9 1,304.3 1,286.1 1,053.0 233.1 1,029.2 351.0 75.4 103.5 42.4 70.0 42.4 37.2 73.8
2 0 1 8 Mar. 2,144.2 1,317.6 1,297.3 1,061.5 235.8 1,040.2 355.2 76.1 105.2 42.8 70.4 42.3 36.7 75.3
June 2,168.0 1,333.8 1,315.7 1,074.2 241.5 1,051.1 361.1 77.0 105.0 43.5 71.0 42.4 36.4 76.8
Sep. 2,196.9 1,349.5 1,334.6 1,086.8 247.8 1,075.6 369.7 78.4 107.4 44.2 71.8 44.9 35.7 79.6
Dec. 2,216.8 1,382.2 1,348.6 1,116.4 232.2 1,085.2 373.2 78.9 107.2 44.7 71.4 45.0 35.1 80.3
Lending, total Change during quarter *
2 0 1 7 Q4 + 18.7 + 9.7 + 12.7 + 7.8 + 4.9 + 8.9 + 4.1 − 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.5 + 1.5
2 0 1 8 Q1 + 33.6 + 10.6 + 11.1 + 8.1 + 3.0 + 26.0 + 4.8 + 4.7 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 4.2 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 2.4
Q2 + 37.0 + 15.4 + 17.8 + 11.8 + 6.0 + 23.1 + 6.6 + 4.1 − 0.6 + 2.9 − 0.6 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 1.6
Q3 + 35.2 + 12.9 + 19.4 + 11.1 + 8.3 + 19.3 + 6.0 + 1.3 + 0.3 + 1.0 + 2.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 4.1
Q4 + 18.5 + 10.8 + 15.2 + 8.9 + 6.2 + 6.8 + 4.8 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
Short-term lending
2 0 1 7 Q4 − 2.8 − − 0.0 − − 0.0 − 2.6 + 0.0 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.8
2 0 1 8 Q1 + 14.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 14.4 + 0.3 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.7
Q2 + 4.0 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6
Q3 + 2.8 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 2.3 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.7 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.9
Q4 − 5.5 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.4
Medium-term lending
2 0 1 7 Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.1 − + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.1
2 0 1 8 Q1 + 2.0 − + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1
Q2 + 8.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 7.3 + 0.6 + 3.0 − 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6
Q3 + 4.6 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 3.6 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.5
Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9
Long-term lending
2 0 1 7 Q4 + 17.6 + 9.7 + 12.6 + 7.8 + 4.8 + 8.7 + 3.8 + 0.5 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.1 + 1.1
2 0 1 8 Q1 + 17.4 + 10.6 + 10.8 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 10.3 + 4.2 + 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.6
Q2 + 24.1 + 15.4 + 16.9 + 11.8 + 5.1 + 11.7 + 5.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.6
Q3 + 27.8 + 12.9 + 18.2 + 11.1 + 7.1 + 13.5 + 5.3 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 2.7
Q4 + 20.1 + 10.8 + 14.7 + 8.9 + 5.8 + 9.6 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5
*Excludinglendingbyforeignbranches.Breakdownoflendingbybuildingandloan fromthechanges.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedaspro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
33
IV. Banks
Lending to
Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Services sector (including the professions) Memo items: Other lending
of which: of which:
Debit
balances
on wage,
Other Lending salary
real to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing Instalment pension Housing
Total enterprises companies activities persons 2 enterprises Total loans Total loans 3 accounts Total loans Period
End of year or quarter * Lending, total
680.0 204.7 36.3 181.6 401.3 46.0 1,150.1 919.0 231.2 163.3 9.2 14.4 3.6 2016
709.0 214.9 42.3 186.4 411.2 47.7 1,192.3 954.3 237.9 171.6 8.6 14.8 3.7 2 0 1 7 Dec.
718.8 217.2 44.1 188.5 414.4 48.2 1,200.0 961.1 239.0 173.3 8.4 14.9 3.7 2 0 1 8 Mar.
729.3 221.8 47.3 190.7 415.5 48.3 1,211.8 973.7 238.1 173.0 8.4 14.9 3.8 June
747.4 231.0 48.2 194.9 430.6 48.6 1,216.6 984.4 232.2 172.2 8.4 15.0 3.7 Sep.
756.0 237.0 47.3 196.9 432.6 48.0 1,228.4 994.8 233.7 172.9 8.3 15.0 3.7 Dec.
Short-term lending
47.9 8.4 5.7 10.2 23.9 5.1 30.6 3.2 27.4 1.8 9.2 0.6 0.0 2016
50.9 10.1 6.8 10.3 23.3 5.0 29.3 2.9 26.4 1.6 8.6 0.5 0.0 2 0 1 7 Dec.
53.5 10.2 7.9 10.7 23.7 5.8 29.0 3.0 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.6 − 2 0 1 8 Mar.
57.2 10.7 10.2 10.6 23.5 5.7 29.2 3.1 26.1 1.5 8.4 0.5 − June
57.4 11.6 10.3 10.2 24.0 5.7 29.2 3.2 26.0 1.5 8.4 0.5 0.0 Sep.
55.9 12.0 8.1 10.4 24.0 5.2 31.2 3.1 28.2 1.5 8.3 0.5 − Dec.
Medium-term lending
72.1 11.1 8.2 19.3 32.9 3.6 77.3 21.1 56.2 51.0 − 0.5 0.0 2016
73.5 12.1 9.3 18.3 32.7 3.6 79.9 20.0 59.9 55.2 − 0.6 0.0 2 0 1 7 Dec.
73.9 12.6 9.3 18.3 32.8 3.4 80.7 19.7 61.0 56.5 − 0.5 0.0 2 0 1 8 Mar.
73.0 13.0 9.7 19.2 31.0 3.4 79.6 19.7 59.9 55.4 − 0.5 0.0 June
76.2 14.0 9.8 20.0 31.7 3.5 80.1 20.0 60.2 55.8 − 0.5 0.1 Sep.
77.5 14.8 9.9 21.3 31.5 3.5 79.6 19.9 59.7 56.4 − 0.5 0.1 Dec.
Long-term lending
560.0 185.2 22.4 152.2 344.5 37.3 1,042.3 894.7 147.6 110.5 − 13.3 3.5 2016
584.6 192.6 26.2 157.8 355.3 39.2 1,083.1 931.4 151.6 114.8 − 13.7 3.7 2 0 1 7 Dec.
591.3 194.5 27.0 159.4 357.9 39.1 1,090.3 938.5 151.9 115.3 − 13.7 3.7 2 0 1 8 Mar.
599.1 198.1 27.4 160.9 361.1 39.2 1,103.0 950.9 152.1 116.0 − 13.9 3.7 June
613.8 205.3 28.0 164.7 374.9 39.5 1,107.2 961.2 146.0 114.9 − 14.0 3.7 Sep.
622.6 210.2 29.2 165.3 377.2 39.3 1,117.6 971.8 145.8 115.0 − 14.0 3.7 Dec.
Change during quarter * Lending, total
+ 8.5 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 0.6 + 9.8 + 8.6 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.0 2 0 1 7 Q4
+ 11.0 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 2.9 + 3.6 + 0.5 + 7.5 + 6.3 + 1.2 + 1.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2 0 1 8 Q1
+ 14.5 + 4.8 + 3.2 + 2.2 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 14.0 + 11.1 + 2.8 + 3.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
+ 9.6 + 3.9 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.3 + 15.7 + 13.4 + 2.3 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 Q3
+ 8.4 + 6.1 − 1.1 + 2.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 11.7 + 10.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 Q4
Short-term lending
+ 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 2 0 1 7 Q4
+ 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 2 0 1 8 Q1
+ 3.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − Q2
− 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
− 1.8 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 1.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 1.2 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2 0 1 7 Q4
+ 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.3 − − 0.0 + 0.0 2 0 1 8 Q1
+ 3.1 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 1.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 1.5 + 1.5 − − 0.0 + 0.0 Q2
+ 2.8 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.6 − − 0.0 + 0.0 Q3
+ 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.5 − + 0.0 − Q4
Long-term lending
+ 6.5 + 2.9 + 0.9 + 0.7 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 8.9 + 8.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2 0 1 7 Q4
+ 7.7 + 2.0 + 0.8 + 2.3 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 7.0 + 6.6 + 0.4 + 0.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2 0 1 8 Q1
+ 7.7 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 12.3 + 11.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 − + 0.1 + 0.0 Q2
+ 6.9 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 1.6 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 14.2 + 13.0 + 1.2 + 1.7 − + 0.1 − 0.0 Q3
+ 8.9 + 5.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 10.4 + 10.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0 Q4
not specially marked. 1 Excluding fiduciary loans. 2 Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
34
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years deposits 3 bonds 4 loans securities) from repos
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
2016 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 232.4 657.3 47.2 610.1 588.5 50.4 28.8 18.3 0.9
2017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2 0 1 8 Jan. 3,428.9 1,949.3 854.1 211.5 642.6 55.8 586.8 582.4 42.9 30.4 16.1 1.4
Feb. 3,425.8 1,949.6 851.6 209.9 641.8 54.4 587.4 582.2 42.3 30.9 15.9 1.1
Mar. 3,421.8 1,948.0 850.7 212.9 637.8 52.6 585.2 581.3 41.8 31.5 15.8 0.6
Apr. 3,439.5 1,971.4 846.3 210.7 635.6 50.7 584.9 580.5 41.3 31.9 15.1 0.9
May 3,471.4 2,002.6 847.7 210.8 636.9 51.9 585.0 580.2 40.9 32.4 14.8 0.7
June 3,473.1 1,996.6 856.7 221.2 635.6 51.4 584.2 579.3 40.6 32.6 15.3 0.7
July 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 218.3 634.0 52.0 582.1 578.2 40.0 32.8 14.9 1.5
Aug. 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 215.1 632.8 53.8 579.0 577.6 39.5 33.1 14.9 0.5
Sep. 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 210.9 633.0 54.7 578.3 577.3 39.1 33.9 14.8 0.3
Oct. 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 210.3 633.4 55.1 578.3 577.0 38.6 33.7 14.9 0.7
Nov. 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 208.1 635.0 55.8 579.2 576.9 37.9 33.7 14.9 0.4
Dec. 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
Changes*
2017 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 24.7 − 2.8 + 10.1 − 12.8 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 − 2.0 + 0.8
2018 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 3.5 − 7.3 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 1.4 − 1.2
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 7.6 + 8.0 + 0.9 + 3.9 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2
Feb. − 3.1 + 0.3 − 2.5 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 1.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3
Mar. − 4.0 − 1.7 − 0.9 + 3.0 − 3.9 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.5
Apr. + 18.6 + 23.4 − 3.5 − 1.3 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2
May + 31.9 + 31.3 + 1.4 + 0.1 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2
June + 1.8 − 6.0 + 9.1 + 10.3 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.0
July + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 2.9 − 1.5 + 0.6 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.8
Aug. + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 3.2 − 1.1 + 1.9 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 1.0
Sep. − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 4.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
Oct. + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.4
Nov. + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 1.7 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
Dec. + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 − 4.7 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2016 199.8 57.9 133.5 79.5 54.0 16.6 37.4 3.9 4.5 27.1 2.5 −
2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2 0 1 8 Jan. 202.1 55.0 139.0 69.6 69.4 27.0 42.4 3.7 4.4 26.1 2.4 −
Feb. 204.3 58.8 137.5 68.7 68.7 26.2 42.5 3.7 4.4 26.1 2.4 −
Mar. 205.9 57.2 140.6 72.2 68.4 25.2 43.2 3.7 4.4 26.0 2.3 −
Apr. 205.1 56.9 140.2 72.3 67.9 23.8 44.1 3.7 4.4 26.0 2.3 −
May 215.9 62.8 145.0 74.7 70.3 25.1 45.2 3.8 4.3 26.0 2.2 −
June 221.4 63.3 150.0 79.3 70.7 24.9 45.8 3.8 4.3 25.8 2.2 −
July 214.9 57.0 149.9 77.3 72.6 25.8 46.8 3.8 4.3 25.7 2.2 0.7
Aug. 223.9 62.7 153.2 79.1 74.0 25.7 48.3 3.8 4.3 25.7 2.2 −
Sep. 221.1 60.4 152.7 76.9 75.9 27.1 48.8 3.8 4.3 25.6 2.2 −
Oct. 216.5 57.5 151.1 73.8 77.3 27.3 50.0 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
Nov. 224.6 62.6 154.0 74.8 79.1 27.9 51.2 3.8 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
Dec. 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
Changes*
2017 − 1.0 + 1.6 − 2.4 − 14.1 + 11.7 + 10.7 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.0
2018 + 16.9 + 3.6 + 13.5 + 2.0 + 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 0.4 − 3.9 + 4.3 + 3.8 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 −
Feb. + 2.2 + 3.8 − 1.5 − 0.9 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
Mar. + 1.6 − 1.6 + 3.2 + 3.5 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
Apr. − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.0 −
May + 10.8 + 5.9 + 4.8 + 2.4 + 2.4 + 1.3 + 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.0 −
June + 5.3 + 0.5 + 4.9 + 4.5 + 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 −
July − 6.4 − 6.3 − 0.1 − 2.0 + 1.9 + 0.9 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.7
Aug. + 9.1 + 5.7 + 3.3 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7
Sep. − 2.9 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 2.3 + 1.9 + 1.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
Oct. − 4.7 − 2.9 − 1.7 − 3.0 + 1.3 + 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
Nov. + 8.1 + 5.1 + 3.0 + 1.0 + 2.0 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
Dec. − 5.7 + 0.1 − 5.7 − 6.9 + 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 −
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional. registereddebtsecurities.2Includingdepositsundersavingsandloancontracts(see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
35
IV. Banks
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
€ billion
Time deposits 1,2 Memo item:
for more than 1 year 2 Subordinated
liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years deposits 3 bonds 4 loans securities) from repos
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
2016 3,127.0 1,740.3 756.2 152.8 603.3 30.6 572.7 584.6 45.9 1.7 15.8 0.9
2017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.6
2018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.5
2 0 1 8 Jan. 3,226.8 1,894.3 715.1 142.0 573.2 28.7 544.5 578.8 38.6 4.4 13.8 1.4
Feb. 3,221.5 1,890.8 714.2 141.1 573.0 28.2 544.9 578.5 38.0 4.9 13.6 1.1
Mar. 3,215.8 1,890.8 710.1 140.7 569.4 27.4 542.1 577.6 37.4 5.5 13.5 0.6
Apr. 3,234.4 1,914.4 706.1 138.5 567.7 26.9 540.8 576.8 37.0 5.9 12.8 0.9
May 3,255.5 1,939.8 702.7 136.1 566.6 26.8 539.7 576.4 36.6 6.4 12.6 0.7
June 3,251.8 1,933.3 706.7 141.8 564.9 26.5 538.4 575.5 36.3 6.9 13.1 0.7
July 3,258.2 1,945.7 702.4 141.0 561.4 26.1 535.3 574.5 35.7 7.0 12.8 0.8
Aug. 3,261.1 1,957.3 694.7 135.9 558.8 28.1 530.7 573.8 35.3 7.4 12.7 0.5
Sep. 3,261.8 1,962.1 691.2 134.1 557.1 27.6 529.5 573.5 34.8 8.2 12.6 0.3
Oct. 3,287.5 1,987.2 692.6 136.5 556.1 27.8 528.3 573.3 34.4 8.4 12.7 0.7
Nov. 3,312.8 2,017.0 689.1 133.3 555.8 27.8 528.0 573.1 33.7 8.4 12.7 0.4
Dec. 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.5
Changes*
2017 + 104.1 + 141.3 − 25.1 − 10.6 − 14.4 − 0.7 − 13.8 − 5.3 − 6.7 + 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.8
2018 + 100.8 + 135.7 − 24.3 − 5.5 − 18.8 − 1.3 − 17.5 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 4.1 − 1.3 − 1.2
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 7.2 + 11.8 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 3.5 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 0.8 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2
Feb. − 5.3 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3
Mar. − 5.6 − 0.1 − 4.1 − 0.5 − 3.6 − 0.8 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5
Apr. + 19.4 + 23.7 − 3.0 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.2
May + 21.1 + 25.3 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2
June − 3.6 − 6.5 + 4.2 + 5.8 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.5 − 0.0
July + 6.6 + 12.4 − 4.2 − 0.8 − 3.4 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1
Aug. + 2.8 + 11.6 − 7.7 − 5.1 − 2.6 + 2.0 − 4.6 − 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4
Sep. + 1.0 + 5.2 − 3.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1
Oct. + 25.8 + 25.1 + 1.5 + 2.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
Nov. + 25.3 + 29.8 − 3.6 − 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
Dec. + 5.9 + 0.8 + 3.9 + 2.2 + 1.7 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.8 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2016 1,032.4 518.3 494.1 98.3 395.8 17.4 378.4 6.9 13.2 1.6 13.0 0.9
2017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.6
2018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.5
2 0 1 8 Jan. 1,051.4 573.9 458.0 93.6 364.4 16.0 348.4 6.9 12.6 2.6 11.4 1.4
Feb. 1,036.8 560.8 456.5 92.5 364.0 15.5 348.6 7.0 12.5 2.7 11.2 1.1
Mar. 1,026.9 555.0 452.5 92.1 360.5 14.9 345.6 7.0 12.4 2.8 11.1 0.6
Apr. 1,034.1 566.2 448.6 89.6 359.0 14.6 344.4 7.1 12.3 2.9 10.5 0.9
May 1,042.4 578.3 444.6 87.0 357.7 14.6 343.0 7.2 12.3 2.9 10.2 0.7
June 1,030.4 562.4 448.5 92.7 355.8 14.2 341.6 7.2 12.4 2.9 10.7 0.7
July 1,033.0 569.8 444.0 91.5 352.5 14.0 338.5 7.2 12.1 2.6 10.4 0.8
Aug. 1,028.5 573.1 436.2 86.3 349.9 16.3 333.6 7.2 12.0 2.5 10.3 0.5
Sep. 1,021.9 570.3 432.5 84.5 348.0 16.0 332.0 7.2 11.9 2.6 10.3 0.3
Oct. 1,039.7 586.7 434.0 86.6 347.4 16.4 331.0 7.1 11.8 2.6 10.3 0.7
Nov. 1,040.8 590.9 431.3 84.2 347.1 16.5 330.6 7.1 11.6 2.6 10.3 0.4
Dec. 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.5
Changes*
2017 + 19.5 + 40.2 − 20.0 − 4.7 − 15.4 − 0.2 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.8 − 1.3 + 0.8
2018 − 3.2 + 25.1 − 27.2 − 5.9 − 21.3 + 0.3 − 21.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.2
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 11.5 + 14.6 − 3.0 + 0.7 − 3.8 − 0.9 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2
Feb. − 14.5 − 13.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3
Mar. − 9.9 − 5.9 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 3.6 − 0.6 − 3.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.5
Apr. + 8.1 + 11.2 − 3.0 − 1.6 − 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.2
May + 8.3 + 12.1 − 3.9 − 2.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2
June − 11.9 − 15.9 + 4.1 + 5.8 − 1.8 − 0.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0
July + 2.7 + 7.4 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1
Aug. − 4.5 + 3.4 − 7.8 − 5.2 − 2.6 + 2.3 − 4.9 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.4
Sep. − 6.5 − 2.7 − 3.6 − 1.8 − 1.9 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
Oct. + 17.8 + 16.4 + 1.5 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4
Nov. + 1.1 + 4.1 − 2.8 − 2.4 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.3
Dec. − 5.4 − 6.6 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
TableIV.12).3Excludingdepositsundersavingsandloancontracts(seealsofoot-
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
36
IV. Banks
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits 1,2
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
institutions, employed Other institu- employed Other
Period total Total Total persons Employees individuals tions Total Total persons Employees individuals
End of year or month*
2016 2,094.5 1,222.0 1,186.9 206.0 828.6 152.3 35.1 262.1 248.6 25.0 182.0 41.5
2017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
2 0 1 8 July 2,225.2 1,375.9 1,338.7 235.3 946.2 157.2 37.2 258.4 244.5 21.5 185.9 37.1
Aug. 2,232.5 1,384.1 1,346.4 243.2 950.9 152.3 37.7 258.6 244.5 21.4 186.3 36.7
Sep. 2,239.8 1,391.8 1,353.8 239.8 961.9 152.1 38.0 258.7 244.6 21.3 186.8 36.6
Oct. 2,247.8 1,400.5 1,362.8 246.1 964.4 152.3 37.7 258.6 244.7 21.2 187.0 36.5
Nov. 2,272.0 1,426.1 1,388.9 248.6 985.1 155.3 37.2 257.8 244.3 21.2 186.7 36.4
Dec. 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
Changes*
2017 + 84.7 + 101.1 + 99.8 + 17.5 + 77.8 + 4.5 + 1.3 − 5.0 − 5.1 − 1.8 − 2.1 − 1.3
2018 + 104.0 + 110.5 + 109.7 + 20.3 + 83.1 + 6.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 5.8 − 0.3
2 0 1 8 July + 3.9 + 5.0 + 6.0 + 6.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0
Aug. + 7.3 + 8.2 + 7.7 + 3.2 + 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2
Sep. + 7.5 + 7.9 + 7.6 − 3.4 + 10.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2
Oct. + 8.0 + 8.7 + 8.9 + 6.3 + 2.4 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.1
Nov. + 24.2 + 25.6 + 26.2 + 2.5 + 20.7 + 3.0 − 0.5 − 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1
Dec. + 11.3 + 7.3 + 7.2 − 0.2 + 6.3 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not
changes.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional. specially marked. 1 Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
€ billion
Deposits
Federal Government and its special funds 1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans
End of year or month*
2016 199.8 7.9 3.6 2.0 2.2 0.1 13.5 42.3 13.4 11.2 16.6 1.1 13.2
2017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
2 0 1 8 July 214.9 10.0 5.1 2.2 2.6 0.1 12.7 47.9 11.6 20.4 14.8 1.2 13.0
Aug. 223.9 10.6 6.1 1.7 2.6 0.1 12.7 48.0 10.7 21.4 14.7 1.2 12.9
Sep. 221.1 9.2 5.1 1.4 2.6 0.1 12.7 48.3 11.2 21.4 14.5 1.2 12.9
Oct. 216.5 9.7 5.1 1.3 3.1 0.1 12.4 46.1 11.2 19.1 14.5 1.2 12.8
Nov. 224.6 10.0 4.9 1.4 3.7 0.1 12.4 40.6 11.2 14.1 14.2 1.2 12.9
Dec. 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
Changes*
2017 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.1 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 2.5 + 0.2 − 0.5
2018 + 16.9 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.5
2 0 1 8 July − 6.4 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 −
Aug. + 9.1 + 0.6 + 1.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.9 + 1.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
Sep. − 2.9 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
Oct. − 4.7 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
Nov. + 8.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.4 − 0.2 − 5.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0
Dec. − 5.7 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4 − − 0.2 − 1.6 + 2.2 − 2.6 − 1.2 − 0.0 + 0.2
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its TelekomAG,andofpubliclyownedenterprises,whichareincludedin”Enterprises”.
successororganisations,oftheFederalRailways,EastGermanRailwaysandFederal Statisticalbreakshavebeeneliminatedfromthechanges.Thefiguresforthelatest
PostOffice,and,from1995,ofDeutscheBahnAG,DeutschePostAGandDeutsche datearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional.Subsequentrevisions,whichappearin

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
37
IV. Banks
Savings deposits 3 Memo item:
by maturity
more than 1 year 2
Subordinated
of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
non-profit up to and up to and non-profit Bank negotiable Liabilities
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arising
tions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total households tions bonds 4 loans securities) 5 from repos Period
End of year or month*
13.5 54.5 207.5 13.3 194.3 577.7 569.3 8.4 32.7 0.1 2.9 − 2016
14.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 2017
13.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 2018
13.9 49.5 208.9 12.2 196.7 567.3 559.7 7.6 23.6 4.4 2.4 − 2 0 1 8 July
14.1 49.6 208.9 11.8 197.1 566.6 559.0 7.6 23.2 5.0 2.4 − Aug.
14.1 49.6 209.1 11.6 197.5 566.4 558.8 7.6 23.0 5.6 2.4 − Sep.
13.9 49.9 208.7 11.4 197.3 566.1 558.6 7.5 22.6 5.8 2.4 − Oct.
13.5 49.1 208.7 11.3 197.4 566.0 558.7 7.3 22.1 5.8 2.4 − Nov.
13.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − Dec.
Changes*
+ 0.1 − 5.9 + 0.9 − 0.5 + 1.4 − 5.3 − 4.7 − 0.6 − 6.1 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 2017
− 0.2 + 0.4 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.2 − 4.5 − 3.9 − 0.6 − 5.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 2018
+ 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 2 0 1 8 July
+ 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − Aug.
+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 − 0.0 − Sep.
− 0.2 + 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − Oct.
− 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 − Nov.
+ 0.2 + 0.3 + 2.2 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 1.9 + 2.0 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 − Dec.
registereddebtsecurities.2Includingdepositsundersavingsandloancontracts(see footnote 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits.
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits 3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds 2 loans Period
End of year or month*
56.0 31.5 8.7 10.1 5.7 0.4 93.6 9.4 57.6 25.1 1.5 − 2016
61.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 2017
65.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 2018
56.7 27.4 9.1 14.5 5.6 0.0 100.4 12.9 45.6 40.7 1.1 − 2 0 1 8 July
63.2 32.6 10.1 14.8 5.7 0.0 102.2 13.3 45.9 41.8 1.1 − Aug.
60.0 29.8 9.8 14.8 5.6 0.0 103.6 14.2 44.3 44.0 1.1 − Sep.
58.2 28.4 9.4 14.8 5.6 0.0 102.6 12.7 44.0 44.8 1.1 − Oct.
62.8 32.5 9.7 14.9 5.7 0.0 111.1 14.0 49.7 46.3 1.1 − Nov.
65.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − Dec.
Changes*
+ 4.5 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 11.8 +11.6 − 0.4 − 2017
+ 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 +10.8 − 0.1 − 2018
− 3.9 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 − − 1.9 − 3.2 − 0.3 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 2 0 1 8 July
+ 6.5 + 5.1 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.0 − + 1.8 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.0 − Aug.
− 3.3 − 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − + 1.5 + 0.9 − 1.6 + 2.2 + 0.0 − Sep.
− 1.9 − 1.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 1.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.0 − Oct.
+ 4.5 + 4.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.5 + 1.3 + 5.7 + 1.5 − 0.0 − Nov.
+ 2.7 + 2.6 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.2 − 4.5 − 4.7 + 2.1 − 0.0 − Dec.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1 Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3 Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3).
GermanUnityFund,EqualisationofBurdensFund.2Includingliabilitiesarisingfrom

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
38
IV. Banks
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
€ billion
Savings deposits 1 Bank savings bonds, 3 sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturities
Special Special At3 on of more
savings savings months’ savings non-banks, than foreign
Period Total Total Total facilities 2 Total facilities 2 Total notice deposits total Total 2 years non-banks
End of year or month*
2016 596.5 588.5 537.1 361.6 51.5 37.7 8.0 6.9 3.3 59.1 50.4 35.8 8.7
2017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
2 0 1 8 Aug. 584.7 577.6 538.4 336.7 39.2 28.3 7.1 6.3 0.1 43.5 39.5 29.3 4.0
Sep. 584.3 577.3 538.4 335.2 38.9 28.0 7.0 6.2 0.1 43.0 39.1 29.0 3.9
Oct. 584.0 577.0 538.6 335.5 38.4 27.7 7.0 6.2 0.1 42.5 38.6 28.6 3.9
Nov. 583.9 576.9 539.1 332.2 37.8 27.4 7.0 6.2 0.1 41.8 37.9 28.2 3.9
Dec. 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 1.0 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
Changes*
2017 − 6.2 − 5.6 + 1.5 − 13.1 − 7.1 − 7.4 − 0.6 − 0.4 . − 7.2 − 6.7 − 4.4 − 0.5
2018 − 4.7 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 9.1 − 6.5 − 3.6 − 2.6
2 0 1 8 Aug. − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.0
Sep. − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 −
Oct. − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.0
Nov. − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.5 − 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.0
Dec. + 1.7 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.0
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2 Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3 Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities.
speciallymarked.1Excludingdepositsundersavingsandloancontracts,whichare
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper 6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: maturities non-
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds 1 bonds 1,2 bonds 3,4 deposit Total guarantee 5 Total guarantee 5 2 years Total 2 years securities securities
Period
End of year or month*
2016 1,098.1 177.0 28.1 407.1 90.9 111.3 4.1 37.4 5.8 949.4 0.6 0.2 33.8 0.5
2017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
2 0 1 8 Aug. 1,085.9 139.8 27.5 351.3 82.8 101.9 4.3 28.0 7.2 956.0 0.8 0.2 30.2 0.5
Sep. 1,096.1 140.4 27.0 351.5 83.8 102.3 4.1 23.6 7.1 970.2 0.7 0.2 30.6 0.4
Oct. 1,109.6 140.8 27.2 363.7 89.2 108.1 3.7 23.8 7.0 977.7 0.9 0.1 30.8 0.4
Nov. 1,112.9 140.5 28.3 360.2 87.9 107.4 3.6 22.6 6.8 983.0 0.7 0.1 30.8 0.4
Dec. 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
Changes*
2017 − 30.8 − 29.7 − 2.1 − 36.7 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 4.6 + 0.6 − 22.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.2 − 0.0
2018 + 33.6 − 7.8 + 1.5 − 14.3 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 10.5 − 0.3 + 45.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
2 0 1 8 Aug. + 5.2 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 0.0
Sep. + 10.1 + 0.7 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 + 14.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0
Oct. + 13.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 12.2 + 5.4 + 5.8 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 7.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0
Nov. + 3.3 − 0.3 + 1.2 − 3.6 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.1 + 5.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
Dec. − 13.3 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 4.2 + 0.4 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 11.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
* See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4 Bonds denominated in
changes.Thefiguresforthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional. non-euroareacurrencies.5Negotiablebearerdebtsecuritiesandmoneymarket
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paperwithanominalguaranteeoflessthan100%.6Non-negotiablebearerdebt
specially marked. 1 Including debt securities denominated in foreign securitiesareclassifiedamongbanksavingsbonds(seealsoTableIV.10,footnote
currencies. 2 Issue value when floated. 3 Including floating rate notes and zero 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
39
IV. Banks
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
Interim statements
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs) 5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memo
bal- ities (in- item:
ances cluding Bearer New
and Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tracts
ber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- entered
of Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of associ- sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or
year/month ations total 13 loans) 1 loans 2 ities 3 tracts loans loans paper) 4 tracts deposits tracts posits 6 ing serves) 7 month 8
All building and loan associations
2017 20 229.2 41.8 0.0 15.8 12.3 104.4 24.8 25.1 2.6 23.0 168.6 9.5 3.0 11.0 83.6
2018 20 233.4 39.4 0.0 15.7 11.9 110.2 25.7 25.8 2.8 20.4 174.3 10.0 3.3 11.7 86.6
2 0 1 8 Oct. 20 233.8 40.5 0.0 16.0 12.0 108.9 25.5 25.9 2.7 22.3 171.5 10.4 3.3 11.6 7.4
Nov. 20 233.6 40.2 0.0 15.9 11.9 109.4 25.6 25.8 2.7 22.0 171.8 10.2 3.3 11.6 7.9
Dec. 20 233.4 39.4 0.0 15.7 11.9 110.2 25.7 25.8 2.8 20.4 174.3 10.0 3.3 11.7 8.3
Private building and Ioan associations
2 0 1 8 Oct. 12 163.0 24.9 − 6.9 9.0 84.4 22.0 11.8 1.7 20.1 111.6 10.1 3.3 7.9 4.6
Nov. 12 162.8 24.6 − 6.7 9.0 84.8 22.1 11.8 1.7 19.9 111.8 9.9 3.3 7.9 5.1
Dec. 12 162.3 23.8 − 6.6 8.9 85.6 22.0 11.7 1.7 18.5 113.3 9.7 3.3 8.1 5.1
Public building and Ioan associations
2 0 1 8 Oct. 8 70.8 15.6 0.0 9.1 3.0 24.5 3.5 14.1 1.0 2.2 60.0 0.3 − 3.7 2.8
Nov. 8 70.8 15.6 0.0 9.2 2.9 24.6 3.5 14.0 1.0 2.1 60.0 0.3 − 3.7 2.8
Dec. 8 71.2 15.6 0.0 9.2 3.0 24.7 3.6 14.1 1.1 1.9 61.0 0.3 − 3.7 3.2
Trends in building and loan association business
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans 10
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings and
ments loan contracts loan contracts 9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits of which: of which: interim
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits cancelled to settle- to settle- bridging which: of Memo
paid into under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item:
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housing
and and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonuses
loan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period counts 9 tracts tracts Total tions 11 Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter ceived 12
All building and loan associations
2017 26.7 2.3 7.6 45.3 26.0 39.6 16.4 4.1 4.5 3.4 18.7 16.4 7.4 7.1 6.2 0.2
2018 27.0 2.1 7.4 45.2 25.1 40.2 15.9 4.3 4.8 3.7 19.5 16.6 6.8 6.6 ... 0.2
2 0 1 8 Oct. 2.2 0.0 0.6 4.2 2.5 3.9 1.7 0.4 0.5 0.4 1.7 17.0 7.0 0.6 0.0
Nov. 2.2 0.0 0.6 3.5 1.9 3.3 1.3 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.7 16.8 6.8 0.6 0.0
Dec. 2.3 1.9 0.5 3.3 1.9 3.1 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.5 16.6 6.8 0.5 ... 0.0
Private building and Ioan associations
2 0 1 8 Oct. 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.2 1.9 2.9 1.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.4 12.1 4.0 0.5 0.0
Nov. 1.4 0.0 0.3 2.7 1.4 2.6 0.9 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.3 12.1 3.9 0.5 0.0
Dec. 1.5 1.2 0.2 2.3 1.3 2.4 0.9 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.2 11.9 3.8 0.4 ... 0.0
Public building and Ioan associations
2 0 1 8 Oct. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.8 3.1 0.1 0.0
Nov. 0.8 0.0 0.4 0.8 0.5 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.0 0.1 0.0
Dec. 0.9 0.7 0.3 1.0 0.6 0.7 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.0 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excludingassetsandliabilitiesand/ortransactionsofforeignbranches.Thefigures 8 Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
forthelatestdatearealwaystoberegardedasprovisional.Subsequentrevisions, whichthecontractfeehasbeenfullypaid.Increasesinthesumcontractedcountas
whichappearinthefollowingMonthlyReport,arenotspeciallymarked.1Including new contracts. 9 For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arisingfromtheallocationofcontractssee“Capitaldisbursed“.10Includinghousing
securitiesandcentralbankcreditbalances.2Loansundersavingsandloancontracts bonuses credited. 11 Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
andinterimandbridgingloans.3Includingmoneymarketpaperandsmallamounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12 The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4 Including equalisation claims. 5 Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6 Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits.7Includingparticipationrightscapitalandfundforgeneralbankingrisks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
40
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets 7
Credit balances and loans Loans
German
banks
(MFIs)
with of which:
foreign foreign Derivative
branches branches 1 Money Money financial
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total 7 Total Total banks banks ities 2,3 Total Total banks banks ities 2 Total portfolio
Foreign branches End of year or month *
2015 51 198 1,842.9 526.0 508.7 161.3 347.5 17.3 635.1 511.6 14.0 497.6 123.6 681.8 499.0
2016 51 192 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2017 52 188 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2 0 1 8 Feb. 50 184 1,670.4 510.1 497.5 210.0 287.5 12.5 526.2 450.5 12.7 437.8 75.7 634.1 413.4
Mar. 50 184 1,594.2 507.4 495.1 188.2 306.8 12.4 506.8 426.9 12.9 414.0 79.9 580.0 385.2
Apr. 49 183 1,634.4 504.6 491.8 187.1 304.8 12.7 524.6 443.8 10.8 433.1 80.8 605.2 408.0
May 48 182 1,612.2 497.1 484.2 190.3 293.9 12.8 531.9 452.8 14.5 438.3 79.1 583.2 364.2
June 48 183 1,533.3 473.3 461.3 182.2 279.1 11.9 510.3 431.6 14.5 417.1 78.7 549.8 350.1
July 48 183 1,523.3 472.0 459.9 186.8 273.1 12.1 523.2 443.2 23.6 419.6 80.0 528.1 328.8
Aug. 48 183 1,501.4 450.4 438.8 183.2 255.6 11.6 524.4 442.6 22.5 420.1 81.8 526.6 328.2
Sep. 48 184 1,494.1 452.1 441.2 185.4 255.8 10.8 541.6 456.5 21.9 434.7 85.1 500.5 318.4
Oct. 49 185 1,487.3 439.9 428.6 205.9 222.7 11.3 535.8 448.0 20.3 427.8 87.8 511.6 336.0
Nov. 49 185 1,456.1 454.1 443.4 206.9 236.5 10.8 519.7 433.1 20.7 412.4 86.6 482.2 313.7
Changes *
2016 + 0 − 6 + 29.1 + 49.3 + 52.9 + 43.7 + 9.2 − 3.5 − 56.4 − 24.6 + 0.5 − 25.1 − 31.8 + 24.9 − 14.8
2017 + 1 − 4 − 216.7 − 52.5 − 49.4 − 7.9 − 41.5 − 3.1 − 10.9 − 10.0 − 1.4 − 8.6 − 0.9 − 74.6 − 60.4
2 0 1 8 Mar. − − − 75.6 − 1.0 − 0.8 − 21.8 + 21.0 − 0.2 − 17.5 − 21.8 + 0.2 − 22.0 + 4.3 − 53.6 − 26.9
Apr. − 1 − 1 + 39.1 − 7.0 − 7.3 − 1.2 − 6.2 + 0.3 + 13.6 + 13.2 − 2.2 + 15.3 + 0.5 + 24.1 + 19.4
May − 1 − 1 − 24.6 − 15.2 − 15.1 + 3.2 − 18.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.6 + 3.8 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 24.4 − 50.3
June − + 1 − 79.0 − 24.1 − 23.2 − 8.1 − 15.1 − 0.9 − 21.5 − 21.2 − 0.0 − 21.1 − 0.3 − 33.5 − 14.3
July − − − 9.5 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 4.6 − 4.5 + 0.2 + 15.2 + 13.5 + 9.1 + 4.4 + 1.6 − 21.1 − 20.3
Aug. − − − 22.4 − 23.1 − 22.6 − 3.6 − 19.0 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 1.7 − 2.0 − 1.5
Sep. − + 1 − 7.7 + 0.6 + 1.4 + 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.8 + 15.3 + 12.3 − 0.6 + 12.9 + 3.0 − 26.6 − 10.6
Oct. + 1 + 1 − 8.5 − 16.3 − 16.7 + 20.5 − 37.2 + 0.4 − 12.1 − 14.1 − 1.6 − 12.5 + 1.9 + 9.5 + 15.0
Nov. − − − 30.9 + 14.9 + 15.4 + 1.0 + 14.4 − 0.5 − 14.9 − 13.8 + 0.5 − 14.3 − 1.1 − 29.1 − 21.8
Foreign subsidiaries End of year or month *
2015 24 58 376.0 126.5 113.5 50.1 63.4 13.0 184.3 152.5 22.2 130.3 31.8 65.1 −
2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2 0 1 8 Feb. 20 50 273.9 73.0 66.4 26.6 39.8 6.6 147.0 120.3 22.7 97.7 26.6 53.9 −
Mar. 20 50 276.0 72.3 65.8 26.5 39.3 6.5 150.3 123.1 22.5 100.6 27.2 53.4 −
Apr. 20 50 267.7 64.4 58.0 23.6 34.3 6.4 147.7 120.7 21.7 99.0 27.0 55.7 −
May 20 50 274.5 67.0 60.5 26.3 34.1 6.6 149.3 121.6 21.8 99.8 27.6 58.2 −
June 20 48 269.1 64.2 57.9 24.5 33.4 6.3 148.8 122.5 21.9 100.5 26.3 56.1 −
July 19 47 248.5 62.2 56.0 24.5 31.5 6.3 136.5 112.6 13.5 99.1 23.8 49.8 −
Aug. 19 47 245.8 56.7 50.6 21.1 29.5 6.1 137.9 113.2 13.4 99.8 24.7 51.1 −
Sep. 18 46 244.8 55.2 49.4 19.8 29.6 5.8 138.8 114.5 13.7 100.8 24.4 50.8 −
Oct. 17 45 243.8 52.1 46.2 19.5 26.7 5.9 139.3 114.2 13.5 100.7 25.1 52.4 −
Nov. 17 45 239.8 51.0 45.0 20.4 24.7 6.0 136.8 110.8 13.6 97.2 26.1 52.0 −
Changes *
2016 − 4 − 5 − 56.8 − 45.9 − 42.6 − 28.7 − 13.9 − 3.3 − 22.7 − 22.1 + 0.4 − 22.4 − 0.6 + 11.8 −
2017 − − 3 − 33.3 − 4.9 − 2.4 + 3.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 8.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 20.2 −
2 0 1 8 Mar. − − + 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 3.6 + 3.0 − 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.5 − 0.5 −
Apr. − − − 9.2 − 8.5 − 8.2 − 2.9 − 5.3 − 0.2 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.2 −
May − − + 4.5 + 1.2 + 1.3 + 2.7 − 1.4 − 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7 + 2.5 −
June − − 2 − 5.4 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 1.8 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.3 − 2.1 −
July − 1 − 1 − 20.2 − 1.7 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 + 0.0 − 12.2 − 9.7 − 8.4 − 1.3 − 2.5 − 6.4 −
Aug. − − − 3.4 − 6.0 − 5.7 − 3.3 − 2.4 − 0.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 1.4 −
Sep. − 1 − 1 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.4 −
Oct. − 1 − 1 − 2.1 − 3.8 − 3.6 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.7 + 1.6 −
Nov. − − − 3.8 − 1.0 − 1.1 + 0.9 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 2.4 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 1.0 − 0.4 −
*Inthistable“foreign“alsoincludesthecountryofdomicileoftheforeignbranches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are
andforeignsubsidiaries.Statisticalrevisionshavebeeneliminatedfromthechanges. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the
(Breaksowingtochangesinthereportingpopulationhavenotbeeneliminatedfrom followingMonthlyReport,arenotspeciallymarked.1Severalbranchesinagiven

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
41
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities 6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks 4
Money
market of which:
paper Derivative
and debt financial
Medium securities Working instruments
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks banks Total Total term term non-banks ing 5 funds Total portfolio Period
End of year or month * Foreign branches
1,060.9 715.3 359.3 356.0 345.6 21.1 16.2 4.9 324.6 128.9 49.9 603.1 497.4 2015
1,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 2016
1,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
1,013.9 653.6 383.8 269.8 360.3 14.9 13.2 1.6 345.4 105.7 51.4 499.5 413.3 2 0 1 8 Feb.
1,006.2 672.6 386.6 285.9 333.6 14.7 13.0 1.7 318.9 97.3 50.9 439.9 387.6 Mar.
1,015.5 678.3 389.4 288.9 337.2 14.8 13.2 1.6 322.5 99.6 51.1 468.2 399.6 Apr.
1,034.4 685.7 411.6 274.1 348.7 13.5 11.9 1.5 335.2 104.5 51.7 421.6 358.5 May
973.0 658.6 407.0 251.7 314.4 12.4 10.9 1.5 301.9 109.6 51.7 399.0 347.1 June
972.2 662.1 405.8 256.3 310.1 10.8 9.3 1.5 299.3 101.5 53.1 396.5 323.8 July
957.3 651.9 404.6 247.4 305.3 10.4 8.8 1.5 295.0 108.1 53.2 382.8 325.2 Aug.
964.0 648.5 417.8 230.7 315.4 10.8 9.3 1.5 304.6 101.5 53.5 375.2 313.0 Sep.
938.4 608.2 400.9 207.3 330.2 8.8 7.3 1.5 321.4 100.2 53.9 394.7 330.9 Oct.
931.9 611.9 392.8 219.1 319.9 13.1 11.3 1.8 306.8 101.4 53.8 369.0 307.1 Nov.
Changes *
+ 66.8 + 76.8 + 65.6 + 11.2 − 10.1 − 5.7 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.4 − 29.6 + 1.2 − 18.1 − 17.3 2016
− 97.3 − 80.7 − 52.1 − 28.6 − 16.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 17.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 86.5 − 58.1 2017
− 6.1 + 20.5 + 2.8 + 17.7 − 26.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 26.4 − 7.9 − 0.5 − 59.6 − 24.3 2 0 1 8 Mar.
+ 5.5 + 2.0 + 2.8 − 0.8 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 3.4 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 28.2 + 8.4 Apr.
+ 11.5 + 0.3 + 22.2 − 21.8 + 11.2 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.0 + 12.5 + 2.5 + 0.6 − 46.6 − 47.6 May
− 61.7 − 27.3 − 4.6 − 22.7 − 34.4 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.0 − 33.3 + 4.9 + 0.1 − 22.5 − 11.6 June
+ 0.6 + 4.7 − 1.2 + 6.0 − 4.1 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2.6 − 7.5 + 1.3 − 2.6 − 22.3 July
− 16.4 − 11.5 − 1.2 − 10.3 − 4.8 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 4.4 + 6.1 + 0.1 − 13.6 + 0.4 Aug.
+ 5.7 − 4.3 + 13.2 − 17.6 + 10.0 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 9.5 − 7.1 + 0.4 − 7.7 − 13.1 Sep.
− 29.3 − 43.9 − 16.9 − 26.9 + 14.6 − 2.0 − 2.0 − + 16.6 − 2.9 + 0.4 + 19.5 + 15.0 Oct.
− 5.9 + 4.3 − 8.0 + 12.3 − 10.2 + 4.3 + 4.0 + 0.3 − 14.5 + 1.4 − 0.1 − 25.7 − 23.3 Nov.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
292.3 166.7 99.6 67.1 125.7 13.1 10.5 2.6 112.6 14.4 26.3 42.9 − 2015
247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016
207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017
205.2 94.1 50.6 43.6 111.1 12.0 6.2 5.8 99.1 13.8 23.6 31.3 − 2 0 1 8 Feb.
207.3 96.0 50.4 45.5 111.3 11.2 5.3 5.9 100.1 13.7 23.9 31.1 − Mar.
200.4 90.3 48.5 41.7 110.1 11.6 5.7 5.9 98.6 13.4 23.8 30.1 − Apr.
206.7 95.4 49.8 45.6 111.2 12.3 6.4 5.9 98.9 13.4 23.9 30.5 − May
202.6 95.4 50.9 44.5 107.2 12.1 6.1 6.0 95.1 12.7 23.8 30.0 − June
184.1 77.4 40.3 37.2 106.7 12.3 6.3 5.9 94.4 12.7 22.9 28.8 − July
181.4 78.7 40.2 38.5 102.8 9.5 5.6 3.8 93.3 12.7 22.9 28.7 − Aug.
178.9 75.0 37.8 37.3 103.9 10.1 6.1 3.9 93.8 13.9 22.8 29.2 − Sep.
175.5 73.4 36.5 36.8 102.1 9.6 6.0 3.6 92.6 14.1 22.8 31.3 − Oct.
172.2 72.6 35.7 37.0 99.5 9.1 5.5 3.6 90.4 13.7 22.5 31.4 − Nov.
Changes *
− 46.2 − 33.5 − 27.8 − 5.7 − 12.7 − 0.9 − 3.8 + 2.9 − 11.9 − 0.8 − 2.5 − 7.3 − 2016
− 32.8 − 33.7 − 22.0 − 11.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2017
+ 2.4 + 2.0 − 0.1 + 2.1 + 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 2 0 1 8 Mar.
− 7.7 − 6.2 − 1.9 − 4.3 − 1.5 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.0 − Apr.
+ 4.9 + 4.4 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 − May
− 4.2 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 1.1 − 4.0 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.5 − June
− 18.2 − 17.8 − 10.6 − 7.2 − 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 1.1 − July
− 3.0 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 4.0 − 2.8 − 0.7 − 2.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − Aug.
− 2.8 − 3.8 − 2.4 − 1.4 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 − Sep.
− 4.3 − 2.1 − 1.2 − 0.9 − 2.1 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.9 − Oct.
− 3.2 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.1 − Nov.
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2 Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5 Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discountpaperandothermoneymarketpaper,debtsecurities.3Includingowndebt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.
securities. 4 Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
42
V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
beginning in 1 Reserve base 2 lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7
2012 10,648.6 106.5 106.0 489.0 383.0 0.0
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2 0 1 8 Nov. . . . . . .
Dec. 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2 0 1 9 Jan. p 12,828.2 128.3 127.9 ... ... ...
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period euro area reserve base before deduction of after deduction of
beginning in 1 Reserve base 2 as a percentage lump-sum allowance 3 lump-sum allowance 4 Current accounts 5 Excess reserves 6 Deficiencies 7
2012 2,874,716 27.0 28,747 28,567 158,174 129,607 1
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2 0 1 8 Nov. . . . . . . .
Dec. 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2 0 1 9 Jan. p 3,580,966 27.9 35,810 35,656 ... ... ...
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
beginning in 1 Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks
2012 3 5,388 4,696 2,477 9,626 4,886 248 1,247
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2 0 1 8 Nov. . . . . . . .
Dec. 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2 0 1 9 Jan. 7,457 5,015 2,965 11,800 6,691 93 1,636
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
Liabilities (excluding savings deposits with building and loan rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after deduction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but associations) with agreed Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period agreed maturities of up to 2 not subject to minimum reserve maturities of up to 2 years to periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting
beginning in 1 years requirements banks in non-euro area countries to 2 years institution
2012 1,734,716 2,451 440,306 602,834 94,453
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2 0 1 8 Nov. . . . . .
Dec. 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2 0 1 9 Jan. 2,489,543 1,335 402,626 576,645 110,815
1 The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2%between1January1999and17January2012.Since18January2012,ithas
refinancingoperationimmediatelyfollowingthemeetingoftheGoverningCouncilof stoodat1%.4Article5(2)oftheRegulationoftheEuropeanCentralBankonthe
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. applicationofminimumreserves.5Averagecreditbalancesofcreditinstitutionsat
2Article3oftheRegulationoftheEuropeanCentralBankontheapplicationof national central banks. 6 Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deductionofthelump-sumallowance.7Requiredreservesafterdeductionofthe
pursuanttoArticle4(1)).3Amountafterapplyingthereserveratiotothereserve lump-sum allowance.
base.Thereserveratioforliabilitieswithagreedmaturitiesofuptotwoyearswas

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
43
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates 2. Base rates
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rate
Minimum ginal Minimum ginal as per as per
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civil
from facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code 1 from Code 1
20 0 5 D e c . 6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 20 1 1 A p r . 13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 20 0 2 J a n . 1 2.57 20 0 9 J a n . 1 1.62
J u l y 13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25 J u l y 1 2.47 J u l y 1 0.12
20 0 6 M a r . 8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50 N o v . 9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
J u n e 15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75 D e c . 14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 20 0 3 J a n . 1 1.97 20 1 1 J u l y 1 0.37
A u g . 9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00 J u l y 1 1.22
O c t . 11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 20 1 2 J u l y 11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 20 1 2 J a n . 1 0.12
D e c . 13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 20 0 4 J a n . 1 1.14
20 1 3 M a y 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00 J u l y 1 1.13 20 1 3 J a n . 1 −0.13
20 0 7 M a r . 14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 N o v . 13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75 J u l y 1 −0.38
J u n e 13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 20 0 5 J a n . 1 1.21
20 1 4 J u n e 11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40 J u l y 1 1.17 20 1 4 J a n . 1 −0.63
20 0 8 J u l y 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25 S e p . 10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30 J u l y 1 −0.73
O c t . 8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 20 0 6 J a n . 1 1.37
O c t . 9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 20 1 5 D e c . 9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30 J u l y 1 1.95 20 1 5 J a n . 1 −0.83
N o v . 12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
D e c . 10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 20 1 6 M a r . 16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 20 0 7 J a n . 1 2.70 20 1 6 J u l y 1 −0.88
J u l y 1 3.19
20 0 9 J a n . 21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00
M a r . 11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 20 0 8 J a n . 1 3.32
A p r . 8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25 J u l y 1 3.19
M a y 13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate 1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
20 1 9 J a n . 16 6,307 6,307 0.00 − − − 7
J a n . 23 6,576 6,576 0.00 − − − 7
J a n . 30 6,574 6,574 0.00 − − − 7
F e b . 6 5,423 5,423 0.00 − − − 7
F e b . 13 5,910 5,910 0.00 − − − 7
Long-term refinancing operations
20 1 8 N o v . 1 1,490 1,490 2 0.00 − − − 91
N o v . 29 1,946 1,946 2 ... − − − 91
D e c . 20 1,554 1,554 2 ... − − − 98
20 1 9 J a n . 31 952 952 2 ... − − − 84
* Source: ECB. 1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or averageminimumbidrateofthemainrefinancingoperationsoverthelifeofthis
collected. 2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation.
4. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR 2
Monthly
average EONIA 1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Nine-month funds Twelve-month funds
2 0 1 8 July −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.32 −0.27 −0.22 −0.18
Aug. −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.32 −0.27 −0.21 −0.17
Sep. −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.32 −0.27 −0.21 −0.17
Oct. −0.37 −0.38 −0.37 −0.32 −0.26 −0.20 −0.15
Nov. −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.32 −0.26 −0.20 −0.15
Dec. −0.36 −0.38 −0.37 −0.31 −0.24 3 . −0.13
2 0 1 9 Jan. −0.37 −0.38 −0.37 −0.31 −0.24 . −0.12
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via
anyoneelsecanbeheldliableforanyirregularityorinaccuracyoftheEONIAorthe Reuters. 2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by
EURIBOR.1Euroovernightindexaverage:weightedaverageovernightrateforinter- Reuterssince30December1998accordingtotheact/360method.3Discontinued
bankoperationscalculatedbytheEuropeanCentralBanksince4January1999on as of 3 December 2018.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
44
VI. Interest rates
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2 0 1 7 Dec. 0.29 66,585 1.34 216,841 0.06 78,428 1.07 25,136
2 0 1 8 Jan. 0.29 66,589 1.32 216,681 0.05 78,112 1.05 26,055
Feb. 0.28 65,984 1.31 216,585 0.04 75,362 1.03 26,887
Mar. 0.27 65,081 1.30 216,572 0.05 72,699 1.01 26,676
Apr. 0.27 64,883 1.29 216,237 0.04 69,677 0.99 26,913
May 0.27 64,743 1.28 216,238 0.06 68,665 0.97 26,848
June 0.26 64,554 1.27 216,143 0.03 68,825 0.94 26,966
July 0.26 64,623 1.26 215,907 0.03 67,013 0.93 26,859
Aug. 0.25 64,215 1.25 216,126 0.03 67,659 0.92 27,206
Sep. 0.24 63,849 1.25 216,273 0.03 66,871 0.90 27,188
Oct. 0.24 63,652 1.24 215,766 0.04 66,681 0.89 27,535
Nov. 0.24 62,369 1.23 215,502 0.03 68,118 0.88 28,176
Dec. 0.23 63,057 1.23 217,570 0.01 68,323 0.87 28,597
Housing loans to households 3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes 4,5
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2 0 1 7 Dec. 2.44 3,851 1.97 25,850 2.68 1,143,333 6.98 48,885 3.87 87,210 3.95 311,861
2 0 1 8 Jan. 2.33 3,906 1.96 25,566 2.66 1,144,088 7.07 48,461 3.85 87,632 3.93 312,287
Feb. 2.31 3,869 1.95 25,474 2.65 1,147,522 7.07 48,468 3.84 87,842 3.92 312,671
Mar. 2.31 3,983 1.94 25,497 2.62 1,153,724 7.03 49,131 3.82 88,481 3.91 311,587
Apr. 2.32 3,933 1.93 25,480 2.60 1,157,212 6.99 48,590 3.79 89,131 3.90 312,321
May 2.31 4,024 1.93 25,609 2.58 1,162,731 7.04 48,209 3.76 84,759 3.89 312,220
June 2.27 4,139 1.92 25,721 2.56 1,169,692 7.03 48,827 3.74 85,404 3.88 311,756
July 2.27 4,217 1.90 25,586 2.54 1,174,210 7.00 48,360 3.75 85,994 3.86 312,593
Aug. 2.28 4,215 1.89 25,643 2.52 1,180,809 7.00 48,053 3.75 86,634 3.85 313,801
Sep. 2.27 4,306 1.89 26,196 2.50 1,186,420 7.00 49,160 3.74 86,205 3.85 313,297
Oct. 2.25 4,311 1.87 26,171 2.48 1,191,048 7.17 50,033 3.54 85,254 3.83 313,604
Nov. 2.25 4,299 1.87 26,265 2.46 1,196,579 7.01 49,658 3.53 85,715 3.83 314,344
Dec. 2.27 4,242 1.86 26,203 2.44 1,199,525 7.10 51,196 3.53 85,387 3.81 312,896
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year 6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Effective interest rate 1 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Volume 2 Effective interest rate 1 Volume 2
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2 0 1 7 Dec. 2.47 133,105 1.90 137,708 2.22 664,374
2 0 1 8 Jan. 2.34 141,326 1.88 138,344 2.20 668,281
Feb. 2.39 142,819 1.88 138,735 2.19 672,403
Mar. 2.39 145,640 1.87 139,810 2.18 672,250
Apr. 2.33 145,705 1.86 140,823 2.16 675,236
May 2.26 149,325 1.78 138,956 2.15 678,530
June 2.29 149,189 1.76 140,052 2.13 680,131
July 2.20 148,897 1.74 142,697 2.12 684,893
Aug. 2.22 148,026 1.74 144,021 2.11 688,709
Sep. 2.22 150,891 1.74 144,942 2.10 691,969
Oct. 2.21 147,714 1.73 147,743 2.08 696,222
Nov. 2.20 148,399 1.72 151,603 2.07 702,286
Dec. 2.24 146,723 1.72 150,727 2.06 703,721
*Theinterestratestatisticsgatheredonaharmonisedbasisintheeuroareafrom eitherasannualisedagreedinterestratesorasnarrowlydefinedeffectiverates.Both
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate calculationmethodscoverallinterestpaymentsondepositsandloansbutnotany
statisticsarebasedontheinterestratesappliedbyMFIsandtherelatedvolumesof otherrelatedchargeswhichmayoccurforenquiries,administration,preparationof
euro-denominateddepositsandloanstohouseholdsandnon-financialcorporations thedocuments,guaranteesandcreditinsurance.2Databasedonmonthlybalance
domiciledintheeuroarea.Thehouseholdsectorcomprisesindividuals(includingsole sheetstatistics.3Securedandunsecuredloansforhomepurchase,includingbuilding
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial andhomeimprovements;includingloansgrantedbybuildingandloanassociations
corporations include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and andinterimcreditsaswellastransmittedloansgrantedbythereportingagentsin
otherfinancialinstitutions.Themostrecentfiguresareinallcasestoberegardedas theirownnameandfortheirownaccount.4Loansforconsumptionaredefinedas
provisional.SubsequentrevisionsappearinginthefollowingMonthlyReportarenot loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and
speciallymarked.FurtherinformationontheMFIinterestratestatisticscanbefound services.5Forthepurposeofthesestatistics,otherloansareloansgrantedforother
ontheBundesbank’swebsite(Statistics/Moneyandcapitalmarkets/Interestratesand purposessuchasbusiness,debtconsolidation,education,etc.6Includingoverdrafts
yields/Interestratesondepositsandloans).oThestatisticsonoutstandingamounts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 on p. 47 ).
arecollectedattheendofthemonth.1Theeffectiveinterestratesarecalculated

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
45
VI. Interest rates
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont’d)
b) New business +
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice 8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 2 rate 1 Volume 2
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2 0 1 7 Dec. 0.03 1,322,096 0.13 4,043 0.35 880 0.59 627 0.18 540,332 0.28 41,475
2 0 1 8 Jan. 0.03 1,319,368 0.19 4,348 0.31 866 0.71 780 0.18 539,145 0.28 42,193
Feb. 0.03 1,328,779 0.26 4,181 0.31 652 0.80 737 0.17 539,604 0.27 41,465
Mar. 0.02 1,334,702 0.30 3,995 0.38 470 0.74 765 0.17 539,077 0.27 41,021
Apr. 0.02 1,347,466 0.31 4,240 0.32 552 0.60 712 0.17 538,787 0.26 40,559
May 0.02 1,360,605 0.36 4,235 0.42 446 0.62 587 0.16 538,616 0.27 40,277
June 0.02 1,370,363 0.30 4,294 0.51 597 0.66 737 0.16 538,165 0.26 39,811
July 0.02 1,375,299 0.27 5,005 0.40 626 0.63 693 0.16 537,703 0.26 39,331
Aug. 0.01 1,383,683 0.30 5,135 0.43 516 0.67 677 0.15 537,459 0.26 38,903
Sep. 0.01 1,391,356 0.31 4,831 0.40 476 0.64 645 0.15 537,477 0.25 38,579
Oct. 0.01 1,399,998 0.28 4,853 0.38 772 0.70 803 0.15 537,728 0.25 38,051
Nov. 0.02 1,425,632 0.30 4,599 0.39 752 0.65 752 0.15 538,222 0.25 37,420
Dec. 0.02 1,432,862 0.28 5,439 0.26 642 0.65 702 0.14 540,271 0.25 37,155
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2 0 1 7 Dec. − 0.02 425,477 − 0.07 13,102 0.09 351 0.28 1,477
2 0 1 8 Jan. − 0.02 429,587 − 0.07 11,368 0.01 520 0.30 1,271
Feb. − 0.02 419,428 − 0.09 8,751 0.11 186 0.32 932
Mar. − 0.02 418,683 − 0.08 10,133 0.13 347 0.31 427
Apr. − 0.03 430,412 − 0.11 8,954 0.06 314 0.35 815
May − 0.03 440,268 − 0.04 9,576 0.11 490 0.34 587
June − 0.03 424,633 − 0.10 11,185 0.06 240 0.23 447
July − 0.02 429,934 − 0.13 11,466 0.08 354 0.29 754
Aug. − 0.02 436,893 − 0.06 10,147 0.07 303 0.46 723
Sep. − 0.02 433,078 − 0.10 9,835 0.07 347 0.23 375
Oct. − 0.03 445,427 − 0.07 12,291 0.17 518 0.66 891
Nov. − 0.03 448,301 − 0.08 12,192 0.13 376 0.78 1,035
Dec. − 0.03 445,938 − 0.07 15,012 0.14 308 0.55 1,109
Loans to households
Loans for consumption 4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
(including charges) Total Renegotiated loans 9 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Annual percentage Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting rate of charge 10 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7
period % p.a. % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2 0 1 7 Dec. 5.39 5.37 6,701 6.83 1,004 5.81 297 4.15 3,315 6.63 3,089
2 0 1 8 Jan. 5.85 5.83 9,288 7.26 1,729 6.04 328 4.32 3,860 6.96 5,100
Feb. 5.70 5.68 8,315 7.09 1,451 6.15 258 4.28 3,497 6.72 4,560
Mar. 5.44 5.43 9,545 7.04 1,732 5.97 287 4.10 4,259 6.53 4,999
Apr. 5.66 5.64 9,413 7.17 1,772 6.14 290 4.27 3,912 6.64 5,211
May 5.87 5.85 9,002 7.40 1,846 6.12 292 4.42 3,737 6.91 4,973
June 5.87 5.85 9,052 7.39 1,870 6.25 279 4.39 3,737 6.92 5,036
July 6.02 6.00 9,543 7.42 2,140 6.64 312 4.57 3,715 6.93 5,516
Aug. 6.08 6.02 9,242 7.44 1,938 7.95 395 4.59 3,702 6.91 5,145
Sep. 5.96 5.91 8,166 7.33 1,629 8.14 372 4.41 3,239 6.79 4,555
Oct. 6.06 5.99 8,915 7.34 1,797 7.68 421 4.60 3,527 6.83 4,967
Nov. 5.84 5.83 8,668 7.19 1,694 7.21 489 4.40 3,599 6.80 4,580
Dec. 5.80 5.81 6,517 7.04 1,134 7.57 520 4.45 2,820 6.72 3,177
Forfootnotes*and1to6,seep.44 .+Fordepositswithanagreedmaturityandall meansthatalloutstandingdepositandlendingbusinessattheendofthemonthhas
loansexcludingrevolvingloansandoverdrafts,creditcarddebt:newbusinesscovers tobeincorporatedinthecalculationofaverageratesofinterest.7Estimated.The
allnewagreementsbetweenhouseholdsornon-financialcorporationsandthebank. volume of new business is extrapolated to form the underlying total using a
The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates of all new grossing-up procedure. 8 Including non-financial corporations’ deposits; including
agreementsconcludedduringthereportingmonth.Forovernightdeposits,deposits fidelityandgrowthpremiums.9Excludingoverdrafts.10Annualpercentagerateof
redeemableatnotice,revolvingloansandoverdrafts,creditcarddebt:newbusiness charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for enquiries,
iscollectedinthesamewayasoutstandingamountsforthesakeofsimplicity.This administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
46
VI. Interest rates
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont’d)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans to households for other purposes 5 with an initial rate fixation of
of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans 9 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
Loans to households
2 0 1 7 Dec. 2.00 6,193 1.80 1,624 1.80 2,705 2.76 958 1.92 2,530
2 0 1 8 Jan. 2.01 6,017 1.94 2,035 1.85 2,693 2.62 888 1.97 2,436
Feb. 1.97 5,062 1.77 1,470 1.77 2,161 2.50 753 1.99 2,148
Mar. 2.03 5,883 1.87 1,424 1.77 2,440 2.58 950 2.08 2,493
Apr. 2.12 5,995 2.02 1,826 1.95 2,612 2.65 1,008 2.09 2,375
May 2.04 5,257 1.84 1,476 1.87 2,165 2.48 737 2.07 2,355
June 2.06 6,370 1.93 1,713 1.87 2,607 2.58 903 2.07 2,860
July 2.06 6,380 1.88 2,123 1.94 2,532 2.35 910 2.08 2,938
Aug. 2.07 5,365 1.83 1,452 1.99 2,124 2.51 756 2.00 2,485
Sep. 2.08 4,952 1.76 1,425 1.98 2,265 2.51 634 2.05 2,053
Oct. 2.11 5,549 1.84 1,952 2.01 2,413 2.48 810 2.08 2,326
Nov. 1.96 5,394 1.75 1,743 1.76 2,263 2.51 720 1.98 2,411
Dec. 1.89 5,773 1.79 1,715 1.76 2,552 2.42 717 1.87 2,504
of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2 0 1 7 Dec. 2.09 4,266 . . 2.00 1,822 2.83 753 1.85 1,691
2 0 1 8 Jan. 2.07 4,146 . . 1.99 1,817 2.72 679 1.89 1,650
Feb. 2.07 3,412 . . 2.01 1,390 2.61 564 1.93 1,458
Mar. 2.07 4,103 . . 1.87 1,645 2.65 741 2.02 1,717
Apr. 2.18 4,204 . . 2.05 1,850 2.75 793 2.04 1,561
May 2.11 3,558 . . 2.09 1,373 2.50 560 2.00 1,625
June 2.07 4,528 . . 1.92 1,869 2.58 692 2.02 1,967
July 2.13 4,266 . . 2.09 1,755 2.46 647 2.05 1,864
Aug. 2.13 3,553 . . 2.12 1,431 2.56 563 1.98 1,559
Sep. 2.04 3,403 . . 1.91 1,586 2.52 491 2.02 1,326
Oct. 2.11 3,858 . . 2.04 1,691 2.49 597 2.04 1,570
Nov. 1.96 3,869 . . 1.81 1,526 2.50 561 1.93 1,782
Dec. 1.96 4,139 . . 1.94 1,777 2.42 546 1.83 1,816
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans 3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
(including charges) Total Renegotiated loans 9 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years
Annual percentage Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting rate of charge 10 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7 interest rate 1 Volume 7
period % p.a. % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
Total loans
2 0 1 7 Dec. 1.86 1.79 17,473 1.87 3,242 2.04 2,150 1.69 1,553 1.65 6,084 1.86 7,686
2 0 1 8 Jan. 1.88 1.82 19,643 1.90 4,529 2.03 2,354 1.69 1,798 1.65 6,864 1.92 8,627
Feb. 1.90 1.84 18,839 1.95 3,687 2.07 2,090 1.73 1,624 1.68 6,400 1.92 8,725
Mar. 1.94 1.89 20,592 1.95 3,981 2.05 2,256 1.73 1,773 1.74 7,047 1.98 9,516
Apr. 1.94 1.89 21,351 1.92 4,645 2.09 2,369 1.72 1,895 1.77 7,418 1.96 9,669
May 1.96 1.91 19,514 1.97 3,803 2.09 2,193 1.74 1,735 1.77 6,847 2.00 8,739
June 1.95 1.90 21,464 1.98 4,691 2.07 3,226 1.76 1,882 1.75 6,771 1.97 9,585
July 1.94 1.88 22,177 1.94 4,907 2.16 2,675 1.74 1,994 1.73 7,666 1.95 9,842
Aug. 1.93 1.87 20,493 1.96 3,401 2.13 2,337 1.70 1,753 1.71 6,974 1.97 9,429
Sep. 1.92 1.86 17,864 1.96 3,046 2.11 1,973 1.71 1,544 1.69 5,923 1.94 8,424
Oct. 1.91 1.86 21,275 1.94 4,124 2.08 2,443 1.68 1,884 1.71 7,669 1.97 9,279
Nov. 1.94 1.88 20,357 1.94 3,423 2.02 2,313 1.74 1,779 1.72 6,738 1.98 9,527
Dec. 1.90 1.85 17,626 1.89 3,168 2.02 2,109 1.71 1,519 1.70 6,088 1.94 7,910
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2 0 1 7 Dec. . 1.69 7,644 . . 1.97 685 1.51 740 1.57 2,733 1.77 3,486
2 0 1 8 Jan. . 1.75 9,069 . . 2.00 837 1.57 946 1.59 3,283 1.88 4,003
Feb. . 1.76 8,579 . . 2.02 702 1.53 803 1.61 2,946 1.86 4,128
Mar. . 1.81 9,154 . . 1.96 831 1.61 871 1.67 3,271 1.94 4,181
Apr. . 1.82 9,782 . . 2.08 866 1.55 907 1.71 3,606 1.91 4,403
May . 1.84 8,392 . . 2.02 733 1.55 834 1.71 3,043 1.96 3,782
June . 1.83 9,040 . . 2.00 1,087 1.61 901 1.71 3,025 1.94 4,027
July . 1.83 9,622 . . 2.06 914 1.60 960 1.69 3,575 1.94 4,173
Aug. . 1.82 8,424 . . 2.02 807 1.54 792 1.65 2,911 1.96 3,914
Sep. . 1.82 7,495 . . 2.13 664 1.51 715 1.65 2,604 1.95 3,512
Oct. . 1.81 9,201 . . 1.98 880 1.51 846 1.67 3,351 1.96 4,124
Nov. . 1.83 8,504 . . 1.95 750 1.53 771 1.67 2,910 1.98 4,073
Dec. . 1.79 7,238 . . 2.03 690 1.49 670 1.64 2,592 1.93 3,286
Forfootnotes*and1to6,seep.44 .Forfootnotes+and7to10,seep.45 .For
footnote 11, see p. 47 .

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
47
VI. Interest rates
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont’d)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans 12 Revolving loans 12
and overdrafts 13 Revolving loans 12 Extended and overdrafts 13 Revolving loans 12
Credit card debt 14 and overdrafts 13 credit card debt Credit card debt 14 and overdrafts 13
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2 interest rate 1 Volume 2
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2 0 1 7 Dec. 8.21 39,538 8.35 31,187 14.94 4,303 3.47 65,936 3.49 65,625
2 0 1 8 Jan. 8.33 39,136 8.38 31,128 14.92 4,369 3.36 68,733 3.37 68,418
Feb. 8.36 39,233 8.39 31,380 14.92 4,334 3.40 70,798 3.42 70,488
Mar. 8.31 39,818 8.36 31,844 14.87 4,340 3.41 71,713 3.43 71,381
Apr. 8.29 39,308 8.35 31,176 14.85 4,408 3.29 72,449 3.30 72,100
May 8.29 39,115 8.38 30,991 14.79 4,376 3.35 71,010 3.37 70,690
June 8.26 39,717 8.34 31,627 14.77 4,370 3.30 74,485 3.32 74,136
July 8.19 39,373 8.29 31,035 14.74 4,430 3.25 73,268 3.26 72,921
Aug. 8.20 39,040 8.27 30,862 14.73 4,390 3.21 72,775 3.23 72,415
Sep. 8.18 40,096 8.27 31,781 14.79 4,421 3.18 76,148 3.19 75,723
Oct. 8.16 39,591 8.24 31,353 14.79 4,366 3.13 74,312 3.15 73,892
Nov. 7.88 40,395 7.93 31,901 14.77 4,429 3.11 74,306 3.13 73,881
Dec. 7.86 41,799 7.96 32,782 14.75 4,585 3.14 73,787 3.16 73,380
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million 15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million 15 with an initial rate fixation of
Renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans 9 up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year 9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7 rate 1 Volume 7
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
Total loans
2 0 1 7 Dec. 1.43 78,501 1.52 21,693 2.45 8,207 2.55 1,862 1.82 1,628 1.15 49,208 1.51 5,166 1.63 12,430
2 0 1 8 Jan. 1.22 69,664 1.49 18,190 2.48 8,321 2.53 1,607 1.92 1,361 0.89 50,613 1.72 2,238 1.55 5,524
Feb. 1.32 53,831 1.48 13,339 2.47 7,501 2.57 1,390 1.97 1,123 0.94 36,050 1.43 1,794 1.68 5,973
Mar. 1.42 69,102 1.52 18,706 2.48 8,966 2.52 1,744 1.93 1,470 1.09 44,944 1.50 3,379 1.74 8,599
Apr. 1.39 65,864 1.46 18,840 2.44 8,704 2.54 1,749 1.94 1,527 1.04 43,667 1.64 2,828 1.73 7,389
May 1.20 72,958 1.36 17,150 2.31 9,732 2.40 1,395 1.95 1,290 0.85 51,023 1.59 2,988 1.73 6,530
June 1.31 84,383 1.42 24,657 2.24 11,612 2.44 1,531 1.97 1,470 0.97 55,948 1.64 3,981 1.73 9,841
July 1.19 81,709 1.41 22,096 2.09 10,235 2.41 1,466 1.93 1,578 0.85 55,149 1.53 3,956 1.74 9,325
Aug. 1.18 66,072 1.41 16,124 2.05 9,274 2.44 1,316 1.86 1,311 0.85 44,950 1.73 2,130 1.64 7,091
Sep. 1.26 76,448 1.40 22,010 2.04 9,668 2.49 1,315 1.94 1,180 0.98 53,010 1.78 3,023 1.66 8,252
Oct. 1.28 78,085 1.39 21,850 2.04 10,699 2.50 1,580 1.92 1,403 0.98 52,918 1.64 3,158 1.72 8,327
Nov. 1.27 74,844 1.47 18,178 2.05 9,884 2.46 1,578 1.91 1,400 0.96 50,045 1.80 3,422 1.63 8,515
Dec. 1.29 96,548 1.46 25,306 2.06 10,205 2.40 1,480 1.85 1,434 1.02 62,907 1.72 5,156 1.60 15,366
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2 0 1 7 Dec. 1.59 13,235 . . 1.92 627 2.65 167 1.75 426 1.44 7,644 2.33 1,098 1.56 3,273
2 0 1 8 Jan. 1.53 7,387 . . 1.92 627 2.36 148 1.90 426 1.32 4,529 1.93 357 1.73 1,300
Feb. 1.55 6,461 . . 1.96 428 2.77 134 1.79 324 1.30 3,638 1.54 457 1.88 1,480
Mar. 1.62 11,118 . . 1.92 608 2.46 160 1.78 396 1.44 6,583 1.68 1,010 1.93 2,361
Apr. 1.57 8,174 . . 1.91 620 2.50 152 1.83 434 1.26 4,155 2.07 764 1.77 2,049
May 1.61 7,425 . . 1.93 540 2.47 158 1.77 354 1.38 4,223 1.82 639 1.92 1,511
June 1.68 12,565 . . 1.88 647 2.60 182 1.82 380 1.42 7,324 2.60 1,202 1.83 2,830
July 1.55 9,982 . . 1.95 707 2.74 155 1.81 468 1.25 5,263 1.81 1,205 1.85 2,184
Aug. 1.56 7,174 . . 2.10 507 2.74 151 1.76 302 1.32 4,296 2.50 348 1.68 1,570
Sep. 1.56 10,319 . . 1.89 576 2.57 124 1.83 309 1.33 6,391 2.52 646 1.79 2,273
Oct. 1.55 9,237 . . 1.96 640 2.64 138 1.84 376 1.32 5,296 1.77 627 1.80 2,160
Nov. 1.61 9,181 . . 1.96 528 2.64 140 1.79 379 1.41 5,283 2.15 824 1.72 2,027
Dec. 1.50 16,718 . . 1.90 607 2.55 122 1.68 411 1.37 8,845 2.04 1,266 1.50 5,467
Forfootnotes*and1to6,seep.44 .Forfootnotes+and7to10,seep.45 . (d)thereisnoobligationofregularrepaymentoffunds.13Overdraftsaredefinedas
11Forthepurposesoftheinterestratestatistics,aloanisconsideredtobesecured debitbalancesoncurrentaccounts.Theyincludeallbankoverdraftsregardlessof
ifcollateral(amongstothersfinancialcollateral,realestatecollateral,debtsecurities) whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the
in at least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or bank.14Includingconvenienceandextendedcreditcarddebt.Conveniencecreditis
assigned.12Includingrevolvingloanswhichhaveallthefollowingfeatures:(a)the defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without paymenttransactionseffectedwiththecardduringonebillingcycleandthedateat
givingpriornoticetothelender;(b)theamountofavailablecreditcanincreaseand whichthedebtbalancesfromthisspecificbillingcyclebecomedue.15Theamount
decreaseasfundsareborrowedandrepaid;(c)theloanmaybeusedrepeatedly; category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
48
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets
€ billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and fund Financial technical Non-financial Remaining
year/quarter Total deposits 2 securities Loans 3 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
2 0 1 6 Q2 2,023.3 339.2 391.8 279.3 229.6 608.2 4.8 66.5 52.8 51.0
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 2,219.9 378.7 397.3 387.3 280.2 613.9 5.3 46.1 31.4 79.9
Q4 2,190.1 361.5 371.3 374.6 308.6 623.6 3.3 44.1 32.4 70.6
2 0 1 7 Q1 2,189.3 355.4 377.5 367.6 297.7 635.7 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
Q2 2,177.9 343.9 378.8 365.2 301.9 643.7 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6
Q3 2,187.4 331.1 386.0 370.9 305.5 650.3 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.3
Q4 2,211.6 320.8 386.9 354.2 336.1 671.1 2.9 48.2 34.3 57.3
2 0 1 8 Q1 2,217.4 344.3 394.6 327.0 343.2 663.0 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.4
Q2 2,226.3 347.5 400.2 320.1 347.1 668.0 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6
Q3 2,224.1 327.3 400.5 328.6 350.5 675.0 2.0 53.0 35.7 51.6
Life insurance
2 0 1 6 Q2 1,116.7 216.6 199.6 160.7 35.6 438.0 2.4 14.9 32.0 16.9
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 1,247.0 242.9 203.0 241.2 47.0 445.8 4.0 10.2 18.7 34.0
Q4 1,197.3 231.3 182.7 223.0 50.7 456.9 2.1 9.6 19.1 21.9
2 0 1 7 Q1 1,170.4 223.8 185.3 217.2 37.2 462.6 1.8 8.2 19.1 15.3
Q2 1,172.7 215.6 189.4 217.6 38.6 467.1 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3
Q3 1,177.4 207.6 193.5 220.6 38.4 472.4 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0
Q4 1,192.7 199.1 192.4 226.0 41.3 487.6 1.8 8.6 19.9 16.0
2 0 1 8 Q1 1,187.5 213.0 199.0 206.9 43.1 480.8 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
Q2 1,195.2 216.2 202.0 201.1 46.3 486.1 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
Q3 1,194.2 201.0 202.3 209.8 47.4 491.2 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
Non-life insurance
2 0 1 6 Q2 532.8 110.5 112.5 55.8 49.3 144.5 1.4 32.8 14.4 11.7
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 592.3 123.8 103.2 93.6 50.8 154.4 0.5 28.5 8.6 28.8
Q4 584.2 118.9 98.9 91.8 56.8 152.5 0.5 26.8 9.0 29.0
2 0 1 7 Q1 606.5 120.2 102.4 92.0 56.9 157.3 0.3 34.0 9.1 34.2
Q2 603.3 116.7 103.9 91.2 58.5 160.3 0.4 33.2 9.1 30.1
Q3 602.5 111.8 106.2 92.9 58.5 162.8 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4
Q4 606.6 111.5 108.0 82.2 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.4 9.7 26.5
2 0 1 8 Q1 622.7 120.1 112.5 75.1 72.3 166.8 0.3 34.5 9.8 31.4
Q2 621.6 120.0 115.3 72.9 73.4 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
Q3 617.2 116.2 114.9 72.9 74.4 168.8 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
Reinsurance 4
2 0 1 6 Q2 373.7 12.1 79.7 62.8 144.8 25.8 1.0 18.8 6.4 22.4
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 380.7 12.0 91.0 52.5 182.3 13.8 0.8 7.3 4.0 17.0
Q4 408.6 11.3 89.7 59.7 201.0 14.3 0.7 7.7 4.3 19.7
2 0 1 7 Q1 412.5 11.4 89.8 58.4 203.6 15.9 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
Q2 401.9 11.6 85.5 56.5 204.8 16.3 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2
Q3 407.5 11.7 86.3 57.5 208.6 15.1 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9
Q4 412.3 10.2 86.5 45.9 223.9 17.6 0.7 8.2 4.7 14.7
2 0 1 8 Q1 407.2 11.2 83.1 45.0 227.8 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
Q2 409.5 11.3 82.9 46.1 227.4 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
Q3 412.7 10.0 83.4 46.0 228.7 14.9 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
Pension funds 5
2 0 1 6 Q2 605.0 138.7 67.7 29.2 20.6 288.8 − 6.0 33.5 20.5
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 608.0 107.7 63.5 29.3 19.1 326.2 − 6.3 35.4 20.5
Q4 609.6 106.4 61.1 29.7 19.9 328.1 − 6.7 37.0 20.8
2 0 1 7 Q1 617.0 103.4 60.3 30.1 20.3 337.7 − 6.7 37.5 20.9
Q2 624.5 102.7 60.6 30.3 20.7 344.3 − 6.8 38.1 21.1
Q3 633.7 100.6 61.7 30.3 21.2 353.1 − 7.0 38.6 21.3
Q4 645.5 96.0 63.5 30.6 21.6 364.5 − 7.1 40.3 21.8
2 0 1 8 Q1 646.8 94.8 63.1 31.0 22.0 366.1 − 7.2 40.6 21.9
Q2 652.7 95.2 62.8 31.5 22.9 369.9 − 7.3 41.1 22.1
Q3 655.3 92.0 62.6 31.6 23.3 374.9 − 7.3 41.5 22.2
1DataasofQ32016arebasedonSolvency IIsupervisorydata,valuationoflistedse- 3Includingdepositsretainedonassumedreinsuranceaswellasregisteredbonds,bor-
curitiesatthecorrespondingconsistentpricefromtheESCB’ssecuritiesdatabase.Up rowers’noteloansandregisteredPfandbriefe.4Notincludingthereinsurancebusi-
toandincludingQ22016dataarebasedonSolvency IsupervisorydatafromtheFed- nessconductedbyprimaryinsurers,whichisincludedthere.5Theterm“pension
eralFinancialSupervisoryAuthority(BaFin),supplementedbyestimatesandBundes- funds“referstotheinstitutionalsector“pensionfunds“oftheEuropeanSystemof
bank calculations. In case of pension funds, occasional data breaks are due to Accounts.Pensionfundsthuscomprisecompanypensionschemesandoccupational
changesinthecalculationbasis.2Accountsreceivabletomonetaryfinancialinstitu- pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not included.
tions,includingregisteredbonds,borrowers’noteloansandregisteredPfandbriefe.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
49
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life/
Debt claims on
End of securities Shares and pension fund Financial Remaining
year/quarter Total issued Loans 2 other equity Total reserves 3 Non-life 4 derivatives liabilities Net worth 7
Insurance corporations
2 0 1 6 Q2 2,023.3 17.6 94.0 191.5 1,501.4 1,184.6 316.8 0.0 70.3 148.4
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 2,219.9 30.7 73.7 383.0 1,579.4 1,396.9 182.5 1.5 151.5 −
Q4 2,190.1 30.7 70.3 441.0 1,494.4 1,313.3 181.1 2.3 151.4 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 2,189.3 30.5 57.2 448.5 1,511.7 1,309.5 202.2 1.8 139.5 −
Q2 2,177.9 28.6 57.0 450.7 1,505.2 1,308.4 196.8 2.1 134.3 −
Q3 2,187.4 28.5 58.4 455.4 1,512.8 1,317.1 195.7 2.3 130.1 −
Q4 2,211.6 28.3 62.6 465.9 1,521.1 1,333.7 187.4 2.2 131.6 −
2 0 1 8 Q1 2,217.4 28.0 61.9 460.3 1,538.6 1,333.3 205.3 1.5 127.0 −
Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 457.1 1,553.3 1,347.6 205.7 1.9 122.3 −
Q3 2,224.1 27.5 65.1 462.6 1,545.0 1,343.7 201.4 2.0 121.9 −
Life insurance
2 0 1 6 Q2 1,116.7 0.0 27.8 22.3 943.1 927.8 15.3 0.0 30.2 93.3
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 1,247.0 3.8 25.9 96.0 1,066.2 1,066.2 − 0.7 54.4 −
Q4 1,197.3 4.1 25.0 116.3 993.7 993.7 − 1.2 56.9 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 1,170.4 4.1 12.5 116.3 991.7 991.7 − 0.9 44.8 −
Q2 1,172.7 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.5 989.5 − 1.0 46.2 −
Q3 1,177.4 4.1 12.3 121.5 993.9 993.9 − 1.1 44.5 −
Q4 1,192.7 4.1 12.8 122.2 1,006.6 1,006.6 − 1.1 45.9 −
2 0 1 8 Q1 1,187.5 4.0 13.3 119.8 1,006.9 1,006.9 − 0.7 42.7 −
Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.6 1,017.0 1,017.0 − 0.8 40.8 −
Q3 1,194.2 4.1 12.6 121.2 1,013.3 1,013.3 − 0.9 42.0 −
Non-life insurance
2 0 1 6 Q2 532.8 0.0 14.5 57.7 401.6 256.8 144.9 0.0 17.2 41.8
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 592.3 0.9 6.6 120.0 407.4 310.1 97.3 0.0 57.3 −
Q4 584.2 1.1 6.3 130.4 390.1 300.5 89.7 0.2 56.2 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 606.5 1.1 7.3 134.0 408.9 300.8 108.2 0.1 55.0 −
Q2 603.3 1.1 6.8 135.6 406.7 302.4 104.2 0.1 53.0 −
Q3 602.5 1.1 6.9 137.3 406.6 305.7 100.9 0.1 50.6 −
Q4 606.6 1.1 6.7 141.2 405.6 309.7 95.9 0.1 51.9 −
2 0 1 8 Q1 622.7 1.1 7.7 141.2 422.7 311.1 111.6 0.0 50.0 −
Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 −
Q3 617.2 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 45.7 −
Reinsurance 5
2 0 1 6 Q2 373.7 17.6 51.7 111.4 156.7 − 156.7 0.0 22.9 13.4
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 380.7 26.0 41.3 167.0 105.8 20.5 85.3 0.8 39.8 −
Q4 408.6 25.5 39.0 194.3 110.5 19.1 91.4 0.9 38.3 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −
Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.8 1.1 35.0 −
Q4 412.3 23.1 43.1 202.6 108.8 17.4 91.4 1.0 33.8 −
2 0 1 8 Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 −
Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 −
Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 −
Pension funds 6
2 0 1 6 Q2 605.0 − 5.4 9.6 530.7 530.2 0.4 − 3.4 56.0
2 0 1 6 Q3 1 608.0 − 6.4 6.7 536.0 536.0 − − 3.3 55.6
Q4 609.6 − 6.8 6.9 546.0 546.0 − − 2.4 47.5
2 0 1 7 Q1 617.0 − 6.9 7.0 552.9 552.9 − − 2.5 47.8
Q2 624.5 − 6.9 7.1 558.7 558.7 − − 2.5 49.4
Q3 633.7 − 6.9 7.2 565.2 565.2 − − 2.5 51.9
Q4 645.5 − 7.1 7.4 576.1 576.1 − − 2.5 52.4
2 0 1 8 Q1 646.8 − 7.2 7.4 579.5 579.5 − − 2.6 50.0
Q2 652.7 − 7.3 7.5 585.7 585.7 − − 2.6 49.6
Q3 655.3 − 7.4 7.5 588.3 588.3 − − 2.6 49.4
1DataasofQ32016arebasedonSolvency IIsupervisorydata.Uptoandincluding servespursuanttoESA1995.4AsofQ32016insurancetechnicalreserves“non-life“
Q22016dataarebasedonSolvency IsupervisorydatafromtheFederalFinancialSu- pursuanttoSolvency II.UptoandincludingQ22016unearnedpremiumsandre-
pervisoryAuthority(BaFin),supplementedbyestimatesandBundesbankcalculations. servesforoutstandingclaimspursuanttoESA1995.5Notincludingthereinsurance
Incaseofpensionfunds,occasionaldatabreaksareduetochangesinthecalcula- businessconductedbyprimaryinsurers,whichisincludedthere.6Theterm“pension
tion basis. 2 Including deposits retained on ceded business as well as registered funds“referstotheinstitutionalsector“pensionfunds“oftheEuropeanSystemof
bonds,borrowers’noteloansandregisteredPfandbriefe.3AsofQ32016insurance Accounts.Pensionfundsthuscomprisecompanypensionschemesandoccupational
technicalreserves“life“pursuanttoSolvency IItakingaccountoftransitionalmea- pension schemes for the self-employed. Social security funds are not includ-
sures.UptoandincludingQ22016long-termnetequityofhouseholdsinlifeinsur- ed.7Ownfundscorrespondtothesumofnetworthandtheliabilityitem“Shares
ance(includingageingprovisionsofhealthinsuranceschemesandpremiumreserves and other equity“.
ofaccidentinsuranceschemeswithguaranteedpremiumrefund)andpensionfundre-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
50
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities 1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities (non-MFIs) 2 ities ities 3 Total 4 associations 5 Bundesbank sectors 6 residents 7
2007 217,798 90,270 42,034 20,123 28,111 127,528 − 26,762 96,476 . − 123,238 244,560
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 77,181 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,526
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,580
2013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,646 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,380
2014 64,774 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,409 − 12,124 − 11,951 74,484 14,366
2015 32,609 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 68,620 119,379 − 66,330 121,164 64,546 − 86,770
2016 72,270 27,429 19,177 18,265 − 10,012 44,840 174,162 − 58,012 187,500 44,674 − 101,894
2017 54,930 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 43,368 145,410 − 71,454 161,012 55,852 − 90,477
2018 57,990 16,630 33,251 12,433 − 29,055 41,359 104,363 − 24,516 67,328 61,551 − 46,371
2 0 1 8 Feb. 5,636 5,264 12,736 2,054 − 9,526 372 1,898 − 5,017 5,725 1,190 3,738
Mar. 25,191 17,065 11,318 820 4,927 8,125 18,942 1,950 7,268 9,724 6,249
Apr. − 9,403 − 12,541 − 469 7,199 − 19,271 3,138 8,824 − 2,582 5,172 6,234 − 18,228
May 20,653 20,327 6,728 2,570 11,028 327 1,462 − 1,553 7,676 − 4,661 19,192
June − 13,265 − 12,897 − 10,982 − 2,030 115 − 369 5,727 − 7,009 6,353 6,383 − 18,993
July − 3,540 − 9,880 − 7,055 3,563 − 6,389 6,340 12,206 − 3,117 5,835 9,488 − 15,746
Aug. 15,981 10,891 2,640 − 3,890 12,142 5,090 7,910 − 1,567 4,562 4,915 8,072
Sep. 20,075 11,015 8,990 − 84 2,109 9,060 19,241 5,189 7,652 6,400 835
Oct. 2,993 7,812 10,652 4,521 − 7,361 − 4,819 − 2,459 − 8,161 3,659 2,043 5,453
Nov. 18,500 13,260 6,849 − 693 7,104 5,240 11,008 3,159 3,945 3,904 7,492
Dec. − 39,633 − 31,356 − 9,339 − 2,127 − 19,890 − 8,277 − 106 − 6,972 3,343 3,523 − 39,527
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares 8 shares 9 Total 10 tutions 5 Other sectors 11 residents 12
2007 − 5,009 10,053 − 15,062 − 62,308 − 6,702 − 55,606 57,299
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,194
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,484
2010 37,767 20,049 17,719 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,361
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 − 449
2015 40,488 7,668 32,820 30,568 − 5,421 35,989 9,920
2016 33,491 4,409 29,082 31,261 − 5,143 36,404 2,230
2017 48,645 15,570 33,075 47,482 7,031 40,451 1,163
2018 68,384 16,188 52,196 58,839 − 11,182 70,021 9,545
2 0 1 8 Feb. 15,184 1,122 14,062 15,596 − 3,709 19,305 − 412
Mar. − 939 1,023 − 1,962 − 7,256 − 3,672 − 3,584 6,317
Apr. 2,843 3,219 − 376 − 33 − 2,546 2,513 2,876
May 16,950 1,175 15,775 16,363 1,156 15,207 587
June 8,160 6,593 1,567 8,066 2,250 5,816 94
July 4,644 549 4,095 4,709 257 4,452 − 65
Aug. 4,807 193 4,614 6,372 473 5,899 − 1,565
Sep. − 817 225 − 1,042 − 2,711 − 2,837 126 1,894
Oct. 1,538 1,227 311 − 727 − 1,242 515 2,265
Nov. − 3,032 227 − 3,259 − 3,854 − 1,544 − 2,310 822
Dec. 11,300 482 10,818 13,017 − 635 13,652 − 1,717
1Netsalesatmarketvaluesplus/minuschangesinissuers’portfoliosoftheirown 8Excludingsharesofpubliclimitedinvestmentcompanies;atissueprices.9Netpur-
debtsecurities.2Includingcross-borderfinancingwithingroupsfromJanuary2011. chasesornetsales(−)offoreignshares(includingdirectinvestment) by residents;
3Netpurchasesornetsales(−)offoreigndebtsecuritiesbyresidents;transaction transaction values. 10 Domestic and foreign shares. 11 Residual; also including
values.4Domesticandforeigndebtsecurities.5Bookvalues;statisticallyadjusted. purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 12 Net
6Residual;alsoincludingpurchasesofdomesticandforeignsecuritiesbydomestic purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct investment) by
mutualfunds.Uptoend-2008includingDeutscheBundesbank.7Netpurchasesor non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values. provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
51
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities 1
Debt securities
issued by special- Corporate
Mortgage Public purpose Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) 2 debt securities
Gross sales
2007 1,021,533 743,616 19,211 82,720 195,722 445,963 15,044 262,873
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,421
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
2016 3 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
2017 3 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2 0 1 8 May 97,205 61,722 3,459 63 46,110 12,089 5,306 30,178
June 90,599 59,456 5,737 364 42,846 10,509 4,220 26,923
July 106,400 65,758 3,016 784 53,034 8,925 6,455 34,187
Aug. 101,600 64,709 1,549 184 50,391 12,584 5,293 31,597
Sep. 86,951 56,321 4,237 560 41,454 10,070 4,764 25,867
Oct. 105,393 68,523 3,117 636 54,075 10,694 7,347 29,523
Nov. 92,380 53,292 3,214 39 39,121 10,918 5,917 33,171
Dec. 54,388 28,723 2,215 151 19,140 7,217 11,345 14,320
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2007 315,418 183,660 10,183 31,331 50,563 91,586 13,100 118,659
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 3 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017 3 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2 0 1 8 May 24,413 11,107 2,333 63 5,804 2,906 3,425 9,881
June 32,355 20,213 4,237 84 12,615 3,277 2,251 9,891
July 28,315 10,970 3,016 604 5,273 2,078 4,707 12,638
Aug. 27,181 12,138 1,305 133 4,488 6,212 2,962 12,081
Sep. 35,433 19,654 3,047 558 13,354 2,694 3,847 11,932
Oct. 24,646 9,564 2,567 636 3,609 2,751 4,924 10,158
Nov. 32,905 15,498 2,686 39 9,850 2,924 5,015 12,391
Dec. 16,845 5,192 1,542 20 1,905 1,725 8,650 3,003
Net sales 5
2007 86,579 58,168 − 10,896 − 46,629 42,567 73,127 − 3,683 32,093
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302
2009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,289
2012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,298
2013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,479
2014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 3 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017 3 2,669 5,954 6,389 − 4,697 18,788 − 14,525 6,828 − 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 − 6,564 18,850 − 5,453 9,738 − 33,630
2 0 1 8 May 21,542 8,519 3,037 − 1,827 5,950 1,358 1,258 11,765
June − 11,298 − 10,143 2,597 − 869 − 6,515 − 5,356 − 627 − 528
July − 9,530 − 6,298 1,570 − 107 − 7,834 73 3,562 − 6,794
Aug. 11,892 2,687 886 − 481 − 1,396 3,679 − 3,774 12,979
Sep. 11,957 8,528 2,319 42 5,728 438 714 2,715
Oct. 2,584 7,796 2,226 − 359 3,035 2,894 3,318 − 8,529
Nov. 13,993 3,367 1,184 − 662 1,476 1,370 − 574 11,200
Dec. − 30,192 − 11,122 966 − 1,558 − 7,164 − 3,366 − 593 − 18,478
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Supplement 2 − Capital ofdebtsecurities. 4 Maximummaturityaccordingtothetermsofissue. 5 Gross
marketstatisticsonpp.23ff.1Excludingregisteredbankdebtsecurities. 2 Including sales less redemptions.
cross-borderfinancingwithingroupsfromJanuary2011.3 Sectoralreclassification

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
52
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special-purpose Other bank bonds Public
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2007 3,130,723 1,868,066 133,501 452,896 411,041 870,629 95,863 1,166,794
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017 1 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2 0 1 8 June 3,092,761 1,192,610 151,936 54,564 676,217 309,892 309,629 1,590,522
July 3,083,231 1,186,312 153,506 54,457 668,383 309,965 313,191 1,583,728
Aug. 3,092,960 1,185,591 154,392 53,976 666,987 1 310,236 1 2 310,662 1,596,707
Sep. 3,104,917 1,194,119 156,711 54,018 672,715 310,674 311,376 1,599,422
Oct. 3,107,502 1,201,915 158,937 53,659 675,750 313,569 314,694 1,590,893
Nov. 3,121,495 1,205,282 160,121 52,996 677,226 314,938 314,120 1,602,093
Dec. 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 311,572 313,527 1,583,616
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-December 2018
less than 2 1,019,417 447,797 46,759 19,576 275,216 106,246 60,196 511,425
2 to less than 4 597,281 263,198 35,745 11,622 146,268 69,563 47,648 286,435
4 to less than 6 478,067 199,094 36,912 6,450 111,324 44,409 42,633 236,340
6 to less than 8 316,636 126,114 25,077 6,336 62,496 32,205 34,091 156,433
8 to less than 10 240,312 76,054 13,141 5,328 36,918 20,668 15,110 149,147
10 to less than 15 118,594 34,188 2,114 533 19,147 12,394 28,806 55,600
15 to less than 20 80,960 18,002 469 1,148 12,819 3,567 5,906 57,052
20 and more 240,037 29,716 872 448 5,872 22,524 79,138 131,185
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1 Sectoral fallingdueenblocanduntilmeanmaturityoftheresidualamountoutstandingfor
reclassification of debt securities. 2 Adjustments due to change of domicile of debt securities not falling due en bloc.
issuers. 3Calculatedfrommonthunderreviewuntilfinalmaturityfordebtsecurities
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments (market capita-
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims of shares, and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other GmbH shares, transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds 1 bonus shares real assets etc. of assets legal form liquidation under review 2
2007 164,560 799 3,164 1,322 200 269 − 682 − 1,847 − 1,636 1,481,930
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 0 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 10 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 9 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 − − 457 − 661 − 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 − − 1,055 − 1,111 − 946 1,634,155
2 0 1 8 June 180,298 368 258 228 16 − − 7 − 52 − 75 1,867,155
July 179,955 − 344 215 24 3 − − 344 − 100 − 141 1,929,117
Aug. 180,004 47 171 112 13 − − 89 − 13 − 147 1,898,601
Sep. 180,260 256 189 195 1 − − 51 − 36 − 43 1,856,858
Oct. 180,431 170 284 3 2 − 2 − 91 − 29 1,759,237
Nov. 180,307 − 123 106 19 3 − 0 0 − 252 1,729,978
Dec. 180,187 − 120 317 22 6 − − 13 − 423 − 29 1,634,155
*Excludingsharesofpubliclimitedinvestmentcompanies.1Includingsharesissued on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and Deutsche
outofcompanyprofits.2Allmarketplaces.Source:Bundesbankcalculationsbased Börse AG.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
53
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents 1 Price indices 2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
With a residual With a residual Corporate German German
maturity of maturity of more bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share
9 to than 9 years and (non- index € Germany share price index
Total Total Total 10 years 4 Total up to 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate =100 =100 = 1,000
2006 3.8 3.7 3.7 3.8 3.8 4.0 4.2 116.78 96.69 407.16 6,596.92
2007 4.3 4.3 4.2 4.2 4.4 4.5 5.0 114.85 94.62 478.65 8,067.32
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2 0 1 8 Aug. 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.5 0.9 2.5 141.24 109.06 567.19 12,364.06
Sep. 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.1 2.7 140.34 108.01 556.11 12,246.73
Oct. 0.5 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.1 2.8 141.11 108.69 519.54 11,447.51
Nov. 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.3 0.6 1.0 3.0 141.47 109.14 509.46 11,257.24
Dec. 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.2 0.6 1.0 3.3 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2 0 1 9 Jan. 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.5 0.9 3.3 142.15 110.01 505.55 11,173.10
1Bearerdebtsecuritieswithmaximummaturitiesaccordingtothetermsofissueof standingofthedebtsecuritiesincludedinthecalculation.Monthlyfiguresarecalcula-
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt tedonthebasisoftheyieldsonallthebusinessdaysinamonth.Theannualfigures
securities and similar, debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero coupon aretheunweightedmeansofthemonthlyfigures.2Endofyearormonth.3Source:
bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Deutsche Börse AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
Groupyieldsforthevariouscategoriesofsecuritiesareweightedbytheamountsout- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds 1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
and loan associations 2 Other sectors 3
of which:
Sales of which: of which:
= Secur- Foreign Foreign
total Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutual
pur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds 4 Total Total shares Total shares dents 5
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,291 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,036
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,438
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,709
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 −473 862 1,000 93,713 42,522 144,075 819 − 1,745 143,256 44,266 − 3,841
2015 181,888 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,750 174,529 7,362 494 167,167 35,257 7,357
2016 155,511 119,369 21,301 −342 11,131 7,384 98,068 36,142 162,429 2,877 − 3,172 159,552 39,315 − 6,919
2017 142,669 94,921 29,560 −235 21,970 4,406 65,361 47,747 146,108 4,938 1,048 141,170 46,700 − 3,441
2018 120,337 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 16,644 126,162 2,979 − 2,306 123,183 18,951 − 5,824
2 0 1 8 June 7,914 6,787 1,068 66 352 479 5,719 1,127 7,547 − 459 − 781 8,006 1,908 367
July 7,640 5,476 1,163 − 57 587 308 4,313 2,164 7,318 607 66 6,711 2,098 323
Aug. 8,570 8,402 1,519 − 27 783 407 6,884 168 8,622 − 215 − 324 8,837 492 − 52
Sep. 7,592 5,836 937 25 −285 797 4,899 1,756 8,200 1,126 249 7,074 1,507 − 608
Oct. 4,731 6,658 649 80 −713 820 6,009 − 1,927 5,706 180 − 758 5,526 − 1,169 − 975
Nov. 11,824 11,097 1,729 378 542 580 9,368 727 11,967 − 1,338 − 718 13,305 1,445 − 143
Dec. 17,638 16,880 − 1,797 6 − 2,620 511 18,676 759 17,176 − 697 − 574 17,873 1,333 462
1Includingpubliclimitedinvestmentcompanies.2Bookvalues.3Residual.4Net transactionvalues.—Thefiguresforthemostrecentdateareprovisional;revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked.
5 Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
54
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2017 2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 30.93 41.58 52.76 19.02 − 0.75 27.52 − 18.68 − 0.44 14.84
Debt securities − 1.20 − 3.40 − 5.65 − 0.65 − 1.05 − 3.01 0.65 0.55 1.46
Short-term debt securities − 0.84 − 0.58 − 2.26 − 1.89 − 0.26 − 0.34 − 0.12 − 0.02 0.38
Long-term debt securities − 0.36 − 2.81 − 3.39 1.24 − 0.78 − 2.67 0.77 0.57 1.09
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 0.64 − 2.68 − 2.80 − 0.04 − 1.07 − 1.15 0.11 0.47 − 0.02
Non-financial corporations − 0.80 0.67 − 0.56 − 0.72 − 0.56 − 0.14 − 0.01 0.32 − 0.13
Financial corporations 1.86 − 2.53 − 0.41 0.67 − 0.14 − 0.59 0.19 0.31 0.08
General government − 0.42 − 0.82 − 1.82 0.01 − 0.37 − 0.43 − 0.07 − 0.15 0.03
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 1.83 − 0.72 − 2.85 − 0.61 0.02 − 1.86 0.54 0.08 1.48
Loans 27.54 12.74 39.45 5.50 2.73 5.79 0.16 − 9.06 − 1.44
Short-term loans 34.96 3.26 20.00 − 0.61 − 0.45 6.79 4.13 − 10.74 − 4.22
Long-term loans − 7.41 9.49 19.45 6.11 3.18 − 1.00 − 3.97 1.68 2.78
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 6.26 − 4.70 18.09 − 0.02 − 1.43 10.49 2.19 − 7.93 − 1.58
Non-financial corporations 1.26 − 11.78 9.53 2.88 − 0.28 6.70 0.12 − 9.12 − 4.14
Financial corporations 4.80 6.89 8.27 − 2.97 − 1.22 3.72 2.07 1.19 2.57
General government 0.20 0.20 0.29 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.00
Loans to the rest of the world 21.28 17.44 21.36 5.52 4.16 − 4.70 − 2.03 − 1.13 0.14
Equity and investment fund shares 54.54 74.50 49.97 − 0.40 16.68 16.22 27.57 38.91 24.14
Equity 38.14 68.67 41.42 1.79 14.41 6.50 24.05 37.93 24.04
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 10.40 22.91 − 3.82 − 2.05 1.91 0.65 21.74 − 2.70 − 1.34
Non-financial corporations − 8.04 22.59 − 3.76 − 2.26 1.96 0.80 21.64 − 2.90 − 1.38
Financial corporations − 2.36 0.31 − 0.06 0.21 − 0.04 − 0.14 0.10 0.20 0.04
Listed shares of the rest of the world 2.05 10.84 7.09 10.26 − 5.14 0.34 − 0.21 16.15 − 15.14
Other equity 1 46.49 34.92 38.15 − 6.42 17.64 5.51 2.53 24.48 40.52
Investment fund shares 16.40 5.83 8.55 − 2.18 2.26 9.71 3.52 0.98 0.10
Money market fund shares 0.21 0.36 − 0.46 0.00 − 1.07 0.89 − 0.63 − 0.03 − 0.14
Non-MMF investment fund shares 16.19 5.47 9.01 − 2.19 3.34 8.83 4.15 1.01 0.24
Insurance technical reserves 2.94 1.12 3.89 1.31 1.25 0.49 0.94 1.37 1.31
Financial derivatives − 1.42 22.74 12.68 3.57 2.85 2.86 2.57 − 2.68 1.37
Other accounts receivable 42.00 − 5.47 94.66 − 22.45 22.06 21.23 25.95 16.56 − 13.84
Total 155.33 143.81 247.75 5.91 43.77 71.09 39.16 45.22 27.84
External financing
Debt securities 7.78 23.71 8.56 − 0.52 0.96 0.55 2.79 2.36 0.90
Short-term securities 1.96 − 0.15 0.60 − 0.42 − 2.62 − 1.83 2.54 1.48 0.38
Long-term securities 5.82 23.85 7.95 − 0.10 3.58 2.37 0.24 0.89 0.53
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 1.70 10.82 7.13 1.24 0.76 1.83 2.48 1.65 − 0.98
Non-financial corporations − 0.80 0.67 − 0.56 − 0.72 − 0.56 − 0.14 − 0.01 0.32 − 0.13
Financial corporations 2.05 10.06 9.13 2.08 1.48 2.39 2.19 1.38 − 0.58
General government 0.02 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.01 − 0.01 0.00
Households 0.42 0.08 − 1.45 − 0.14 − 0.16 − 0.42 0.29 − 0.05 − 0.27
Debt securities of the rest of the world 6.08 12.89 1.42 − 1.76 0.20 − 1.28 0.31 0.71 1.88
Loans 54.91 35.50 90.15 11.97 18.59 11.06 49.00 47.71 26.82
Short-term loans 40.97 1.02 20.35 3.06 7.96 − 1.97 24.12 18.32 19.95
Long-term loans 13.94 34.48 69.80 8.91 10.63 13.03 24.88 29.39 6.87
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 23.72 14.47 51.80 7.98 10.42 7.22 35.68 17.76 16.45
Non-financial corporations 1.26 − 11.78 9.53 2.88 − 0.28 6.70 0.12 − 9.12 − 4.14
Financial corporations 29.29 23.08 45.50 5.77 13.75 6.23 28.61 26.18 20.57
General government − 6.83 3.18 − 3.23 − 0.68 − 3.04 − 5.71 6.94 0.70 0.03
Loans from the rest of the world 31.15 20.95 38.35 4.00 8.16 3.84 13.32 29.95 10.36
Equity 16.67 11.18 17.86 6.06 5.69 2.88 1.58 11.86 − 1.14
Listed shares of domestic sectors 7.42 27.31 6.93 2.68 3.43 5.36 19.82 4.46 5.16
Non-financial corporations − 8.04 22.59 − 3.76 − 2.26 1.96 0.80 21.64 − 2.90 − 1.38
Financial corporations 11.70 − 2.10 9.53 6.21 0.26 3.83 − 5.23 4.50 4.07
General government 0.11 0.07 0.51 0.13 0.16 0.15 0.16 0.15 0.09
Households 3.66 6.74 0.65 − 1.39 1.05 0.59 3.26 2.71 2.38
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 1.40 − 25.79 − 2.59 − 1.28 − 1.47 − 4.71 8.91 6.20 − 4.78
Other equity 1 10.65 9.66 13.53 4.66 3.74 2.23 − 27.15 1.20 − 1.52
Insurance technical reserves 5.60 3.60 7.25 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81 1.81
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 10.81 − 0.13 3.69 2.23 1.00 − 2.12 1.50 3.27 3.72
Other accounts payable 22.73 28.95 − 4.06 − 26.51 − 8.46 3.04 19.79 27.89 − 11.26
Total 96.88 102.80 123.45 − 4.96 19.59 17.22 76.46 94.90 20.85
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
55
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2017 2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Financial assets
Currency and deposits 463.1 514.9 556.2 525.5 532.8 556.2 527.2 539.7 540.4
Debt securities 47.8 44.8 38.8 42.8 41.9 38.8 39.2 39.7 41.0
Short-term debt securities 6.0 5.5 3.3 3.9 3.6 3.3 3.1 3.1 3.5
Long-term debt securities 41.7 39.3 35.6 39.0 38.3 35.6 36.0 36.6 37.5
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 23.3 20.8 18.2 20.2 19.3 18.2 18.2 18.7 18.6
Non-financial corporations 3.6 4.4 3.9 4.6 4.1 3.9 3.8 4.1 4.0
Financial corporations 14.5 12.0 11.7 12.3 12.3 11.7 11.9 12.2 12.3
General government 5.2 4.4 2.5 3.3 3.0 2.5 2.4 2.3 2.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 24.4 24.0 20.7 22.7 22.6 20.7 21.0 21.1 22.5
Loans 511.6 523.1 556.3 550.4 551.4 556.3 556.5 549.4 547.2
Short-term loans 409.4 414.3 431.1 426.1 424.7 431.1 435.7 426.3 421.6
Long-term loans 102.2 108.8 125.2 124.3 126.6 125.2 120.9 123.0 125.6
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 335.8 331.1 349.2 340.1 338.7 349.2 351.3 343.7 341.9
Non-financial corporations 233.3 221.6 231.1 224.7 224.4 231.1 231.2 222.3 218.0
Financial corporations 95.9 102.8 111.0 108.5 107.3 111.0 113.1 114.3 116.9
General government 6.5 6.7 7.0 6.9 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0
Loans to the rest of the world 175.8 192.0 207.1 210.3 212.7 207.1 205.2 205.7 205.3
Equity and investment fund shares 1,891.7 1,939.7 2,079.8 2,007.9 2,036.6 2,079.8 2,072.1 2,118.7 2,150.5
Equity 1,739.7 1,779.7 1,909.7 1,849.7 1,875.3 1,909.7 1,901.2 1,945.8 1,976.6
Listed shares of domestic sectors 273.0 292.3 332.2 304.1 322.7 332.2 349.4 338.5 338.3
Non-financial corporations 266.6 286.2 325.3 297.9 315.9 325.3 342.2 330.9 330.4
Financial corporations 6.3 6.1 6.8 6.2 6.9 6.8 7.1 7.6 7.9
Listed shares of the rest of the world 32.3 44.4 48.4 56.3 47.8 48.4 48.3 63.7 48.5
Other equity 1 1,434.4 1,443.0 1,529.2 1,489.3 1,504.7 1,529.2 1,503.6 1,543.6 1,589.8
Investment fund shares 151.9 159.9 170.1 158.2 161.4 170.1 170.9 172.8 173.9
Money market fund shares 1.4 1.9 1.5 1.7 0.6 1.5 0.9 0.9 0.7
Non-MMF investment fund shares 150.6 158.0 168.6 156.4 160.7 168.6 170.0 172.0 173.1
Insurance technical reserves 48.8 50.2 54.2 52.4 53.5 54.2 55.4 56.6 57.8
Financial derivatives 42.7 60.1 49.3 51.1 50.2 49.3 48.7 42.8 41.4
Other accounts receivable 927.6 962.0 1,033.1 991.1 1,038.8 1,033.1 1,088.1 1,107.7 1,089.2
Total 3,933.3 4,094.8 4,367.8 4,221.2 4,305.1 4,367.8 4,387.2 4,454.5 4,467.6
Liabilities
Debt securities 156.8 183.8 210.6 188.1 210.2 210.6 185.4 189.0 185.8
Short-term securities 3.0 2.9 3.4 7.9 5.3 3.4 5.9 7.4 6.5
Long-term securities 153.7 180.9 207.2 180.2 205.0 207.2 179.4 181.6 179.2
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 58.7 72.1 82.8 75.4 80.0 82.8 79.6 80.1 78.9
Non-financial corporations 3.6 4.4 3.9 4.6 4.1 3.9 3.8 4.1 4.0
Financial corporations 40.0 51.9 64.3 55.9 61.0 64.3 61.2 61.5 60.7
General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
Households 15.0 15.7 14.4 14.8 14.8 14.4 14.4 14.3 14.1
Debt securities of the rest of the world 98.1 111.7 127.8 112.7 130.3 127.8 105.8 108.9 106.9
Loans 1,452.1 1,481.4 1,559.8 1,535.7 1,550.3 1,559.8 1,606.9 1,665.2 1,684.9
Short-term loans 559.4 562.8 578.9 573.9 580.7 578.9 602.7 631.8 646.2
Long-term loans 892.6 918.6 980.8 961.7 969.6 980.8 1,004.3 1,033.4 1,038.8
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 1,119.7 1,129.0 1,176.5 1,161.1 1,169.5 1,176.5 1,211.1 1,225.3 1,240.6
Non-financial corporations 233.3 221.6 231.1 224.7 224.4 231.1 231.2 222.3 218.0
Financial corporations 834.4 853.7 895.1 877.4 888.5 895.1 922.3 944.9 964.7
General government 52.0 53.7 50.3 59.0 56.6 50.3 57.7 58.1 57.9
Loans from the rest of the world 332.4 352.4 383.3 374.6 380.8 383.3 395.8 439.9 444.3
Equity 2,695.7 2,773.4 3,054.5 2,916.4 3,001.4 3,054.5 2,949.1 2,970.7 2,934.4
Listed shares of domestic sectors 626.4 664.0 756.6 697.8 737.6 756.6 745.7 735.0 740.5
Non-financial corporations 266.6 286.2 325.3 297.9 315.9 325.3 342.2 330.9 330.4
Financial corporations 150.1 154.7 180.2 166.4 173.4 180.2 163.6 164.5 167.5
General government 43.4 44.4 51.8 46.7 51.0 51.8 48.7 49.0 52.1
Households 166.2 178.7 199.2 186.8 197.4 199.2 191.1 190.7 190.5
Listed shares of the rest of the world 756.3 803.7 925.3 879.1 906.1 925.3 881.6 907.0 875.0
Other equity 1 1,313.0 1,305.7 1,372.6 1,339.5 1,357.7 1,372.6 1,321.9 1,328.7 1,318.9
Insurance technical reserves 255.9 259.5 266.7 263.1 264.9 266.7 268.6 270.4 272.2
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 42.0 38.2 26.9 32.7 31.3 26.9 26.7 28.2 30.1
Other accounts payable 1,010.5 1,045.1 1,055.0 1,024.8 1,055.3 1,055.0 1,081.1 1,104.3 1,097.2
Total 5,613.0 5,781.3 6,173.4 5,960.8 6,113.5 6,173.4 6,117.7 6,227.7 6,204.6
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
56
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2017 2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 96.67 114.85 103.47 30.17 18.04 42.90 16.67 43.35 31.49
Currency 25.51 21.17 17.03 5.58 2.47 5.34 6.34 10.53 11.25
Deposits 71.16 93.68 86.45 24.59 15.58 37.57 10.33 32.83 20.24
Transferable deposits 100.96 105.26 99.72 29.95 20.65 35.86 12.14 33.90 21.35
Time deposits − 9.22 1.28 − 4.03 − 2.32 − 2.47 2.34 1.15 1.99 1.43
Savings deposits
(including savings certificates) − 20.58 − 12.87 − 9.24 − 3.04 − 2.61 − 0.64 − 2.95 − 3.06 − 2.53
Debt securities − 18.40 − 12.80 − 8.14 − 1.49 − 2.28 − 3.01 − 1.00 0.52 1.71
Short-term debt securities 0.75 − 0.16 − 0.20 0.18 − 0.34 − 0.41 − 0.37 − 0.01 − 0.02
Long-term debt securities − 19.15 − 12.63 − 7.93 − 1.67 − 1.94 − 2.60 − 0.63 0.53 1.72
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 10.06 − 4.14 − 5.09 − 0.67 − 1.88 − 2.56 − 0.01 0.16 1.18
Non-financial corporations 0.36 − 0.01 − 1.43 − 0.22 − 0.14 − 0.40 0.08 − 0.23 − 0.12
Financial corporations − 7.42 − 2.48 − 2.68 − 0.17 − 1.55 − 1.97 0.07 0.61 1.36
General government − 2.99 − 1.65 − 0.99 − 0.28 − 0.18 − 0.19 − 0.17 − 0.22 − 0.06
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 8.34 − 8.66 − 3.05 − 0.82 − 0.41 − 0.45 − 0.98 0.36 0.53
Equity and investment fund shares 47.95 45.78 55.13 12.32 14.08 16.62 17.73 8.06 11.79
Equity 16.62 21.65 14.69 2.21 5.11 3.97 7.35 2.79 7.01
Listed shares of domestic sectors 4.17 9.37 0.90 − 0.18 0.89 0.04 4.27 2.55 2.63
Non-financial corporations 3.88 6.09 0.54 − 1.42 1.01 0.47 3.12 1.63 2.27
Financial corporations 0.28 3.28 0.36 1.24 − 0.12 − 0.43 1.15 0.92 0.37
Listed shares of the rest of the world 8.00 6.93 9.65 1.69 2.94 2.77 1.47 − 0.83 2.82
Other equity 1 4.45 5.35 4.13 0.70 1.28 1.15 1.61 1.07 1.57
Investment fund shares 31.33 24.13 40.44 10.11 8.97 12.65 10.38 5.27 4.77
Money market fund shares − 0.57 − 0.53 − 0.28 0.04 − 0.16 0.05 − 0.40 − 0.03 − 0.06
Non-MMF investment fund shares 31.90 24.66 40.72 10.08 9.12 12.60 10.79 5.29 4.83
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 20.09 15.58 20.23 4.18 4.17 7.75 4.22 4.24 4.19
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 31.69 24.82 37.18 9.21 7.43 8.08 12.38 8.60 7.86
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 30.85 32.58 30.84 8.59 6.87 3.49 4.11 4.84 4.51
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable 2 − 17.31 − 19.50 − 27.38 − 10.21 − 0.95 − 26.56 15.47 − 14.13 − 13.82
Total 191.54 201.31 211.33 52.77 47.35 49.27 69.59 55.47 47.73
External financing
Loans 38.20 47.46 55.55 16.64 18.56 12.45 10.81 20.12 20.41
Short-term loans − 3.17 − 4.31 − 2.19 − 0.34 − 1.09 − 0.40 − 0.02 0.11 1.83
Long-term loans 41.36 51.76 57.74 16.98 19.66 12.85 10.83 20.01 18.58
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 35.63 41.92 47.41 13.31 15.84 12.15 9.00 15.79 17.50
Consumer loans 5.44 9.78 11.25 3.25 3.41 2.19 1.78 4.34 2.36
Entrepreneurial loans − 2.88 − 4.24 − 3.11 0.07 − 0.68 − 1.89 0.04 − 0.01 0.55
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 39.35 42.87 49.99 15.54 16.93 10.42 11.00 17.65 19.41
Loans from other financial institutions − 1.16 4.59 5.57 1.10 1.63 2.03 − 0.19 2.47 1.00
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable − 1.14 − 0.23 0.74 0.06 0.02 0.54 0.02 0.01 − 0.05
Total 37.06 47.23 56.29 16.70 18.58 12.99 10.83 20.13 20.36
1Includingunlistedshares.2Includingaccumulatedinterest-bearingsurplusshares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
57
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2017 2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,094.8 2,208.7 2,311.0 2,252.0 2,270.0 2,311.0 2,327.7 2,371.0 2,405.4
Currency 153.2 174.4 191.4 183.6 186.1 191.4 197.7 208.3 220.6
Deposits 1,941.6 2,034.4 2,119.6 2,068.4 2,084.0 2,119.6 2,130.0 2,162.8 2,184.8
Transferable deposits 1,082.4 1,188.0 1,287.7 1,231.2 1,251.8 1,287.7 1,299.8 1,333.7 1,354.9
Time deposits 246.8 248.7 245.4 245.6 243.1 245.4 246.6 248.6 250.2
Savings deposits
(including savings certificates) 612.4 597.7 586.5 591.7 589.1 586.5 583.6 580.5 579.8
Debt securities 139.8 127.4 120.5 125.4 123.6 120.5 117.7 118.1 119.3
Short-term debt securities 2.9 2.7 2.5 3.2 2.9 2.5 2.1 2.0 2.0
Long-term debt securities 136.9 124.7 118.0 122.2 120.7 118.0 115.6 116.0 117.3
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 89.4 85.6 82.5 86.2 85.1 82.5 81.2 81.4 82.5
Non-financial corporations 13.4 13.9 12.5 13.0 12.9 12.5 12.4 12.1 12.1
Financial corporations 69.5 66.7 66.1 68.9 68.1 66.1 65.1 65.7 67.0
General government 6.5 5.0 3.9 4.3 4.1 3.9 3.7 3.5 3.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 50.3 41.8 37.9 39.3 38.5 37.9 36.4 36.7 36.9
Equity and investment fund shares 1,040.7 1,106.2 1,216.3 1,156.6 1,191.3 1,216.3 1,196.6 1,215.3 1,239.5
Equity 555.9 588.3 640.1 609.4 630.6 640.1 624.5 629.0 643.8
Listed shares of domestic sectors 188.9 200.8 226.4 211.1 223.7 226.4 217.3 214.2 217.2
Non-financial corporations 158.7 169.8 190.3 177.5 188.4 190.3 182.5 180.8 180.8
Financial corporations 30.3 31.0 36.1 33.6 35.4 36.1 34.8 33.4 36.5
Listed shares of the rest of the world 74.8 86.8 101.0 92.7 96.5 101.0 97.7 102.9 111.4
Other equity 1 292.2 300.8 312.7 305.6 310.3 312.7 309.5 311.9 315.2
Investment fund shares 484.8 517.8 576.2 547.2 560.7 576.2 572.1 586.3 595.7
Money market fund shares 3.4 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.6 2.7 2.3 2.3 2.1
Non-MMF investment fund shares 481.4 515.0 573.5 544.4 558.1 573.5 569.8 584.1 593.5
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 324.3 339.9 360.1 348.2 352.3 360.1 364.3 368.6 372.7
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 919.5 947.8 991.4 973.2 981.9 991.4 1,003.8 1,012.4 1,020.3
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 786.6 819.2 850.1 832.1 839.7 850.1 854.2 859.0 863.5
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable 2 37.1 32.6 31.1 32.2 31.7 31.1 31.5 31.8 31.8
Total 5,342.8 5,581.8 5,880.5 5,719.7 5,790.6 5,880.5 5,895.8 5,976.2 6,052.6
Liabilities
Loans 1,606.6 1,654.7 1,711.9 1,680.5 1,699.1 1,711.9 1,722.6 1,737.9 1,758.7
Short-term loans 60.9 56.6 54.4 55.9 54.8 54.4 54.4 54.5 56.3
Long-term loans 1,545.8 1,598.1 1,657.5 1,624.6 1,644.3 1,657.5 1,668.2 1,683.4 1,702.4
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 1,153.8 1,195.8 1,247.4 1,218.3 1,234.7 1,247.4 1,257.4 1,275.0 1,292.9
Consumer loans 191.9 201.8 211.8 207.4 210.6 211.8 212.8 213.4 215.5
Entrepreneurial loans 260.9 257.0 252.7 254.8 253.8 252.7 252.5 249.5 250.4
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,514.9 1,558.3 1,610.0 1,582.3 1,599.2 1,610.0 1,620.9 1,633.7 1,653.5
Loans from other financial institutions 91.8 96.4 101.9 98.3 99.9 101.9 101.8 104.2 105.2
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.1 15.4 16.6 16.4 16.7 16.6 17.6 17.2 17.2
Total 1,621.7 1,670.1 1,728.5 1,697.0 1,715.8 1,728.5 1,740.3 1,755.1 1,775.9
1Includingunlistedshares.2Includingaccumulatedinterest-bearingsurplusshares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
58
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2012 − 0.9 − 16.1 − 5.5 + 2.2 + 18.4 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.7
2013 − 4.0 − 7.4 − 2.5 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.2
2014 + 16.7 + 13.7 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 3.1 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
2015 p + 23.9 + 14.7 + 2.2 + 4.3 + 2.7 + 0.8 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 28.7 + 11.5 + 4.2 + 4.8 + 8.2 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 34.0 + 6.1 + 8.3 + 9.5 + 10.1 + 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
2018 pe + 59.2 + 20.3 + 10.3 + 13.6 + 14.9 + 1.7 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4
2 0 1 6 H1 p + 19.5 + 7.6 + 3.5 + 1.7 + 6.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.4
H2 p + 9.3 + 3.8 + 0.7 + 3.1 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.1
2 0 1 7 H1 p + 19.8 + 1.5 + 5.1 + 6.2 + 7.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.4
H2 p + 14.2 + 4.6 + 3.2 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.2
2 0 1 8 H1 pe + 48.1 + 18.2 + 13.6 + 7.3 + 9.0 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2012 2,202.9 1,387.9 684.1 147.5 1.2 79.9 50.3 24.8 5.3 0.0
2013 2,188.1 1,390.4 663.2 150.5 1.3 77.4 49.2 23.5 5.3 0.0
2014 2,189.6 1,396.5 657.6 152.0 1.4 74.5 47.5 22.4 5.2 0.0
2015 p 2,159.7 1,372.6 654.3 152.4 1.4 70.8 45.0 21.5 5.0 0.0
2016 p 2,143.9 1,366.8 637.5 153.9 1.1 67.9 43.3 20.2 4.9 0.0
2017 p 2,092.8 1,351.3 611.1 148.5 0.8 63.9 41.2 18.6 4.5 0.0
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 2,117.3 1,351.0 627.5 152.5 1.2 66.3 42.3 19.7 4.8 0.0
Q2 p 2,111.1 1,353.6 620.3 152.0 0.9 65.7 42.1 19.3 4.7 0.0
Q3 p 2,104.5 1,353.0 618.3 150.4 0.8 64.8 41.7 19.0 4.6 0.0
Q4 p 2,092.8 1,351.3 611.1 148.5 0.8 63.9 41.2 18.6 4.5 0.0
2 0 1 8 Q1 p 2,070.1 1,338.6 600.6 148.0 1.0 62.7 40.5 18.2 4.5 0.0
Q2 p 2,052.4 1,329.3 596.7 144.4 0.9 61.5 39.8 17.9 4.3 0.0
Q3 p 2,052.6 1,335.4 595.7 139.2 0.8 61.0 39.7 17.7 4.1 0.0
Sources:FederalStatisticalOfficeandBundesbankcalculations.1Thedeficit/surplus thefirsthalfoftheyear.Therefore,the2018half-yearfiguresarenotdirectlycompat-
inaccordancewithESA2010correspondstotheMaastrichtdefinition.Inconnection iblewiththeannualfigures.2QuarterlyGDPratiosarebasedonthenationaloutput
withthepublicationofthe2018annualfigures,norevisedfigureswerereleasedfor of the four preceding quarters.
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees consumption formation Interest Other surplus burden 1
€ billion
2012 1,220.9 624.9 454.3 141.7 1,221.8 645.5 212.3 126.5 61.5 63.1 112.8 − 0.9 1,083.7
2013 1,259.0 651.0 465.0 143.0 1,263.0 666.4 217.8 133.0 60.1 55.5 130.2 − 4.0 1,120.3
2014 1,308.5 673.6 482.0 153.0 1,291.8 691.1 224.4 137.7 60.1 47.0 131.6 + 16.7 1,160.2
2015 p 1,356.5 704.2 500.8 151.5 1,332.6 721.7 229.8 143.8 64.1 42.3 130.9 + 23.9 1,212.0
2016 p 1,415.5 738.7 523.9 152.9 1,386.8 755.2 237.8 150.1 68.2 37.4 138.0 + 28.7 1,269.5
2017 p 1,473.8 772.5 548.6 152.8 1,439.8 784.5 246.7 156.3 72.4 33.8 146.1 + 34.0 1,327.9
2018 pe 1,543.2 807.3 571.9 164.0 1,484.1 808.4 255.9 162.5 78.8 30.8 147.7 + 59.2 1,386.3
As a percentage of GDP
2012 44.3 22.7 16.5 5.1 44.3 23.4 7.7 4.6 2.2 2.3 4.1 − 0.0 39.3
2013 44.5 23.0 16.5 5.1 44.7 23.6 7.7 4.7 2.1 2.0 4.6 − 0.1 39.6
2014 44.5 22.9 16.4 5.2 44.0 23.5 7.6 4.7 2.0 1.6 4.5 + 0.6 39.5
2015 p 44.5 23.1 16.4 5.0 43.7 23.7 7.5 4.7 2.1 1.4 4.3 + 0.8 39.8
2016 p 44.8 23.4 16.6 4.8 43.9 23.9 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.2 4.4 + 0.9 40.2
2017 p 45.0 23.6 16.7 4.7 43.9 23.9 7.5 4.8 2.2 1.0 4.5 + 1.0 40.5
2018 pe 45.5 23.8 16.9 4.8 43.8 23.9 7.6 4.8 2.3 0.9 4.4 + 1.7 40.9
Percentage growth rates
2012 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 0.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 1.8 + 2.0 + 0.2 − 6.5 − 0.3 . + 3.6
2013 + 3.1 + 4.2 + 2.4 + 1.0 + 3.4 + 3.2 + 2.6 + 5.1 − 2.2 − 12.0 + 15.4 . + 3.4
2014 + 3.9 + 3.5 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.3 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 15.4 + 1.1 . + 3.6
2015 p + 3.7 + 4.5 + 3.9 − 0.9 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.5 + 6.6 − 9.9 − 0.6 . + 4.5
2016 p + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 0.9 + 4.1 + 4.6 + 3.5 + 4.4 + 6.5 − 11.7 + 5.5 . + 4.7
2017 p + 4.1 + 4.6 + 4.7 − 0.1 + 3.8 + 3.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 6.2 − 9.5 + 5.9 . + 4.6
2018 pe + 4.7 + 4.5 + 4.3 + 7.4 + 3.1 + 3.0 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 8.8 − 9.1 + 1.1 . + 4.4
Source:FederalStatisticalOffice.*FiguresinaccordancewithESA2010.1Taxesand
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution
Fund.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
59
X. Public finances in Germany
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central, state and local government 1 Social security funds 2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which: 3
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cial
transac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total 4 Taxes tions 5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions 5 surplus enue 6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2012 p 745.0 600.0 14.7 770.2 218.8 285.2 69.9 42.6 25.5 − 25.2 536.2 518.8 +17.4 1,171.1 1,178.8 − 7.8
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 786.7 236.0 292.9 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 5.1 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.3 1,236.7 + 8.6
2015 p 829.5 673.3 10.4 804.1 244.1 302.6 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,300.8 1,273.4 + 27.4
2016 p 862.1 705.8 9.0 843.4 251.3 320.5 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 18.7 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.0 1,329.2 + 25.8
2017 p 900.0 734.5 7.9 872.1 261.6 325.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 27.9 631.3 621.8 + 9.5 1,417.0 1,379.7 + 37.4
2 0 1 6 Q1 p 206.1 169.9 1.4 205.5 60.0 81.2 17.7 8.4 2.2 + 0.6 143.0 146.6 − 3.6 322.2 325.3 − 3.0
Q2 p 216.7 176.6 2.4 194.1 60.7 77.7 5.4 10.4 2.4 + 22.7 148.7 147.0 + 1.7 338.5 314.2 + 24.3
Q3 p 207.1 169.3 2.9 210.9 62.0 79.3 14.5 12.3 2.4 − 3.8 148.3 149.7 − 1.4 328.2 333.4 − 5.2
Q4 p 232.6 189.2 2.1 233.2 68.1 82.6 7.7 17.2 4.8 − 0.6 160.1 152.2 + 7.8 365.3 358.1 + 7.2
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 216.0 180.4 0.9 199.6 62.9 80.3 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 16.4 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 338.0 326.4 + 11.6
Q2 p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.6 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.7 + 13.4
Q3 p 219.6 180.4 3.5 215.9 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 3.8 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 346.1 343.2 + 2.8
Q4 p 243.8 196.3 2.1 244.4 69.8 84.7 6.9 19.2 4.1 − 0.6 168.2 158.0 +10.2 383.4 373.8 + 9.6
2 0 1 8 Q1 p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
Q2 p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
Q3 p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
Source:BundesbankcalculationsbasedonFederalStatisticalOfficedata.1Annualfig- latterareallprovisional.Thequarterlyfiguresforsomeinsurancesectorsareesti-
uresbasedonthecalculationsoftheFederalStatisticalOffice.Bundesbanksupple- mated.3Thedevelopmentofthetypesofexpenditurerecordedhereisinfluencedin
mentaryestimationsforthereportingyearsafter2011thatarenotyetavailable.The partbystatisticalchangeovers.4Includingdiscrepanciesinclearingtransactionsbe-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tweencentral,stateandlocalgovernment.5Ontherevenueside,thiscontainspro-
generalgovernmentsectorasdefinedinthenationalaccountsbutarenotyetin- ceedsbookedasdisposalsofequityinterestsandasloanrepayments.Ontheexpend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank itureside,thiscontainstheacquisitionofequityinterestsandloansgranted.6In-
FMSW.2Theannualfiguresdonottallywiththesumofthequarterlyfigures,asthe cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal Employment Agency.
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
€ billion
Central government State government 2,3 Local government 3
Period Revenue 1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2012 p 312.5 335.3 − 22.8 311.0 316.1 − 5.1 200.0 198.5 + 1.5
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 +11.2
2 0 1 6 Q1 p 81.1 82.2 − 1.1 90.5 88.2 + 2.4 49.0 55.1 − 6.1
Q2 p 87.5 73.6 + 13.8 92.7 88.2 + 4.4 61.1 57.9 + 3.2
Q3 p 85.2 88.6 − 3.5 91.5 90.0 + 1.5 60.7 60.7 + 0.1
Q4 p 90.9 93.9 − 3.0 104.3 104.4 − 0.0 76.3 68.0 + 8.3
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 88.2 82.9 + 5.3 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
Q2 p 81.5 80.0 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
Q3 p 88.6 93.6 − 5.0 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
Q4 p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.7 109.2 − 4.5 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
2 0 1 8 Q1 p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
Q2 p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
Q3 p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1 Any assignedtothegeneralgovernmentsector.Annualfiguresuptoandincluding2011:
amountsoftheBundesbank’sprofitdistributionexceedingthereferencevaluethat excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
wereusedtorepaypartsofthedebtofcentralgovernment’sspecialfundsarenotin- associationsbasedonthecalculationsoftheFederalStatisticalOffice.Forthefollow-
cludedhere.2IncludingthelocalauthoritylevelofthecitystatesBerlin,Bremenand ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations.
Hamburg. 3 Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
60
X. Public finances in Germany
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government 1 government 1 European Union 2 government 3 tax shares 4 budget 5
2012 600,046 518,963 284,801 207,846 26,316 81,184 − 101 28,498
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,368
2018 ... 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 ... ... 26,775
2 0 1 7 Q1 181,506 154,154 85,256 66,704 2,194 17,950 + 9,403 6,606
Q2 177,090 149,915 76,391 66,605 6,918 27,631 − 456 6,825
Q3 180,407 155,250 82,576 66,718 5,957 25,517 − 361 7,467
Q4 195,537 170,139 92,507 71,019 6,613 34,060 − 8,662 6,471
2 0 1 8 Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
Q2 194,715 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 29,064 − 540 6,592
Q3 189,015 161,683 84,952 69,414 7,317 27,579 − 248 7,579
Q4 ... 177,157 92,363 76,459 8,335 ... ... 6,206
2 0 1 7 Dec. . 84,116 47,025 34,852 2,239 . . 2,157
2 0 1 8 Dec. . 86,104 45,080 37,676 3,348 . . 2,069
Sources:FederalMinistryofFinance,FederalStatisticalOfficeandBundesbankcalcu- governmenttaxrevenue.3IncludinglocalgovernmenttaxesinthecitystatesBerlin,
lations. 1 Before deducting or adding supplementary central government grants, BremenandHamburg.Includingrevenuefromoffshorewindfarms.4Differencebe-
regionalisationfunds(localpublictransport),compensationforthetransferofmotor tweenlocalgovernment’sshareinthejointtaxesreceivedbythestategovernment
vehicletaxtocentralgovernmentandconsolidationassistance,whichcentralgovern- cashofficesintheperiodinquestion(seeTableX.6)andtheamountspassedonto
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these localgovernmentinthesameperiod.5Volumeofthepositionsmentionedunder
amountswhicharedeductedfromtaxrevenueintheFederalbudget.2Customs footnote 1.
dutiesandsharesinVATandgrossnationalincomeaccruingtotheEUfromcentral
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes 2 Turnover taxes 5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total 1 Total tax 3 tax tion tax tax 4 Total tax imports fers 6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2012 551,785 231,555 149,065 37,262 16,934 28,294 194,635 142,439 52,196 7,137 99,794 14,201 4,462 32,822
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2 0 1 7 Q1 165,352 76,990 45,309 17,009 8,511 6,161 57,502 44,196 13,306 438 23,364 5,834 1,224 11,198
Q2 161,036 78,178 48,256 14,825 7,872 7,225 54,243 39,885 14,358 2,059 19,868 5,407 1,281 11,121
Q3 165,923 75,218 47,253 12,720 6,034 9,211 56,481 42,571 13,911 2,214 25,114 5,580 1,315 10,673
Q4 182,288 82,077 54,707 14,873 6,843 5,654 58,128 43,846 14,282 3,868 31,587 5,384 1,243 12,149
2 0 1 8 Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912
Q3 173,202 78,105 50,368 12,683 7,192 7,862 59,169 43,951 15,218 2,315 26,424 5,797 1,391 11,519
Q4 190,161 86,001 58,409 15,204 7,513 4,876 60,581 44,994 15,587 4,257 31,936 6,109 1,276 13,004
2 0 1 7 Dec. 90,693 51,866 24,744 15,455 8,623 3,044 19,159 14,174 4,986 1,852 15,569 1,825 422 6,577
2 0 1 8 Dec. 92,977 52,112 26,024 15,827 7,845 2,416 20,890 15,669 5,221 2,054 15,459 2,044 417 6,873
Source:FederalMinistryofFinanceandBundesbankcalculations.1Thistotal,unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
thatinTableX.5,doesnotincludethereceiptsfromtheequalisationofburdens plans. 4 Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies,localbusinesstax(lesslocalbusinesstaxtransferstocentralandstategovern- taxesonearnings.5Theallocationofrevenuetocentral,stateandlocalgovern-
ment),realpropertytaxesandotherlocalgovernmenttaxes,orthebalanceofun- ment,whichisadjustedatmoreregularintervals,isregulatedinSection1oftheRev-
transferred tax shares. 2 Respective percentage share of central, state and local enueAdjustmentAct.Respectivepercentageshareofcentral,stateandlocalgovern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2018: 49.6:47.2:3.2. The EU share is deducted from central
ationtaxandnon-assessedtaxesonearnings50:50:-,finalwithholdingtaxoninter- government’sshare.6Respectivepercentageshareofcentralandstategovernment
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3 After for 2018: 22.7:77.3. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
61
X. Public finances in Germany
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes
€ million
Central government taxes 1 State government taxes 1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax 2 taxes
2012 39,305 13,624 14,143 11,138 8,443 6,973 2,121 4,047 7,389 4,305 1,432 1,076 55,398 42,345 12,017
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,377
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,654
2017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 −4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,966
2018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 ... ... ...
2 0 1 7 Q1 4,812 4,324 2,637 6,178 2,536 1,746 578 553 3,359 1,641 490 343 16,593 12,905 3,228
Q2 10,091 4,809 3,634 2,353 2,374 1,784 476 −5,652 3,129 1,538 474 265 18,113 13,881 3,832
Q3 10,497 4,144 3,867 2,669 2,132 1,628 502 −324 3,394 1,497 417 273 16,698 12,443 3,824
Q4 15,622 4,677 4,261 2,070 1,906 1,786 538 727 3,257 1,438 456 233 17,118 13,670 3,082
2 0 1 8 Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 18,827 14,548 3,853
Q3 10,423 4,353 3,886 2,752 2,128 1,677 531 674 3,592 1,463 464 278 18,128 13,764 3,919
Q4 15,436 4,860 4,543 2,197 1,956 1,650 545 749 3,645 1,752 481 231 ... ... ...
2 0 1 7 Dec. 8,514 2,851 1,874 659 565 655 192 260 1,080 502 149 93 . . .
2 0 1 8 Dec. 8,513 2,882 1,866 651 540 521 218 267 1,162 657 149 77 . . .
Sources:FederalMinistryofFinance,FederalStatisticalOfficeandBundesbankcalcu-
lations.1Forthesumtotal,seeTableX.6.2Includingrevenuefromoffshorewind
farms.
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
€ million
Revenue 1,2 Expenditure 1,2 Assets 1,4
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:
central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions 3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits 5 Securities loans 6 estate assets
2012 259,700 181,262 77,193 254,604 216,450 15,283 + 5,096 30,481 28,519 1,756 104 102 4,315
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,250
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,147
2017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,032
2018 p 311,975 221,558 89,699 307,944 263,687 18,582 + 4,031 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2 0 1 6 Q1 68,182 47,397 20,665 70,076 60,143 4,239 − 1,894 33,865 31,194 2,406 179 86 4,223
Q2 71,291 50,372 20,548 70,418 60,097 4,238 + 873 34,427 31,892 2,265 183 87 4,220
Q3 70,218 49,333 20,670 73,782 63,081 4,453 − 3,564 31,412 28,776 2,365 187 84 4,213
Q4 76,136 55,171 20,733 74,016 63,117 4,450 + 2,120 34,088 31,529 2,315 192 53 4,161
2 0 1 7 Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136
Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115
Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2 0 1 8 Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033
Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019
Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
Sources:FederalMinistryofLabourandSocialAffairsandGermanpensioninsurance sequently.2Includingfinancialcompensationpayments.Excludinginvestmentspend-
scheme.*ExcludingtheGermanpensioninsuranceschemeforthemining,railway ingandproceeds.3Includingcontributionsforrecipientsofgovernmentcashbene-
andmaritimeindustries.1Thefinalannualfiguresgenerallydifferfromthetotalof fits.4Largelycorrespondstothesustainabilityreserves.Endofyearorquarter.5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
62
X. Public finances in Germany
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total 1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit 2 benefits 3 promotion 4 payment 5 payment iture 6 surplus ment
2012 37,429 26,570 314 7,238 34,842 13,823 828 6,699 3,822 982 5,117 + 2,587 −
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −
2 0 1 6 Q1 8,376 7,271 261 − 7,984 4,083 395 1,739 . 150 984 + 393 −
Q2 8,991 7,737 278 − 7,807 3,648 203 1,847 . 147 1,288 + 1,184 −
Q3 8,877 7,609 276 − 7,349 3,428 74 1,608 . 165 1,399 + 1,529 −
Q4 10,108 8,569 299 − 7,750 3,276 77 1,841 . 134 1,642 + 2,358 −
2 0 1 7 Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −
Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −
Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2 0 1 8 Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −
Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −
Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
Source:FederalEmploymentAgency.*Includingtransferstothecivilservants’pen- encouragejobtake-up,rehabilitation,compensationtop-uppaymentsandpromo-
sion fund. 1 Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2 Un- tion of business start-ups. 5 Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3 Including seasonal short-time amount.6Includingcollectionchargestoothersocialsecurityfunds,excludingad-
workingbenefitsandrestructuringshort-timeworkingbenefits,restructuringmea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers.
suresandrefundsofsocialsecuritycontributions.4Vocationaltraining,measuresto
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1
of which: of which:
Central Thera- Adminis-
govern- peutical trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental treatment Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions 2 funds 3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment 4 and aids benefits iture 5 surplus
2012 193,314 176,388 14,000 184,289 60,157 29,156 29,682 11,749 11,477 9,171 9,711 + 9,025
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,041
2 0 1 6 Q1 53,320 49,292 3,500 55,424 18,044 8,879 9,374 3,470 3,419 2,955 2,458 − 2,104
Q2 54,988 51,009 3,500 55,603 17,686 9,005 9,362 3,478 3,528 2,963 2,599 − 615
Q3 55,632 51,377 3,500 55,114 17,421 8,929 9,166 3,399 3,585 2,842 2,628 + 517
Q4 59,552 55,146 3,500 56,832 17,342 9,194 9,351 3,526 3,698 2,912 3,291 + 2,720
2 0 1 7 Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298
Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415
Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
2 0 1 8 Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264
Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934
Source:FederalMinistryofHealth.1Thefinalannualfiguresgenerallydifferfrom ment.3Federalgrantandliquidityassistance.4Includingdentures.5Net,i.e.after
thetotalofthereportedprovisionalquarterlyfiguresasthelatterarenotrevisedsub- deductingreimbursementsforexpensesforlevyingcontributionsincurredbyother
sequently.Excludingrevenueandexpenditureaspartoftheriskstructurecompen- social security funds.
sationscheme.2Includingcontributionsfromsubsidisedlow-paidpart-timeemploy-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
63
X. Public finances in Germany
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
€ million
Revenue 1 Expenditure 1
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions 2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme 3 expenditure surplus
2012 23,082 22,953 22,988 3,135 9,961 5,073 881 1,083 + 95
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,235
2017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,557
2 0 1 6 Q1 7,600 7,578 7,587 941 2,703 1,613 238 389 + 13
Q2 7,918 7,901 7,659 949 2,724 1,665 244 331 + 259
Q3 7,958 7,942 7,810 961 2,746 1,682 247 373 + 147
Q4 8,550 8,535 7,941 975 2,741 1,877 250 322 + 608
2 0 1 7 Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400
Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999
Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
2 0 1 8 Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780
Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,202 3,251 2,781 515 397 − 1,079
Source:FederalMinistryofHealth.*Includingtransferstothelong-termcareprovi- includingspecialcontributionsforchildlesspersons(0.25%ofincomesubjecttoinsur-
dentfund.1Thefinalannualfiguresgenerallydifferfromthetotalofthereported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers.
provisionalquarterlyfiguresasthelatterarenotrevisedsubsequently.2Since2005
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
market
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing 1 of which: of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Other
market market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross 2 Net loans deposits 3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs pe porations pe creditors 1 creditors pe
2012 + 263,334 + 31,728 + 6,183 + 13,375 2012 2,202,864 12,126 630,053 199,132 60,157 1,301,397
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,188,128 12,438 637,529 190,555 43,994 1,303,612
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,189,569 12,774 608,040 190,130 44,949 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,159,746 85,952 595,457 186,661 45,028 1,246,649
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,143,904 205,391 572,779 179,755 41,737 1,144,242
2017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 p 2,092,781 319,159 521,035 175,617 41,039 1,035,932
2018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670
2 0 1 6 Q1 + 61,598 + 10,650 + 8,501 − 19,345 2 0 1 6 Q1 2,168,305 108,746 610,257 183,160 41,396 1,224,746
Q2 + 60,691 + 4,204 + 3,694 + 4,084 Q2 2,171,800 142,139 598,990 181,372 39,602 1,209,695
Q3 + 33,307 − 13,887 − 18,398 − 4,864 Q3 2,165,378 172,567 585,591 179,359 38,912 1,188,949
Q4 + 26,890 − 12,297 + 3,872 + 3,333 Q4 2,143,904 205,391 572,779 179,755 41,737 1,144,242
2 0 1 7 Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2 0 1 7 Q1 p 2,117,281 239,495 558,767 178,219 39,561 1,101,238
Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289 Q2 p 2,111,075 265,130 545,118 176,514 39,305 1,085,010
Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941 Q3 p 2,104,519 290,214 532,727 176,646 39,474 1,065,459
Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95 Q4 p 2,092,781 319,159 521,035 175,617 41,039 1,035,932
2 0 1 8 Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2 0 1 8 Q1 p 2,070,073 329,387 502,264 176,495 38,501 1,023,425
Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139 Q2 p 2,052,381 344,279 483,621 179,856 37,816 1,006,808
Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871 Q3 p 2,052,583 356,899 471,975 180,464 38,033 1,005,211
Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971
Source: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical
1 Including the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund, the In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual.
vestment and Repayment Fund and the Restructuring Fund
for Credit Institutions. 2 After deducting repurchases. 3 Ex-
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes-
bank.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
64
X. Public finances in Germany
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other government
or quarter) Total and deposits 1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2012 2,202,864 9,742 106,945 1,441,406 124,399 520,372 . .
2013 2,188,128 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 100,363 520,638 . .
2014 2,189,569 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,770 507,536 . .
2015 2,159,746 14,303 65,676 1,499,098 85,041 495,627 . .
2 0 1 6 Q1 2,168,305 11,976 69,372 1,491,129 104,405 491,423 . .
Q2 2,171,800 12,181 76,710 1,485,041 111,114 486,754 . .
Q3 2,165,378 15,370 77,249 1,491,971 98,096 482,692 . .
Q4 2,143,904 15,845 69,715 1,484,378 91,352 482,615 . .
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 2,117,281 12,891 60,798 1,479,234 88,577 475,781 . .
Q2 p 2,111,075 15,196 54,362 1,486,948 83,379 471,191 . .
Q3 p 2,104,519 16,161 48,197 1,489,630 82,589 467,943 . .
Q4 p 2,092,781 14,651 48,789 1,484,691 83,476 461,175 . .
2 0 1 8 Q1 p 2,070,073 12,540 48,449 1,479,750 71,250 458,084 . .
Q2 p 2,052,381 12,773 54,968 1,466,057 67,160 451,423 . .
Q3 p 2,052,583 15,811 60,047 1,466,370 64,682 445,672 . .
Central government
2012 1,387,857 9,742 88,372 1,088,796 88,311 112,636 1,465 11,354
2013 1,390,440 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,970 122,852 2,696 10,303
2014 1,396,496 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,756 1,202 12,833
2015 1,372,604 14,303 49,512 1,139,039 45,256 124,494 2,932 13,577
2 0 1 6 Q1 1,382,473 11,976 49,030 1,138,051 58,381 125,035 2,853 10,025
Q2 1,391,131 12,181 59,399 1,129,874 65,168 124,508 2,803 11,367
Q3 1,381,054 15,370 61,408 1,134,326 46,832 123,117 2,634 9,042
Q4 1,366,840 15,845 55,208 1,124,445 50,004 121,338 2,238 8,478
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 1,350,988 12,891 45,510 1,124,430 48,082 120,075 2,465 7,469
Q2 p 1,353,600 15,196 40,225 1,132,686 44,682 120,811 2,547 8,136
Q3 p 1,352,975 16,161 34,216 1,136,873 45,235 120,490 2,674 10,160
Q4 p 1,351,290 14,651 36,297 1,132,542 47,758 120,041 2,935 10,603
2 0 1 8 Q1 p 1,338,592 12,540 35,921 1,133,358 37,206 119,567 2,953 9,864
Q2 p 1,329,322 12,773 42,883 1,120,469 34,069 119,128 2,685 10,645
Q3 p 1,335,436 15,811 46,608 1,119,011 35,617 118,389 2,492 10,187
State government
2012 684,123 − 18,802 355,756 12,314 297,252 13,197 2,968
2013 663,225 − 6,847 360,706 11,573 284,099 12,141 2,655
2014 657,633 − 8,391 361,916 19,003 268,323 14,825 2,297
2015 654,287 − 16,169 362,376 18,510 257,232 15,867 4,218
2 0 1 6 Q1 647,567 − 20,347 355,304 21,563 250,352 12,358 4,230
Q2 644,144 − 17,318 357,069 23,456 246,301 13,860 4,061
Q3 644,655 − 15,848 359,618 26,149 243,040 11,685 3,871
Q4 637,471 − 14,515 361,996 16,054 244,907 11,408 3,376
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 627,512 − 15,308 356,832 15,301 240,071 10,407 3,527
Q2 p 620,263 − 14,167 356,647 14,516 234,933 11,180 3,578
Q3 p 618,271 − 14,021 355,342 16,095 232,813 13,313 3,581
Q4 p 611,072 − 12,543 354,941 15,753 227,836 14,325 3,609
2 0 1 8 Q1 p 600,563 − 12,583 349,945 14,094 223,941 13,307 3,740
Q2 p 596,743 − 12,144 349,086 14,434 221,079 14,388 3,777
Q3 p 595,662 − 13,499 350,782 11,894 219,487 13,968 3,666
Local government
2012 147,499 − − 423 24,801 122,275 3,124 802
2013 150,536 − − 646 25,441 124,449 2,523 530
2014 151,995 − − 1,297 26,126 124,572 1,959 734
2015 152,386 − − 2,047 27,004 123,335 2,143 463
2 0 1 6 Q1 154,614 − − 2,076 26,916 125,622 2,348 476
Q2 154,257 − − 2,453 26,476 125,328 2,216 503
Q3 155,086 − − 2,455 26,794 125,838 2,123 527
Q4 153,914 − − 2,404 26,529 124,982 1,819 566
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 152,462 − − 2,645 25,566 124,251 1,959 610
Q2 p 151,995 − − 2,672 25,376 123,947 1,950 644
Q3 p 150,360 − − 2,687 24,589 123,083 1,851 664
Q4 p 148,487 − − 2,947 24,101 121,439 1,600 714
2 0 1 8 Q1 p 147,967 − − 2,427 22,905 122,635 1,765 719
Q2 p 144,419 − − 2,561 22,570 119,287 1,913 724
Q3 p 139,203 − − 2,703 20,617 115,883 2,049 757
For footnotes see end of table.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
65
X. Public finances in Germany
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:2
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other government
or quarter) Total and deposits 1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2012 1,171 − − − 195 976 − 2,661
2013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,872
2014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,122
2015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,685
2 0 1 6 Q1 1,211 − − − 458 753 − 2,828
Q2 1,147 − − − 443 704 − 2,948
Q3 1,025 − − − 334 691 − 3,002
Q4 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,226
Q2 p 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,318
Q3 p 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,433
Q4 p 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2 0 1 8 Q1 p 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,702
Q2 p 883 − − − 383 500 − 3,840
Q3 p 790 − − − 400 390 − 3,900
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-visothergovernmentsubsectorsalsocomprisesecuritiesholdingspurchasedon
andtheFederalRepublicofGermany−FinanceAgency.1Particularlyliabilitiesresult- themarket.Noentryforgeneralgovernmentasdebtandclaimsareconsolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2 Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors.
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
€ million
Currency and deposits 2 Debt securities
of which: 3 of which: 3
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal of inflation- Treasury discount Federal
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savings
or quarter) Total 1 Total 1 day bond Total 1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds) 4 (Bobls) 4 securities (Schätze) 5 (Bubills) 6 notes Loans 1
2007 984,256 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,997
2008 1,016,364 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 75,144
2009 1,082,644 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,592
2010 1,334,021 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 239,112
2011 1,344,082 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 212,322
2012 1,387,857 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,947
2013 1,390,440 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,822
2014 1,396,496 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 178,144
2015 1,372,604 14,303 1,070 1,188,551 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,750
2016 1,366,840 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,342
2017 p 1,351,290 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,800
2 0 1 6 Q1 1,382,473 11,976 1,051 1,187,081 666,565 225,678 61,893 14,603 4,395 98,232 20,526 1,205 183,416
Q2 1,391,131 12,181 1,033 1,189,273 675,794 220,840 49,675 14,550 3,099 99,417 28,369 1,108 189,676
Q3 1,381,054 15,370 1,021 1,195,734 664,034 231,375 50,869 14,570 3,097 102,053 30,626 922 169,949
Q4 1,366,840 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 171,342
2 0 1 7 Q1 p 1,350,988 12,891 995 1,169,939 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 168,158
Q2 p 1,353,600 15,196 986 1,172,911 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,493
Q3 p 1,352,975 16,161 977 1,171,089 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,726
Q4 p 1,351,290 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,800
2 0 1 8 Q1 p 1,338,592 12,540 951 1,169,279 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,773
Q2 p 1,329,322 12,773 941 1,163,353 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,196
Q3 p 1,335,436 15,811 932 1,165,619 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,006
Sources:FederalRepublicofGermany−FinanceAgency,FederalStatisticalOffice, 2010.2Particularlyliabilitiesresultingfromcoinsincirculation.3Issuancesbythe
and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Comprises all of central government, i.e. all FederalRepublicofGermany.Excludingissuers’holdingsofownsecuritiesbutin-
off-budgetentitiesinadditiontothecorebudget,includingthegovernment-owned cludingthoseheldbyothergovernmententities.4Excludinginflation-inducedindex-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5 Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
66
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
2017 2018
2016 2017 2018 2016 2017 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
Item Index 2010 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 118.0 120.8 122.0 4.8 2.4 1.0 4.2 − 0.6 2.6 3.5 1.7 3.4 0.1
Construction 105.5 108.0 112.0 1.8 2.4 3.6 6.0 0.3 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.9 4.2
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and restaurant
services 110.6 114.3 116.7 1.3 3.4 2.1 5.1 2.2 3.5 2.8 2.2 2.5 1.2
Information and communication 132.9 137.6 142.7 3.4 3.6 3.7 4.4 3.2 3.4 3.4 3.6 3.9 3.1
Financial and insurance
activities 104.5 105.0 105.6 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.5 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.3 1.2
Real estate activities 104.5 105.6 106.8 0.0 1.1 1.1 1.4 0.4 1.3 1.4 1.0 1.0 0.7
Business services 1 109.5 112.3 114.2 1.0 2.6 1.7 4.2 0.9 2.9 2.3 1.5 2.7 1.3
Public services, education and
health 108.2 109.7 111.0 2.6 1.4 1.2 2.2 1.2 1.4 0.8 1.2 1.2 0.9
Other services 98.9 100.1 100.6 − 1.1 1.2 0.5 2.7 0.1 1.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.9 0.1
Gross value added 111.1 113.5 115.2 2.2 2.2 1.5 3.5 0.7 2.3 2.3 1.5 2.4 1.0
Gross domestic product 2 111.3 113.7 115.3 2.2 2.2 1.5 3.4 0.9 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.3 1.1
II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 108.4 110.3 111.3 2.1 1.8 1.0 2.1 1.8 2.1 1.1 1.6 1.0 0.5
Government consumption 112.3 114.1 115.3 4.0 1.6 1.1 1.7 1.4 1.5 1.7 0.6 1.1 0.9
Machinery and equipment 113.8 118.0 123.3 2.2 3.7 4.5 4.2 1.7 4.1 4.7 4.5 5.0 3.7
Premises 112.3 115.6 119.1 3.8 2.9 3.0 5.8 1.6 3.0 1.8 1.4 3.5 3.3
Other investment 4 124.7 126.3 126.8 5.2 1.3 0.4 2.2 1.2 0.4 1.5 0.4 0.4 0.4
Changes in inventories 5,6 . . . 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.0 0.3 0.1 − 0.1 0.0 0.3 1.0
Domestic demand 109.5 111.7 113.8 3.0 2.0 1.8 2.4 2.0 2.2 1.5 1.5 1.9 2.2
Net exports 6 . . . − 0.5 0.3 − 0.2 1.1 − 0.9 0.1 0.8 0.0 0.6 − 1.0
Exports 127.8 133.7 136.9 2.3 4.6 2.4 7.3 1.8 4.9 4.7 2.1 4.3 1.1
Imports 125.5 131.6 136.0 4.1 4.8 3.4 5.7 4.5 5.5 3.7 2.6 3.7 3.8
Gross domestic product 2 111.3 113.7 115.3 2.2 2.2 1.5 3.4 0.9 2.2 2.2 1.4 2.3 1.1
At current prices (€ billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption 3 1,675.6 1,732.2 1,777.5 2.7 3.4 2.6 3.9 3.4 3.6 2.7 3.0 2.6 2.1
Government consumption 615.5 638.9 663.1 4.8 3.8 3.8 3.4 3.4 3.9 4.4 3.1 3.8 3.6
Machinery and equipment 206.5 215.2 226.0 2.6 4.2 5.0 4.4 2.1 4.5 5.7 5.2 5.9 4.4
Premises 307.1 326.6 352.6 5.6 6.4 7.9 8.7 4.8 6.5 5.8 5.7 8.1 8.7
Other investment 4 120.4 123.9 127.1 6.0 2.9 2.6 3.5 2.8 2.1 3.1 2.6 2.6 2.6
Changes in inventories 5 − 12.8 − 7.2 8.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 2,912.3 3,029.5 3,154.5 3.8 4.0 4.1 4.2 4.0 4.3 3.6 3.4 4.1 4.8
Net exports 247.5 247.8 233.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,450.2 1,541.9 1,595.6 1.5 6.3 3.5 9.0 3.9 6.5 6.0 2.6 4.9 2.8
Imports 1,202.8 1,294.1 1,361.9 1.5 7.6 5.2 9.9 8.0 7.2 5.5 2.9 4.8 7.1
Gross domestic product 2 3,159.8 3,277.3 3,388.2 3.6 3.7 3.4 4.3 2.5 4.2 4.0 3.2 4.2 3.0
IV. Prices (2010 = 100)
Private consumption 106.9 108.6 110.4 0.7 1.6 1.6 1.8 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.4 1.6 1.6
Gross domestic product 110.1 111.8 113.9 1.4 1.5 1.9 0.9 1.6 2.0 1.8 1.8 1.8 1.9
Terms of trade 103.9 102.8 102.1 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.5 0.2 − 0.5 − 1.4
V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,601.0 1,668.8 1,746.5 3.8 4.2 4.7 4.2 4.4 4.3 4.1 4.5 4.6 4.8
Entrepreneurial and property
income 762.7 787.6 785.6 3.5 3.3 − 0.3 5.4 − 1.5 5.4 3.3 0.0 3.4 − 2.1
National income 2,363.7 2,456.4 2,532.1 3.7 3.9 3.1 4.6 2.5 4.7 3.9 2.9 4.2 2.4
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,222.4 3,346.3 3,460.4 3.5 3.8 3.4 4.4 2.8 4.3 3.8 3.1 4.3 3.0
Source:FederalStatisticalOffice;figurescomputedinNovember2018.Initialannual inghouseholds.4Intellectualpropertyrights(interalia,computersoftwareandenter-
resultsfor2018:figurescomputedinJanuary2019.1Professional,scientific,techni- tainment,literaryorartisticoriginals)andcultivatedassets.5Includingnetincrease
cal,administrationandsupportserviceactivities.2Grossvalueaddedplustaxeson in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP.
products(nettedwithsubsidiesonproducts).3Includingnon-profitinstitutionsserv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
67
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector*
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture of
facture of computers,
basic metals electronic Motor
and and optical vehicles,
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailers
sector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and electrical and and semi-
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015 = 100
% of total 1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.60 29.44 36.96 2.28 10.92 10.27 9.95 12.73 14.14
Period
2015 99.7 99.6 100.1 99.7 99.8 99.7 99.6 99.8 99.8 99.7 99.7 99.6
2016 101.5 105.3 98.7 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.6 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.1
2017 104.9 108.7 98.8 104.7 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.3
2018 2,x 105.9 109.3 97.0 106.0 105.6 106.0 106.3 107.1 107.4 108.9 106.3 103.7
2 0 1 7 Q4 109.9 122.3 104.6 108.2 104.6 111.3 109.6 107.0 106.7 111.6 115.8 104.8
2 0 1 8 Q1 102.7 87.8 105.1 105.2 106.1 104.3 108.9 104.7 107.3 108.3 100.6 109.5
Q2 107.5 113.6 90.5 107.7 108.0 107.6 105.4 107.4 110.1 107.6 104.9 110.8
Q3 2 106.2 115.5 93.3 105.6 106.8 103.2 104.1 111.4 107.9 110.3 105.1 96.5
Q4 x 107.2 120.5 99.2 105.5 101.5 108.8 106.7 104.8 104.4 109.5 114.8 98.0
2 0 1 7 Dec. 104.3 122.7 106.6 100.9 92.4 108.3 97.1 99.8 93.2 107.9 128.6 83.8
2 0 1 8 Jan. 95.7 75.2 106.0 98.5 102.4 93.8 102.8 102.8 101.5 102.0 87.9 99.4
Feb. 98.8 83.0 101.6 101.4 102.6 100.7 105.4 99.4 104.9 104.3 97.1 105.3
Mar. 113.6 105.1 107.7 115.6 113.3 118.4 118.4 112.0 115.5 118.7 116.7 123.9
Apr. 105.1 109.6 92.5 105.3 106.0 105.5 103.2 103.0 108.6 104.0 100.3 112.3
May 106.7 114.1 90.2 106.7 108.2 104.8 102.8 109.6 109.4 105.9 101.7 108.2
June 110.6 117.1 88.9 111.1 109.8 112.6 110.3 109.6 112.3 112.9 112.7 112.0
July 2,3 106.9 115.5 93.6 106.5 108.6 104.3 98.4 109.9 109.3 108.9 104.7 100.6
Aug. 3 100.5 111.4 94.9 99.0 102.9 93.0 95.0 110.0 102.9 105.5 98.1 80.4
Sep. 111.2 119.5 91.4 111.4 108.8 112.2 118.9 114.2 111.6 116.6 112.6 108.6
Oct. x 110.0 121.3 97.1 109.1 109.1 108.4 111.9 111.0 111.8 112.2 108.5 104.4
Nov. x 111.4 122.5 99.0 110.4 107.3 113.4 111.7 108.4 111.6 114.6 113.2 108.0
Dec. x,p 100.2 117.7 101.5 97.0 88.1 104.7 96.5 95.1 89.8 101.6 122.6 81.7
Annual percentage change
2015 + 0.9 − 2.3 + 5.1 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.3 − 0.2
2016 + 1.8 + 5.7 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.5
2017 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.1
2018 2,x + 1.0 + 0.6 − 1.8 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 4.0 + 1.1 + 1.8 + 2.1 − 1.5
2 0 1 7 Q4 + 4.7 + 3.3 + 0.3 + 5.3 + 6.2 + 5.4 + 3.1 + 3.3 + 5.8 + 7.4 + 7.2 + 5.7
2 0 1 8 Q1 + 3.9 + 3.5 + 0.7 + 4.2 + 3.8 + 4.3 + 2.6 + 5.3 + 3.9 + 5.9 + 4.9 + 4.3
Q2 + 2.9 + 2.2 − 3.5 + 3.5 + 2.4 + 3.5 − 0.2 + 7.0 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 3.1 + 4.6
Q3 2 − 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 2.0 + 5.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 2.0 − 8.3
Q4 x − 2.5 − 1.5 − 5.2 − 2.5 − 2.9 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 1.9 − 0.9 − 6.4
2 0 1 7 Dec. + 6.3 + 2.9 + 0.7 + 7.7 + 7.9 + 8.7 + 2.1 + 5.1 + 8.1 + 11.5 + 12.1 + 9.1
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 6.1 + 16.4 − 4.6 + 5.8 + 5.0 + 6.0 + 3.8 + 7.3 + 4.9 + 6.4 + 5.6 + 5.4
Feb. + 2.1 − 1.3 + 2.0 + 2.6 + 3.5 + 1.6 + 0.6 + 4.2 + 4.2 + 5.2 + 2.5 − 0.4
Mar. + 3.6 − 0.6 + 5.1 + 4.3 + 3.0 + 5.4 + 3.4 + 4.6 + 2.8 + 6.1 + 6.5 + 7.6
Apr. + 1.8 + 0.3 − 3.1 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 3.7 − 2.4 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 4.9
May + 3.6 + 4.2 − 4.8 + 4.1 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 0.4 + 9.2 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 3.5
June + 3.3 + 2.2 − 2.6 + 3.7 + 2.8 + 3.6 + 2.1 + 7.5 + 2.9 + 3.7 + 3.3 + 5.3
July 2,3 + 0.3 − 3.0 + 2.5 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 3.1 + 5.2 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 2.8 − 3.2
Aug. 3 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 2.0 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 3.5 − 3.3 + 7.1 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 3.4 − 16.0
Sep. − 0.3 + 1.0 − 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 5.4 − 0.8 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 6.5
Oct. x + 0.5 + 0.4 − 5.7 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 2.0 − 1.8 + 2.7 − 0.2 + 2.5 + 5.3 − 3.4
Nov. x − 4.0 − 0.7 − 5.1 − 4.5 − 3.9 − 4.9 − 5.1 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 2.4 − 2.3 − 11.8
Dec. x,p − 3.9 − 4.1 − 4.8 − 3.9 − 4.7 − 3.3 − 0.6 − 4.7 − 3.6 − 5.8 − 4.7 − 2.5
Sourceoftheunadjustedfigures:FederalStatisticalOffice.*Forexplanatorynotes, indexbasedonthe2010weightingschemeisused.3Influencedbyachangein
seeStatisticalSupplement4−Seasonallyadjustedbusinessstatistics,TablesII.10to holidaydates.xProvisional;estimatedandadjustedinadvancebytheFederalStatis-
II.12.oUsingJDemetra+2.2.1(X13).1Shareofgrossvalueaddedatfactorcostof ticalOfficetotheresultsoftheQuarterlyProductionSurveyandtheQuarterlySurvey
theproductionsectorinthebaseyear2015.2FromJuly2018deflatedbyproducer in the specialised construction industry, respectively.
priceindexbasedonthe2015weightingscheme.UntilJune2018theproducerprice

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
68
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2015 =100 change 2015 =100 change 2015 =100 change 2015 =100 change 2015 =100 change 2015 =100 change
Total
2014 97.8 + 2.7 100.6 + 0.6 96.2 + 3.9 96.8 + 4.6 95.8 + 0.6 97.1 + 5.9
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.8
2016 100.8 + 1.0 98.9 − 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.0 − 0.8
2017 108.6 + 7.7 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2018 p 110.0 + 1.3 111.8 + 2.2 109.3 + 0.7 106.9 + 1.1 118.6 + 1.8 103.1 + 0.9
2 0 1 7 Dec. 115.2 + 9.1 103.4 + 14.0 125.2 + 7.2 94.5 + 4.2 108.6 + 12.3 89.8 + 1.2
2 0 1 8 Jan. 110.9 + 9.9 115.7 + 10.5 107.9 + 9.7 111.2 + 8.7 112.6 + 5.2 110.8 + 10.0
Feb. 110.3 + 4.1 110.9 + 2.3 110.1 + 5.9 108.7 − 1.4 112.2 + 3.1 107.6 − 2.8
Mar. 121.6 + 3.8 121.2 + 4.1 122.9 + 3.6 113.6 + 2.9 123.6 − 2.1 110.3 + 4.8
Apr. 108.4 + 1.5 115.9 + 7.2 104.7 − 1.7 101.5 − 0.6 114.1 + 2.5 97.3 − 1.8
May 109.9 + 6.0 114.2 + 7.2 107.6 + 5.2 106.7 + 5.0 121.3 + 10.1 101.8 + 3.0
June 111.5 + 0.7 115.0 + 3.7 110.2 − 1.1 105.2 + 1.2 121.2 + 3.1 99.9 + 0.4
July 106.9 + 1.0 114.7 + 5.3 101.7 − 2.0 109.6 + 1.7 120.3 + 10.5 106.1 − 1.2
Aug. 98.9 − 0.1 103.8 − 1.0 94.8 + 0.7 106.5 − 1.4 116.6 + 1.2 103.2 − 2.3
Sep. 109.3 − 0.9 109.2 + 0.3 109.5 − 2.1 109.1 + 2.0 124.4 − 1.4 104.2 + 3.5
Oct. 111.1 − 1.5 113.8 + 0.3 109.8 − 2.6 109.4 − 0.2 127.7 − 0.2 103.4 − 0.2
Nov. 112.5 − 2.0 111.0 − 6.1 114.2 + 1.0 105.4 − 5.4 122.0 − 5.9 99.9 − 5.2
Dec. p 108.5 − 5.8 95.8 − 7.4 117.9 − 5.8 95.8 + 1.4 106.7 − 1.7 92.2 + 2.7
From the domestic market
2014 98.1 + 1.1 101.7 − 1.1 95.2 + 3.1 97.1 + 2.0 100.4 + 0.0 96.0 + 2.8
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.9 + 2.2 98.0 − 1.8 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.8 101.6 + 3.7 108.6 + 5.3 99.3 + 3.1
2018 p 107.2 + 0.2 108.8 + 1.6 106.6 − 1.1 103.0 + 1.4 113.9 + 4.9 99.3 + 0.0
2 0 1 7 Dec. 101.3 + 1.4 98.4 + 12.7 106.1 − 5.9 86.2 + 0.0 89.0 + 2.5 85.2 − 0.9
2 0 1 8 Jan. 107.8 + 8.8 113.4 + 11.0 104.0 + 7.5 101.8 + 4.0 103.1 + 0.4 101.3 + 5.2
Feb. 105.6 − 3.5 108.1 − 0.9 103.5 − 6.2 105.3 + 0.5 109.5 + 7.1 103.9 − 1.7
Mar. 119.7 + 4.3 119.4 + 5.9 121.6 + 3.1 109.0 + 3.6 122.1 + 5.3 104.6 + 3.0
Apr. 105.0 − 4.5 108.7 + 2.7 103.0 − 11.3 97.9 + 4.9 115.5 + 13.2 91.9 + 1.7
May 106.5 + 5.1 110.2 + 6.3 103.4 + 3.4 106.2 + 10.1 127.6 + 29.3 99.0 + 3.4
June 107.7 − 0.9 111.4 + 5.6 105.4 − 6.6 101.4 + 1.5 113.1 + 5.5 97.5 + 0.1
July 109.8 + 2.4 113.7 + 5.1 107.1 + 0.4 105.4 + 0.5 109.4 + 6.9 104.1 − 1.6
Aug. 98.3 − 2.9 102.3 − 4.4 94.2 − 1.4 103.1 − 3.0 114.7 + 3.4 99.2 − 5.3
Sep. 107.7 + 0.2 107.1 + 1.1 109.1 − 0.3 101.2 − 3.2 116.9 − 3.5 95.9 − 3.0
Oct. 106.4 − 4.1 110.0 − 2.0 103.2 − 6.2 107.6 − 0.9 120.5 − 6.3 103.2 + 1.4
Nov. 112.0 − 0.7 110.6 − 3.1 113.9 + 1.9 107.2 − 3.9 120.9 − 1.7 102.6 − 4.6
Dec. p 100.4 − 0.9 90.5 − 8.0 110.5 + 4.1 89.8 + 4.2 93.5 + 5.1 88.6 + 4.0
From abroad
2014 97.5 + 3.8 99.5 + 2.5 96.7 + 4.2 96.5 + 6.6 92.0 + 1.1 97.9 + 8.3
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.3 + 0.5 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.0 + 7.2 101.1 + 1.3
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.6 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.8 104.4 + 3.3
2018 p 112.1 + 2.1 115.0 + 2.8 110.9 + 1.8 109.9 + 0.9 122.3 − 0.4 105.9 + 1.4
2 0 1 7 Dec. 125.7 + 14.3 108.8 + 15.4 136.7 + 14.6 100.9 + 7.1 124.3 + 18.8 93.3 + 2.8
2 0 1 8 Jan. 113.3 + 10.9 118.2 + 10.1 110.3 + 11.0 118.5 + 12.1 120.2 + 8.8 118.1 + 13.4
Feb. 113.9 + 10.2 113.9 + 5.9 114.1 + 13.9 111.3 − 2.7 114.3 + 0.2 110.4 − 3.6
Mar. 123.1 + 3.4 123.2 + 2.4 123.7 + 3.9 117.2 + 2.4 124.8 − 7.3 114.7 + 6.2
Apr. 111.0 + 6.4 123.7 + 11.9 105.8 + 5.1 104.3 − 4.2 112.9 − 5.0 101.5 − 4.0
May 112.4 + 6.4 118.5 + 8.2 110.2 + 6.3 107.0 + 1.4 116.3 − 2.7 104.0 + 2.9
June 114.4 + 2.0 118.8 + 1.7 113.1 + 2.3 108.2 + 0.9 127.8 + 1.5 101.8 + 0.7
July 104.7 − 0.1 115.8 + 5.7 98.4 − 3.5 112.8 + 2.5 129.0 + 13.0 107.6 − 0.9
Aug. 99.3 + 2.1 105.5 + 2.8 95.1 + 1.9 109.1 − 0.2 118.1 − 0.5 106.2 + 0.0
Sep. 110.6 − 1.7 111.4 − 0.7 109.7 − 3.1 115.3 + 5.8 130.4 + 0.1 110.5 + 8.2
Oct. 114.7 + 0.3 117.9 + 2.6 113.7 − 0.6 110.8 + 0.4 133.5 + 4.8 103.5 − 1.3
Nov. 112.8 − 3.1 111.5 − 9.1 114.4 + 0.4 104.0 − 6.6 122.8 − 9.1 97.9 − 5.6
Dec. p 114.6 − 8.8 101.6 − 6.6 122.4 − 10.5 100.5 − 0.4 117.3 − 5.6 95.0 + 1.8
Sourceoftheunadjustedfigures:FederalStatisticalOffice.*Atcurrentprices;forex-
planatorynotes,seeStatisticalSupplement4−Seasonallyadjustedbusinessstatistics,
Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.1 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
69
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client 1
Building
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector 2
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2014 95.4 − 0.4 95.2 + 0.7 88.5 + 4.4 102.0 − 1.0 91.8 − 3.6 95.6 − 1.7 99.2 − 0.1 95.1 − 3.5
2015 99.9 + 4.7 99.9 + 4.9 99.9 + 12.9 100.0 − 2.0 99.8 + 8.7 99.9 + 4.5 99.9 + 0.7 99.9 + 5.0
2016 114.4 + 14.5 115.0 + 15.1 116.9 + 17.0 114.9 + 14.9 108.9 + 9.1 113.7 + 13.8 111.7 + 11.8 116.0 + 16.1
2017 122.4 + 7.0 123.1 + 7.0 123.1 + 5.3 123.5 + 7.5 121.9 + 11.9 121.7 + 7.0 119.8 + 7.3 125.0 + 7.8
2 0 1 7 Nov. 113.2 + 10.8 118.1 + 13.1 113.7 − 0.4 126.2 + 29.0 102.7 + 6.5 107.4 + 7.7 124.7 + 23.0 99.7 + 4.0
Dec. 133.9 + 26.3 148.9 + 31.7 148.6 + 39.8 157.5 + 27.4 117.8 + 22.7 116.5 + 19.1 142.3 + 23.8 115.4 + 20.7
2 0 1 8 Jan. 99.2 + 8.9 100.7 + 8.2 102.0 + 9.8 103.4 + 5.5 86.7 + 15.3 97.3 + 9.6 105.8 + 4.5 89.9 + 14.5
Feb. 124.1 + 18.3 118.0 + 9.2 112.8 + 6.0 124.7 + 11.3 110.3 + 11.6 131.2 + 29.6 136.3 + 31.2 117.0 + 11.4
Mar. 145.6 + 1.7 140.2 − 0.5 138.6 − 4.9 136.9 + 0.1 157.9 + 12.3 151.8 + 4.3 137.5 + 2.9 159.1 + 4.5
Apr. 135.9 + 1.5 130.7 + 1.2 141.1 + 13.0 125.8 − 7.6 114.4 − 2.4 141.9 + 1.7 127.0 + 0.3 142.8 − 3.4
May 142.8 + 14.9 136.9 + 13.7 130.7 + 7.9 143.0 + 25.8 134.9 − 5.8 149.6 + 16.1 142.8 + 27.4 150.2 + 7.1
June 147.2 + 5.5 141.8 + 0.7 142.6 − 1.0 136.3 + 2.9 159.9 − 1.0 153.5 + 11.2 136.9 + 7.5 161.8 + 7.4
July 142.1 + 7.3 142.0 + 12.5 142.2 + 14.9 143.7 + 11.1 134.8 + 10.0 142.3 + 1.9 144.3 + 13.7 139.6 − 3.0
Aug. 128.7 + 10.5 119.8 + 5.4 125.7 + 13.2 116.6 + 2.6 112.3 − 8.5 139.0 + 16.1 127.4 + 12.9 132.0 + 6.4
Sep. 139.8 + 14.3 143.6 + 17.0 156.0 + 28.8 130.4 + 9.1 152.2 + 8.5 135.4 + 11.2 134.9 + 14.0 135.7 + 6.3
Oct. 131.9 + 15.7 128.5 + 11.7 141.1 + 14.2 122.1 + 15.0 110.7 − 7.7 135.9 + 20.4 134.2 + 23.9 123.6 + 7.7
Nov. 128.9 + 13.9 126.1 + 6.8 139.9 + 23.0 117.6 − 6.8 112.1 + 9.2 132.2 + 23.1 137.2 + 10.0 112.8 + 13.1
Sourceoftheunadjustedfigures:FederalStatisticalOffice.*Atcurrentprices;exclu- version 0.2.8. 1 Excluding housing construction orders. 2 Including road
dingvalueaddedtax;forexplanatorynotes,seeStatisticalSupplement−Seasonally construction.
adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. o Using the Census X-12-ARIMA method,
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order houses
clothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco 1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale 2
At current
prices At 2010 prices 3 At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age age age
Period 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2015 4 100.1 + 3.7 4 100.1 + 3.8 100.1 + 2.9 100.2 + 0.3 100.2 + 1.0 100.2 + 2.7 100.0 + 5.3 4 100.0 + 20.0
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.1 + 2.0 101.7 + 1.6 101.0 + 0.8 99.9 − 0.3 101.5 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.8
2017 5 107.6 + 5.0 105.2 + 3.0 105.6 + 3.8 108.3 + 7.2 106.8 + 6.9 104.0 + 2.5 107.8 + 3.8 120.6 + 9.8
2018 110.4 + 2.6 106.2 + 1.0 109.0 + 3.2 105.6 − 2.5 106.7 − 0.1 103.6 − 0.4 112.1 + 4.0 127.7 + 5.9
2 0 1 7 Dec. 129.3 + 4.1 125.4 + 2.5 125.2 + 4.3 128.0 + 3.2 162.7 + 2.6 113.9 + 3.4 123.3 + 4.8 154.6 + 8.0
2 0 1 8 Jan. 100.4 + 4.3 97.8 + 2.7 99.1 + 4.6 90.1 + 1.3 110.8 − 1.0 90.7 + 5.0 107.9 + 6.4 120.1 + 6.6
Feb. 96.4 + 2.4 93.7 + 1.2 98.1 + 3.9 78.9 − 3.8 93.0 + 1.5 89.6 + 0.0 104.8 + 5.6 108.9 + 2.6
Mar. 110.9 + 1.2 107.0 − 0.2 110.2 + 4.1 100.7 − 9.7 104.3 + 2.3 107.6 − 4.9 113.2 + 3.7 126.7 + 6.0
Apr. 113.0 + 5.7 108.6 + 4.0 112.0 + 3.9 120.5 + 10.2 91.4 − 1.7 114.5 + 4.7 113.0 + 7.6 122.1 + 7.3
May 110.4 + 2.6 105.9 + 0.8 112.0 + 5.1 110.3 − 0.7 90.1 + 0.6 106.7 − 1.1 107.9 + 1.0 119.5 + 4.0
June 109.3 + 3.3 105.1 + 1.2 111.4 + 6.1 106.6 − 3.7 100.4 + 5.1 102.0 − 1.4 109.4 + 3.1 114.4 + 1.9
July 110.1 + 2.4 106.8 + 0.8 110.1 + 2.5 105.1 − 2.5 97.1 − 4.4 103.2 − 1.7 115.3 + 5.5 122.7 + 9.1
Aug. 106.1 + 3.0 102.6 + 1.4 106.9 + 3.1 98.7 − 0.8 97.5 − 0.2 96.7 − 1.4 108.9 + 4.3 115.6 + 4.5
Sep. 107.6 + 1.8 102.8 + 0.0 105.1 + 2.5 109.5 − 7.8 106.7 + 3.5 100.3 + 0.1 109.5 + 3.1 125.8 + 7.4
Oct. 113.9 + 3.3 108.4 + 1.3 110.2 + 4.2 115.8 − 3.2 106.1 − 3.2 109.0 − 0.7 113.8 + 4.4 137.1 + 12.4
Nov. 118.6 + 3.2 113.1 + 1.6 109.1 + 1.0 111.6 − 0.8 128.1 + 3.5 112.8 + 1.3 117.2 + 3.2 163.4 + 7.9
Dec. 6 127.8 − 1.2 122.7 − 2.2 124.2 − 0.8 119.3 − 6.8 155.2 − 4.6 110.3 − 3.2 124.7 + 1.1 155.8 + 0.8
Sourceoftheunadjustedfigures:FederalStatisticalOffice.*Excludingvalueadded integrationofalargeronlineretailsales-basedenterprisethatfoundedabusiness
tax; forexplanatorynotes,seeStatisticalSupplement4−Seasonallyadjustedbusi- establishmentinGermanyinMay2015.5AsofJanuary2017figuresareprovisional,
nessstatistics,TableII.24.oUsingtheCensusX-12-ARIMAmethod,version0.2.8. andparticularlyuncertaininrecentmonthsduetoestimatesformissingreports.6Un-
1Includingstallsandmarkets.2Notinstores,stallsormarkets.3Valuesatcurrent adjusted figures partially estimated by the Federal Statistical Office.
prices deflated with retail price indices at 2010 weights. 4 As of May 2015

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
70
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour mark et *
Employment 1 Employment subject to social contributions 2 Short-time workers 3 Unemployment 4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legal
category
Solely of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary Temporary social Security Unem-
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
Annual Annual sector ment ment butions 2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies, 4,6
Thou- percentage Thou- percentage rate 4,5 thou-
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2014 42,670 +0.8 30,197 +1.6 8,860 20,332 770 5,029 134 49 2,898 933 6.7 490
2015 43,071 +0.9 30,823 +2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,642 +1.3 31,508 +2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 44,269 +1.4 32,234 +2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 113 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 8 44,838 8 +1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,340 802 5.2 796
2 0 1 5 Q4 43,485 +1.2 31,333 +2.3 9,049 21,204 837 4,829 101 46 2,655 775 6.0 604
2 0 1 6 Q1 43,087 +1.4 31,077 +2.4 8,929 21,131 793 4,785 312 50 2,892 932 6.6 610
Q2 43,563 +1.3 31,350 +2.2 8,988 21,298 820 4,823 59 47 2,674 782 6.1 653
Q3 43,842 +1.3 31,593 +2.1 9,056 21,431 858 4,827 46 35 2,651 808 6.0 682
Q4 44,076 +1.4 32,014 +2.2 9,137 21,770 866 4,781 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2 0 1 7 Q1 43,729 +1.5 31,790 +2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734 7 987 6.2 671
Q2 44,195 +1.5 32,064 +2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 5.6 717
Q3 44,479 +1.5 32,324 +2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763
Q4 44,672 +1.4 32,759 +2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 79 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2 0 1 8 Q1 r 44,369 r +1.5 32,563 +2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 179 22 2,525 909 5.7 760
Q2 r 44,782 r +1.3 32,802 +2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 20 11 2,325 760 9 5.1 794
Q3 r 45,020 r +1.2 10 33,038 10 +2.2 10 9,386 10 22,545 10 855 10 4,698 ... 10 23 2,311 784 5.1 828
Q4 8 45,179 8 +1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,200 755 4.9 804
2 0 1 5 Sep. 43,429 +1.1 31,333 +2.2 9,076 21,153 850 4,810 51 39 2,708 799 6.2 600
Oct. 43,517 +1.1 31,368 +2.3 9,068 21,206 846 4,814 61 47 2,649 764 6.0 612
Nov. 43,554 +1.3 31,389 +2.5 9,060 21,247 842 4,846 66 52 2,633 764 6.0 610
Dec. 43,385 +1.3 31,150 +2.5 8,964 21,167 798 4,843 177 39 2,681 798 6.1 591
2 0 1 6 Jan. 42,993 +1.3 30,983 +2.3 8,906 21,073 784 4,774 343 48 2,920 961 6.7 581
Feb. 43,049 +1.4 31,069 +2.4 8,923 21,127 793 4,769 343 50 2,911 947 6.6 614
Mar. 43,218 +1.4 31,209 +2.2 8,954 21,217 804 4,782 252 52 2,845 888 6.5 635
Apr. 43,386 +1.3 31,314 +2.2 8,983 21,279 809 4,806 67 55 2,744 817 6.3 640
May 43,580 +1.3 31,410 +2.3 9,000 21,337 826 4,838 57 45 2,664 774 6.0 655
June 43,724 +1.3 31,443 +2.2 9,010 21,339 846 4,865 54 42 2,614 754 5.9 665
July 43,704 +1.2 31,378 +2.1 9,007 21,273 853 4,863 43 31 2,661 805 6.0 674
Aug. 43,810 +1.3 31,675 +2.2 9,076 21,486 865 4,802 50 38 2,684 830 6.1 685
Sep. 44,011 +1.3 32,007 +2.2 9,157 21,729 869 4,768 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687
Oct. 44,093 +1.3 32,045 +2.2 9,154 21,773 871 4,767 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691
Nov. 44,140 +1.3 32,069 +2.2 9,147 21,807 876 4,794 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681
Dec. 43,994 +1.4 31,848 +2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2 0 1 7 Jan. 43,644 +1.5 31,707 +2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777 7 1,010 6.3 647
Feb. 43,694 +1.5 31,774 +2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
Mar. 43,850 +1.5 31,930 +2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
Apr. 44,024 +1.5 32,013 +2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
May 44,205 +1.4 32,131 +2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 5.6 714
June 44,356 +1.4 32,165 +2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
July 44,375 +1.5 32,128 +2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
Aug. 44,445 +1.4 32,396 +2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765
Sep. 44,618 +1.4 32,732 +2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
Oct. 44,683 +1.3 32,778 +2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
Nov. 44,737 +1.4 32,830 +2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772
Dec. 44,595 +1.4 32,609 +2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 183 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2 0 1 8 Jan. r 44,317 r +1.5 32,504 +2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 256 21 2,570 941 5.8 736
Feb. r 44,340 r +1.5 32,551 +2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 144 20 2,546 927 5.7 764
Mar. r 44,451 r +1.4 32,660 +2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 136 24 2,458 859 5.5 778
Apr. r 44,625 r +1.4 32,782 +2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 20 10 2,384 796 5.3 784
May r 44,812 r +1.4 32,857 +2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 19 9 2,315 751 9 5.1 793
June r 44,910 r +1.2 32,870 +2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 23 14 2,276 735 5.0 805
July r 44,922 r +1.2 32,844 +2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 20 12 2,325 788 5.1 823
Aug. r 44,992 r +1.2 10 33,126 10 +2.3 10 9,410 10 22,607 10 857 10 4,669 ... 10 24 2,351 804 5.2 828
Sep. r 45,145 r +1.2 10 33,419 10 +2.1 10 9,493 10 22,826 10 844 10 4,636 ... 10 32 2,256 759 5.0 834
Oct. r 45,209 r +1.2 10 33,478 10 +2.1 10 9,510 10 22,890 10 829 10 4,629 ... 10 21 2,204 742 4.9 824
Nov. r 45,246 r +1.1 10 33,496 10 +2.0 10 9,505 10 22,926 10 823 10 4,651 ... 10 27 2,186 745 4.8 807
Dec. 8 45,083 8 +1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,210 777 4.9 781
2 0 1 9 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,406 919 5.3 758
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. * Annual and Code(SGBIII).8InitialpreliminaryestimatebytheFederalStatisticalOffice.9From
quarterlyfigures:averages;calculatedbytheBundesbank;deviationsfromtheoffi- May2018calculatedonthebasisofnewlabourforcefigures.10Unadjustedfigures
cialfiguresareduetorounding.1Workplaceconcept;averages.2Monthlyfigures: estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2016 and 2017 the estimated
endofmonth.3Numberwithinagivenmonth.4Mid-monthlevel.5Relativetothe valuesforGermanydeviatedfromthefinaldatabyamaximumof1.1%forem-
totalcivilianlabourforce.6Excludinggovernment-assistedformsofemployment,in- ployeessubjecttosocialcontributions,byamaximumof0.4%forpersonssolelyin
cluding jobs located abroad. 7 From January 2017 persons receiving additional jobsexemptfromsocialcontributions,andbyamaximumof70.0%forcyclically
incomeassistance(unemploymentbenefitandunemploymentbenefitIIatthesame induced short-time work.
time)shallbeassignedtothelegalcategoryoftheThirdBookoftheSocialSecurity

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
71
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which: 1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials 6
prices of
of which: industrial
Memo item: products Index of
Non- Consumer Con- sold on producer
energy price index struction the prices of
industrial Housing (national price domestic agricultural Other raw
Total Food 2 goods Energy 3 Services rents 4 concept) index market 5 products 5 Exports Imports Energy 7 materials 8
Period 2015 = 100 2010 = 100 2015 = 100 2010 = 1002015 = 100
Index level
2014 99.9 98.8 99.2 107.5 98.8 98.8 106.6 98.6 101.9 111.1 99.1 102.9 142.8 108.3
2015 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0 106.9 100.0 100.0 100.0 100.0
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.2 101.2 107.4 101.9 98.4 106.6 99.0 96.7 83.2 98.4
2017 102.1 104.0 102.3 97.5 102.5 102.9 109.3 105.3 101.1 115.2 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.1
2018 104.0 106.7 103.1 102.3 104.0 104.6 111.4 110.2 103.7 9 115.3 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.2
2 0 1 7 Mar. 101.8 103.4 102.6 97.5 102.0 102.4 109.0 100.6 117.6 100.9 101.1 99.7 116.4
Apr. 101.8 103.4 102.7 98.3 101.5 102.6 109.0 100.9 119.9 101.1 101.0 100.4 110.1
May 101.6 103.5 102.7 96.9 101.5 102.8 108.8 104.9 100.8 120.9 100.8 100.0 93.1 104.2
June 101.8 103.6 102.0 96.1 102.5 102.9 109.0 100.8 121.3 100.6 99.0 85.7 100.4
July 102.2 103.8 101.4 95.9 103.8 103.0 109.4 101.0 120.2 100.5 98.6 86.5 102.9
Aug. 102.4 103.8 101.8 96.3 103.8 103.1 109.5 105.7 101.1 121.2 100.3 98.6 90.1 103.3
Sep. 102.4 104.1 102.9 97.5 102.8 103.2 109.6 101.5 116.0 100.5 99.3 96.3 102.8
Oct. 102.3 104.8 103.2 97.4 102.2 103.3 109.6 101.6 114.3 100.6 99.9 101.6 102.7
Nov. 102.6 104.8 103.2 98.7 102.6 103.5 109.9 106.5 101.7 114.8 100.8 100.6 110.3 103.8
Dec. 103.4 105.5 102.8 98.5 104.2 103.6 110.6 101.9 114.4 100.8 100.8 113.7 103.6
2 0 1 8 Jan. 102.4 106.2 101.8 98.9 102.4 103.9 109.8 102.4 9 110.6 101.1 101.4 115.9 105.4
Feb. 102.9 106.2 102.2 98.5 103.3 104.0 110.3 108.3 102.3 110.1 101.0 100.9 108.7 106.0
Mar. 103.3 106.4 103.2 97.9 103.7 104.1 110.7 102.4 111.4 101.1 100.8 109.5 104.9
Apr. 103.2 106.8 103.4 99.5 102.7 104.3 110.7 102.8 110.8 101.3 101.4 116.7 106.1
May 103.8 106.9 103.3 101.9 103.4 104.4 111.2 109.4 103.3 109.7 101.8 102.9 129.9 112.5
June 103.9 106.9 102.9 102.4 103.8 104.5 111.3 103.7 110.4 102.1 103.4 130.5 111.3
July 104.3 106.6 101.9 102.3 105.5 104.7 111.6 103.9 112.5 102.2 103.3 129.9 105.8
Aug. 104.3 106.4 102.5 103.1 105.0 104.8 111.7 111.0 104.2 115.6 102.4 103.3 130.5 105.7
Sep. 104.7 107.1 103.9 105.1 104.2 104.9 112.1 104.7 118.2 102.4 103.7 140.8 102.7
Oct. 104.8 107.1 104.3 106.1 104.0 105.0 112.3 105.0 117.8 102.6 104.7 144.7 105.5
Nov. 104.9 107.0 104.3 108.0 103.9 105.1 112.4 112.0 105.1 118.3 102.5 103.7 123.7 105.2
Dec. 105.2 107.0 103.9 103.5 105.8 105.2 112.5 104.7 118.2 102.1 102.4 111.4 103.2
2 0 1 9 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 112.3 104.4
Annual percentage change
2014 + 0.8 + 1.5 + 0.5 − 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.9 + 1.6 − 1.0 − 8.0 − 0.3 − 2.2 − 10.9 − 7.9
2015 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.8 − 7.0 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 1.9 − 3.8 + 0.9 − 2.8 − 30.0 − 7.7
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 16.8 − 1.6
2017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.3 + 3.1 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 8.1 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 19.7 + 8.8
2018 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 4.7 + 2.6 9 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 25.1 − 0.8
2 0 1 7 Mar. + 1.5 + 2.2 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 0.5 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 3.2 +10.3 + 2.3 + 5.6 + 37.9 + 24.4
Apr. + 2.0 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 5.0 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 3.3 +13.2 + 2.6 + 5.8 + 33.7 + 15.3
May + 1.4 + 2.2 + 1.3 + 2.0 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 1.5 + 3.1 + 2.8 +14.1 + 2.1 + 4.0 + 12.7 + 7.2
June + 1.5 + 2.6 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.4 +14.0 + 1.6 + 2.4 − 2.5 + 1.5
July + 1.5 + 2.5 + 1.4 + 0.8 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 1.7 + 2.4 + 9.3 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 2.5 + 2.7
Aug. + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.4 + 2.6 +13.6 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 7.4 + 4.8
Sep. + 1.8 + 2.9 + 1.4 + 2.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.2 +10.8 + 1.5 + 2.8 + 14.8 + 6.0
Oct. + 1.5 + 3.6 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 2.8 + 5.1 + 1.3 + 2.5 + 5.6 + 2.9
Nov. + 1.8 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.7 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 1.8 + 3.8 + 2.6 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 15.6 − 4.3
Dec. + 1.6 + 2.8 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 6.7 − 9.1
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 1.4 + 2.9 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 2.1 9 − 3.7 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 6.4 − 9.1
Feb. + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 4.2 + 1.8 − 5.2 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.4 − 10.8
Mar. + 1.5 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 1.7 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.8 − 5.3 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 9.8 − 9.9
Apr. + 1.4 + 3.3 + 0.7 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 − 7.6 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 16.2 − 3.6
May + 2.2 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 5.2 + 1.9 + 1.6 + 2.2 + 4.3 + 2.5 − 9.3 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 39.5 + 8.0
June + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 6.6 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 2.9 − 9.0 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 52.3 + 10.9
July + 2.1 + 2.7 + 0.5 + 6.7 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 2.0 + 2.9 − 6.4 + 1.7 + 4.8 + 50.2 + 2.8
Aug. + 1.9 + 2.5 + 0.7 + 7.1 + 1.2 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 4.6 + 2.1 + 4.8 + 44.8 + 2.3
Sep. + 2.2 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 7.8 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 3.2 + 1.9 + 1.9 + 4.4 + 46.2 − 0.1
Oct. + 2.4 + 2.2 + 1.1 + 8.9 + 1.8 + 1.6 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 3.1 + 2.0 + 4.8 + 42.4 + 2.7
Nov. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 1.1 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 2.3 + 5.2 + 3.3 + 3.0 + 1.7 + 3.1 + 12.1 + 1.3
Dec. + 1.7 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 3.3 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.4
2 0 1 9 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 3.1 − 0.9
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on transportfuelsandlubricants.4Netrents.5Excludingvalueaddedtax.6Forthe
datafromtheFederalStatisticalOffice;fortheIndexofWorldMarketPricesofRaw euroarea,ineuro.7Coal,crudeoil(Brent)andnaturalgas.8Food,beveragesandto-
Materials:HWWI.1Deviationsfromtheofficialfiguresareduetorounding.2Inclu- baccoaswellasindustrialrawmaterials.9FromJanuary2018onwardsprovisionalfi-
dingalcoholicbeveragesandtobacco.3Electricity,gasandotherfuelsaswellas gures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
72
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
8. Households’ income *
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries 1 salaries 2 benefits received 3 Mass income 4 Disposable income 5 Saving 6 ratio 7
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- As
age age age age age age percent-
Period € billion change € billion change € billion change € billion change € billion change € billion change age
2010 1,039.0 2.9 702.2 4.4 385.3 1.2 1,087.5 3.2 1,606.4 2.4 160.1 2.5 10.0
2011 1,088.6 4.8 729.4 3.9 380.4 − 1.3 1,109.8 2.0 1,653.7 2.9 158.2 − 1.2 9.6
2012 1,133.0 4.1 756.8 3.8 387.6 1.9 1,144.5 3.1 1,695.6 2.5 157.6 − 0.4 9.3
2013 1,167.4 3.0 778.3 2.8 388.1 0.1 1,166.4 1.9 1,717.2 1.3 153.7 − 2.5 8.9
2014 1,213.0 3.9 807.2 3.7 398.4 2.6 1,205.6 3.4 1,761.3 2.6 167.2 8.8 9.5
2015 1,261.4 4.0 837.2 3.7 416.5 4.5 1,253.7 4.0 1,805.7 2.5 174.8 4.5 9.7
2016 1,311.9 4.0 869.1 3.8 430.5 3.4 1,299.6 3.7 1,857.5 2.9 181.9 4.1 9.8
2017 1,366.6 4.2 902.9 3.9 444.8 3.3 1,347.7 3.7 1,922.0 3.5 189.8 4.3 9.9
2 0 1 7 Q2 333.2 4.2 215.2 3.6 109.9 3.7 325.1 3.6 478.9 3.2 44.9 2.1 9.4
Q3 337.4 4.3 227.7 4.1 111.7 2.6 339.5 3.6 480.0 3.7 39.9 4.2 8.3
Q4 377.6 4.0 249.2 3.7 110.3 2.9 359.5 3.5 485.1 2.9 42.0 6.0 8.7
2 0 1 8 Q1 333.3 4.7 220.3 4.5 115.3 2.1 335.5 3.7 494.6 3.5 67.0 6.3 13.5
Q2 349.2 4.8 225.3 4.7 112.3 2.2 337.7 3.9 493.9 3.1 48.6 8.1 9.8
Q3 354.5 5.0 239.3 5.1 115.1 3.1 354.4 4.4 493.8 2.9 44.3 11.1 9.0
Source:FederalStatisticalOffice;figurescomputedinNovember2018.*Households salariesplusmonetarysocialbenefitsreceived.5Massincomeplusoperatingsurplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1 Residence concept. 2 After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage tax and
contributionstothesocialsecurityfunds.3Socialsecuritybenefitsincashfromthe consumption-relatedtaxes)andothercurrenttransferspaid.Includingtheincreasein
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claimsoncompanypensionfunds.6Includingtheincreaseinclaimsoncompanypen-
pensionpayments(net),privatefundedsocialbenefits,lesssocialcontributionson sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income.
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4 Net wages and
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
Index of negotiated wages 1
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates 2 per employee 3
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change 2010 = 100 change
2011 101.7 1.7 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 101.8 1.8 103.4 3.4
2012 104.4 2.7 104.4 2.6 104.7 2.8 104.7 2.9 106.2 2.7
2013 107.0 2.4 106.9 2.4 107.3 2.5 107.2 2.4 108.4 2.1
2014 110.1 2.9 109.9 2.8 110.1 2.7 110.1 2.7 111.5 2.8
2015 112.6 2.3 112.4 2.2 112.6 2.3 112.7 2.3 114.6 2.8
2016 114.9 2.1 114.7 2.1 115.0 2.1 115.2 2.2 117.3 2.4
2017 117.4 2.1 117.1 2.1 117.5 2.2 117.8 2.3 120.3 2.5
2018 120.6 2.7 120.4 2.8 120.6 2.6 121.0 2.7 . .
2 0 1 7 Q3 120.0 2.1 119.7 2.0 120.1 2.0 118.3 2.1 118.4 2.6
Q4 130.4 1.9 130.1 1.8 130.5 1.8 118.6 2.1 131.4 2.4
2 0 1 8 Q1 111.5 2.2 111.3 2.3 111.4 2.1 119.4 2.2 116.7 2.9
Q2 113.6 3.2 113.4 3.2 113.4 2.9 121.1 2.9 121.3 3.2
Q3 123.2 2.7 123.0 2.7 123.4 2.8 121.6 2.8 122.5 3.4
Q4 134.0 2.8 133.8 2.8 134.0 2.7 122.0 2.8 . .
2 0 1 8 June 113.2 3.0 113.0 3.0 113.3 3.0 121.4 3.1 . .
July 143.1 2.8 142.8 2.9 143.3 2.9 121.5 2.9 . .
Aug. 113.3 2.6 113.1 2.7 113.5 2.7 121.6 2.7 . .
Sep. 113.4 2.6 113.1 2.6 113.5 2.7 121.6 2.7 . .
Oct. 113.5 2.3 113.3 2.4 113.7 2.4 121.8 2.8 . .
Nov. 173.0 3.1 172.7 3.1 172.6 2.8 122.0 2.8 . .
Dec. 115.6 2.8 115.4 2.8 115.8 2.9 122.0 2.9 . .
1Currentdataarenormallyrevisedonaccountofadditionalreports.2Excluding andretirementprovisions).3Source:FederalStatisticalOffice;figurescomputedin
one-offpaymentsandcovenants(capitalformationbenefits,specialpayments,such November 2018.
asannualbonuses,holidaypay,Christmasbonuses(13thmonthlysalarypayment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
73
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
Non- Trade of which:
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash 1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total (€ billion)
2014 2,079.8 1,284.9 431.2 521.0 249.6 794.9 203.1 187.3 132.5 583.2 1,496.6 812.6 427.4 684.0 207.2 175.8
2015 2,226.9 1,395.2 470.9 565.6 273.1 831.7 215.5 190.5 136.1 633.6 1,593.3 861.3 466.2 732.0 222.8 180.3
2016 2,367.8 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.8
2017 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2 0 1 6 H2 2,367.8 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.8
2 0 1 7 H1 2,385.4 1,471.8 502.3 584.2 288.6 913.6 238.2 220.8 149.9 701.7 1,683.6 888.0 498.3 795.7 246.2 194.9
H2 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2 0 1 8 H1 p,3 2,551.8 1,533.0 541.7 602.5 289.8 1,018.8 250.1 236.1 143.3 775.6 1,776.2 909.5 541.0 866.7 254.7 210.2
As a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 61.8 20.7 25.1 12.0 38.2 9.8 9.0 6.4 28.0 72.0 39.1 20.6 32.9 10.0 8.5
2015 100.0 62.7 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.1
2016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.1
2017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2 0 1 6 H2 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.1
2 0 1 7 H1 100.0 61.7 21.1 24.5 12.1 38.3 10.0 9.3 6.3 29.4 70.6 37.2 20.9 33.4 10.3 8.2
H2 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2 0 1 8 H1 p,3 100.0 60.1 21.2 23.6 11.4 39.9 9.8 9.3 5.6 30.4 69.6 35.6 21.2 34.0 10.0 8.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2014 1,656.6 990.2 276.6 412.6 236.0 666.3 185.7 140.3 99.0 451.7 1,204.9 644.6 319.1 560.3 185.7 122.5
2015 1,782.4 1,077.9 304.2 447.3 259.0 704.5 198.8 147.0 104.4 485.3 1,297.1 690.3 354.0 606.8 198.4 127.5
2016 1,910.2 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.9
2017 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.1 698.4 381.6 649.7 215.5 148.4
2 0 1 6 H2 1,910.2 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.9
2 0 1 7 H1 1,923.5 1,138.9 325.3 464.9 273.1 784.6 224.2 171.9 125.5 550.6 1,372.9 709.7 379.4 663.2 224.4 153.2
H2 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.1 698.4 381.6 649.7 215.5 148.4
2 0 1 8 H1 p,3 2,071.9 1,177.0 360.2 460.4 277.5 894.9 232.7 185.5 115.2 604.9 1,467.0 727.9 411.2 739.2 229.5 167.5
As a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 59.8 16.7 24.9 14.3 40.2 11.2 8.5 6.0 27.3 72.7 38.9 19.3 33.8 11.2 7.4
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.5 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.9 34.0 11.1 7.2
2016 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.4
2017 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2 0 1 6 H2 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.4
2 0 1 7 H1 100.0 59.2 16.9 24.2 14.2 40.8 11.7 8.9 6.5 28.6 71.4 36.9 19.7 34.5 11.7 8.0
H2 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2 0 1 8 H1 p,3 100.0 56.8 17.4 22.2 13.4 43.2 11.2 9.0 5.6 29.2 70.8 35.1 19.9 35.7 11.1 8.1
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)
2014 423.2 294.7 154.6 108.4 13.6 128.6 17.4 47.0 33.5 131.5 291.7 168.0 108.3 123.7 21.6 53.4
2015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.7
2016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.9
2017 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2 0 1 6 H2 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.9
2 0 1 7 H1 461.9 332.9 177.0 119.3 15.5 129.0 14.0 48.8 24.5 151.1 310.7 178.3 118.9 132.5 21.8 41.8
H2 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2 0 1 8 H1 p,3 479.8 356.0 181.4 142.1 12.3 123.8 17.4 50.5 28.1 170.7 309.2 181.6 129.8 127.6 25.2 42.7
As a percentage of total assets
2014 100.0 69.6 36.5 25.6 3.2 30.4 4.1 11.1 7.9 31.1 68.9 39.7 25.6 29.2 5.1 12.6
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.3
2017 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2 0 1 6 H2 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.3
2 0 1 7 H1 100.0 72.1 38.3 25.8 3.4 27.9 3.0 10.6 5.3 32.7 67.3 38.6 25.7 28.7 4.7 9.0
H2 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2 0 1 8 H1 p,3 100.0 74.2 37.8 29.6 2.6 25.8 3.6 10.5 5.9 35.6 64.4 37.8 27.1 26.6 5.2 8.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excludinggroupsengagedinrealestateactivities.1Includingcashequivalents.2In-
StockExchangewhichpublishIFRSconsolidatedfinancialstatementsonaquarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. 3 From this point onwards: significant
orhalf-yearlybasisandmakeanoteworthycontributiontovalueaddedinGermany. changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
74
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA 1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution 2 Distribution 2
before depreciation
and amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA 1 ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
Annual Annual change in Annual change in
per- per- per- per- per-
centage centage centage centage centage
Period € billion 3 change 4 € billion 3 change 4 % points 4 % % % € billion 3 change 4 % points 4 % % %
Total
2010 1,320.9 13.3 181.4 30.6 13.7 1.8 6.6 11.4 18.6 98.3 66.7 7.4 2.4 3.2 6.9 12.1
2011 1,414.3 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 −1.0 5.5 11.0 17.4 93.8 −4.1 6.6 −0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 −0.4 5.2 10.2 17.5 95.7 −7.7 6.2 −0.9 1.9 6.1 11.0
2013 1,541.1 −0.6 187.2 −2.8 12.2 −0.3 5.1 10.3 18.5 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 11.1
2014 1,565.7 1.0 198.9 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.4 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,635.4 6.9 196.2 −1.0 12.0 −1.0 6.1 10.6 17.9 91.6 −16.3 5.6 −1.5 1.7 6.6 11.4
2016 1,626.1 −0.4 214.9 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.6 11.4 18.0 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,722.9 5.2 243.9 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.3 33.2 8.3 1.7 2.5 6.7 12.1
2 0 1 3 H2 780.0 −1.1 93.9 −2.0 12.0 −0.1 5.4 10.9 19.2 45.7 25.6 5.9 1.3 1.7 6.3 12.2
2 0 1 4 H1 757.3 −0.9 97.2 4.6 12.8 0.7 4.8 9.6 16.1 57.9 9.4 7.6 0.7 1.0 5.2 10.5
H2 808.8 2.9 101.7 5.3 12.6 0.3 5.4 10.8 19.1 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.7 7.1 12.0
2 0 1 5 H1 815.3 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 −0.4 4.8 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.3 −0.5 1.1 5.9 10.9
H2 831.4 5.1 93.5 −7.6 11.3 −1.5 6.3 11.5 18.5 32.7 −36.6 3.9 −2.5 2.3 7.2 11.7
2 0 1 6 H1 782.7 −1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 6.1 10.5 18.0 65.7 2.8 8.4 0.4 1.7 6.4 11.4
H2 843.4 1.1 103.1 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.8 11.9 19.1 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 2.9 7.5 12.5
2 0 1 7 H1 845.0 6.8 125.9 14.5 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.3 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
H2 881.1 3.7 117.8 14.7 13.4 1.3 6.8 11.9 19.2 63.3 38.4 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.3 12.4
2 0 1 8 H1 p,6 849.5 −0.1 120.7 −2.4 14.2 −0.3 5.1 10.5 18.2 72.9 −5.0 8.6 −0.5 1.6 6.3 12.5
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2010 980.7 15.8 136.2 38.7 13.9 2.3 6.6 11.4 16.3 75.7 72.5 7.7 2.6 3.0 7.3 12.0
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 −1.7 12.1 −1.5 5.5 11.3 16.4 74.1 −4.9 6.9 −1.1 2.1 6.8 11.5
2012 1,173.8 7.7 140.8 5.3 12.0 −0.3 5.4 10.2 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 −0.4 1.8 6.1 9.8
2013 1,179.0 −0.8 138.8 −2.6 11.8 −0.2 4.4 10.3 15.7 74.5 −5.8 6.3 −0.3 1.3 5.8 10.5
2014 1,197.4 1.0 148.1 5.8 12.4 0.6 5.4 9.8 15.5 82.0 9.3 6.9 0.5 1.4 5.9 10.2
2015 1,282.5 7.0 144.0 −2.7 11.2 −1.1 6.1 10.5 16.0 65.2 −20.3 5.1 −1.8 1.8 6.5 10.3
2016 1,267.1 −1.0 156.5 6.0 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.5 16.0 80.6 4.3 6.4 0.3 2.7 6.3 10.4
2017 1,362.9 5.5 181.6 16.8 13.3 1.3 6.7 10.9 15.6 108.0 41.1 7.9 2.0 2.9 6.7 10.4
2 0 1 3 H2 591.8 −1.4 67.1 −0.2 11.3 0.1 4.0 10.5 16.2 31.4 1.7 5.3 0.2 0.6 5.8 11.2
2 0 1 4 H1 584.4 −1.1 74.3 3.8 12.7 0.6 4.7 9.6 15.2 46.3 8.9 7.9 0.7 1.4 5.5 9.7
H2 613.1 3.0 73.8 7.8 12.0 0.5 4.2 9.8 15.9 35.8 9.8 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.3 10.8
2 0 1 5 H1 636.4 8.7 80.1 7.8 12.6 −0.1 5.1 10.1 15.5 48.8 4.8 7.7 −0.3 2.1 6.1 10.0
H2 646.7 5.3 63.9 −13.3 9.9 −2.1 5.3 11.1 15.6 16.4 −52.4 2.5 −3.3 1.8 6.9 10.7
2 0 1 6 H1 611.3 −2.6 84.0 1.3 13.7 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.8 50.7 −6.5 8.3 −0.3 2.9 6.4 10.0
H2 655.9 0.5 72.5 11.9 11.1 1.1 6.1 11.2 16.0 29.9 34.8 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.5
2 0 1 7 H1 678.7 7.2 98.5 18.7 14.5 1.4 5.9 10.1 16.1 64.0 37.5 9.4 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.6
H2 684.9 3.9 83.1 14.7 12.1 1.2 6.6 11.7 16.5 44.0 46.4 6.4 1.9 3.0 7.1 10.8
2 0 1 8 H1 p,6 665.8 −0.2 90.9 −3.7 13.7 −0.5 6.2 10.8 16.7 57.1 −5.6 8.6 −0.5 2.8 6.6 11.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2010 340.2 5.8 45.1 9.0 13.3 0.4 6.0 11.2 19.7 22.6 47.0 6.7 1.8 3.4 6.0 12.8
2011 335.3 1.7 45.9 7.6 13.7 0.8 6.0 10.4 20.7 19.7 −0.7 5.9 −0.1 3.2 6.2 13.8
2012 359.1 2.8 48.0 −3.3 13.4 −0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 −47.2 3.9 −3.0 2.1 5.7 14.2
2013 362.0 −0.1 48.4 −3.4 13.4 −0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 84.4 6.9 3.0 2.4 5.9 12.5
2014 368.3 1.1 50.8 2.2 13.8 0.1 6.2 12.7 22.6 27.3 5.7 7.4 0.3 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.4 52.2 4.8 14.8 −0.2 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 −1.6 7.5 −0.6 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.4 58.4 14.6 16.3 1.8 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 24.7 8.8 1.5 2.5 8.3 15.5
2017 360.0 3.8 62.3 7.7 17.3 0.6 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 10.0 9.5 0.5 2.4 7.2 15.1
2 0 1 3 H2 188.2 0.2 26.7 −6.7 14.2 −1.1 5.6 11.4 21.8 14.3 241.4 7.6 5.2 2.2 7.4 13.5
2 0 1 4 H1 172.9 −0.5 23.0 7.7 13.3 1.0 4.8 9.3 20.4 11.6 11.7 6.7 0.7 1.0 5.1 13.5
H2 195.6 2.5 27.8 −2.2 14.2 −0.7 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 1.5 8.1 −0.1 3.6 8.1 18.0
2 0 1 5 H1 178.9 8.4 22.8 −2.2 12.7 −1.5 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 −15.7 5.8 −1.6 −0.5 4.5 14.2
H2 184.7 4.6 29.7 10.8 16.1 0.9 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.3 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2 0 1 6 H1 171.5 1.2 27.8 27.7 16.2 3.5 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 62.1 8.7 3.3 1.0 6.4 14.9
H2 187.4 3.6 30.6 4.6 16.3 0.2 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.7 8.8 −0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2 0 1 7 H1 166.3 4.8 27.4 −0.2 16.5 −0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 −0.8 8.8 −0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
H2 196.2 2.8 34.7 14.9 17.7 1.9 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.3 20.2 9.8 1.4 3.0 7.8 17.9
2 0 1 8 H1 p,6 183.7 0.4 29.8 3.0 16.2 0.4 4.0 9.7 22.9 15.8 −1.8 8.6 −0.2 −0.9 5.1 15.5
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.
StockExchangewhichpublishIFRSconsolidatedfinancialstatementsonaquarterly 4Adjustedforsubstantialchangesinthebasisofconsolidationoflargegroupsand
orhalf-yearlybasisandmakeanoteworthycontributiontovalueaddedinGermany. in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Supplement 4 −
Excludinggroupsengagedinrealestateactivities.1Earningsbeforeinterest,taxes, Seasonallyadjustedbusinessstatistics.5Includinggroupsinagricultureandforest-
depreciationandamortisation.2Quantiledataarebasedonthegroups’unweighted ry.6Fromthispointonwards:significantchangesinIFRSstandards,impairingcom-
returnonsales.3Annualfiguresdonotalwaysmatchthesumofthetwohalf-year parability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
75
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
€ million
2018
Item 2015 2016 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep. Oct. Nov. p
A. Current account + 308,770 + 346,639 + 363,675 + 80,534 + 82,083 + 90,378 + 28,456 + 30,389 + 23,247
1. Goods
Exports 2,135,337 2,136,518 2,269,381 569,359 590,117 579,579 191,695 212,944 208,863
Imports 1,784,550 1,766,321 1,929,840 496,056 504,941 512,203 170,733 191,721 186,435
Balance + 350,785 + 370,199 + 339,542 + 73,303 + 85,176 + 67,377 + 20,962 + 21,224 + 22,428
2. Services
Receipts 800,971 808,509 863,630 202,669 221,414 238,634 77,539 74,342 73,389
Expenditure 748,527 764,271 761,114 179,475 189,457 200,347 64,316 64,011 66,622
Balance + 52,443 + 44,238 + 102,510 + 23,194 + 31,956 + 38,287 + 13,223 + 10,331 + 6,767
3. Primary income
Receipts 665,060 650,888 679,298 157,938 194,270 169,555 57,675 52,155 54,023
Expenditure 621,692 581,073 615,994 130,844 201,099 149,887 51,280 41,592 45,959
Balance + 43,368 + 69,814 + 63,305 + 27,095 − 6,830 + 19,668 + 6,395 + 10,563 + 8,064
4. Secondary income
Receipts 114,843 108,095 111,776 26,109 31,299 26,946 9,448 8,740 8,483
Expenditure 252,670 245,709 253,461 69,168 59,519 61,901 21,573 20,469 22,495
Balance − 137,827 − 137,612 − 141,686 − 43,058 − 28,218 − 34,954 − 12,124 − 11,729 − 14,012
B. Capital account + 16,566 + 3,132 − 21,333 + 2,614 + 1,728 + 2,297 + 88 + 1,108 + 948
C. Financial account (increase: +) + 267,248 + 344,767 + 419,094 +121,309 + 62,630 + 92,802 + 59,870 + 20,391 + 23,104
1. Direct investment + 142,673 + 177,293 + 124,515 +140,501 + 27,464 + 20,181 + 25,173 + 73,790 − 27,074
By resident units abroad +1,080,356 + 521,802 + 261,966 + 62,653 − 2,223 + 49,096 + 8,398 + 71,041 −102,305
By non-resident units in the euro area + 937,683 + 344,509 + 137,448 − 77,849 − 29,687 + 28,915 − 16,775 − 2,749 − 75,232
2. Portfolio investment + 199,249 + 478,497 + 266,390 − 4,175 + 39,467 + 34,791 − 43,994 − 14,853 − 9,592
By resident units abroad + 401,926 + 387,046 + 640,812 +192,278 − 1,890 + 41,046 − 8,829 − 31,145 − 45,281
Equity and
investment fund shares + 15,478 + 19,987 + 177,740 + 53,364 + 5,436 + 11,613 − 4,045 − 10,862 − 29,037
Long-term debt securities + 378,796 + 359,327 + 396,457 +110,501 + 13,033 + 69,962 + 20,959 − 19,494 − 1,719
Short-term debt securities + 7,654 + 7,733 + 66,616 + 28,412 − 20,357 − 40,530 − 25,743 − 790 − 14,525
By non-resident units in the euro area + 202,678 − 91,447 + 374,421 +196,452 − 41,356 + 6,256 + 35,165 − 16,292 − 35,689
Equity and
investment fund shares + 208,634 + 104,219 + 507,604 +122,820 + 21,484 + 11,087 + 4,519 + 726 − 37,155
Long-term debt securities + 33,199 − 242,180 − 142,739 + 45,390 − 33,506 + 6,558 + 39,077 − 3,345 + 5,149
Short-term debt securities − 39,158 + 46,513 + 9,556 + 28,242 − 29,335 − 11,390 − 8,431 − 13,674 − 3,683
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options + 81,917 + 18,431 + 17,087 + 3,119 + 38,008 + 33,327 + 6,381 + 1,740 + 13,641
4. Other investment − 167,256 − 344,931 + 12,502 − 29,513 − 48,877 + 3,340 + 70,064 − 39,536 + 42,890
Eurosystem − 26,457 − 152,798 − 175,527 + 3,844 − 27,444 + 40,556 − 43,527 + 30,161 − 19,496
General government + 20,154 + 12,380 + 18,894 − 2,049 − 4,050 − 9,479 − 3,580 − 3,294 − 2,789
MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 120,160 − 123,767 + 136,830 − 20,455 − 38,741 − 20,286 +113,546 − 44,925 + 60,394
Enterprises and households − 40,793 − 80,745 + 32,305 − 10,852 + 21,358 − 7,450 + 3,626 − 21,478 + 4,781
5. Reserve assets + 10,664 + 15,480 − 1,400 + 11,376 + 6,567 + 1,164 + 2,246 − 750 + 3,239
D. Net errors and omissions − 58,089 − 5,003 + 76,753 + 38,161 − 21,181 + 129 + 31,327 − 11,106 − 1,091
*Source:ECB,accordingtotheinternationalstandardsoftheInternationalMonetary
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
76
XII. External sector
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million
Current account Financial account
(Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.) 1
of which:
Supple-
mentary Balance of of which: Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items 2 Services 3 Primary income income account 4 Total assets omissions 5
2004 + 101,205 + 153,166 − 6,859 − 38,713 + 16,860 − 30,109 − 119 + 112,834 − 1,470 + 11,748
2005 + 105,730 + 157,010 − 6,068 − 40,600 + 20,905 − 31,585 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 6,960
2006 + 135,959 + 161,447 − 4,205 − 34,641 + 41,453 − 32,300 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 22,511
2007 + 169,636 + 201,989 − 922 − 34,881 + 36,332 − 33,804 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 15,130
2008 + 143,318 + 184,521 − 3,586 − 31,467 + 24,724 − 34,461 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 21,088
2009 + 141,233 + 141,167 − 6,064 − 19,648 + 54,757 − 35,043 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 9,683
2010 + 144,890 + 161,146 − 5,892 − 27,041 + 50,665 − 39,880 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 53,351
2011 + 165,078 + 163,426 − 8,900 − 31,574 + 68,235 − 35,010 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 44,639
2012 + 193,590 + 200,401 − 10,518 − 32,775 + 64,858 − 38,894 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 41,759
2013 + 190,092 + 212,662 − 3,663 − 41,376 + 62,444 − 43,639 − 563 + 225,360 + 838 + 35,831
2014 + 218,965 + 228,185 − 5,741 − 24,485 + 56,549 − 41,283 + 2,936 + 240,116 − 2,564 + 18,215
2015 + 271,403 + 261,135 − 2,565 − 16,910 + 67,222 − 40,044 + 534 + 239,418 − 2,213 − 32,520
2016 + 268,812 + 267,999 − 1,845 − 19,948 + 60,639 − 39,879 + 3,468 + 257,693 + 1,686 − 14,587
2017 + 261,225 + 268,862 + 1,256 − 20,874 + 67,357 − 54,120 − 254 + 279,967 − 1,269 + 18,995
2018 p + 249,101 + 241,955 − 5,589 − 16,687 + 71,105 − 47,273 − 43 + 232,541 + 392 − 16,517
2 0 1 6 Q1 + 66,589 + 63,353 + 566 − 3,042 + 19,599 − 13,320 − 205 + 40,617 + 1,228 − 25,767
Q2 + 69,819 + 76,770 − 54 − 3,707 + 125 − 3,370 + 1,009 + 62,621 + 761 − 8,207
Q3 + 61,051 + 66,795 − 346 − 11,309 + 16,175 − 10,610 + 307 + 59,558 − 261 − 1,801
Q4 + 71,353 + 61,082 − 2,012 − 1,889 + 24,740 − 12,579 + 2,356 + 94,897 − 43 + 21,188
2 0 1 7 Q1 + 68,671 + 67,077 + 2,402 − 2,921 + 21,296 − 16,781 + 616 + 67,316 − 360 − 1,972
Q2 + 54,185 + 67,753 − 187 − 4,785 + 3,058 − 11,841 − 727 + 72,061 + 385 + 18,604
Q3 + 63,967 + 68,874 − 113 − 11,794 + 17,922 − 11,035 + 904 + 54,979 + 152 − 9,892
Q4 + 74,402 + 65,158 − 846 − 1,374 + 25,082 − 14,463 − 1,047 + 85,610 − 1,446 + 12,255
2 0 1 8 Q1 + 71,111 + 64,605 − 1,397 − 630 + 21,620 − 14,483 + 214 + 69,348 + 699 − 1,977
Q2 + 64,343 + 69,552 + 848 − 3,608 + 3,772 − 5,373 + 85 + 69,954 − 374 + 5,526
Q3 + 52,163 + 56,134 + 506 − 11,211 + 19,286 − 12,045 − 1,025 + 48,965 − 493 − 2,174
Q4 p + 61,483 + 51,664 − 5,546 − 1,237 + 26,427 − 15,371 + 683 + 44,273 + 560 − 17,893
2 0 1 6 July + 18,927 + 20,453 + 413 − 3,460 + 5,372 − 3,437 − 103 + 17,363 + 342 − 1,461
Aug. + 17,632 + 20,933 − 435 − 4,807 + 6,016 − 4,510 − 101 + 17,217 + 93 − 314
Sep. + 24,492 + 25,409 − 324 − 3,042 + 4,788 − 2,662 + 511 + 24,977 − 695 − 26
Oct. + 19,777 + 20,598 + 294 − 3,425 + 6,117 − 3,513 − 117 + 28,457 − 145 + 8,797
Nov. + 25,394 + 23,647 − 347 − 255 + 6,949 − 4,948 − 69 + 22,295 + 140 − 3,031
Dec. + 26,182 + 16,837 − 1,959 + 1,790 + 11,675 − 4,119 + 2,541 + 44,145 − 38 + 15,422
2 0 1 7 Jan. + 12,379 + 16,200 + 171 − 979 + 6,851 − 9,693 − 145 + 7,119 − 124 − 5,115
Feb. + 23,381 + 22,690 + 1,022 − 955 + 6,280 − 4,634 + 291 + 14,387 − 216 − 9,285
Mar. + 32,911 + 28,187 + 1,209 − 987 + 8,165 − 2,453 + 470 + 45,810 − 21 + 12,429
Apr. + 16,218 + 19,883 + 21 − 1,181 + 5,852 − 8,336 − 321 + 21,216 − 2 + 5,319
May + 15,352 + 23,194 − 968 − 1,674 − 5,295 − 872 + 85 + 11,773 − 47 − 3,664
June + 22,614 + 24,676 + 760 − 1,930 + 2,501 − 2,632 − 491 + 39,072 + 434 + 16,949
July + 19,015 + 21,320 + 679 − 4,043 + 6,159 − 4,420 + 525 + 14,479 + 463 − 5,062
Aug. + 18,054 + 21,764 − 765 − 5,392 + 5,158 − 3,476 + 174 + 8,062 − 912 − 10,167
Sep. + 26,897 + 25,790 − 27 − 2,359 + 6,605 − 3,139 + 204 + 32,438 + 602 + 5,336
Oct. + 19,522 + 21,065 + 393 − 3,846 + 6,527 − 4,224 − 206 + 15,799 + 1,176 − 3,517
Nov. + 26,432 + 25,333 − 587 − 508 + 6,868 − 5,260 − 536 + 29,624 − 270 + 3,728
Dec. + 28,448 + 18,759 − 652 + 2,980 + 11,687 − 4,979 − 305 + 40,187 − 2,353 + 12,044
2 0 1 8 Jan. + 20,211 + 18,211 − 1,171 − 550 + 7,601 − 5,052 + 489 + 27,562 − 121 + 6,861
Feb. + 21,437 + 20,698 + 351 + 710 + 5,419 − 5,390 + 19 + 19,584 + 583 − 1,872
Mar. + 29,463 + 25,695 − 576 − 791 + 8,600 − 4,041 − 294 + 22,202 + 236 − 6,966
Apr. + 23,792 + 22,990 + 97 − 576 + 4,014 − 2,636 + 357 + 32,072 − 670 + 7,923
May + 13,713 + 21,907 + 195 − 1,003 − 7,293 + 102 + 50 + 17,186 + 83 + 3,423
June + 26,838 + 24,655 + 555 − 2,029 + 7,050 − 2,839 − 321 + 20,697 + 213 − 5,820
July + 14,973 + 18,322 + 1,101 − 4,297 + 5,613 − 4,664 − 203 + 10,516 + 266 − 4,254
Aug. + 15,867 + 18,511 − 88 − 5,508 + 6,595 − 3,731 + 90 + 18,960 − 640 + 3,003
Sep. + 21,324 + 19,301 − 506 − 1,406 + 7,079 − 3,650 − 912 + 19,489 − 119 − 922
Oct. + 18,876 + 20,051 − 586 − 3,648 + 6,845 − 4,372 − 818 + 9,230 + 700 − 8,827
Nov. + 21,617 + 19,468 − 2,214 + 711 + 7,059 − 5,622 − 489 + 4,181 − 124 − 16,947
Dec. p + 20,991 + 12,144 − 2,746 + 1,700 + 12,523 − 5,377 + 1,991 + 30,863 − 17 + 7,882
1Excludingfreightandinsurancecostsofforeigntrade.2Forexample,warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5 Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissionsresultingfromthedifferencebetweenthebalanceonthefinancialaccount
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account.
3 Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4 Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
77
XII. External sector
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
by country and group of countries*
€ million
2018
Group of countries/country 2015 2016 2017 Jan./Dec. p Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. p
All countries 1 Exports 1,193,555 1,203,833 1,278,958 1,317,880 105,381 109,181 117,360 116,403 96,056
Imports 949,245 954,917 1,031,013 1,090,037 87,745 90,975 98,445 96,024 82,127
Balance + 244,310 + 248,916 + 247,946 + 227,843 + 17,636 + 18,206 + 18,915 + 20,378 + 13,929
I.European countries Exports 803,425 818,644 872,427 900,190 69,303 74,386 80,524 78,869 63,343
Imports 653,782 657,753 699,677 745,666 58,178 62,211 66,622 65,929 56,460
Balance + 149,643 + 160,891 + 172,749 + 154,524 + 11,126 + 12,174 + 13,901 + 12,940 + 6,883
1. EU Member States (28) Exports 692,493 705,548 749,850 778,603 59,450 64,809 69,938 68,167 55,160
Imports 543,334 551,344 586,071 623,102 48,531 52,476 55,189 54,786 47,343
Balance + 149,159 + 154,204 + 163,780 + 155,501 + 10,920 + 12,333 + 14,749 + 13,381 + 7,817
Euro area (19) Exports 434,075 441,092 471,213 492,590 36,502 41,077 44,226 42,924 35,331
countries Imports 356,643 358,848 378,700 405,200 31,489 33,974 35,438 35,040 31,432
Balance + 77,432 + 82,244 + 92,513 + 87,390 + 5,012 + 7,102 + 8,787 + 7,884 + 3,899
of which:
Austria Exports 58,217 59,778 62,656 64,788 5,161 5,533 5,956 5,753 4,614
Imports 37,250 38,543 40,686 43,107 3,428 3,638 3,922 3,812 3,105
Balance + 20,967 + 21,235 + 21,970 + 21,681 + 1,733 + 1,895 + 2,034 + 1,941 + 1,509
Belgium and Exports 46,196 46,931 50,071 50,398 3,804 4,080 4,427 4,284 3,619
Luxembourg Imports 40,116 40,960 43,689 49,527 4,081 4,348 3,840 4,357 3,873
Balance + 6,079 + 5,971 + 6,381 + 871 − 277 − 267 + 587 − 73 − 254
France Exports 102,762 101,106 105,687 105,372 7,191 8,925 8,997 9,171 7,901
Imports 66,819 65,651 64,329 65,122 4,664 5,180 5,949 5,655 5,115
Balance + 35,943 + 35,454 + 41,359 + 40,250 + 2,526 + 3,745 + 3,048 + 3,515 + 2,786
Italy Exports 57,987 61,265 65,422 69,968 4,423 5,754 7,129 6,130 4,751
Imports 49,038 51,737 55,342 60,218 4,484 5,163 5,323 5,000 4,123
Balance + 8,949 + 9,528 + 10,080 + 9,750 − 61 + 590 + 1,806 + 1,129 + 628
Netherlands Exports 79,191 78,433 84,661 91,327 7,177 7,381 8,175 8,176 6,761
Imports 87,889 83,142 90,597 98,398 7,903 8,154 8,851 8,506 8,196
Balance − 8,697 − 4,709 − 5,935 − 7,071 − 726 − 773 − 677 − 330 − 1,435
Spain Exports 38,715 40,497 43,067 44,293 3,013 3,516 3,946 3,934 3,198
Imports 26,442 27,870 31,396 32,490 2,200 2,583 2,707 2,755 2,614
Balance + 12,273 + 12,627 + 11,671 + 11,802 + 814 + 934 + 1,240 + 1,179 + 584
Other EU Member Exports 258,417 264,456 278,638 286,014 22,949 23,732 25,712 25,243 19,830
States Imports 186,691 192,496 207,371 217,902 17,042 18,502 19,751 19,746 15,911
Balance + 71,727 + 71,960 + 71,267 + 68,111 + 5,907 + 5,230 + 5,961 + 5,497 + 3,919
of which:
United Exports 89,018 85,939 85,440 82,021 6,342 6,533 7,115 7,053 5,566
Kingdom Imports 38,414 35,654 36,820 36,891 2,614 2,873 3,287 3,265 2,718
Balance + 50,604 + 50,285 + 48,620 + 45,130 + 3,728 + 3,660 + 3,828 + 3,788 + 2,848
2. Other European Exports 110,932 113,096 122,576 121,587 9,853 9,577 10,586 10,702 8,183
countries Imports 110,448 106,409 113,607 122,564 9,647 9,735 11,433 11,143 9,117
Balance + 484 + 6,687 + 8,969 − 977 + 206 − 158 − 848 − 441 − 934
of which:
Switzerland Exports 49,070 50,161 53,913 54,056 4,496 4,459 4,966 4,919 3,633
Imports 42,089 43,896 45,689 45,871 3,649 3,809 4,349 4,243 3,102
Balance + 6,981 + 6,265 + 8,224 + 8,185 + 847 + 649 + 617 + 676 + 530
II.Non-European Exports 387,398 382,486 403,490 413,891 35,679 34,464 36,461 37,215 32,433
countries Imports 295,461 297,164 328,606 342,718 29,432 28,568 31,631 29,905 25,501
Balance + 91,936 + 85,322 + 74,884 + 71,172 + 6,248 + 5,896 + 4,830 + 7,311 + 6,932
1. Africa Exports 23,897 24,434 25,431 22,636 1,961 1,813 1,942 1,935 1,890
Imports 18,307 16,675 20,428 22,466 2,011 1,866 2,196 2,083 1,727
Balance + 5,590 + 7,759 + 5,003 + 170 − 50 − 53 − 254 − 148 + 163
2. America Exports 156,982 147,542 154,644 159,131 13,841 12,930 14,281 14,187 11,821
Imports 85,582 83,499 89,927 92,410 7,441 7,556 8,052 7,964 6,791
Balance + 71,400 + 64,043 + 64,717 + 66,720 + 6,399 + 5,374 + 6,228 + 6,223 + 5,030
of which:
United States Exports 113,733 106,822 111,805 113,452 9,427 9,274 10,095 10,188 8,494
Imports 60,217 57,968 61,902 64,603 5,344 5,451 5,877 5,701 4,775
Balance + 53,516 + 48,855 + 49,903 + 48,850 + 4,083 + 3,823 + 4,218 + 4,487 + 3,720
3. Asia Exports 196,297 200,158 212,070 219,815 18,829 18,754 19,246 20,012 17,782
Imports 188,621 193,979 214,393 224,212 19,634 18,894 21,069 19,515 16,727
Balance + 7,676 + 6,179 − 2,323 − 4,397 − 805 − 140 − 1,823 + 496 + 1,055
of which:
Middle East Exports 39,518 36,659 33,104 29,122 2,335 2,486 2,431 2,943 2,866
Imports 7,330 6,581 6,963 8,092 817 652 757 597 557
Balance + 32,188 + 30,079 + 26,141 + 21,030 + 1,518 + 1,834 + 1,674 + 2,346 + 2,309
Japan Exports 16,968 18,307 19,546 20,449 1,773 1,888 1,726 1,756 1,651
Imports 20,180 21,922 22,955 23,736 2,000 1,948 2,113 2,082 1,640
Balance − 3,213 − 3,615 − 3,410 − 3,287 − 227 − 60 − 387 − 326 + 10
People‘s Republic Exports 71,284 76,046 86,141 93,137 7,848 7,958 8,527 8,361 7,142
of China 2 Imports 91,930 94,172 101,837 106,059 9,354 8,789 10,497 9,775 8,365
Balance − 20,646 − 18,126 − 15,695 − 12,922 − 1,506 − 831 − 1,970 − 1,414 − 1,223
New industrial countries Exports 51,510 51,921 53,425 54,975 4,812 4,428 4,677 4,742 4,016
and emerging markets Imports 42,478 42,966 50,873 52,916 4,432 4,549 4,932 4,522 3,991
of Asia 3 Balance + 9,032 + 8,955 + 2,552 + 2,059 + 381 − 121 − 255 + 220 + 25
4. Oceania and Exports 10,221 10,352 11,344 12,309 1,048 967 992 1,082 940
polar regions Imports 2,951 3,011 3,857 3,630 345 252 314 342 256
Balance + 7,271 + 7,341 + 7,487 + 8,679 + 703 + 715 + 678 + 740 + 684
*Source:FederalStatisticalOffice.Exports(f.o.b.)bycountryofdestination,imports otherdatanotclassifiablebyregion.2ExcludingHongKong.3BruneiDarussalam,
(c.i.f.)bycountryoforigin.Individualcountriesandgroupsofcountriesaccordingto HongKong,Indonesia,Malaysia,Philippines,RepublicofKorea,Singapore,Taiwan
thecurrentposition.1Includingfuelandothersuppliesforshipsandaircraftand and Thailand.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
78
XII. External sector
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
€ million
Services 1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of computer and Other Government Other
Financial intellectual information business goods and Compensation Investment primary
Period Total Transport Travel 2 services property services services services 3 of employees income income 4
2014 − 24,485 − 6,902 − 37,653 + 7,007 + 3,549 + 2,666 − 700 + 2,971 + 1,184 + 54,473 + 891
2015 − 16,910 − 5,258 − 36,595 + 9,587 + 4,830 + 4,064 − 2,488 + 3,160 + 1,521 + 66,048 − 347
2016 − 19,948 − 6,185 − 38,247 + 9,856 + 6,203 + 3,224 − 3,004 + 3,094 + 750 + 60,943 − 1,054
2017 − 20,874 − 4,047 − 43,588 + 10,683 + 6,494 + 3,252 − 1,683 + 2,092 − 36 + 68,622 − 1,229
2018 p − 16,687 − 2,343 − 43,066 + 10,473 + 7,129 + 4,499 − 2,204 + 2,527 − 228 + 72,056 − 722
2 0 1 7 Q2 − 4,785 − 407 − 10,675 + 2,655 + 1,538 + 893 − 608 + 625 − 203 + 5,303 − 2,042
Q3 − 11,794 − 1,134 − 17,166 + 2,746 + 1,433 + 512 + 53 + 545 − 620 + 19,690 − 1,148
Q4 − 1,374 − 1,249 − 9,415 + 3,076 + 2,494 + 1,470 − 274 + 370 + 197 + 21,761 + 3,123
2 0 1 8 Q1 − 630 − 787 − 6,238 + 2,684 + 1,059 + 867 − 314 + 655 + 559 + 21,896 − 835
Q2 − 3,608 − 46 − 10,459 + 2,219 + 1,657 + 1,515 − 703 + 738 − 248 + 6,112 − 2,092
Q3 − 11,211 − 564 − 17,100 + 1,904 + 1,580 + 938 − 228 + 651 − 694 + 20,907 − 927
Q4 p − 1,237 − 946 − 9,269 + 3,667 + 2,833 + 1,180 − 959 + 482 + 155 + 23,140 + 3,131
2 0 1 8 Feb. + 710 − 249 − 1,577 + 693 + 762 + 675 − 162 + 218 + 208 + 5,446 − 235
Mar. − 791 − 237 − 3,012 + 1,149 + 136 + 557 − 103 + 246 + 162 + 8,645 − 207
Apr. − 576 − 46 − 2,230 + 796 + 456 + 194 − 515 + 247 − 79 + 4,532 − 439
May − 1,003 + 46 − 3,775 + 709 + 780 + 474 − 152 + 243 − 80 − 5,905 − 1,307
June − 2,029 − 46 − 4,455 + 713 + 421 + 847 − 35 + 248 − 89 + 7,485 − 345
July − 4,297 − 80 − 5,541 + 773 + 174 + 62 − 587 + 231 − 252 + 6,213 − 348
Aug. − 5,508 − 214 − 6,763 + 350 + 986 − 38 − 471 + 161 − 225 + 7,133 − 313
Sep. − 1,406 − 270 − 4,797 + 782 + 421 + 913 + 830 + 259 − 217 + 7,562 − 266
Oct. − 3,648 − 275 − 5,628 + 995 + 696 + 103 − 236 + 212 + 34 + 7,348 − 537
Nov. + 711 − 164 − 2,327 + 1,523 + 1,645 − 278 − 557 + 137 + 29 + 7,328 − 298
Dec. p + 1,700 − 508 − 1,314 + 1,149 + 492 + 1,355 − 166 + 133 + 92 + 8,465 + 3,967
1Includingfreightandinsurancecostsofforeigntrade.2Since2001thesample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4 Includes, inter alia, taxes on
resultsofahouseholdsurveyhavebeenusedontheexpenditureside.3Domestic leasing,productionandimportstransferredtotheEUaswellassubsidiesreceived
publicauthorities’receiptsfromandexpenditureonservices,notincludedelsewhere; from the EU.
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government 2
of which: of which:
Personal transfers
Current between
Current taxes on resident and of which: Non-produced
international income, wealth, non-resident Workers’ non-financial Capital
Period Total Total cooperation 1 etc. Total households 3 remittances Total assets transfers
2014 − 41,283 − 28,146 − 6,419 + 8,105 − 13,137 − 3,477 − 3,451 + 2,936 + 2,841 + 95
2015 − 40,044 − 23,965 − 6,805 + 10,638 − 16,079 − 3,540 − 3,523 + 534 + 2,366 − 1,832
2016 − 39,879 − 24,870 − 11,523 + 10,994 − 15,009 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 3,468 + 3,372 + 96
2017 − 54,120 − 23,688 − 11,496 + 10,584 − 30,432 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 254 + 3,021 − 3,275
2018 p − 47,273 − 27,295 − 9,484 + 10,066 − 19,978 − 5,153 − 5,142 − 43 + 1,711 − 1,755
2 0 1 7 Q2 − 11,841 − 1,706 − 1,500 + 6,239 − 10,135 − 1,159 − 1,153 − 727 + 384 − 1,111
Q3 − 11,035 − 5,432 − 1,557 + 1,755 − 5,603 − 1,157 − 1,153 + 904 + 1,531 − 627
Q4 − 14,463 − 8,946 − 5,444 + 794 − 5,517 − 1,159 − 1,153 − 1,047 + 372 − 1,419
2 0 1 8 Q1 − 14,483 − 9,356 − 2,233 + 1,655 − 5,127 − 1,291 − 1,286 + 214 − 431 + 645
Q2 − 5,373 − 529 − 1,260 + 6,154 − 4,844 − 1,287 − 1,286 + 85 + 99 − 14
Q3 − 12,045 − 7,476 − 1,940 + 1,131 − 4,569 − 1,288 − 1,286 − 1,025 − 290 − 735
Q4 p − 15,371 − 9,933 − 4,050 + 1,126 − 5,438 − 1,287 − 1,286 + 683 + 2,333 − 1,650
2 0 1 8 Feb. − 5,390 − 3,679 − 558 + 814 − 1,712 − 429 − 429 + 19 − 269 + 288
Mar. − 4,041 − 2,160 − 343 + 612 − 1,881 − 432 − 429 − 294 − 281 − 14
Apr. − 2,636 − 994 − 314 + 1,479 − 1,643 − 429 − 429 + 357 + 505 − 148
May + 102 + 1,640 − 281 + 3,635 − 1,538 − 429 − 429 + 50 − 108 + 158
June − 2,839 − 1,176 − 665 + 1,040 − 1,663 − 429 − 429 − 321 − 297 − 24
July − 4,664 − 2,833 − 857 + 150 − 1,831 − 430 − 429 − 203 + 101 − 304
Aug. − 3,731 − 2,525 − 543 + 251 − 1,206 − 429 − 429 + 90 + 237 − 147
Sep. − 3,650 − 2,118 − 540 + 730 − 1,532 − 429 − 429 − 912 − 628 − 284
Oct. − 4,372 − 3,243 − 1,074 + 150 − 1,130 − 429 − 429 − 818 − 591 − 228
Nov. − 5,622 − 3,254 − 999 + 158 − 2,367 − 429 − 429 − 489 − 313 − 176
Dec. p − 5,377 − 3,436 − 1,977 + 818 − 1,941 − 429 − 429 + 1,991 + 3,237 − 1,246
1 Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3 Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperationandothercurrenttransfers.2Includesinsurancepremiumsandclaims households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
79
XII. External sector
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
€ million
2018
Item 2016 2017 2018 p Q2 Q3 Q4 p Oct. Nov. Dec. p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 397,043 + 363,024 + 353,040 + 117,234 + 61,003 + 18,453 − 21,090 + 41,727 − 2,183
1. Direct investment + 82,985 + 111,797 + 135,811 + 55,587 + 24,229 + 13,443 + 7,391 − 121 + 6,174
Equity + 70,623 + 71,205 + 139,344 + 58,113 + 22,601 + 23,587 + 7,314 + 3,124 + 13,149
of which:
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 10,867 + 23,779 + 25,973 + 5,656 + 7,859 + 415 + 4,580 + 2,352 − 6,517
Debt instruments + 12,362 + 40,592 − 3,533 − 2,526 + 1,627 − 10,144 + 76 − 3,246 − 6,975
2. Portfolio investment + 98,236 + 105,157 + 68,181 + 6,146 + 28,440 − 8,803 − 7,336 + 6,529 − 7,995
Shares 2 + 17,254 + 14,042 + 10,178 − 1,361 + 3,862 − 506 − 590 + 561 − 477
Investment fund shares 3 + 36,142 + 47,747 + 16,644 + 4,412 + 4,088 − 441 − 1,927 + 727 + 759
Long-term
debt securities 4 + 51,037 + 47,101 + 48,345 + 4,358 + 21,055 − 2,225 − 3,490 + 6,303 − 5,037
Short-term
debt securities 5 − 6,196 − 3,733 − 6,985 − 1,262 − 565 − 5,631 − 1,329 − 1,062 − 3,240
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options 6 + 32,535 + 8,937 + 21,319 + 9,583 + 10,045 + 537 − 1,500 + 5,589 − 3,552
4. Other investment 7 + 181,602 + 138,402 + 127,338 + 46,291 − 1,217 + 12,716 − 20,344 + 29,854 + 3,206
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 18,627 − 21,008 + 49,858 + 6,134 + 1,171 + 1,493 + 14,952 − 3,219 − 10,240
Long-term + 44,980 + 19,619 + 4,458 − 494 + 3,336 + 3,023 + 2,116 − 2,347 + 3,254
Short-term − 26,353 − 40,627 + 45,400 + 6,628 − 2,165 − 1,530 + 12,836 − 872 − 13,494
Enterprises and
households 9 − 6,248 + 7,927 + 27,793 − 8,122 + 19,553 + 2,979 − 4,004 + 17,699 − 10,716
Long-term + 1,725 − 3,372 + 12,223 + 4,573 + 3,109 + 2,881 + 1,941 + 293 + 647
Short-term − 7,974 + 11,298 + 15,570 − 12,695 + 16,445 + 98 − 5,945 + 17,406 − 11,363
General government − 1,268 − 5,154 − 7,108 − 4,915 − 4,736 + 1,020 − 18 − 253 + 1,292
Long-term − 7,595 − 3,730 − 1,276 − 832 − 13 − 121 − 224 − 30 + 134
Short-term + 6,327 − 1,424 − 5,832 − 4,083 − 4,723 + 1,141 + 206 − 223 + 1,158
Bundesbank + 170,491 + 156,637 + 56,795 + 53,195 − 17,206 + 7,223 − 31,275 + 15,627 + 22,870
5. Reserve assets + 1,686 − 1,269 + 392 − 374 − 493 + 560 + 700 − 124 − 17
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country
(increase: +) + 139,350 + 83,057 + 120,499 + 47,279 + 12,039 − 25,820 − 30,320 + 37,546 − 33,046
1. Direct investment + 51,816 + 69,548 + 85,649 + 23,454 + 14,510 + 27,147 + 213 + 17,881 + 9,053
Equity + 11,894 + 24,077 + 13,364 + 541 + 3,233 + 7,501 + 1,462 + 4,397 + 1,642
of which:
Reinvestment of earnings 1 + 3,935 + 9,216 + 8,829 + 941 + 1,938 + 3,280 + 1,661 + 1,465 + 154
Debt instruments + 39,921 + 45,471 + 72,285 + 22,914 + 11,277 + 19,646 − 1,249 + 13,484 + 7,411
2. Portfolio investment − 108,471 − 95,045 − 45,633 − 17,519 − 8,821 − 26,885 + 6,496 + 7,446 − 40,827
Shares 2 + 342 − 1,126 + 6,564 + 3,548 − 1,643 + 354 + 2,019 + 97 − 1,763
Investment fund shares 3 − 6,919 − 3,441 − 5,824 − 3,038 − 338 − 656 − 975 − 143 + 462
Long-term
debt securities 4 − 97,281 − 70,559 − 30,864 − 18,710 − 8,467 − 20,242 + 1,266 + 6,481 − 27,989
Short-term
debt securities 5 − 4,613 − 19,919 − 15,508 + 682 + 1,627 − 6,341 + 4,187 + 1,011 − 11,538
3. Other investment 7 + 196,006 + 108,554 + 80,483 + 41,344 + 6,350 − 26,083 − 37,029 + 12,218 − 1,272
Monetary financial institutions 8 + 86,742 + 17,476 − 35,965 + 19,374 + 8,519 − 108,955 − 12,901 − 20,620 − 75,434
Long-term + 5,774 + 7,541 − 8,496 + 3,309 − 3,878 − 509 + 1,856 − 574 − 1,790
Short-term + 80,968 + 9,935 − 27,469 + 16,065 + 12,397 − 108,446 − 14,757 − 20,046 − 73,643
Enterprises and
households 9 + 3,716 + 17,557 + 16,750 + 3,658 + 12,720 − 4,090 − 7,937 + 21,084 − 17,237
Long-term + 8,579 + 3,339 + 8,690 + 10,204 − 1,887 − 1,506 − 34 − 247 − 1,226
Short-term − 4,863 + 14,218 + 8,060 − 6,546 + 14,607 − 2,584 − 7,903 + 21,331 − 16,012
General government − 5,309 − 6,313 + 932 − 592 + 4,069 − 4,205 + 3,452 − 438 − 7,219
Long-term − 4,682 − 3,290 + 656 + 153 + 101 + 402 + 14 + 323 + 65
Short-term − 626 − 3,023 + 277 − 746 + 3,968 − 4,607 + 3,438 − 761 − 7,284
Bundesbank + 110,857 + 79,834 + 98,766 + 18,904 − 18,957 + 91,167 − 19,643 + 12,193 + 98,618
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 257,693 + 279,967 + 232,541 + 69,954 + 48,965 + 44,273 + 9,230 + 4,181 + 30,863
1 Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee stock
RepublicofGermany(seeSpecialStatisticalPublication10).2Includingparticipation options.7Includesinparticularloans,tradecreditsaswellascurrencyanddeposits.
certificates. 3 Including reinvestment of earnings. 4 Up to and including 2012 8 Excluding Bundesbank. 9 Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financial corporations,
unlimited.5Short-term:originalmaturityuptooneyear.6Balanceoftransactions households and non-profit institutions serving households.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
80
XII. External sector
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
End of reporting Gold and gold drawing position in deposits and within the Portfolio External (col. 1 minus
period Total Total receivables rights the IMF securities Total ESCB 1 investment 2 liabilities 3,4 col. 10)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
1 9 9 9 Jan. 5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,475
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,719
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 671,359 471,486
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,494 439,487
2 0 1 6 May 884,887 173,927 118,133 14,970 6,839 33,984 667,972 655,544 42,988 501,620 383,267
June 922,232 184,628 128,963 14,746 6,780 34,139 693,498 681,070 44,106 518,491 403,741
July 904,044 186,300 130,417 14,698 6,736 34,449 672,748 660,320 44,996 518,946 385,099
Aug. 918,692 183,951 128,171 14,685 6,642 34,452 689,906 677,479 44,834 525,347 393,345
Sep. 957,860 183,796 128,795 14,657 6,605 33,738 728,554 715,738 45,510 549,909 407,951
Oct. 947,718 181,623 126,245 14,708 6,631 34,039 720,795 708,029 45,300 543,001 404,717
Nov. 991,108 177,348 121,032 14,917 6,572 34,826 766,905 754,057 46,855 552,565 438,543
Dec. 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,731 397,719
2 0 1 7 Jan. 1,034,804 177,256 121,656 14,806 6,523 34,270 809,862 795,621 47,687 577,969 456,835
Feb. 1,060,894 184,666 128,507 14,976 6,248 34,935 828,264 814,375 47,964 609,255 451,639
Mar. 1,075,039 181,898 126,158 14,886 6,183 34,671 843,892 829,751 49,249 623,579 451,460
Apr. 1,089,144 180,726 126,011 14,697 6,055 33,963 858,281 843,439 50,137 601,538 487,606
May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 601,130 497,749
June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 623,941 474,939
July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 614,300 478,469
Aug. 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 623,104 466,780
Sep. 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 622,729 492,470
Oct. 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 604,141 481,775
Nov. 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 579,766 512,066
Dec. 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 671,359 471,486
2 0 1 8 Jan. 1,114,634 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,525 882,043 53,165 618,843 495,792
Feb. 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 637,646 510,333
Mar. 1,157,102 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 937,348 923,466 53,924 678,869 478,233
Apr. 1,137,942 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 916,858 902,364 54,115 632,732 505,210
May 1,196,227 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 970,555 956,150 54,203 654,573 541,654
June 1,212,477 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 990,543 976,266 54,857 698,155 514,323
July 1,145,236 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 927,466 913,270 54,463 662,027 483,210
Aug. 1,142,982 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 926,771 912,448 53,864 638,899 504,083
Sep. 1,189,133 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,337 956,487 54,717 679,190 509,943
Oct. 1,165,423 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 942,063 927,555 55,089 668,621 496,802
Nov. 1,181,915 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 957,690 941,130 56,026 671,927 509,987
Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,494 439,487
2 0 1 9 Jan. 1,123,922 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,792 646,268 477,655
oAssetsandliabilitiesvis-à-visallcountrieswithinandoutsidetheeuroarea.Upto respectivecountrydesignation),sinceNovember2000alsobalanceswithnon-euro
December2000thelevelsattheendofeachquarterareshown,owingtorevalua- areacentralbankswithintheESCB.2Mainlylong-termdebtsecuritiesfromissuers
tions,atmarketprices;withineachquarter,however,thelevelsarecomputedonthe withintheeuroarea.3Includingestimatesofcurrencyincirculationabroad.4See
basisofcumulativetransactionvalues.FromJanuary2001allend-of-monthlevelsare Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5 Euro opening
valuedatmarketprices.1MainlynetclaimsonTARGET2balances(accordingtothe balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
81
XII. External sector
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms payments
or month Total banks Total operations Total granted effected Total banks Total operations Total used received
All countries
2015 876,992 264,561 612,431 416,692 195,739 181,240 14,499 1,018,628 152,364 866,264 681,975 184,289 112,668 71,621
2016 877,132 245,991 631,141 420,851 210,290 196,110 14,180 1,051,138 132,151 918,987 722,253 196,734 124,129 72,605
2017 r 892,379 218,372 674,007 450,147 223,860 210,204 13,657 1,087,253 138,289 948,964 750,464 198,500 128,892 69,607
2018 914,056 233,402 680,654 450,943 229,712 215,637 14,075 1,174,527 138,328 1,036,199 832,342 203,857 133,440 70,417
2 0 1 8 July 909,598 227,451 682,147 451,542 230,605 215,987 14,618 1,138,487 142,643 995,844 792,830 203,014 130,806 72,208
Aug. 897,840 225,010 672,830 451,202 221,628 207,157 14,471 1,136,688 139,575 997,113 804,749 192,365 119,515 72,849
Sep. 921,660 230,436 691,224 457,904 233,319 218,914 14,405 1,158,686 149,527 1,009,159 804,205 204,954 133,245 71,709
Oct. 920,790 225,577 695,213 458,608 236,604 221,953 14,651 1,152,825 138,463 1,014,362 809,873 204,489 131,857 72,632
Nov. 935,319 239,460 695,859 455,322 240,537 225,908 14,629 1,187,166 155,185 1,031,981 824,055 207,925 135,818 72,107
Dec. 914,056 233,402 680,654 450,943 229,712 215,637 14,075 1,174,527 138,328 1,036,199 832,342 203,857 133,440 70,417
Industrial countries 1
2015 768,263 260,659 507,604 374,690 132,915 119,868 13,047 919,095 147,507 771,588 644,558 127,030 91,119 35,911
2016 760,622 242,112 518,510 378,804 139,705 127,025 12,680 946,894 128,163 818,731 685,120 133,611 96,436 37,174
2017 r 773,242 214,321 558,921 406,982 151,939 139,749 12,190 982,232 131,450 850,782 711,966 138,816 104,054 34,762
2018 789,499 228,170 561,329 406,279 155,050 142,678 12,372 1,058,150 125,576 932,574 792,349 140,225 105,662 34,563
2 0 1 8 July 785,200 222,842 562,359 406,930 155,428 142,614 12,815 1,027,476 130,424 897,052 755,931 141,121 106,413 34,708
Aug. 776,673 220,355 556,318 407,029 149,289 136,649 12,640 1,026,266 126,827 899,439 767,269 132,170 97,033 35,137
Sep. 798,542 225,895 572,646 414,636 158,011 145,356 12,655 1,040,724 131,154 909,570 766,446 143,124 108,112 35,012
Oct. 796,144 220,834 575,309 414,730 160,579 147,723 12,856 1,039,744 124,654 915,090 772,268 142,822 107,588 35,234
Nov. 812,204 234,786 577,418 412,397 165,021 152,202 12,819 1,069,745 140,539 929,206 783,397 145,809 110,700 35,109
Dec. 789,499 228,170 561,329 406,279 155,050 142,678 12,372 1,058,150 125,576 932,574 792,349 140,225 105,662 34,563
EU Member States 1
2015 631,596 242,588 389,007 294,555 94,452 83,957 10,495 752,188 136,630 615,558 531,136 84,422 58,673 25,749
2016 614,938 224,194 390,744 293,305 97,439 87,421 10,018 770,003 118,015 651,988 563,776 88,212 61,312 26,901
2017 r 612,266 194,340 417,927 311,482 106,445 96,562 9,882 807,562 115,034 692,528 596,283 96,244 71,297 24,947
2018 629,920 207,625 422,295 314,364 107,932 98,242 9,689 865,713 108,560 757,153 661,338 95,816 71,623 24,192
2 0 1 8 July 622,069 202,008 420,061 310,625 109,436 99,078 10,358 843,038 111,823 731,215 632,670 98,545 73,888 24,658
Aug. 615,469 198,865 416,603 312,490 104,113 93,943 10,170 839,872 111,671 728,201 637,077 91,123 66,310 24,813
Sep. 632,796 204,704 428,092 316,743 111,349 101,231 10,117 855,888 116,070 739,818 638,557 101,260 76,530 24,730
Oct. 629,302 199,848 429,454 317,841 111,614 101,339 10,274 851,661 109,601 742,059 642,051 100,008 75,046 24,962
Nov. 647,320 214,613 432,707 316,555 116,152 106,053 10,099 879,324 123,017 756,307 653,669 102,638 77,871 24,766
Dec. 629,920 207,625 422,295 314,364 107,932 98,242 9,689 865,713 108,560 757,153 661,338 95,816 71,623 24,192
of which: Euro area 2
2015 469,103 195,348 273,755 212,286 61,469 54,890 6,579 606,161 94,619 511,542 458,734 52,808 38,164 14,644
2016 450,353 171,625 278,728 214,125 64,603 57,876 6,727 616,804 75,803 541,001 484,967 56,034 41,167 14,867
2017 r 449,892 150,351 299,541 227,981 71,560 64,102 7,458 642,792 74,554 568,238 503,465 64,773 49,432 15,342
2018 461,247 155,715 305,532 234,656 70,875 63,734 7,141 702,037 67,366 634,671 569,246 65,425 49,682 15,743
2 0 1 8 July 453,625 155,487 298,138 224,694 73,444 65,620 7,824 681,024 68,957 612,067 544,369 67,698 51,689 16,009
Aug. 451,171 153,236 297,935 228,492 69,442 61,803 7,639 678,295 66,930 611,365 549,161 62,205 46,058 16,146
Sep. 461,764 155,744 306,019 232,246 73,773 66,137 7,637 690,147 69,624 620,523 552,087 68,436 52,432 16,004
Oct. 460,566 151,613 308,953 235,209 73,744 66,052 7,692 684,291 67,816 616,475 549,890 66,586 50,313 16,273
Nov. 472,765 161,838 310,927 234,166 76,761 69,175 7,586 705,593 77,917 627,675 558,524 69,152 52,997 16,155
Dec. 461,247 155,715 305,532 234,656 70,875 63,734 7,141 702,037 67,366 634,671 569,246 65,425 49,682 15,743
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
2015 107,753 3,094 104,659 42,003 62,656 61,204 1,452 95,363 886 94,477 37,218 57,259 21,549 35,710
2016 115,100 2,632 112,468 42,031 70,437 68,937 1,500 101,101 1,061 100,039 36,933 63,107 27,693 35,414
2017 r 117,488 2,618 114,871 43,097 71,774 70,307 1,467 98,995 1,101 97,894 38,298 59,596 24,838 34,758
2018 122,483 3,445 119,038 44,535 74,503 72,800 1,703 104,630 1,236 103,394 39,793 63,601 27,778 35,823
2 0 1 8 July 122,313 2,869 119,443 44,484 74,959 73,156 1,803 99,821 1,324 98,498 36,699 61,799 24,355 37,443
Aug. 119,064 2,864 116,200 44,044 72,156 70,325 1,831 98,699 1,315 97,384 37,280 60,104 22,443 37,662
Sep. 121,024 2,759 118,265 43,140 75,125 73,375 1,750 100,512 1,224 99,288 37,559 61,729 25,094 36,635
Oct. 122,551 2,959 119,591 43,749 75,842 74,047 1,795 100,259 1,287 98,972 37,405 61,567 24,230 37,336
Nov. 121,039 2,889 118,150 42,796 75,354 73,544 1,810 104,213 1,744 102,470 40,459 62,011 25,080 36,931
Dec. 122,483 3,445 119,038 44,535 74,503 72,800 1,703 104,630 1,236 103,394 39,793 63,601 27,778 35,823
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are guresshowninTableXI.7.1FromJuly2013includingCroatia.2FromJanuary2014
showninTable4ofSectionIV,“Banks”.Statisticalincreasesanddecreaseshavenot includingLatvia;fromJanuary2015includingLithuania.3Allcountriesthatarenot
beeneliminated;tothisextent,thechangesintotalsarenotcomparablewiththefi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 including Croatia.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
82
XII. External sector
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States
or monthly
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2007 1.6348 1.4678 10.4178 7.4506 161.25 8.0165 9.2501 1.6427 0.68434 1.3705
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2 0 1 7 Oct. 1.5099 1.4801 7.7890 7.4429 132.76 9.3976 9.6138 1.1546 0.89071 1.1756
Nov. 1.5395 1.4978 7.7723 7.4420 132.39 9.6082 9.8479 1.1640 0.88795 1.1738
Dec. 1.5486 1.5108 7.8073 7.4433 133.64 9.8412 9.9370 1.1689 0.88265 1.1836
2 0 1 8 Jan. 1.5340 1.5167 7.8398 7.4455 135.25 9.6464 9.8200 1.1723 0.88331 1.2200
Feb. 1.5684 1.5526 7.8068 7.4457 133.29 9.6712 9.9384 1.1542 0.88396 1.2348
Mar. 1.5889 1.5943 7.7982 7.4490 130.86 9.5848 10.1608 1.1685 0.88287 1.2336
Apr. 1.5972 1.5622 7.7347 7.4479 132.16 9.6202 10.3717 1.1890 0.87212 1.2276
May 1.5695 1.5197 7.5291 7.4482 129.57 9.5642 10.3419 1.1780 0.87726 1.1812
June 1.5579 1.5327 7.5512 7.4493 128.53 9.4746 10.2788 1.1562 0.87886 1.1678
July 1.5792 1.5356 7.8504 7.4523 130.23 9.4975 10.3076 1.1622 0.88726 1.1686
Aug. 1.5762 1.5063 7.9092 7.4558 128.20 9.6161 10.4668 1.1413 0.89687 1.1549
Sep. 1.6189 1.5211 7.9930 7.4583 130.54 9.6205 10.4426 1.1286 0.89281 1.1659
Oct. 1.6158 1.4935 7.9481 7.4597 129.62 9.4793 10.3839 1.1413 0.88272 1.1484
Nov. 1.5681 1.4998 7.8880 7.4611 128.79 9.6272 10.2918 1.1377 0.88118 1.1367
Dec. 1.5849 1.5278 7.8398 7.4653 127.88 9.8055 10.2766 1.1293 0.89774 1.1384
2 0 1 9 Jan. 1.5975 1.5196 7.7504 7.4657 124.34 9.7631 10.2685 1.1297 0.88603 1.1416
* Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange
referenceratespublishedbytheECB;foradditionaleuroforeignexchangereference
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 − Exchange rate statistics.
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999 January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001 January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007 January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008 January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009 January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011 January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014 January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015 January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
83
XII. External sector
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
1999Q1=100
Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness
EER-19 1 EER-38 2 Based on the deflators of total sales 3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries 4
In real terms In real terms
based on based on of which:
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selected
consumer domestic national consumer Euro area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product 3 economy 3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries 5 countries 4 37 countries 5 56 countries 6
1999 96.3 96.1 96.1 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.5 95.9 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.0 85.2 88.0 85.8 91.9 97.3 85.3 90.9 93.0 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.1 86.5 86.0 90.6 86.9 91.7 96.4 86.2 90.2 93.0 91.4 90.8
2002 90.1 90.2 89.5 89.4 95.2 90.5 92.3 95.5 88.7 90.7 93.5 91.9 91.7
2003 100.7 101.2 100.4 100.5 107.1 101.4 95.7 94.5 97.8 94.8 97.0 96.5 96.7
2004 104.6 104.9 103.2 103.8 111.7 105.0 95.9 93.3 100.2 95.1 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.4 101.0 101.8 109.6 102.4 94.8 91.9 99.3 92.9 98.4 96.9 96.5
2006 102.8 103.3 100.2 100.5 109.6 101.7 93.5 90.3 98.7 91.2 98.5 96.4 95.8
2007 106.1 106.0 102.0 102.7 113.0 103.6 94.4 89.5 102.5 91.4 100.7 97.8 96.9
2008 109.3 108.1 103.3 105.9 117.1 105.5 94.6 88.1 105.6 90.5 102.1 97.7 97.0
2009 110.7 108.8 104.2 110.8 120.2 106.5 94.8 88.8 105.0 91.0 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.1 96.0 102.6 111.6 97.6 92.3 88.5 98.6 87.2 98.7 93.6 91.9
2011 103.3 100.1 93.8 101.2 112.3 97.0 92.0 88.4 97.9 86.4 98.1 92.7 91.3
2012 97.7 94.8 88.3 95.1 107.2 92.2 90.1 88.3 92.9 83.7 95.8 89.7 88.2
2013 101.0 97.7 91.0 97.7 111.8 95.0 92.4 88.8 98.1 85.6 98.1 91.4 90.1
2014 101.4 97.2 91.1 98.6 114.1 95.4 93.0 89.6 98.4 86.3 98.1 91.6 90.7
2015 91.7 87.6 82.9 88.4 105.7 87.0 90.2 90.5 89.7 82.7 94.1 86.4 85.8
2016 94.4 89.5 85.1 p 89.1 109.7 p 88.9 91.1 91.0 91.2 84.1 94.7 87.5 p 87.0
2017 96.6 91.4 86.0 p 89.9 112.0 p 90.0 92.4 91.2 94.2 85.1 96.0 88.6 p 87.8
2018 98.9 p 93.4 ... ... 117.9 p 93.8 ... ... ... ... p 97.3 p 89.7 p 89.8
2 0 1 6 Feb. 94.2 89.3 84.8 p 89.0 110.3 p 89.5 91.1 91.2 90.8 84.0 94.5 87.3 p 87.2
Mar. 93.6 88.8 109.0 p 88.5 94.5 87.0 p 86.7
Apr. 94.4 89.5 109.8 p 89.0 94.9 87.5 p 87.1
May 94.6 89.8 85.2 p 89.4 110.2 p 89.4 91.1 91.0 91.1 84.3 94.7 87.6 p 87.3
June 94.4 89.6 109.8 p 89.0 94.5 87.6 p 87.1
July 94.6 89.7 109.5 p 88.7 94.8 87.6 p 86.9
Aug. 94.9 90.0 85.4 p 89.3 110.0 p 89.0 91.2 90.9 91.6 84.3 95.0 87.6 p 87.0
Sep. 95.1 90.1 110.2 p 89.2 95.1 87.8 p 87.2
Oct. 95.1 90.3 110.0 p 89.0 95.4 87.9 p 87.1
Nov. 94.6 89.6 84.8 p 88.9 109.6 p 88.6 91.1 90.9 91.2 84.0 94.8 87.5 p 86.8
Dec. 93.7 88.9 108.6 p 87.8 94.7 87.3 p 86.5
2 0 1 7 Jan. 93.9 89.1 109.0 p 88.0 94.5 87.2 p 86.4
Feb. 93.4 88.9 83.6 p 87.9 108.1 p 87.4 90.8 90.9 90.6 83.6 94.5 87.1 p 86.2
Mar. 94.0 89.2 108.5 p 87.5 94.7 87.2 p 86.2
Apr. 93.7 89.0 108.2 p 87.2 94.5 87.1 p 86.0
May 95.6 90.5 85.0 p 88.8 110.5 p 88.8 91.8 91.2 92.5 84.6 95.3 87.9 p 87.0
June 96.3 91.2 111.4 p 89.5 95.9 88.5 p 87.6
July 97.6 92.4 113.3 p 91.0 96.6 89.2 p 88.5
Aug. 99.0 93.6 87.8 p 91.5 115.0 p 92.3 93.3 91.3 96.4 86.1 97.2 89.8 p 89.2
Sep. 99.0 93.6 115.0 p 92.3 97.3 89.9 p 89.3
Oct. 98.6 93.1 114.8 p 91.9 97.1 89.5 p 89.0
Nov. 98.5 93.1 87.6 p 91.3 115.0 p 92.0 93.6 91.3 97.0 86.0 97.2 89.5 p 89.0
Dec. 98.8 93.3 115.3 p 92.1 97.5 89.8 p 89.3
2 0 1 8 Jan. 99.4 93.9 116.1 p 92.8 97.6 89.8 p 89.4
Feb. 99.6 93.9 p 88.2 p 91.8 117.3 p 93.6 94.0 91.2 98.6 86.3 97.7 89.9 p 89.5
Mar. 99.7 94.2 117.7 p 93.9 97.8 90.0 p 89.7
Apr. 99.5 p 93.9 117.9 p 94.0 97.8 p 89.9 p 89.7
May 98.1 p 92.7 p 87.3 p 90.6 116.6 p 93.1 93.7 91.3 97.4 85.8 p 97.3 p 89.3 p 89.3
June 97.9 p 92.6 116.7 p 93.0 p 97.1 p 89.3 p 89.3
July 99.2 p 93.8 118.2 p 94.2 p 97.1 p 89.9 p 89.9
Aug. 99.0 p 93.3 p 87.8 p 91.4 119.0 p 94.6 93.5 91.3 96.8 86.2 p 96.8 p 89.5 p 89.9
Sep. 99.5 p 93.9 120.4 p 95.6 p 97.3 p 90.1 p 90.9
Oct. 98.9 p 93.4 119.0 p 94.4 p 97.0 p 89.9 p 90.3
Nov. 98.3 p 92.9 ... ... 117.9 p 93.5 ... ... ... ... p 96.9 p 89.7 p 89.9
Dec. 98.4 p 92.7 118.0 p 93.3 p 96.9 p 89.5 p 89.7
2 0 1 9 Jan. 97.8 p 92.1 117.3 p 92.6 p 96.7 p 89.2 p 89.4
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the group EER-19 (see footnote 1) and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand,
economy’spricecompetitivenessisconsistentwiththeprocedureusedbytheECBto Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey and
computetheeffectiveexchangeratesoftheeuro(seeMonthlyReport,November Venezuela. Due to the redenomination of the Venezuelan bolívar on
2001, pp. 50-53, May 2007, pp. 31-35 and August 2017, pp. 41-43). For more 20 August 2018,thespotratefrom17 August 2018isusedsincethen.3Annual
detailed information on methodology, see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No 134 and quarterly averages. 4 Euro area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from
(www.ecb.eu).Adeclineinthefiguresimpliesanincreaseincompetitiveness.1ECB 2007includingSlovenia,from2008includingCyprusandMalta,from2009including
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, from 2015
exchangeratesoftheeurovis-à-visthecurrenciesofthefollowingcountries:Austra- including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway, Sweden,
lia,Bulgaria,Canada,China,Croatia,Czechia,Denmark,HongKong,Hungary,Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 5 Euro area countries
Norway,Poland,Romania,Singapore,SouthKorea,Sweden,Switzerland,theUnited (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-19. 6 Euro area
KingdomandtheUnitedStates.Wherecurrentpriceandwageindiceswerenotavai- countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-38 (see
lable,estimateswereused.2ECBcalculations.Includescountriesbelongingtothe footnote 2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
84•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
85•
Overview of publications by the
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica-
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail-
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division.
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web-
site.
Annual Report June 2018
– Outlook for the German economy – macro-
economic projections for 2018 and 2019 and
Financial Stability Review an outlook for 2020
– Lower bound, inflation target and the an-
choring of inflation expectations
Monthly Report
July 2018
For information on the articles published be- – The market for Federal securities: holder
tween 2000 and 2018 see the index attached structure and the main drivers of yield move-
to the January 2019 Monthly Report. ments
– The realignment of the Chinese economy
and its global implications
Monthly Report articles – Trends in the financing structures of German
non- financial corporations as reflected in the
April 2018 corporate financial statements statistics
– Wage growth in Germany: assessment and
determinants of recent developments August 2018
– Germany’s external position: new statistical – The current economic situation in Germany
approaches and results since the financial
crisis September 2018
– Current regulatory developments in the field – Models for short- term economic forecasts:
of payments and in the settlement of secur- an update
ities and derivatives – The performance of German credit institu-
– Maastricht debt: methodological principles, tions in 2017
compilation and development in Germany
October 2018
May 2018 – State government finances: comparison of
– The current economic situation in Germany developments, debt brakes and fiscal surveil-
lance
– The macroeconomic impact of uncertainty

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
86•
– Activities of multinational enterprise groups Statistical Supplements to the
and national economic statistics Monthly Report
– The growing importance of exchange- traded
funds in the financial markets 1 Banking statistics1, 2
2 Capital market statistics1, 2
November 2018 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
– The current economic situation in Germany 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
5 Exchange rate statistics2
December 2018
– Outlook for the German economy – macro-
economic projections for 2019 and 2020 and Special Publications
an outlook for 2021
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan- Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell,
cing in 2017 November 1996 3
– Germany’s international investment position:
amount, profitability and risks of cross- Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im
border assets Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May
19973
January 2019
– The impact of an interest rate normalisation Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975
on the private non- financial sector in the bis 1989, August 19993
euro area from a balance sheet perspective
– Price competitiveness in individual euro area The market for German Federal securities,
countries: developments, drivers and the in- May 2000
fluence of labour market reforms
– Financial cycles in the euro area Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:
– IFRS 9 from the perspective of banking super- MEMMOD, June 2000
vision
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
February 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, March
20133
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik-
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh-
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder,
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April
2008
For footnotes, see p. 88•.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
87•
Special Statistical Publications Discussion Papers*
1 Banking statistics guidelines, 54/ 2018
July 20182, 4 Effects of bank capital requirement tightenings
on inequality
2 Banking statistics customer classification,
July 20182 55/2018
Revisiting the finance and growth nexus – A
3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen, deeper look at sectors and instruments
July 20132, 3
56/2018
4 Financial accounts for Germany 2012 to Assessing the uncertainty in central banks’ infla-
2017, July 20182 tion outlooks
5 Extrapolated results from financial state- 57/2018
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2016, Credit crunches from occasionally binding bank
December 20172 borrowing constraints
6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 01/2019
deutscher Unternehmen von 2014 bis 2015, The interest rate exposure of euro area house-
May 20182, 3 holds
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 02/2019
payments statistics, September 20132 Monetary policy, housing, and collateral con-
straints
8 The balance of payments statistics of the
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 03/2019
February 1991o Who benefits from using property taxes to
finance a labor tax wedge reduction?
9 Securities deposits, August 2005
04/2019
10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, Anatomy of regional price differentials: Evi-
April 20181, 2 dence from micro price data
11 Balance of payments by region, 05/2019
July 2013 What drives the short-term fluctuations of
banks’ exposure to interest rate risk?
12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113 06/2019
Connectedness between G10 currencies:
Searching for the causal structure
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p. 88•.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2019
88•
Banking legislation 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute
of the European System of Central Banks 1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con-
and of the European Central Bank, June tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
1998 3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue,
2 Banking Act, July 20142 which may be of a more recent date than the English one.

