Monthly Report
May 2020
Vol. 72  
No 5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 15 May 2020.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  12
The monthly development of aggregate output in the euro area ........................................  21
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  25
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  26
Acquisition of financial assets and the search for yield in Germany  ....................................  38
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  46
Methodological changes in securities issues statistics  .........................................................  53
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  59
A weekly activity index for the German economy  ...............................................................  68
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  73
Current fiscal developments in the euro area  ......................................................................  85Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
5

Overview
Pandemic plunges world 
economy into severe crisis
Within just a few weeks, the rapid spread of 
the novel coronavirus has sent the world econ -
omy into a deep recession. In particular, the 
far- reaching measures to contain the spread of 
the virus have weighed heavily on economic 
activity in many places. In China, where the 
pandemic originated, economic life largely 
came to a standstill in the first half of February 
2020. Similar developments are becoming evi -
dent elsewhere, with a certain time lag. In the 
euro area, real gross domestic product (GDP) 
was already down substantially in the first 
quarter. In March, three major Member States 
– Italy, Spain and France – felt impelled to take 
drastic measures due to rapidly rising case 
numbers. Beyond the services sector, some in -
dustrial firms whose output was considered 
non- essential were also closed in those coun -
tries. In the United Kingdom and the United 
States, too, aggregate output fell considerably 
in the first quarter. However, the main impact 
of the containment measures is unlikely to be 
reflected in the GDP figures until the second 
quarter almost everywhere – with the excep -
tion of China, where the economy is already 
recovering after material restrictions were 
lifted. The same will hold for most emerging 
market economies. Some are suffering from 
the additional burden of worsened financing 
terms and the steep drop in commodity prices.
Since the end of April, the first restrictions have 
been relaxed in Europe, but also the United 
States, meaning that economic activity could 
be gradually restarted in some areas. Other 
countries are likely to follow. The world econo -
my’s path to recovery will largely depend on 
the pace at which rules are relaxed and on how 
the pandemic develops, making it highly uncer -
tain. It is to be expected that at least some eco -
nomic activities will remain subject to signifi -
cant restrictions for a  long time yet. Cautionary consumer restraint, as can be observed in 
China, is also likely to impede a swift return to 
normal. Finally, there is the risk that, despite 
broad government assistance, the recovery 
process will extend over a longer period due in 
part to weak corporate finances and rigid  ities 
on the labour market.
Developments in international financial markets 
over the past few weeks have been dominated 
by the assessment of the economic and finan -
cial fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. The 
stock markets saw a surge in volatility and 
strong price drops. At the same time, bonds 
with high credit quality (safe haven assets) 
were heavily in demand, in spite of intermittent 
tensions even in these highly liquid markets. 
Federal securities (Bunds) were delivering his -
torically low yields in the first half of March. 
Announcements of fiscal and monetary policy 
support measures stabilised the markets in 
mid- March: the central banks of major cur -
rency areas loosened their monetary policy 
stance, in some cases using new monetary pol -
icy instruments. At the same time, additional 
issuance of government bonds took shape, 
which is intended to finance the fiscal burden 
posed by the coronavirus pandemic. All in all, 
these measures have transferred some of the 
pandemic’s costs and risks from the private to 
the public sector. In the stock markets, this was 
evidenced by subsiding volatility and significant 
price recovery. Government bond market yields 
saw mixed developments, however. In the euro 
area, they picked up somewhat after reaching 
their lows. Yield spreads between ten- year 
Bunds and government bonds with the same 
maturity issued by other euro area countries 
initially widened, but then narrowed again 
slightly under the influence of the new pan -
demic emergency purchase programme. Given 
the elevated level of uncertainty, participants in 
the foreign exchange markets increasingly 
sought currencies that are considered to be 
relatively safe. In effective terms, the US dollar, World economy 
in deep 
recession 
First restrictions 
eased, but swift 
normalisation 
unlikelyFinancial 
markets   influ -
enced by the 
coronavirus 
pandemic and 
its falloutDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
6

the euro, the yen and the Swiss franc appreci -
ated. By contrast, mainly the currencies of 
commodity exporters as well as of emerging 
market economies and former transition coun -
tries fell across the board. In keeping with this, 
extensive outflows from investment funds 
which invest in emerging markets were ob -
served in March.
In response to the severe deterioration in the 
outlook for growth and inflation in the euro 
area – in the face of the spread of COVID-  19 – 
the Governing Council of the ECB adopted a 
series of measures in March and in April. These 
include adding a temporary envelope of add -
itional net asset purchases of €120 billion to 
the existing asset purchase programme (APP), 
and a new pandemic emergency purchase pro -
gramme (PEPP) coming to €750 billion. As for 
refinancing operations, the Governing Council 
twice eased the terms of the third series of tar -
geted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO- III). In addition, in March it adopted a 
series of additional unconditional refinancing 
operations in order to bridge the period until 
the fourth TLTRO- III in June. In April it adopted 
a further series of unconditional operations, 
the pandemic emergency longer- term refinan -
cing operations (PELTROs). Above and beyond 
that, the Governing Council decided to tem -
porarily ease the Eurosystem’s collateral frame -
work and announced the Eurosystem’s partici -
pation in a coordinated action to enhance the 
provision of US dollar liquidity to the banking 
system. The Eurosystem’s key interest rates and 
the associated forward guidance were left un -
changed by the Governing Council of the ECB 
at all monetary policy meetings during the re -
porting period. Therefore, the main refinancing 
rate remains at 0%, while the rate of the mar -
ginal lending facility stands at 0.25% and the 
deposit facility rate at -0.5%.
Given the much gloomier economic outlook 
and the feared risks to price stability, the 
adopted measures are intended to increase the 
degree of monetary policy accommodation. 
They also aim to prevent the pandemic’s nega -tive effects on the real economy from spilling 
over to the banking system. This would amplify 
the risk of the real economy and the financial 
system getting caught in a mutually reinforcing 
downward spiral. One of the key aspects in this 
connection is preventing disruptions in bank 
lending. In this respect, a surge in loans to the 
private sector was observed in the first quarter. 
In March, in particular, businesses took out 
credit lines and new loans on a large scale to 
compensate for lost earnings and to avoid 
future  liquidity shortages. This increased bor -
rowing was supported by various assistance 
programmes for business loans which national 
governments had created as first responses to 
the crisis. In contrast to this, lending to house -
holds, which until then had been on a stable 
upward path, weakened significantly, particu -
larly in the countries that were especially 
affected  by the pandemic. Amidst this strong 
credit growth, the broad monetary aggregate 
M3 likewise grew exceptionally strongly in the 
first quarter of 2020.
On 5  May, Germany’s Federal Constitutional 
Court delivered its verdict on the Eurosystem’s 
public sector purchase programme (PSPP), 
which forms part of the APP . It found that the 
Court of Justice of the European Union’s ruling 
on this matter in December 2018 and the PSPP 
decisions of the Governing Council of the ECB 
were “ultra vires” acts by the Court and the 
ECB Governing Council, meaning that both 
parties exceeded their powers; in the first case, 
this was due to an insufficient assessment of 
proportionality, and in the second, an insuffi -
ciently substantiated and documented assess -
ment of proportionality. The Federal Constitu -
tional Court found no evidence as to whether 
the Governing Council of the ECB, in its assess -
ment of proportionality, had sufficiently 
weighed and balanced the expected benefits 
for achieving the monetary policy objective 
against the economic policy effects arising   
from the PSPP . The court ruled that the Bundes -
bank’s continued full participation in the PSPP 
is contingent on the Governing Council of the 
ECB presenting its considerations on the pro -Monetary policy: 
far- reaching 
measures in face 
of coronavirus 
crisis
Rapid acceler -
ation in lending 
growth due to 
coronavirus 
crisis Federal 
Constitutional  
Court delivers 
verdict on PSPPDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
7

portionality of the programme within three 
months.
German economic output experienced a huge 
decline in the first quarter of 2020 owing to 
the COVID-  19 pandemic and the measures 
taken to contain it. According to the Federal 
Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real GDP de -
creased by 2.2% from the previous quarter 
after seasonal and calendar adjustment. The 
exceptionally steep drop in GDP in the first 
quarter is all the more notable as economic 
output had probably still seen broad- based 
growth in the first two months of that quarter, 
meaning that the drop was confined to the 
month of March.
The pandemic and the measures taken to con -
tain it in Germany and abroad have impaired 
economic activity in Germany on a broad front. 
On the one hand, many consumer- related ser -
vice sectors have been affected, some of which 
had to interrupt their business activities for 
some time or severely restrict them. These in -
clude the hotel and restaurant sector, large 
parts of the bricks and mortar retail sector, 
travel service providers, other leisure and cul -
tural services and passenger transport. Con -
sumer spending is therefore likely to have de -
clined considerably. Domestic restrictions have 
also affected output and sales in the manufac -
turing sector. The decline in demand from 
abroad and disruptions to global supply and 
value chains have caused additional downward 
pressure here, with exports of goods falling by 
more than one- tenth in March alone. Further -
more, the abrupt change in the economic en -
vironment and the exceptionally high level of 
uncertainty are likely to have had a dampening 
effect on private investment in machinery and 
equipment. By contrast, the construction sector 
remained on an expansionary path, partly be -
cause construction activity continued to a large 
extent.
Banks in Germany likewise substantially ex -
panded their lending to the domestic private 
sector in the first quarter of 2020. This was attrib utable mainly to loans to non-  financial 
corporations, which rose exceptionally sharply 
in March in the wake of the COVID-  19 crisis. 
The loans primarily served to strengthen liquid -
ity reserves and thus mainly covered the short- 
term maturity segment. This was supported by 
extensive assistance loans from the Federal 
Government as well as additional financial sup -
port from the state governments, for which 
applica tions could be submitted as of March. 
According to the latest round of the Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS), banks expect enterprises’ 
demand for loans to further accelerate in the 
second quarter. Loans to households for house 
purchase, which recorded high inflows in Ger -
many, especially before the outbreak of the 
coronavirus epidemic, also had a supporting ef -
fect. However, on balance, credit standards 
and credit conditions were tightened across all 
segments by the banks participating in the sur -
vey, with tightening particularly pronounced in 
corporate lending.
The measures to contain the pandemic are 
having a considerable impact on the labour 
market. The most important adjustment tool is 
the short-  time work scheme (Kurzarbeit),  
which is currently playing a much greater role 
than in the Great Recession of 2008-09, when 
just under 1½ million people received this 
wage substitute at its peak. From the begin -
ning of March to 26 April, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency processed applications for short- 
time work covering 10 million people. How -
ever, the number of notifications is a ceiling, as 
the prior notification of short- time work is a 
necessary condition for enterprises to subse -
quently claim short- time working benefits. 
Assum ing that current registration patterns 
mirror those in the past, around 6 million 
people may have been in short-  time work in 
April. In the same month, seasonally adjusted 
registered unemployment rose sharply by 
373,000 on the month to 2.64 million, with 
the unemployment rate increasing by 0.8 per -
centage point to 5.8%. The severe recession is 
also gradually making its mark on agreements 
in the current wage round. Instead of signifi -German econ -
omy in deep 
recession
Economic slump 
on a broad front
Credit develop -
ments and credit 
standardsLabour market 
considerably 
impacted by 
the effects of 
the pandemic 
measures Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
8

cant pay improvements, the focus is now on 
protecting jobs.
Up to and including March, the pandemic and 
the containment measures affected consumer 
price inflation mainly through lower energy 
prices. By contrast, there was no observable 
change in the general price trend. This is likely 
to do with the containment measures’ large 
number of partially conflicting price effects. By 
March there had also still not yet been any sig -
nificant constraints in the collection of prices, 
as this took place around the middle of the 
month and thus in some cases before the 
severe  restric tions were imposed across Ger -
many. It was not until April that there were 
mounting reports of difficulties in the on- site 
collection of prices and of the non- availability 
of individual price representatives. This mainly 
affected the services sector (e.g. hair salon 
visits) and travel (e.g. package holidays or hotel 
accommodation).
Against this backdrop, inflation declined from 
1.3% in March to 0.8% in April, reflecting a 
further sharp fall in energy prices. By contrast, 
food prices rose significantly. The core rate, i.e. 
the annual inflation rate excluding energy and 
food, weakened from 1.3% to 1.0%.
The German economy will remain firmly in the 
grip of the COVID-  19 pandemic in the second 
quarter. Economic output is likely to be signifi -
cantly lower still than the average of the already  
depressed first quarter. This is mainly due to the 
fact that the containment measures will have 
an impact for a considerably longer period than 
in the first quarter, when they mainly only 
affected  the second half of March. Despite the 
easing that has been initiated, social and eco -
nomic life in Germany is still very far from a 
situation that would previously have been 
regarded  as normal. The available economic in -
dicators show a correspondingly gloomy pic -
ture. For instance, sentiment among enter -
prises and consumers recently fell to the lowest 
level ever recorded since observations began in 
the Federal Republic of Germany. Timely high- frequency indicators also indicate that eco -
nomic activity in the second quarter has re -
mained strongly subdued thus far. This applies 
both to the services sector, in which business 
activity was massively restricted on a temporary 
basis by the containment measures imple -
mented, and to industry, which has to cope 
with a slump in incoming orders from Germany 
and abroad. By contrast, the construction sec -
tor appears to be comparatively robust. In add -
ition, fiscal policy is providing positive stimuli.
There is currently much to suggest that macro -
economic developments will pick up again over 
the course of the second quarter as a result of 
the easing of measures and that a recovery will 
ensue. However, there is a very high degree of 
uncertainty about economic developments 
going forward. These will depend, amongst 
other things, on the further global spread of 
the virus and the measures to contain it, but 
also on the resultant changes in consumption 
and investment behaviour.
This crisis situation shows how important 
sound public finances are. They enable central 
government to take on extensive costs and 
risks without sacrificing confidence in its ability 
to act. German public finances have been 
placed on a sound footing in recent years. In 
2019, the general government budget recorded 
a structural surplus and the debt ratio fell below 
60%. Since March, however, German fiscal pol -
icy has been dominated by the COVID-  19 epi -
demic. Extensive fiscal policy measures have 
been implemented to support the health sys -
tem and limit economic damage. In addition, 
public finances are to some extent automatic -
ally stabilising economic developments. Taxes, 
in particular, are falling sharply and expenditure 
on short- time workers’ benefits and unemploy -
ment benefits is growing strongly. The latest 
tax estimate is therefore not a surprise and 
confirmed expectations. In addition, enter -
prises can receive extensive credit guarantees 
and in some cases government capital injec -
tions are also being envisaged. Such assistance 
will increase the Maastricht debt level. Overall, No significant 
impact of the 
pandemic on 
inflation trend 
to date
Inflation rate in 
April markedly 
lower due to 
energy
German 
economy  in 
accelerated 
tailspin  in 
Q2 2020Recovery fore -
seeable, but 
scale and speed 
uncertain
Public finances 
have stabilising 
effect in the 
coronavirus 
crisis Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
9

a high deficit and a sharp rise in the debt ratio 
are only a matter of time, though the actual 
extent remains very uncertain. However, Ger -
many is likely to be able to cope well with these 
challenges because it built up considerable lee -
way before the crisis.
It was important and right that fiscal policy 
makers quickly set up a broad rescue package 
in the face of the abrupt deterioration in the 
macroeconomic situation. The aim was, and 
still is, to avoid overwhelming the healthcare 
system and to limit the economic fallout of the 
containment measures. The objective of fiscal 
measures to support economic activity is to 
limit income losses, unemployment and cor -
porate insolvencies as much as possible. As the 
duration, scale and economic impact of the 
course of the pandemic and the resulting con -
straints are difficult to estimate reliably, adjust -
ments may become necessary. For example, 
the longer economic activity is restricted as a 
result of the pandemic, the more squeezed 
enter prises will be. If insolvencies and subse -
quent unemployment are to be avoided in the 
event of prolonged restrictions, it would be 
logical  to retool government assistance from 
liquid ity support to solvency protection.
The Federal Government is preparing measures 
to stimulate economic activity going forward. 
This means that it will be possible to addition -
ally counteract weak demand following the 
severe  restrictions. An economic stimulus pro -
gramme should be targeted and mainly tem -
porary and could incorporate other govern -
ment objectives such as climate protection or 
digitalisation. When the fiscal stabilisation 
measures are phased out and the economy 
picks up, public finances will then improve 
again automatically, at least to a large extent. 
Owing to the favourable starting position, fiscal 
policy is likely to still have sufficient scope for a 
strong temporary stimulus if necessary. The 
budgetary rules, with their exemption clauses, 
offer sufficient flexibility to deliver the appropri -
ate fiscal response to the current crisis. At the 
same time, they will ensure a reduction in the temporarily required deficits and higher debt 
ratio going forward. Given the high level of un -
certainty, it is not yet possible to reliably assess 
the extent to which a subsequent consolidation 
will be necessary. In this respect, it is logical to 
focus on stabilising economic activity for the 
time being and to not yet address potential 
consolidation measures. There is therefore also 
ample justification for initially continuing to 
monitor and assess developments as well as 
basing the Federal Government’s budget plans, 
for example, on better information in the third 
quarter.
In the other euro area countries, public finances 
are likewise making a strong contribution to 
stability. The European Commission and the 
European Council have activated the general 
escape clause of the Stability and Growth Pact; 
the usual rules are therefore no longer in force 
until further notice. The case for this measure is 
quite strong in the light of the exceptional cri -
sis. Owing to extensive measures taken in all 
countries and due to the severe economic 
slump, the European Commission has most 
recently  forecast a euro area deficit ratio of 
over 8%. The debt ratio is set to rise past 
100%. However, the Commission is expecting 
a visible reversal to occur in 2021: given a re -
bounding economy and the phase- out of sup -
port measures, the deficit ratio will then go 
back down to 3½%. Going forward, the aim 
will once again be to reduce the high debt 
ratios in an orderly manner commensurate with 
the fiscal rules.
It is also in the euro area where the important 
role of sound public finances in crisis resolution 
is being witnessed. Some individual countries 
currently have only limited leeway as they are 
being squeezed by rising financing costs. Ac -
tion to address this situation is being taken at 
the European level. The idea is to shield coun -
tries in part from the consequences of a loss of 
confidence so that important and sound meas -
ures are not rejected out of fears of negative 
market reactions. This is why the European 
Council has approved a raft of joint fiscal meas -Supportive fiscal 
policy in the 
crisis  important 
and right
Economic 
stimulus  pro -
gramme as and 
when needed 
going forwardPublic finances 
throughout euro 
area making 
strong contribu -
tion to stability
Protection 
against loss of 
confidence in 
public financesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
10

ures ensuring favourable financing conditions 
and thus facilitating efforts to combat the cri -
sis. Further joint assistance is in the pipeline.
All in all, fiscal policy is in a position to make an 
essential contribution to resolving the COVID-  
19 crisis. This is primarily a national task. How -
ever, the European level is likewise capable of 
making an important contribution in the spirit 
of solidarity. Assistance loans at favourable 
interest rates can take pressure of those Mem -
ber States which are having – or are afraid of 
encountering – temporary difficulties accessing 
the capital markets. This is what the ESM is for, in principle. Transfers can also be made in order 
to support those Member States hit especially 
hard by the crisis. The EU budget would be a 
suitable tool for this purpose and could also be 
expanded considerably depending on the polit -
ical consensus reached. As has usually been the 
case, the measures can be transparently and 
directly funded by contributions from Member 
States. In order to maintain a balance between 
liability and responsibility, a new extensive and, 
in particular, more permanent debt instrument 
at the European level should logically be ac -
companied by more comprehensive integration 
steps.Further 
European- level 
measures 
plannedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
11

Global and European setting
World economic 
developments 
Within just a few weeks, the rapid spread of 
the novel coronavirus has plunged the world 
economy into a deep recession. In particular, 
the far- reaching measures imposed in many 
places to contain the spread of the virus have 
weighed heavily on economic activity. In China, 
where the pandemic originated, economic life 
largely came to a standstill in the first half of 
February 2020. After restrictions were eased in 
March, some parts of the economy returned to 
normal. Nevertheless, quarterly gross domestic 
product (GDP) figures for the first quarter are 
showing a collapse of historical proportions. 
Similar developments are becoming evident 
elsewhere – with a certain time lag. Looking at 
the euro area, real GDP had already fallen 
sharply in the first quarter. Aggregate output shrank considerably in the United Kingdom and 
the United States as well, while the contraction 
evident for Japan will be only slightly milder. 
However, the main impact of the massive tight -
ening of containment measures in many places 
over the course of March is not likely to be re -
flected in the GDP results until the second 
quarter. The same will also hold for most emer -
ging market economies, which in some cases 
are suffering from the additional burden of 
worsened financing terms and the steep drop 
in commodity prices.
Surveys of purchasing managers confirm the 
considerable disruption to economic activity. To 
wit, under the impact of the sharp contraction 
in China, the global Purchasing Managers’ 
Index in February fell back below the expansion 
threshold for the first time since the global 
finan cial and economic crisis. Despite initial 
signs of delays in cross- border production 
chains, the assessment of the situation in the 
industrial countries initially deteriorated only 
slightly.1 However, as COVID-  19 spread glob -
ally, the downturn picked up momentum here, 
too. Countries that were quick to impose ex -
tensive containment measures took the great -
est hit.2 The services sector, which is typically 
more resilient during normal economic down -
turns, was particularly affected. As of late, 
however, it was precisely the tourism and rec -
reation industry which was suffering under 
travel restric tions, contact bans and business World economy 
in deep 
recession 
Services sector 
particularly 
affected
Stringency of government containment 
measures*
Sources: Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker, IMF 
and Bundesbank calculations. * According to the Oxford COV-
ID-19 Government Response Tracker. A value of 0 denotes no 
response, while 100 indicates the most stringent containment 
measures possible. 1 Aggregation of stringency indices for in-
dividual  countries,  weighted  by  each  country’s  percentage 
share of global GDP based on market exchange rates.
Deutsche BundesbankJan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May
2020020406080100Index values, daily data
020406080100Global1
China USA
United KingdomCountry values
Japan
1 Details of the Purchasing Managers’ Index for global 
manufacturing indicate such problems, with the delivery 
times sub- component plummeting between January and 
March 2020.
2 In this vein, the survey data in April deteriorated drastic -
ally for India, Italy, France and Spain. On a monthly average 
– measured in terms of an index to assess the stringency of 
government response measures developed at the Univer -
sity of Oxford – these countries deployed the most strin -
gent measures. By contrast, in Japan and the United States, 
which implemented less stringent intervention measures, 
business activity was more robust. For a description of the 
index, see Hale et al. (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
12

closures.3 Overall, the Purchasing Managers’ 
Index for services dropped in April to by far its 
lowest level since the survey was introduced in 
1998.
Since the end of April, the first restrictions were 
relaxed in Europe, but also the United States, 
meaning that activity could be gradually re -
started in some sectors of the economy. Other 
countries are likely to follow. The world econo -
my’s path to recovery will largely depend on 
the pace at which rules are relaxed and on how 
the pandemic develops, making it highly uncer -
tain. It is to be expected that at least some eco -
nomic activities will remain subject to signifi -
cant restrictions for a long time yet. Cautionary 
consumer restraint, as can be observed in 
China, is also likely to impede a swift return to 
normal. Finally, there is the risk that, despite 
broad government assistance, the recovery 
process will extend over a longer period due to 
weak corporate finances and rigidities on the 
labour market.4
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) appears 
to have been guided by similar thinking when 
preparing its most recent World Economic Out -
look. For the current year, even despite a 
second- half improvement, the IMF is expecting 
global GDP to contract by 3% (calculated on 
the basis of purchasing power parity weights).5 
A slump in activity of this magnitude would be 
unparalleled since the end of the Second World 
War. Although global GDP is expected to jump 
by nearly 6% in the coming year, according to 
the current forecast, in the final quarter of 
2021 it would remain some 3% behind the 
level that had been expected in January. In add -
ition, even regarding this projection, the IMF 
sees risks as being tilted considerably to the 
downside, mostly directly related to the further 
trajectory of the pandemic. Thus, keeping con -
tainment measures in force for a protracted 
period or tightening them in response to a po -
tential fresh outbreak could exacerbate the 
economic crisis.6First restrictions 
eased but return 
to normal not 
likely any time 
soon
IMF expecting 
most severe 
post- war 
economic  crisisSectoral Purchasing Managers’ Indices 
for the global economy*
Sources: IHS Markit and JP Morgan. * Output component: val-
ues over 50 indicate month-on-month growth, and values un-
der 50 a month-on-month decline, in business activity.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20202530354045505560Index points, seasonally adjusted
Quarterly averages
Selected segments of the services sector 
in April 2020
10 20 30 40 50 60Financial 
servicesHealth care 
services
Industry-related 
services
Transport
Tourism and 
recreationServicesManufacturing 
April
3 The purchasing managers’ assessment is corroborated by 
other indicators of activity, with the OpenTable reservation 
platform recording a near- total stop to restaurant visits 
since the last week of March in countries where the com -
pany operates. According to information provided by flight -
radar24, global air traffic fell by nearly two- thirds year- on- 
year in April.
4 To wit, at the beginning of April the G20 countries had 
already adopted spending and tax reduction programmes 
amounting to 3½% of GDP . This sum, which does not in -
clude extensive lending programmes or capital injections, 
has since been topped up further and, according to IMF 
estimates, has already surpassed the fiscal stimulus pack -
ages adopted during the global financial and economic cri -
sis. See International Monetary Fund (2020a).
5 See International Monetary Fund (2020b).
6 In the most unfavourable scenario put forward by the 
IMF, global GDP in 2021 will undershoot the level assumed 
in the forecasts by a further 8%. See International Monet -
ary Fund (2020b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
13

The abrupt contraction in economic activity 
also left a deep mark on the international com -
modity markets. Crude oil prices, in particular, 
collapsed. This was due to a severe drop in de -
mand for energy, partly as a result of global re -
strictions on movement. On the supply side, 
temporary expansions of production by Saudi 
Arabia and Russia contributed to the pressure 
on prices. This price war was settled in the 
second week of April, at least for the time 
being, by a renewed agreement between OPEC 
and its partners on extensive production cuts. 
Other producers also cut their production vol -
umes given sales prices which were only rarely 
break- even.7 Nevertheless, the International 
Energy Agency is expecting a considerable glut 
in crude oil markets for the first half of the 
year.8 Against this background, expected inven -
tory bottlenecks weighed additionally on 
prices.9 As this report went to press, the price 
of a barrel of Brent crude oil stood at US$30. 
This was a drop of more than 60% from the 
previous year’s level. While futures prices were significantly higher, the forward curve does not 
point to a complete price recovery in the near 
future. The prices of non- energy commodities, 
as measured by the HWWI price index, likewise 
declined in the reporting period, albeit to a 
much lesser extent than crude oil prices. Indus -
trial commodities prices fell more sharply than 
those of food and beverages.
The global economic slump dampened con -
sumer price inflation in large areas of the world. 
In the industrial countries, year- on- year energy 
prices, driven by plunging crude oil prices, went 
into reverse and dipped well into negative ter -
ritory in March. Even core inflation, which strips 
out energy and food, has fallen distinctly to 
1.6% since the end of 2019, though this was 
also abetted by sliding prices for travel services. 
Headline inflation in the industrial countries 
shrank from 1.8% in December 2019 to 1.2% 
in March 2020.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In China, the country where the pandemic ori -
ginated, economic activity was already severely 
impaired in the first quarter as a result of strin -
gent containment measures. Real GDP col -
lapsed by 6.8% on the year. According to the 
official statistics, this was the first GDP contrac -
tion since the introduction of quarterly esti -
mates in 1992. Almost all sectors took a hit in 
the first quarter. Losses were particularly severe 
in hotel and restaurant services as well as in 
wholesale and retail trade. Industrial produc -
tion fell by nearly 9%, mainly because the plant 
shutdowns on either side of Chinese New Year, 
which were originally scheduled to end in late Crude oil prices 
down sharplyUpward pressure  
on consumer 
prices easing
Chinese 
economy  first to 
be severely 
impaired by 
impact of virus 
outbreak …World market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and
food and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 8 May 2020, or 1 to 14 May 2020 for crude 
oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020304050607080Monthly averages, log scale
8090100110120130140
80901001101202015 = 100, US dollar basis, enlarged scaleCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beveragesIndustrial commodities
7 Particularly in the US states of Texas, New Mexico and 
Louisiana, almost two- thirds of the surveyed exploring and 
production firms reported prices per barrel of WTI of 
US$24 or lower as being insufficient to cover operating 
costs. See Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (2020).
8 See International Energy Agency (2020).
9 Futures contracts for a barrel of WTI were even occasion -
ally trading in negative territory just before their expiry date 
for May delivery.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
14

January, were extended for at least a week by 
the authorities in large areas of the country. In 
addition, labour shortages and the absence of 
supplies made it difficult to subsequently ramp 
up production. Large- scale losses of production 
and logistical problems also led to a sharp de -
cline in goods exports, thereby interrupting 
cross- border supply chains in parts.
In the meantime, China has considerably eased 
its containment measures. Nevertheless, the 
Chinese economy is still far from its normal 
state. Many services sectors are suffering from 
consumer restraint. Retail sales were down in 
April 2020 by as much as 7½% on the year. 
Supply- side disruptions in industry have now 
largely been rectified, and exports accordingly 
rebounded considerably in March and April, 
but given the massive slump in global eco -
nomic activity, this recovery is likely to be only 
temporary.10 The marked deterioration in the 
labour market is another sign that the domestic 
economy will not see a rapid improvement. 
Not least against this backdrop, it is surprising 
that the fiscal and monetary policy stance has 
so far been only moderately expansionary.
India was hit only relatively late by the pan -
demic. Nonetheless, its government already 
imposed a strict lockdown on 24 March 2020. 
Given the relatively informal structure of India’s 
economy, the lockdown hit broad segments of 
the population especially hard. Many day 
labour  ers are no longer receiving income. 
Activ ity in the services sector appears to have 
almost ground to a temporary halt. This is the 
picture being conveyed at any rate by the cor -
responding Purchasing Managers’ Index, which 
collapsed in April.11 All in all, there is reason to 
fear a severe contraction in economic output in 
the current quarter. The government initiated a 
rescue package for the needy with a volume 
amounting to 0.8% of GDP and is currently 
preparing an even larger economic stimulus 
programme. The Reserve Bank of India adopted 
a raft of liquidity and easing measures, includ -
ing slashing its policy rate by 75 basis points to 
4.4%.The pandemic arrived in Brazil, too, at a rela -
tively late stage. Moreover, the government 
has thus far resisted taking far- reaching nation -
wide containment measures; only some of its 
constituent states imposed restrictions on pub -
lic life beginning in March 2020. These meas -
ures are already beginning to leave visible foot -
prints in the macroeconomic indicators, with 
both retail sales and industrial production in 
March falling distinctly short of their level over 
the same period a year ago. Real GDP is likely 
to have already shrunk in the first quarter of 
the year. Economic output is set to contract 
sharply in the current quarter. The tightening of 
external financing conditions is weighing add -
itionally on the Brazilian economy. Yields on 
sovereign debt have picked up distinctly, and 
the real has depreciated against the US dollar 
by just over 30% since the beginning of the 
year. The central bank has undertaken multiple 
policy rate cuts; the rate now stands at 3%.
The Russian economy is currently being buf -
feted both by the direct impact of the pan -
demic and by the collapse in oil prices. In order … and still far 
removed from 
normal at the 
current end, too
India’s informal 
sector hit par -
ticularly hardBrazil: compara -
tively lenient 
containment 
measuresChina: economic indicators
20151050510
––––++Year-on-year percentage change
Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.
2019 2020
Source: NBS. 1 No data for individual months available owing 
to the Chinese New Year festival.
Deutsche BundesbankApr. Mar. Jan./
Feb.1Retail salesIndustrial production 
10 In that vein, according to the Markit Purchasing Man -
agers’ Index for manufacturing, the component for new 
export orders in April dropped to its lowest level since the 
end of 2008.
11 At a paltry 5.4 points, India’s index is at the bottom of 
the standings in a cross- country comparison.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
15

to contain the contagion, the government 
ordered employees to stay home from work 
between the end of March 2020 and the mid -
dle of May. Massive aggregate losses are there -
fore on the cards for the second quarter. In 
order to cushion the impact of the economic 
slump, the government has initiated an assis -
tance programme for businesses and house -
holds amounting to around 3% of GDP . To 
prop up the government budget, which, owing 
to high oil price- related revenue losses, is fa -
cing severe distress, the government can also 
access the reserves of the National Welfare 
Fund, which as at end-  April amounted to just 
shy of 10% of GDP . Since March, the central 
bank has reduced the policy rate by 50 basis 
points to 5.5%.
United States
In the United States, as from mid- March 2020 
the authorities began to respond to skyrocket -
ing infection and death counts. The initially 
locally  confined containment measures were 
already enough to weigh quite considerably on 
economic life. According to an initial estimate, 
even despite a solid start to the year, first-  
quarter GDP was down by 1¼% on the quarter. 
Services, which are usually relatively impervious 
to volatility, suffered particularly under the cur -fews and business closures. Although spending 
on consumer durables and business investment 
was likewise reduced significantly, and US 
products found fewer buyers globally, the 
losses in this area have to date been lower than 
during the financial and economic crisis. House -
holds’ consumer spending on food and some 
drugstore products was even up considerably.12 
Imports, on the other hand, plunged sharply. 
Against the background of international travel 
warnings and bans, it was especially spending 
on overseas tourism which fell. The interrup -
tion of supplies from China owing to factory 
closures in that country in the first-  quarter 
months appears to have been a factor as well.13
As the containment measures were tightened 
and regionally expanded, the economic crisis 
intensified at the beginning of the second 
quarter. This was reflected especially on the 
labour  market, where, in April alone, just under 
21 million workers were laid off. This meant 
that it took only a single month for nearly as 
many jobs to be lost as had been created dur -
ing the preceding boom, which had lasted 
more than a decade. The unemployment rate 
accordingly rose to 14.7% in April, the highest 
figure since measurement began in 1948.14 The 
government responded to early signs of a dras -
tic deterioration in the labour market situation 
by significantly expanding unemployment 
benefits as a temporary measure. One- off pay -Economic 
output  in Russia 
severely 
impaired since 
March
GDP plummeted 
in first quarterCrisis having 
severe impact 
on labour 
market US labour market indicators
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1 According to the business 
survey;  excluding  agriculture.  2 According  to  the  household 
survey.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20125135145155Seasonally adjusted, monthly data
481216 Unemployed 2
As a percentage of the entire 
civilian labour forceEmployed1
Million
12 Investment in private housing construction, which typ -
ically already begins to flag in the run- up to economic 
slowdowns, even picked up sharply. At the end of the 
quarter, though, new construction was likewise con -
strained severely by the containment measures.
13 US imports of goods from China were down in the first 
quarter by one- fifth from the previous quarter’s level in 
terms of value. Imports from other countries even saw a 
slight uptick.
14 The historically unparalleled rise in the number of first- 
time applications for unemployment assistance had sug -
gested an even more dramatic increase in unemployment. 
Indeed, many workers unable to show up for work owing 
to business closures were erroneously listed as remaining 
employed. Absent such erroneous classifications, the un -
employment rate would probably have risen to around 
20%. In addition, many recipients of benefits were, by their 
own account, not available for the labour market in April, 
pushing the employment rate down considerably. Add -
itional family responsibilities owing to the closure of 
schools and childcare facilities may have been an important 
factor here.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
16

ments were made as well. Other measures 
envis age tax relief, lending programmes and 
direct financial aid to enterprises. All in all, 
accord ing to estimates by the Congressional 
Budget Office, the federal budget deficit could 
balloon this year to just under 18% of GDP .15 
The US Federal Reserve responded to the crisis 
by cutting its policy rate to nearly zero and 
launching extensive liquidity programmes. All 
these actions are set to support the economic 
recovery process set in motion by the latest 
easing of containment measures.
Japan
For a long while, Japan’s experience of the 
coronavirus pandemic tended to be mild by 
international standards. Against this back -
ground, the government felt less compelled 
than other countries to take drastic containment 
measures, instead, in particular, appealing to the 
public to engage in social distancing. However, 
schools were closed throughout the country and 
large events –  including the Olympic Games 
scheduled for this summer  – cancelled. Real 
GDP is likely to have gone down once again in 
the first quarter already, not least owing to per -
sistent consumer restraint. Prior to the outbreak 
of the pandemic, a slight recovery had actually 
been expected following the severe damper in 
the final quarter of 2019 caused by a VAT hike. 
In April, following a rapid rise in infection and 
death counts, the Japanese government saw the 
need to respond by declaring a national emer -
gency. The attendant restrictions are set to have 
weighed additionally on economic activity. In 
the same month, Japan’s cabinet approved an 
extensive economic stimulus package in order to 
counteract recessionary tendencies. In addition, 
the Bank of Japan intensified its already expan -
sionary monetary policy stance.
United Kingdom
The United Kingdom is one of the countries 
that has been most severely affected by the pandemic around the globe thus far. The UK 
government responded with wide- ranging 
containment measures from the end of March 
2020, including contact bans and closures of 
schools and businesses. Due to the higher level 
of uncertainty caused by the virus’s spread, 
economic output had already fallen sharply in 
this month. Monthly gross value added con -
tracted by just under 6%. The hotel and res -
taurant sectors and other services sectors such 
as trade, education, art, entertainment and rec -
reation were particularly hard hit. Manufactur -
ing output also shrank markedly. According to 
an initial estimate, there was a quarter- on- 
quarter decline of 2% in real GDP in the first 
quarter after seasonal adjustment. The second 
quarter is likely to see a much sharper dip in 
activity, given the prolonged restrictions.16 The 
Composite Purchasing Managers’ Index, which 
had already seen an enormous decline in 
March, fell to an all- time low in April. The situ -
ation on the labour market also deteriorated 
considerably within a very short period of 
time.17 UK government data show that applica -
tions for the government’s new scheme to 
continue the payment of wages and salaries 
were made for 7.5 million employees, and new 
welfare applications have risen by 2.5 million 
since mid- March. In response to the crisis, the 
government launched a sizeable package of fis -
cal measures.18 The Bank of England succes -Less restrictive 
containment 
measures but 
underlying trend 
dynamics previ -
ously already 
weak
Deep recession 
expected15 See Congressional Budget Office (2020).
16 In its scenario analysis, the Office for Budget Responsi -
bility considers the possibility of a dramatic decline in GDP 
of 35% in the second quarter compared with the first quar -
ter. The unemployment rate could reportedly soar to 10%. 
See Office for Budget Responsibility (2020).
17 This is also indicated by business surveys conducted by 
the UK’s Office for National Statistics (ONS). According to 
these surveys, over 40% of the surveyed businesses con -
tinuing to trade stated that they had laid off employees 
temporarily between 23 March and 5 April 2020 due to the 
coronavirus pandemic, while only 7% of companies had 
recruited new staff. Another survey conducted between 
6 and 19 April 2020 produced similar results. See Office for 
National Statistics (2020).
18 Credit lines provided as part of the Corporate Financing 
Facility and the Coronavirus Business Interruption Loan 
Scheme account for a significant proportion of these. 
Further more, additional funds were made available for the 
National Health Service (NHS) and for direct support to 
businesses and households.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
17

sively lowered its base rate by 65 basis points 
to 0.1% and announced bond purchases.
Poland
Once the pandemic had also reached Poland at 
the beginning of March, the government im -
mediately enacted a series of measures, which 
were subsequently extended and tightened. 
The impact of this could be observed in certain 
services sectors in particular. For example, retail 
sales in March fell by 13% on the previous 
month after seasonal adjustment. Industrial 
output decreased by 7.3% during the same 
period, with passenger car production experi -
encing a major setback. This will have been 
partly due to European manufacturers closing 
their plants. Overall, first- quarter real GDP 
shrank by 0.5% on the quarter. An even 
stronger decline in GDP is expected for the 
second quarter. This is suggested by the fact 
that sentiment in the industrial and services 
sectors fell to an all- time low in April. Against 
this backdrop, the Polish central bank lowered 
its policy rate by a total of 100 basis points to 
0.5%, despite the recent very strong rise in 
consumer prices by 4.6% on the year. Further -
more, it adopted measures to strengthen 
liquid ity in the banking system and a purchase 
programme for government bonds. These 
measures accompany the Polish government’s 
comprehensive economic stimulus package.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The spread of the novel coronavirus in Europe 
and the measures taken to contain it had a very 
negative impact on economic activity in the 
euro area towards the end of the first quarter 
of 2020. In the quarter as a whole, real GDP fell 
by a seasonally adjusted 3.8% on the preced -
ing period according to Eurostat’s flash esti -
mate. Taking into account the fact that the 
restric tions on economic life largely came into 
effect in the second half of March, economic output may have decreased by around one-  
fifth within a short space of time (for more in -
formation on this, see the box on p. 21).
The pandemic spread across the euro area from 
mid- February; first in northern Italy and then in 
other regions. Besides Italy, Spain and France 
were also severely affected. As a result, these 
three large euro area countries felt compelled 
to take drastic measures in light of the rapidly 
increasing case numbers and the subsequent 
strain on their health sectors. These measures 
included curfews, the closure of businesses, 
restaurants and hotels, cultural institutions, 
sports facilities, schools and universities as well 
as restrictions on international transport and 
travel. In some cases, non- essential production 
activities were even shut down temporarily. 
Public life largely came to a standstill in these 
countries. Other Member States followed suit 
with similarly far- reaching, albeit often less 
strict interventions as a precaution. All in all, 
governments placed heavy restrictions on eco -
nomic activity in the euro area over the course 
of March, with most Member States once more 
tightening measures considerably around the 
middle of the month in particular.19
Aside from the official order to close busi -
nesses, the precautions taken by households 
and companies were also important. Even be -
fore the official restrictions came into force, 
many households had already begun to reduce 
their social contact and forgo mobility. Travel 
and visits to restaurants were limited in particu -
lar.20 Businesses also made efforts to prevent 
infections.
The various containment and precautionary 
measures taken restricted economic activity in Policy rate cuts 
and economic 
stimulus pack -
age to limit 
recession
Sharp decline 
in economic 
activity  towards 
end of Q1Spread of 
coronavirus 
sparked drastic 
measures
Private precau -
tions also 
important
19 This picture is confirmed by the Oxford COVID-  19 Gov -
ernment Response  Tracker.
20 For example, according to data provided by the book -
ing platform OpenTable, some countries already saw a 
trend decline in visits to restaurants in the first half of 
March compared to the same period in 2019. The figures 
for air traffic according to flightradar24 also indicate a 
downward trend in the number of daily flight departures 
from major European airports at the beginning of March.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
18

a variety of ways. Business closures and bans 
on events immediately brought about reduc -
tions in activity. Furthermore, businesses felt 
compelled to pause production in order to 
adapt their operations to stricter hygiene re -
quirements. The closure of education facilities 
tended to narrow the labour supply as parents 
had to reduce their working hours because of a 
lack of childcare. Some of these losses could be 
covered by changes in the way that services 
were provided. For instance, restaurants in -
creasingly offered takeaway services. Telework -
ing and flexible working time models replaced 
set hours in offices. Face- to- face meetings 
were replaced by digital communication, and 
in- store shopping by mail order purchases. 
These alternatives were not available every -
where, however, and were only able to reduce 
the fallout slightly. In some cases, they were 
probably also accompanied by productivity 
losses. Finally, there were disruptions in supply 
chains on account of the border closures.
There were further indirect effects in addition 
to these direct effects. Demand from house -
holds and enterprises is likely to have suffered 
due to the expectation of income losses and a 
lack of planning certainty. According to Euro -
pean Commission surveys, households’ expect -
ations regarding their financial situation in April 
deteriorated drastically, and they clearly re -
frained from planning larger purchases. Enter -
prises acted similarly with their recruitment and 
investment plans.
Broken down by economic sector, some ser -
vices sectors were immediately hit hardest by 
the restrictions. This is especially true for retail 
outlets, the hotel and catering trade and per -
sonal services. The heavier losses in services set 
the current economic downturn apart from 
previous cyclical downturns in which the eco -
nomic slowdown was typically seen chiefly in 
the manufacturing sector. While mail order 
trade and postal and courier services may have 
benefited from the situation, this did not come 
close to offsetting the revenue losses in other 
sectors. Subsequently, the Purchasing Man -agers’ Index for the services sector had already 
reached its lowest position on record in March. 
In April it declined strongly again.
Manufacturing suffered greatly as well, al -
though the official restrictions imposed on the 
sector were less strict in most countries. Indus -
trial output in March fell by 11% on the previ -
ous month after seasonal adjustment. A host 
of sectors recorded significant declines, includ -
ing the manufacture of machinery and equip -
ment and the textile and clothing industry. The 
production of motor vehicles saw a particularly 
steep drop. Across Europe, production has 
been suspended in a great many factories and 
ancillary industries since mid- March following 
disruptions in cross- border supply chains and a 
lack of sales opportunities given the closure of 
motor vehicle traders. By contrast, the produc -
tion of food recorded comparatively small 
losses in March, whilst output even increased 
in the pharmaceutical industry. The further de -
cline in the production component of the Pur -Only limited 
mitigation 
possible  for 
major, direct 
restrictions
Indirect effects
Services particu -
larly hard hitLosses in 
manufacturing  
considerable, 
tooStringency of government containment 
measures in the euro area *
Sources:  Oxford  COVID-19  Government  Response  Tracker, 
Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. * According to the Ox-
ford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker. A value of 0 de-
notes no response, while 100 indicates the most stringent con-
tainment  measures  possible.  1 Stringency  index  for  16  euro 
area Member States, weighted by nominal GDP.
Deutsche BundesbankJan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May
2020020406080100Index values, daily data
020406080100Euro area1
France
ItalySpainof which
GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
19

chasing Managers’ Index for manufacturing in 
April indicates that in this sector, too, the 
downturn during the month of March was 
even sharper than the monthly average. This is 
also suggested by the steep drop in capacity 
utilisation from 81% in January to 70% in April.
In addition, substantial restrictions were im -
posed on construction. Consequently, the Pur -
chasing Managers’ Index for construction in 
April fell to a new all- time low after having 
already  declined significantly in the previous 
month. Nevertheless, output in the construc -
tion sector probably was not scaled back as 
sharply as in services and industry. This was 
probably because the rules in certain euro area 
countries were less restrictive for this sector. 
Moreover, the real estate markets and con -
struction activity in several countries had been 
very buoyant beforehand. Despite considerable 
losses, the order books still remained distinctly 
above their long- term average in April accord -
ing to European Commission surveys.
The economic crisis triggered by the pandemic 
can also be seen very clearly in expenditure-  
side indicators. Retail sales fell by 11% from 
February to March, although food trade and 
mail orders increased. However, this was not 
nearly enough to offset the steep declines in 
other sectors. Overall, the first quarter was down 3% on the previous quarter. The number 
of new motor vehicle registrations decreased 
by just under 60% in March, and fell by one-  
third in the first quarter.21 The reduction in con -
struction activity had a direct dampening effect 
on the volume of investment. Exports and im -
ports were also down markedly due to produc -
tion restrictions in some countries as well as 
weaker demand, and to more difficult trans -
port conditions and the lack of tourism activity.
Although no euro area country was spared the 
effects of the COVID-  19 pandemic, so far the 
economic slump has hit France, Italy and Spain 
particularly hard.22 In France, seasonally ad -
justed real GDP dropped by almost 6% in the 
first quarter according to an initial official esti -
mate. The decline was spread broadly across 
sectors, although the government containment 
measures primarily affected certain services. 
The fact that employees could be given sick 
leave in order to care for children and when -
ever the possibility of working from home was 
not available is likely to have been a factor. This 
reduced the available labour force markedly. 
According to a survey by the French labour   
ministry, over 10% of employees in the private 
sector were absent due to illness at the end of 
March.23 In Italy, while preventative measures 
were taken early, they were initially limited to 
certain regions only. These measures were sub -
sequently extended to the whole country, and 
production in sectors deemed to be non-  
essential was suspended for a time by official 
decree. As a consequence, economic output 
contracted by almost 5% on the previous quar -
ter according to a provisional estimate by the 
Italian statistical office. However, the extremely 
sharp drop in industrial output in March sug -
gests that the decline could have been even Construction 
activity down as 
well
Massive declines 
also apparent 
on expenditure 
sideMassive GDP 
losses in the 
large Member 
StatesSectoral Purchasing Managers’ Indices 
for the euro area *
Source: IHS Markit. * Values over 50 indicate period-on-period 
growth in business activity. 1 Output component.
Deutsche Bundesbank2005 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20102030405060Index values, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
ServicesManufacturing 1
21 The roadmap to gradually reduce the CO₂ limits for 
motor vehicles in the EU announced at the beginning of 
the year is likely to have played a role too, however.
22 It should be noted that the work of statistical offices 
has similarly been impaired by the pandemic, and statistical 
reports and surveys did not have the usual coverage in all 
cases. The official figures on GDP growth in the first quar -
ter are likely to be of an even more provisional nature than 
is otherwise the case.
23 See Dares (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
20

The monthly development of aggregate output 
in the euro area
At the end of the fi  rst quarter, aggregate 
economic activity in the euro area experi-
enced a sudden and unexpected collapse as 
a result of the COVID- 19 pandemic and the 
measures taken to contain it. Key monthly 
economic indicators, such as industrial out-
put and real retail sales, fell sharply in March. 
The extent to which aggregate output 
dropped in that month is, of course, a mat-
ter of discussion. Most statistical offi   ces, in-
cluding Eurostat, publish fi  gures for real 
gross domestic product (GDP) on a quar-
terly basis only.
In order to obtain a picture of monthly GDP 
development, we can apply a statistical es-
timation procedure that breaks down the 
quarterly GDP series into monthly data by 
means of other indicator variables.1 In this 
context, industrial output, price- adjusted 
retail sales, and goods exports2 are used as 
indicator variables.
The estimate shows that, following weak 
fi  nal fi  gures for 2019, the euro area econ-
omy was unable to recover in the fi  rst two 
months of 2020, with economic activity re-
maining essentially unchanged in both January and February. Sentiment indicators 
suggested that there would be an upturn in 
the subsequent months. According to 
model outputs, economic output instead 
plummeted by more than 9% in March.3 
This sequence of monthly growth rates cor-
responds to the GDP change rate of -3.8% 
for the fi  rst quarter as reported by Eurostat.
When interpreting the estimation results, it 
should be noted that the measures taken to 
contain the pandemic were tightened sig-
nifi  cantly as of mid- March. There is thus 
good reason to assume that economic ac-
tivity was impacted particularly severely in 
the second half of the month. From this, it 
can be inferred that economic output in the 
euro area could have fallen by around one- 
fi  fth by the end of March. It is likely to have 
remained largely at this level through April, 
as the fi  rst, tentative relaxations of contain-
ment measures were only implemented to-
wards the end of that month.
1 Specifi  cally, the unobserved monthly real GDP series 
is regressed on monthly indicator variables within a 
state space model. In addition, the quarterly GDP series 
is linked to the monthly series to be estimated. This 
ensures that the quarterly averages of the estimated 
monthly series correspond to the observed quarterly 
GDP . This regression- based interpolation procedure 
can be traced back to Chow and Lin (1971) and was 
used, amongst others, by Bernanke et al. (1997) as 
well as Mönch and Uhlig (2005).
2 For this purpose, the export values according to the 
external trade statistics were adjusted using the price 
index for foreign sales of industrial goods.
3 This was by far the largest drop in monthly GDP ever 
recorded. The previous sharpest monthly decline based 
on estimation results –  in January 2009 during the 
global fi  nancial and economic crisis – only amounted 
to just under 2%.Estimated monthly path for aggregate 
output in the euro area
Source: Bundesbank calculations on the basis of Eurostat data.
Deutsche BundesbankOct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar.
2019 20209092949698100102December 2019 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted
Quarterly 
average
Quarter-on-quarter 
percentage change
Month-on-month 
percentage change0 0
– 1.00 0.30.1
– 3.8
– 9.4Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
21

greater. In Spain, GDP also fell by just over 5% 
in the first quarter. Services in trade, transport 
and hotels and catering in particular, but also in 
the art and entertainment sectors, suffered se -
vere losses due to administrative restrictions 
and the absence of the important tourism busi -
ness. Non- essential production plants were 
ordered to close temporarily at the end of 
March. Very sharp GDP declines were also ob -
served in Belgium, Portugal and Slovakia. Real 
GDP narrowed less strongly in Austria and the 
Netherlands, and in some euro area countries 
activity even remained largely unchanged on 
average over the quarter (e.g. in Lithuania and 
Finland).
The crisis has left its first traces on the labour 
markets as well. The number of persons em -
ployed fell by 0.2% in the first quarter accord -
ing to Eurostat’s flash estimate. The measures 
taken to protect jobs, including the instrument 
of government- assisted short- time working, 
have probably mitigated the effects of the eco -
nomic slump on employment. It is likely that 
recruitment has been cut drastically, however. 
The recent strong reduction in labour shortages 
in manufacturing and the services sector, 
accord ing to survey results, also suggests this. 
The number of unemployed persons, which 
had fallen up to February in seasonally adjusted 
terms, rose by 197,000 in March, and the 
standardised unemployment rate went up 
slightly to 7.4%. As a quarterly average, it was 
still marginally below the level of the preceding 
quarter. However, it should be noted that this 
statistic excludes unemployed persons not 
actively  looking for a job and that in many 
cases job-  seeking was not possible once the 
strict containment measures had been intro -
duced. The unemployment rate therefore prob -
ably does not provide an adequate picture of 
the current labour market situation.
Euro area consumer price inflation weakened 
slightly in the first quarter after seasonal adjust -
ment. This was primarily attributable to the 
lower energy prices as a result of declining 
crude oil prices. However, the rise in services prices also slowed, whereas food prices in -
creased more strongly. Inflationary pressures 
remained moderate for non- energy industrial 
goods. Overall, the inflation rate, measured by 
the annual increase in the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP), rose slightly to 1.1% in 
the first quarter. By contrast, the rate excluding 
energy and food went down by 0.1 percentage 
point to 1.1% as well.
The restrictions associated with the pandemic 
have increasingly hampered the measurement 
of inflation since March. Precautionary meas -
ures taken when deploying price collectors and 
the closure of businesses led to gaps in the 
price data, and online surveys were only able to 
partially plug these gaps. For this reason, prices 
were increasingly extrapolated in a variety of 
ways.24 While this affected just 5% of the price 
observations underlying the HICP in March 
(mostly in Italy), this percentage increased to 
35% in April.25 The price observations for non- 
energy industrial goods were worst hit at 45%, 
followed by the observations for services.
Amidst a correspondingly higher level of uncer -
tainty, the Eurostat flash estimate for the HICP 
in April suggests that inflation is flagging. An -
nual HICP inflation fell from 0.7% to 0.4% in 
March, which was chiefly attributable to the 
further steep decline in energy prices. This 
more than offset the surge in unprocessed 
food prices. Core inflation excluding energy 
and food decreased slightly to 0.9%. The euro 
area inflation rate is likely to remain low in the 
next few months due to the energy compon -
ent.Labour market 
situation 
deteriorated 
Slowdown in 
euro area 
consumer  price 
inflation at start 
of yearPandemic 
impairs inflation 
measurement 
and obstructs 
identification of 
inflation trend
Further 
slowdown  in 
inflationary 
pressures in 
April, mainly 
due to energy
24 According to recommendations from Eurostat (2020a), 
missing data can be replaced, for example, by the preced -
ing month’s index figure or by the index figures of a com -
parable aggregate for which there are still price observa -
tions. For goods with strongly seasonal prices, for instance, 
the previous year’s monthly inflation rates can be employed 
for extrapolation purposes.
25 The share of extrapolated prices varies significantly be -
tween Member States, from just 5% in Lithuania and Fin -
land, to 50% in France and 70% in Slovakia. See Eurostat 
(2020b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
22

The restrictions on economic activity intro -
duced in the euro area countries in March ini -
tially remained mostly in force in April. Only 
towards the end of the month were some 
restric tions eased, with other relaxations in the 
pipeline. Because the restrictions have now 
been in place in the second quarter for longer 
than in the first quarter, this alone will cause 
the euro area to see another significant con -
traction in GDP on a quarterly average despite 
the gradual easing of restrictions and resultant 
improvement in economic conditions. On top 
of this, there are clear signs that external de -
mand for products from the euro area has suf -
fered. According to European Commission sur -
veys, the assessment of orders from abroad 
deteriorated dramatically in April.
Nevertheless, there is a justified hope for a re -
covery if restrictions can be gradually lifted, and 
enterprises and households better adapt to the 
changed circumstances. There may also be 
some catch-  up effects. This is all expected to 
be seen in the GDP growth rates of the second 
half of the year. It should also be taken into ac -
count that euro area countries took extensive 
support measures to which the European level 
is also set to contribute. The measures mainly 
aim at protecting jobs and keeping businesses 
afloat. They include, in particular, liquidity as -
sistance and loan guarantees for enterprises, 
tax and social contribution deferrals, and 
expanded   short-  time working regulations and 
income substitution schemes for the self-  
employed. These measures should help to pre -
vent the economic crisis from becoming en -
trenched due to second round effects.
A sustainable, comprehensive recovery of the 
euro area’s economy presupposes, however, 
that the pandemic will be contained not only in 
the euro area but also around the globe and 
that confidence will return as a result. Without 
a medical solution in the form of a vaccine or 
treatment, the recovery process could end up 
being a drawn- out affair. Until that point, vari -
ous government measures will remain in effect, and households and enterprises will continue 
to proceed with caution. This means that cer -
tain activities will not be undertaken in full for 
a time, such as holiday and business travel, and 
that the existing capacities in some sectors, 
such as transport and hotels and catering, will 
no longer be able to be fully utilised on ac -
count of stricter hygiene requirements. External 
demand, too, will probably see only a gradual 
recov ery. Ultimately, second round effects re -
sulting from households’ income losses and a 
poorer financial situation for enterprises cannot 
be completely avoided either, despite the 
exten sive measures that governments have 
taken.26Expectation of 
another strong 
GDP decline in 
current quarter, 
yet improvement 
for rest of year
Government 
support 
measures  
expected to 
counteract 
negative second 
round effects
Requirements 
for a sustainable 
and comprehen -
sive recoveryConsumer prices in the euro area by 
component
Sources: Eurostat and ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 201.00.500.51.01.52.02.5
––+++++Year-on-year change
Energy
Food
Non-energy industrial goods 
ServicesComponents (contributions):
Percentage points
April eHICP Percentage change
26 This makes it very difficult to estimate the duration and 
intensity of the current economic crisis. Economists from 
the European Central Bank have therefore drafted several 
scenarios on the potential future course of economy activ -
ity, which differ from each other primarily in terms of how 
the pandemic and the containment measures pan out. See 
also European Central Bank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
23

List of references
Bernanke, B., M. Gertler and M. Watson (1997), Systematic Monetary Policy and the Effects of Oil 
Price Shocks, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 28 (1), pp. 91-157.
Chow, G.C. and A. Lin (1971), Best Linear Unbiased Interpolation, Distribution, and Extrapolation 
of Time Series by Related Series, The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 53 (4), pp. 372-375.
Congressional Budget Office (2020), CBO’s Current Projections of Output, Employment, and Inter -
est Rates and a Preliminary Look at Federal Deficits for 2020 and 2021, blog entry of 24 April 2020, 
https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56335
Dares (2020), Activité et conditions d’emploi de la main- d’oeuvre pendant la crise sanitaire 
Covid-19, Synthèse des résultats de l’enquête flash – avril 2020, 17 April 2020, https://dares.
travail-emploi.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/dares_acemo_covid19_synthese_17-04-2020.pdf
European Central Bank (2020), Alternative scenarios for the impact of the COVID-  19 pandemic on 
economic activity in the euro area, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3/ 2020, pp. 25ff.
Eurostat (2020a), Guidance on the compilation of the HICP in the context of the COVID-19 crisis, 
https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/10186/10693286/HICP_guidance.pdf
Eurostat (2020b), Country information on imputation related to Covid-19, https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/de/web/hicp/methodology
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (2020), Oil Price Collapse Reverberates with Job, Capital Expend -
iture Cuts, Dallas FED Energy Survey, 25 March 2020.
Hale, T., N. Angrist, B. Kira, A. Petherick, T. Phillips and S. Webster (2020), Variation in government 
responses to COVID-19, BSG Working Paper Series, 2020/032, Version 5.0, April 2020.
International Energy Agency (2020), Oil Market Report, May 2020.
International Monetary Fund (2020a), Fiscal Monitor: Policies to Support People During the 
COVID-19 Pandemic, April 2020.
International Monetary Fund (2020b), World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown, April 2020.
Mönch, E. and H. Uhlig (2005), Towards a Monthly Business Cycle Chronology for the Euro Area, 
Journal of Business Cycle Measurement and Analysis, Vol. 1, pp. 43-69.
Office for Budget Responsibility (2020), Coronavirus analysis – Coronavirus reference scenario, 
https://obr.uk/coronavirus-analysis /
Office for National Statistics (2020), Business Impact of COVID-19 Survey (BICS), 23 April 2020 and 
7 May 2020.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
24

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
In response to the severe deterioration in the 
outlook for euro area growth and inflation in -
duced by the spread of COVID-  19, the Govern -
ing Council of the ECB in March and April 2020 
adopted a raft of comprehensive monetary pol -
icy measures. These include additional net asset 
purchases under the existing asset purchase 
programme (APP) and a new pandemic emer -
gency purchase programme (PEPP). As regards 
refinancing operations, the Governing Council 
twice eased the terms of the third series of tar -
geted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO- III) and adopted two new series of non- 
targeted operations. It also agreed on temporary 
changes to the Eurosystem’s collateral frame -
work and announced the Eurosystem’s partici -
pation in a coordinated central bank action to 
enhance the provision of US dollar liquidity to 
the banking system. No action was taken at 
any of the monetary policy meetings, however, 
to adjust the Eurosystem’s key interest rates 
and the associated forward guidance, which 
means that the main refinancing rate remains 
at 0.0%, while the rate of the marginal lending 
facility stands at 0.25% and the deposit facility 
rate at -0.5%. All in all, the measures adopted 
improve the liquidity situation in particular and 
help ensure favourable financing terms and 
promote lending to households and enter -
prises.
At its regular monetary policy meeting on 
12 March, the Governing Council decided to 
add a temporary envelope of additional net 
asset purchases totalling €120 billion until the 
end of the year, ensuring a strong contribution 
from the private sector purchase programmes. 
In combination with the existing net asset pur -
chases under the APP at a monthly volume of 
€20 billion, this is intended to support favour -
able financing conditions for the real economy 
in times of heightened uncertainty.At the same meeting, the Governing Council 
additionally resolved to ease conditions on the 
TLTRO- III, raising the maximum total amount 
that TLTRO- III counterparties are entitled to 
borrow from 30% to 50% of their stock of eli -
gible loans as at 28  February 2019. Further -
more, the interest rate on these operations was 
lowered by 25 basis points for the period from 
June 2020 to July 2021. These modifications 
were accompanied by a series of additional 
longer- term refinancing operations (LTROs) de -
signed to immediately bridge the euro area 
finan cial system’s liquidity needs until the 
fourth TLTRO- III operation is settled on 24 June 
2020. These operations, which began on 
18 March, are allotted on a weekly basis and all 
mature on 24 June, which means that their re -
sidual matur ity will diminish. The operations are 
conducted as fixed rate tenders with full allot -ECB Governing 
Council adopts 
extensive mon -
etary policy 
measures
Temporary APP 
expansion and 
more favourable 
refinancing 
termsMoney market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 From 
1 October 2019, EONIA calculated as €STR + 8.5 basis points. 
3 Three-month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. 
• Average 1 to 14 May 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 20200.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.3
––––––+++
01020 Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,3Basis
points% p.a.
EONIA1,2Three-month EURIBOR 1
Deposit facility rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate
€STR 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
25

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve maintenance periods under 
review between 29  January 2020 and 
5 May 2020 saw euro area liquidity needs 
stemming from autonomous factors in-
crease signifi  cantly by €178.9 billion to 
€1,558.5 billion in the context of the 
COVID- 19 pandemic (see the table below).1 
This was mainly attributable to the sharp 
rise in government deposits and strong 
growth in banknote demand (see the chart 
on p. 28). Public sector deposits averaged 
€374.4 billion in the March- May 2020 
period, rising by €162.6 billion, or around 
77%, compared with the average for the 
December 2019- January 2020 period. The 
Bundesbank likewise recorded an increase 
in these deposits, which grew by €49.3 bil-
lion to €102.9 billion (+94%). Owing to the 
crisis, the volume of banknotes in circula-
tion also rose sharply in the period under 
review, climbing by €39.7 billion to an aver-age of €1,321.9 billion in the March- May 
2020 period. Net banknote demand at the 
Bundesbank accounted for €30.3 billion of 
the increase, which caused cumulative net 
banknote issuance in Germany to climb to 
an average of €776.2 billion in the March- 
May 2020 period. The combined total of 
net foreign assets and other factors, which 
are considered together owing to liquidity- 
neutral valuation effects, went up by €23.4 
billion and reduced liquidity needs accord-
ingly. The minimum reserve requirement 
stood at €135.7 billion in the March- May 
2020 reserve period, an increase that 
boosted the calculated liquidity needs of 
1 Average of the second reserve maintenance period 
of 2020 (March- May 2020) as compared to the aver-
age of the eighth reserve maintenance period of 2019 
(December 2019- January 2020), which was reported 
on in the February 2020 issue of the Monthly Report.
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2020
29 January
to
17 March18 March
to
5 May
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) +  5.1 –  44.8
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) – 56.8 – 105.8
3. Net foreign assets 1 –  1.5 + 159.2
4. Other factors 1 + 35.9 – 170.2
Total
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations –  1.5 –   0.8
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –  0.2 + 249.8
c) Other operations + 27.6 + 117.5
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +  0.0 +   0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 10.0 –  27.2
Total
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 18.6 + 177.9
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –  1.2 –   0.1
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
26

the banking system in the Eurosystem by an 
additional €1.3 billion.
The outstanding tender volume expanded 
signifi  cantly in the period under review. 
Compared with the average of the Decem-
ber 2019- January 2020 period, it grew by 
€247 billion to an average of €866 billion in 
the March- May 2020 period, with the in-
crease solely due to higher demand in the 
latter reserve period (see the lower chart on 
p. 28). In Germany, too, comparing aver-
ages for the same periods, the volume grew 
considerably by €32 billion to €107 billion. 
The higher volume is mainly due to the add-
itional longer- term refi  nancing operations 
(LTROs), see pp. 25 and 30), of which one 
of a total of 13 operations was settled for 
the fi  rst time on 18 March 2020 (€109 bil-
lion). Even though –  alongside continued 
strong demand in the second and third 
additional LTROs  – bids for subsequent 
weekly operations have been lower so far, 
outstanding liquidity in these tenders added 
up to around €312 billion at the end of the 
March- May 2020 period. These operations 
are likely to benefi  t from their role as bridge 
operations, as they will all mature on 
24 June 2020, allowing banks to seamlessly 
transfer outstanding liquidity to the fourth 
operation of the third series of targeted 
longer- term refi  nancing operations (TLTRO-III), 
which will be settled on the same day and 
whose terms have meanwhile been signifi  -
cantly improved again. Ultimately, the tem-
porary expansion of the collateral frame-
work is also likely to have helped push up 
the overall volume of the additional LTROs. 
In addition to these operations, the allot-
ment of the third TLTRO-III operation also 
enlarged the outstanding tender volume in 
the March- May 2020 period. At the same 
time, however, the demand of €115.0 bil-
lion was offset by voluntary early repay-
ments totalling €92.6 billion in the TLTRO-II 
series, resulting in a net liquidity effect of just €22.4 billion. The current outstanding 
volume in the TLTRO-III series is €216 bil-
lion; for TLTRO-II, this fi  gure stands at €418 
billion. Demand in the regular tender oper-
ations, i.e. the main refi  nancing operations 
and three- month tenders, remained extremely 
low over the period under review.
Owing to the higher refi  nancing volume, 
the share of purchase programmes in the 
total liquidity provided decreased – despite 
the new purchases under the PEPP and the 
extension of the APP – to around 76% on 
average in the March- May 2020 period, 
compared with 81% in the previous period. Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources:  ECB,  Eurex  Repo  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 From 1 October 2019, EONIA is calculated as €STR + 8.5 
basis points. 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum 
reserve requirement plus the deposit facility. 3 The last period 
displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankDec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May
2019 20200.60.50.40.30.20.10
––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
02004006008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,8002,0002,200
Excess liquidity2Main refinancing rate
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period 3EONIA1
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
GermanyEuro areaTheoretical allowancesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
27

The average balance sheet holdings of all 
purchase programmes in the March- May 
2020 period stood at €2,784 billion, repre-
senting an increase of around €145 billion 
compared to the corresponding average 
holdings in the December 2019- January 
2020 reserve period. During the period under review, volumes increased by €73.0 
billion in the PSPP , €19.8 billion in the CSPP , 
€10.0 billion in the CBPP3 and €2.6 billion 
in the ABSPP . As at 8 May 2020, the active 
programmes recorded balance sheet hold-
ings totalling €2,868.6 billion, of which 
PSPP: €2,196.4 billion, CBPP3: €278.7 bil-
lion, CSPP: €209.6 billion, PEPP: €152.9 bil-
lion and ABSPP: €31.0 billion. In addition to 
the purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and the use of amortised cost accounting 
may also continue to infl  uence the level of 
holdings.
As a result of the sharp increase in liquidity 
provision, excess liquidity rose substantially 
in the period under review, averaging 
€1,956 billion in the March- May 2020 
period, €212 billion higher than in the De-
cember 2019- January 2020 period. How-
ever, most of the increase was recorded in 
the March- May 2020 period, after there 
was barely any growth in excess liquidity in Autonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive  (negative) 
sign. 1 Including end-of-quarter liquidity-neutral valuation ad-
justments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 20201,5001,2501,00075050025002505007501,000
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the Eurosystem
Liquidity provision and use
Sources:  ECB  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Securities  markets  programme  (SMP),  covered  bond  purchase  programmes  (CBPP1, 
CBPP2 and CBPP3), asset-backed securities purchase programme (ABSPP), public sector purchase programme (PSPP), corporate sector 
purchase programme (CSPP) and pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP). 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum 
reserve requirement plus the deposit facility. 3 Volume so small it is hardly visible. 4 The marginal lending facility is not shown in this 
chart owing to its very low volume.
Deutsche Bundesbank2,5002,0001,5001,00050005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,000
–––––++++++++
October November December January February March April May
2019 2020Current account 
holdings in excess 
of the reserve 
requirementDeposit facility 4Purchase
programmes 1
Main refinancing
operations 3
Three-month 
tenders 3
Second series of
targeted longer-
term refinancing 
operations
(TLTRO-II)Third series of 
targeted longer-
term refinancing 
operations
(TLTRO-III)Additional longer-
term refinancing 
operationsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
28

the January- March 2020 period. It should 
be noted that the increase in autonomous 
factors – partly as a result of the crisis and 
partly as a side- effect of the high liquidity 
provision itself – curbed the rise in excess 
liquidity in some cases. These developments 
also had an impact on the two- tier system 
for remunerating excess reserve holdings. 
As the corresponding allowances remuner-
ated at 0% increased only slightly in the 
period under review, the share of excess 
liquid ity remunerated at -0.50% rose signifi  -
cantly (see the chart on p. 27). Overall, in the 
March- May 2020 period, the allowance in 
the Eurosystem amounted to €814.2 billion, 
97.6% of which was used by the banks on 
average, which was somewhat up on the 
fi  gure for the December 2019- January 2020 
period (96.3%). In Germany, the allowance 
in the March- May 2020 period, at €223.2 
billion, was broadly unchanged from that of 
the December 2019- January 2020 period, 
although respective average use increased 
to 96.9%, compared with 94.6%.
In the money market, the crisis caused by 
the COVID- 19 pandemic led to higher turn-
over in the very short maturities and, at 
times, also to higher interest rates (see the 
chart on p. 27). This was compounded by 
the movements around the end of the 
quarter in March. Unsecured €STR turnover 
reached new highs of up to €60 billion 
(6 April 2020). However, the €STR remained 
broadly stable at -0.54% in most cases. 
There was one exception at the end of the 
quarter, when the €STR rose by 1 basis 
point to -0.53%. In GC Pooling, turnover in 
the ON, TN and SN maturities increased sig-
nifi  cantly in both baskets (ECB basket and 
ECB EXTended basket), the interest rates of 
which are combined in the Deferred Fund-
ing Rate. In the fi  rst two weeks of April 
prior to Easter, this turnover climbed to up 
to €29 billion (9 April 2020). At the same 
time, repo rates for the overnight maturity rose to -0.45% in the days leading up to 
Easter, after standing at -0.49% in mid- 
March. The highest rate was in the ECB 
EXTended basket at -0.40% at the end of 
the quarter. In GC Pooling, it was evident 
that, from March 2020 onwards, there was 
hardly any turnover in maturities of six 
months or more, which are, however, usu-
ally very low in any case (i.e. in less eventful 
times). After Easter, there appeared to be 
somewhat more demand again for oper-
ations with maturities of three months, but, 
in general, the attractive terms of the add-
itional LTROs (maturities of up to three 
months) probably also led to a certain 
crowding- out of market activities.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
29

ment at an interest rate equivalent to the de -
posit facility  rate.
On 15 March, the ECB, along with other major 
central banks, announced a coordinated action 
to enhance the provision of liquidity through 
standing US dollar liquidity swap line arrange -
ments. From 16 March, the ECB has been offer -
ing weekly US dollar operations with 84- day 
maturity in addition to its existing one- week 
operations. The interest rate on all US dollar 
operations was lowered to the US dollar over -
night index swap (OIS) rate plus 25 basis points, 
which represents a reduction of 25 basis points. 
These changes are to remain in place for as 
long as appropriate to support the smooth 
functioning of US dollar funding markets.
Following a teleconference on 18 March, the 
Governing Council announced its decision to 
launch the PEPP – a new temporary purchase 
programme with an overall envelope of €750 
billion. The aim of the PEPP is to counter the 
risks to the monetary policy transmission mech -
anism and the Eurosystem’s objective of price 
stability posed by the outbreak and escalating 
diffusion of the coronavirus. Purchases under 
the PEPP comprise all asset categories eligible 
under the APP . For the purchases of public sec -
tor securities, the benchmark allocation of the 
cumulative net purchases across jurisdictions 
will continue to be the capital key of the na -
tional central banks. At the same time, how -
ever, purchases under the PEPP will be con -
ducted in a flexible manner. This allows for fluc -
tuations in the distribution of purchase flows 
over time, across asset classes and among jur -
isdictions. Securities issued by the Greek gov -
ernment may likewise be purchased under the 
PEPP due to a waiver of the eligibility require -
ments. The Governing Council will terminate 
net asset purchases under the PEPP once it 
judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is over, 
but in any case not before the end of the year.
In addition, the Governing Council decided to 
expand the range of eligible assets under the 
corporate sector purchase programme (CSPP) to include non- financial commercial paper. It 
also announced an easing of the collateral 
standards by adjusting the main risk param -
eters of the collateral framework.
On 7 April, the Governing Council elaborated 
on this announcement by introducing tempor -
ary collateral easing measures.1 First, it eased 
various requirements under the additional 
credit claim (ACC) frameworks, amongst other 
things by reducing loan- level reporting require -
ments and by accommodating the require -
ments for government guarantees on such 
loans. Second, it adopted general easing meas -
ures on the conditions for using credit claims as 
collateral and a waiver of the minimum credit 
quality requirements for Greek government 
bonds to be accepted as collateral in Eurosys -
tem credit operations. Third, the Governing 
Council decided to temporarily increase its risk 
tolerance level in credit operations through a 
general reduction of collateral valuation hair -
cuts by a fixed factor of 20%.
On 22 April, the Governing Council reinforced 
collateral framework measures to mitigate the 
impact of possible rating downgrades on col -
lateral availability.2 To this end, it will grand -
father the eligibility of marketable assets used 
as collateral in Eurosystem credit operations 
until September 2021. Marketable assets (with 
the exception of asset- backed securities (ABSs)) 
and issuers of these assets that met the min -
imum credit quality requirements for collateral 
eligibility (i.e. BBB-) on 7 April 2020 will con -
tinue to be eligible in case of rating down -
grades as long as their rating remains at or 
above credit quality step 5 (CQS5, equivalent to 
a rating of BB) on the Eurosystem harmonised 
rating scale. These measures, including the de -
cisions taken on 7 April, shall apply until Sep -
tember 2021.
Following its regular meeting on 30 April, the 
Governing Council announced its decision to Coordinated 
central bank 
action to 
enhance the 
provision of 
US dollar 
liquidity 
Decision 
to launch 
additional  tem -
porary purchase 
programme with 
an envelope of 
€750 billionCollateral 
requirements 
eased 
temporarily 
Grandfathering 
of marketable 
assets used in 
credit operations 
in the event 
of rating 
downgrades 
1 See European Central Bank (2020a).
2 See European Central Bank (2020b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
30

recalibrate the TLTRO- III in order to support fur -
ther the provision of credit to households and 
firms in the face of the current economic dis -
ruption and heightened uncertainty. In this 
context, it lowered the interest rate on all 
TLTRO- III operations by an additional 25 basis 
points for the period from June 2020 to June 
2021. The interest rate for all participating 
banks in this period will thus be a maximum of 
50 basis points below the average main refi -
nancing rate (i.e. currently -0.5%). For banks 
whose eligible net lending exceeds the lending 
performance threshold of 0% in the newly de -
fined lending assessment period (1 March 2020 
to 31  March 2021), the interest rate applied 
from June 2020 to June 2021 will be 50 basis 
points below the average interest rate on the 
deposit facility (i.e. currently -1.0%). Outside 
the June 2020 to June 2021 window, the ap -
plicable interest rate will be the average inter -
est rate on the deposit facility (currently -0.5%), 
without the additional need to reach the ori -
ginal net lending threshold, which was reduced 
from 2.5% to 1.15%, in the original lending as -
sessment period from 1 April 2019 to 31 March 
2021. For detailed information about other 
scenarios, see the ECB press release of 30 April.3
Moreover, the Governing Council decided to 
conduct a new series of pandemic emergency 
longer- term refinancing operations (PELTROs). 
These operations will provide liquidity support 
to the euro area financial system and contrib -
ute to preserving the smooth functioning of 
money markets after the expiry of the add -
itional longer- term refinancing operations an -
nounced on 12 March 2020. The PELTROs are 
being conducted as fixed rate tender proced -
ures with full allotment. The interest rate will 
be 25 basis points below the average main re -
financing rate applicable over the life of the re -
spective PELTRO (i.e. currently -0.25%). The first 
of the seven operations was settled on 21 May. 
The maturity of the operations will become in -
creasingly shorter and the maturity dates will 
be staggered. For example, the first operation 
has a maturity of 16 months, the last just 8 
months.4In the reporting period, the APP holdings re -
corded on the balance sheet rose by €109.7 
billion. On 8 May, the Eurosystem held assets 
totalling €2,715.7 billion as part of the APP (see 
the box on pp. 26-29 for a breakdown of the 
holdings by individual programme). The hold -
ings are furthermore also being influenced by 
the smoothing over time of reinvestments in 
line with the technical parameters agreed upon 
in December 2018 and by the use of amortised 
cost accounting.5 The Eurosystem’s PEPP asset 
holdings came to €152.9 billion on 8 May.
The third operation of the TLTRO- III series was 
settled on 25 March 2020. At around €115 bil -
lion in total, demand was even higher than in 
the second operation. At the same time, the 
monetary policy counterparties voluntarily re -
paid funds from the second series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO- II) 
to the tune of €92.6 billion, resulting in a 
positive  net liquidity effect of €22.4 billion. 
Together  , the TLTRO- II and TLTRO- III series cur -
rently have an outstanding volume of around 
€634 billion. Owing to the further easing of 
conditions, demand looks set to be even 
stronger for the operation settled in June.
Bank demand was also strong for the add -
itional longer- term refinancing operations an -
nounced on 12 March, especially for the first 
operations. On 8 May, the amount outstanding 
in these operations was €326.4 billion. Banks 
also made substantial use of low- price and 
longer- term US dollar liquidity operations, where 
the outstanding volume on 8  May came to 
US$141.4 billion.
Increased purchase activity and demand for re -
financing operations added significantly to ex -
cess liquidity levels, which came to €2,123 bil -
lion at the end of the period under review, Further easing 
of TLTRO- III and 
series of new 
PELTROsAPP and PEPP 
considerably 
push up secur -
ities holdings 
recorded on 
balance  sheet
Demand sharply 
higher in third 
TLTRO- III
Demand also 
brisk for add -
itional longer- 
term refinancing 
operations and 
US dollar oper -
ations
Clear increase in 
excess liquidity
3 See European Central Bank (2020c).
4 For further details on the modalities of and calendar for 
these operations, see European Central Bank (2020d).
5 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
31

more than €300 billion higher than in February 
2020. The increase would have been stronger 
still were it not for the counterbalancing effect 
of liquidity-  absorbing factors (particularly cash 
in circulation and government deposits), which 
likewise rose significantly (see the box on 
pp. 26-29).
Short- term money market rates saw mixed de -
velopments during the reporting period. The 
unsecured EONIA overnight rate, which is com -
puted by applying a fixed spread to the euro 
short- term rate (€STR), remained broadly un -
changed overall, hovering within a range of 
-0.46% and -0.44%. Another unsecured rate, 
the three- month EURIBOR, followed a different 
path, rising markedly from mid- March on -
wards. To begin with, this upturn corrected the 
decline in EURIBOR rates observed since the 
end of February, as earlier expectations of rate 
cuts were priced out after the Governing 
Council  meeting on 12 March. However, the 
EURIBOR later shot well above its original level 
to peak at -0.16%. Market participants’ greater 
preference for shorter maturities in response to 
the uncertainty surrounding the coronavirus 
was probably a major factor behind this in -
crease. However, interest rate hikes in neigh -
bouring market segments may also have con -
tributed to the rise in the EURIBOR. Interest 
rates of this kind are included in the contribu -
tions reported by the individual panel banks if 
an insufficient number of transactions directly 
corresponding to the definition of EURIBOR 
have been executed. As this report went to 
press, though, the EURIBOR was already no -
ticeably lower again.
The secured STOXX GC Pooling interest rate 
also went up occasionally, albeit to a much 
lesser extent than the EURIBOR. At last count, 
however, it was trading back at -0.49% – the 
same level as in February.
Mounting uncertainty at the end of February 
initially sent money market forward rates no -
ticeably lower as the novel coronavirus began 
to spread worldwide. Another 10- bp cut in the deposit facility rate was almost fully priced into 
rates prior to the ECB Governing Council’s 
March meeting. After the Governing Council 
decided not to lower the deposit facility rate on 
12  March, these rate cut expectations were 
priced out, pushing short- term money market 
forward rates higher again. Forward rates in 
the money market later experienced some 
volatility, reflecting the distinct uncertainty sur -
rounding the economic and monetary policy 
outlook for the euro area. As this report went 
to press, markets were again pricing in at least 
one further 10- bp cut in the deposit facility rate 
by the middle of next year.
On 5  May 2020, the Federal Constitutional 
Court pronounced its judgement on the Euro -
system’s public sector purchase programme 
(PSPP). It found that the Court of Justice of the 
European Union’s ruling on this matter in De -
cember 2018 and the PSPP decisions of the 
Governing Council of the ECB were “ultra vires” 
acts, meaning that the Court and the ECB Gov -
erning Council had exceeded their powers; in 
the first case, this was due to an insufficient 
assessment of proportionality, and in the 
second, an insufficiently substantiated assess -
ment of proportionality. The Federal Constitu -
tional Court found no evidence as to whether 
the Governing Council of the ECB, in its assess -
ment of proportionality, had sufficiently 
weighed and balanced the expected benefits 
for achieving the monetary policy objective 
against the economic policy effects arising 
from the PSPP . In the absence of documenta -
tion demonstrating that such balancing took 
place, it is not possible to carry out a judicial 
review as to whether the Eurosystem stayed 
within its mandate. The court ruled that the 
Bundesbank’s continued full participation in 
the PSPP is contingent on the Governing Coun -
cil of the ECB presenting its considerations on 
the proportionality of the programme within 
three months.Short- term 
money market 
rates follow 
different  pathsMoney market 
forward rates 
reflect uncer -
tainty about 
euro area 
outlook 
Federal 
Constitutional  
Court delivers 
verdict on PSPPDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
32

Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The broad monetary aggregate M3 grew ex -
ceptionally strongly in the first quarter of 2020, 
particularly in March, when the evolution of al -
most all the components and counterparts was 
dominated by the effects of the coronavirus 
pandemic. This drove the annual growth rate 
of M3 up to 7.5%, 2 percentage points higher 
than at the end of 2019. Monetary growth was 
mainly propelled by a surge in loans to the pri -
vate sector on the back of large- scale draw -
downs of existing credit lines and new borrow -
ing by enterprises, in particular. However, finan -
cing investments was less of a concern than 
the need to compensate for revenue shortfalls 
and avoid future liquidity shortages. The sharp 
acceleration in borrowing was facilitated by the 
various state support schemes for loans to en -
terprises which governments rolled out as an 
immediate response to the crisis. Loans to 
households, on the other hand, which until 
then had recorded stable growth, weakened 
significantly, particularly in the countries that 
were especially affected by the pandemic. An -
other key factor driving monetary growth was 
the increase in securities- based lending, with 
both banks and the Eurosystem adding sub -
stantially to their stocks of government bonds 
on balance in the first quarter.
As regards the components of the money sup -
ply, the strong growth in M3 was driven mainly 
by overnight deposits. Net inflows into this de -
posit category in March were almost five times 
as high as the average over the previous 12 
months. Non- financial corporations increased 
their holdings particularly sharply, but house -
holds and financial corporations also stepped 
up their stocks significantly. Two factors are 
likely to have played a key role here – first, the 
increased preference for large holdings of li -
quid funds in times of crisis, and second, the 
high level of uncertainty surrounding the 
longer- term impact of the coronavirus pan -
demic on financial markets, which caused mar -
ket participants to hold back, to a degree, on Strong M3 
expansion in Q1, 
especially in 
March
Sharp increase 
in overnight 
deposits in 
particular Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10
20246
–+++M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsYear-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households5Contribution of components in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general government
Percentage
change 
in M3Percentage change
in M3
Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
33

making longer- term and riskier investments, 
pushing up the volume of funds “parked” in 
the form of liquid deposits. Another typical 
hallmark of a crisis situation is the increased de -
mand for cash. The strict lockdowns in some 
countries, and the problems involved in getting 
hold of cash, may have increased the desire to 
stockpile physical currency. In addition, the in -
crease in marketable financing instruments, 
particularly short- term bank debt securities 
held by the euro area non- monetary sector, 
was remarkably strong in the first quarter.
Developments in the counterparts were also 
heavily influenced by the outbreak of the 
coronavirus pandemic. The quicker rate of in -
crease in loans to the private sector, which ac -
counted for around 50% of the net inflows 
into M3 in the first quarter of 2020, was par -
ticularly striking. The strong credit growth 
stemmed from developments in loans to enter -
prises in March – on the one hand, loans to 
insurance corporations, pension funds and 
other financial intermediaries recorded very 
high net inflows, particularly in the short- term 
segment. On the other, loans to non-  financial 
corporations surged across all maturities, but 
most noticeably in the area of short- term 
credit. This development saw the annual 
growth rate in this business segment, which 
has been diminishing since the end of 2018, bounce back to 5.4% at the end of March, its 
highest level since 2009.
The sharp increase in lending to non- financial 
corporations in March was evident across the 
euro area, chiefly in the four large Member 
States – especially France (see the top chart on 
p. 35). It also affected Italy and Spain, whose 
banks had barely recorded any positive stimuli 
in corporate business in the last few quarters. 
The sudden increase in credit growth was prob -
ably caused by enterprises aiming to boost 
their liquid funds given the significant decline in 
economic activity in the first quarter of 2020 
and expectations of further revenue shortfalls. 
In some cases, they did this by drawing down 
existing credit lines and applying for the 
government- backed loans which began to be 
rolled out in March and are primarily aimed at 
supporting lending to small and medium- sized 
enterprises during the coronavirus crisis. The 
surge in the cost of market- based debt in 
March might have been another factor which 
drove enterprises to take out loans, whose 
interest rates were hovering close to historical 
lows in March in the euro area.
The Bank Lending Survey (BLS) also confirmed 
that the increase in credit growth was driven Inflows into 
loans to 
non- financial 
corporations 
accelerated 
sharply follow -
ing outbreak of 
coronavirus 
pandemic, …… with the 
likely aim of 
boosting liquid -
ity during period 
of declining eco -
nomic activityConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q4 2019 Q1 2020
Holdings against central government 2 – 37.5 63.5
Monetary aggregate M3 89.2 467.8
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 138.5 386.7
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) – 29.3 4.0
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) – 20.0 77.1
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 4.4 – 41.1
of which:
Capital and reserves 24.2 17.0
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 19.8 – 58.1Assets Q4 2019 Q1 2020
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 90.5 224.7
Loans 78.8 244.1
Loans, adjusted 1 104.9 236.3
Securities 11.7 – 19.5
Credit to general government 
in the euro area –  5.2 132.0
Loans – 15.6 21.7
Securities 10.2 110.3
Net external assets 0.6 66.2
Other counterparts of M3 – 29.7 67.4
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
34

primarily by demand- side factors.6 The sur -
veyed bank managers reported that corporate 
demand for loans rebounded sharply on the 
quarter in the first three months of 2020, 
mainly climbing on the back of an unusually 
strong uptick in demand for short- term loans. 
BLS respondents primarily put this down to in -
creased financing needs for inventories and 
working capital, but also cited debt restructur -
ing, refinancing and renegotiations, as well as 
the low general level of interest rates. By con -
trast, reduced funding requirements for fixed 
investment and a declining need for funds for 
mergers, acquisitions and corporate restructur -
ing had a diminishing effect on demand per se. 
On balance, the banks surveyed as part of the 
BLS expect to see a further sharp increase in 
demand, especially for short- term loans, in the 
quarter ahead.
Unlike corporate lending, loans to households 
in the euro area were adversely affected by the 
coronavirus pandemic. This credit segment saw 
the strong net inflows registered in the previ -
ous months switch to a slight outflow in March 
2020, the first since 2014. This was driven by 
an abrupt decline in consumer credit and sig -
nificantly slower growth in loans for house pur -
chase. Overall, however, the annual growth 
rate in this credit segment decreased only mod -
erately, dropping to 3.4% at the end of the 
quarter. Banks in Italy, Spain and France ac -
counted for the bulk of the net outflow in 
March, while their counterparts in Germany 
continued to report net inflows on balance (see 
the adjacent top chart and the section begin -
ning on p. 42). The lockdown measures and 
business constraints introduced to contain the 
pandemic will presumably have had a strong 
dampening impact on private consumption 
and consumer confidence, and therefore also 
on credit demand – particularly in the countries 
that were affected early on by the pandemic.Steep rise in 
demand for 
credit by 
non- financial 
corporations, 
particularly in 
the short- term 
segment 
Loans to 
households  
slowed down 
discernibly, by 
contrastLoans to the private non-financial sector 
in the euro area*
100102030405060708090100110120130140
–++++++++++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, seasonally adjusted
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankExtended by the euro area MFI sector 2
... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–100+10+20+30+40+50+60+70
To households 3To non-financial corporations1
Securities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202001000100200300400500600700
––+++++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof which:Extended by the euro area MFI sector
6 BLS interviews for the first quarter of 2020 took place 
between 19 March and 3 April.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
35

Here, too, the picture is consistent with what 
the bank managers surveyed as part of the BLS 
reported. According to the survey data, the first 
quarter of 2020 saw demand for consumer 
credit and other loans fall for the first time 
since the second quarter of 2013. Additionally, 
growth in demand for housing loans was con -
siderably weaker than in the preceding quarter. 
The respondent banks mainly attributed the 
slowdown to lower consumer confidence and 
reduced spending on consumer durables. Over -
all, in the second quarter of 2020, euro area 
banks anticipate a sharp decline in demand, es -
pecially for loans for house purchase. One 
major reason for this is probably households’ 
uncertainty about the impact of the corona -
virus pandemic on their future income and em -
ployment situation.
The coronavirus crisis also affected the lending 
policies of the banks surveyed in the BLS, which 
reported that they had tightened their credit 
standards across all loan segments in the first 
quarter of 2020. However, standards were 
tightened far less sharply than during the finan -
cial and sovereign debt crisis. The main reasons 
for the tightening of standards in the reporting 
quarter were a deterioration in the perception 
of risk as well as a lower risk tolerance among 
banks, especially in the area of loans for house 
purchase, consumer credit and other loans. In 
corporate business, lending standards were 
tightened, as were the credit terms and condi -
tions in their entirety. Lending rates for loans to 
enterprises and in business with households 
still declined overall in the first quarter, though. 
This would suggest that the greater risk of 
default  introduced by the coronavirus crisis has 
not yet fed into higher interest rates. For the 
second quarter, euro area banks on balance are 
planning to ease their standards for loans to 
enterprises and tighten them for business with 
households.
Besides loans, securities- based lending by the 
MFI sector also contributed perceptibly to 
monetary growth on the back of brisk net pur -
chases by both commercial banks and the Eu -rosystem, especially in March. Buyers focused 
almost exclusively on paper issued by the pub -
lic sector. The same can be said for the net pur -
chases by the Eurosystem, which significantly 
expanded its asset purchases under the APP 
and the PEPP in response to the economic re -
percussions of the pandemic. By contrast, 
banks strongly reduced their holdings of shares 
and investment fund shares amid sharply re -
ceding equity prices in the first quarter and ele -
vated uncertainty surrounding future price de -
velopments.
Besides the factors mentioned above, another 
component which buoyed monetary growth in 
the reporting quarter was the MFI sector’s net 
external assets. Once again, this was largely 
due to the strong net inflows from the con -
tinued current account surpluses registered in 
the euro area. Portfolio transactions with non- 
residents also strengthened the net external 
asset position overall, partly because – on bal -
ance – non- resident investors withdrew capital 
from emerging market economies and re -
invested it in regions including the euro area. 
The impact of the coronavirus is difficult to 
quantify here because the granular balance of 
payments data for March are not yet available. 
In particular, it remains to be seen whether a 
global environment of risk aversion will trigger 
the repatriation of capital by resident and non- 
resident investors alike.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers saw a huge increase in the first 
quarter of 2020, mainly owing to extraordinar -
ily strong inflows in March (for more informa -
tion about general developments in deposit 
business, see also the box on pp. 38-41). Domes -
tic investors showed a very strong preference 
for overnight bank deposits. In contrast to the 
usual pattern, it was mainly the corporate sec -
tor which drove the accumulation of deposits Growth in 
household credit 
demand signifi -
cantly weaker 
for loans for 
house purchase 
and negative for 
consumer credit 
and other loans
Tightening of 
banks’ lending 
policiesBonds register 
significant net 
inflows, shares 
and investment 
fund shares 
record outflows
Inflows of funds 
from abroad 
continue to pro -
vide support
Huge increase 
in deposit 
business , 
particularly  
overnight 
depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
36

in the reporting quarter, with both financial in -
stitutions and non- financial corporations build -
ing up far more overnight deposits than usual. 
Given the considerable uncertainty which the 
coronavirus- related restrictions caused for the 
German economy, many enterprises apparently 
considered it necessary to strengthen their li -
quidity reserves by deferring investment pro -
jects or taking out loans. In addition, it is likely 
that the high levels of uncertainty in financial 
markets prompted financial institutions, in par -
ticular, to “park” inflows of funds in overnight 
deposits. Households likewise showed a dis -
tinct preference for bank deposits, which they 
built up to a similar extent as in the preceding 
quarters, partially at the expense of other, less 
liquid bank deposits. The very low interest rate 
disadvantage of overnight deposits compared 
to other types of bank deposits probably fa -
voured this decision (see the adjacent chart).
Banks’ credit business with domestic non- banks 
in the reporting quarter was likewise influenced 
by the immediate and likely future fallout of 
the pandemic. Unsurprisingly, the households 
and enterprises affected by the crisis showed 
strong demand for loans, which was reflected 
by the robust growth in loans to the domestic 
private sector. The reporting quarter also saw 
lending to the public sector rebound distinctly 
for the first time since summer 2015, with 
banks expanding their holdings of both loans 
and securities.
Loans to both households and non- financial 
corporations recorded strong net growth, with 
demand among NFCs for short-  term loans ris -
ing extremely sharply in the wake of the 
coronavirus crisis. NFCs continued to step up 
their longer- term loans as well during the re -
porting quarter, but at much the same pace as 
in the preceding quarters.
The high financing needs which enterprises are 
showing at the current end are being met by 
large- scale assistance loans from the Federal 
Government and additional funding from state 
governments. Since mid- March, enterprises Sharp expansion 
in lending 
business  with 
non- banks
Crisis sends 
demand for 
loans to enter -
prises sharply 
higher, …Interest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 202001234% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
MFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2019 2020
Q4 Q1
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 40.1 90.8
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 8.5 1.3
over 2 years – 4.6 – 8.9
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 3.0 – 9.0
over 3 months – 2.6 – 2.5
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 0.7 3.1
Securities – 4.3 7.1
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 33.3 48.2
of which: to households 3 20.9 21.3
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 10.2 18.7
Securities 1.2 – 1.1
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, 
adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, 
households and general government excluding central govern-
ment. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including 
non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Non- fi  nancial cor-
porations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
37

Acquisition of fi  nancial assets and the search for yield 
in Germany
As last discussed in the May 2019 edition of 
this report, the persistent low interest rate 
environment has had various effects on the 
structure of fi  nancial investment by the indi-
vidual money- holding sectors in Germany 
over the past few years.1 Despite rising 
gradually between 2014 and 2018, house-
holds’ search for yield continued to play a 
subordinate role. Risk aversion and prefer-
ence for liquidity instead remained the pre-
dominant factors. By contrast, fi  nancial cor-
porations2 exhibited a more pronounced 
search for yield.3
According to the latest data from monetary 
statistics and fi  nancial accounts, these de-
velopments generally continued in 2019. It 
is not yet possible to comment on the initial 
impact of the coronavirus pandemic as the 
fi  nancial accounts data are only available up 
to the end of 2019.
Households’ acquisition of fi  nancial assets 
in the form of bank deposits reached a new 
record high in 2019. Bank deposits were 
therefore, once again, by far the most im-
portant form of investment for this sector 
(see the chart on p. 39). On balance, the 
infl  ows  stemmed solely from the ongoing 
dynamic  growth in overnight deposits, as 
all other forms of deposit recorded minor 
net outfl  ows. The same was true of savings 
deposits redeemable at notice of up to three 
months, which had been built up slightly in 
recent years. Households’ preference for 
overnight deposits, which are particularly 
liquid , is also likely to be attributable to the 
fact that the interest rate differential be-
tween these deposits and other forms of 
deposit reached a historically low level.
In addition to deposits, the acquisition of 
claims on insurance corporations was also a major form of investment for households in 
2019. However, the related infl  ows weak-
ened slightly again compared with the pre-
vious year. By contrast, the acquisition of 
fi  nancial assets in the form of investment 
fund shares regained importance against 
the background of a positive capital market 
environment. On balance, households in-
vested twice as much in investment fund 
shares as in direct equity holdings. How-
ever, the relatively high level of stock pur-
chases recorded in the previous year was 
almost maintained. Debt securities were 
sold off to a limited extent in net terms. In 
the previous year, this asset class had ex-
perienced slight infl  ows again for the fi  rst 
time since 2007. On the whole, the in-
creased importance of investment fund 
shares for households’ acquisition of fi  nan-
cial assets indicates that awareness of risk 
and return has risen slightly once again. 
However, the continued large share of de-
posits and insurance claims is evidence that 
there is still a pronounced aversion to risk.
In 2019, non- fi  nancial corporations again 
built up more bank deposits compared with 
the relatively weak fi  gures in the previous 
year (see the chart on p. 39). On balance, 
this sector also increased only its overnight 
deposits. This development occurred even 
though the corresponding interest rates on 
short- term deposits were broadly in nega-
tive territory, which was not the case for 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b).
2 For the purpose of this box, fi  nancial corporations 
exclude monetary fi  nancial institutions (central bank, 
credit institutions and money market funds), as the an-
alysis relates to the money- holding sectors. In addition, 
the following sectoral analysis disregards the general 
government sector, as its acquisition of fi  nancial assets 
is comparatively modest and volatile.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020) for an analysis of 
the acquisition of fi  nancial assets and search for yield 
in the euro area.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
38

households’ deposits.4 It appears that these 
deposits have not become less attractive to 
non- fi  nancial corporations to any note-
worthy degree. Against the backdrop of 
weaker internal fi  nancing, the total acquisi-
tion of fi  nancial assets by non- fi  nancial cor-
porations in 2019 was, once again, signifi  -
cantly lower on the year and was only just 
above zero. In addition to the build- up of 
deposits, high infl  ows were only recorded 
in the case of equity. A signifi  cant part of 
the funds was invested in equity invest-
ments, above all in the form of other equity 
(e.g. equity in private limited companies). 
Lending was very weak overall. In this con-text, there was a shift from long- term to 
short- term loans as well as from loans to 
domestic borrowers to loans to non- fi  nancial 
corporations in the rest of the euro area. As 
in previous years, strategic participations 
thus appear to be the main driver of invest-
ment decisions made by German non- 
fi  nancial corporations. However, their pref-
erence for liquid and safe fi  nancial invest-
ments increased again slightly in relative 
terms.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a).Build-up of deposits and total acquisition of financial assets in the 
private non-financial sector in Germany
1 Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. Deposits figures seasonally adjusted. 2 Including cash. 3 Households including 
non-profit institutions serving households. 4 Non-financial corporations and quasi-corporations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1950050100150200250
–+++++€ billion, cumulated transactions within the year 1
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 2019–500+50+100+150+200+250+300
30201001020304050
–––+++++
–150–100–500+50+100+150+200+250+300+350Households 3
Non-financial-corporations4… with a longer maturity… redeemable at notice of up to 3 months… with an agreed maturity of up to 2 years
Overnight deposits      Deposits ...
Deposits2
Debt securitiesLoansInsurance claims
TotalTotalTotal acquisition of financial assets Deposits
OtherInvestment fund shares
EquityDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
39

Within the fi  nancial sector, insurance cor-
porations and pension funds signifi  cantly 
increased their acquisition of fi  nancial assets 
in 2019, in an environment of persistently 
high infl  ows from households (see the chart 
above). In particular, they boosted their 
holdings of debt securities, equity, and in-
vestment fund shares. Once again, invest-
ment fund shares recorded the strongest 
infl  ows. In terms of volume, these ac-
counted for almost half of the total acquisi-
tion of fi  nancial assets in this sector. In add-
ition, insurance corporations and pension 
funds also increased their holdings of listed 
and unlisted shares as well as their holdings of other equity in net terms. In the case of 
debt securities, long- term securities issued 
by foreign issuers were topped up in par-
ticular. By contrast, the relatively strong 
lending activity experienced last year weak-
ened again considerably. Furthermore, in-
surance corporations and pension funds 
continued their sharp reduction of longer- 
term bank deposits in particular, which has 
been taking place since 2010. Overall, this 
reinforced the shift in fi  nancial investment 
in this sector from low- risk deposits to rela-
tively riskier securities that had already been 
observed in previous years.Build-up of deposits and total acquisition of financial assets in the money-holding 
financial sector in Germany
1  Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. Deposits figures seasonally adjusted. 2 Including cash. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations (corporations and quasi-corporations).
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1940302010010
––––+€ billion, cumulated transactions within the year 1
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 2019–500+50+100+150+200
3020100102030
–––+++
–100–500+50+100+150+200+250Insurance corporations and pension funds
Other financial intermediaries 3… with a longer maturity… redeemable at notice of up to 3 months… with an agreed maturity of up to 2 years
Overnight deposits      Deposits ... Deposits 2
Equity 
Loans
Debt securitiesOther
TotalTotalDeposits Total acquisition of financial assets
Investment fund shares
Insurance claimsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
40

The acquisition of fi  nancial assets by other 
fi  nancial institutions (including investment 
funds) weakened somewhat in 2019, fol-
lowing strong infl  ows in the previous year 
(see the chart on p. 40). This was mainly 
due to the fact that this sector acquired 
equity on a signifi  cantly smaller scale than 
in previous years. There was a pronounced 
shift within this asset class from listed shares 
to other equity, which is signifi  cantly less 
liquid . Within the share portfolio, securities 
issued by domestic non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations were replaced by foreign securities. 
While the diminished interest in equity re-
duced the riskiness of fi  nancial investment 
per se, the shifts within this asset class, 
when viewed in isolation, resulted in an in-
crease in riskiness. The acquisition of fi  nan-
cial assets in the form of investment fund 
shares recorded considerable growth. In 
this context, investment funds invest in a 
diver sifi  ed portfolio of securities rather than 
purchasing individual shares and debt 
secur ities directly. Net purchases of debt 
secur ities also increased noticeably, with 
the focus mainly on long- term foreign 
secur ities. On the other hand, deposits 
were slightly scaled back, meaning that 
their role was reduced again compared 
with last year. This development was driven 
especially by investment funds, which pri-
marily reduced their overnight deposits. 
Based on these observations, it is not pos-
sible to make defi  nitive statements about 
developments in the riskiness of other fi  nan-
cial institutions’ fi  nancial investment.
Across all sectors, the developments seen in 
the previous years thus largely continued in 
2019. In the case of households, investment 
decisions were again shaped by risk aver-
sion and a preference for liquidity. However, 
yield aspects gained somewhat in import-
ance again in this sector against the back-
drop of rising equity prices worldwide and 
persistently low interest rates. The acquisi-tion of strategic stakes continued to be the 
main driver of fi  nancial investment among 
non- fi  nancial corporations. The continued 
shift in fi  nancial investment from deposits 
to riskier securities –  compared with de-
posits  – amongst insurance and pension 
funds is indicative of a higher degree of 
riskiness. However, no clear conclusions can 
be drawn from the opposing shifts with re-
gard to riskiness in the case of other fi  nan-
cial institutions.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
41

have been able to file an application through 
their principal banks for corona assistance 
loans from the Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau 
(KfW) and other business development banks. 
Disbursements of approved loan applications 
then commenced at the beginning of April 
2020.7 However, anecdotal evidence suggests 
that, in some cases, banks were already finan -
cing corona assistance loans in advance in the 
form of bridge loans as early as March. As well 
as this, many enterprises apparently also drew 
down their existing credit lines (irrevocable 
lending commitments) to overcome short- term 
liquidity shortfalls. One indication of this is the 
significant dip in the stock of irrevocable lend -ing commitments during the reporting quarter, 
combined with a stronger than usual rise in 
short- term lending (see the chart on p. 43).
The latest BLS suggests that other factors were 
at play as well.8 The banks surveyed reported 
that they had experienced the sharpest rise (by 
historical standards) in demand for loans to en -
terprises since the BLS began at the end of 
2002. This is consistent with the development 
of lending volumes described above. The re -
spondents primarily put this down to the high 
financing needs for inventories and working 
capital. Other factors driving up demand for 
bank loans included the drop in the use of in -
ternal financing for the first time since the start 
of 2010, the decline in other institutions’ will -
ingness to provide credit, and a reduction in 
enterprises obtaining funding via the capital 
market. Taken together, this suggests that Ger -
man enterprises are currently more dependent 
on bank loans as a source of liquidity than was 
previously the case. Over the next three 
months, banks expect an even sharper rise in 
demand for credit, especially from smaller and 
medium- sized enterprises for short- term loans. 
This probably indicates that firms are expected 
to experience increasing liquidity problems.
At the same time, the banks surveyed restricted 
their lending policies for loans to enterprises in 
response to the economic repercussions of the 
coronavirus pandemic. During the reporting 
quarter, credit standards in the corporate finan -
cing sector were tightened on balance to an 
extent last seen in 2009. The overall picture 
was very mixed, however, with the majority of 
institutions leaving their credit standards un -
changed in the reporting quarter. According to 
the bank managers surveyed, standards were 
tightened mainly in response to the signifi -
cantly negative assessment of the situation in … owing to 
advance 
financing  of 
assistance loans, 
increased take- 
up of credit 
lines, and pay -
ment deferralsBLS indicates 
increased 
demand from 
enterprises is 
primarily the 
result of finan -
cing needs for 
fixed, short- term 
spending
Lending policies 
more restrictive 
overall2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
210123456
––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2Up to 1 year
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total,
percentage changeLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeMaturity contributions in percentage points
7 For more detailed information about the assistance loans 
issued by the Federal Government and grants issued by the 
state governments, see https://www.kfw.de/ 
inlandsfoerderung/Companies/KfW-Corona-Hilfe /
8 This survey round was conducted between 19 March and 
3 April.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
42

specific industries or for particular firms and the 
decline in borrowers’ creditworthiness. Re -
spondent banks also took a dimmer view of 
the risks surrounding the general state of the 
economy, the economic prospects and the re -
coverability of collateral. For the first time since 
2012, a significant number of BLS banks cited 
higher capital costs as an additional tightening 
factor.
The banks surveyed also further tightened their 
credit terms and conditions as a whole. Ac -
cording to BLS data, the banks made both their 
collateral requirements and loan covenants 
considerably stricter. Margins were also ex -
panded further, regardless of credit ratings.
Banks’ lending business in the reporting quar -
ter was supported not only by corporate cus -
tomers, but also by another slight uptick in 
loans to households. This was again attribut -
able to loans for house purchase, which re -
corded high inflows, particularly in January and 
February. On balance, at 5.7% on the year, the 
growth rate of loans for house purchase rose 
to its highest level since 2000.
These data are backed up by reports from BLS 
respondent banks that demand for loans to 
households for house purchase continued to 
increase in the reporting quarter. The low gen -
eral level of interest rates and, to a lesser ex -
tent, the financing needs for refinancing, debt 
restructuring and renegotiation, were again 
cited as the main reasons for the increase in 
demand. The influence of the outlook in the 
housing market and expected developments in 
house prices also remained positive, but de -
creased compared to the previous quarters. 
Over the next three months, though, the BLS 
banks are expecting a sharp decline in housing 
loans, probably on account of the pronounced 
uncertainty regarding the duration of the 
coronavirus crisis, its impact on the labour mar -
ket, and households’ income situation.
The pandemic did not yet have a significant im -
pact on standards for loans for house purchase in the reporting quarter. These were tightened 
only marginally in the first quarter of 2020. On 
balance, however, the BLS banks are planning 
to tighten standards more sharply in the second 
quarter. In the first quarter, BLS banks made 
credit terms and conditions agreed in loan con -
tracts more restrictive overall, mainly by nar -
rowing margins irrespective of creditworthi -
ness.
Unlike loans for house purchase, growth in 
consumer credit in the reporting quarter was 
significantly lower than in the previous quarter. 
This is mainly because the inflows in January 
and February were offset by a net reduction in 
March. This would suggest that the economic 
consequences of the corona pandemic were al -
ready having a stronger impact on this credit 
segment than on loans for house purchase in 
March.
Credit standards in the consumer credit seg -
ment were tightened again more sharply in the 
reporting quarter for the first time since 2011. 
Here, too, this was due to a more downbeat 
risk assessment of the general economic situ -
ation and outlook, the decline in borrowers’ 
creditworthiness and the reduced recoverability 
of collateral. The credit terms and conditions 
agreed in loan contracts, on the other hand, Further discern -
ible increase in 
loans to house -
holdsBLS standards 
tightened only 
marginally, 
credit conditions 
tightened some -
what more 
strongly
Crisis dampens 
growth in con -
sumer credit
Lending policies 
more restrictive 
in consumer 
credit businessIrrevocable lending commitments 
and loans to domestic non-financial 
corporations*
84048121620
––+++++Year-on-year percentage change, end-of-quarter data
15 2016 2017 2018 2019 20
* Non-financial  corporations  and  quasi-corporations.  1 Not 
seasonally  adjusted.  2 Seasonally  adjusted  and  adjusted  for 
loan sales and securitisation.
Deutsche BundesbankIrrevocable lending commitments1
Loans with a maturity
of up to 1 year 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
43

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q2 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20201.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
44

were tightened only marginally in the reporting 
quarter.
Against the backdrop of the situation in finan-
cial markets, German banks responded to the 
ad hoc questions in the April BLS with reports 
of a deterioration in their funding situation 
compared with the previous quarter.
The Eurosystem’s expanded APP continued to 
weigh on banks’ earnings through weaker net 
interest income. However, in the banks’ assess -
ment, the burden was less heavy than in the 
previous survey round. On balance, the pur -
chase programme had a positive impact only 
on the credit volume for loans for house pur -
chase. The banks are expecting the APP and 
PEPP to significantly improve their liquidity pos -
ition and market financing conditions in the 
coming six months.
The negative deposit facility rate once again 
contributed to a decline in banks’ net interest income, in part through lower lending rates. 
The negative earnings effect was tempered by 
the two- tier system of remunerating excess 
liquid ity holdings, however. At the same time, 
viewed in isolation, the negative deposit rate 
once again led to an expansion of the credit 
volume in all business areas.
Only a few banks from the German sample 
took part in the TLTRO- III in March 2020, mainly 
out of profitability considerations. They re -
ported that the uptake in funds was used pri -
marily for lending to the non-  financial sector 
and liquidity holding in the Eurosystem, adding 
that they would participate in future operations 
mainly because of the attractive design of the 
TLTRO- III operations and in order to avoid fu -
ture funding constraints. The TLTRO- III oper -
ations had no impact on banks’ lending pol -
icies.Deterioration in 
German banks’ 
funding environ -
ment
German banks 
expect their 
liquidity position 
and financing 
conditions to 
improveTwo- tier system 
for excess liquid -
ity eases burden
Use of TLTRO- III 
funds mainly 
for lending 
and liquidity 
management 
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Sectoral portfolio adjustments in the euro area during the low inter -
est rate period, Monthly Report, April 2020, pp. 19-44.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), Negative interest rates on the deposits of non-  financial corpor -
ations and households in Germany, Monthly Report, November 2019, pp. 31-32.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), Acquisition of financial assets and the search for yield in Germany, 
Monthly Report, May 2019, pp. 31-34.
European Central Bank (2020a), Press release of 7 April 2020, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/
pr/date/2020/html/ecb.pr200407~2472a8ccda.en.html
European Central Bank (2020b), Press release of 22 April 2020, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/
pr/date/2020/html/ecb.pr200422~962a743486.en.html
European Central Bank (2020c), Press release of 30 April 2020, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/
pr/date/2020/html/ecb.pr200430~fa46f38486.en.html
European Central Bank (2020d), Press release of 30 April 2020, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/
pr/date/2020/html/ecb.pr200430_1~477f400e39.en.htmlDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
45

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Developments in international financial markets 
over the past few weeks have been dominated 
by the assessment of the economic and finan -
cial fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. 
While market participants’ outlook for the 
economy was still fairly positive as 2020 began 
and equity markets reached new highs in many 
places, market activity was increasingly shaped 
by the coronavirus pandemic from the end of 
February. The stock markets saw a surge in volatility and sharp price drops. At the same 
time, bonds with high credit quality (safe haven 
assets) were heavily in demand, in spite of 
intermittent tensions even in these highly liquid 
markets. Federal securities were delivering his -
torically low yields in the first half of March. 
The announcement of fiscal and monetary pol -
icy support measures stabilised the markets in 
mid- March: the central banks of major cur -
rency areas loosened their monetary policy 
stance, in some cases using new monetary pol -
icy instruments. In March, the Governing Coun -
cil of the ECB announced that it would be 
scaling up its asset purchase programme (APP) 
with a temporary envelope of additional net 
purchases totalling €120 billion. It also decided 
to launch an additional purchase programme 
(the pandemic emergency purchase programme 
– PEPP). Under the PEPP , €750 billion worth of 
private and public sector securities are to be 
purchased up until the end of 2020. At the 
same time, additional issuance of government 
bonds are on the cards, intended to help fi -
nance the fiscal burden posed by the corona -
virus pandemic. All in all, these measures are 
set to transfer a portion of the costs and risks 
associated with the pandemic from the private 
to the public sector. In the equity markets, this 
was reflected by subsiding volatility and a sig -
nificant price recovery. Sovereign bond market 
yields saw mixed developments, however. In 
the euro area, they picked up again somewhat 
after reaching their lows. The yield spreads be -
tween ten- year Federal bonds (Bunds) and ten- 
year government bonds of other euro area 
countries widened initially but narrowed again 
slightly in response to the new PEPP . Given the 
elevated level of uncertainty, participants in the 
foreign exchange markets increasingly sought 
currencies that are considered to be relatively 
safe. In effective terms, the US dollar, the euro, 
the yen and the Swiss franc appreciated. By 
contrast, mainly the currencies of commodity 
exporters as well as of emerging market econ -
omies and former transition countries fell on a Financial mar -
kets assessing 
economic reper -
cussions of the 
coronavirus 
pandemic
Implied volatility
in the financial markets
Sources: Bloomberg and Thomson Reuters. 1 Calculated using 
the prices of index options with a maturity of 30 days. 2 Im-
plied  volatility  of  currency  options  with  a  maturity  of  three 
months.  3 Implied  volatility  of  options  on  the  Bund  future 
(Germany) and T-Note future (United States) for a three-month 
horizon.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 202036912102030405060708090
369121518
Bond market 3 Equity market 1
Enlarged scale
Foreign exchange market 2%, daily data
United StatesEuro area
VSTOXX (EURO STOXX 50)
GermanyUnited States
VIX (S&P 500)
Euro/US dollar Euro/yenGermany
VDAXDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
46

broad basis. In keeping with this, extensive out -
flows from investment funds which invest in 
emerging markets were observed in March.
Exchange rates
In recent months, the foreign exchange mar -
kets were shaped by the global spread of the 
novel coronavirus as well as market partici -
pants’ assessments of the strain it is placing on 
economies and the economic policy measures 
designed to combat the crisis. After the virus 
had spread from Asia to other continents in 
February and early negative ramifications for 
the global economy became apparent, uncer -
tainty on the financial markets rose dramatic -
ally. This tended to work in favour of currencies 
which are considered relatively safe.
From mid- February to the second week of 
March the euro initially recorded marked gains 
against the US dollar, which was weighed 
down by speculation that the Federal Reserve 
System (the Fed) could cut policy rates to coun -
ter a crisis- induced downturn in the US econ -
omy. While the Eurosystem had also signalled 
its readiness to combat the crisis, the US policy 
rate’s higher level meant that the Fed had 
greater monetary policy leeway. In early March, 
even before its regularly scheduled meeting, 
the Fed then indeed made a policy rate cut, 
which – at 50 basis points – was also larger 
than expected. Both the size and timing of this 
move came as a surprise for market partici -
pants, leading the euro to record additional 
gains against the US dollar. Subsequently, nas -
cent speculation around potential further rate 
cuts by the Fed also contributed to the euro’s 
appreciation to begin with.
The start of the second week in March brought 
a dramatic slump in oil prices after an agree -
ment between the OPEC member countries 
and Russia on scaling back oil production had 
initially broken down. This heightened invest -
ors’ risk aversion and generated considerable 
turbulence on the financial markets. Key euro exchange rates also became substantially more 
volatile as a result. While the euro initially 
climbed to $1.15 – a value not matched in over 
a year – sentiment subsequently reversed, fa -
vouring the US dollar. Market participants’ de -
mand for currencies considered particularly 
safe, such as the US dollar, grew as the turmoil 
in financial markets persisted and the World 
Health Organisation classified the spread of the 
coronavirus as a pandemic. At the same time, 
the euro was weakened by the climbing num -
ber of new infections in the euro area, the lock -
down of parts of northern Italy and the fore -
seeable economic strains unfolding as a result. 
An extraordinary rate cut by the Fed of a fur -
ther 100 basis points had no lasting impact on 
the development of exchange rates, nor did 
the PEPP asset purchase programme agreed on 
by the ECB Governing Council. Ultimately, the 
euro fell to US$1.07 in the second half of 
March, its lowest level since April 2017.
It took a coordinated action of the Eurosystem, 
the Fed and the central banks of Canada, the 
United Kingdom, Japan and Switzerland to halt 
the US dollar’s soaring trajectory. It was agreed 
that in order to further enhance provision of US 
dollar liquidity, seven- day maturity US dollar 
swaps would be offered on a daily basis, as op -
posed to the existing weekly offering. These 
swaps enable the participating central banks to 
buy US dollars from the Fed against their own 
currency and keep the domestic banking sys -
tem supplied with US dollars. The coordinated 
action evidently alleviated market participants’ 
concerns as to the provision of US dollar liquid -
ity for the banking system and the prospect of 
a shortage of the US currency. The hitherto 
negative dollar basis of the euro, the yen and 
the Swiss franc, which is an indicator of tension 
in the foreign exchange market, rapidly dwin -
dled thereafter and the high level of volatility Coronavirus 
pandemic 
bolsters  safe 
currencies
Euro down 
against the 
US dollar, …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
47

exhibited by exchange rates fell markedly.1 The 
measure thus helped to calm the market. The 
euro was then able to recoup some of its prior 
losses. Since then, the euro has been hovering 
with no discernible trend in a narrow band of 
between US$1.08 and US$1.10. At the end of 
the reporting period, it was trading at US$1.08, 
down 3.9% on its level at the start of the year.
The euro also depreciated against the yen on 
balance. Part of the reason for this was that the 
use of the yen as a financing currency for carry 
trades tends to trigger net capital flows to 
Japan in times of mounting uncertainty. The 
low level of exchange rate volatility at the be -ginning of the year likely encouraged currency 
carry trades; but the growing uncertainty men -
tioned above meant that the exchange rate risk 
associated with these transactions increased 
too. At the same time, financial market partici -
pants became more risk averse. Taken by them -
selves, these developments tend to lead to an 
unwinding of currency carry trades and rising 
demand for the yen. By contrast, the monetary 
policy easing measures adopted by the Bank of 
Japan with a view to tackling the economic 
burdens emanating from the present crisis 
made no discernible impression on develop -
ments in the foreign exchange markets. The 
euro closed the period under review trading at 
¥115, down 5.3% on its value at the start of 
the year.
The euro’s performance against the pound 
sterling during the period under review was 
shaped by the UK government’s shifting strat -
egy for containing the coronavirus. In contrast 
to the governments of severely affected coun -
tries in the euro area, the United Kingdom’s 
government had initially rejected taking meas -
ures to curb the spread of the virus that would 
place heavier restrictions on the economy and 
citizens. Driven by market participants’ scepti -
cism regarding this policy and the impression 
that little progress was being made in negoti -
ations on the future trade relationship with the 
European Union, which are subject to a tight 
timeframe, the euro rose into the second half 
of March to £0.93, its highest level in 11 years. 
… and against 
the yen… but up 
against the 
pound sterling Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries. An increase indicates an appreciation 
of  the  euro.  3 9 March:  Collapse  in  oil  prices.  4 20 March: 
Swap  agreements  between  the  Eurosystem,  the  Federal  Re-
serve and other central banks.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM
20201.051.101.151.20
115120125130135
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105Daily data, log scale
¥
£US$ against the ...
... US dollar
... yenLaunch exchange rate:
€1 = US$1.1789 1
... pound sterlingLaunch exchange rate: €1 = ¥133.73 1
Launch exchange rate: €1 = £0.71111
Nominal effective exchange rate2
Q1 1999 = 100
Launch exchange rate: 103.12 1
43
1 The term “dollar basis” refers to the difference between 
the costs of direct US dollar funding and “synthetic” US 
dollar funding. Direct funding means borrowing US dollars 
in the interbank market; synthetic funding involves borrow -
ing in euro, for instance, with the loaned amount being 
exchanged for US dollars through a swap and, at the same 
time, exchanged back in a forward transaction upon ma -
turity. The dollar basis is thus calculated as the difference 
between the USD LIBOR (London interbank offered rate), 
on the one hand, and the EUR LIBOR plus the swap rate on 
the other. The swap rate is computed on the basis of the 
forward rate and the spot rate of the euro against the US 
dollar. A negative dollar basis implies that direct US dollar 
funding is cheaper than the synthetic variant – i.e. US dol -
lar funding constituted from a swap with the euro. How -
ever, in phases of market tension, direct US dollar funding 
is often not available to foreign commercial banks or its 
availability is limited.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
48

Only once the UK government introduced 
comprehensive protective measures to combat 
the spread of the virus did the pound sterling 
embark on a marked recovery. As this report 
went to press, the single currency was never -
theless trading at £0.88, which was around 
4.0% stronger than at the beginning of the 
year.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners the euro nudged 
slightly higher on balance compared to the be -
ginning of the year (+0.4%). Whilst it also de -
preciated against the renminbi (-2.0%) and the 
Swiss franc (-3.2%) in addition to falling against 
the US dollar and the Japanese yen, these 
losses were offset by some strong price gains 
against other currencies. For example, the euro 
rose considerably against the currencies of 
major partner countries in east- central Europe, 
from which risk- averse investors were pulling 
out capital; it appreciated 7.3% against the 
zloty, 8.5% against the Czech koruna and 7.3% 
against the forint. The euro also recorded 
marked gains against the currencies of Norway 
(+12.1%) and Canada (+4.3%), which faced 
broad- based downward pressure due to the 
collapse in oil prices. On balance, the price 
competitiveness of euro area suppliers deterior -
ated somewhat over the period under review 
but, looking at the long- term average, their 
competitive position can currently still be con -
sidered neutral.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  investment
Bond market
Government bond yields in the major currency 
areas showed volatile and mixed developments 
during the period under review. In the United 
States, yields on ten- year US Treasuries declined 
by 131 basis points, closing the period under 
review at 0.6% and thus still in the region of 
the historical low they also reached in March. 
The considerable fall in yield is due, in part, to a series of comprehensive measures to ease 
monetary policy undertaken by the US central 
bank. The first set of decisions came at the be -
ginning of March and others followed. Among 
other moves, the US Federal Reserve lowered 
the target range for its policy rate, the Federal 
Funds Rate, by a total of 150 basis points in 
two stages. It also announced securities pur -
chases without a pre- defined limit.2 The mon -
etary policy measures brought down both the 
expectations of short- term interest rate devel -
opments in the United States contained in 
long- term yields as well as –  and most not -
ably – the term premium. The latter compen -
sates investors for taking on the risk of unex -
pected changes in short- term rates. The term 
premium is currently negative, meaning that, at 
present, investors receive a higher yield in terms 
of expected value if they invest papers with a Euro appreci -
ation in effective 
terms
Ten- year 
US Treasury 
yields signifi -
cantly lowerBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20200.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–––+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
GermanyJapanEuro areaUnited States
United
Kingdom
2 See https://www.federalreserve.gov/covid-19.htm  for an 
overview compiled by the Federal Reserve of its measures 
and publications in relation to the coronavirus pandemic.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
49

short maturity on a revolving basis. This reflects 
the fact that investors demand a premium for 
bearing the risk that the short- term rate may 
be unexpectedly low in future. US yields are 
also typically dampened in times of crisis by the 
fact that US Treasury bonds are seen as a safe- 
haven asset. Nevertheless, yields did show a 
marked rise for a time in the first half of March. 
According to an analysis by the Bank for Inter -
national Settlements, a number of institutional 
investors sold US Treasuries in early March to 
cover their liquid ity needs.3 These liquidity 
needs arose from trading strategies aiming to 
exploit small yield differences, such as between 
bonds and derivatives.
Amid strong fluctuations, the yield on ten- year 
Bunds dropped 33 basis points on balance 
from the beginning of the year, to -0.6%; it 
was thus back above its historical low recorded 
in March 2020 (-0.85%). The upward impulses 
from the United States mentioned above likely 
served to push yields higher. The chief contrib -
uting factor behind the higher rates was, how -
ever, the announcement communicated by the 
Finance Agency in two press releases that the 
current year would see issuance of additional 
nominal interest-bearing Federal securities in 
the expected amount of €229 billion. The pro -
spect of this fresh issuance on the horizon re -
duced the scarcity premium, i.e. the yield spread between a ten- year Bund and an EONIA 
swap with the same maturity. By contrast, 
monetary policy measures, like those being im -
plemented by the Eurosystem, are likely to have 
had a dampening effect on capital market 
yields in the period under review. Nevertheless, 
in the volatile market setting (exhibiting a 
higher level of volatility than on the long- term 
average), their announcement had no direct, 
measurable effect on the level of Bund yields. 
With the yields on ten- year US Treasury bonds 
falling considerably more strongly than those 
of ten- year Bunds, the yield spread narrowed 
significantly, shrinking by 92 basis points to 116 
basis points.
As this report went to press, the term structure 
computed from yields on Federal securities was 
flatter than at the start of the year. Measured 
by the differential between ten- year and two-  
year yields, the spread stood at 21 basis points, 
which is a low yield spread by historical stand -
ards. The negative term premium observed for 
Federal securities is one factor that helps to ex -
plain the curve’s relative flatness. As this report 
went to press, Bunds were exhibiting negative 
yields across the entire maturity spectrum.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP- weighted average) widened 
compared with the beginning of the year by 42 
basis points to 108 basis points. In the period 
under review, this average yield spread reached 
a high on 18 March 2020, the day of the PEPP 
decision, but subsequently narrowed again. 
The Eurosystem’s new purchase programme 
likely played a contributing role here. While the 
distribution among the Member States of cu -
mulative purchases of sovereign debt under the 
PEPP will be guided by the national central 
banks’ respective contribution to the ECB’s 
capital (the capital key), fluctuations in terms of 
asset class and countries are permissible over 
the course of the programme. From the per -
spective of market participants, the risk at -Yield on 
ten- year Bunds 
downYield curve for 
Federal secur -
ities flatter
Higher yield 
spreads over 
BundsYield curve in the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method),  based  on  listed  Federal  securities.  1 In  place  since 
18 September 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.70.60.50.40.30.2
–––––––
Residual maturity in years30 December 2019% p.a.
14 May 2020
3 See Schrimpf et al. (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
50

tached to euro area government bonds with 
lower credit ratings has evidently decreased.
Compared to the beginning of the year, yields 
on ten- year UK bonds (gilts) were down by 62 
basis points at 0.2%. The Bank of England has 
also responded to the coronavirus crisis with a 
significant loosening of its monetary policy 
stance. It brought down its policy rate (the 
Bank Rate) in two stages, trimming a total of 
65 basis points and taking it to a new historical 
low. It also significantly stepped up its asset 
purchase programme. Ten- year Japanese gov -
ernment bonds were yielding virtually the same 
as at the end of 2019, at 0.0%. Yields thus re -
mained within the range in which market par -
ticipants assume that the Bank of Japan wishes 
to keep interest rates as part of its policy to 
control the yield curve. The Bank of Japan also 
loosened its monetary policy stance, proceed -
ing, in April, to remove the ceiling applying to 
its securities purchase programmes.
Euro area forward inflation rates derived from 
inflation swaps for a period of five years start -
ing in five years’ time latterly stood at 0.8%, 
putting them significantly down on balance in 
the reporting period (-49 basis points). Aside 
from long- term inflation expectations, the indi -
cator also encompasses inflation risk premia 
and liquidity premia which, to a degree, spill 
over from the bond market to the swap market 
on account of an arbitrage relationship. These 
premia, which vary from bond to bond, played 
an enhanced role in the reporting period and 
are likely to have depressed the indicator value 
for forward inflation rates. In mid- March, in 
particular, market participants were demanding 
higher premiums in return for taking on liquid -
ity risk. At that juncture, the indicator stood at 
an all- time low of 0.7%, due to the fact that 
the liquidity benefits offered by ten- year bench -
mark Bunds were particularly high compared 
with other bonds, not least against inflation-  
linked debt securities. During such phases, the 
forward inflation rate dips due to the varying 
liquidity of the bonds included in the calcula -
tion. Inflation risk and liquidity premia are a key reason for the gap between market- based indi -
cators and the higher inflation expectations 
computed from surveys. Long- term euro area 
inflation expectations collated by Consensus 
Economics in a survey likewise fell slightly to 
1.8% during the period under review.
Yields on European corporate bonds went up 
sharply in March, given the looming economic 
impact of the coronavirus pandemic. Despite 
declining again since the end of March, yields 
have risen significantly over the reporting 
period overall. Bonds issued by BBB- rated 
finan cial corporations with a residual maturity 
of between seven and ten years were yielding Yields down 
in the United 
Kingdom 
Forward infla -
tion rate in the 
euro area sig -
nificantly lower, 
survey- based 
inflation expect -
ations down 
marginally
Corporate bond 
yields upForward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 1 Brent blend (for delivery in 
one month).
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20201.41.82.22.6Weekly averages
20406080% p.a.
00.40.81.2Five-year forward inflation rate 
five years ahead, based on swapsConsensus inflation expectations
six to ten years ahead
United StatesEuro area
Memo item:
Crude oil price1
Difference between forward inflation
rates in the United States 
and the euro areaPer-
cent-
age
pointsUS$0.81.21.62.0
% p.a.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
51

2.4% as this report went to press, 98 basis 
points above their level at the end of last year. 
Yields on non- financial corporate bonds of 
equivalent maturity rose by 70 basis points to 
1.7%. In particular, heightened default risks 
played a pivotal role in pushing up yields. This 
was also reflected in higher CDS premia. Bond 
yields at lower- rated enterprises recorded par -
ticularly strong growth, as demonstrated by 
corporate bond yields in the high- yield paper 
sector, which increased by 255 basis points to 
5.9%. In this market segment, enterprises 
either  cancelled or postponed planned bond 
issuance  in view of the significant market 
tension  that began to emerge in March. In the 
meantime, however, the first few companies 
have resumed issuing bonds
With risk- free interest rates down, corporate 
bond spreads over Bunds widened more sub -
stantially than the increases in corporate bond 
yields. As a consequence, yield spreads cur -
rently lie above their respective five- year aver -ages. That said, relative to the emerging risks, 
as outlined in the sometimes highly pessimistic 
assessments of the economic situation, spreads 
expanded by a comparatively small margin. 
During the financial crisis, interest rate spreads 
in the high- yield paper segment exceeded 
2,200 basis points, compared with a peak of 
866 basis points in mid- March. The monetary 
and fiscal policy measures that have been taken 
appear to be channelling some of the risks into 
the public sector.
Gross issuance in the German bond market in 
the first quarter of 2020 was well up on the 
preceding three- month period. This came on 
the back of the usual seasonal pattern seen at 
the beginning of each year, and was not pri -
marily attributable to the economic impact of 
the pandemic. In March, however, the initial ef -
fects of a change in issuance behaviour were 
already discernible in sub- components. Overall, 
German borrowers issued paper to the tune of 
€394 billion, up from €293½ billion in the pre -
vious three months.4 Net of redemptions and 
changes in issuers’ own holdings, domestic is -
suers ramped up their capital market borrow -
ing by €67 billion. The outstanding volume of 
foreign debt securities in the German market 
grew by €15½ billion in the first quarter, with 
the result that, on balance, the total outstand -
ing volume of bonds in Germany grew by 
€82½ billion in the period under review.
In the first three months of 2020, the public 
sector issued bonds worth €46½ billion net, 
compared with net redemptions totalling €22 
billion in the previous quarter. Central govern -
ment (including the resolution agency classified 
as belonging to it) enlarged its capital market 
debt by €23½ billion net, mainly by issuing 
Treasury discount paper (Bubills, €10 billion) 
and five- year Federal notes (Bobls, €8 billion), 
but also thirty- year Federal bonds (Bunds, €5 High net issu -
ance of German 
debt securities
Rise in public 
sector capital 
market debtYield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBOXX indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20200100200300400500600700800900
100200300400High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB financial corporations 2
BBB non-financial corporations 2By rating categoryBasis points, daily data
4 The methodology used for issuing statistics has been re -
vised. The data pool collected using the new methodology 
is now available from January 2020. Individual data for the 
period January to February 2020 have been revised. (See 
the box on p. 53).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
52

Methodological changes in securities issues statistics
The Bundesbank regularly reports on the 
sale and purchase of securities issued by 
domestic issuers in its press releases and its 
reports on the economic situation. The re-
ports are based, inter alia, on the issues 
statistics for debt securities, which record 
monthly data on the terms of such secur-
ities as well as on the volume of monthly 
sales, redemptions and amounts outstand-
ing.
The securities issues statistics were restruc-
tured in January 2020. The Bundesbank has 
amended its statistical methodology to ad-
here to the optional international standards 
laid out in the most recent edition of the 
Handbook on Securities Statistics,1 pub-
lished in 2015. The Handbook focuses on 
the necessity of collecting statistics in a 
coher ent and internationally comparable 
manner, as confi  rmed by the global fi  nan-
cial crisis in 2008. The Handbook was jointly 
produced by the Bank for International 
Settlements, the European Central Bank 
and the International Monetary Fund.
The methodological adjustments affect the 
following:
– data on amounts outstanding and own 
holdings of debt securities, which are 
now reported including accrued interest;
– foreign currency bonds, which are now 
converted into euro at the current ex-
change rate;
– maturities, which are calculated follow-
ing the actual day count convention;– securities quoted in units, such as certifi  -
cates and structured products, which are 
presented separately at market values.
Furthermore, reporting gaps have been 
closed. For example, commercial paper is-
sued by non- banks and participation certifi  -
cates are recorded in the securities issues 
statistics on a security- by- security basis. 
Secur ities issued by banks that do not have 
an international securities identifi  cation 
number (ISIN) are also included here.
The data collected using the new method-
ology are now available as of January 2020. 
Data from January and February 2020 have 
been revised. On account of the changes 
to  and expansion of the statistics, the 
amount  outstanding of all debt securities 
for January 2020 increased by a total of 
€66.4 billion  to €3,233.2 billion. The debt 
securities quoted in units, which are pre-
sented separately in the Bundesbank’s Stat-
istical Series –  Securities issues statistics, 
amounted to €101.1 billion at the time the 
changes were implemented (3% of the out-
standing amount of all debt securities).
Overall, the data on the outstanding amount 
of debt securities and the sale of debt 
secur ities by banks and enterprises (non- 
MFIs) have been particularly affected by the 
changes. The aggregates can be found in 
the monthly Statistical Series –  Secur ities 
issues statistics.2 All methodological infor-
mation can be found in the explanatory 
notes accompanying that publication.
1 https://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/wgsd/pdf/hss.pdf
2 https://www.bundesbank.de/en/publications/
statistics/statistical-series/overview-of-the-statistical- 
series-821978Comparison of amounts outstanding 
and gross sales 
As at January 2020, € million
Item New procedure Old procedure
Amounts outstanding 3,233,228 3,166,822
Gross sales 157,049 148,121
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
53

billion) and two-  year Federal Treasury notes 
(€2½ billion). Parallel to this, state and local 
governments issued debt securities worth €23 
billion on balance. This heightened issuance ac -
tivity was attributable to the actions of a num -
ber of federal states which, in some cases, 
placed a record volume of bonds on the mar -
ket, presumably with a view to using the cap -
ital market to finance the fiscal burdens caused 
by the pandemic.
Domestic credit institutions increased their cap -
ital market debt by €14 billion in the months 
from January to March 2020, after having re -
deemed €8 billion net in the final quarter of 
2019. Debt securities of specialised credit insti -
tutions and mortgage Pfandbriefe (€7½  billion 
and €5½ billion, respectively) constituted the 
lion’s share of issues, followed on a smaller 
scale by other bank debt securities which can 
be structured flexibly (€2½ billion). In March, 
however, banks significantly scaled back their 
issuance activity, even reducing their capital market debt. The volume of outstanding public 
Pfandbriefe continues to decline (-€1½ billion).
In the first quarter of 2020, domestic enter -
prises issued debt securities in the amount of 
€6½ billion net, which on balance reflects the 
customary seasonal pattern. It is striking, 
though, that other financial institutions, in par -
ticular, issued fewer instruments in March, opt -
ing to redeem bonds on balance. This may 
have been prompted by the poorer financing 
and access conditions prevailing in the corpor -
ate bond market in that month.
On the demand side of the German bond mar -
ket, foreign investors were the dominant buyers 
in the first quarter of 2020, adding €55 billion 
net worth of German debt securities to their 
portfolios. Domestic credit institutions ex -
panded their bond portfolio by €30½ billion 
net, placing a particular emphasis on foreign 
securities (€19½ billion). The Bundesbank ac -
quired debt securities in the amount of €12 bil -
lion net, first and foremost under the Eurosys -
tem’s asset purchase programmes. Domestic 
non- banks, by contrast, parted with bonds 
worth €14½ billion net, predominantly in the 
form of German securities (€8½ billion).
Equity market
Global equity indices recorded sharp price 
losses in the reporting period. At the beginning 
of the year, equity markets were initially buoyed 
by signs that several long- simmering political 
downside risks, such as the trade dispute be -
tween the United States and China, were 
weakening. However, initial price corrections 
set in at the end of February, which then inten -
sified dramatically over the month of March. It 
was becoming increasingly clear that the nega -
tive economic impact of the pandemic was not 
just going to be confined to Asia, and that a 
global economic slump would follow. Stock 
markets reached their interim lows at the end 
of March, having shed between 30% and 40% 
of their value by that time. Though a sharp Net issuance 
by credit 
institutions Net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Purchases of 
debt securities
Marked drop in 
equity prices 
worldwideInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2019 2020
Q1 Q4 Q1
Debt securities
Residents 15.0 15.6 27.7
Credit institutions 7.0 – 15.4 30.3
of which:
Foreign debt securities 7.4 –  8.0 19.3
Deutsche Bundesbank – 8.1 10.0 11.9
Other sectors 16.1 21.0 – 14.5
of which:
Domestic debt securities – 5.1 11.1 –  8.7
Non-residents 63.5 – 37.3 54.8
Shares
Residents 5.8 22.3 13.1
Credit institutions – 1.4 3.1 –  8.7
of which:
Domestic shares – 0.6 3.0 –  4.5
Non-banks 7.1 19.2 21.8
of which:
Domestic shares 3.9 3.8 12.1
Non-residents – 1.5 –  1.5 –  5.8
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 20.0 52.1 33.7
Investment in retail funds 3.1 4.9 –  0.8
of which:
Equity funds – 0.4 0.7 –  5.8
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
54

drop, this is not an unprecedented downturn. 
During the 2008 financial crisis, prices tumbled 
even more significantly – albeit over a longer 
period.
Since the end of March, stock prices have re -
couped just under half of their lost value, not 
least because of the monetary and fiscal policy 
measures instigated to stabilise the economy, 
as outlined above. All in all, circumstances have 
caused the European EURO STOXX index to fall 
by 24.0% since the end of 2019, with the Brit -
ish FTSE All-  Share index going down by 24.9% 
and the Japanese Nikkei 225 by 15.8%. Price 
losses in the United States proved compara -
tively benign, with the S&P 500 dropping by 
11.7%, putting it broadly back at its level of 
one year earlier.
The share prices of companies whose oper -
ations have largely been brought to a halt by 
the coronavirus pandemic, e.g. airlines, hotels 
and restaurants, have fallen by a particularly 
large margin. Bank shares likewise recorded 
above- average price losses; in the euro area, for 
example, they forfeited 48.1% of their value. 
These losses were mainly attributable to two 
factors. First, given the sharp economic down -
turn, investors are expecting a significant in -
crease in defaults on the part of borrowers, 
which may well have a knock- on effect on bank 
balance sheets. Second, from the perspective 
of market participants, the yield curve will 
remain  flat for the foreseeable future. This 
scenario puts a strain on the banking sector’s 
profits from maturity transformation.
Concerns about the economic consequences 
of Covid-19 unleashed a great deal of uncer -
tainty among investors. Price uncertainty in the 
stock markets, as measured by implied volatil -
ity, rose sharply in both the euro area and the 
United States. In mid- March, this implied vola -
tility reached levels last observed during the 
2008 financial crisis. However, for the reasons 
given above, the recent spike in uncertainty 
soon receded again somewhat from the high 
levels of stress. Nevertheless, at last count, un -certainty on both sides of the Atlan tic remained 
well above its five- year average in each case.
Heightened uncertainty and an increase in the 
market price for risk led to a significant hike in 
the risk premia being demanded by market 
participants. A higher (expected) risk premium 
goes hand in hand with falling share prices. 
Moreover, market participants revised their 
profit expectations downwards significantly in 
some cases. The determinants of individual 
components can be quantified using a dividend 
discount model. According to this model, the 
declines seen in safe interest rates, which ele -
vated the present value of future dividends, 
had the effect of boosting prices. Even so, the 
impact of falling interest rates was more than 
offset by higher risk premia and lower profit ex -
pectations. As regards the EURO STOXX index, 
the model in question identifies the lower profit 
expectations as the main driving factor behind 
the observed price losses, whereas the price 
losses suffered by the S&P 500 index are mainly Shares in 
airlines , leisure 
enterprises and 
banks particu -
larly hard hit
Coronavirus 
unleashes sharp 
rise in uncer -
taintyHigher risk pre -
mia and falling 
profit expect -
ations weigh on 
stock pricesEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesDaily data, beginning of 2018 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
708090100110120130
35405060708090100110120
2018 2019 2020Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
55

attributed to higher risk premia. This has caused 
the previously comparatively high valuation of 
stock markets to decline somewhat on both 
sides of the Atlantic.
Funding on the German stock market totalled 
€2 billion on balance in the reporting quarter, 
putting it well below the previous quarter’s ra -
ther high level (€5½ billion). The volume of for -
eign shares circulating in the German market 
rose by €5½ billion over the same period. On 
balance, equities were purchased mainly by 
resident non- banks (€22 billion) which, for ex -
ample, also include investment funds. By con -
trast, domestic credit institutions downsized their equity portfolios by €8½ billion on bal -
ance. Foreign investors narrowed their equity 
exposure in Germany by €6 billion net.
Mutual funds
In the first quarter of 2020, domestic invest -
ment companies posted moderate inflows of 
€33 billion, compared with €57 billion in the 
previous quarter. In March, in the wake of the 
pandemic, investment funds experienced a 
marked decline in inflows, with individual fund 
categories also recording significant outflows. 
On balance, inflows were channelled exclu -
sively to specialised funds reserved for institu -
tional investors (€33½ billion). Of the various 
asset classes, mixed securities funds, in particu -
lar, registered significant net inflows of capital 
(€18½ billion), as did bond funds and open-  
end real estate funds, which enjoyed fairly 
large inflows of €9½ billion and €7 billion re -
spectively. The outstanding volume of foreign 
mutual fund shares in Germany fell by €10 bil -
lion in the period under review. Outflows pre -
vailed in March, tallying with reports of inter -
mittent sizeable withdrawals of funds across 
the globe, particularly from funds specialising 
in emerging market economies. On balance, in -
vestment fund shares were bought almost ex -
clusively by domestic non- banks, which added 
fund shares worth €23½ billion net to their 
portfolios, solely acquiring shares in domestic 
mutual funds on balance. German credit insti -
tutions bolstered their fund portfolio by €½ bil -
lion net, while non- resident investors disposed 
of domestic mutual fund shares worth €1 bil -
lion net.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital imports totalling 
€37½ billion in the first quarter of 2020, 
whereas direct investment generated net out -
flows in the amount of €16½ billion.Equity market 
fundingSales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
shares
Direct invest -
ment records 
net capital 
exportsComparison of share price movements 
during the coronavirus crisis and the 
financial crisis
Source: Refinitiv Datastream. 1 Chosen starting points: Finan-
cial  crisis:  Insolvency  of  Lehman  Brothers  on  15  September 
2008;  Coronavirus:  outbreak  of  the  pandemic  in  Europe 
(chiefly in Italy): 20 February 2020 2 Change in indices in peri-
ods of equal length during the financial crisis (from 15 Septem-
ber to 8 December 2008) and the coronavirus pandemic (from 
20 February to 14 May 2020).
Deutsche Bundesbank– 40 – 30 – 20 – 10 0Travel &
leisureAutomobiles &
PartsFinancials
Health CareIndustrialsOverall 
marketCoronavirus pandemic Financial crisis
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 18060708090100110 EURO STOXX index
Beginning of crisis = 100,1 log scale
Selected sectors of the EURO STOXX index 2
%Days since crisis beganDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
56

Firms domiciled in Germany increased their dir -
ect investment abroad by €49½ billion be -
tween January and March 2020 (compared 
with €4½ billion in the previous quarter). In 
particular, they augmented their equity capital 
abroad (€39½ billion), both through reinvested 
profits and through equity capital in the 
narrower  sense. German firms furthermore 
engaged  in intra- group lending to the tune of 
€9½ billion in order to provide affiliated enter -
prises abroad with additional funds. This lend -
ing took the form of financial credits while, by 
contrast, trade credits were mainly redeemed. 
In the first quarter of 2020, German enter -
prises, which invest in a large number of coun -
tries and regions throughout the world, 
engaged  in relatively large net investments 
within the euro area (€22½ billion). At the 
same time, they also expanded their presence 
in other European countries through direct in -
vestment, most notably in the United Kingdom 
(€12 billion). Beyond Europe, they invested 
heavily in the United States (€3½ billion) and 
China (€2 billion).
Foreign enterprises invested €33 billion net in 
Germany between January and March 2020, 
after having withdrawn funds in the region of 
around €21 billion in the fourth quarter of 
2019. The lion’s share of this investment (€21½ 
billion) took the form of intra- group loans, with 
financial credits serving to swell funds substan -
tially. More than two- fifths of these constituted 
“reverse investments”, i.e. loans channelled to 
German parent companies by their affiliates 
domiciled abroad, a typical way in which the 
latter pass on proceeds from the issuance of 
securities. By contrast, trade credits were mainly 
redeemed. Foreign enterprises’ equity invest -
ment in Germany also expanded in the first 
quarter of 2020. Of this total amount (€11½ 
billion), most was accounted for by reinvested 
earnings. Relatively high inward FDI flows were 
recorded in particular from the Netherlands 
(€11½ billion) and Luxembourg (€9 billion), as 
well as from the United Kingdom and the 
United States (€3½ billion each).Capital outflows 
arising from 
transactions 
by domestic 
enterprises
FDI in Germany 
generates 
capital  inflowsMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2019 2020
Q1 Q4 Q1p
I. Current account + 64.3 + 68.2 + 65.0
1. Goods 1 + 56.8 + 51.7 + 53.3
2. Services 2 –  1.7 –  2.2 –  1.3
3. Primary income + 25.9 + 31.1 + 26.9
4. Secondary income – 16.7 – 12.4 – 14.0
II. Capital account +  0.8 –  1.0 –  0.5
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 40.5 + 91.9 + 16.7
1. Direct investment + 35.9 + 25.2 + 16.5
Domestic investment 
abroad + 54.7 +  4.3 + 49.4
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 18.8 – 20.9 + 32.9
2. Portfolio investment – 15.4 + 71.5 – 37.5
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 41.1 + 32.8 + 10.5
Shares 3 +  1.5 +  9.4 +  4.8
Investment fund shares 4+ 13.4 + 20.9 – 10.0
of which:
Money market fund 
shares –  2.0 +  4.7 –  4.7
Short-term debt 
 securities 5 +  7.7 –  2.0 +  0.7
Long-term debt 
 securities 6 + 18.4 +  4.4 + 14.9
of which:
Denominated in euro 7 + 16.3 +  3.8 + 11.9
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities + 56.4 – 38.7 + 48.0
Shares 3 –  3.1 –  2.8 –  6.0
Investment fund shares –  3.9 +  1.4 –  0.8
Short-term debt 
 securities 5 + 22.3 – 17.0 + 26.6
Long-term debt 
 securities 6 + 41.2 – 20.3 + 28.2
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 8 + 17.5 – 18.0 +  1.1
3. Financial derivatives 9 +  6.6 +  1.8 + 31.9
4. Other investment 10 + 13.4 –  6.0 +  5.7
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 – 51.5 + 61.9 – 82.2
Enterprises and 
 households 12 – 22.4 +  1.1 –  1.7
General government –  5.6 –  0.0 +  1.0
Bundesbank + 93.0 – 69.0 + 88.7
5. Reserve assets –  0.1 –  0.6 +  0.1
IV. Errors and omissions 13 – 24.6 + 24.6 – 47.7
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Short- 
term: original maturity up to one year. 6  Long- term: original 
maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 7 Including out-
standing foreign D- Mark bonds. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the Bun-
desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- 
fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institutions 
serving households. 13 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting 
from the difference between the balance on the fi  nancial ac-
count and the balances on the current account and the capital 
account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
57

List of references
Schrimpf, A., H.S. Shin and V. Sushko (2020), Leverage and margin spirals in fixed income markets 
during the Covid-  19 crisis, BIS Bulletin No 2.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
58

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
German economic output underwent a mas -
sive decline in the first quarter of 2020 owing 
to the coronavirus pandemic and the measures 
taken to contain it. According to the Federal 
Statistical Office’s flash estimate, real gross do -
mestic product (GDP) was 2.2% down on the 
quarter after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. The exceptionally steep drop in GDP in 
the first quarter is all the more notable as eco -
nomic output had probably still seen broad-  
based growth in the first two months of that 
quarter, meaning that the decline was confined 
to the month of March. Most of the introduced 
containment measures were still in place in 
April and substantial restrictions are likely to re -
main in force subsequently, even though some 
rules have already been relaxed and further in -
stances of an easing have been announced for 
the near future. This means that aggregate 
output in the second quarter will be consider -
ably lower still than in the first quarter as a 
whole.
The pandemic and the measures taken to con -
tain it in Germany and abroad have hit domes -
tic economic activity on a broad front. On the 
one hand, many consumer- related service sec -
tors have been affected, some of which had to 
interrupt their business activities for some time 
or severely restrict them. These include the 
hotel and restaurant sector, large parts of the 
bricks and mortar retail sector, travel service 
providers, other leisure and cultural services, 
and passenger transport. Consumer spending 
is therefore likely to have declined considerably. 
The restrictions in Germany have also affected 
output and sales in the manufacturing sector. 
The decline in demand from abroad and dis -
ruptions to global supply and value chains have 
caused additional downward pressure in this 
respect. Exports of goods fell by more than 
one- tenth in March alone. Furthermore, the 
abrupt change in the economic environment and the exceptionally high level of uncertainty 
are likely to have had a dampening effect on 
private investment in machinery and equip -
ment. By contrast, the construction sector re -
mained on an expansionary path, partly be -
cause it was possible for large parts of the con -
struction industry to go on working. In add -
ition, the government increased its consumption 
expenditure in connection with measures to 
tackle the pandemic.
German exports contracted strongly in the first 
quarter of 2020 in real terms. Even though 
business with China was already depressed, 
seasonally adjusted exports of goods in the first 
two months of the year were slightly up on 
their average in the fourth quarter of 2019, but 
this was followed by a decrease of more than 
one- tenth in March. This decline was broadly 
based regionally. There was a particularly sharp German econ -
omy in deep 
recession
Economic slump 
on a broad frontStrong decline 
in exports
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20949698100102104106108
–3–2–10+1+2+3+4Price and seasonally adjusted
2015 = 100, log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
59

fall in the volume of exports of goods to euro 
area countries, although exports to non- euro 
area countries were down considerably, too. 
What stands out particularly when looking at 
the first quarter as a whole is the decline of 
one- eighth in the value of exported goods to 
the People’s Republic of China, whose econ -
omy was the first to be affected by compre -
hensive nationwide containment measures.
A steep decline in private consumption is ex -
pected for the first quarter of 2020. Price-  
adjusted retail sales were, in fact, up slightly on 
the quarter, with opposing developments in 
various subsectors more or less balancing each other out. Massive declines in purchases of tex -
tiles, clothing, footwear and information and 
communication equipment at retail outlets 
were offset by a very strong increase in the 
procurement of food. This was probably due 
chiefly to extensive stockpiling. Substitution 
effects  are also likely to have played a part in 
this respect in view of the order to close res -
taurants. Moreover, households bought signifi -
cantly more goods online and by mail order. 
Their spending in other consumption areas was 
down considerably, however. This affected the 
hotel and restaurant sector, for example, whose 
business operations were largely dormant from 
the second half of March owing to the contain -
ment measures. Purchases of passenger cars 
fresh from the assembly line were also reduced 
to a serious extent. This is suggested by the 
number of new motor vehicle registrations by 
households, which in March contracted by just 
under one- third in seasonally adjusted terms. 
The standstill in the case of other consumption- 
related services, including travel agencies, hair -
dressers and passenger transport operators, 
likewise exerted strong downward pressure.
Business investment in machinery and equip -
ment is likely to have fallen significantly in the 
first quarter of 2020. This is suggested mainly 
by the considerably lower number of new pas -
senger car registrations by business owners, 
although  other capital goods producers like -
wise reported a decline in the value of their 
domestic  sales in the first quarter.
By contrast, construction investment is likely to 
have shown a clear increase in the first quarter 
of 2020. This is suggested by the figures for 
nominal turnover in the main construction sec -
tor, which are available up to February; on an 
average of the first two months of 2020, these 
show a quite considerable and broadly based 
rise compared with the preceding quarter. 
Turnover growth will probably have weakened 
from mid- March as a result of the coronavirus 
pandemic, but data on output in March indi -
cate that the main construction sector was Steep decline 
in private 
consumption Significant 
decline in 
machinery and 
equipment busi -
ness investment
By contrast, 
construction 
investment likely 
to be clearly 
higher90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2090100110
8590100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 190100 100110
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesmonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
60

arguably  relatively little affected by the contain -
ment measures that were introduced.
In price- adjusted terms, German imports of 
goods fell distinctly in the first quarter of 2020. 
The contraction in the volume of imports from 
non- euro area countries was somewhat larger 
than that from euro area partner countries. In 
this connection, it should be noted that these 
declines are unlikely to have been solely due to 
weaker domestic demand. In actual fact, pro -
duction outages in other countries and border 
closures in the wake of the pandemic- related 
measures may also have led to a temporary 
interruption of supply chains.
Sectoral trends
The global restrictions in connection with the 
coronavirus pandemic have hit German indus -
try hard. After a good start to the year, indus -
trial output slumped in March 2020 and was 
down on the month by a seasonally adjusted 
11½%. In the first quarter of 2020 as a whole, 
output, at 2½%, was also still considerably 
below its level in the final quarter of 2019. The 
crisis left a particularly deep mark on the auto -
motive sector (-9½%), where restrictions intro -
duced in Germany and abroad are likely to 
have led to a partial failure of sales channels. In 
view of the rapid economic slump and greatly 
heightened uncertainty, it is also conceivable 
that many potential passenger car buyers de -
cided to defer their purchases. Furthermore, 
border closures probably made the supply of 
inputs and intermediate goods much more dif -
ficult. In line with this, overall it was capital 
goods production which experienced the 
strongest decline. Consumer goods output was 
also down substantially on its level in the previ -
ous quarter. By contrast, manufacturers of 
intermediate goods in fact reported a marked 
growth in output in the quarter as a whole, al -
though the final month of the reporting quar -
ter saw a quite considerable fall in production 
here, too.According to ifo Institute data, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing 
fell dramatically at the start of the second quar -
ter. This meant that, overall, it was only mar -
ginally above its record low during the Great 
Recession in 2009. Manufacturers of capital 
goods reported particularly low capacity utilisa -
tion. Capacity utilisation of tangible fixed assets 
in the consumer goods sector likewise reached 
a new low. By contrast, manufacturers of inter -
mediate goods have so far managed to utilise 
their capacities to a significantly greater extent 
than during the last severe recession.
The construction boom in Germany defied the 
coronavirus crisis in the first quarter of 2020. 
This was mainly due to the fact that construc -
tion activity in Germany was allowed to con -
tinue largely unhindered subject to compliance 
with certain hygiene regulations. Benefiting 
from warmer- than- average weather condi -
tions, construction output in the reporting 
period showed a very strong 5½% increase on Distinct fall 
in imports 
of goods
Strong decline in 
industrial output 
in first quarter
Slump in 
capacity  
utilisation 
Construction 
boom continues 
in spite of 
coronavirus 
crisis Output in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 209095100105110
8590951001051101151201251301352015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
monthly
Main constructionConstruction1Industry
Industry excluding
automotiveDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
61

the quarter, for example. Similarly strong 
growth in output was recorded in both the fin -
ishing trades and the main construction sector. 
In line with this, according to the ifo Institute, 
capacity utilisation in the main construction 
sector climbed to a new record high in the re -
porting period.
The measures introduced in Germany to con -
tain the coronavirus pandemic hit the services 
sector with great force in March. The declines 
in sales in this sector were probably spread 
quite unevenly across the various sectors. The 
same was true of the retail trade, where – in 
spite of the steep decline in March  – price-  
adjusted sales in the first quarter of the year 
were in fact slightly up on the final quarter of 
2019 in seasonally adjusted terms. Clear growth 
in the food, beverages and tobacco as well as 
online and mail order subsectors offset the 
slump in sales of textiles, clothing and foot -
wear, and information and communication 
technology (ICT) equipment due to the ordered 
closure of businesses. Wholesale business, for 
which statistical data on turnover are available 
only up to February, is likely to have suffered 
markedly, above all owing to the weakness of 
industry. This, at least, is suggested by the as -
sessment of the business situation in this sector 
which, according to the ifo Institute, was de -
teriorating from March onwards. The economic 
constraints that were introduced are likely to 
have had a comparatively strong impact on 
motor vehicle sales. This is also implied by the 
number of new car registrations, which was 
down by more than one- third in March. Other 
services sectors, too, suffered massively from 
the pandemic- related containment measures. 
According to the ifo Institute, the assessment 
of the business situation in this sector was 
already  deteriorating to a disproportionately 
large extent in March. In the hotel and restaur -
ant sector, where the introduction of general 
contact restrictions led to a virtually complete 
cessation of economic activity, sentiment was 
already in free fall at that point.Labour market
The measures to contain the pandemic are hav -
ing a considerable impact on the labour mar -
ket. The indicators do not give a full picture so 
far, however, and there is still major uncertainty 
about the scale of the effects. The latest data 
on unemployment and some leading indicators 
already relate to developments in April. The 
position for data on employment is March, 
however, and as long ago as February for the 
details. The time lag for data on the actual use 
of short- time work is especially long, as firms 
often initially register for short- time work as 
a  precaution and then leave a decision on 
whether to implement it till later. An applica -
tion for compensation has to be submitted to 
the Federal Employment Agency within three 
months. The number of persons notified for 
short- time work has already reached an unpre -
cedented level. Even so, there is still consider -
able uncertainty about the actual number of 
persons in short- time work.
It is likely that the short- time work scheme 
(Kurzarbeit) is currently playing a significantly 
greater role as an adjustment tool for reducing 
working hours than it did in the Great Reces -
sion of 2008-09. Just under 1½ million people 
were receiving this wage substitute when the 
recession was at its peak, for an average reduc -
tion in working hours of around one-  third. 
Since then, the number of employees subject 
to social security contributions has risen by 
more than 6 million to 33.8 million. Unlike the 
last time around, when it was predominantly 
the manufacturing sector that made use of 
short- time work, large swathes of the services 
sector are also being affected this time. Fur -
thermore, the loss of work per person owing to 
mandatory business closures is likely to be sig -
nificantly higher than it was last time, at least in 
the short term. From the beginning of March 
to 26  April, the Federal Employment Agency 
processed 10.14 million applications for short-  
time work. The number of notifications is 
merely a ceiling, as prior notification of short-  
time work is a necessary condition for enter -Services sector 
particularly hard 
hit by pandemicLabour market 
hit significantly 
by effects of 
pandemic 
measures 
Short- time work 
is the adjust -
ment tool of 
the hourDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
62

prises to subsequently claim short- time work -
ing benefits. Assuming that the current regis -
tration pattern mirrors that in the past, around 
6 million people may have been in short- time 
work in April. A survey from the first half of 
April conducted on behalf of the Hans Böckler 
Foundation suggests somewhere in the region 
of 4 million short- time workers in Germany 
nation  wide.1 First, the number of short-  time 
workers will probably go back down again in 
the near future owing to the gradual opening 
of business life in the services sector. Second, 
given a continuing weak international environ -
ment, it may be assumed that short- time work 
will soon be playing an increasingly important 
role in manufacturing in particular. The wide -
spread working time accounts and overtime 
hours in this sector are likely to be dropping 
rapidly at present. These have to be reduced 
first before use can be made of short- time 
working.
In the first quarter of this year, registered un -
employment remained largely unchanged in 
seasonally adjusted terms. Taking an average of 
the first quarter, where the last reporting date 
of 12 March was still prior to the introduction 
of the far-  reaching contact restrictions, 2.27 
million persons were registered as unemployed. 
In April – the cut- off date was 14 April – sea -
sonally adjusted unemployment jumped by 
373,000 on the month to 2.64 million. This 
pushed up the unemployment rate by 0.8 per -
centage point to 5.8%. This rise was due more 
or less entirely to the coronavirus pandemic, 
although  this increase overstates the economic 
consequences. According to calculations by the 
Federal Employment Agency, almost half of the 
increase in unemployment can be explained by 
statistical one- off effects alone.2 Leaving aside 
short- time work, for which the data are not yet 
available, total underemployment as calculated 
by the Federal Employment Agency is less influ -
enced by these effects; at 244,000 persons, it 
went up considerably – but much less strongly – 
than registered unemployment. This increase 
was due not only to the higher number of per -
sons registering as unemployed, but also to persons who were out of work not being 
recruited  into employment. Especially pro -
nounced, at 234,000, was the increase in the 
number of unemployed persons claiming insur -
ance benefits, almost three- quarters of which 
was for economic reasons. By contrast, the rise 
in the number of unemployed persons receiv -
ing the basic welfare allowance was due chiefly 
to the reduction in labour market policy meas -
ures.
The restrictions in economic life since mid-  
March have become evident in the employ -
ment statistics only to a small degree so far. 
The total number of persons in work in Ger -
many declined slightly in March, marking the 
end of ten years of virtually uninterrupted em -
ployment growth. In seasonally adjusted terms, Sudden sharp 
rise in 
unemployment 
in April
Ten years of 
continuous 
employment 
growth came to 
an end in MarchApplications for short-time work
Source: Federal Employment Agency
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20012345678910Number of persons in millions, annual total
January 
to April
1 See Hans Böckler Foundation (2020)
2 The fact that many labour market policy measures could 
not be carried out owing to contact restrictions was a key 
factor in the rise in unemployment. As persons affected by 
this are not available on the labour market during the 
measures and therefore not included in the registered un -
employment figure within the meaning of Section 16 of 
the Third Book of the Social Security Code – although they 
are indeed included in total underemployment – such per -
sons were newly registered as unemployed in April owing 
to the coronavirus pandemic. Another effect lifting the un -
employment figure is the absence of availability checks by 
the Federal Employment Agency, which in normal circum -
stances would have led to persons being taken off the un -
employment register because of their unavailability. See 
statistics provided by the Federal Employment Agency 
(2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
63

employment was down by 41,000 persons, or 
around 0.1%, on the month. This trend reversal 
is primarily based on the developments for pay -
roll employees, with the number of persons 
employed in relatively unstable low- paid part-  
time jobs possibly having undergone a marked 
reduction first. There was a fall in the number 
of self- employed persons in March, as was al -
ready the case in the months before.
In April, the leading labour market indicators 
reflected the gloomy outlook for the next few 
months. The ifo employment barometer, which 
surveys the recruitment plans of trade and in -
dustry over the coming three months, plunged 
deep into negative territory in all the subsec -
tors, after the March survey had only partly 
reflected  the measures to combat the pan -
demic. The number of job vacancies reported 
to the Federal Employment Agency was 11% 
down on the average of the first quarter. As 
many enterprises probably do not, in the 
present situation, verify the accuracy of the 
current job vacancy information reported to 
the Federal Employment Agency, the number 
of posts that are actually vacant is likely to be 
smaller. This is also indicated by the sharp de -
cline in the intake of new job offers, which 
more than halved, as well as the survey on jobs 
on offer in the economy as a whole, which was 
already down by one- fifth in the first quarter. 
As a result, the Federal Employment Agency’s 
BA- X job index, which records stock figures as 
well as the inflow of reported vacancies, plum -
meted. The survey- based IAB labour market 
barometer on employment and unemploy -
ment, which focuses on various regional ef -
fects, likewise showed an exceptionally sharp 
fall.
Wages and prices
In the first quarter of 2020, negotiated pay 
rates rose slightly more slowly than in the 
fourth quarter of 2019. This was due, first, to 
the moderate incremental increases from the 
longer- term collective wage agreements of Slump in leading 
indicators
Growth in 
negotiated  pay 
rates and actual 
earnings slowed 
in the first 
quarter Labour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20Apr.42.042.543.043.544.044.545.045.5
29.530.030.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.005001,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200+400Apr.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Apr.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Jan.-
Feb.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
64

previous years and, second, to the low wage 
agreements in new settlements. Including an -
cillary agreements, negotiated rates of pay rose 
by 2.4% year on year in the first quarter, fol -
lowing growth of 2.5% in the final quarter of 
2019. The increase in actual earnings is likely to 
have been considerably smaller still owing to 
the economic downturn and the resulting 
short- time work in many industries as well as 
the reduction in paid overtime.
The severe recession is also gradually having an 
impact on agreements in the current wage 
round. The focus shifted from significant im -
provements in pay to protecting jobs. In the 
most recent collective wage agreement in the 
metalworking and electrical engineering indus -
tries, for instance, the trade union IG Metall de -
cided not to make any demands for regular 
wage increases. Instead, management and the 
trade unions agreed to top up earnings for em -
ployees in short- time work to a level of 80% of 
their previous net remuneration. In addition, 
employees are entitled to additional paid days 
off to care for young children. In return, firms 
were given greater leeway to make working 
hours more flexible, for instance by reducing 
weekly working hours to up to 28 hours with 
partial wage compensation. Other industries 
have similar arrangements for topping up 
short- time working benefits. As a result of con -
tact restrictions and ongoing economic uncer -
tainty, some wage negotiations, like those in 
the main construction sector, were postponed.
In the first quarter of 2020, consumer prices 
(HICP) continued to increase moderately, by a 
seasonally adjusted 0.3% on the quarter. Food 
prices, in particular, went up markedly, and 
prices of industrial goods excluding energy rose 
somewhat again, while the previously strong 
growth in service prices abated. Lower energy 
prices had a dampening impact, although they 
did not fall as sharply in the reporting period as 
might have been expected given the massive 
slump in crude oil prices. Looking at the year-  
on- year figure, headline inflation still gained 
significant momentum, at 1.5%, compared with 1.1% in the final quarter of 2019. Exclud -
ing energy and food, however, inflation fell 
from 1.6% to 1.3%, partly as a result of lower 
travel prices.
Up to the end of March, the COVID-  19 pan -
demic and the measures taken to contain it 
were reflected in the inflation rate mainly in the 
form of lower energy prices. By contrast, there 
was no clearly identifiable change in the gen -
eral price trend. This is likely to be related to 
the fact that the global containment measures 
have a multiplicity of price effects, some of 
which work in opposite directions. Further -
more, certain prices – especially in the leisure Pay round of 
2020: priority is 
protecting jobs
Despite plum -
meting oil 
prices, the 
annual HICP 
rate went up 
perceptibly in 
the first quarter 
of 2020So far, COVID-  19 
is having no sig -
nificant impact 
on the inflation 
trend or the 
quality of HICP 
dataExport pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2096100104108
96100104108
96100104108
0123
+++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2Producer prices1
%2015 = 100, log scale
96100104
Apr.Import prices
Apr.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
65

sector – are rarely adjusted. Nor were there any 
significant restrictions on the collection of price 
data until March. This took place around the 
middle of the month, which, in some cases, 
was before stringent restrictions were imposed 
throughout Germany.3 It was only in April that 
there were mounting reports of difficulties in 
the on- site collection of prices and the non-  
availability of individual price representatives. 
This chiefly concerned the services sector (e.g. 
visits to the hairdresser) and travel (e.g. pack -
age holidays and hotel accommodation). In 
some cases, the price representatives in ques -
tion had to be approximated using alternative 
sources or estimated on the basis of past values 
in accordance with harmonised European 
methods.4 According to the Federal Statistical 
Office, HICP quality has been assured to date.5 
However, when interpreting HICP figures over 
the next few months, greater attention should 
be paid to potential distortions as a result of 
such imputations.6Against this backdrop, inflation declined to 
0.8% in April, down from 1.3% in March, re -
flecting a further sharp drop in energy prices.7 
By contrast, food prices rose significantly. The 
core rate, i.e. the annual inflation rate exclud -
ing energy and food, weakened from 1.3% to 
1.0%. However, this was mainly due to the evi -
dent decline in prices for clothing and package 
holidays, with the current travel restrictions 
meaning that the latter are based on a pure 
extrapolation using the monthly rate for April 
2019. Over the next few months, the recent 
sharp drop in the oil price is likely to continue 
to significantly dampen inflation rates.
Order books and outlook
The German economy remains firmly in the 
grip of the coronavirus pandemic in the second 
quarter. Economic output is likely to be signifi -
cantly lower still than the average of the already  
depressed first quarter. This is mainly due to the 
fact that the containment measures will have 
an impact for a considerably longer period than 
in the first quarter, when they primarily affected 
the second half of March. Despite the instances 
of easing that have been initiated, social and 
economic life in Germany is still very far from a 
situation that used to be regarded as normal. 
The available economic indicators paint a cor -
respondingly gloomy picture. For instance, sen -
timent among both enterprises and consumers 
recently fell to its lowest level since observa -
tions began in the Federal Republic of Ger -
many. Timely high- frequency indicators also 
point to economic activity in the second quar -
ter having remained strongly subdued thus far April inflation 
markedly lower 
owing to energy
German 
economy  in 
accelerated 
tailspin  in the 
second quarter 
of 20202013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202000.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–0.50+0.5+1.0%
Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 The wage 
drift is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual 
earnings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1
3 See also Federal Statistical Office (2020a).
4 See Federal Statistical Office (2020b). According to this 
information, around 27% of the German HICP basket was 
based on estimates in April 2020.
5 See Federal Statistical Office (2020c).
6 Extrapolating with constant past index values may, for 
example, lead to a tendency towards zero inflation. Adopt -
ing the previous year’s monthly inflation rates for goods 
with a pronounced seasonal profile may cause calendar 
effects  to be neglected.
7 The rate of inflation as measured by the consumer price 
index (CPI) was 0.9%, down from 1.4%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
66

(see also the box on pp. 68 ff.). This applies both 
to the services sector, where, for a time, busi -
ness activity was – and, in some cases, still is 
being – massively restricted by the containment 
measures put in place, and to industry, which 
has to cope with a slump in incoming orders 
from Germany and abroad. This, in conjunction 
with lower capacity utilisation and the ex -
tremely high uncertainty, suggests that com -
mercial investment in machinery and equip -
ment will be sharply curtailed in the second 
quarter. By contrast, the construction sector 
appears to be comparatively robust. In add -
ition, government activities are providing posi -
tive stimuli.
Sentiment in the German economy deterior -
ated abruptly and to an unprecedented extent 
as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. The 
business climate index fell to an all- time low in 
April 2020 according to the ifo Institute. 
Though the assessment of business conditions 
was still marginally above the record low ex -
perienced during the Great Recession in 2009, 
business expectations were more pessimistic 
than ever before. Broken down by sector, the 
business climate in the services sector (exclud -
ing trade) was well below the level seen during 
the last recession. This pattern was especially 
pronounced for hotel and restaurant services, 
which were hit harder than most by the con -
tact restrictions imposed to curb the spread 
of  the coronavirus. Sentiment in the retail 
and wholesale trade also reached new lows, 
although  they are comparable to the lows seen 
during past downturns. Industrial business con -
fidence deteriorated sharply, but was still 
slightly higher than at its all- time low some 
11 years ago when industry was at the centre 
of the economic downturn. Nonetheless, short- 
term export and output expectations both 
reached a new all- time low. Surveys in the main 
construction sector testify to somewhat less 
pessimistic sentiment than the average of the 
other industries. However, this can be attrib -
uted mainly to the still fairly positive assess -
ment of business conditions. By contrast, con -
struction enterprises have never looked to the Sentiment in 
the German 
economy  at 
all- time lowDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source  of  the  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office. 
1 Only calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20859095100105110115
–15–10–50+5+10
9095100105110115
80859095100105110
9095100105110115120125130135140
–50+5+10+15+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scaleLog scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
%%Total
MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
67

A weekly activity index for the German economy
The coronavirus pandemic and the meas-
ures adopted to contain it have plunged the 
German economy into recession with as-
tonishing speed. Nevertheless, there still 
exists major uncertainty about the exact 
scale of the pandemic’s impact on the 
economy. The speed of the slump and the 
lack of experience concerning the nature of 
the underlying economic shocks  make it 
espe cially diffi   cult to assess the economic 
consequences in a timely manner. However, 
particularly in the current situation, an as-
sessment of this kind is an essential require-
ment for making sound economic and 
health policy decisions.
Traditional models for short- term macro-
economic analysis and forecasting rely on 
the dynamic relationships that the indica-
tors have shown with each other in the past.1 The unprecedented nature of the cur-
rent crisis is likely to have changed these re-
lationships, meaning that the models are 
arguably currently not appropriately speci-
fi  ed for reliable estimates of the current 
situation or for short- term forecasts. Added 
to this is the fact that most economic indi-
cators are published with a –  sometimes 
marked – time lag. For example, key fi  gures 
on industrial output in March – the point at 
which the coronavirus pandemic fi  rst began 
to have a major impact on economic activ-
ity in Germany – did not become available 
until early May.2 Economic developments at 
the current end are changing so rapidl y at 
the moment, however, that there is a need 
for indicators to be available more quickly.
A new weekly activity index (WAI) for Ger-
many has been developed at the Bundes-
bank to assess the impact of the COVID- 19 
crisis on economic activity in a timely man-
ner.3 The current situation and initial results 
are discussed below. Based on an index 
published by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York,4 the WAI is composed of seven 
high- frequency (recorded daily and weekly), 
rapidly available indicators. These are aug-
mented by data on monthly industrial out-
put  and quarterly gross domestic product 
(GDP). One key selection criterion for in-
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).
2 Survey- based indicators  – on the business climate, 
for instance  – also show a certain delay in their publi-
cation and/ or are not collected frequently enough to 
provide an instant refl  ection of quickly changing devel-
opments. For instance, the monthly ifo business climate 
index for March, which was published on 25 March, 
was still based in part on business survey responses 
that had been submitted prior to the introduction of 
the far- reaching lockdown measures. It was therefore 
only the publication of the April fi  gure that revealed 
the full extent of the slump in sentiment among Ger-
man fi  rms.
3 These insights are based on current work in pro-
gress; see Eraslan and Götz (2020).
4 See Lewis et al. (2020).Weekly activity index and GDP growth
Deutsche BundesbankJ A S OND J FMAM
2019 2020–5–4–3–2–10+1%
2004 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20543210123
–––––+++
At the current endGDP (quarter-on-quarter change)Weekly activity indexDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
68

cluding an indicator in the index  was that it 
should display suffi   cient explanatory power 
in relation to economic activity. Further-
more, the indicators  have been compiled in 
such a way that they cover as many differ-
ent economic sectors as possible. The high- 
frequency indicators electricity5 and toll 
(road charge)6 capture the production sec-
tor, while G- unemployment7 and G- short- 
time work,8 variables that are produced 
from Google searches, relate to the labour 
market. The toll (road charge) indicator also 
refl  ects the trade sector. The fl  ights indica-
tor9 creates a point of reference for global 
activity, the air pollution variable10 serves as 
a metric for mobility, and the cash indica-
tor11 captures a part of consumer behav-
iour. As some indicators display a marked 
seasonal or calendar pattern, they are sub-
jected to seasonal and calendar adjustment 
in advance.
The WAI is constructed in two stages: fi  rst, 
the indicators used are made comparable 
by means of data transformation. The out-
come is a (weekly available)12 12- week 
growth rate of its rolling 12- week averages 
for each high- frequency indicator. The rate 
may therefore be interpreted at the end of 
the quarter as a quarterly growth rate. The 
dataset that is now available contains not 
only these weekly indicators  but, with in-
dustrial output and  GDP , also a monthly in-
dicator and a quarterly indicator. In a 
second step, the WAI is calculated by means 
of a principal component analysis using the 
EM algorithm13 as a weekly factor of this 
mixed- frequency dataset. As a by- product, 
the EM algorithm also provides factor- 
based, weekly estimates for missing obser-
vations of those indicators that enter into 
the dataset  at a lower frequency, i.e. indus-
trial output and GDP . A rapidly available es-
timation for GDP growth at the current end 
can thus also be derived from the WAI.Looking back over a longer period of time, 
the WAI displays a close coincident move-
ment with the quarterly growth rate of 
GDP .14 As a result of the standardisation 
performed on the data, the values of the 
WAI are centred around zero; in other 
words, they are to be construed as devi-
ations from their long- term average. Conse-
quently, positive values point to an above- 
average increase in real economic activity, 
whereas a negative WAI indicates a below- 
average growth or decline in economic out-
put. Generally speaking, the values of the 
WAI may be interpreted as the rolling 12- 
week growth rates of real economic activ-
ity. Thus, an index value of 3 in any given 
week indicates that the average growth 
rate of economic activity over the past 12 
weeks in comparison with the preceding 
12- week period was 3  percentage points 
above the long- term average. At the end of 
the quarter, this approximately corresponds 
5 Realised electricity consumption (excluding industrial 
grids and producers’ own use, in MWh, source of un-
adjusted fi  gures: Federal Network Agency (Bundes-
netzagentur (2020)).
6 Daily truck toll mileage index (Lkw- Maut- 
Fahrleistungsindex) (source of unadjusted fi  gures: the 
Federal Offi   ce for Goods Transport (Bundesamt für 
Güterverkehr (BAG)), Federal Statistical Offi   ce (2020d)).
7 Google search term “unemployment” (relative search 
frequency, source of unadjusted fi  gures: Google- Trends 
(2020)).
8 Google search term “short- time work” (relative 
search frequency, source of unadjusted fi  gures: 
Google- Trends (2020)).
9 Worldwide number of fl  ights (comprises inter alia 
passenger and cargo fl  ights, source of unadjusted 
data: Flightradar24 (2020)).
10 Nitrogen dioxide concentration in the air (average 
of all available cities and towns in Germany, source of 
unadjusted values: European Environmental Agency 
(EEA) (2020)).
11 Cash withdrawals (in euro, source: Bundesbank cal-
culations).
12 A weekly average was previously formed for daily 
data so that they are available  at weekly frequency.
13 EM is here an abbreviation of “expectation maxi-
misation”. See Dempster et al. (1977); Stock and Wat-
son (2002).
14 The correlation between the quarter- end values of 
the WAI and the quarterly GDP growth rate over the 
entire estimation period (mid- 2004 to the present) 
amounts to around 0.9.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
69

future with less confidence than at the end of 
the period under review.
The orders situation in German industry deteri -
orated markedly in March after a good start to 
the year. As a consequence, average industrial 
orders in the first quarter of 2020 also fell 
sharply on the quarter. Broken down by region, 
compared with the first two months of the 
quarter, strong negative impulses in March 
came chiefly from demand in the euro area, 
which was especially hard hit by the corona -
virus pandemic. However, the volume of new 
orders from within Germany and from non-  
euro area countries also shrank at a double-  
digit rate. Looking at the various sectors of in -
dustry, incoming orders in the capital goods 
sector fell quite considerably in March – again 
compared with the first two months of the 
quarter. Here, weak demand in the automotive 
industry had a particularly pronounced impact; 
this sector was disproportionately hard hit by 
the slump in demand in the wake of the pan -demic as well as by disruptions of international 
supply chains, in part as a consequence of tem -
porary closures of borders. Manufacturers of 
intermediate goods also reported a sharp fall in 
new orders. By contrast, demand among pro -
ducers of consumer goods remained largely at 
the same level as in the two previous months. 
However, this was due to incoming orders in 
the pharmaceuticals industry, which rose 
sharply, presumably as a result of the pan -
demic. Ifo Institute surveys also show a quite 
considerable fall in incoming manufacturing 
orders overall at the end of the period under 
review.
In the second quarter of 2020, the German 
construction industry is likely to prove visibly 
more robust in the face of the coronavirus crisis 
than other sectors. Output is likely to be down 
on the first quarter, which benefited from the 
mild weather. The contact restrictions that 
were imposed dampened productivity in this 
sector, and the closing of borders may have Orders situation 
in industry has 
deteriorated 
considerably
Construction 
industry com -
paratively robustto the quarterly growth rate of economic 
activity according to the WAI.
In the current situation, the WAI and the 
estimate of GDP growth derived from it 
supply valuable and, above all, timely infor-
mation on how the coronavirus pandemic is 
impacting economic activity in Germany. 
From mid- March, the WAI shows a dra-
matic decline in real economic activity: the 
index value for the last week in March 
stands at -2.2, which corresponds to a WAI- 
implied decline in GDP of 1.9% in the fi  rst 
quarter compared with the preceding quar-
ter. This means that the signal given by the 
WAI at the end of March was quite close to 
the Federal Statistical Offi   ce’s fl  ash esti-
mate.15 During the month of April, the WAI 
showed a further marked fall and amounts 
to -4.6 at the current end.16 This suggests 
that economic activity in Germany con-tinued to slow signifi  cantly up to the middle 
of May.
15 According to the Federal Statistical Offi   ce’s fl  ash 
esti mate of 15 Ma y 2020, the fi  rst quarter saw a 2.2% 
decline in real GDP after seasonal and calendar adjust-
ment compared with the preceding three- month 
period.
16 Last updated: 12 May 2020.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
70

significantly aggravated the labour shortage in 
the industry. Furthermore, the containment 
measures are likely to have resulted in delays in 
the issue of new building permits. However, 
operations appear to have continued as normal 
on German building sites. This is evident, above 
all, in the utilisation of machinery and equip -
ment in the main construction sector, which ifo 
Institute data for April 2020 show to have been 
only marginally shy of the high marked shortly 
after the new year. In addition, construction 
firms’ order books were in excellent shape 
shortly before the onset of the crisis. Averaged 
across January and February – the latest months 
for which statistical data are available – incom -
ing orders in the main construction sector re -
mained at the exceptionally high level of the 
previous quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. 
In line with this, the reach of orders in the main 
construction sector remained very high into 
April, according to the ifo Institute.
Private consumption has been particularly hard 
hit by the measures to contain the coronavirus 
pandemic. In April especially, they resulted in a 
sharp curtailment of consumers’ consumption 
options and, consequently, probably also con -
sumer spending. In the meantime, some of the constraints have been eased considerably. 
Nonetheless, consumer behaviour is unlikely to 
return to normal rapidly in the second quarter 
given the ongoing epidemiological risk and a 
dramatic deterioration in the outlook for the 
labour  market and incomes. Recent surveys by 
the market research institution Gesellschaft für 
Konsumforschung (GfK) point in a similar direc -
tion. According to the surveys, consumers’ in -
come expectations and their propensity to pur -
chase, in particular, were in free fall in April. As 
a consequence, the GfK consumer climate 
index forecast for the month of May fell to its 
lowest level since the time series began in 
1983.
There is currently much to suggest that macro -
economic developments will pick up again over 
the course of the second quarter as measures 
are eased and that a recovery will gather pace. 
However, there is a very high degree of uncer -
tainty about what lies ahead for the economy. 
This will depend, along with other factors, not 
only on the evolution of the pandemic and the 
measures taken to contain it, but also on the 
resultant changes in consumption and invest -
ment behaviour.Private 
consumption  
particularly hard 
hit by pandemic 
containment 
measuresRecovery on the 
cards, but scale 
and speed 
uncertain
List of references
Dempster, A.P ., N.M. Laird and D.B. Rubin (1977), Maximum Likelihood from Incomplete Data via 
the EM Algorithm, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological), 39: 1-22.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Models for short- term economic forecasts: an update, Monthly Re -
port, September 2018, pp. 15-28.
Eraslan, S. and T. Götz (2020), An unconventional weekly economic activity index for Germany, 
mimeo.
European Environmental Agency (EEA) (2020), concentration of nitrogen dioxide in the air, avail -
able for download at https://www.eea.europa.eu/themes/air/air-quality-and-covid19
Federal Network Agency (2020), Realisierter Stromverbrauch, available for download at https://
smard.de/home/downloadcenter/download_marktdaten/726Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
71

Federal Statistical Office (2020a), Inflation rate at +1.4% in March 2020, press release no 132 of 
16 April 2020, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Press/2020/04/PE20_132_611.html;jsessionid=9C7973
56F815B503B73C41A2F7291AF7.internet8731
Federal Statistical Office (2020b), Impact of the corona crisis on the CPI/ HICP price collection in 
reporting month April 2020, method report of 14 May 2020, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Themes/
Economy/Prices/Consumer-Price-Index/Methods/corona-cpi-hicp.pdf?__blob=publicationFile
Federal Statistical Office (2020c), Inflation rate at +0.9% in April 2020, press release no 165 of 
14 May 2020, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Press/2020/05/PE20_165_611.html
Federal Statistical Office (2020d), truck toll mileage index, available for download at https://www.
destatis.de/DE/Themen/Branchen-Unternehmen/Industrie-Verarbeitendes-Gewerbe/Tabellen/
Lkw-Maut-Fahrleistungsindex-Daten.html
Flightradar24 (2020), number of flights around the world, available for download at https://www.
flightradar24.com/data/statistics
Google-  Trends (2020), Google search term “unemployment” and “short- term work”, available for 
download at https://trends.google.de /
Hans Böckler Foundation (2020), Corona- Krise: 14 Prozent in Kurzarbeit -40 Prozent können finan -
ziell maximal drei Monate durchhalten – Pandemie vergrössert Ungleichheiten, press release of 
21 April 2020.
Lewis, D.J., K. Mertens and J.H. Stock (2020), Weekly Economic Index, https://www.newyorkfed.
org/research/policy/weekly-economic-index
Statistics provided by the Federal Employment Agency (2020): Auswirkungen der Corona- Krise auf 
die Arbeitslosigkeit – Berechnung des Corona- Effekts, Berichte: Blickpunkt Arbeitsmarkt – Monats -
bericht zum Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt, Nuremberg, April 2020, pp. 12 ff.
Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson (2002), Macroeconomic Forecasting Using Diffusion Indexes, Journal 
of Business & Economic Statistics, 20:2, pp. 147-162.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
72

Public finances*
Government finances in the 
coronavirus pandemic
Overview
In recent years, German government finances 
have recorded significant surpluses and a de -
clining debt ratio. Last year, the surplus stood 
at 1.4% of gross domestic product (GDP). At 
59.8%, the debt ratio was below the 60% 
mark for the first time since 2002. The budget 
plans for the current year were already expan -
sionary, and the expansion has intensified con -
siderably since March in the wake of the 
coronavirus pandemic. Extensive fiscal policy 
measures have been implemented to support 
the health system and limit economic damage. 
A crisis situation like this shows how important 
sound public finances are. They enable the 
government to take on extensive costs and 
risks without sacrificing confidence in its ability 
to act.
It was important and right that fiscal policy -
makers quickly set up a broad rescue package. 
As the duration and economic impact of the 
constraints are difficult to estimate reliably, fur -
ther adjustments may become necessary. The 
Federal Government is preparing an economic 
stimulus package for the time ahead. This 
enables  counteractive action to be taken should 
weak demand continue after the severe restric -
tions. The programme could also incorporate 
other government objectives, such as climate 
protection or digitalisation. Owing to the fa -
vourable starting position, as things currently 
stand, government finances still have sufficient 
scope for a strong stimulus if necessary. As with 
the current support measures, this programme 
should be temporary. When the fiscal stabilisa -
tion measures are phased out and the econ -
omy recovers, government finances will then 
improve again automatically, at least to a large 
extent. Given the high level of uncertainty, it is 
not yet possible to reliably assess the extent to which a subsequent consolidation will be 
neces sary to comply with the budgetary rules 
again. In this respect, it is reasonable to focus 
on stabilising economic activity for the time 
being and to not yet address potential consoli -
dation measures. There is therefore also ample 
justification for initially continuing to monitor 
and assess developments as well as, for ex -
ample, basing the Federal Government’s 
budget plans in autumn on better information 
– including a renewed update of the tax esti -
mate.
In the current year, government finances are 
chiefly marked by the consequences of the 
pandemic. A high deficit and a sharp rise in the 
debt ratio are on the cards, though the actual 
extent of both remains very uncertain. Accord -
ing to its stability programme of mid-  April, the 
Federal Government expects a deficit ratio of 
around 7% and a debt ratio of approximately 
75%. While the European Commission’s May 
projection shows a similar development, the 
Joint Economic Forecast of early April displayed 
a more favourable outlook. The official tax esti -
mate just presented does not fundamentally 
change the picture (for more details on the tax 
estimate, see pp. 76 ff.).
This year’s development is, first, crucially 
shaped by automatic stabilisers. The economic 
downturn is causing taxes, in particular, to fall 
sharply1 and expenditure on short-  time work -
ing and unemployment benefits to soar. The 
situation is further aggravated by measures to Government 
finances have 
stabilising effect 
in coronavirus 
crisis
Economic stimu -
lus package in 
preparationFocus on stabil -
ising economic 
activity
High deficit in 
2020 and sharp 
rise in debt due 
to …
… automatic 
stabilisers and 
fiscal measures
* The section entitled “Government finances in the corona -
virus pandemic” refers to the general government as well 
as national accounts data and the Maastricht debt ratio. 
This is followed by more detailed reporting on budgetary 
developments (government finance statistics) at the indi -
vidual levels.
1 The development of social contributions is also muted, 
but they are not affected to the same extent as taxes. This 
is because they are largely dependent on wages and pen -
sions, which are more stable. In addition, short- time work -
ing and unemployment benefits are also subject to contri -
butions to the health, long- term care and pension insur -
ance schemes.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
73

support revenue and expenditure. For instance, 
short- time working benefits, unemployment 
benefits and the basic allow ance for job seek -
ers were temporary expanded. In addition, the 
Federal Employment Agency is refunding the 
social contributions for short- time working 
benefits in this crisis. One- off transfers have 
been agreed, especially for small enterprises. 
Deferring taxes and social contributions as well 
as simplifying reductions in advance payments 
of taxes on income is improving enterprises’ 
liquid ity situation. In addition, enterprises can 
receive extensive credit guarantees, and capital 
injections are also being offered. Loans and 
injec tions from these programmes increase the 
Maastricht debt level.2 The deficit increases in 
cases where domestic guarantees result in a 
payment obligation for the government or cap -
ital injections are considered transfers from 
the outset (as they ultimately constitute a loss 
absorp tion measure).
Health protection measures
Since the beginning of the coronavirus epi -
demic in Germany, extensive health protection 
measures have been taken. The first priority 
was to curb the spread of the virus and to re -
serve capacity for treatment. Investment grants 
enable hospitals to significantly increase their 
capacity for intensive care. In- patient, and also 
out- patient, treatment not related to the 
coronavirus is currently only being administered 
to a limited extent. In return, central govern -
ment is reimbursing hospitals for remuneration 
shortfalls so that they can concentrate on the 
treatment of COVID-  19 cases. In addition, hos -
pitals receive higher remuneration for nursing 
activities. The health insurance institutions are 
providing compensation for the largest part of 
revenue shortfalls as a result of reduced out-  
patient and dental treatment. They are also 
making one- off payments to providers of thera -
peutic treatment. Overall, government health 
expenditure is expected to experience a tem -
porary perceptible rise despite only moderate utilisation of large parts of the health system at 
present.
Economic and income support 
measures
Economic activity was reduced in many ways in 
order to contain the coronavirus epidemic. Fis -
cal policy measures have been deployed to pre -
vent or mitigate economic damage. They aim 
at limiting corporate insolvencies and un -
employment as far as possible. In addition, so -
cial benefits have been temporarily expanded 
to soften income losses.
Since March, labour input has fallen signifi -
cantly. So far, this appears to be chiefly re -
flected in lower working hours rather than 
higher unemployment. The Federal Employ -
ment Agency is thus primarily making higher 
payments for short- time working benefits.3 The 
prerequisites for this insurance benefit have 
been temporarily reduced in the present crisis. 
For example, it is currently available in cases 
where fewer working hours have been cut, and 
can be received for a longer period of time. In 
addition, the Federal Employment Agency is 
paying the social contributions that enter prises 
otherwise have to pay.4 Short- time work is thus 
significantly easing the burden on enterprises 
from wage costs. This should help both to 
avoid redundancies in the event of a temporary 
loss of work and to maintain income prospects. 
An agreement has also just been passed enab -
ling the individual benefit to be raised tempor -
arily should short- time working arrangements 
stay in place for a longer period of time. Given Health protec -
tion: transfers to 
expand and 
reserve capacity 
for COVID-  19Limit economic 
damage
Expanded short- 
time working 
benefits stabilise 
labour market
2 The guaranteed loans are assigned to the government 
because it bears the majority of the risks (for 80% to 100% 
of the loan amount).
3 Like unemployment benefits, short- time working benefits 
can be considered automatic stabilisers. Enterprises register 
short- time work and pay workers up front. Once working 
hours have been cut, enterprises have three months to 
claim a refund from the Federal Employment Agency.
4 The enterprise generally pays the full contributions (em -
ployer and employee share excluding contribution to un -
employment insurance) on 80% of the lost gross remuner -
ation.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
74

the poorer chance of recruitment during the 
current crisis, the period of entitlement to un -
employment benefit I was also extended by 
three months for the rest of the year.
Households with no or low income can apply 
for the basic allowance. Their assets or a higher 
standard of housing are not taken into account 
for the time being. In addition, losses in earn -
ings this year will be partly offset if they occur 
as a result of a government decision to restrict 
childcare.
In order to preserve the liquidity and, in some 
cases, the solvency of enterprises, central and 
state government have launched extensive as -
sistance programmes. Very small to medium-  
sized enterprises, self-  employed persons and 
freelancers can receive one-  off transfers. The 
funds are intended to help cover ongoing oper -
ating costs in the event of a lack of revenue as 
a result of the coronavirus pandemic. Central 
government is also planning to provide add -
itional support to restaurants and the catering 
trade by temporarily lowering the VAT rate on 
food. In addition, there will be guarantees for 
low- interest loans for enterprises across all sec -
tors, covering 80% to 100% of the loan 
amount. The loans are mostly to be settled via 
government- assigned special programmes run 
by the KfW banking group and state govern -
ment promotional banks. For large enterprises 
that are generally healthy, central government 
also added an Economic Stabilisation Fund 
(WSF) to the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund 
(SoFFin). In addition to providing credit guaran -
tees, this new fund can also grant capital under 
certain conditions. Central and state govern -
ments have issued extensive authorisations for 
transfers to enterprises, credit guarantees and 
capital injections. Central government alone 
plans to transfer €50 billion. The guarantee 
framework for credit guarantees in the central 
government budget was increased by up to 
€510 billion. The WSF has a guarantee frame -
work of €400 billion and credit authorisations 
of €200 billion.The longer economic activity is restricted as a 
result of the pandemic, the more squeezed en -
terprises will be. If insolvencies are to be 
avoided as far as possible, it would be logical 
to retool government assistance from liquidity 
support to solvency protection. This can gener -
ally be achieved by means of transfers or acqui -
sition of equity. So far, central government has 
only provided such assistance for small and 
major enterprises. Given the extraordinary crisis 
situation, closing existing gaps appears to war -
rant consideration. Care should be taken to 
support, wherever possible, only those enter -
prises experiencing problems as a result of the 
coronavirus pandemic and where the business 
model holds the promise of success after the 
crisis.
In addition to these measures, special tax rules 
have come into force aimed, in particular, at 
improving the liquidity situation. These rules af -
fect profit- related taxes, turnover tax and se -
lected central government taxes. For instance, 
this year it will be possible to defer tax pay -
ments without incurring interest, and there will 
be no compulsory enforcements. Furthermore, 
special advance payments of turnover tax made 
after the beginning of the year can be reim -
bursed without having to forego the otherwise 
associated deadline extension of one month. 
Enterprises can defer the payment of social 
contributions until the end of May. The proced -
ure for lowering advance payments of income, 
corporation and local business taxes has also 
been simplified. Aside from this, there are plans 
to reimburse some advance payments made 
last year for losses incurred this year. In this 
context, it would appear worthwhile extending 
these options  further still. These measures will 
ease the strain on enterprises in the short term 
by lowering liquidity outflows. This will initially 
result  in lower government tax revenue in cash Basic allowance 
and partial com -
pensation for 
loss of income 
due to restricted 
childcare
Enterprises: 
transfers, tax 
subsidies, credit 
guarantees 
and capital 
assistancePressure on cor -
porate solvency 
mounts with 
length and 
intensity of crisis
Deferring taxes 
and lowering 
advance tax 
payments eases 
strain on enter -
prises’ liquidityDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
75

terms, but revenue will then be correspond -
ingly higher going forward.5
Fiscal rules
In times of crisis, the budgetary rules offer suf -
ficient flexibility to allow an appropriate fiscal 
response. For instance, the European budget 
limits have been suspended for the time being 
(see p. 86). Central government and most fed -
eral states have adopted supplementary 
budgets and, for this purpose, have activated 
the exemption clauses for their debt brakes. 
The social security funds and local governments 
do not have comparable rules. There is much 
to suggest that central and state governments 
should support them in tackling the burdens 
stemming from the crisis. Generally speaking, 
central government is responsible for the social 
security funds, whilst individual federal states 
are responsible for their municipalities. Overall, 
the government is thus in a position to make a 
broad- based, strong contribution to stabilisa -
tion during the crisis. It is not yet possible to 
reliably assess for how long and to what extent 
this will be necessary. If the exemption clauses 
are lifted later on, the regular fiscal rules will 
come back into force.Further measures at the 
European  level
At the European level, too, far- reaching meas -
ures are envisaged to manage the economic 
consequences of the coronavirus crisis as ef -
fectively as possible (see the box on pp. 85-90). 
Within the EU, Germany has a comparatively 
strong economy and an effective social security 
system. Its government finances enjoy a high 
level of confidence and the financing condi -
tions on the capital markets are exceptionally 
favourable. In this respect, European instru -
ments are less targeted at Germany and, at the 
same time, Germany is likely to make a greater 
contribution owing to its relative economic 
strength.6
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
As described above, tax revenue is being sig -
nificantly affected by the coronavirus crisis. 
While this was still barely discernible in the first 
quarter (+3½% in a year- on- year comparison; 
see the adjacent chart and the table on p. 77),7 
a sharp decline is expected for the year as a 
whole. The current tax estimate also envisages 
large shortfalls in tax revenue. Overall, these 
are in line with the latest expectations. Follow -
ing strong shortfalls in the current year, rev -
enue will rebound in 2021. According to the 
tax estimate, however, tax revenue will still fall 
far short of the October 2019 projection in the Exemption 
clauses of 
budgetary rules 
activatedAssistance 
measures at 
European level
Tax estimate 
subject to 
extreme 
uncertainty Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020024681012Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
5 As long as these measures target liquidity only, there is 
no change in the tax liability. Payments are simply post -
poned for a time. This shift is reflected in the monthly pay -
ment flows, which are shown in the finance statistics. In 
the national accounts, taxes are generally recorded on an 
accrual basis. A deferral of tax liabilities therefore does not 
affect tax revenue in the national accounts. Over and 
above this, incoming payments are allocated to the corres -
ponding period in Germany using a stylised short time lag.
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).
7 This figure excludes receipts from local government 
taxes, which are not yet known for the first quarter. These 
are included from here on in the following remarks.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
76

medium term, too. This is due to the fact that 
economic activity as outlined in the Federal 
Government’s spring projection will fail to 
reach the trajectory that had previously been 
expected. That said, the uncertainty surround -
ing the current estimate is extremely high over -
all – both in terms of macroeconomic develop -
ments and the effects of tax measures. In this 
respect, it shows more of a snapshot of what is 
potentially a rapidly changing economic situ -
ation. It would therefore make sense for there 
to be an additional update of the tax estimate 
in September. The draft central government 
budget for 2021 and the medium-  term fiscal 
plan up to 2024 should then be based on this.
Specifically, the new official tax estimate puts 
tax revenue at down by 10% for 2020. This is 
driven largely by the macroeconomic assump -
tions (see the table on p. 78), which include de -
clines in all major macroeconomic reference 
variables for tax revenue. Progressive taxation 
will also reduce revenue because average 
wages are expected to decrease. Short- time 
working benefits, which replace a large part of 
lost income, are not taxed.8 In addition, the tax 
measures that have already been put in place in 
response to the coronavirus crisis will lead to 
shortfalls of around €20 billion (see the remarks 
on pp. 75f.). Legislative changes adopted prior 
to these measures will likewise have a net 
dampening effect.9 This applies first and fore -
most to the Family Relief Act (Familienentlas -
tungsgesetz),  under which the previous year’s 
bracket creep was compensated and child 
benefits were raised, in particular.
A 10½% increase in revenue is expected for the 
coming year. The driving factors will be the as -
sumed overall economic recovery and progres -
sive taxation. In addition, the discontinuation 
of tax measures introduced to tackle the 
coronavirus crisis will create additional revenue. 
It is expected that tax payments deferred in 
2020 will be made at this point. By contrast, 
the partial abolition of the solidarity surcharge 
will have a negative effect. Further legislative 
changes and court rulings will only marginally reduce growth. Growth of between 3% and 
4½% is expected for the subsequent years up 
to 2024. This largely reflects the macroeco -
nomic assumptions and progressive taxation. In 
net terms, revenue shortfalls from legislative 
changes and court rulings will weigh moder -
ately on growth. The tax ratio (as defined in the 
government finance statistics) will tumble to Considerable 
decline in tax 
revenue 
expected this 
year
Strong recovery 
in 2021Growth in sub -
sequent years 
driven by eco -
nomic growth 
and progressive 
taxationTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1 Estimate 
for 
2020 1 2019 2020
€ billionYear-
on-year 
change 
%Year-
on-year 
change 
%
Tax revenue, total 2 175.2 181.4 +  3.5 –  9.8
of which:
Wage tax 50.9 53.4 +  4.8 –  3.4
Profi  t-related taxes 32.1 34.6 +  7.9 – 24.7
Assessed income 
tax3 17.5 18.7 +  7.2 – 25.3
Corporation tax 9.2 8.5 –  7.6 – 41.3
Non- assessed 
taxes on earnings 4.0 4.9 + 24.1 – 10.6
Withholding tax 
on interest 
income  and 
capital  gains 1.4 2.5 + 71.3 + 22.4
Turnover taxes 4 60.4 60.1 –  0.6 –  9.1
Other 
consumption-related 
taxes 5 20.1 20.5 +  1.7 –  5.1
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2020. 2 In-
cluding EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts 
from local government taxes. 3  Employee refunds deducted 
from revenue. 4 Turnover tax and import turnover tax. 5 Taxes 
on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alco-
hol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, 
alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
8 However, while not being taxed, short- time working 
benefits are factored in when the tax rate is determined 
(“Progressionsvorbehalt”). This leads to higher tax rates, 
which in turn leads to a moderate increase in tax revenue 
in the following year.
9 The official tax estimate is generally based on current le -
gislation.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
77

21.9% in 2020 (2019: 23.3%). After that, it will 
pick back up to 23.1% in 2024.
Compared with the October 2019 forecast, tax 
revenue shortfalls of €98½ billion are antici -
pated for 2020. While this is chiefly attributable 
to the downward revision of macroeconomic 
assumptions, the measures introduced in re -
sponse to the coronavirus crisis also necessi -
tated a major correction. Shortfalls will then be 
significantly lower in 2021 (€52½ billion). Al -
though strong economic growth is assumed, 
and the measures in place to boost corporate 
liquidity will then no longer be in place (i.e. tax 
payments will be expected following the expiry 
of coronavirus measures), this will not be 
enough to offset the losses incurred in the pre -
vious year. Revenue shortfalls will also arise due 
to the fact that, unlike in October, the tax esti -
mate now factors in the partial abolition of 
the  solidarity surcharge and further tax cuts. 
Revenue expectations for 2022 to 2024 were 
scaled back by between €50 billion and €60 bil -
lion per year. The decisive factor here is that, 
according to the spring projection, the eco -
nomic activity that underlies these expectations 
will continue to catch up at no more than a 
moderate pace and will stray noticeably from 
the path previously laid out. Structural tax cuts 
are also reflected, especially the partial aboli -
tion of the solidarity surcharge.Central government budget
The central government budget recorded a sur -
plus of €2 billion in the first quarter, compared 
with a deficit of €1½ billion at the start of the 
previous year. Revenue was up sharply (+9%). 
Tax revenue grew significantly, partly as a result 
of lower transfers to the EU budget. The Bun -
desbank’s high profit distribution had a slightly 
greater impact on revenue still, exceeding the 
previous year’s figure by €3½ billion. The 
budget estimate was also exceeded by this 
amount. According to the budget plan, this 
additional revenue is still to be transferred to the 
investment and repayment fund for debt repay -
ment. Expenditure rose by 5%, with the corona -
virus crisis barely playing a role at this time.
At the end of March, the Federal Government 
approved a supplementary budget for the cur -
rent year to tackle the tremendous pandemic-  
related burdens that lie ahead. The €37½ bil -
lion remaining in the refugee reserve under the 
old plans was not utilised for this purpose. In -
stead, net borrowing of €156 billion is envis -
aged. This is intended to cover tax revenue 
shortfalls of €33½ billion – one- tenth of the 
revenue previously estimated. On the expend -
iture side, €50 billion was earmarked for trans -
fers to micro- enterprises, €7½ billion for add -
itional basic allowance benefits and €6 billion Revenue expect -
ations down 
significantly  
compared with 
October 2019, 
even in medium 
termStill a surplus in 
central govern -
ment budget at 
start of year, …
… but supple -
mentary budget 
includes high 
borrowing 
authorisation to 
finance major 
pandemic- 
related burdensOﬃ   cial tax estimate fi  gures and the Federal Government’s macroeconomic projection
Item 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Tax revenue1
€ billion 799.3 717.8 792.5 816.0 851.1 883.3
% of GDP 23.3 21.9 22.7 22.7 23.0 23.1
Year-on-year change (%) 3.0 – 10.2 10.4 3.0 4.3 3.8
Revision of previous tax estimate (€ billion) 2.9 – 98.6 – 52.7 – 59.1 – 53.8 – 51.7
Real GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2020) 0.6 –  6.3 5.2 1.4 1.4 1.4
Autumn projection (October 2019) 0.5 1.0 1.3 1.1 1.1 1.1
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Spring projection (April 2020) 2.7 –  4.7 6.8 3.0 3.0 3.0
Autumn projection (October 2019) 2.8 2.9 3.1 2.8 2.8 2.8
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates (May 2020) and the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 1 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue and receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
78

for higher calls on guarantees. In addition, 
€3½ billion was budgeted to contain the epi -
demic in Germany. A global additional spend -
ing item of €55 billion, which was formed in 
response to the crisis, is very extensive. Further -
more, the guarantee framework, which can be 
flexibly implemented with the approval of the 
Budget Committee, was expanded consider -
ably (by up to €510 billion). With regard to 
guarantees, attention is likely to be focused on 
loans issued by the Kreditanstalt für Wiederauf -
bau (KfW) for companies, in particular.
The supplementary budget is based on a sharp 
downward revision of nominal GDP . The cyc -
lical burden is now estimated at €50 billion. As 
cyclical effects are factored out of the debt 
brake, net borrowing of 0.35% of GDP permit -
ted under the debt brake has increased by this 
amount. Nevertheless, planned net borrowing 
is expected to exceed the constitutional limit by 
€100 billion owing to wide- ranging additional 
spending authorisations and tax revenue short -
falls in connection with the coronavirus crisis 
(see the table on p. 80). It was thus with good 
reason that the Bundestag invoked the exemp -
tion clause. At the same time, it adopted a 
repay  ment plan to pay off this debt incurred 
under the exemption clause, which involves 
undershooting the ceiling for structural net 
borrowing (currently €12 billion) by €5 billion 
per year for 20 years starting in 2023. This will 
be counted as repayment.
It is currently difficult to gauge how extensive 
borrowing will actually be. According to the 
new tax estimate, tax revenue will lag behind 
the figures in the supplementary budget by €7 
billion. Further tax cuts and an economic stimu -
lus package are on the horizon. However, the 
large global additional spending item, in par -
ticular, is likely to still provide a considerable 
buffer, which will be able to at least partly off -
set further revenue shortfalls and additional 
expend iture. Overall, the central government 
budget is in a good position to make a strong 
temporary contribution to stabilising economic 
activity. Moreover, financing conditions remain highly favourable. Once the coronavirus crisis 
has been overcome, central government fi -
nances will automatically stabilise significantly, 
even if the economic stimulus package, in par -
ticular, is temporary. It will only be possible to 
reliably gauge remaining consolidation require -
ments for future compliance with the budget -
ary rules (including the repayment of debt in -
curred under the exemption clause) once the 
structural effects of the pandemic can be iden -
tified more precisely. In view of this, it was with 
good reason that preparation of the medium-  
term fiscal plan (as well as the draft budget for 
2021) was postponed until late summer.10 
However, it could still be too early even at this 
point in time for a firm plan, potentially backed 
up by specific measures, to return to normal 
budgetary rules.Use made of 
debt brake 
exemption 
clause, repay -
ment up to 
2042 planned
Uncertainty 
high – central 
government 
budget can 
make a strong 
temporary 
contribution  to 
stabilising eco -
nomic activityCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
1 Including interest expenditure recorded ahead of time in Q2 
(€7 billion).
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q45051015
–+++
–50+5+10+15+20
2018
20202018Quarterly figures
2019Cumulated from start of year2020
2019€ billion
11
1
10 The benchmark figures adopted by the Federal Govern -
ment in mid- March for its fiscal planning did not yet take 
into account the spread of the coronavirus and the conse -
quences of this for the central government budget. There 
is therefore a considerable need for adjustment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
79

Central government’s off- budget entities 
posted a deficit of just over €1½ billion in the 
first quarter.11 A surplus of €1 billion had been 
recorded one year earlier. The new Economic 
Stabilisation Fund, in particular, is likely to run a 
large deficit over the remainder of the year. In 
addition to a guarantee framework of €400 bil -
lion to protect loans to larger enterprises, it 
also has credit authorisations of €200 billion. 
One half is intended for capital injections for 
larger enterprises, while the other half is in -
tended to finance government- guaranteed 
KfW loans.
State government budgets
In order to overcome the coronavirus crisis, 
most of the federal states are making use of the 
exemption clause in their debt brake and 
adopting supplementary budgets. After several 
years of positive balances and despite a surplus 
of €5 billion in the first quarter,12 state govern -ment budgets are now expected to record a 
very large deficit this year. Expenditure is likely 
to rise sharply. For example, the federal states 
are responsible for financing certain hospital in -
vestments. In addition, they have set up various 
state- specific programmes for resident enter -
prises. By providing one- off grants, the majority 
of federal states are supplying smaller enter -
prises with aid on top of central government 
assistance as well as – unlike central govern -
ment – supporting medium- sized enterprises. 
In addition, the federal states are offering guar -
antees for loans to enterprises, subsidised 
liquid ity loans via their promotional banks and, 
in some cases, capital injections for enterprises. 
Several federal states are also reimbursing their Significant out -
flows from new 
Economic Stabil -
isation Fund 
planned
Large deficit this 
year due to 
pandemic- 
related burdensKey central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
€ billion
Item2019 2020
Provisional 
actual Budget 
(November  
2019)Supplemen-
tary budget 
(March 2020)
 1. Fiscal balance 13.3 – 11.0 – 167.0
 2. Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.3 0.3
 3. Transfer to (–)/withdrawal from (+) reserves – 13.5 10.6 10.6
 4. Net borrowing (1.+2.+3.)
(repayment: +; borrowing: –) – – – 156.0
 5. Balance of fi  nancial transactions 0.0 –  0.3 –   0.3
 6. Cyclical component in the budget procedure 1 –  2.9 –  0.5 –  50.1
 7. Balance of incorporated off-budget entities 0.7 –  5.9 –   5.9
Digitalisation fund 0.3 –  1.0 –   1.0
Energy and climate fund 1.8 –  3.8 –   3.8
Flood assistance fund –  0.6 –  0.5 –   0.7
All-day schools (as of 2020) 1.0 1.0
Fund to promote municipal investment –  0.9 –  1.6 –   1.3
 8. Structural net borrowing (4.–5.–6.+7.)
(repayment: +; borrowing: –) 3.5 –  5.1 – 111.5
 9. Structural balance (8.–2.–3.) 16.8 – 16.1 – 122.4
10. Structural balance adjusted for updated estimate of potential output 2 0.8 20.7 – 135.2
11. Debt brake ceiling (–0.35% of GDP 3) – 11.5 – 11.7 –  11.7
12. Amount credited to the control account (8.–11.) 15.0 6.6 –
13. Credit balance on the control account at year-end 52.2 46.5 52.2
14. Amount exceeding ceiling (11.–8.) – – 99.8
15. Outstanding repayment amount – – 99.8
16. Size of refugee reserve at year-end 48.2 19.2 37.6
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. * For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public fi  nances, 
Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68 f. 1  Simplifi  ed procedure applied: 2019 adjusted to national accounts fi  gures published in February 
2020 and 2020 supplementary budget adjusted to the Federal Government’s March 2020 expectations. 2 Potential output based on the 
Federal Government’s 2020 spring projection. 3 GDP: gross domestic product. Here, this refers to GDP in the year before the budget is 
prepared.
Deutsche Bundesbank
11 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping. SoFFin’s deficit is also 
factored out. It is based on funds transferred to refinance 
the bad bank FMSW. In return, the direct debt of FMSW 
which is also attributable to central government is repaid.
12 The quarterly data on state government budgets are 
based on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
80

local governments for costs that can be clearly 
attributed to the crisis, with one particular ex -
ample being lost fees for day care facilities for 
small children. The usual transfers to local gov -
ernment financed using state government tax 
revenue will initially continue as planned. More 
comprehensive stabilisation assistance at the 
local government level appears foreseeable. By 
contrast, state government tax revenue will fall 
considerably – which is also indicated by the 
current tax estimate (-8½%).13 If the federal 
states further expand their support programmes 
or co- finance an additional economic stabilisa -
tion package, their budgets will be put under 
more strain. However, deficits in state govern -
ment budgets will also shrink again as tempor -
ary fiscal measures cease to apply and the over -
all economic recovery gains a stronger foot -
hold. The exact extent to which the deficits will 
decrease cannot be reliably estimated here, 
either  .
The states receiving consolidation assistance 
(Berlin, Bremen, Saarland, Saxony-  Anhalt and 
Schleswig- Holstein) were required to demon -
strate by the end of April 2020 that they had 
reduced their structural deficits in 2019 as 
agreed. The aim was to prepare the budgets of 
these federal states for the debt brake, which 
would apply from 2020 onwards. If the re -
spective federal states’ structural deficits (ad -
justed for cyclical effects and financial transac -
tions) come under the agreed ceiling, the states 
receive the full amount of consolidation assis -
tance for the reporting year. This assistance will 
be paid out for the last time for 2019. Accord -
ing to the reports and press releases that have 
already been published by Berlin, Bremen and 
Saxony-  Anhalt, these requirements were met.
Local government finances
Local government budgets are also coming 
under massive pressure as a result of the 
coronavirus crisis. A large deficit is anticipated 
for the current year. In particular, local business 
tax revenue – a large revenue item – will de -cline considerably (by 19½% according to the 
latest tax estimate). Revenue from local gov -
ernment shares in income and turnover tax will 
also decrease. By contrast, the regular transfers 
from state government will boost revenue. 
Local government expenditure is likely to in -
crease significantly again this year. In particular, 
the temporary relaxing of the means- tested as -
sessment of the basic allowance will increase 
spending on social benefits.
On the whole, there is much to suggest that 
local governments should be shielded from the 
financial burdens caused by the pandemic. This 
is largely a task for the federal states. Such sup -
port could also be combined with a fundamen -
tal reform of local government financing. The 
current situation once again demonstrates a 
need for action. For instance, there is a lot to Consolidation 
reports: deficit 
ceilings com -
plied with 
in 2019
Large deficit 
expected this 
year due to 
sharp decline in 
tax revenueProtection 
against 
pandemic- 
related burdens 
together with 
reform of local 
government 
financing to be 
consideredState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q463036912
––++++
3691215182124
2018
20202018Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192020
2019€ billion
13 In the tax estimate, the local government taxes of city 
states come under local government tax revenue rather 
than state government tax revenue.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
81

be said for substantially stabilising local govern -
ment tax revenue while preserving local gov -
ernment tax autonomy.14
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
In the first quarter, the statutory pension insur -
ance scheme recorded a deficit of €2 billion. 
Two- thirds of the €1½ billion increase in the 
deficit compared with the previous year was at -
tributable to higher mothers’ pensions. Follow -
ing a delay, these were not paid out until the second quarter of 2019. A significant deficit is 
likely to be recorded for the year as a whole 
after the previous year’s surplus, although this 
is easily covered by the fluctuation reserve. In 
mid- 2020, pensions will be raised nationwide 
by an average of 3½%. The adjustment is due 
mainly to the favourable per capita wage de -
velopments of the past year. The sustainability 
factor will also have an adjustment- boosting 
effect, as the ratio of persons subject to com -
pulsory contributions to pension recipients that 
is applicable here rose once again. The number 
of pensions is likely to continue growing only 
relatively moderately. Owing to the coronavirus 
crisis, revenue growth is expected to weaken 
significantly. However, shortfalls in contribution 
receipts due to lower wages will be mitigated 
primarily by short- time working and unemploy -
ment benefit contributions. In addition, central 
government funds will rise markedly in line 
with adjustment rules.
In March, the Commission for a Reliable Inter -
generational Contract (Kommission verläss -
licher Generationenvertrag)  set up by the Fed -
eral Government submitted its report. It was 
appointed to put forward recommendations on 
the reform of the pension insurance scheme 
from 2026 onwards. The majority of the Com -
mission’s members support a continuation of 
statutory upper limits for the contribution rate 
and pension level, each for a period of seven 
years. They propose a threshold of between 
20% and 24% for the contribution rate and of 
between 44% and 49% for the pension level. 
Until 2030, the pension level should continue 
to be calculated on the basis of 45 contribution 
years. It will not be until 2031 that longer 
periods of employment are included, as also in -
tended in combination with the higher statu -
tory retirement age. The pension level will then 
be higher due to these longer periods of em -
ployment. The presumed significant increase in 
central government funds and thus tax burdens 
in this context is not explored in any further 
detail in the Commission’s report.Significant 
deficit  expected 
this yearPensions 
Commission  
recommends  
dual thresholds 
even after 2026, 
but does not 
explore central 
government 
funds needed in 
further  detailFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently re-
vised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–4–20+2+4Cumulated from start of year202020192018
2018
2019
20202018 2019 202002468
2018 2019 202002468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
€ billionFiscal balance, quarterly figures
14 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b) for more details.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
82

With regard to the statutory retirement age, 
the Commission was unable to agree on a rec -
ommendation to link the statutory retirement 
age to life expectancy. Instead, it proposes that 
this issue be left until 2026 to be dealt with by 
another expert panel. In addition to the pen -
sion level, the contribution rate and central 
government funds, the retirement age is a key 
variable within the pension insurance scheme. 
Life expectancy is expected to rise after 2030 
as well. If this is not taken into account by rais -
ing the retirement age, the pension- drawing 
period will keep growing longer while the con -
tribution period remains unchanged. As a re -
sult, the pressure to adjust the remaining vari -
ables will increase considerably.15 All in all, 
therefore, a number of questions remain un -
answered, notably with regard to the central 
government grant and the statutory retirement 
age, which are of crucial importance for the 
long- term outlook of the pension insurance 
scheme, in particular. The impact of the corona -
virus crisis will also need to be examined in 
greater detail.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency was scarcely 
affected by the coronavirus crisis in the first 
quarter. It recorded a core budget deficit16 of €1 
billion. Its budget was broadly balanced a year 
earlier. Revenue fell by 3% as a result of a con -
tribution rate cut, whereas expenditure con -
tinued to rise steeply (by 8½%). While spending 
on unemployment benefits rose sharply, as in 
the previous quarters, expenditure on short-  
time working benefits was still at a low level.
Overall, the Federal Employment Agency’s finan -
cial situation is set to deteriorate considerably 
over the remainder of the year in the wake of 
the coronavirus crisis. A very large deficit is ex -
pected. The Federal Employment Agency is 
making a strong contribution to stabilisation, 
especially on the expenditure front – with one 
particular example being short- time working 
benefits. As in the crisis of 2009, special rules governing these benefits have been adopted. 
For example, the Federal Employment Agency 
is reimbursing the social contributions normally 
payable by enterprises on short- time working 
benefits. In addition, benefits are being granted 
more readily and for a longer period of time. 
Spending on unemployment benefits will also 
increase at an accelerated pace. This is partly 
due to the fact that, until the end of the year, Decision regard -
ing possible 
adjustment of 
statutory retire -
ment age to be 
made in 2026
Deficit in Q1
Very large deficit 
expected this 
yearFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency *
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q42024
–++
–20+2+4+6Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202020192018
2020201920182018 2019 2020–12–8–40+4+8+12
2018 2019 2020128404812
–––+++ Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
15 For various simulations of the long- term outlook for the 
statutory pension insurance scheme, see Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2019).
16 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are thus recorded as expenditure, reducing the 
core budget balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
83

the base period has been extended by three 
months. On the revenue side, contribution re -
ceipts will decrease significantly. The number of 
employees will decline and pay will be lower 
due to short-  time work. Contribution receipts 
for short- time working and unemployment 
benefits will not have the same dampening ef -
fect here as on the other branches of the social 
secur ity funds. The Federal Employment Agen -
cy’s very high reserve (end- 2019: €25½ billion) 
sets it in good stead for the time being to bear 
the burdens that lie ahead. Should additional 
funds be required, central government can 
grant an interest- free loan.
Statutory health insurance 
scheme
The finances of the statutory health insurance 
scheme are also being affected by the corona -
virus crisis this year.17 It is being hit particularly 
hard on the revenue side. Contribution receipts 
will be subdued in the wake of the economic 
downturn. Nevertheless, they are likely to con -
tinue to grow. The contribution payments 
borne by the Federal Employment Agency will 
stabilise revenue, but so will pension contribu -
tions – which will rise significantly in the middle 
of the year. The unexpectedly weak revenue 
growth will weigh solely on the health fund, 
which is making payments to the health insur -
ance institutions that were determined on the 
basis of revenue expectations from last au -
tumn. From today’s perspective, health insur -
ance institutions’ expenditure is characterised 
by a high degree of uncertainty. Provided that significantly fewer regular benefits (i.e. those 
not related to the coronavirus) are paid out and 
the health insurance institutions are not bur -
dened by safeguard clauses for individual ser -
vice providers, it is possible that expenditure 
will also increase only marginally.
On balance, the health fund is likely to record a 
large deficit for the year as a whole. It should 
be able to plug the gap using its reserves. How -
ever, its intra- year liquidity could take more of a 
hit due to the deferral of social contribution 
payments and the pre- funded compensation of 
hospitals for empty beds. Central government 
should then prevent any bottlenecks by provid -
ing liquidity assistance or by bringing forward 
transfers. By contrast, the health insurance in -
stitutions could close the year quite favourably, 
especially if there is a significant reduction in 
the number of regular hospital operations and 
procedures taking place. Next year, however, 
the health insurance institutions are likely to 
come under considerable financing pressure. A 
sharp rise in expenditure, partly due to catch-  
up spending on postponed hospital or medical 
treatments, is likely to be combined with a level 
of revenue that is still low as a result of the 
pandemic. However, the health insurance insti -
tutions as a whole have very extensive reserves, 
which should initially limit supplementary con -
tribution rate increases on average. The Federal 
Government also announced that it may make 
additional central government funds available 
to stabilise contribution rates.Coronavirus 
crisis  weighing 
on health 
insurance  
schemeHealth fund to 
record very clear 
deficit; result for 
health insurance 
institutions sub -
ject to major 
uncertainty
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), The EU budget and its financing: looking back and ahead, Monthly 
Report, April 2020, pp. 45-65.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), Commentaries, Monthly Report, April 2020, pp. 10-12.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), Long- term outlook for the statutory pension insurance scheme, 
Monthly Report, October 2019, pp. 53-81.17 Data for the first quarter are not yet available; develop -
ments in this period will be discussed in the July Monthly 
Report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
84

Current fi  scal developments in the euro area
2019: Defi  cit ratio barely changed 
despite  looser fi  scal stance
The government defi  cit ratio in the euro 
area remained almost unchanged last year 
at 0.6%. According to the European Com-
mission, the fi  scal stance was expansion-
ary.1 However, this was largely offset by 
shrinking interest expenditure. Cyclical de-
velopments had virtually no impact. The 
debt ratio fell by 1.8  percentage points 
(pps) to 86%.2
Coronavirus sending defi  cit and debt 
ratios sharply higher this year
The European Commission’s latest forecast 
highlights the current particularly high level 
of uncertainty,3 especially surrounding the 
further spread of the pandemic, the action 
being taken to contain it, and the fi  scal 
measures which are still in fl  ux. In this re-
spect, a cautious interpretation is war-
ranted. The European Commission is ex-
pecting the euro area defi  cit ratio to rise by 
8 pps this year (to 8.5%). Part of this in-
crease –  equivalent to 3¼% of gross do-
mestic product (GDP) – is due to the fi  scal 
measures taken to combat the effects of 
COVID- 19, while the remaining larger share 
is attributable to the severe economic 
downturn and the strong impact of the 
automatic stabilisers. The European Com-
mission  expects the euro area economy to 
rebound strongly a year later, in 2021. Since 
the temporary expansionary measures will 
then no longer be in place and the econ-
omy will have recovered fairly quickly, the 
defi  cit ratio is projected to fall by 5 pps to 
3.5%. The debt ratio is expected to climb by 
17 pps this year to reach almost 103%. In 
addition to the factors mentioned above, 
there is also the effect of fi  scal measures, 
which are refl  ected in the debt level but not in the defi  cit (2¼ pps). These include, for 
example, government or government- 
mandated assistance loans to enterprises. 
The debt ratio will then recede by 4 pps in 
2021 to just under 100%, mainly as a result 
of signifi  cantly lower defi  cits and  recover-
ing, strongly expanding economic growth 
(in the denominator).
The European Commission is expecting the 
defi  cit ratios to rise considerably in all euro 
area countries this year. The increase will be 
weakest in Ireland (6 pps) and strongest in 
Italy (9½ pps), followed by Cyprus (8¾ pps) 
and Germany (8½ pps). As at the aggregate 
level, in most cases the larger share of this 
increase can be put down to the adverse 
macroeconomic developments. European 
Commission data indicate that eight euro 
area countries have taken or are planning 
measures which affect the fi  scal balance by 
4% of GDP or more. The fi  gures are highest 
for Germany (4¾%), followed by Italy 
(4½%) and Cyprus (4¼%),4 and lowest in 
France, Finland and Belgium (around 2%). 
Note, however, that a great many assump-
tions have to be made in order to estimate 
what fi  scal effect the measures will have. 
All  of the countries will see the defi  cit ratio 
1 The fi  scal stance is measured by the change in the 
cyclically adjusted primary balance. The primary bal-
ance is the general government fi  scal balance net of 
interest expenditure.
2 The European Commission does not consolidate 
lending between euro area countries here.
3 In addition to the baseline scenario for its macroeco-
nomic forecast, the Commission prepared two further 
scenarios based on less favourable assumptions.
4 This volume is  generally roughly equivalent to the 
change in the cyclically adjusted primary balance. If it 
is not, this means that fi  scal policy measures or struc-
tural developments  will have an impact without being 
seen in the context of the pandemic. Overall, it is diffi   -
cult to identify structural and cyclical drivers at the 
present time. The results may differ signifi  cantly de-
pending on the method used and expectations regard-
ing future developments. For Spain and Luxembourg, 
the European Commission does not specify the scope 
of the measures in its forecast report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
85

decline again sharply in 2021. It will persist 
well above 3% in Belgium, Spain, France, 
Italy, Latvia and Slovakia.  In 2021, the debt 
ratio will be highest in Greece  (182.6%), 
followed  by Italy (153.6%) and Portugal 
(124.4%). Unlike in 2019, Belgium, Spain, 
France and Cyprus will then also have debt 
ratios of well over 100%. By contrast, the 
debt ratios in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Lux-
embourg, Malta, the Netherlands and Slo-
vakia will still be below 60% in 2021, just 
like they were in 2019 (see the above table).
General escape clause under the 
European  fi  scal framework activated
Government measures are a major factor in 
addressing this exceptional crisis. To elimin-
ate any barriers which might hinder govern-
ment action, it was swiftly decided to relax 
the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
The fi  rst move came in March, when it was 
agreed that coronavirus- related measures 
should not count in the assessment of a 
country’s fi  scal performance. Shortly after 
that, when the sharp economic downturn came more clearly into view, the European 
Commission and the European Council acti-
vated the general escape clause. This means 
that, until further notice, the usual provi-
sions under the European fi  scal framework 
will now no longer apply.
The general escape clause opens up the fi  s-
cal framework to give Member States the 
leeway they need, allowing them to adopt 
discretionary crisis- response measures, no 
matter what state their public fi  nances are 
in. The general escape clause also allows 
the automatic stabilisers to work freely. 
Countries are affected in different ways by 
the pandemic, and containment measures 
vary from one Member State to the next. 
Furthermore, how COVID- 19 affects a coun-
try depends on the way that country’s 
economy is structured. Therefore, it might 
make sense to use different fi  scal policy ap-
proaches in different countries. In addition, 
each country’s national public fi  nances 
started out from very different positions. 
The current crisis is showing how important 
sound public fi  nances are as a matter of Public fi  nances in euro area countries
European Commission Spring Economic Forecast, May 2020
CountryGeneral government balance 
as a percentage of GDPGeneral government gross debt 
as a percentage of GDPCyclically adjusted budget 
balance  as a percentage of 
potential  GDP
2019 2020 2021 2019 2020 2021 2019 2020 2021
Austria 0.7 –  6.2 – 1.9 70.4 78.8 75.8 – 0.3 – 3.4 – 1.1
Belgium – 1.9 –  8.9 – 4.2 98.6 113.9 110.0 – 2.5 – 4.5 – 2.9
Cyprus 1.7 –  7.0 – 1.8 95.5 115.7 105.0 – 1.2 – 5.3 – 2.1
Estonia – 0.3 –  8.3 – 3.4 8.4 20.7 22.6 – 2.4 – 5.8 – 1.9
Finland – 1.1 –  7.4 – 3.4 59.4 69.5 69.6 – 1.7 – 4.2 – 1.6
France – 3.0 –  9.9 – 4.0 98.1 116.5 111.9 – 3.7 – 4.9 – 2.6
Germany 1.4 –  7.0 – 1.5 59.8 75.7 71.8 0.9 – 3.8 – 0.5
Greece 1.5 –  6.4 – 2.1 176.6 196.4 182.6 3.8 0.4 1.0
Ireland 0.4 –  5.6 – 2.9 58.8 66.4 66.7 – 0.7 – 1.5 – 0.5
Italy – 1.6 – 11.1 – 5.6 134.8 158.9 153.6 – 1.5 – 6.1 – 3.5
Latvia – 0.2 –  7.3 – 4.5 36.9 43.1 43.7 – 1.5 – 5.2 – 3.9
Lithuania 0.3 –  6.9 – 2.7 36.3 48.5 48.4 – 1.6 – 4.4 – 1.6
Luxembourg 2.2 –  4.8 0.1 22.1 26.4 25.7 1.2 – 2.6 0.7
Malta 0.5 –  6.7 – 2.5 43.1 50.7 50.8 – 1.3 – 4.2 – 1.3
Netherlands 1.7 –  6.3 – 3.5 48.6 62.1 57.6 0.8 – 2.4 – 1.6
Portugal 0.2 –  6.5 – 1.8 117.8 131.6 124.4 – 1.1 – 3.6 – 0.9
Slovakia – 1.3 –  8.5 – 4.2 48.0 59.5 59.9 – 2.3 – 6.6 – 4.0
Slovenia 0.5 –  7.2 – 2.1 66.1 83.8 79.9 – 0.9 – 4.5 – 1.2
Spain – 2.8 – 10.1 – 6.7 95.5 115.6 113.7 – 4.2 – 5.8 – 5.2
Euro area – 0.7 –  8.5 – 3.5 86.0 102.7 98.8 – 1.3 – 4.4 – 2.1
Sources: European Commission, AMECO.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
86

principle for mounting an effective fi  scal re-
sponse to a challenge of this kind. They 
allow governments to introduce extensive 
stabilisation measures without running the 
risk of losing confi  dence in the capital mar-
kets.
Emergency assistance measures rolled 
out at the European level
Some countries currently have limited fi  nan-
cial leeway, and action is being taken at the 
European level to alleviate this. The idea is 
to shield countries in part from the conse-
quences of a loss of confi  dence so that they 
need not fear a negative market response 
to important and sound measures. This is 
why the European Council has approved a 
raft of joint fi  scal measures ensuring favour-
able fi  nancing conditions and thus facilitat-
ing efforts to combat the crisis. The Euro-
pean Commission estimates that these 
European initiatives will be able to mobilise 
a total of more than €½ trillion in emer-
gency assistance.5
First, fi  nancial support is to be provided for 
short- time work schemes in the EU Member 
States (SURE6). This exceptional and tem-
porary  initiative will allow the European 
Commission to borrow up to €100 billion 
on behalf of the  European Union. Market 
conditions are likely to be favourable, given 
that all the EU countries are liable for the 
debt – via guarantees and via the EU 
budget. This enables low- interest assistance 
loans to be granted at the European level. 
To access these loans, Member States will 
need to take or have taken measures to 
promote short- time working. The require-
ments were not specifi  ed in  greater detail, 
and no other conditions need to be met. 
The borrowing countries –  like all coun-
tries – are simply requested to take into ac-
count the European Commission’s eco-
nomic and fi  scal policy recommendations 
from the European Semester.Second, the European Investment Bank 
(EIB) is to be given €25 billion in additional 
guarantees by the EU Member States as a 
way of facilitating lending by commercial 
banks or national promotional banks to 
small and medium- sized enterprises. The 
European Commission expects this to en-
able an additional €200 billion in loans to 
be granted in the  European Union.
Third, the European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM) is to provide euro area countries with 
precautionary pandemic credit lines upon 
request. The ESM was established as an 
international institution in 2012 by means 
of an international treaty to close a gap that 
had come to light in the last fi  nancial and 
economic crisis. Since then, it has provided 
a safety net for euro area countries that are 
experiencing or facing the prospect of se-
vere fi  nancing problems. The ESM can pro-
vide assistance via various fi  nancing instru-
ments to alleviate these diffi   culties. It there-
fore made sense to activate the ESM during 
the current crisis. The new pandemic credit 
lines are to be based on existing provisions 
governing precautionary credit lines. For ex-
ample, the risks to fi  nancial stability must 
be signifi  cant, and fi  scal sustainability and a 
sustainable external position must be en-
sured. According to the European Commis-
sion’s preliminary assessment, in consult-
ation with the ECB and in cooperation with 
the ESM (from early May 2020), these con-
ditions  have been met in all countries. In a 
departure from earlier ESM programmes, 
no further conditions are attached. The spe-
cial coronavirus- related assistance only 
needs to be used to cover unspecifi  ed direct 
and indirect costs in the health system. 
5 Exemptions have also been granted under the EU 
competition rules, in particular with regard to state 
aid. The accommodative monetary policy measures 
also have a supporting effect here. See pp. 30 f. of this 
report for more on the latest monetary policy deci-
sions.
6 SURE stands for Support to mitigate Unemployment 
Risk in an Emergency.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
87

Countries can be granted credit lines of up 
to 2% of their GDP in 2019. In mathemat-
ical terms, this would allow for loans total-
ling around €240 billion to be provided in 
the euro area. The ESM does not need to 
be topped up for this purpose. The existing 
guarantees provided by the euro area coun-
tries  currently secure additional ESM debt of 
as much as €410 billion with a very good 
credit rating.7
The pandemic assistance provided through 
the SURE scheme and the ESM have one 
thing in common: both are fi  nanced by 
public sector debt. In addition, the assis-
tance is provided in the form of low- interest 
loans which have to be repaid.8 Depending 
on the assistance in question, either the 
euro area countries or the EU Member 
States are jointly liable for the debt taken 
out at the European level. However, the 
scope of liability is limited for each country, 
roughly depending on its GDP weight.9 In 
Germany, the Bundestag has to approve the 
assumption of liability and the specifi  c vol-
ume in question. A direct fi  nancial burden 
will only materialise if recipient countries 
default on their repayments.10 From an eco-
nomic point of view, it is the sub- market 
interest rates on these loans which give 
them their character as fi  nancial assistance 
or transfers.
Borrowing drives up the debt level of the 
EU and the ESM.11 Debt levels rise for the 
borrowing Member States as well, but not 
for the other countries that provide guaran-
tees or fund the EU budget.12
In addition to possible assistance loans, dir-
ect transfers at the European level have also 
been mobilised. To this end, all the available 
funds from the current EU budget have 
been activated to combat the crisis. This 
means that just under €40 billion will be 
channelled to the EU countries in an effort to tackle the coronavirus pandemic and its 
economic fallout.
More European measures in the pipeline
The European Council has agreed to pro-
vide additional funds for Community assis-
tance. The European Commission has been 
invited to submit proposals on this matter. 
Topics under discussion include an increase 
in the EU budget and a substantial volume 
of additional common debt.
For joint action in this exceptional crisis, it 
would be logical to temporarily expand the 
EU budget and increase the fi  nancial contri-
butions made by the Member States ac-
cordingly. That way, fi  nancial assistance 
could be made available as transfers (and in 
some cases also as assistance loans) and 
their uses could be determined jointly. 
Given the exceptional circumstances, it 
would make sense to signifi  cantly increase 
the EU budget for a time. Needless to say, it 
would be up to politicians to decide on the 
specifi  c scope of joint projects or transfers. 
7 Non- euro area countries are not eligible for ESM as-
sistance. They would receive assistance loans (as hith-
erto) via the EU balance of payments facility. Since the 
funding of these loans is likewise subject to joint liabil-
ity, it is possible to grant favourable lending rates.
8 By contrast, the EIB is not set to increase its debt. 
Rather, it will use the additional guarantees to facilitate 
a higher level of private sector debt via various instru-
ments. This, however, entails the risk of debt being 
shifted to the public sector, though by no more than 
the guarantees promised.
9 In the ESM, the limits on liability for euro area coun-
tries are based on the ECB capital key, which is based 
on both GDP and population data. Contributions to 
the EU budget,  by contrast, depend on a country’s 
share of the Community’s gross national income. 
Some countries make different contributions owing to 
(complex) rebate schemes.
10 A fi  nancial burden would also materialise if the 
interest rates on assistance loans were lower than 
those on joint debt raised in the capital market.
11 These are not subject to budgetary surveillance and 
the constraints of the Stability and Growth Pact.
12 It does, however, seem appropriate for countries 
that decide to jointly raise debt for a specifi  c purpose 
and are explicitly liable for it to report it (pro rata) in 
their national accounts.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
88

The criteria for granting assistance would 
also need to determined. For instance, the 
impact of lockdown measures on different 
economic indicators might be relevant.13 
There is also the possibility of taking relative 
economic strength into account, as  has 
been the case hitherto with cohesion funds. 
One decision that would need to be made 
concerns the extent to which countries with 
weaker economies should support those 
which are stronger economically but harder 
hit by the coronavirus crisis.
The issuance of additional common debt 
for the purpose of granting low- interest as-
sistance loans or transfers is another topic 
of debate.14 Considerations at present 
mainly revolve around the idea of the EU 
issuing additional debt.15 The proposal is for 
the debt to be secured primarily through fu-
ture EU budgets, much like the SURE pro-
gramme outlined above. In the case of as-
sistance loans, risk provisions would need 
to be set aside in future EU budgets. To this 
end, safety margins would need to be 
planned between the payment appropri-
ations and the own resources ceiling16 (pos-
sibly supplemented by guarantees). These 
buffers would have to be suffi   ciently large 
to be able to absorb any defaults on the 
loans granted. Provided the safeguards are 
suffi   cient, the European Commission (on 
behalf of the European Union) would be 
able to issue and pass on debt at very fa-
vourable terms. Assuming the assistance 
loans are serviced as agreed, there is no re-
course to the EU budget or the guarantors. 
The debt of the EU increases, and the debt 
of the borrowing Member States increases 
as well.
The situation is different when debt secured 
jointly is used to fund not just loans but 
transfers (or other fi  nal expenditure) as well. 
In this case, there is not just a possibility of 
the EU budget being charged (as in the case 
of possible loan losses) – it is a certainty. Future expenditure for debt servicing (i.e. 
for interest and redemption payments) has 
to be budgeted for. These outlays need to 
be covered by (additional) national contri-
butions.17 In economic terms, the EU budget 
would show defi  cits at the time of the ex-
penditure outfl  ows (the expenditure would 
not be offset by credit claims, unlike in the 
case of loans), and its debt level would in-
crease. Taken in isolation, the transfers do 
not increase the debt level of the recipient 
countries. However, these countries, like all 
the Member States, will participate in the 
resulting debt service in subsequent years, 
i.e. in the interest and redemption burdens.
It is currently unclear when governments 
will agree on further European assistance 
and how it will be structured. Views diverge 
on key aspects, such as size, form (loans or 
transfers), distribution criteria and use deci-
sions (joint or national decisions). Further-
more, it is still highly uncertain how COVID- 
19 will develop from here and what impact 
it will have, which makes it diffi   cult to de-
cide on suitable funding and programmes. 
There would also need to be an assessment 
of whether and to what extent large- scale 
debt fi  nancing, if planned, is legally permis-
sible at the European level.18 In any case, an 
established instrument for assistance loans 
13 It would have to be decided whether national 
measures already taken and their effects are taken into 
account.
14 Here again, a joint decision would be required on 
the terms or conditions attached to the granting of the 
assistance.
15 In addition to the existing ESM, this might lead to 
the creation of another instrument for general credit 
assistance.
16 The own resources ceiling determines the max-
imum contribution to be paid by the Member States.
17 An EU tax has also been proposed as an alternative 
source of funding. This new tax would also have to be 
paid by EU taxpayers. This would diminish Member 
States’ scope to raise tax revenue accordingly: assum-
ing a Member State does not wish to increase the 
overall tax burden, it would have to reduce its own 
national taxes.
18 It would be appropriate, though, to allocate the 
debt to the EU Member States which have a say and 
are liable (see above).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
89

is already in place, in the shape of the ESM. 
It is sometimes suggested that European 
debt is a way of avoiding burdens for Mem-
ber States, given that it does not increase 
national debt ratios. This is only a statistical 
effect, however, and does not refl  ect eco-
nomic reality, because European debt also 
needs to be serviced by national taxpayers 
– even if the distribution of the burden may 
be less clear initially. Viewed in terms of the 
fi  scal framework, it would in any case im-
pair transparency and cause other problems 
if those rules were at risk of becoming inef-
fective because  of national debt being re-
placed by European debt.
All in all, fi  scal policy can play a key role in 
overcoming the COVID- 19 crisis. While this 
is chiefl  y a national task, the European level 
can also make an important contribution in 
the spirit of solidarity. Assistance loans 
granted at favourable interest rates can take the pressure off Member States which 
are having – or are afraid of encountering – 
temporary diffi   culties accessing the capital 
markets. This is what the ESM is for, in prin-
ciple. Transfers can also be made in order to 
support those Member States hit especially 
hard by the crisis. The EU budget would be 
a suitable tool for this purpose and could 
also be expanded considerably depending 
on the political consensus reached. As has 
 been the case up to now, the measures 
 could be transparently and directly funded 
by contributions from Member States. In 
order to maintain a balance between liabil-
ity and responsibility, a new extensive and, 
in particular, more permanent debt instru-
ment at the European level should logically 
be accompanied by more comprehensive 
integration steps.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
90

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43 •
2. Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43 •
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
4. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
3•

6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  78 •
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ....................................................  78 •
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
8. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  81 •
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
May 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 EONIA  5,7 EURIBOR  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2018         July 7.0 4.5 4.0 3.9 3.4 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.0
         Aug. 6.5 4.0 3.5 3.7 3.4 3.4 − 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1         Sep. 6.8 4.3 3.6 3.6 3.2 3.2 0.1 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2
         Oct. 6.8 4.4 3.9 3.7 2.9 2.9 0.7 − 0.37 − 0.32 1.3
         Nov. 6.7 4.3 3.8 3.9 2.6 2.8 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2         Dec. 6.6 4.3 4.2 3.9 2.8 3.0 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.31 1.1
2019         Jan. 6.2 4.1 3.8 4.1 2.7 2.9 0.9 − 0.37 − 0.31 1.0
         Feb. 6.7 4.5 4.3 4.3 3.0 3.2 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.9         Mar. 7.5 5.2 4.7 4.6 2.7 3.0 1.3 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
         Apr. 7.4 5.3 4.8 4.8 2.7 3.2 1.2 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.7
         May 7.1 5.2 4.8 4.8 2.2 2.8 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.7         June 7.2 5.0 4.6 4.9 2.2 3.1 2.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 0.4
         July 7.8 5.5 5.2 5.2 2.1 3.0 2.0 − 0.37 − 0.36 0.2
         Aug. 8.4 6.2 5.8 5.6 2.3 3.3 1.7 − 0.36 − 0.41 − 0.1         Sep. 7.9 5.9 5.7 5.7 2.2 3.3 1.8 − 0.40 − 0.42 − 0.1
         Oct. 8.4 6.1 5.7 5.6 2.4 3.7 1.6 − 0.46 − 0.41 − 0.0
         Nov. 8.3 5.9 5.6 5.4 2.1 3.4 1.8 − 0.45 − 0.40 0.1         Dec. 8.0 5.7 4.9 5.2 2.0 3.3 1.6 − 0.46 − 0.40 0.2
2020         Jan. 7.9 5.5 5.2 5.2 1.9 3.2 1.2 − 0.45 − 0.39 0.2
         Feb. 8.1 5.6 5.5 6.0 1.9 3.2 0.9 − 0.45 − 0.41 − 0.0         Mar. 10.3 7.4 7.5 ... 3.5 4.2 0.3 − 0.45 − 0.42 0.2
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.45 − 0.25 0.3
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, overnight index average. 6 Euro interbank offered rate. 7 See also footnotes to Table
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by VI.4, p. 43  .8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2. External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which: Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 EUR 1 = USD ...
2018         July + 33,410 + 27,206 − 5,168 + 2,379 − 450 + 13,575 − 16,387 − 4,286 1.1686 99.2 93.8
         Aug. + 32,068 + 20,470 + 58,489 − 7,884 + 85,682 + 14,092 − 36,680 + 3,279 1.1549 99.0 93.4         Sep. + 30,240 + 22,040 + 63,831 + 1,041 − 23,716 + 6,731 + 77,459 + 2,316 1.1659 99.5 93.9
         Oct. + 33,775 + 23,955 − 1,726 + 65,867 − 43,734 + 12,326 − 35,435 − 750 1.1484 98.9 93.4
         Nov. + 28,167 + 25,860 + 23,943 − 67,351 + 30,396 + 17,196 + 40,246 + 3,456 1.1367 98.3 92.9         Dec. + 40,261 + 23,583 + 57,066 − 35,467 + 94,683 + 260 − 5,534 + 3,124 1.1384 98.4 92.7
2019         Jan. + 10,473 + 8,497 + 30,091 + 31,858 − 18,972 + 3,924 + 15,842 − 2,561 1.1416 97.8 92.2
         Feb. + 19,370 + 25,889 − 11,388 + 26,746 − 38,536 − 3,673 + 3,790 + 285 1.1351 97.4 91.6         Mar. + 38,105 + 31,301 + 73,513 + 45,011 − 29,896 + 5,152 + 48,172 + 5,073 1.1302 96.9 91.1
         Apr. + 13,264 + 23,089 − 31,127 − 11,959 − 37,480 + 13,335 + 1,740 + 3,237 1.1238 96.7 90.9
         May + 1,287 + 25,846 + 14,398 − 17,922 − 42,009 + 9,032 + 63,452 + 1,845 1.1185 97.4 91.4         June + 15,879 + 25,267 + 14,660 − 60,901 + 27,790 + 10,433 + 39,607 − 2,269 1.1293 97.9 91.9
         July + 35,768 + 34,580 + 30,267 − 13,099 − 29,605 + 10,242 + 57,280 + 5,449 1.1218 97.5 91.3
         Aug. + 35,646 + 22,677 + 23,388 + 29,665 − 5,375 − 3,915 + 2,383 + 629 1.1126 98.1 91.8         Sep. + 42,862 + 28,309 + 51,725 + 10,029 − 6,270 − 2,121 + 56,027 − 5,939 1.1004 97.4 91.1
         Oct. + 36,572 + 36,347 + 47,250 + 41,883 + 33,729 + 6,352 − 35,610 + 895 1.1053 97.4 90.9
         Nov. + 29,558 + 29,661 + 26,346 − 30,834 + 40,265 + 322 + 20,463 − 3,870 1.1051 96.7 90.2         Dec. + 41,682 + 30,832 + 9,225 − 39,738 + 56,390 − 12,107 + 4,220 + 460 1.1113 96.7 90.1
2020         Jan. + 10,507 + 11,427 + 3,861 + 17,014 − 34,968 + 8,053 + 12,779 + 982 1.1100 96.2 p 89.3
         Feb. + 33,842 + 32,569 + 44,585 + 22,786 + 1,365 + 14,954 + 6,588 − 1,108 1.0905 95.6 p 88.6         Mar. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1063 98.1 p 91.0
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.0862 97.5 p 90.1
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary Tables XII.10 and 12, pp.
82-83   .2Including employee stock options. 3Against the
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 1Monthly averages, see also currencies of the EER-19 group. 4 Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2017 2.5 1.9 2.5 5.7 3.1 2.3 1.5 8.1 1.7 3.8
2018 1.9 1.5 1.5 4.8 1.6 1.7 1.9 8.2 0.8 4.3
2019 1.2 1.4 0.6 4.3 1.0 1.3 1.9 5.5 0.3 2.2
2018         Q4 1.2 1.6 0.9 5.1 0.9 1.3 1.6 3.6 0.6 5.0
2019         Q1 1.4 1.4 0.9 4.8 0.5 1.0 0.8 7.6 0.0 3.1
         Q2 1.2 1.3 − 0.1 3.9 1.1 1.5 3.0 3.9 0.2 2.0
         Q3 1.3 1.6 1.1 4.8 1.8 1.8 3.0 4.5 0.8 2.9
         Q4 1.0 1.3 0.3 3.9 0.5 0.9 0.6 6.2 0.1 1.0
2020         Q1 − 3.3 ... ... ... ... − 5.2 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 2
 Annual percentage change
2017 3.0 2.9 3.4 4.2 3.4 2.5 4.1 − 2.2 3.6 8.6
2018 0.7 1.2 1.0 4.0 3.4 0.4 1.8 − 5.0 0.7 2.0
2019 − 1.3 4.8 r − 4.3 0.1 1.8 0.3 − 0.9 2.8 − 1.0 0.8
2018         Q4 − 2.1 1.1 − 2.3 5.4 1.8 − 1.6 2.6 − 10.9 − 2.3 0.8
2019         Q1 − 0.3 3.1 r − 2.2 5.3 0.3 0.9 1.6 0.9 0.0 − 0.8
         Q2 − 1.3 5.9 r − 5.0 2.1 3.0 1.5 0.4 0.4 − 0.8 1.4
         Q3 − 1.6 4.3 r − 4.9 − 1.6 3.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 4.7 − 1.2 2.5
         Q4 − 2.1 5.9 r − 5.1 − 5.1 0.9 − 0.8 − 5.1 4.7 − 2.1 0.0
2020         Q1 e − 6.0 ... p − 7.2 − 4.5 − 0.1 − 7.5 − 1.2 p 6.6 − 11.3 − 2.3
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 As a percentage of full capacity
2017 82.9 81.8 86.6 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 79.5 76.8 74.5
2018 83.8 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.4
2019 82.3 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2019         Q1 83.5 81.5 86.3 75.2 83.2 85.2 70.2 80.3 78.4 77.0
         Q2 82.7 81.3 85.3 73.5 80.8 85.1 71.7 76.9 77.5 76.9
         Q3 81.8 81.2 83.9 72.5 81.6 84.3 71.8 74.1 77.0 75.9
         Q4 81.0 80.7 82.6 69.9 78.6 83.4 72.1 78.0 76.8 75.5
2020         Q1 80.8 79.7 82.9 70.7 78.4 82.6 72.3 75.5 76.5 74.7
         Q2 69.7 72.8 71.4 63.3 77.2 68.5 67.3 56.7 ... 69.1
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 4
 As a percentage of civilian labour force
2017 9.1 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.4 21.5 6.8 11.2 8.7
2018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 9.0 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.5
2019 7.6 5.4 3.2 4.5 6.7 8.5 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2019         Nov. 7.4 5.2 3.1 4.3 6.7 8.2 16.7 4.7 9.5 5.9
         Dec. 7.3 5.2 3.2 4.4 6.6 8.2 16.4 4.7 9.6 6.4
2020         Jan. 7.3 5.2 e 3.2 4.7 6.6 8.1 16.2 4.9 9.5 6.5
         Feb. 7.3 5.2 e 3.2 4.7 6.5 7.9 16.1 4.8 9.3 6.5
         Mar. 7.4 5.3 e 3.7 ... 6.5 8.4 ... 5.3 8.4 6.9
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.4 ... ...Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
May 2020
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2019         Nov. 1.0 0.4 1.2 1.8 0.8 1.2 0.5 0.8 0.2 2.0
         Dec. 1.3 0.9 1.5 1.8 1.1 1.6 1.1 1.1 0.5 2.1
2020         Jan. 1.4 1.4 1.6 1.6 1.2 1.7 1.1 1.1 0.4 2.2
         Feb. 1.2 1.0 1.7 2.0 1.1 1.6 0.4 0.9 0.2 2.3
         Mar. 0.7 0.4 1.3 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.2 0.5 0.1 1.4
         Apr. e 0.4 e 0.0 0.8 ... e − 0.3 e 0.5 − 0.9 e − 0.2 e 0.1 − 0.1
 
 General government financial balance 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2017 − 1.0 − 0.7 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 2.9 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.8
2018 − 0.5 − 0.8 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 2.3 1.0 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.8
2019 − 0.6 − 1.9 1.4 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 3.0 1.5 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.2
 
 General government debt 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2017 87.8 101.7 65.3 9.3 61.3 98.3 176.2 67.7 134.1 39.3
2018 85.8 99.8 61.9 8.4 59.6 98.1 181.2 63.5 134.8 37.2
2019 84.1 98.6 59.8 8.4 59.4 98.1 176.6 58.8 134.8 36.9
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical are provisional. 1  Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted. 2  Manufacturing,
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations. 3  Manufacturing: quarterly

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1
 Annual percentage change
4.2 1.8 6.5 2.9 2.5 3.5 3.0 4.8 2.9 4.4 20173.6 3.1 7.3 2.6 2.4 2.6 3.9 4.1 2.3 4.1 20183.9 2.3 4.4 1.8 1.6 2.2 2.4 2.4 2.0 3.2 2019
3.9 1.2 8.2 2.2 2.5 2.1 3.3 3.8 2.4 3.4 2018          Q4
4.2 0.3 5.8 1.8 2.0 2.4 3.7 3.3 2.5 3.2 2019          Q1
3.8 2.9 4.6 1.9 1.9 1.9 2.4 2.5 1.8 3.1          Q23.8 3.0 3.0 2.0 1.7 2.1 1.5 2.4 1.9 3.5          Q33.8 3.0 4.4 1.6 0.9 2.3 2.1 1.7 1.7 3.2          Q4
... ... ... ... − 2.7 ... ... ... − 3.8 ... 2020          Q1
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
6.8 3.7 8.8 1.3 5.8 3.5 3.3 8.1 3.2 8.1 20175.2 − 1.1 1.2 0.6 4.9 0.1 4.4 5.3 0.4 6.9 20183.5 − 3.6 1.1 − 0.9 0.2 − 2.4 0.5 3.0 0.5 4.1 2019
5.6 − 1.9 4.5 − 1.6 4.7 − 1.4 4.6 1.4 − 2.9 6.0 2018          Q4
4.7 − 1.6 − 2.3 − 1.4 5.7 − 4.1 6.8 3.9 − 0.2 6.4 2019          Q1
5.5 − 1.3 0.1 − 1.4 0.0 − 2.2 2.9 3.4 1.4 2.4          Q24.1 − 2.3 3.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 2.9 2.6 0.7 4.4          Q3
− 0.1 − 9.1 2.5 − 0.9 − 4.2 0.5 − 4.7 2.0 0.3 3.3          Q4
− 1.8
p − 13.7 p 10.8 p − 1.5 ... − 1.2 − 7.3 p − 2.0 p − 5.9 ... 2020          Q1
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 201777.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 201877.3 79.8 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
77.5 80.1 77.1 84.4 87.0 77.8 88.2 85.2 80.8 61.5 2019          Q1
76.9 79.7 78.2 84.3 87.2 79.4 89.1 84.8 80.4 66.0          Q277.5 80.3 75.9 84.1 86.7 80.1 89.4 83.6 80.8 64.2          Q377.2 79.0 78.0 84.0 85.3 77.4 84.1 83.8 79.3 63.6          Q4
76.4 83.4 78.8 83.2 84.8 80.6 82.2 83.0 80.0 63.3 2020          Q1
70.0 53.8 61.1 75.2 73.9 71.7 77.1 71.9 70.9 47.4          Q2
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
7.1 5.6 4.0 4.9 5.6 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.3 11.1 20176.2 5.5 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 20186.3 5.6 3.4 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
6.5 5.6 3.4 3.5 4.2 6.7 5.6 4.1 13.8 6.5 2019          Nov.
6.4 5.6 3.3 3.2 4.2 6.7 5.6 3.8 13.7 6.3          Dec.
6.6 5.6 3.4 3.0 4.3 6.8 5.4 3.7 13.8 5.9 2020          Jan.
6.6 5.7 3.4 2.9 4.5 6.4 5.5 3.6 13.6 5.8          Feb.7.1 6.5 3.5 2.9 4.5 ... 5.6 3.8 14.5 6.7          Mar.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Apr.Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
May 2020
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
 Annual percentage change
3.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 20172.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 20182.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
1.7 1.0 1.3 2.6 1.2 0.2 3.2 1.4 0.5 0.5 2019          Nov.
2.7 1.8 1.3 2.8 1.8 0.4 3.2 2.0 0.8 0.7          Dec.
3.0 2.5 1.4 1.7 2.2 0.8 3.2 2.3 1.1 0.7 2020          Jan.
2.8 1.8 1.1 1.3 2.2 0.5 3.1 2.0 0.9 1.0          Feb.1.7 0.3 1.2 1.1 1.6 0.1 2.4 0.7 0.1 0.1          Mar.
0.9 − 0.8
e 1.4 1.0 ... 0.1 2.2 − 1.3 e − 0.6 e − 1.2          Apr.
General government financial balance 5
As a percentage of GDP
0.5 1.3 3.3 1.3 − 0.8 − 3.0 − 1.0 0.0 − 3.0 2.0 20170.6 3.1 1.9 1.4 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.7 20180.3 2.2 0.5 1.7 0.7 0.2 − 1.3 0.5 − 2.8 1.7 2019
General government debt 5
As a percentage of GDP
39.1 22.3 50.3 56.9 78.3 126.1 51.3 74.1 98.6 93.9 201733.8 21.0 45.6 52.4 74.0 122.0 49.4 70.4 97.6 100.6 201836.3 22.1 43.1 48.6 70.4 117.7 48.0 66.1 95.5 95.5 2019
data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter. 4Monthly data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5  According to Maastricht Treaty definition. 
data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
May 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2018         Aug. − 2.3 − 13.6 − 4.8 11.3 22.6 − 23.1 2.2 25.3 5.0 − 8.3 − 0.4 1.8 12.0
         Sep. 24.0 21.3 − 12.3 2.7 6.9 65.8 − 22.9 − 88.7 25.6 − 12.5 − 0.5 21.5 17.1
         Oct. 11.8 17.3 3.1 − 5.5 − 7.3 − 18.3 65.0 83.2 7.4 − 6.7 − 0.2 2.9 11.5
         Nov. 92.0 91.6 12.1 0.4 2.0 74.6 37.5 − 37.1 4.0 − 4.2 − 1.0 3.6 5.6
         Dec. − 88.9 − 69.4 − 20.9 − 19.5 − 21.4 4.1 − 159.8 − 163.9 6.9 16.5 0.1 − 8.2 − 1.5
2019         Jan. 124.8 69.6 14.5 55.3 43.7 1.9 189.2 187.3 19.8 − 8.8 0.1 26.2 2.3
         Feb. 53.9 42.7 17.6 11.2 24.8 27.4 − 26.0 − 53.4 20.4 0.3 − 0.1 25.8 − 5.5
         Mar. 15.0 41.0 1.4 − 26.0 − 26.1 74.7 0.4 − 74.3 8.8 − 2.4 0.0 − 4.2 15.3
         Apr. 69.1 90.1 27.1 − 21.0 − 20.5 − 15.7 107.8 123.5 − 15.9 − 5.0 0.2 − 10.2 − 0.9
         May 39.0 36.6 12.7 2.4 3.2 63.5 69.9 6.3 11.0 − 2.9 0.6 7.6 5.7
         June − 0.4 23.0 − 13.5 − 23.4 − 22.6 78.1 − 15.3 − 93.5 41.8 19.9 1.1 6.2 14.7
         July 49.7 61.3 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 14.3 35.0 165.1 130.1 0.7 − 21.9 0.4 5.0 17.2
         Aug. 25.2 19.2 − 7.9 5.9 5.7 − 3.9 26.6 30.5 − 16.2 − 15.5 − 0.4 − 7.3 7.0
         Sep. 6.6 26.5 25.9 − 19.9 − 13.7 41.8 − 45.7 − 87.5 36.1 25.1 − 1.1 − 1.4 13.5
         Oct. 43.6 63.1 − 9.3 − 19.6 − 25.7 17.3 16.3 − 1.0 − 11.3 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 20.0 12.1
         Nov. 54.5 55.0 31.0 − 0.5 3.3 10.4 − 21.6 − 32.0 19.1 0.8 − 0.8 4.8 14.3
         Dec. − 118.1 − 79.2 − 24.9 − 38.9 − 20.6 − 20.2 − 299.1 − 278.9 − 7.6 6.3 − 1.4 − 5.9 − 6.7
2020         Jan. 101.8 51.7 1.9 50.2 28.0 22.9 295.5 272.6 − 5.4 − 6.2 − 1.0 13.1 − 11.4
         Feb. 62.8 52.2 20.1 10.7 22.1 36.7 88.2 51.6 2.7 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 3.2 9.6
         Mar. 310.2 169.4 − 24.0 140.7 126.6 − 5.2 100.1 105.3 − 32.3 0.3 − 1.0 − 44.2 12.6
  
  
b) German contribution
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2018         Aug. 4.1 5.7 − 8.7 − 1.6 2.8 − 8.5 − 11.6 − 3.1 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 1.7 1.8
         Sep. 19.3 18.3 1.8 1.0 4.1 − 4.1 7.9 12.0 12.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 7.6 7.8
         Oct. 7.0 8.7 1.4 − 1.7 − 5.0 34.2 2.8 − 31.4 1.6 0.1 − 0.5 4.1 − 2.0
         Nov. 20.0 18.5 0.9 1.5 2.5 15.1 − 3.7 − 18.8 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 3.0 − 1.4
         Dec. − 5.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 33.5 3.6 37.1 − 1.1 0.7 − 0.3 − 9.1 7.5
2019         Jan. 16.3 15.0 0.3 1.3 − 1.3 67.9 21.1 − 46.8 2.1 − 5.7 − 0.5 14.0 − 5.7
         Feb. 12.5 16.4 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 1.4 24.3 − 15.4 − 39.6 6.6 − 0.8 0.1 12.6 − 5.2
         Mar. 9.7 17.2 0.1 − 7.5 − 4.8 − 32.1 13.9 46.1 − 4.0 − 3.2 0.2 − 4.4 3.4
         Apr. 7.6 12.7 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 6.1 19.2 14.8 − 4.5 − 6.6 − 2.7 0.2 − 4.0 0.0
         May 19.3 19.8 0.5 − 0.5 1.4 11.8 2.4 − 9.3 9.1 − 1.7 0.6 7.5 2.6
         June 25.7 26.4 4.3 − 0.7 1.2 − 8.0 10.3 18.3 11.5 1.5 0.6 2.4 7.1
         July 9.5 7.8 0.0 1.6 − 0.8 42.6 6.3 − 36.4 0.8 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 4.4
         Aug. 25.2 19.9 1.0 5.2 5.5 − 13.6 2.4 16.0 − 6.2 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 3.7 2.3
         Sep. 5.7 11.8 − 0.8 − 6.1 − 1.3 − 2.8 − 24.3 − 21.5 4.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.0 5.6
         Oct. 10.2 11.0 1.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 56.3 2.4 − 53.9 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 3.6 2.5
         Nov. 25.3 20.4 5.2 4.9 3.9 − 23.5 − 17.6 5.9 3.0 − 1.9 − 0.9 1.6 4.2
         Dec. − 4.4 1.5 0.8 − 5.9 − 1.1 − 38.9 − 47.5 − 8.6 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 5.8 2.7
2020         Jan. 16.3 9.5 1.9 6.8 2.6 74.7 37.7 − 37.0 − 9.0 − 2.6 − 1.5 3.8 − 8.6
         Feb. 24.5 25.4 4.3 − 0.9 1.2 − 9.4 8.9 18.4 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.6 4.7 − 1.7
         Mar. 46.8 30.9 − 6.1 15.9 14.3 − 34.3 18.5 52.7 − 8.6 − 3.8 − 0.7 − 8.3 4.2
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report, p. 30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
May 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 a) Euro area 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which: ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl. money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
2.9 − 38.4 − 5.2 − 1.5 − 0.0 2.9 − 3.0 − 6.6 5.2 3.8 − 1.6 1.8 2018          Aug.
40.6 6.6 − 17.1 45.5 69.3 2.1 67.2 − 20.6 − 3.2 − 10.7 − 21.1 − 0.9          Sep.
− 38.8 − 13.1 − 38.0 13.9 8.6 1.8 6.9 8.3 − 3.0 − 10.2 25.3 − 1.3          Oct.
7.3 67.0 − 88.3 88.1 97.1 5.3 91.8 − 11.2 2.1 31.5 0.3 − 2.6          Nov.
− 59.9 − 85.4 − 53.6 49.9 49.0 18.0 31.1 − 4.7 5.5 − 14.2 1.3 7.6          Dec.
66.8 60.6 − − 20.4 − 22.4 − 39.9 − 13.1 − 26.8 3.3 14.2 15.6 5.4 − 7.1 2019          Jan.
18.6 3.2 − 39.2 46.4 40.2 3.2 37.0 − 0.4 6.6 0.2 − 8.3 − 0.0          Feb.
− 21.7 − 20.1 − 122.6 139.7 133.4 6.2 127.3 − 6.5 12.8 − 7.3 0.7 − 19.0          Mar.
− 33.2 28.6 − 73.8 55.5 46.3 7.4 38.9 2.5 6.7 22.3 14.3 − 0.4          Apr.
17.8 − 7.4 − 81.0 88.6 87.6 5.1 82.5 − 12.4 13.4 − 7.7 − 9.7 5.8          May33.6 − 71.2 − 73.5 87.3 98.4 7.5 90.8 − 14.5 3.4 − 20.7 − 11.9 − 2.0          June
− 13.0 47.0 − 50.0 31.1 25.7 9.0 16.7 1.4 4.0 17.9 21.1 − 5.2          July
6.3 − 81.9 − 113.1 110.1 86.1 1.3 84.7 19.1 4.9 4.7 18.0 − 13.5          Aug.5.8 43.0 − − 36.6 − 18.6 − 1.3 3.2 − 4.4 − 15.6 − 1.7 − 17.9 − 13.9 − 0.4          Sep.
− 37.7 51.3 − 58.5 45.7 60.3 3.0 57.3 − 10.2 − 4.5 42.1 1.4 6.5          Oct.
− 1.1 − 53.3 − 100.1 102.9 122.0 6.5 115.5 − 17.6 − 1.5 − 14.7 3.1 − 0.7          Nov.− 66.5 − 25.8 − − 38.3 2.3 7.2 16.3 − 9.2 − 9.4 4.4 − 33.6 − 22.5 − 17.3          Dec.
84.7 41.4 − 4.0 − 44.7 − 51.8 − 7.3 − 44.6 − 0.6 7.8 − 7.1 34.3 13.7 2020          Jan.
43.7 − 42.6 − 95.7 82.5 83.6 5.2 78.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 19.7 − 4.8 5.0          Feb.
5.1 − 15.5 − 347.8 319.9 298.5 23.7 274.8 16.8 4.6 29.8 − 24.0 27.7          Mar.
 
 
  b) German contribution 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  10 
of which: Components of the money stockIntra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl. money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
13.7 − 14.2 5.3 0.5 − 0.4 2.4 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 1.7 2018          Aug.
12.2 − 32.9 3.9 − 0.3 23.8 27.3 − 2.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.5          Sep.
− 17.8 43.5 3.8 0.1 13.8 11.1 − 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.0 2.3          Oct.
9.7 − 8.2 2.5 1.0 32.8 38.6 − 4.1 0.5 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.5          Nov.
− 5.4 − 27.6 4.0 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.3 − 3.3 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.8          Dec.
− 18.5 103.9 − 9.6 7.5 − 3.4 − 14.3 9.6 0.3 0.9 0.0 0.0 2019          Jan.
− 2.7 20.3 2.9 0.4 12.5 8.3 3.6 1.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7          Feb.
17.7 − 58.0 2.5 1.2 21.8 20.9 − 1.5 2.2 0.0 − 0.2 0.3          Mar.
− 15.2 33.9 3.9 2.1 14.7 17.9 − 3.7 0.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.6          Apr.
19.0 − 20.1 4.0 0.8 23.0 23.8 0.4 − 0.3 − 1.3 0.1 0.4          May
3.7 − 7.7 3.0 2.1 10.3 10.3 − 1.4 − 0.4 1.7 − 0.0 0.2          June
− 27.1 74.0 3.6 3.2 4.4 7.2 − 3.3 − 0.6 1.0 0.1 0.1          July
10.7 − 26.8 5.8 − 0.7 33.9 26.1 5.7 − 1.2 3.1 0.0 0.3          Aug.
9.9 − 6.6 4.9 0.8 − 4.7 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 0.1 1.7          Sep.
− 19.8 74.2 4.3 0.2 14.7 18.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.3          Oct.
8.2 − 29.5 4.5 0.7 20.0 24.1 − 3.4 − 0.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2          Nov.
− 2.0 − 32.4 4.9 3.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 − 6.6 0.6 1.8 − 0.1 0.0          Dec.
− 5.6 108.0 2.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 7.8 5.9 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 3.4 2020          Jan.
24.4 − 25.0 4.9 0.1 14.5 17.7 1.2 − 1.7 − 0.6 0.1 − 2.2          Feb.
7.7 − 72.1 12.2 0.9 85.6 93.3 − 0.6 − 3.4 − 0.3 0.4 − 3.8          Mar.
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
May 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2018         Feb. 26,361.1 17,897.8 13,316.5 11,070.0 1,456.5 790.0 4,581.2 1,025.2 3,556.0 5,324.6 3,138.7
         Mar. 26,366.0 17,959.2 13,358.0 11,111.1 1,466.5 780.4 4,601.1 1,023.3 3,577.8 5,250.6 3,156.2
         Apr. 26,501.9 18,032.8 13,432.9 11,127.7 1,490.1 815.1 4,599.9 1,025.1 3,574.8 5,321.5 3,147.6
         May 26,904.3 18,104.1 13,514.0 11,201.8 1,504.4 807.8 4,590.1 1,019.9 3,570.2 5,531.8 3,268.5
         June 26,765.0 18,099.1 13,482.4 11,193.8 1,501.5 787.1 4,616.7 1,016.8 3,599.9 5,448.6 3,217.3
         July 26,770.5 18,156.1 13,547.1 11,235.8 1,523.9 787.3 4,609.0 1,012.7 3,596.3 5,455.3 3,159.0
         Aug. 26,807.8 18,127.6 13,530.9 11,227.3 1,524.1 779.5 4,596.7 1,001.7 3,595.0 5,477.5 3,202.7
         Sep. 26,763.1 18,146.6 13,538.6 11,248.0 1,508.3 782.3 4,608.1 1,000.7 3,607.4 5,457.8 3,158.6
         Oct. 27,077.1 18,151.7 13,555.3 11,266.2 1,510.9 778.1 4,596.4 1,002.6 3,593.8 5,667.4 3,258.0
         Nov. 27,216.6 18,243.5 13,638.0 11,337.8 1,516.2 784.1 4,605.5 1,001.0 3,604.5 5,694.7 3,278.5
         Dec. 26,990.0 18,173.2 13,568.6 11,295.5 1,502.0 771.2 4,604.5 1,002.8 3,601.8 5,557.1 3,259.8
2019         Jan. 27,392.4 18,309.2 13,637.5 11,345.0 1,517.2 775.3 4,671.7 1,015.9 3,655.8 5,770.3 3,313.0
         Feb. 27,436.4 18,354.8 13,683.9 11,368.2 1,528.4 787.3 4,670.9 1,001.2 3,669.6 5,763.7 3,317.9
         Mar. 27,733.7 18,397.3 13,735.6 11,413.7 1,526.2 795.7 4,661.7 1,001.4 3,660.2 5,841.5 3,494.9
         Apr. 27,886.9 18,468.4 13,828.8 11,472.8 1,529.9 826.1 4,639.6 1,001.1 3,638.6 5,942.3 3,476.2
         May 28,185.5 18,497.0 13,854.0 11,494.5 1,549.1 810.4 4,643.0 1,000.3 3,642.7 6,027.6 3,660.8
         June 28,305.8 18,522.1 13,875.0 11,521.2 1,552.6 801.2 4,647.1 1,000.0 3,647.1 5,991.6 3,792.1
         July 28,772.2 18,601.9 13,939.4 11,583.8 1,550.9 804.7 4,662.6 1,002.8 3,659.7 6,208.7 3,961.6
         Aug. 29,374.0 18,658.9 13,961.4 11,612.7 1,549.5 799.3 4,697.5 1,003.1 3,694.4 6,311.4 4,403.7
         Sep. 29,193.7 18,651.7 13,971.3 11,595.9 1,566.7 808.7 4,680.3 996.7 3,683.7 6,300.2 4,241.9
         Oct. 28,965.5 18,689.3 14,042.5 11,660.4 1,550.6 831.5 4,646.7 1,002.5 3,644.2 6,259.5 4,016.8
         Nov. 29,016.8 18,729.5 14,099.5 11,684.5 1,569.3 845.7 4,630.0 998.6 3,631.4 6,270.8 4,016.6
         Dec. 28,328.2 18,591.7 14,008.9 11,617.0 1,544.2 847.6 4,582.8 981.0 3,601.8 5,930.7 3,805.8
2020         Jan. 29,021.2 18,722.7 14,062.9 11,668.7 1,543.3 850.9 4,659.8 1,003.4 3,656.4 6,301.9 3,996.6
         Feb. 29,487.8 18,769.7 14,104.3 11,699.4 1,563.5 841.4 4,665.4 992.2 3,673.2 6,414.0 4,304.1
         Mar. 30,018.7 19,007.6 14,235.0 11,881.2 1,557.3 796.6 4,772.5 1,006.6 3,766.0 6,484.9 4,526.3
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2018         Feb. 6,051.9 4,220.1 3,253.3 2,799.4 183.1 270.8 966.8 311.4 655.4 1,195.1 636.8
         Mar. 6,053.7 4,228.1 3,260.9 2,809.5 183.0 268.4 967.2 309.7 657.5 1,184.4 641.2
         Apr. 6,046.4 4,233.3 3,267.7 2,816.0 184.4 267.4 965.6 310.5 655.0 1,178.5 634.6
         May 6,148.1 4,248.4 3,280.8 2,824.1 186.8 269.8 967.6 306.5 661.1 1,226.7 673.0
         June 6,120.9 4,264.2 3,297.3 2,838.8 187.5 271.0 966.9 304.3 662.7 1,201.8 654.9
         July 6,089.3 4,274.2 3,307.9 2,849.4 187.0 271.5 966.3 304.9 661.4 1,194.2 620.9
         Aug. 6,121.9 4,279.7 3,313.6 2,863.9 183.8 265.9 966.0 300.5 665.5 1,189.8 652.4
         Sep. 6,119.7 4,295.4 3,331.0 2,880.3 184.8 265.9 964.4 297.5 666.9 1,194.5 629.8
         Oct. 6,154.2 4,303.6 3,339.1 2,888.2 185.3 265.6 964.5 300.8 663.7 1,208.1 642.4
         Nov. 6,177.4 4,323.4 3,356.8 2,905.6 188.1 263.0 966.7 299.8 666.9 1,202.7 651.3
         Dec. 6,194.1 4,317.4 3,353.6 2,903.7 187.8 262.2 963.7 296.4 667.3 1,208.5 668.2
2019         Jan. 6,252.9 4,333.5 3,366.6 2,917.4 188.8 260.4 966.9 299.2 667.7 1,232.6 686.9
         Feb. 6,243.9 4,343.3 3,382.0 2,932.6 189.2 260.2 961.3 296.6 664.7 1,221.0 679.6
         Mar. 6,392.0 4,373.9 3,414.7 2,963.7 189.7 261.3 959.2 293.9 665.3 1,265.4 752.8
         Apr. 6,408.7 4,379.3 3,427.3 2,976.4 189.1 261.9 951.9 294.8 657.1 1,278.2 751.2
         May 6,524.8 4,402.6 3,446.8 2,995.6 190.0 261.1 955.8 293.1 662.8 1,284.5 837.7
         June 6,619.8 4,431.8 3,473.1 3,017.0 194.4 261.7 958.6 291.2 667.5 1,294.2 893.7
         July 6,698.2 4,445.3 3,481.1 3,024.8 194.0 262.3 964.2 293.7 670.5 1,312.3 940.7
         Aug. 6,973.5 4,478.6 3,501.8 3,044.3 196.5 261.0 976.8 293.5 683.3 1,330.9 1,163.9
         Sep. 6,872.6 4,462.9 3,497.0 3,040.4 196.0 260.5 965.9 288.3 677.6 1,311.9 1,097.8
         Oct. 6,769.9 4,466.0 3,506.4 3,049.0 195.9 261.4 959.5 291.6 667.9 1,303.7 1,000.3
         Nov. 6,785.4 4,490.1 3,527.4 3,064.8 199.7 262.9 962.6 292.6 670.0 1,289.6 1,005.8
         Dec. 6,716.1 4,480.4 3,527.3 3,064.0 197.9 265.4 953.1 288.5 664.6 1,236.4 999.3
2020         Jan. 6,847.7 4,503.3 3,537.5 3,071.5 198.2 267.8 965.8 292.8 673.0 1,290.1 1,054.4
         Feb. 7,028.5 4,531.0 3,562.2 3,092.6 203.2 266.4 968.8 290.8 678.0 1,306.1 1,191.4
         Mar. 7,146.8 4,567.1 3,589.0 3,128.9 202.1 258.0 978.1 292.4 685.7 1,321.4 1,258.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12   ).
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
May 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which: up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,108.3 12,329.7 11,524.1 11,601.3 6,351.7 831.2 232.1 1,916.0 2,215.2 55.1 2018          Feb.
1,117.0 12,393.6 11,580.0 11,659.1 6,416.1 831.4 226.4 1,909.0 2,221.4 54.8          Mar.
1,121.2 12,401.3 11,610.5 11,679.0 6,454.0 817.6 222.3 1,907.3 2,223.4 54.4          Apr.
1,126.1 12,502.4 11,690.4 11,761.7 6,547.6 810.5 217.7 1,901.0 2,231.0 54.0          May1,137.6 12,613.5 11,776.6 11,843.5 6,623.2 821.3 214.9 1,895.3 2,235.2 53.7          June
1,145.3 12,605.9 11,760.3 11,825.5 6,603.4 817.0 212.1 1,900.1 2,239.8 53.1          July
1,148.3 12,595.3 11,752.9 11,802.7 6,593.5 812.0 208.9 1,890.6 2,245.0 52.7          Aug.1,150.4 12,662.2 11,780.0 11,831.5 6,656.7 796.3 205.9 1,878.0 2,242.3 52.3          Sep.
1,152.2 12,639.5 11,788.3 11,848.3 6,668.8 812.8 203.6 1,872.0 2,239.0 52.1          Oct.
1,157.5 12,719.4 11,861.8 11,912.4 6,750.6 801.6 200.7 1,866.9 2,241.2 51.3          Nov.1,175.4 12,713.3 11,926.3 11,989.2 6,799.1 800.5 200.7 1,888.7 2,248.7 51.5          Dec.
1,162.4 12,768.0 11,911.1 11,976.6 6,777.8 798.0 199.4 1,888.0 2,262.2 51.3 2019          Jan.
1,165.6 12,833.0 11,959.7 12,005.5 6,806.3 795.2 196.8 1,887.9 2,268.0 51.2          Feb.1,171.7 12,947.7 12,078.5 12,135.0 6,931.6 785.8 199.5 1,886.3 2,280.5 51.3          Mar.
1,179.1 12,958.1 12,120.9 12,180.6 6,970.5 788.5 201.8 1,880.4 2,287.8 51.5          Apr.
1,184.2 13,059.3 12,198.6 12,257.0 7,049.7 775.7 201.4 1,876.7 2,301.5 52.1          May1,191.7 13,181.7 12,288.1 12,335.7 7,122.9 762.3 198.3 1,894.2 2,304.7 53.2          June
1,200.7 13,178.8 12,300.1 12,350.5 7,148.0 767.4 198.9 1,873.6 2,309.0 53.7          July
1,202.0 13,283.3 12,388.8 12,438.5 7,227.7 782.1 201.0 1,860.5 2,313.8 53.4          Aug.1,205.2 13,298.4 12,383.2 12,446.2 7,222.9 768.9 200.8 1,886.9 2,313.7 53.0          Sep.
1,208.2 13,292.6 12,422.6 12,487.2 7,284.7 758.3 201.3 1,883.1 2,310.5 49.4          Oct.
1,214.7 13,388.9 12,520.7 12,572.4 7,387.8 740.6 200.6 1,885.1 2,309.7 48.6          Nov.1,231.1 13,311.3 12,508.3 12,583.4 7,391.9 738.4 200.2 1,890.2 2,315.3 47.4          Dec.
1,223.8 13,359.2 12,460.0 12,555.1 7,363.1 733.7 200.1 1,888.5 2,323.6 46.0 2020          Jan.
1,229.0 13,476.4 12,527.8 12,614.8 7,430.4 731.0 198.5 1,886.2 2,323.4 45.3          Feb.1,252.7 13,770.5 12,778.1 12,898.7 7,693.5 759.2 192.5 1,882.4 2,327.9 43.2          Mar.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
249.8 3,642.4 3,523.0 3,388.4 1,995.9 160.2 35.3 615.5 540.0 41.5 2018          Feb.
248.3 3,652.2 3,524.1 3,389.6 1,998.1 164.6 34.2 612.1 539.4 41.0          Mar.
250.3 3,641.8 3,529.8 3,395.0 2,013.5 157.6 33.6 610.6 539.1 40.6          Apr.
250.2 3,693.8 3,568.4 3,425.0 2,048.0 154.6 33.0 610.2 539.0 40.3          May252.7 3,716.5 3,574.0 3,423.0 2,039.4 165.5 32.6 607.2 538.5 39.8          June
256.0 3,694.1 3,571.0 3,429.7 2,053.1 161.2 32.2 605.8 538.0 39.4          July
256.4 3,703.1 3,568.1 3,417.3 2,051.8 153.7 34.0 601.1 537.7 38.9          Aug.256.1 3,737.2 3,588.3 3,437.1 2,076.9 153.2 33.2 597.4 537.8 38.6          Sep.
256.3 3,730.6 3,595.8 3,453.9 2,092.2 155.1 33.6 596.9 538.0 38.1          Oct.
257.2 3,774.2 3,632.0 3,482.3 2,127.4 149.8 33.2 595.9 538.5 37.4          Nov.260.0 3,766.4 3,629.3 3,481.1 2,120.4 152.5 33.7 596.7 540.6 37.2          Dec.
267.6 3,737.2 3,622.2 3,471.2 2,113.7 154.3 33.5 592.1 540.9 36.7 2019          Jan.
268.0 3,747.2 3,634.2 3,474.2 2,117.5 153.9 33.2 591.0 541.8 36.7          Feb.269.1 3,785.8 3,652.3 3,490.2 2,136.2 152.2 33.0 587.7 544.0 37.1          Mar.
271.3 3,782.3 3,667.4 3,506.4 2,156.4 151.2 32.8 584.8 544.1 37.2          Apr.
272.1 3,824.2 3,689.1 3,523.2 2,176.6 149.4 32.7 582.9 543.7 37.9          May274.2 3,837.7 3,697.8 3,528.6 2,183.2 147.8 32.3 583.5 543.3 38.4          June
277.3 3,812.4 3,701.4 3,532.6 2,191.7 147.0 31.6 581.4 542.7 38.1          July
276.6 3,849.7 3,730.3 3,550.9 2,213.2 149.7 31.7 576.9 541.5 37.8          Aug.277.4 3,853.5 3,722.1 3,546.0 2,213.9 146.4 31.5 576.1 540.8 37.2          Sep.
277.6 3,848.5 3,734.8 3,571.5 2,240.3 148.6 31.2 575.2 539.9 36.4          Oct.
278.4 3,874.7 3,753.7 3,580.0 2,257.7 143.0 30.8 573.7 539.2 35.6          Nov.281.8 3,863.9 3,744.4 3,574.3 2,250.5 144.8 31.0 573.5 540.0 34.5          Dec.
281.2 3,850.4 3,733.8 3,572.3 2,255.2 145.3 31.0 570.6 537.2 33.0 2020          Jan.
281.3 3,890.4 3,750.4 3,576.3 2,265.3 142.0 31.3 569.8 535.4 32.5          Feb.282.2 3,982.8 3,830.2 3,655.2 2,346.4 147.3 30.5 567.2 532.0 31.8          Mar.
volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra -Eurosystem
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability ite ms“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
May 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont’d)
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which: market of which:
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund Denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2018         Feb. 344.1 384.3 192.0 83.4 30.4 47.8 25.8 4.8 229.1 228.6 510.3 2,075.7 1,430.3
         Mar. 358.1 376.4 181.7 85.8 29.5 48.6 25.9 4.8 231.7 231.2 508.8 2,079.3 1,435.3
         Apr. 338.2 384.1 190.5 84.7 28.4 49.7 26.0 4.7 227.6 227.1 520.2 2,087.8 1,436.3
         May 345.3 395.4 196.6 87.2 29.8 51.0 26.0 4.7 253.0 252.5 507.7 2,100.8 1,439.0
         June 366.7 403.3 199.6 91.7 29.9 51.9 25.7 4.7 247.4 246.8 498.4 2,095.8 1,438.6
         July 374.6 405.8 203.3 88.4 30.9 52.8 25.7 4.7 254.0 253.5 509.0 2,077.8 1,432.3
         Aug. 377.4 415.1 208.7 90.6 31.0 54.4 25.9 4.6 257.8 257.3 507.3 2,084.9 1,439.1
         Sep. 414.4 416.3 211.2 87.8 32.4 54.8 25.5 4.6 247.2 246.7 486.2 2,109.6 1,457.3
         Oct. 375.6 415.5 213.2 84.0 32.3 55.7 25.8 4.5 237.4 236.9 511.5 2,165.4 1,474.6
         Nov. 383.1 423.9 218.9 85.1 33.6 56.3 25.7 4.3 268.8 268.4 511.8 2,162.9 1,469.0
         Dec. 322.5 401.6 203.7 78.7 34.2 56.9 23.8 4.3 254.5 254.2 513.3 2,158.0 1,471.8
2019         Jan. 389.2 402.2 196.8 86.0 34.9 55.8 24.2 4.5 270.1 269.6 524.5 2,176.2 1,484.5
         Feb. 407.9 419.6 207.3 92.2 34.2 56.3 25.1 4.5 270.5 269.7 516.3 2,205.0 1,506.2
         Mar. 386.0 426.7 212.0 92.6 35.4 56.7 25.5 4.4 272.7 272.3 520.2 2,185.7 1,489.6
         Apr. 352.9 424.6 212.2 91.4 34.5 56.9 25.3 4.4 295.0 294.6 532.3 2,174.9 1,487.9
         May 370.7 431.6 216.9 94.9 33.4 57.0 25.1 4.3 287.4 287.0 522.6 2,190.9 1,497.2
         June 404.2 441.8 224.4 94.6 35.1 58.1 25.2 4.4 266.0 265.7 510.6 2,182.1 1,493.8
         July 391.2 437.1 221.5 93.8 34.1 58.2 25.2 4.4 284.1 283.8 533.0 2,189.0 1,492.6
         Aug. 397.4 447.4 228.3 97.2 34.1 58.3 25.3 4.3 289.0 288.5 550.9 2,173.5 1,484.1
         Sep. 402.9 449.3 231.4 98.0 31.7 58.9 25.0 4.2 257.0 256.5 537.1 2,181.1 1,484.6
         Oct. 365.0 440.5 224.5 95.5 32.3 59.1 25.2 3.9 298.8 298.3 538.6 2,174.4 1,488.3
         Nov. 363.9 452.6 235.7 95.5 33.8 59.1 24.8 3.8 284.3 283.7 541.6 2,187.7 1,492.9
         Dec. 297.4 430.4 224.7 85.9 33.7 59.1 23.6 3.6 250.3 249.8 520.3 2,155.0 1,487.4
2020         Jan. 381.9 422.2 209.6 92.6 33.2 59.5 23.2 4.1 243.4 242.9 554.7 2,188.7 1,500.7
         Feb. 425.6 436.0 219.8 96.8 32.8 59.2 23.3 4.0 263.3 262.7 550.0 2,192.6 1,503.3
         Mar. 430.6 441.3 232.8 93.2 30.9 58.1 22.3 3.9 293.1 292.5 525.9 2,180.2 1,489.4
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2018         Feb. 46.7 207.4 66.3 69.2 26.8 41.5 3.0 0.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 522.7 263.8
         Mar. 55.0 207.6 63.2 72.7 25.8 42.3 3.0 0.6 2.9 2.9 2.2 523.5 265.6
         Apr. 39.7 207.0 63.1 72.5 24.4 43.3 3.0 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 524.1 270.0
         May 51.4 217.4 68.6 74.9 25.7 44.5 3.1 0.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 536.8 274.3
         June 69.1 224.5 70.7 79.2 25.6 45.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 2.0 531.3 274.8
         July 48.1 216.4 63.4 76.6 26.5 46.2 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.8 1.9 526.6 277.0
         Aug. 61.7 224.1 67.3 78.9 26.4 47.7 3.1 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.9 527.7 282.0
         Sep. 73.9 226.2 69.6 76.9 27.8 48.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.9 536.3 287.6
         Oct. 56.1 220.6 66.1 73.9 28.0 48.9 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 1.9 544.5 286.9
         Nov. 65.7 226.3 69.4 74.8 28.7 49.7 3.1 0.7 1.3 1.3 2.2 544.9 290.3
         Dec. 60.3 225.0 74.6 67.5 29.3 49.9 3.0 0.6 0.8 0.8 2.2 532.5 283.4
2019         Jan. 41.8 224.2 67.1 74.8 30.0 48.7 3.0 0.6 1.7 1.7 2.2 546.6 294.1
         Feb. 38.8 234.3 71.8 80.3 29.3 49.1 3.1 0.6 2.0 2.0 2.2 560.4 302.9
         Mar. 56.4 239.2 75.9 80.0 30.3 49.4 3.1 0.6 11.4 11.4 2.0 557.3 298.2
         Apr. 41.2 234.7 73.6 78.4 29.4 49.6 3.1 0.6 12.5 12.5 1.9 552.8 293.5
         May 60.3 240.7 77.4 81.7 28.3 49.6 3.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 2.0 560.1 300.1
         June 64.0 245.1 80.4 81.5 29.0 50.6 3.1 0.5 12.9 12.9 2.0 558.0 301.8
         July 36.9 242.9 79.6 80.7 28.2 50.8 3.1 0.5 13.9 13.9 2.0 559.4 296.9
         Aug. 47.6 251.2 84.7 83.8 28.1 50.9 3.2 0.5 16.9 16.7 2.0 557.3 295.0
         Sep. 57.3 250.3 84.6 85.0 25.8 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.5 1.3 2.2 563.5 297.7
         Oct. 37.4 239.6 76.3 82.4 26.1 51.3 3.1 0.5 1.2 1.0 2.1 555.2 299.2
         Nov. 45.4 249.3 83.4 83.9 27.4 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.7 1.5 1.9 560.4 302.2
         Dec. 43.4 246.2 89.5 75.4 27.0 51.0 2.9 0.4 3.5 3.4 1.8 551.4 301.6
2020         Jan. 37.8 240.2 77.8 81.4 26.6 51.3 2.7 0.4 2.5 2.4 1.8 560.9 306.5
         Feb. 62.2 251.9 85.5 86.0 26.3 50.9 2.8 0.4 2.0 1.8 1.8 563.9 315.2
         Mar. 69.9 257.7 97.6 82.5 24.6 49.7 2.8 0.4 1.7 1.6 2.2 553.0 315.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p. 10    ).9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
May 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item:
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (from 2002 German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which: MonetaryIntra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
31.9 30.2 2,013.6 4,505.5 2,708.1 − 5.3 2,899.8 − 7,777.1 11,217.6 11,864.1 6,745.4 147.5 2018          Feb.
38.2 30.1 2,011.1 4,348.9 2,720.9 42.5 2,923.1 − 7,840.1 11,282.7 11,930.3 6,749.2 147.5          Mar.
40.3 29.9 2,017.6 4,494.0 2,722.0 − 4.3 2,932.1 − 7,892.1 11,316.7 11,987.3 6,755.7 148.4          Apr.
35.2 29.7 2,035.9 4,708.0 2,701.2 0.9 3,004.2 − 7,994.8 11,419.5 12,067.6 6,747.7 147.0          May38.6 28.9 2,028.3 4,564.0 2,672.3 24.1 2,911.9 − 8,086.6 11,529.1 12,168.0 6,706.1 150.2          June
37.8 24.1 2,015.9 4,612.7 2,667.5 7.1 2,891.1 − 8,080.6 11,518.5 12,159.0 6,693.9 152.4          July
39.8 24.1 2,020.9 4,649.3 2,663.2 17.7 2,884.1 − 8,082.1 11,519.2 12,166.7 6,686.5 155.5          Aug.40.6 22.1 2,046.9 4,574.8 2,663.2 23.4 2,846.0 − 8,152.5 11,566.5 12,185.1 6,699.8 157.9          Sep.
39.6 23.7 2,102.1 4,704.7 2,709.2 − 14.4 2,971.7 − 8,160.1 11,581.4 12,226.4 6,795.6 149.7          Oct.
38.9 21.7 2,102.3 4,659.6 2,711.2 6.6 3,018.8 − 8,256.6 11,668.3 12,313.3 6,792.3 153.3          Nov.47.5 20.7 2,089.8 4,503.3 2,727.3 8.7 2,936.1 − 8,302.9 11,714.7 12,363.6 6,818.5 149.8          Dec.
36.3 23.9 2,116.1 4,696.6 2,752.7 10.8 3,031.2 − 8,264.1 11,693.2 12,349.0 6,868.4 151.7 2019          Jan.
33.2 26.1 2,145.7 4,661.2 2,740.5 15.1 3,029.3 − 8,305.1 11,741.1 12,389.1 6,886.1 150.4          Feb.16.0 22.5 2,147.2 4,647.3 2,766.5 23.2 3,198.7 − 8,442.9 11,886.7 12,519.2 6,912.4 151.9          Mar.
17.0 21.4 2,136.4 4,770.1 2,761.0 14.1 3,202.5 − 8,488.9 11,942.5 12,591.4 6,890.6 151.5          Apr.
23.4 22.1 2,145.3 4,776.2 2,774.6 26.2 3,364.1 − 8,576.2 12,032.4 12,675.1 6,910.1 149.7          May20.0 21.6 2,140.5 4,640.6 2,830.3 33.6 3,469.1 − 8,670.3 12,114.6 12,741.2 6,980.7 155.2          June
16.1 21.3 2,151.6 4,796.8 2,878.9 25.7 3,685.2 − 8,699.0 12,150.2 12,798.2 7,020.3 151.7          July
2.7 20.7 2,150.1 4,854.7 2,940.4 − 2.9 4,083.0 − 8,787.9 12,264.2 12,915.0 7,067.0 152.7          Aug.3.2 19.0 2,158.9 4,803.5 2,942.8 25.5 3,943.0 − 8,789.8 12,251.1 12,883.2 7,104.7 153.4          Sep.
7.5 19.9 2,147.1 4,768.2 2,935.0 34.3 3,715.4 − 8,847.2 12,293.4 12,936.7 7,077.5 152.9          Oct.
6.8 19.5 2,161.4 4,770.3 2,922.8 31.6 3,674.8 − 8,972.5 12,401.2 13,041.6 7,080.8 157.9          Nov.
− 10.5 19.4 2,146.1 4,450.7 2,914.1 26.2 3,469.4 − 8,975.1 12,396.7 12,997.3 7,060.4 152.0          Dec.
0.1 22.1 2,166.4 4,759.2 2,951.2 25.1 3,715.7 − 8,927.3 12,357.9 13,007.2 7,115.7 154.9 2020          Jan.
4.7 23.1 2,164.8 4,817.4 2,967.6 28.6 3,963.1 − 9,012.1 12,442.0 13,105.2 7,127.1 156.9          Feb.
34.9 22.5 2,122.8 4,905.6 2,936.3 15.2 4,139.2 − 9,309.9 12,759.9 13,452.6 7,046.8 154.9          Mar.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
16.7 14.3 491.6 968.4 653.3 − 1,003.8 1,263.2 361.3 2,062.1 2,896.6 2,933.5 1,844.1 − 2018          Feb.
16.0 13.9 493.6 953.5 657.7 − 1,016.5 1,278.1 368.2 2,061.3 2,901.1 2,936.2 1,847.4 −          Mar.
17.5 12.3 494.3 949.7 658.7 − 1,002.9 1,270.5 369.5 2,076.6 2,907.0 2,941.3 1,848.1 −          Apr.
19.0 13.1 504.7 997.9 662.3 − 1,044.2 1,297.9 374.9 2,116.6 2,946.8 2,982.4 1,862.6 −          May17.0 12.5 501.8 996.0 666.2 − 1,070.1 1,277.7 378.5 2,110.1 2,954.5 2,987.3 1,860.9 −          June
16.7 11.9 498.0 967.9 665.4 − 1,019.3 1,250.8 381.6 2,116.5 2,954.1 2,986.4 1,855.4 −          July
18.3 12.0 497.4 966.5 672.6 − 1,024.8 1,273.6 386.9 2,119.1 2,953.0 2,986.4 1,858.4 −          Aug.17.8 11.0 507.4 979.8 670.9 − 1,059.4 1,251.7 390.8 2,146.5 2,978.4 3,010.4 1,863.3 −          Sep.
20.2 11.0 513.2 952.8 676.1 − 1,031.2 1,277.1 394.6 2,158.3 2,990.0 3,025.5 1,873.8 −          Oct.
19.4 10.3 515.2 932.7 675.8 − 1,041.8 1,288.0 397.1 2,196.8 3,024.9 3,058.2 1,874.7 −          Nov.17.7 10.1 504.6 967.9 689.9 − 1,063.4 1,297.9 401.1 2,195.0 3,021.7 3,052.5 1,879.0 −          Dec.
18.2 9.6 518.7 920.7 690.0 − 971.6 1,326.1 391.5 2,180.7 3,017.3 3,049.1 1,886.9 − 2019          Jan.
19.1 8.2 533.2 882.8 684.4 − 966.0 1,330.9 394.4 2,189.4 3,030.9 3,062.3 1,895.1 −          Feb.19.2 8.3 529.8 958.7 695.9 − 1,031.3 1,412.2 396.9 2,212.1 3,054.7 3,095.5 1,900.4 −          Mar.
18.6 8.2 525.9 953.9 692.7 − 985.8 1,398.5 400.8 2,230.0 3,069.0 3,110.2 1,890.7 −          Apr.
18.9 8.4 532.9 944.9 702.5 − 1,016.3 1,496.1 404.8 2,254.0 3,093.0 3,133.5 1,906.3 −          May19.7 7.6 530.7 957.2 722.3 − 1,013.1 1,542.9 407.8 2,263.6 3,100.7 3,142.8 1,926.0 −          June
19.7 7.9 531.9 925.0 735.6 − 950.3 1,600.3 411.4 2,271.3 3,104.7 3,148.2 1,938.3 −          July
20.3 7.6 529.4 944.3 757.0 − 980.7 1,826.9 417.2 2,297.9 3,135.9 3,182.8 1,952.6 −          Aug.22.3 7.4 533.8 927.2 755.6 − 992.1 1,761.2 422.1 2,298.5 3,131.2 3,164.7 1,954.3 −          Sep.
20.7 6.7 527.8 867.4 750.0 − 918.5 1,664.0 426.3 2,316.5 3,147.7 3,178.4 1,941.3 −          Oct.
21.4 5.8 533.1 877.7 749.1 − 951.9 1,671.9 430.8 2,341.2 3,168.5 3,199.3 1,943.1 −          Nov.21.0 6.1 524.3 863.5 750.1 − 999.8 1,681.4 435.8 2,340.1 3,161.1 3,193.6 1,933.9 −          Dec.
23.9 6.7 530.2 831.0 757.2 − 900.5 1,744.6 437.9 2,333.0 3,157.1 3,192.1 1,942.8 − 2020          Jan.
21.7 6.8 535.4 850.2 764.8 − 912.0 1,867.4 442.7 2,350.9 3,174.6 3,207.0 1,953.8 −          Feb.18.4 6.3 528.3 901.4 757.5 − 991.9 1,940.1 455.0 2,444.0 3,263.8 3,292.4 1,935.0 −          Mar.
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to three months (excluding central govern ments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to two years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the over two years and at agreed notice of over three months, debt securities w ith
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two maturities of over two years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
May 2020
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2018         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 627.1 1.9 759.5 0.1 2,476.8 668.0 0.0 1,159.0 247.5 495.6 1,295.3 3,122.3
         June 625.2 1.8 757.3 0.1 2,519.9 659.5 0.0 1,170.4 218.0 502.5 1,353.9 3,183.8
         July 635.1 2.1 744.2 0.1 2,558.4 652.2 0.0 1,183.6 263.4 533.8 1,306.9 3,142.6
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 637.5 3.0 739.9 0.1 2,589.7 671.2 0.0 1,192.2 239.1 519.1 1,348.7 3,212.0
         Oct. 625.2 6.9 727.8 0.1 2,622.8 631.8 0.0 1,194.3 283.1 504.4 1,369.0 3,195.1
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 625.1 6.8 726.4 0.1 2,642.3 635.9 0.0 1,202.4 240.2 542.9 1,379.4 3,217.7
2019         Jan. 655.8 7.9 723.8 0.1 2,652.8 640.0 0.0 1,218.8 231.3 618.2 1,332.1 3,190.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 665.5 6.0 723.1 0.1 2,645.8 637.6 0.0 1,209.2 257.3 571.4 1,364.8 3,211.7
         Apr. 678.6 5.7 720.3 0.1 2,635.9 619.6 0.0 1,215.8 270.5 555.6 1,379.0 3,214.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 689.7 5.5 718.6 0.4 2,630.6 601.9 0.0 1,228.2 248.2 561.9 1,404.6 3,234.7
         July 710.3 4.6 700.1 0.0 2,620.4 570.8 0.0 1,240.8 295.9 592.2 1,335.7 3,147.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 720.2 3.0 692.5 0.0 2,612.4 555.7 0.0 1,251.1 268.5 621.2 1,331.5 3,138.3
         Oct. 758.5 2.0 668.5 0.0 2,608.7 456.6 0.0 1,252.7 298.6 641.3 1,388.5 3,097.8
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 773.3 1.8 663.7 0.0 2,618.8 257.9 0.0 1,262.9 226.6 648.1 1,662.1 3,182.9
2020         Jan. 768.6 2.9 616.1 0.0 2,639.1 254.6 0.0 1,282.2 211.8 654.3 1,623.7 3,160.6
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 767.1 1.4 615.9 0.0 2,666.7 244.6 0.0 1,277.1 268.6 618.4 1,642.3 3,164.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2018         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 150.7 1.1 93.3 0.0 530.6 190.8 0.0 273.8 61.1 − 191.3 440.9 905.5
         June 150.1 1.1 93.1 0.0 540.6 200.3 0.0 277.4 59.2 − 217.9 466.0 943.6
         July 151.9 0.4 91.8 0.0 547.6 196.8 0.0 280.0 69.4 − 194.1 439.6 916.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 152.1 0.4 91.5 0.0 556.2 192.9 0.0 282.0 65.2 − 178.9 439.0 913.9
         Oct. 148.1 0.5 88.5 0.0 563.5 160.0 0.0 282.6 81.3 − 183.4 460.0 902.6
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 146.9 0.6 88.1 0.0 570.0 148.0 0.0 283.6 69.6 − 185.2 489.5 921.2
2019         Jan. 155.8 1.7 87.6 0.1 570.4 153.1 0.0 293.4 60.5 − 144.9 453.7 900.1
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 158.3 0.6 87.6 0.0 569.5 163.3 0.0 294.3 49.3 − 157.0 466.0 923.7
         Apr. 160.8 0.6 86.7 0.0 563.7 172.5 0.0 296.1 61.2 − 199.4 481.6 950.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 163.6 0.6 86.1 0.0 565.2 166.3 0.0 299.6 58.0 − 213.6 505.3 971.1
         July 169.4 0.7 85.3 0.0 563.1 150.1 0.0 303.0 65.7 − 175.0 474.5 927.7
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 172.5 0.5 84.9 0.0 562.7 150.1 0.0 305.6 57.6 − 157.6 464.9 920.6
         Oct. 182.8 0.4 82.8 0.0 560.0 151.5 0.0 306.5 70.8 − 159.4 456.6 914.7
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 186.9 0.4 82.4 0.0 566.1 82.2 0.0 307.6 55.9 − 135.3 525.4 915.3
2020         Jan. 186.0 0.9 74.0 0.0 567.9 73.6 0.0 311.7 52.7 − 95.7 486.5 871.8
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 185.0 0.4 74.0 0.0 573.7 65.4 0.0 311.2 64.4 − 125.0 517.1 893.7
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
May 2020
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
. . . . . . . . . . . . 2018          Apr.
− 3.8 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 41.3 − 18.3 + 0.0 + 10.8 + 43.9 + 20.7 − 20.3 − 27.8          May
− 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 43.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 11.4 − 29.5 + 6.9 + 58.6 + 61.5          June
+ 9.9 + 0.3 − 13.1 + 0.0 + 38.5 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 13.2 + 45.4 + 31.3 − 47.0 − 41.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 2.4 + 0.9 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 31.3 + 19.0 + 0.0 + 8.6 − 24.3 − 14.7 + 41.8 + 69.4          Sep.
− 12.3 + 3.9 − 12.1 + 0.0 + 33.1 − 39.4 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 44.0 − 14.7 + 20.3 − 16.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 19.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 − 42.9 + 38.5 + 10.4 + 22.6          Dec.
+ 30.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 16.4 − 8.9 + 75.3 − 47.3 − 26.8 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 9.7 − 1.9 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 9.6 + 26.0 − 46.8 + 32.7 + 20.8          Mar.
+ 13.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 18.0 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 13.2 − 15.8 + 14.2 + 2.7          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 11.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 17.7 + 0.0 + 12.4 − 22.3 + 6.3 + 25.6 + 20.3          June
+ 20.6 − 0.9 − 18.5 − 0.4 − 10.2 − 31.1 + 0.0 + 12.6 + 47.7 + 30.3 − 68.9 − 87.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 9.9 − 1.6 − 7.6 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 15.1 + 0.0 + 10.3 − 27.4 + 29.0 − 4.2 − 9.1          Sep.
+ 38.3 − 1.0 − 24.0 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 99.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 30.1 + 20.1 + 57.0 − 40.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 14.8 − 0.2 − 4.8 + 0.0 + 10.1 −198.7 + 0.0 + 10.2 − 72.0 + 6.8 + 273.6 + 85.1          Dec.
− 4.7 + 1.1 − 47.6 + 0.0 + 20.3 − 3.3 + 0.0 + 19.3 − 14.8 + 6.2 − 38.4 − 22.3 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 27.6 − 10.0 + 0.0 − 5.1 + 56.8 − 35.9 + 18.6 + 3.5          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
Deutsche Bundesbank
. . . . . . . . . . . . 2018          Apr.
− 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 − 17.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 4.2 + 30.0 − 13.0 − 27.3          May
− 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 10.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 3.6 − 1.8 − 26.6 + 25.1 + 38.1          June
+ 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 10.2 + 23.9 − 26.4 − 27.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 4.2 + 15.2 − 0.6 − 2.5          Sep.
− 4.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 32.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 16.1 − 4.5 + 21.1 − 11.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.6 − 12.0 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 11.7 − 1.8 + 29.5 + 18.5          Dec.
+ 8.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 + 9.7 − 9.2 + 40.2 − 35.9 − 21.1 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 11.2 − 12.0 + 12.3 + 23.6          Mar.
+ 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 12.0 − 42.5 + 15.6 + 26.5          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 6.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.2 − 14.2 + 23.7 + 21.0          June
+ 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 7.6 + 38.6 − 30.7 − 43.5          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 8.1 + 17.4 − 9.6 − 7.1          Sep.
+ 10.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 13.2 − 1.8 − 8.3 − 5.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 − 69.3 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 14.9 + 24.1 + 68.8 + 0.6          Dec.
− 0.9 + 0.4 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 1.8 − 8.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 3.2 + 39.6 − 38.9 − 43.5 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 11.7 − 29.3 + 30.7 + 21.9          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
May 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claims
external loans residents with banks, arising from
As at Gold and other denominated security the credit
reporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
date assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2019 Oct.                 4 4,695.1 474.1 357.5 82.4 275.1 19.0 18.9 18.9 −
                              11 4,692.3 474.1 358.9 82.4 276.6 18.4 17.2 17.2 −
                              18 4,687.1 474.1 357.2 82.4 274.9 18.5 17.5 17.5 −
                              25 4,680.9 474.1 355.7 82.4 273.4 20.2 17.0 17.0 −
         Nov.                 1 4,676.3 474.1 356.3 82.4 273.9 19.3 16.4 16.4 −
                                8 4,684.1 474.1 355.6 82.3 273.3 19.5 17.0 17.0 −
                              15 4,691.9 474.1 354.3 82.3 272.0 20.0 17.0 17.0 −
                              22 4,696.5 474.1 355.5 82.3 273.1 19.5 18.0 18.0 −
                              29 4,698.3 474.1 353.4 81.6 271.8 20.3 18.5 18.5 −
         Dec.                 6 4,709.3 474.1 352.8 81.6 271.2 21.1 20.7 20.7 −
                              13 4,713.6 474.1 355.5 81.6 273.9 19.5 18.8 18.8 −
                              20 4,682.6 474.1 357.4 81.6 275.7 22.9 19.1 19.1 −
                              27 4,692.0 474.1 358.6 81.6 277.0 22.0 17.0 17.0 −
2020 Jan.                 3 4,664.0 470.7 347.3 80.5 266.8 21.5 17.1 17.1 −
                              10 4,655.8 470.7 344.2 80.5 263.7 19.5 16.7 16.7 −
                              17 4,660.3 470.7 345.3 80.5 264.8 19.9 15.5 15.5 −
                              24 4,674.4 470.7 345.5 80.5 265.0 20.3 15.3 15.3 −
                              31 4,671.4 470.7 346.0 80.5 265.5 19.9 15.3 15.3 −
2020 Feb.                 7 4,668.9 470.7 347.2 80.5 266.7 20.9 15.9 15.9 −
                              14 4,679.7 470.7 344.6 80.5 264.1 22.3 14.5 14.5 −
                              21 4,688.3 470.7 345.7 80.5 265.2 23.0 14.5 14.5 −
                              28 4,691.9 470.7 345.8 80.0 265.8 23.9 14.8 14.8 −
         Mar.                 6 4,702.2 470.7 346.4 80.0 266.4 24.0 16.6 16.6 −
                              13 4,704.2 470.7 348.9 80.0 268.9 22.8 14.7 14.7 −
                              20 4,927.3 470.7 349.3 80.0 269.3 124.4 13.9 13.9 −
                              27 5,062.7 470.6 349.9 80.0 269.9 139.3 13.9 13.9 −
         Apr.                 3 5,199.8 509.9 357.2 80.9 276.3 148.3 13.2 13.2 −
                              10 5,257.5 509.9 358.3 82.4 275.9 148.8 13.0 13.0 −
                              17 5,282.9 509.8 358.2 83.0 275.2 148.6 12.5 12.5 −
                              24 5,347.0 509.8 360.4 83.6 276.7 150.1 13.7 13.7 −
         May                 1 5,395.2 509.8 359.7 83.6 276.1 151.6 12.9 12.9 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 Oct.                 4 1,768.6 147.6 55.3 21.2 34.1 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
                              11 1,758.7 147.6 55.0 21.2 33.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
                              18 1,763.7 147.6 54.6 21.2 33.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 −
                              25 1,737.7 147.6 54.5 21.2 33.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
         Nov.                 1 1,710.2 147.6 54.6 21.2 33.4 0.0 0.5 0.5 −
                                8 1,730.6 147.6 54.6 21.2 33.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 −
                              15 1,724.7 147.6 54.7 21.2 33.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 −
                              22 1,724.6 147.6 54.7 21.2 33.5 0.0 0.9 0.9 −
                              29 1,765.3 147.6 54.2 21.0 33.2 0.0 1.0 1.0 −
         Dec.                 6 1,757.4 147.6 54.4 21.0 33.4 0.0 3.8 3.8 −
                              13 1,770.7 147.6 54.2 21.0 33.3 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
                              20 1,736.8 147.6 54.4 21.0 33.5 1.4 2.6 2.6 −
                              27 1,743.1 147.6 54.4 21.0 33.5 1.4 0.6 0.6 −
2020 Jan.                 3 1,737.3 146.6 52.8 20.7 32.1 1.4 0.6 0.6 −
                              10 1,701.8 146.6 53.2 20.7 32.5 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
                              17 1,688.3 146.6 53.2 20.7 32.5 0.0 1.4 1.4 −
                              24 1,660.0 146.6 53.3 20.7 32.6 0.0 1.2 1.2 −
                              31 1,700.8 146.6 53.6 20.7 32.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
2020 Feb.                 7 1,695.0 146.6 53.8 20.7 33.1 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
                              14 1,694.8 146.6 53.8 20.7 33.1 0.0 1.2 1.2 −
                              21 1,697.1 146.6 54.3 20.7 33.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
                              28 1,714.7 146.6 54.4 20.6 33.8 0.0 1.4 1.4 −
         Mar.                 6 1,735.7 146.6 53.5 20.6 32.9 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
                              13 1,785.7 146.6 53.3 20.6 32.7 0.0 1.3 1.3 −
                              20 1,843.9 146.6 52.7 20.6 32.1 39.0 1.0 1.0 −
                              27 1,864.1 146.5 52.9 20.6 32.3 37.5 1.5 1.5 −
         Apr.                 3 1,916.4 158.7 54.9 20.8 34.1 43.8 1.1 1.1 −
                              10 1,923.4 158.7 55.3 21.1 34.2 45.3 1.0 1.0 −
                              17 1,905.4 158.7 55.5 21.3 34.2 46.0 0.7 0.7 −
                              24 1,909.6 158.7 55.9 21.6 34.3 47.4 1.0 1.0 −
         May                 1 1,938.0 158.7 56.0 21.6 34.4 47.8 0.2 0.2 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrum ents are valued at the
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB. 
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
May 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for governmentfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    As atopera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
665.6 1.8 663.8 − − − − 31.0 2,829.8 2,609.1 220.7 23.4 275.7 2019 Oct.                  4
666.1 2.3 663.8 − − 0.0 − 30.0 2,830.7 2,609.9 220.7 23.4 273.6                               11
665.7 1.9 663.8 − − 0.1 − 30.8 2,827.3 2,606.5 220.8 23.4 272.6                               18
664.9 1.1 663.8 − − 0.0 − 31.9 2,820.4 2,604.7 215.7 23.4 273.3                               25
665.8 2.2 663.6 − − 0.0 − 33.9 2,817.1 2,602.0 215.1 23.4 270.0          Nov.                  1
665.2 1.6 663.6 − − 0.0 − 31.1 2,826.4 2,610.9 215.4 23.4 271.9                                 8
665.1 1.5 663.6 − − 0.0 − 33.4 2,831.3 2,615.3 215.9 23.4 273.4                               15
665.5 1.9 663.6 − − 0.0 − 29.4 2,837.6 2,621.9 215.6 23.4 273.7                               22
666.4 2.5 663.8 − − 0.0 − 28.1 2,839.3 2,624.0 215.3 23.4 274.9                               29
665.3 1.4 663.8 − − 0.0 − 26.9 2,841.7 2,627.0 214.7 23.4 283.4          Dec.                  6
665.3 1.4 663.8 − − 0.0 − 34.1 2,846.7 2,632.0 214.7 23.4 276.4                               13
619.0 2.5 616.2 − − 0.3 − 28.4 2,854.2 2,639.4 214.8 23.4 284.1                               20
624.1 7.9 616.2 − − 0.1 − 26.3 2,854.3 2,639.2 215.1 23.4 292.1                               27
617.7 1.5 616.2 − − 0.0 − 22.5 2,846.7 2,631.9 214.8 23.4 297.2 2020 Jan.                  3
617.3 1.1 616.2 − − 0.0 − 25.1 2,850.7 2,637.0 213.7 23.4 288.2                               10
617.0 0.8 616.2 − − 0.0 − 34.4 2,853.5 2,641.4 212.1 23.4 280.7                               17
617.1 1.0 616.2 − − 0.0 − 33.7 2,860.2 2,649.3 210.9 23.4 288.1                               24
617.7 1.6 616.1 − − 0.0 − 40.1 2,860.6 2,652.2 208.4 23.4 277.6                               31
617.0 0.8 616.1 − − − − 35.8 2,859.8 2,655.3 204.5 23.3 278.3 2020 Feb.                  7
617.2 0.9 616.1 − − 0.2 − 34.1 2,865.5 2,663.1 202.5 23.3 287.4                               14
617.2 1.0 616.1 − − 0.1 − 39.3 2,870.9 2,669.5 201.4 23.3 283.6                               21
617.2 1.7 615.5 − − − − 36.5 2,873.3 2,671.9 201.3 23.3 286.4                               28
616.9 1.4 615.5 − − 0.0 − 49.1 2,874.5 2,674.7 199.8 23.3 280.7          Mar.                  6
617.7 2.2 615.5 − − 0.0 − 46.1 2,879.8 2,680.0 199.8 23.3 280.2                               13
726.1 1.5 724.6 − − 0.0 − 37.6 2,899.6 2,697.4 202.2 23.3 282.3                               20
826.1 1.1 825.0 − − 0.0 − 32.3 2,925.7 2,721.0 204.7 23.3 281.5                               27
869.2 0.4 868.7 − − − − 32.1 2,959.7 2,755.0 204.7 23.3 287.1          Apr.                  3
888.6 0.3 888.2 − − 0.0 − 35.4 2,997.4 2,791.8 205.6 23.3 282.9                               10
893.1 0.2 892.9 − − − − 39.7 3,017.2 2,812.3 204.9 23.3 280.5                               17
911.9 0.2 911.8 − − 0.0 − 40.1 3,052.4 2,846.8 205.6 23.3 285.3                               24
948.9 0.3 948.6 − − − − 34.4 3,067.9 2,865.9 202.0 23.3 286.7          May                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
82.9 0.5 82.4 − − − − 4.6 561.5 561.5 − 4.4 910.4 2019 Oct.                  4
83.1 0.7 82.4 − − 0.0 − 4.5 557.7 557.7 − 4.4 906.0                               11
82.8 0.4 82.4 − − 0.1 − 5.5 558.0 558.0 − 4.4 910.0                               18
82.5 0.1 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.5 559.1 559.1 − 4.4 882.9                               25
82.8 0.3 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.4 560.9 560.9 − 4.4 854.0          Nov.                  1
82.8 0.3 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.8 563.4 563.4 − 4.4 870.7                                 8
82.7 0.3 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.8 565.1 565.1 − 4.4 863.7                               15
83.0 0.6 82.4 − − 0.0 − 4.6 566.5 566.5 − 4.4 862.8                               22
83.1 0.6 82.4 − − 0.0 − 6.0 567.7 567.7 − 4.4 901.3                               29
82.9 0.5 82.4 − − 0.0 − 6.7 569.9 569.9 − 4.4 887.6          Dec.                  6
82.8 0.4 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.5 568.3 568.3 − 4.4 905.8                               13
74.6 0.4 74.0 − − 0.3 − 4.7 569.6 569.6 − 4.4 877.4                               20
75.9 1.9 74.0 − − 0.0 − 4.1 569.6 569.6 − 4.4 885.0                               27
74.7 0.7 74.0 − − 0.0 − 2.1 568.3 568.3 − 4.4 886.5 2020 Jan.                  3
74.6 0.6 74.0 − − 0.0 − 4.4 565.7 565.7 − 4.4 851.2                               10
74.5 0.5 74.0 − − 0.0 − 6.5 567.3 567.3 − 4.4 834.4                               17
74.6 0.6 74.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 568.7 568.7 − 4.4 804.0                               24
74.4 0.4 74.0 − − 0.0 − 6.3 571.1 571.1 − 4.4 842.7                               31
74.4 0.4 74.0 − − − − 5.4 571.9 571.9 − 4.4 836.0 2020 Feb.                  7
74.5 0.4 74.0 − − 0.2 − 5.1 573.0 573.0 − 4.4 836.2                               14
74.5 0.5 74.0 − − 0.1 − 6.2 574.8 574.8 − 4.4 835.1                               21
74.5 0.5 74.0 − − 0.0 − 5.7 575.5 575.5 − 4.4 852.2                               28
74.2 0.2 74.0 − − 0.0 − 8.8 575.8 575.8 − 4.4 869.4          Mar.                  6
74.5 0.5 74.0 − − 0.0 − 7.5 573.2 573.2 − 4.4 925.0                               13
86.7 0.5 86.3 − − 0.0 − 8.4 574.8 574.8 − 4.4 930.2                               20
100.7 0.7 100.0 − − 0.0 − 7.2 577.3 577.3 − 4.4 936.1                               27
108.4 0.2 108.2 − − 0.0 − 9.3 582.7 582.7 − 4.4 953.1          Apr.                  3
110.7 0.1 110.6 − − 0.0 − 7.1 588.7 588.7 − 4.4 952.2                               10
111.7 0.1 111.7 − − − − 7.3 583.7 583.7 − 4.4 937.5                               17
114.8 0.0 114.8 − − 0.0 − 7.7 590.9 590.9 − 4.4 928.9                               24
116.3 0.0 116.3 − − − − 7.7 596.7 596.7 − 4.4 950.1          May                  1

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
May 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro
(covering Fine- area credit
the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
As at Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
date liabilities lation  1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 3
 
2019 Oct.                 4 4,695.1 1,254.9 1,863.6 1,407.1 456.5 − − − 5.4 − 406.3 268.6 137.7
                              11 4,692.3 1,254.7 1,851.9 1,393.1 458.8 − − − 4.2 − 420.4 280.6 139.8
                              18 4,687.1 1,254.2 1,832.5 1,393.8 438.7 − − − 4.5 − 447.5 308.0 139.5
                              25 4,680.9 1,253.3 1,846.2 1,393.6 452.5 − − − 5.1 − 433.0 294.8 138.2
         Nov.                 1 4,676.3 1,258.6 1,900.4 1,662.5 237.9 − − − 5.4 − 372.2 224.4 147.8
                                8 4,684.1 1,257.3 1,949.2 1,693.5 255.8 − − − 6.1 − 342.9 203.7 139.2
                              15 4,691.9 1,256.7 1,915.5 1,684.1 231.4 − − − 5.4 − 386.3 247.7 138.6
                              22 4,696.5 1,256.3 1,888.3 1,657.8 230.5 − − − 4.7 − 415.5 275.4 140.1
                              29 4,698.3 1,265.1 1,925.9 1,649.8 276.1 − − − 5.6 − 361.5 221.6 139.9
         Dec.                 6 4,709.3 1,272.6 1,941.6 1,662.0 279.6 − − − 8.1 − 336.9 200.5 136.5
                              13 4,713.6 1,276.9 1,927.3 1,629.4 298.0 − − − 5.9 − 335.2 201.7 133.5
                              20 4,682.6 1,287.4 1,877.0 1,629.8 247.2 − − − 6.2 − 330.1 201.3 128.9
                              27 4,692.0 1,293.9 1,850.6 1,623.1 227.5 − − − 10.4 − 324.8 195.2 129.5
2020 Jan.                 3 4,664.0 1,289.1 1,867.2 1,638.3 228.9 − − − 5.5 − 312.5 180.9 131.7
                              10 4,655.8 1,280.0 1,907.6 1,665.0 242.6 − − − 5.0 − 318.9 188.0 130.9
                              17 4,660.3 1,274.3 1,906.5 1,648.1 258.3 − − − 6.2 − 355.3 225.9 129.4
                              24 4,674.4 1,270.2 1,889.1 1,608.3 280.9 − − − 6.8 − 398.5 271.6 127.0
                              31 4,671.4 1,273.9 1,900.4 1,640.4 260.0 − − − 7.0 − 372.8 244.6 128.2
2020 Feb.                 7 4,668.9 1,274.5 1,925.6 1,690.6 235.0 − − − 6.6 − 345.1 218.4 126.6
                              14 4,679.7 1,274.8 1,881.7 1,658.5 223.2 − − − 7.1 − 397.0 268.0 129.0
                              21 4,688.3 1,275.1 1,851.7 1,624.0 227.7 − − − 7.1 − 440.7 312.0 128.8
                              28 4,691.9 1,278.7 1,866.2 1,609.6 256.6 − − − 6.9 − 420.2 296.9 123.2
         Mar.                 6 4,702.2 1,280.4 1,910.0 1,661.7 248.3 − − − 9.9 − 383.9 258.2 125.8
                              13 4,704.2 1,286.0 1,883.7 1,599.5 284.1 − − − 8.1 − 397.5 271.4 126.1
                              20 4,927.3 1,304.8 1,913.4 1,712.9 200.4 − − 0.0 8.3 − 462.8 329.4 133.4
                              27 5,062.7 1,313.1 2,021.5 1,809.0 212.5 − − − 8.0 − 480.8 349.5 131.3
         Apr.                 3 5,199.8 1,319.5 2,116.4 1,865.6 250.9 − − − 9.1 − 479.6 348.5 131.2
                              10 5,257.5 1,327.1 2,129.5 1,867.2 262.4 − − − 8.2 − 505.4 377.3 128.1
                              17 5,282.9 1,326.9 2,133.8 1,861.8 272.0 − − − 7.9 − 519.3 391.1 128.2
                              24 5,347.0 1,329.7 2,133.2 1,801.5 331.6 − − 0.0 9.4 − 563.9 435.3 128.6
         May                 1 5,395.2 1,334.1 2,188.7 1,826.9 361.8 − − 0.0 9.3 − 534.9 403.8 131.0
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 Oct.                 4 1,768.6 305.9 616.5 467.4 149.1 − − − 2.0 − 105.4 60.0 45.4
                              11 1,758.7 306.3 617.3 463.1 154.1 − − − 1.7 − 99.0 54.8 44.2
                              18 1,763.7 307.2 602.4 457.6 144.8 − − − 1.3 − 121.9 76.1 45.9
                              25 1,737.7 307.4 592.8 447.2 145.6 − − − 1.9 − 114.1 70.0 44.1
         Nov.                 1 1,710.2 305.6 597.2 533.4 63.8 − − − 1.7 − 83.2 35.4 47.8
                                8 1,730.6 305.5 617.9 546.4 71.5 − − − 2.5 − 82.8 43.0 39.9
                              15 1,724.7 306.3 581.3 520.6 60.7 − − − 2.0 − 116.2 73.4 42.8
                              22 1,724.6 307.6 579.8 522.1 57.8 − − − 1.6 − 112.5 71.5 41.0
                              29 1,765.3 307.1 638.2 533.3 104.9 − − − 2.1 − 83.4 48.0 35.4
         Dec.                 6 1,757.4 309.6 631.0 523.9 107.1 − − − 3.7 − 76.2 44.2 32.0
                              13 1,770.7 311.6 615.5 500.2 115.3 − − − 2.0 − 99.6 67.6 32.1
                              20 1,736.8 317.0 578.2 488.0 90.2 − − − 1.9 − 95.7 61.5 34.2
                              27 1,743.1 318.9 552.3 483.2 69.1 − − − 4.0 − 101.3 65.4 35.9
2020 Jan.                 3 1,737.3 311.7 569.1 510.4 58.7 − − − 1.7 − 88.1 46.9 41.3
                              10 1,701.8 308.8 570.3 507.3 63.1 − − − 1.3 − 76.9 39.1 37.9
                              17 1,688.3 308.1 558.2 486.5 71.7 − − − 2.0 − 94.7 52.3 42.5
                              24 1,660.0 307.6 544.4 470.7 73.8 − − − 2.6 − 88.1 56.9 31.3
                              31 1,700.8 309.2 586.0 520.5 65.5 − − − 2.8 − 74.7 39.6 35.1
2020 Feb.                 7 1,695.0 310.2 580.6 524.1 56.5 − − − 2.0 − 72.2 41.3 30.9
                              14 1,694.8 311.2 555.4 501.1 54.3 − − − 2.0 − 99.6 68.8 30.8
                              21 1,697.1 313.0 564.0 506.7 57.3 − − − 0.8 − 98.5 69.3 29.2
                              28 1,714.7 310.1 579.7 510.5 69.3 − − − 1.4 − 96.0 65.5 30.5
         Mar.                 6 1,735.7 311.5 603.4 533.1 70.4 − − − 2.6 − 101.3 71.4 29.9
                              13 1,785.7 313.3 614.1 523.7 90.4 − − − 1.7 − 131.1 89.6 41.5
                              20 1,843.9 323.9 635.0 570.0 65.0 − − 0.0 1.6 − 149.5 104.3 45.2
                              27 1,864.1 330.2 646.7 584.4 62.3 − − − 2.9 − 156.3 111.5 44.7
         Apr.                 3 1,916.4 321.2 708.0 645.3 62.7 − − − 4.9 − 137.2 95.5 41.6
                              10 1,923.4 324.5 695.8 633.1 62.8 − − − 3.6 − 143.3 101.8 41.5
                              17 1,905.4 323.7 696.3 625.3 71.0 − − − 3.4 − 119.6 92.4 27.1
                              24 1,909.6 324.7 679.7 575.5 104.2 − − − 3.5 − 129.4 104.3 25.1
         May                 1 1,938.0 323.6 696.9 585.2 111.7 − − − 3.6 − 124.7 101.0 23.7
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8%
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1In accordance with the accounting value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
May 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to  area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    As atdenominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    reporting credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
1 accounts reserves    date liabilities  2 
Eurosystem 3
 
230.1 7.4 11.1 11.1 − 58.1 272.8 − 478.3 107.2 2019 Oct.                  4
227.7 8.5 11.2 11.2 − 58.1 270.1 − 478.3 107.2                               11
217.4 7.6 10.7 10.7 − 58.1 269.1 − 478.3 107.2                               18
208.9 8.4 9.6 9.6 − 58.1 272.7 − 478.3 107.2                               25
206.9 8.7 8.9 8.9 − 58.1 271.5 − 478.3 107.2          Nov.                  1
197.1 8.0 9.3 9.3 − 58.1 270.5 − 478.3 107.2                                 8
196.2 8.0 8.9 8.9 − 58.1 271.2 − 478.3 107.2                               15
200.4 8.0 9.0 9.0 − 58.1 270.7 − 478.3 107.2                               22
208.2 8.4 8.8 8.8 − 58.1 271.2 − 478.3 107.2                               29
215.7 8.6 9.0 9.0 − 58.1 273.1 − 478.3 107.2          Dec.                  6
230.2 8.3 8.9 8.9 − 58.1 277.3 − 478.3 107.2                               13
244.4 9.1 8.3 8.3 − 58.1 276.5 − 478.3 107.2                               20
274.4 9.0 7.9 7.9 − 58.1 277.4 − 478.3 107.2                               27
265.8 8.0 7.4 7.4 − 57.4 277.2 − 466.6 107.2 2020 Jan.                  3
222.8 8.3 7.4 7.4 − 57.4 274.5 − 466.6 107.3                               10
196.8 8.9 7.0 7.0 − 57.4 274.1 − 466.6 107.3                               17
181.7 8.7 7.0 7.0 − 57.4 281.2 − 466.6 107.1                               24
189.4 7.9 7.0 7.0 − 57.4 282.0 − 466.6 107.0                               31
187.5 9.6 6.7 6.7 − 57.4 282.2 − 466.6 107.0 2020 Feb.                  7
187.9 8.2 6.3 6.3 − 57.4 285.9 − 466.6 107.0                               14
179.0 8.6 6.5 6.5 − 57.4 288.0 − 466.6 107.5                               21
187.4 8.1 7.4 7.4 − 57.4 285.4 − 466.6 107.6                               28
180.7 9.2 6.1 6.1 − 57.4 290.4 − 466.6 107.6          Mar.                  6
195.5 7.9 5.8 5.8 − 57.4 288.3 − 466.6 107.6                               13
308.8 7.2 6.0 6.0 − 57.4 284.2 − 466.6 107.9                               20
316.1 7.2 5.8 5.8 − 57.4 277.4 − 466.6 108.8                               27
321.0 7.3 6.0 6.0 − 57.9 267.1 − 507.1 108.9          Apr.                  3
331.2 7.3 5.8 5.8 − 57.9 268.9 − 507.1 108.9                               10
334.2 6.9 6.3 6.3 − 57.9 273.7 − 507.1 108.9                               17
343.4 7.5 6.8 6.8 − 57.9 279.1 − 507.1 109.1                               24
360.2 7.5 6.7 6.7 − 57.9 279.7 − 507.1 109.1          May                  1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
115.9 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.1 32.6 422.1 146.6 5.7 2019 Oct.                  4
111.8 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.1 32.8 422.1 146.6 5.7                               11
108.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 32.9 422.1 146.6 5.7                               18
99.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 33.1 422.1 146.6 5.7                               25
95.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 33.2 426.3 146.6 5.7          Nov.                  1
94.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 15.1 33.2 426.3 146.6 5.7                                 8
91.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.3 426.3 146.6 5.7                               15
95.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.3 426.3 146.6 5.7                               22
102.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 33.5 430.8 146.6 5.7                               29
105.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.5 430.8 146.6 5.7          Dec.                  6
109.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.6 430.8 146.6 5.7                               13
112.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.6 430.8 146.6 5.7                               20
134.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.7 430.8 146.6 5.7                               27
132.4 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.9 33.6 435.8 144.2 5.7 2020 Jan.                  3
109.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 34.0 435.8 144.2 5.7                               10
90.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 33.9 435.8 144.2 5.7                               17
81.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 34.6 435.8 144.2 5.7                               24
90.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.9 34.9 437.9 144.2 5.7                               31
91.8 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.9 34.6 438.1 144.2 5.7 2020 Feb.                  7
88.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.9 34.8 438.1 144.2 5.7                               14
81.8 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.9 35.1 438.1 144.2 5.7                               21
89.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.9 29.5 442.7 144.2 5.7                               28
79.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 29.4 442.7 144.2 5.7          Mar.                  6
88.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 29.4 442.7 144.2 5.7                               13
96.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 29.7 442.7 144.2 5.7                               20
90.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 29.6 442.7 144.2 5.7                               27
82.6 0.0 − − − 15.0 29.1 455.0 157.8 5.7          Apr.                  3
93.6 − − − − 15.0 29.1 455.0 157.8 5.7                               10
99.7 0.0 − − − 15.0 29.3 455.0 157.8 5.7                               17
109.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.0 29.5 455.0 157.8 5.7                               24
122.9 − 0.2 0.2 − 15.0 29.5 458.2 157.8 5.7          May                  1
 
basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/li ability related to bank-
banknotes issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note issue“. 2For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DEM banknotes still in circu-
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according lation. 3 Source: ECB. 
to the aforementioned accounting procedure and the value of euro banknotes put

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2018         June 7,804.7 35.0 2,266.6 1,853.0 1,584.7 268.2 413.6 285.5 128.1 3,832.7 3,430.8 2,979.9 2,672.2
         July 7,784.2 34.7 2,276.2 1,852.8 1,585.7 267.1 423.4 295.9 127.5 3,840.0 3,437.3 2,987.0 2,679.3
         Aug. 7,828.0 35.1 2,294.8 1,865.2 1,597.6 267.6 429.6 301.1 128.5 3,840.6 3,431.8 2,987.4 2,690.7
         Sep. 7,799.9 35.8 2,267.8 1,846.4 1,577.7 268.7 421.4 291.0 130.4 3,854.6 3,447.2 3,006.3 2,708.5
         Oct. 7,845.2 36.9 2,286.9 1,855.6 1,588.6 267.0 431.4 298.1 133.2 3,858.3 3,447.8 3,009.7 2,711.9
         Nov. 7,881.2 36.8 2,303.5 1,872.8 1,605.2 267.6 430.8 295.9 134.8 3,874.4 3,460.7 3,023.7 2,727.7
         Dec. 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 36.7 2,267.3 1,827.4 1,559.5 267.8 439.9 304.8 135.1 3,878.8 3,468.7 3,032.2 2,737.6
         Feb. 7,935.7 36.9 2,304.8 1,862.5 1,591.5 271.1 442.3 304.8 137.5 3,893.1 3,477.0 3,044.8 2,751.0
         Mar. 8,121.3 37.0 2,343.5 1,885.9 1,614.7 271.2 457.6 319.3 138.4 3,921.0 3,488.4 3,059.8 2,765.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 38.2 2,354.4 1,893.6 1,625.2 268.5 460.8 321.6 139.1 3,928.3 3,492.4 3,068.0 2,774.1
         May 8,280.9 37.9 2,376.8 1,919.0 1,648.5 270.5 457.8 317.9 139.9 3,944.5 3,509.1 3,085.5 2,790.5
         June 8,321.9 37.9 2,332.5 1,869.9 1,600.4 269.6 462.6 321.6 141.0 3,972.1 3,530.5 3,108.0 2,809.6
         July 8,372.1 37.4 2,311.4 1,845.2 1,575.0 270.2 466.2 324.2 142.0 3,984.9 3,539.6 3,114.5 2,815.1
         Aug. 8,645.5 38.3 2,327.7 1,857.2 1,589.6 267.6 470.5 327.6 142.9 4,009.7 3,554.6 3,127.0 2,827.3
         Sep. 8,550.4 38.0 2,323.6 1,835.8 1,569.4 266.4 487.8 344.3 143.5 4,001.0 3,562.6 3,139.5 2,839.7
         Oct. 8,445.6 39.3 2,312.0 1,810.4 1,543.9 266.5 501.6 358.5 143.1 4,008.1 3,569.7 3,149.2 2,847.6
         Nov. 8,509.2 40.1 2,361.5 1,860.2 1,590.2 270.0 501.3 358.1 143.2 4,027.4 3,586.5 3,166.8 2,863.7
         Dec. 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020         Jan. 8,482.2 39.4 2,293.1 1,800.7 1,531.5 269.2 492.4 348.1 144.3 4,033.9 3,591.5 3,173.1 2,867.5
         Feb. 8,666.7 40.3 2,308.1 1,815.4 1,545.5 269.9 492.7 348.9 143.8 4,055.3 3,606.4 3,190.1 2,885.8
         Mar. 8,912.7 48.1 2,422.3 1,921.9 1,653.1 268.8 500.4 357.5 142.9 4,096.9 3,642.2 3,215.5 2,915.9
 Changes 3
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 − 29.2 − 49.7 − 53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 − 3.8 − 2.3 − 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2018         July − 14.4 − 0.3 10.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 10.1 10.7 − 0.6 7.8 6.8 5.9 6.1
         Aug. 41.9 0.4 19.8 13.8 13.0 0.8 5.9 4.9 1.0 0.6 − 5.6 0.4 11.3
         Sep. − 30.4 0.8 − 27.3 − 18.9 − 19.9 1.0 − 8.4 − 10.4 1.9 14.2 15.9 19.2 18.2
         Oct. 36.4 1.1 15.0 8.5 10.3 − 1.8 6.5 6.1 0.4 3.8 0.5 3.4 3.2
         Nov. 38.5 − 0.1 17.2 17.6 16.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.0 1.6 16.7 13.4 14.4 16.1
         Dec. − 100.0 3.8 − 114.6 − 104.0 − 104.3 0.2 − 10.6 − 10.9 0.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 1.6 − 0.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 − 3.9 79.5 59.2 58.8 0.5 20.3 20.0 0.3 17.0 12.6 10.0 11.4
         Feb. 31.1 0.1 36.8 34.8 31.7 3.0 2.1 − 0.4 2.5 15.5 9.5 13.7 14.5
         Mar. 124.6 0.2 32.4 25.5 26.3 − 0.8 6.9 6.5 0.4 12.4 10.7 14.4 14.6
         Apr. 33.9 1.2 10.8 7.7 10.5 − 2.8 3.1 2.4 0.7 7.6 4.4 8.4 8.9
         May 124.6 − 0.3 22.1 25.4 23.2 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.9 0.7 16.3 16.3 17.4 16.2
         June 50.5 0.0 − 42.3 − 48.3 − 47.7 − 0.6 6.0 4.8 1.2 27.8 21.7 22.9 19.4
         July 49.8 − 0.5 − 23.0 − 25.4 − 26.0 0.6 2.4 1.5 0.9 12.1 9.1 6.8 5.6
         Aug. 265.9 0.8 14.8 11.4 14.2 − 2.8 3.4 2.7 0.7 23.9 14.6 12.3 11.9
         Sep. − 100.4 − 0.3 − 19.8 − 19.0 − 18.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.3 0.6 7.9 8.2 12.1 12.1
         Oct. − 93.5 1.2 − 9.8 − 24.8 − 25.0 0.2 15.0 15.3 − 0.3 8.8 8.1 10.5 8.8
         Nov. 55.4 0.8 48.2 49.3 45.9 3.3 − 1.1 − 1.2 0.1 18.6 16.6 17.3 15.8
         Dec. − 187.4 3.3 − 129.3 − 99.6 − 96.3 − 3.3 − 29.7 − 29.4 − 0.3 − 6.1 − 1.2 2.2 1.6
2020         Jan. 162.1 − 4.0 61.4 40.5 37.7 2.8 21.0 19.6 1.4 13.0 6.8 4.7 3.1
         Feb. 182.8 0.8 14.6 14.6 13.8 0.8 0.1 0.5 − 0.4 21.8 15.0 17.2 18.3
         Mar. 248.6 7.9 114.8 106.7 107.7 − 1.0 8.1 8.7 − 0.5 43.4 36.6 26.0 30.5
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro area
to non-banks in other Member States residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which: Secur- of which: Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
307.7 450.8 270.0 180.8 402.0 278.4 166.4 123.6 29.9 93.7 1,032.5 777.4 637.9 2018          June
307.7 450.3 270.8 179.5 402.7 281.2 169.9 121.5 29.7 91.8 1,028.8 770.8 604.5          July
296.8 444.3 266.4 178.0 408.9 286.1 173.1 122.8 29.7 93.1 1,021.0 762.2 636.6          Aug.297.8 440.9 263.4 177.5 407.4 283.7 171.7 123.6 29.6 94.0 1,028.7 770.3 613.1          Sep.
297.8 438.1 265.4 172.7 410.5 287.6 176.1 122.9 31.0 91.9 1,037.4 780.7 625.6          Oct.
296.0 437.0 264.5 172.5 413.7 290.8 177.8 122.9 30.9 92.1 1,032.1 777.3 634.5          Nov.297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2          Dec.
294.6 436.5 265.9 170.6 410.1 291.8 179.6 118.3 28.9 89.5 1,049.5 794.1 670.0 2019          Jan.
293.8 432.2 263.3 168.9 416.1 294.1 181.5 122.0 28.8 93.1 1,037.8 781.6 663.2          Feb.294.1 428.5 260.6 168.0 432.6 311.4 197.8 121.2 28.9 92.4 1,084.1 826.7 735.7          Mar.
293.8 424.5 260.8 163.7 435.9 315.7 202.0 120.2 29.6 90.5 1,099.5 840.3 734.2          Apr.
295.0 423.6 259.2 164.4 435.5 317.7 205.0 117.8 29.4 88.4 1,101.0 839.1 820.6          May298.5 422.5 257.7 164.7 441.6 320.9 207.2 120.7 29.0 91.7 1,103.8 841.8 875.6          June
299.4 425.0 260.2 164.8 445.3 322.2 209.5 123.1 29.0 94.1 1,114.6 851.7 923.8          July
299.7 427.6 260.2 167.4 455.1 330.1 216.8 125.0 28.9 96.1 1,122.3 857.7 1,147.5          Aug.299.8 423.2 255.1 168.1 438.3 313.4 200.6 124.9 28.8 96.1 1,106.8 841.9 1,081.1          Sep.
301.6 420.5 257.1 163.4 438.4 313.1 201.3 125.3 30.1 95.2 1,102.8 842.5 983.5          Oct.
303.1 419.8 257.7 162.0 440.8 315.2 201.0 125.6 30.5 95.1 1,091.3 828.7 989.0          Nov.303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5          Dec.
305.6 418.3 258.6 159.8 442.4 316.4 203.8 126.0 29.8 96.2 1,078.6 819.6 1,037.1 2020          Jan.
304.3 416.3 256.5 159.8 448.9 322.8 206.6 126.2 29.9 96.3 1,088.6 829.3 1,174.5          Feb.299.6 426.7 258.5 168.2 454.6 325.1 212.8 129.5 29.5 100.0 1,104.5 838.8 1,240.9          Mar.
Changes 3
− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
− 9.8 − 46.2 − 19.1 − 27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 − 11.4 − 1.5 − 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 − 17.7 − 8.6 − 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 − 32.1 − 33.3 330.3 2019
− 0.2 0.9 2.2 − 1.3 0.9 3.1 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 31.6 2018          July
− 10.9 − 6.0 − 4.5 − 1.5 6.2 4.9 3.1 1.3 0.0 1.2 − 11.0 − 11.5 32.1          Aug.
1.1 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.6 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 5.4 5.9 − 23.5          Sep.
0.2 − 2.9 1.9 − 4.8 3.3 4.5 4.1 − 1.2 1.4 − 2.6 4.0 3.5 12.6          Oct.
− 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 3.3 3.3 1.5 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 − 4.0 − 2.2 8.8          Nov.
1.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 3.5 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.3 − 1.5 3.5 3.5 16.1          Dec.
− 1.4 2.6 2.4 0.2 4.4 5.1 3.2 − 0.8 0.3 − 1.0 16.5 15.8 19.8 2019          Jan.
− 0.8 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 1.7 6.0 2.4 2.2 3.7 − 0.0 3.7 − 14.5 − 15.1 − 6.9          Feb.− 0.2 − 3.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 1.7 3.0 2.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 1.2 16.1 17.2 63.6          Mar.
− 0.4 − 4.0 0.2 − 4.2 3.1 4.2 4.3 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 15.8 14.1 − 1.5          Apr.
1.2 − 1.0 − 1.7 0.7 − 0.1 2.3 3.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 0.0 − 2.8 86.5          May3.5 − 1.2 − 1.5 0.3 6.1 3.4 2.7 2.6 − 0.4 3.1 10.5 9.9 54.5          June
1.2 2.2 2.5 − 0.2 3.0 1.3 2.1 1.7 − 0.0 1.8 4.4 4.1 56.8          July
0.4 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 9.3 7.5 7.0 1.8 − 0.1 1.9 2.6 1.2 223.7          Aug.0.0 − 4.0 − 4.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 21.9 − 21.7 − 66.4          Sep.
1.7 − 2.4 2.1 − 4.6 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.5 1.3 − 0.8 3.9 7.7 − 97.7          Oct.
1.5 − 0.8 0.6 − 1.4 2.1 1.7 − 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 − 17.6 − 19.3 5.3          Nov.0.7 − 3.4 − 3.0 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 3.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 47.9 − 44.3 − 7.5          Dec.
1.6 2.1 3.9 − 1.8 6.2 3.2 4.5 3.0 0.4 2.6 36.0 35.9 55.6 2020          Jan.
− 1.1 − 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.1 6.8 6.7 2.8 0.1 0.1 − 0.0 8.3 7.9 137.3          Feb.− 4.5 10.5 2.0 8.5 6.9 3.0 6.2 3.9 − 0.4 4.2 16.1 9.6 66.4          Mar.
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home Member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country States Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2018         June 7,804.7 1,224.7 1,035.7 189.0 3,582.9 3,463.7 1,991.4 893.1 281.1 579.2 539.1 109.0 44.0
         July 7,784.2 1,228.5 1,042.2 186.3 3,584.2 3,462.9 1,997.6 887.1 277.5 578.2 538.6 108.8 44.5
         Aug. 7,828.0 1,229.6 1,043.7 185.9 3,595.2 3,474.5 2,014.0 882.9 276.6 577.6 538.3 106.9 45.1
         Sep. 7,799.9 1,220.4 1,034.2 186.2 3,594.0 3,473.8 2,017.5 879.0 273.7 577.3 538.4 108.8 48.2
         Oct. 7,845.2 1,227.0 1,034.3 192.7 3,614.3 3,494.1 2,039.3 877.8 273.4 577.0 538.6 108.8 47.3
         Nov. 7,881.2 1,244.5 1,046.8 197.7 3,646.1 3,527.4 2,074.8 875.8 271.5 576.8 539.1 106.2 47.1
         Dec. 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 1,238.4 1,040.5 197.9 3,646.4 3,530.1 2,074.3 877.3 277.3 578.4 541.4 104.9 45.9
         Feb. 7,935.7 1,258.4 1,046.6 211.8 3,658.9 3,544.0 2,083.6 880.9 281.8 579.5 542.4 103.3 44.6
         Mar. 8,121.3 1,281.9 1,050.1 231.8 3,676.8 3,554.7 2,095.7 877.1 280.6 582.0 544.7 109.9 51.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 1,298.3 1,061.2 237.0 3,689.3 3,569.8 2,117.1 870.5 276.7 582.2 544.7 105.8 47.5
         May 8,280.9 1,291.2 1,057.1 234.1 3,721.9 3,599.3 2,147.3 869.5 277.3 582.5 544.4 108.1 50.1
         June 8,321.9 1,292.1 1,048.3 243.8 3,728.4 3,595.5 2,144.7 868.1 274.5 582.6 544.0 116.0 56.6
         July 8,372.1 1,291.9 1,055.1 236.8 3,728.8 3,605.7 2,160.6 863.3 271.9 581.8 543.4 110.3 51.1
         Aug. 8,645.5 1,306.3 1,062.2 244.1 3,754.1 3,626.8 2,182.9 863.7 276.0 580.2 542.2 114.6 54.3
         Sep. 8,550.4 1,299.7 1,038.3 261.4 3,745.4 3,618.0 2,179.8 859.2 273.5 579.0 541.5 115.2 55.7
         Oct. 8,445.6 1,313.5 1,050.3 263.2 3,761.4 3,633.5 2,201.7 854.6 270.4 577.2 540.6 114.1 51.4
         Nov. 8,509.2 1,326.4 1,057.3 269.1 3,791.3 3,663.8 2,238.9 849.3 266.7 575.6 539.9 115.8 52.6
         Dec. 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020         Jan. 8,482.2 1,293.2 1,033.0 260.2 3,775.6 3,647.0 2,229.5 846.8 267.2 570.7 537.5 116.3 54.3
         Feb. 8,666.7 1,313.5 1,047.8 265.7 3,794.5 3,664.2 2,248.7 847.1 270.3 568.4 535.8 117.4 55.6
         Mar. 8,912.7 1,418.5 1,135.8 282.7 3,853.2 3,704.7 2,299.1 841.2 268.4 564.4 532.5 135.5 72.3
 Changes 4
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 − 20.1 − 25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 − 18.8 − 6.5 − 4.3 1.2 − 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 − 10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 − 30.6 − 6.6 − 3.4 − 0.6 10.6 8.7
2018         July − 14.4 4.7 7.2 − 2.5 1.8 − 0.4 6.5 − 5.9 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 41.9 2.0 2.6 − 0.6 10.7 11.3 16.1 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.0 0.6
         Sep. − 30.4 − 9.6 − 9.7 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 3.6 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 0.0 1.9 3.1
         Oct. 36.4 5.4 − 0.4 5.9 19.1 19.3 21.1 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.0
         Nov. 38.5 17.7 12.6 5.1 32.1 33.5 35.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.1 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.2
         Dec. − 100.0 − 30.3 − 24.8 − 5.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 1.3 − 3.1 − 4.2 1.7 2.0 − 1.7 − 2.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 24.8 18.9 6.0 3.6 3.0 − 1.2 4.4 10.1 − 0.2 0.3 0.4 1.0
         Feb. 31.1 19.6 5.6 13.9 12.0 13.3 9.0 3.2 4.1 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 − 1.4
         Mar. 124.6 19.3 2.7 16.6 15.7 9.5 11.1 − 4.1 − 1.4 2.5 2.2 5.7 6.3
         Apr. 33.9 16.4 11.2 5.2 12.6 15.1 21.4 − 6.6 − 3.9 0.2 0.1 − 4.1 − 4.3
         May 124.6 − 7.3 − 4.2 − 3.1 32.4 29.5 30.1 − 0.9 0.6 0.3 − 0.3 2.3 2.7
         June 50.5 2.1 − 8.2 10.3 7.3 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 2.8 0.2 − 0.4 7.9 6.6
         July 49.8 − 1.3 6.3 − 7.6 − 0.7 9.3 15.4 − 5.2 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 5.8 − 5.6
         Aug. 265.9 13.7 6.8 6.9 24.7 20.5 21.9 0.2 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 4.2 3.1
         Sep. − 100.4 − 19.2 − 21.7 2.5 − 9.5 − 9.5 − 3.5 − 4.7 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 0.7 0.5 1.3
         Oct. − 93.5 15.0 12.5 2.5 17.1 16.2 22.5 − 4.5 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 4.2
         Nov. 55.4 11.9 6.6 5.3 29.1 29.5 36.7 − 5.7 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.7 1.5 1.1
         Dec. − 187.4 − 82.4 − 46.4 − 36.0 − 12.2 − 13.2 − 7.3 − 5.4 − 4.9 − 0.5 0.6 0.7 2.2
2020         Jan. 162.1 49.3 22.2 27.2 − 3.4 − 3.5 − 2.0 2.9 5.3 − 4.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Feb. 182.8 20.0 14.6 5.4 18.5 17.0 19.0 0.2 3.0 − 2.2 − 1.7 1.0 1.3
         Mar. 248.6 105.0 88.0 16.9 58.8 40.5 50.4 − 5.9 − 1.8 − 4.0 − 3.4 18.1 16.7
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which: from Money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- repos with
of which: of which: central non-banks fund euro Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 201663.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 201756.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 201859.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
62.2 21.7 2.9 2.5 10.2 9.3 1.3 2.1 1,022.2 33.7 670.8 680.2 620.5 2018          June
61.5 19.0 2.9 2.5 12.4 10.0 1.8 2.0 1,016.9 33.1 681.9 682.2 586.7          July
58.9 16.4 2.8 2.5 13.9 10.6 1.2 2.0 1,021.2 35.0 690.5 684.5 603.8          Aug.57.8 17.4 2.8 2.5 11.5 9.2 1.3 2.0 1,034.7 33.9 681.7 687.2 578.7          Sep.
58.6 17.2 2.8 2.5 11.4 9.7 2.4 2.0 1,044.7 36.2 666.9 687.8 600.0          Oct.
56.3 15.0 2.8 2.5 12.5 10.0 1.3 2.4 1,048.3 34.6 643.3 688.1 607.3          Nov.56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7          Dec.
56.2 15.3 2.8 2.5 11.5 10.1 1.7 2.4 1,048.1 32.1 636.9 688.3 640.1 2019          Jan.
55.9 14.9 2.8 2.5 11.7 10.0 2.0 2.3 1,067.9 32.2 621.9 684.9 639.5          Feb.55.4 14.9 2.8 2.5 12.1 10.5 11.4 2.1 1,065.3 32.7 666.8 699.3 717.8          Mar.
55.5 15.0 2.8 2.5 13.7 11.2 12.5 2.0 1,060.0 32.1 698.4 696.3 697.8          Apr.
55.2 14.8 2.8 2.5 14.4 12.0 11.2 2.0 1,071.8 32.4 688.6 703.5 790.6          May56.6 16.1 2.8 2.5 17.0 14.0 12.9 2.0 1,071.1 33.1 676.3 706.6 832.5          June
56.4 15.6 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 13.9 2.1 1,075.3 33.4 667.9 709.9 882.4          July
57.5 17.4 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 16.9 2.2 1,072.7 33.9 676.2 713.0 1,103.9          Aug.56.8 15.2 2.7 2.4 12.2 10.9 1.5 2.3 1,077.8 35.7 671.4 719.2 1,033.2          Sep.
60.1 17.8 2.7 2.4 13.8 10.6 1.2 2.2 1,067.5 33.4 657.4 711.0 931.3          Oct.
60.6 18.3 2.7 2.4 11.7 10.6 1.7 2.0 1,076.7 33.7 653.6 723.6 933.9          Nov.59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6          Dec.
59.4 17.1 2.7 2.4 12.3 10.8 2.5 1.8 1,078.0 36.0 622.5 712.5 996.0 2020          Jan.
59.2 15.3 2.6 2.4 12.9 11.2 2.0 1.9 1,087.4 34.6 638.8 714.0 1,114.6          Feb.60.6 16.5 2.6 2.4 13.1 11.4 1.7 2.5 1,074.1 30.8 674.1 713.4 1,175.2          Mar.
Changes 4
− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
− 6.4 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 2.1 2.1 − 2.6 0.3 30.0 − 5.9 − 36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 − 0.5 22.3 0.1 − 47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
− 0.6 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.7 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 0.6 12.3 2.6 − 32.6 2018          July
− 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 2.8 1.9 7.5 2.3 17.3          Aug.− 1.2 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 0.0 11.8 − 1.1 − 10.0 2.2 − 23.7          Sep.
0.8 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.1 5.5 2.2 − 18.1 − 0.7 24.1          Oct.
− 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.5 − 1.0 0.3 4.4 − 1.6 − 23.1 0.5 7.6          Nov.
0.5 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 0.5 − 0.6 0.0 − 12.7 − 2.6 − 66.2 8.0 4.7          Dec.
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.4 0.9 0.0 13.9 0.2 61.2 − 7.3 31.7 2019          Jan.
− 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 17.8 − 0.0 − 16.4 − 4.0 1.9          Feb.− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.6 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 0.4 15.8 11.6 68.4          Mar.
0.1 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 0.8 1.1 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.5 31.6 − 3.0 − 19.4          Apr.
− 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.0 11.8 0.2 − 10.4 7.2 92.3          May
1.4 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.5 2.0 1.7 0.0 3.4 0.9 − 8.2 4.8 39.5          June
− 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.0 − 4.2 − 2.8 1.0 0.1 1.0 0.2 − 11.7 2.2 59.2          July
1.1 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.1 0.1 − 5.4 0.4 5.8 2.3 221.7          Aug.
− 0.8 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.1 0.1 1.3 1.7 − 8.3 5.3 − 69.0          Sep.
3.4 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 6.5 − 2.1 − 9.7 − 6.9 − 102.1          Oct.
0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 0.2 0.4 − 0.2 5.6 0.2 − 7.2 11.5 4.2          Nov.
− 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 9.2 − 1.3 − 90.5 6.4 0.7          Dec.
0.3 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 − 0.5 1.1 − 0.1 11.0 3.5 59.9 − 17.2 61.4 2020          Jan.
− 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.4 − 0.6 0.1 8.6 − 1.4 15.5 1.3 119.4          Feb.
1.4 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 0.3 0.6 − 13.7 − 4.3 35.3 − 0.3 63.2          Mar.
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which: of which:
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2019         Oct. 1,543 8,494.3 577.0 2,384.8 1,893.8 486.4 4,333.2 398.5 3,250.2 0.4 671.6 112.2 1,087.1
         Nov. 1,535 8,558.1 576.9 2,424.4 1,930.1 489.9 4,351.6 395.8 3,266.3 0.4 676.0 112.1 1,093.2
         Dec. 1,534 8,358.5 526.7 2,319.0 1,830.1 486.3 4,316.9 367.7 3,264.5 0.5 673.3 112.0 1,084.1
2020         Jan. 1,532 8,529.4 560.0 2,368.0 1,875.1 489.4 4,349.9 390.9 3,271.6 0.4 676.0 111.6 1,139.9
         Feb. 1,533 8,714.7 555.1 2,399.0 1,901.1 494.0 4,377.0 396.5 3,289.0 0.5 677.7 105.3 1,278.3
         Mar. 1,533 8,963.4 675.5 2,418.4 1,919.2 495.1 4,414.1 418.8 3,298.4 0.4 679.8 105.5 1,349.9
Commercial banks 6
2020         Feb. 259 3,694.9 294.6 1,001.9 913.6 87.7 1,376.7 237.1 928.3 0.4 205.6 43.8 977.8
         Mar. 259 3,863.6 336.9 1,032.4 944.3 87.3 1,391.3 249.3 928.9 0.3 204.8 43.8 1,059.2
   Big banks 7
2020         Feb. 4 2,259.5 85.3 576.4 539.7 36.7 654.1 129.7 413.0 0.1 107.4 38.1 905.8
         Mar. 4 2,344.8 84.3 586.2 550.1 36.1 654.3 129.8 411.9 0.1 107.1 38.0 981.9
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2020         Feb. 146 1,044.4 118.3 249.9 200.4 49.4 606.4 70.2 443.5 0.1 91.5 5.0 64.8
         Mar. 146 1,080.2 137.1 254.5 204.6 49.6 613.5 74.9 445.3 0.1 91.1 5.0 70.1
   Branches of foreign banks
2020         Feb. 109 390.9 91.1 175.7 173.6 1.6 116.2 37.3 71.7 0.2 6.6 0.7 7.3
         Mar. 109 438.6 115.5 191.7 189.6 1.6 123.4 44.6 71.7 0.1 6.6 0.7 7.3
Landesbanken
2020         Feb. 6 858.8 32.4 275.2 210.2 64.4 419.1 50.6 313.3 0.0 49.7 8.9 123.3
         Mar. 6 871.4 52.5 269.2 204.4 64.2 421.9 54.8 315.3 0.0 47.0 8.9 118.9
Savings banks
2020         Feb. 379 1,357.6 86.6 173.6 58.0 115.4 1,062.2 51.3 844.3 0.0 166.2 14.5 20.5
         Mar. 379 1,362.4 89.0 171.4 56.5 114.7 1,067.6 52.5 846.6 0.0 167.8 14.7 19.7
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2020         Feb. 842 989.9 36.9 171.1 64.3 106.7 743.0 35.5 593.5 0.0 114.0 17.7 21.2
         Mar. 842 993.4 40.5 166.9 60.4 106.3 746.8 36.1 596.3 0.0 114.4 17.7 21.4
Mortgage banks
2020         Feb. 10 232.3 1.9 24.1 14.9 9.2 197.5 3.1 175.4 − 19.0 0.2 8.6
         Mar. 10 233.9 1.9 24.5 15.1 9.4 198.7 3.1 175.7 − 19.9 0.2 8.6
Building and loan associations
2020         Feb. 19 238.1 1.4 48.1 31.9 16.1 184.2 1.0 157.3 . 26.0 0.3 4.1
         Mar. 19 239.6 1.5 48.5 32.2 16.2 185.3 1.0 158.3 . 25.9 0.3 4.2
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2020         Feb. 18 1,343.1 101.2 705.0 608.2 94.5 394.2 17.9 277.1 − 97.3 20.0 122.7
         Mar. 18 1,399.1 153.1 705.4 606.3 96.9 402.6 21.9 277.4 0.0 100.1 19.9 118.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2020         Feb. 143 1,242.6 169.6 390.8 349.8 40.4 544.1 93.4 355.5 0.4 93.2 3.2 135.0
         Mar. 143 1,337.0 209.5 418.7 377.8 40.2 557.6 108.9 356.1 0.2 89.9 3.2 148.0
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2020         Feb. 34 851.7 78.5 215.1 176.2 38.7 427.9 56.2 283.7 0.2 86.6 2.5 127.8
         Mar. 34 898.4 93.9 227.0 188.2 38.6 434.2 64.3 284.5 0.2 83.2 2.5 140.7
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,837.1 560.1 1,276.9 3,896.3 2,327.0 279.0 668.4 43.1 583.9 546.5 38.0 1,164.7 547.5 1,048.8 2019          Oct.
1,846.4 579.0 1,267.3 3,926.4 2,365.0 273.9 667.5 43.9 582.3 545.8 37.7 1,182.8 548.9 1,053.7          Nov.1,690.8 446.6 1,244.2 3,890.7 2,348.7 257.2 667.2 29.2 581.8 546.4 35.9 1,172.2 552.5 1,052.3          Dec.
1,787.7 558.8 1,228.9 3,906.0 2,356.9 270.6 665.9 41.5 577.2 543.4 35.3 1,180.6 552.1 1,103.0 2020          Jan.
1,817.4 567.0 1,250.3 3,931.2 2,383.5 272.9 665.0 40.3 575.0 541.7 34.9 1,193.1 552.4 1,220.6          Feb.1,961.6 610.8 1,350.8 3,985.6 2,451.1 269.7 659.5 32.3 570.9 538.3 34.4 1,177.3 556.2 1,282.7          Mar.
Commercial banks 6
887.7 395.2 492.4 1,568.2 1,031.7 165.4 258.3 38.3 98.6 93.1 14.3 170.8 200.1 868.1 2020          Feb.
980.4 424.9 555.4 1,581.2 1,053.8 159.6 255.6 29.1 98.1 92.6 14.1 166.8 203.0 932.2          Mar.
Big banks 7
456.7 187.6 269.1 766.8 486.1 94.1 101.7 38.2 82.7 78.0 2.3 124.2 110.2 801.6 2020          Feb.
492.8 196.1 296.8 757.6 483.9 89.8 99.4 28.5 82.3 77.7 2.3 120.8 111.3 862.3          Mar.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
220.8 82.5 138.3 641.5 434.8 45.2 134.0 0.1 15.7 14.8 11.9 45.9 80.2 56.1 2020          Feb.
238.0 88.4 149.6 654.4 449.2 44.5 133.5 0.6 15.5 14.6 11.7 45.4 81.9 60.4          Mar.
Branches of foreign banks
210.2 125.1 85.0 159.9 110.8 26.1 22.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.6 9.7 10.5 2020          Feb.
249.6 140.5 109.1 169.2 120.8 25.3 22.7 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.6 9.8 9.5          Mar.
Landesbanken
244.5 59.4 185.2 249.7 112.3 44.9 85.9 1.7 6.3 6.2 0.3 196.5 43.4 124.7 2020          Feb.
244.7 55.8 188.9 270.7 134.3 45.2 84.7 3.1 6.2 6.1 0.2 190.3 43.1 122.5          Mar.
Savings banks
149.2 14.7 134.5 1,021.3 693.4 15.6 14.7 − 283.2 262.7 14.4 19.1 122.4 45.7 2020          Feb.
155.2 13.3 141.9 1,019.5 695.8 14.0 14.7 − 280.9 260.7 14.2 19.0 122.7 46.0          Mar.
 
Credit cooperatives
 
124.9 3.5 121.3 737.2 499.8 32.9 13.6 − 186.5 179.4 4.4 11.2 83.9 32.8 2020          Feb.
128.7 3.8 124.9 736.1 500.8 32.2 13.5 − 185.3 178.5 4.3 10.8 84.1 33.7          Mar.
Mortgage banks
48.1 3.5 44.6 67.5 2.4 3.0 62.0 − − − . 99.1 10.3 7.2 2020          Feb.
51.2 3.9 47.3 67.3 2.6 3.2 61.4 − − − . 98.0 10.6 6.9          Mar.
Building and loan associations
23.2 2.7 20.5 190.3 3.1 2.4 184.3 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.7 12.0 10.9 2020          Feb.
24.8 2.8 22.0 190.0 3.1 2.4 184.1 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.7 12.2 10.9          Mar.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
339.8 88.1 251.7 97.1 40.9 8.7 46.0 0.3 − − . 694.6 80.3 131.2 2020          Feb.
376.7 106.3 270.4 120.7 60.7 13.0 45.5 0.2 − − . 690.6 80.6 130.5          Mar.
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
437.7 216.4 221.3 575.1 422.5 49.5 79.0 2.8 19.4 19.1 4.8 35.2 61.5 133.2 2020          Feb.
506.5 245.4 261.0 593.1 442.9 48.2 78.2 1.9 19.2 18.9 4.6 34.9 62.8 139.7          Mar.
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
227.5 91.2 136.2 415.2 311.6 23.4 56.3 2.8 19.1 18.8 4.7 34.5 51.8 122.7 2020          Feb.
256.9 104.9 151.9 423.9 322.1 22.9 55.5 1.9 18.9 18.6 4.5 34.3 53.1 130.2          Mar.
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to Ap ril 2018)
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Br anches (with
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking cat egories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2018         Oct. 36.6 505.8 1,323.8 1,082.0 0.0 1.4 240.3 6.1 3,384.4 2,977.1 0.2 0.6 406.6
         Nov. 36.5 496.8 1,350.3 1,107.7 0.0 1.3 241.3 6.0 3,397.3 2,992.0 0.2 0.8 404.3
         Dec. 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019         Jan. 36.5 451.8 1,346.4 1,106.7 0.0 0.8 238.9 6.1 3,405.3 3,003.3 0.2 1.0 400.8
         Feb. 36.6 471.9 1,361.8 1,118.8 0.0 0.8 242.1 6.1 3,413.6 3,014.0 0.2 0.3 399.0
         Mar. 36.8 476.4 1,380.3 1,137.3 0.0 1.0 242.0 6.0 3,425.0 3,026.0 0.3 1.0 397.7
         Apr. 38.0 501.2 1,363.8 1,123.2 0.0 0.8 239.8 6.0 3,428.9 3,034.7 0.2 1.1 393.0
         May 37.7 517.6 1,371.8 1,129.7 0.0 0.8 241.3 5.5 3,445.6 3,049.5 0.2 1.5 394.4
         June 37.7 477.9 1,362.5 1,121.2 0.0 1.0 240.3 5.2 3,467.1 3,067.0 0.2 1.3 398.5
         July 37.2 460.1 1,355.5 1,113.6 0.0 0.9 241.0 5.1 3,476.1 3,075.1 0.2 2.3 398.6
         Aug. 38.0 462.1 1,365.8 1,126.4 0.0 0.9 238.4 4.8 3,491.7 3,087.2 0.2 2.9 401.4
         Sep. 37.8 452.7 1,354.1 1,115.7 0.0 0.8 237.6 4.7 3,499.8 3,094.5 0.2 3.8 401.3
         Oct. 39.0 529.1 1,252.1 1,013.6 0.0 0.9 237.6 4.6 3,506.7 3,104.5 0.2 3.4 398.6
         Nov. 39.9 529.6 1,301.7 1,059.6 0.0 1.1 241.0 4.6 3,523.5 3,121.1 0.2 3.3 398.9
         Dec. 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020         Jan. 39.2 515.2 1,256.9 1,015.4 0.0 0.8 240.7 4.6 3,528.4 3,125.8 0.3 3.3 399.1
         Feb. 40.0 509.4 1,280.0 1,035.2 0.0 0.9 243.8 5.0 3,544.7 3,141.9 0.3 4.6 397.8
         Mar. 47.9 621.7 1,273.0 1,029.4 0.0 1.0 242.6 5.1 3,580.0 3,174.1 0.2 5.1 400.6
Changes *
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.2
2019 + 2.8 + 59.7 − 63.0 − 61.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 5.5
2018         Oct. + 1.1 + 34.7 − 25.4 − 23.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.6
         Nov. − 0.1 − 9.0 + 26.6 + 25.7 − − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 12.9 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.2
         Dec. + 3.9 − 80.6 − 26.9 − 24.0 − − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5
2019         Jan. − 3.9 + 35.6 + 23.0 + 23.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.8 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 3.1
         Feb. + 0.1 + 20.1 + 15.3 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 8.3 + 10.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.7
         Mar. + 0.2 + 3.8 + 22.0 + 22.7 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 12.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.8
         Apr. + 1.2 + 24.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.7
         May − 0.3 + 16.4 + 8.0 + 6.5 − − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 16.7 + 14.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.5
         June − 0.0 − 39.7 − 9.2 − 8.4 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 21.5 + 17.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 4.1
         July − 0.5 − 17.7 − 7.2 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0
         Aug. + 0.8 + 1.9 + 10.3 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.2 + 15.6 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 2.8
         Sep. − 0.2 − 9.4 − 9.2 − 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.1 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.1
         Oct. + 1.2 + 76.4 − 102.1 − 102.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.8
         Nov. + 0.9 + 0.4 + 49.6 + 46.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 16.8 + 16.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3
         Dec. + 3.3 − 53.0 − 46.9 − 43.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
2020         Jan. − 4.0 + 38.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 0.8 − 5.9 + 23.1 + 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 16.3 + 16.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.3
         Mar. + 7.8 +112.4 − 7.0 − 5.9 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 35.3 + 32.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 2.8
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
− 17.9 87.9 1,032.9 111.3 921.6 0.0 4.8 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 577.0 38.6 33.7 2018          Oct.
− 17.9 87.7 1,045.8 115.5 930.3 0.0 4.7 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 576.9 37.9 33.7          Nov.− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9          Dec.
− 17.8 90.8 1,039.4 114.9 924.6 0.0 4.7 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 578.5 36.7 33.8 2019          Jan.
− 17.8 90.8 1,045.6 118.2 927.4 0.0 4.7 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 579.5 36.1 34.0          Feb.− 17.6 90.9 1,049.4 122.3 927.1 0.0 4.7 3,565.3 2,101.1 846.4 582.0 35.8 33.9          Mar.
− 17.5 90.7 1,060.8 131.5 929.3 0.0 4.6 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 582.3 35.4 33.9          Apr.
− 17.5 91.2 1,056.4 121.5 934.9 0.0 4.6 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 582.5 35.2 33.7          May− 17.5 90.9 1,047.1 122.5 924.6 0.0 4.6 3,609.5 2,150.7 841.2 582.7 34.9 33.4          June
− 17.1 91.0 1,053.9 123.2 930.6 0.0 4.5 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 581.8 34.8 32.9          July
− 17.1 90.3 1,061.4 127.7 933.7 0.0 4.5 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 580.3 34.7 32.7          Aug.− 17.0 90.0 1,037.5 121.4 916.1 0.0 4.5 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 579.0 34.4 32.6          Sep.
− 17.1 90.1 1,049.3 129.3 920.0 0.0 4.5 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 577.2 34.1 32.5          Oct.
− 17.1 90.2 1,055.9 126.6 929.4 0.0 4.5 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 575.7 33.8 32.5          Nov.− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5          Dec.
− 16.9 90.0 1,031.4 125.4 906.0 0.0 4.4 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 570.7 32.6 32.3 2020          Jan.
− 16.9 86.1 1,046.8 133.2 913.6 0.0 4.4 3,675.5 2,254.0 820.8 568.5 32.2 32.8          Feb.− 16.9 86.3 1,134.7 147.5 987.2 0.0 4.3 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 564.5 31.8 32.5          Mar.
Changes *
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018− − 0.7 + 0.1 − 8.6 + 1.6 − 10.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 2019
− − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2 2018          Oct.
− − 0.0 − 0.2 + 13.0 + 4.2 + 8.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 3.2 − 24.9 − 8.9 − 16.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2          Dec.
− − 0.2 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 9.4 + 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2019          Jan.
− − − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Feb.− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.4 + 12.0 − 3.8 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Mar.
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 9.2 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.3 − 10.0 + 5.7 − + 0.0 + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          May− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.2 + 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.7 + 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5          July
− + 0.0 − 0.6 + 7.6 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 0.0 − + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2          Aug.− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 21.4 − 6.3 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          Sep.
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 11.8 + 7.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 6.7 − 2.7 + 9.4 − + 0.0 + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 0.2 − 45.8 − 19.3 − 26.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec.
− − 0.3 − 0.4 + 21.2 + 18.2 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 2020          Jan.
− − 0.0 − 3.9 + 15.4 + 7.8 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 17.4 + 18.9 + 1.1 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4          Feb.− − 0.1 + 0.2 + 87.9 + 14.3 + 73.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar.
including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2018         Oct. 0.3 1,013.0 772.7 492.7 280.0 2.1 238.1 2.8 772.5 495.4 115.8 379.6 6.0 271.1
         Nov. 0.3 1,007.9 765.4 491.4 274.0 1.5 241.0 2.9 776.4 500.3 117.6 382.7 5.9 270.2
         Dec. 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019         Jan. 0.2 1,031.6 787.8 518.2 269.6 1.3 242.5 3.1 784.3 511.1 119.4 391.8 6.0 267.2
         Feb. 0.2 1,031.8 785.3 511.5 273.7 1.7 244.8 3.2 782.0 504.5 110.6 393.9 5.9 271.5
         Mar. 0.2 1,092.9 845.1 565.9 279.2 2.0 245.8 3.2 799.2 519.8 122.8 397.0 7.8 271.6
         Apr. 0.2 1,106.2 858.3 579.0 279.3 2.8 245.2 3.3 807.9 529.0 130.3 398.7 6.6 272.2
         May 0.2 1,090.6 840.9 564.1 276.8 2.8 246.8 3.6 820.1 542.9 140.2 402.7 6.4 270.8
         June 0.2 1,109.3 857.3 578.3 279.0 3.1 248.9 3.8 816.2 535.9 135.8 400.1 6.6 273.6
         July 0.2 1,099.0 844.6 563.6 281.0 3.3 251.1 3.8 829.3 548.2 143.9 404.3 8.6 272.5
         Aug. 0.2 1,099.5 844.9 562.8 282.1 3.4 251.1 3.9 850.7 564.8 158.0 406.8 9.4 276.4
         Sep. 0.2 1,120.8 867.0 583.4 283.5 3.9 249.9 3.9 826.7 539.6 131.1 408.5 8.6 278.5
         Oct. 0.2 1,132.8 880.2 590.3 289.9 3.8 248.8 3.9 826.5 544.3 140.7 403.7 9.2 273.0
         Nov. 0.2 1,122.8 870.5 585.6 284.9 3.4 248.9 3.8 828.1 541.1 136.8 404.3 9.9 277.1
         Dec. 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020         Jan. 0.2 1,111.1 859.7 578.2 281.5 2.7 248.7 3.8 821.5 536.9 133.0 403.8 7.7 277.0
         Feb. 0.2 1,119.0 865.9 590.7 275.2 2.9 250.2 3.8 832.3 543.7 136.8 406.9 8.6 279.9
         Mar. 0.3 1,145.4 889.8 615.5 274.4 3.0 252.5 3.5 834.1 543.2 135.9 407.4 11.7 279.2
Changes *
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.7
2019 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 11.3 − 21.9 + 10.7 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 26.8 + 19.9 + 12.7 + 7.3 + 3.0 + 3.8
2018         Oct. − 0.0 − 7.7 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 14.8 + 10.5 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
         Nov. + 0.0 − 4.9 − 6.5 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Dec. − 0.0 + 8.0 + 8.2 + 13.2 − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 9.5 − 17.4 + 7.9 − 2.0 − 2.0
2019         Jan. − 0.0 + 17.6 + 16.1 + 14.5 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 22.2 + 21.4 + 19.4 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.9
         Feb. + 0.0 − 1.8 − 4.4 − 7.7 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 8.3 − 9.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 4.2
         Mar. + 0.0 + 28.2 + 27.8 + 24.7 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 2.5 − 3.4 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 2.0
         Apr. + 0.0 + 13.7 + 13.5 + 13.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.6 + 7.7 + 1.9 − 1.1 + 0.7
         May − 0.0 − 17.6 − 19.4 − 16.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 12.1 + 13.9 + 10.0 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 1.6
         June + 0.0 + 23.8 + 21.3 + 15.8 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.4
         July − 0.0 − 15.1 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 7.7 + 2.2 + 2.0 − 1.6
         Aug. + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 19.0 + 14.5 + 13.9 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.7
         Sep. − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.5 − 11.3 − 10.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 1.6
         Oct. + 0.0 + 18.1 + 18.9 + 9.8 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 7.5 + 10.1 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.2
         Nov. − 0.0 − 14.2 − 13.8 − 6.7 − 7.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 6.1 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 0.7 + 3.7
         Dec. + 0.0 − 53.1 − 51.2 − 50.3 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 29.1 − 24.9 − 24.9 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.9
2020         Jan. − 0.0 + 42.2 + 41.2 + 43.2 − 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 23.1 + 21.1 + 21.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.9
         Feb. + 0.0 + 6.5 + 4.7 + 11.5 − 6.8 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.1 + 6.4 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 2.8
         Mar. + 0.0 + 27.5 + 24.9 + 25.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.5 + 1.6 + 3.1 − 0.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 201032.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 201811.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.8 22.5 702.4 413.6 288.9 200.1 88.8 0.0 271.0 129.8 141.2 82.8 58.4 0.1 2018          Oct.
11.8 22.3 693.6 410.5 283.1 194.4 88.7 0.0 258.1 132.6 125.5 67.7 57.8 0.2          Nov.11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1          Dec.
11.7 21.5 674.5 405.5 269.1 182.9 86.1 0.0 268.4 132.7 135.8 77.9 57.9 0.1 2019          Jan.
11.8 21.7 699.2 430.9 268.3 181.1 87.3 0.0 241.7 110.2 131.5 73.6 57.8 0.1          Feb.13.0 21.5 762.8 464.1 298.7 209.1 89.6 1.3 259.1 113.8 145.3 87.7 57.6 0.1          Mar.
13.0 22.3 787.1 441.7 345.4 255.0 90.4 1.3 268.4 124.2 144.2 86.9 57.3 0.1          Apr.
13.0 22.3 783.6 482.4 301.2 210.0 91.2 1.3 261.3 120.7 140.6 83.6 57.0 0.1          May12.8 22.3 787.2 471.3 315.9 225.1 90.7 1.3 265.6 126.9 138.8 81.8 56.9 0.1          June
12.8 22.0 768.5 460.7 307.8 214.3 93.5 1.3 262.9 126.2 136.7 79.5 57.2 0.1          July
12.8 22.0 779.4 436.0 343.4 247.8 95.6 1.3 274.2 127.1 147.1 90.2 56.9 0.1          Aug.12.8 22.2 806.6 440.4 366.2 269.8 96.4 1.3 244.6 123.1 121.5 63.1 58.4 0.1          Sep.
12.6 21.8 787.8 430.9 356.9 259.3 97.6 1.1 251.8 119.9 131.9 73.3 58.6 0.1          Oct.
12.6 21.6 790.4 452.4 338.0 239.5 98.5 1.1 251.6 120.5 131.1 72.4 58.7 0.1          Nov.11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1          Dec.
11.4 21.4 756.2 433.4 322.8 223.1 99.8 − 247.8 121.8 126.0 68.1 57.8 0.1 2020          Jan.
11.4 19.0 770.5 433.8 336.7 230.1 106.6 − 255.7 129.5 126.2 66.5 59.6 0.1          Feb.11.4 19.0 826.9 463.3 363.6 250.9 112.6 − 269.0 146.3 122.7 62.8 60.0 0.1          Mar.
Changes *
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018− 0.3 − 0.9 − 9.5 − 49.4 + 39.8 + 28.0 + 11.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 2019
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 12.5 − 14.5 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − + 0.7 − 3.8 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 0.0 2018          Oct.
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 2.8 − 5.4 − 5.4 − 0.0 − − 12.7 + 2.9 − 15.6 − 15.0 − 0.6 + 0.0          Nov.+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 49.1 − 40.2 − 8.9 − 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 22.3 − 4.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 31.6 + 34.9 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 0.7 − + 36.9 + 22.5 + 14.5 + 14.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2019          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 24.8 − 1.2 − 2.2 + 1.0 − − 27.2 − 22.6 − 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Feb.+ 1.3 − 0.2 + 32.9 + 22.7 + 10.2 + 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 1.6 + 3.5 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.8 + 24.4 − 22.2 + 46.6 + 45.9 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 10.4 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 −          Apr.
− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2 + 40.4 − 44.6 − 45.3 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 7.2 − 7.9 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.0 + 7.2 − 9.6 + 16.8 + 14.6 + 2.2 − + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          June
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 22.0 − 12.0 − 10.0 − 12.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 2.4 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 25.9 + 34.3 + 32.8 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.6 + 10.0 + 10.3 − 0.4 −          Aug.− 0.0 + 0.1 + 9.8 − 3.1 + 12.9 + 12.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 2.3 − 18.6 − 20.0 + 1.4 + 0.0          Sep.
− 0.2 − 0.3 − 14.6 − 8.1 − 6.5 − 8.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.7 + 10.9 + 10.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 20.3 − 20.9 − 21.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.− 1.1 − 0.2 − 106.0 −111.5 + 5.5 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 20.7 − 7.7 − 12.9 − 11.4 − 1.6 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 73.0 + 92.9 − 19.8 − 21.6 + 1.7 − + 16.7 + 9.2 + 7.6 + 7.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Jan.
− 0.0 − 2.4 + 13.3 + 5.0 + 8.4 + 5.9 + 2.5 − + 7.6 + 7.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.0          Feb.+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 57.2 + 29.9 + 27.3 + 21.1 + 6.2 − + 14.2 + 17.4 − 3.2 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 0.0          Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2018         Oct. 3,384.4 2,977.3 252.6 228.0 227.4 0.6 24.6 24.7 − 0.1 3,131.8 2,718.7
         Nov. 3,397.3 2,992.2 251.7 227.9 227.4 0.5 23.9 23.6 0.3 3,145.6 2,732.7
         Dec. 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019         Jan. 3,405.3 3,003.5 255.8 230.8 230.3 0.5 25.0 24.5 0.5 3,149.4 2,738.4
         Feb. 3,413.6 3,014.2 257.6 235.4 234.9 0.5 22.2 22.4 − 0.2 3,156.0 2,746.4
         Mar. 3,425.0 3,026.3 261.6 241.0 240.4 0.6 20.6 20.2 0.4 3,163.4 2,755.8
         Apr. 3,428.9 3,034.9 256.3 235.0 234.3 0.7 21.4 21.0 0.4 3,172.6 2,769.9
         May 3,445.6 3,049.7 257.3 236.6 235.7 0.9 20.7 20.1 0.6 3,188.3 2,785.8
         June 3,467.1 3,067.2 271.3 249.8 249.2 0.6 21.5 20.8 0.7 3,195.8 2,795.2
         July 3,476.1 3,075.3 270.3 243.8 243.2 0.6 26.5 24.9 1.6 3,205.9 2,807.7
         Aug. 3,491.7 3,087.4 266.2 238.8 238.3 0.5 27.4 25.0 2.4 3,225.5 2,825.7
         Sep. 3,499.8 3,094.7 269.2 246.1 245.6 0.6 23.1 19.9 3.2 3,230.6 2,831.0
         Oct. 3,506.7 3,104.7 261.6 237.1 236.5 0.6 24.5 21.6 2.8 3,245.1 2,849.5
         Nov. 3,523.5 3,121.3 262.6 239.8 239.2 0.6 22.8 20.1 2.7 3,260.9 2,864.3
         Dec. 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020         Jan. 3,528.4 3,126.0 261.5 236.3 235.7 0.6 25.2 22.6 2.6 3,266.9 2,874.2
         Feb. 3,544.7 3,142.3 264.8 240.0 239.3 0.7 24.8 20.8 4.0 3,279.9 2,888.9
         Mar. 3,580.0 3,174.3 288.4 261.9 261.1 0.8 26.4 22.2 4.2 3,291.6 2,892.2
Changes *
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2018         Oct. + 0.5 + 5.3 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 2.2 − 1.1 + 5.2 + 9.1
         Nov. + 12.9 + 14.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 13.8 + 14.0
         Dec. − 2.9 − 1.8 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 10.8 + 13.1 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 5.6
         Feb. + 8.3 + 10.7 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 6.5 + 8.0
         Mar. + 10.9 + 12.0 + 4.1 + 5.7 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.8
         Apr. + 3.8 + 8.5 − 4.7 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 13.4
         May + 16.7 + 14.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.7 + 16.0
         June + 21.5 + 17.6 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 13.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.4
         July + 9.2 + 8.2 − 1.0 − 6.1 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 10.2 + 12.9
         Aug. + 15.6 + 12.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 19.8 + 18.2
         Sep. + 8.1 + 7.3 + 3.1 + 7.4 + 7.3 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 5.1 + 0.8 + 5.1 + 4.8
         Oct. + 6.9 + 10.0 − 7.4 − 8.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 14.4 + 18.4
         Nov. + 16.8 + 16.7 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 15.9 + 14.9
         Dec. − 1.9 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.5
2020         Jan. + 6.8 + 6.5 + 1.1 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 7.2
         Feb. + 16.3 + 16.2 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.3 + 13.0 + 14.7
         Mar. + 35.3 + 32.1 + 23.6 + 21.9 + 21.8 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 11.7 + 3.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 20102,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 20182,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5 2019
2,484.5 279.7 2,204.9 234.1 16.6 413.1 240.7 20.2 220.5 172.5 − 1.3 2018          Oct.
2,500.3 284.2 2,216.1 232.4 16.6 412.9 240.9 20.0 220.9 171.9 − 1.3          Nov.2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4          Dec.
2,507.3 283.1 2,224.2 231.1 16.5 411.1 241.4 19.3 222.0 169.7 − 1.3 2019          Jan.
2,516.1 284.2 2,231.9 230.3 16.5 409.6 240.8 18.9 221.9 168.7 − 1.3          Feb.2,525.3 286.6 2,238.7 230.5 16.3 407.6 240.4 18.7 221.7 167.2 − 1.3          Mar.
2,539.8 291.3 2,248.5 230.0 16.2 402.7 239.8 18.4 221.4 162.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,554.8 293.7 2,261.1 231.0 16.3 402.5 239.1 18.2 220.9 163.4 − 1.3          May2,560.3 294.3 2,266.1 234.9 16.2 400.6 237.0 17.9 219.0 163.7 − 1.3          June
2,571.9 295.2 2,276.8 235.8 15.8 398.2 235.4 17.4 218.0 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,588.9 298.3 2,290.5 236.8 15.9 399.7 235.2 17.4 217.8 164.5 − 1.2          Aug.2,594.1 297.2 2,296.8 236.9 15.8 399.6 235.2 17.0 218.2 164.4 − 1.2          Sep.
2,611.0 299.7 2,311.3 238.5 15.9 395.6 235.5 16.9 218.6 160.1 − 1.2          Oct.
2,624.4 301.6 2,322.8 240.0 15.9 396.5 237.6 17.6 220.0 158.9 − 1.2          Nov.2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5          Dec.
2,631.8 300.0 2,331.8 242.4 15.7 392.7 236.0 17.0 219.0 156.7 − 1.2 2020          Jan.
2,646.4 302.5 2,344.0 242.5 15.7 391.0 235.7 17.2 218.5 155.3 − 1.2          Feb.2,654.8 304.5 2,350.3 237.5 15.6 399.4 236.3 17.2 219.1 163.1 − 1.2          Mar.
Changes *
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018+ 126.0 + 18.9 + 107.2 + 6.8 − 0.8 − 17.8 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 12.3 − + 0.1 2019
+ 9.2 + 1.0 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − − 0.0 2018          Oct.
+ 15.8 + 4.6 + 11.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Nov.− 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 − + 0.2          Dec.
+ 8.0 + 0.5 + 7.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 − − 0.2 2019          Jan.
+ 8.7 + 1.1 + 7.6 − 0.7 − − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.0 − −          Feb.+ 9.1 + 2.1 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.5 − + 0.0          Mar.
+ 13.9 + 4.5 + 9.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 15.0 + 2.4 + 12.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − − 0.0          May+ 5.6 + 0.6 + 5.0 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.2 − − 0.0          June
+ 11.7 + 1.0 + 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 17.1 + 3.3 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 4.7 − 0.7 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 16.8 + 2.4 + 14.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 13.4 + 1.9 + 11.6 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − + 0.3          Dec.
+ 5.3 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 − − 0.3 2020          Jan.
+ 14.6 + 2.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.3 − + 0.0          Feb.+ 8.4 + 2.1 + 6.3 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 7.8 − − 0.0          Mar.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2018 2,727.0 1,382.2 1,391.2 1,116.4 274.8 1,483.6 392.7 139.3 116.5 71.9 138.7 53.2 50.6 157.3
2019         Mar. 2,765.7 1,437.3 1,404.9 1,152.3 252.6 1,513.5 398.4 144.4 117.8 74.0 141.0 53.6 50.1 160.5
         June 2,809.5 1,469.6 1,427.8 1,182.8 244.9 1,539.7 405.2 150.3 120.5 76.2 140.5 54.4 50.5 161.5
         Sep. 2,839.6 1,487.2 1,450.4 1,197.0 253.4 1,551.7 411.6 150.1 118.6 77.4 139.9 54.8 50.1 166.2
         Dec. 2,864.8 1,512.1 1,470.4 1,213.0 257.4 1,560.5 416.1 146.6 119.0 77.1 141.6 54.2 50.3 168.2
2020         Mar. 2,915.9 1,533.2 1,488.6 1,225.8 262.8 1,598.9 421.9 155.8 120.1 79.4 143.5 54.5 52.5 176.4
 Short-term lending
2018 227.6 − 7.2 − 7.2 195.9 4.1 35.5 4.9 14.7 48.3 3.7 4.9 28.0
2019         Mar. 240.4 − 7.7 − 7.7 210.1 4.5 39.5 6.2 15.8 49.6 4.0 5.0 29.7
         June 249.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 217.3 4.6 42.9 7.2 16.5 48.6 4.7 5.2 29.3
         Sep. 245.6 − 8.4 − 8.4 213.6 5.0 41.1 5.3 16.7 48.0 4.4 4.5 30.1
         Dec. 238.4 − 8.1 − 8.1 206.2 4.7 35.9 5.6 15.7 48.6 3.8 4.6 27.0
2020         Mar. 261.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 230.3 4.9 43.4 6.7 17.1 49.5 4.1 6.1 34.6
 Medium-term lending
2018 282.6 − 35.4 − 35.4 202.5 15.4 24.9 4.5 12.5 19.0 4.5 10.6 49.0
2019         Mar. 286.6 − 35.1 − 35.1 206.0 15.4 25.4 4.5 12.9 19.3 4.5 10.4 49.1
         June 294.3 − 36.0 − 36.0 212.6 16.1 26.1 5.2 13.5 19.5 4.5 10.4 49.0
         Sep. 297.1 − 36.4 − 36.4 215.4 16.5 27.3 4.9 13.7 19.6 4.7 10.0 50.1
         Dec. 301.3 − 36.6 − 36.6 219.5 16.6 28.5 4.9 13.9 19.7 4.6 10.2 52.0
2020         Mar. 304.5 − 36.9 − 36.9 222.8 17.0 29.7 5.1 13.9 20.4 4.5 10.4 51.3
 Long-term lending
2018 2,216.8 1,382.2 1,348.6 1,116.4 232.2 1,085.2 373.2 78.9 107.2 44.7 71.4 45.0 35.1 80.3
2019         Mar. 2,238.7 1,437.3 1,362.1 1,152.3 209.8 1,097.4 378.5 79.5 107.2 45.3 72.1 45.0 34.6 81.7
         June 2,266.1 1,469.6 1,383.8 1,182.8 200.9 1,109.8 384.5 81.3 108.1 46.2 72.4 45.3 34.9 83.2
         Sep. 2,296.8 1,487.2 1,405.6 1,197.0 208.6 1,122.7 390.2 81.8 108.5 46.9 72.3 45.7 35.6 85.9
         Dec. 2,325.1 1,512.1 1,425.7 1,213.0 212.7 1,134.9 394.8 82.2 108.6 47.6 73.3 45.8 35.5 89.2
2020         Mar. 2,350.2 1,533.2 1,443.4 1,225.8 217.6 1,145.7 400.0 82.7 108.4 48.4 73.6 45.9 36.0 90.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2019         Q1 + 38.7 + 15.1 + 13.5 + 11.4 + 2.1 + 29.8 + 5.5 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 4.9
         Q2 + 43.8 + 16.3 + 20.1 + 13.5 + 6.7 + 26.8 + 6.9 + 5.8 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 1.0
         Q3 + 29.8 + 18.0 + 22.4 + 15.4 + 7.0 + 12.0 + 6.1 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 4.8
         Q4 + 25.3 + 20.1 + 20.0 + 13.9 + 6.1 + 9.2 + 4.6 − 3.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.0
2020         Q1 + 51.0 + 15.6 + 17.8 + 12.4 + 5.4 + 38.2 + 5.4 + 9.2 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 8.2
 Short-term lending
2019         Q1 + 12.9 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 14.3 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 3.5
         Q2 + 9.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Q3 − 3.6 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.3 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8
         Q4 − 7.0 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 7.5 − 0.2 − 5.2 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 3.2
2020         Q1 + 22.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 24.2 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 7.6
 Medium-term lending
2019         Q1 + 3.7 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Q2 + 7.4 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Q3 + 3.5 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.3
         Q4 + 4.2 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 1.9
2020         Q1 + 3.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.7
 Long-term lending
2019         Q1 + 22.0 + 15.1 + 13.3 + 11.4 + 1.9 + 12.3 + 5.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.5
         Q2 + 27.0 + 16.3 + 18.9 + 13.5 + 5.5 + 12.7 + 6.1 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.5
         Q3 + 30.0 + 18.0 + 21.3 + 15.4 + 5.9 + 12.7 + 5.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.7
         Q4 + 28.1 + 20.1 + 20.1 + 13.9 + 6.2 + 12.6 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.3
2020         Q1 + 25.1 + 15.6 + 17.3 + 12.4 + 4.9 + 10.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.4
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
756.0 237.0 47.3 196.9 432.6 48.0 1,228.4 994.8 233.7 172.9 8.3 15.0 3.7 2018
772.0 242.9 48.7 197.6 436.3 48.6 1,237.2 1,002.7 234.4 173.7 8.0 15.1 3.8 2019          Mar.
785.8 247.4 51.6 199.3 441.1 48.6 1,254.6 1,018.8 235.9 175.6 8.0 15.2 3.8          June794.7 252.9 50.9 200.6 444.7 48.3 1,272.5 1,035.0 237.5 176.4 8.5 15.4 3.8          Sep.803.6 264.5 51.1 193.9 447.5 47.6 1,288.4 1,050.4 238.0 176.5 7.9 15.9 3.9          Dec.
816.6 273.2 54.2 196.6 450.6 48.0 1,301.0 1,062.8 238.2 178.0 7.9 16.0 3.9 2020          Mar.
Short-term lending
55.9 12.0 8.1 10.4 24.0 5.2 31.2 3.1 28.2 1.5 8.3 0.5 − 201860.1 12.1 9.3 10.4 24.4 5.8 29.8 3.2 26.5 1.5 8.0 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
63.0 12.5 10.2 10.6 24.6 5.6 31.3 3.4 28.0 1.9 8.0 0.5 0.0          June63.5 13.5 9.5 10.7 24.3 5.4 31.5 3.4 28.1 1.6 8.5 0.5 0.0          Sep.65.0 14.4 9.7 10.2 23.9 4.9 31.6 3.3 28.2 1.3 7.9 0.7 0.0          Dec.
69.0 14.8 12.2 11.1 23.8 5.2 30.0 3.4 26.6 1.4 7.9 0.7 0.0 2020          Mar.
Medium-term lending
77.5 14.8 9.9 21.3 31.5 3.5 79.6 19.9 59.7 56.4 − 0.5 0.1 201880.0 15.4 9.6 21.8 31.7 3.5 80.1 19.6 60.5 57.2 − 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
84.4 16.6 11.0 22.4 32.2 3.6 81.2 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          June85.1 17.5 11.2 22.6 32.0 3.7 81.3 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          Sep.85.7 18.1 11.0 22.9 31.9 3.5 81.4 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec.
87.4 19.1 11.6 23.3 31.9 3.6 81.2 19.8 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 2020          Mar.
Long-term lending
622.6 210.2 29.2 165.3 377.2 39.3 1,117.6 971.8 145.8 115.0 − 14.0 3.7 2018631.9 215.4 29.8 165.4 380.3 39.3 1,127.2 979.9 147.4 115.1 − 14.1 3.7 2019          Mar.
638.5 218.3 30.3 166.3 384.3 39.4 1,142.0 995.5 146.5 115.8 − 14.2 3.8          June646.1 222.0 30.3 167.3 388.4 39.2 1,159.7 1,011.7 147.9 116.7 − 14.4 3.7          Sep.652.9 232.0 30.4 160.9 391.7 39.1 1,175.5 1,027.1 148.3 117.1 − 14.7 3.8          Dec.
660.2 239.3 30.5 162.3 394.9 39.3 1,189.8 1,039.5 150.2 118.6 − 14.8 3.8 2020          Mar.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 14.1 + 4.6 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.6 + 8.8 + 8.0 + 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 15.5 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 4.3 − 0.1 + 16.9 + 13.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 9.0 + 5.6 − 0.7 + 1.2 + 3.6 − 0.3 + 17.9 + 16.3 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 9.1 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 15.9 + 15.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
+ 13.0 + 4.9 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 0.5 + 12.6 + 12.3 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Q1
Short-term lending
+ 2.4 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 3.5 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 4.0 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2020          Q1
Medium-term lending
+ 2.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 4.3 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.8 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 1.8 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2020          Q1
Long-term lending
+ 9.3 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 9.7 + 8.2 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 7.7 + 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 12.8 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 7.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 3.9 − 0.2 + 17.4 + 16.0 + 1.4 + 1.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 7.0 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 15.5 + 15.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
+ 7.3 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.2 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.8 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q1
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2019         Apr. 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 214.7 626.9 56.0 570.9 582.3 35.4 33.9 15.2 2.6
         May 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 216.3 624.7 54.9 569.8 582.5 35.2 33.7 15.2 1.6
         June 3,609.5 2,150.7 841.2 214.5 626.7 55.4 571.4 582.7 34.9 33.4 15.1 2.2
         July 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 210.7 623.2 54.0 569.2 581.8 34.8 32.9 14.9 0.2
         Aug. 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 214.7 619.7 54.1 565.5 580.3 34.7 32.7 14.9 0.6
         Sep. 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 214.8 615.5 51.8 563.7 579.0 34.4 32.6 15.2 0.3
         Oct. 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 211.7 614.3 51.8 562.6 577.2 34.1 32.5 15.1 0.5
         Nov. 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 207.5 613.4 52.4 561.0 575.7 33.8 32.5 14.9 0.5
         Dec. 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2020         Jan. 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 208.4 611.3 52.4 558.9 570.7 32.6 32.3 14.8 0.5
         Feb. 3,675.5 2,254.0 820.8 212.2 608.6 52.2 556.4 568.5 32.2 32.8 14.6 0.3
         Mar. 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 212.7 602.8 50.1 552.7 564.5 31.8 32.5 14.6 0.6
Changes*
2018 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 3.5 − 7.3 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 1.4 − 1.2
2019 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 0.8 − 24.9 − 4.1 − 20.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.3
2019         Apr. + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 − 1.1 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 1.6 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.0
         June − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6
         July + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 3.8 − 3.7 − 1.4 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 2.0
         Aug. + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 + 4.0 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Sep. − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 4.2 − 2.4 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3
         Oct. + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 4.2 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Dec. − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
2020         Jan. − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 17.4 + 18.9 + 1.1 + 3.8 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Mar. + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 5.8 − 2.1 − 3.7 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
Domestic government End of year or month*
2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2019         Apr. 229.6 62.3 159.5 79.7 79.8 28.4 51.4 3.7 4.1 25.0 2.2 1.4
         May 238.8 68.9 162.0 83.0 79.0 27.3 51.7 3.7 4.1 25.0 2.2 1.4
         June 240.8 68.3 164.6 84.1 80.5 28.1 52.4 3.7 4.2 24.8 2.2 2.0
         July 234.6 66.2 160.6 80.7 79.9 27.3 52.6 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.2 −
         Aug. 245.2 73.5 163.7 83.7 80.0 27.3 52.7 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.3 0.2
         Sep. 242.8 72.0 162.9 85.1 77.9 25.0 52.9 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.2 0.2
         Oct. 234.5 66.0 160.7 82.5 78.2 25.2 53.0 3.6 4.2 24.7 2.3 0.2
         Nov. 245.6 74.7 163.2 83.9 79.3 26.4 52.8 3.6 4.2 24.7 2.2 0.2
         Dec. 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2020         Jan. 236.9 69.1 160.5 81.6 78.9 25.7 53.2 3.2 4.1 24.4 2.2 0.2
         Feb. 247.0 74.8 164.8 86.7 78.1 25.4 52.7 3.3 4.1 25.0 2.2 0.2
         Mar. 238.6 72.7 158.6 83.1 75.5 23.9 51.7 3.2 4.1 25.0 2.1 0.2
Changes*
2018 + 16.9 + 3.6 + 13.5 + 2.0 + 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2019 + 17.1 + 11.8 + 5.8 + 7.8 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2
2019         Apr. − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
         May + 9.1 + 6.6 + 2.5 + 3.3 − 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0
         June + 1.6 − 0.8 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.6
         July − 6.1 − 2.1 − 4.0 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Aug. + 10.5 + 7.3 + 3.2 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2
         Sep. − 2.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 + 1.1 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Oct. − 8.3 − 6.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov. + 11.1 + 8.7 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Dec. − 8.5 + 0.0 − 8.3 − 7.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
2020         Jan. − 0.2 − 5.6 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Feb. + 10.1 + 5.7 + 4.3 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − −
         Mar. − 8.4 − 2.1 − 6.3 − 3.6 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.62018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.52019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2019         Apr. 3,352.4 2,060.4 682.1 135.1 547.1 27.5 519.5 578.5 31.3 8.9 13.0 1.1
         May 3,372.6 2,083.8 679.0 133.3 545.7 27.6 518.1 578.8 31.0 8.7 13.0 0.2         June 3,368.8 2,082.4 676.6 130.4 546.2 27.3 518.9 579.0 30.7 8.6 12.9 0.2
         July 3,382.3 2,100.3 673.3 130.0 543.3 26.7 516.6 578.1 30.6 8.2 12.7 0.2
         Aug. 3,393.3 2,115.6 670.6 131.0 539.7 26.8 512.8 576.5 30.5 8.0 12.7 0.4         Sep. 3,386.3 2,113.4 667.3 129.7 537.6 26.8 510.9 575.3 30.2 7.9 12.9 0.2
         Oct. 3,409.9 2,141.1 665.4 129.2 536.1 26.6 509.5 573.6 29.9 7.9 12.9 0.3
         Nov. 3,429.2 2,169.8 657.7 123.6 534.1 25.9 508.2 572.1 29.6 7.8 12.8 0.4         Dec. 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2020         Jan. 3,421.2 2,166.0 659.2 126.8 532.4 26.7 505.7 567.5 28.5 7.9 12.6 0.4
         Feb. 3,428.6 2,179.2 656.0 125.5 530.5 26.8 503.7 565.2 28.1 7.7 12.4 0.2         Mar. 3,477.9 2,232.2 656.9 129.6 527.3 26.2 501.0 561.2 27.6 7.5 12.4 0.5
Changes*
2018 + 100.8 + 135.7 − 24.3 − 5.5 − 18.8 − 1.3 − 17.5 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 4.1 − 1.3 − 1.22019 + 105.4 + 144.0 − 31.5 − 8.6 − 22.9 − 1.5 − 21.4 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.4
2019         Apr. + 19.3 + 23.3 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 20.2 + 23.3 − 3.1 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9         June − 3.6 − 1.2 − 2.3 − 3.1 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         July + 13.3 + 17.9 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1
         Aug. + 10.9 + 15.3 − 2.7 + 1.0 − 3.7 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3         Sep. − 6.5 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3
         Oct. + 23.7 + 27.7 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. + 19.3 + 28.7 − 7.7 − 5.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec. − 5.3 − 8.2 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
2020         Jan. − 2.7 + 4.3 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 7.3 + 13.2 − 3.2 − 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 49.0 + 52.6 + 0.9 + 4.1 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.62018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.52019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2019         Apr. 1,035.7 596.5 420.7 85.6 335.1 16.5 318.6 7.1 11.4 2.6 10.5 1.1
         May 1,043.1 606.9 417.7 84.7 333.0 16.6 316.4 7.1 11.3 2.6 10.5 0.2         June 1,029.8 595.8 415.6 81.9 333.7 16.5 317.2 7.1 11.3 2.6 10.4 0.2
         July 1,035.2 604.4 412.5 81.7 330.8 15.9 314.9 7.1 11.2 2.2 10.2 0.2
         Aug. 1,036.6 608.6 409.7 83.1 326.7 15.8 310.8 7.1 11.2 2.2 10.2 0.4         Sep. 1,033.6 608.9 406.4 82.3 324.1 15.8 308.3 7.2 11.1 2.2 10.4 0.2
         Oct. 1,045.5 622.3 405.2 82.8 322.4 15.5 306.9 7.0 11.0 2.4 10.4 0.3
         Nov. 1,036.2 620.2 398.2 77.9 320.3 14.9 305.4 6.9 10.9 2.4 10.3 0.4         Dec. 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2020         Jan. 1,030.8 616.3 397.5 81.7 315.8 15.4 300.3 6.6 10.5 2.4 10.2 0.4
         Feb. 1,020.0 608.4 394.7 81.2 313.5 15.6 297.9 6.5 10.4 2.4 10.0 0.2         Mar. 1,080.3 665.3 398.2 87.3 310.9 15.4 295.5 6.5 10.3 2.3 10.0 0.5
Changes*
2018 − 3.2 + 25.1 − 27.2 − 5.9 − 21.3 + 0.3 − 21.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.22019 − 3.4 + 30.4 − 32.8 − 4.8 − 28.0 − 1.6 − 26.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.4
2019         Apr. + 7.4 + 11.0 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 7.5 + 10.4 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9         June − 13.1 − 10.9 − 2.1 − 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         July + 5.3 + 8.7 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1
         Aug. + 1.4 + 4.2 − 2.8 + 1.4 − 4.2 − 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3         Sep. − 2.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3
         Oct. + 12.1 + 13.5 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. − 9.4 − 2.2 − 7.0 − 4.9 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec. − 4.7 − 5.8 + 1.5 + 3.2 − 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
2020         Jan. − 0.7 + 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. − 10.9 − 7.9 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 60.0 + 56.6 + 3.5 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
2019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2019         Oct. 2,364.4 1,518.8 1,479.3 264.9 1,056.4 158.0 39.4 260.2 246.8 21.1 188.7 37.0
         Nov. 2,393.0 1,549.7 1,510.7 267.1 1,083.4 160.2 38.9 259.4 246.4 20.9 188.5 37.0
         Dec. 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2020         Jan. 2,390.4 1,549.7 1,511.6 269.7 1,081.7 160.2 38.1 261.7 248.3 20.6 190.3 37.4
         Feb. 2,408.6 1,570.8 1,531.6 272.1 1,098.2 161.3 39.2 261.3 247.9 20.4 191.1 36.3
         Mar. 2,397.6 1,566.8 1,526.8 266.9 1,098.7 161.2 40.0 258.7 245.5 19.8 189.8 35.9
Changes*
2018 + 104.0 + 110.5 + 109.7 + 20.3 + 83.1 + 6.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 5.8 − 0.3
2019 + 108.8 + 113.6 + 111.8 + 18.5 + 88.7 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.7
2019         Oct. + 11.6 + 14.2 + 14.4 + 6.5 + 7.6 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1
         Nov. + 28.6 + 30.9 + 31.4 + 2.2 + 27.0 + 2.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Dec. − 0.6 − 2.4 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.4
2020         Jan. − 2.0 + 2.5 + 3.7 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0
         Feb. + 18.2 + 21.1 + 20.0 + 2.5 + 16.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Mar. − 10.9 − 4.0 − 4.8 − 5.3 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.3 − 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
 
 
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
2019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2019         Oct. 234.5 10.6 5.3 1.0 4.3 0.1 11.8 58.9 16.0 27.1 14.7 1.1 12.8
         Nov. 245.6 10.6 5.4 1.0 4.1 0.1 11.8 58.5 17.5 25.1 14.8 1.1 12.9
         Dec. 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2020         Jan. 236.9 10.8 5.3 1.1 4.3 0.1 11.6 59.5 20.9 22.7 15.0 0.9 12.8
         Feb. 247.0 11.2 5.3 1.5 4.3 0.1 11.6 63.2 19.9 27.4 15.0 0.9 13.4
         Mar. 238.6 11.4 5.4 1.5 4.5 0.1 11.6 67.0 23.0 28.1 15.0 0.9 13.4
Changes*
2018 + 16.9 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.5
2019 + 17.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.0
2019         Oct. − 8.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 2.6 − 3.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov. + 11.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Dec. − 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.7 + 3.6 − 7.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2
2020         Jan. − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 5.7 − 0.2 + 5.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Feb. + 10.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 3.7 − 1.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6
         Mar. − 8.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
14.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 201713.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 201813.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 − 2019
13.3 46.4 213.8 11.1 202.7 566.6 559.3 7.2 18.9 5.5 2.5 − 2019          Oct.
13.0 45.6 213.8 11.1 202.8 565.2 558.1 7.1 18.7 5.4 2.4 −          Nov.13.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 −          Dec.
13.4 45.1 216.6 11.2 205.4 561.0 554.0 7.0 18.0 5.5 2.4 − 2020          Jan.
13.5 44.3 217.0 11.2 205.8 558.7 551.8 6.9 17.7 5.4 2.4 −          Feb.13.3 42.3 216.4 10.8 205.6 554.8 547.9 6.9 17.3 5.2 2.5 −          Mar.
Changes*
− 0.2 + 0.4 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.2 − 4.5 − 3.9 − 0.6 − 5.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 2018− 0.4 − 3.8 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 2019
− 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2019          Oct.
− 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Nov.+ 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec.
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 4.2 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2020          Jan.
+ 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − −          Feb.− 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Mar.
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
61.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 201765.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 201865.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 − 2019
59.3 30.9 9.1 13.9 5.5 0.0 105.7 13.8 45.3 45.4 1.2 − 2019          Oct.
62.8 34.6 9.0 13.8 5.4 0.0 113.8 17.2 48.9 46.6 1.1 −          Nov.65.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 −          Dec.
57.8 29.9 8.5 14.0 5.3 0.0 108.9 13.0 49.3 45.6 1.0 − 2020          Jan.
61.0 33.0 8.7 14.0 5.3 0.0 111.6 16.6 49.1 44.8 1.1 −          Feb.58.3 30.6 8.7 13.7 5.3 0.0 101.9 13.7 44.8 42.3 1.1 −          Mar.
Changes*
+ 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 +10.8 − 0.1 − 2018− 0.8 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2019
− 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.9 − 1.9 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2019          Oct.
+ 3.3 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.1 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 1.2 − 0.0 −          Nov.+ 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 −          Dec.
− 7.5 − 7.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2020          Jan.
+ 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.7 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 −          Feb.− 2.7 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.6 − 2.9 − 4.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 −          Mar.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturities
Special Special At 3 on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
2019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2019         Nov. 582.3 575.7 539.9 313.2 35.7 25.9 6.6 5.9 0.1 37.7 33.8 25.4 3.9
         Dec. 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 0.9 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2020         Jan. 577.2 570.7 537.5 308.3 33.2 23.5 6.5 5.9 0.1 35.3 32.6 24.7 2.6
         Feb. 575.0 568.5 535.9 305.5 32.6 23.0 6.5 5.8 0.1 34.9 32.2 24.4 2.6
         Mar. 570.9 564.5 532.5 299.6 32.0 22.4 6.4 5.8 0.1 34.4 31.8 24.1 2.6
Changes*
2018 − 4.7 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 9.1 − 6.5 − 3.6 − 2.6
2019 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 21.3 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 . − 5.3 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.2
2019         Nov. − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Dec. − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.3
2020         Jan. − 4.5 − 4.5 − 3.0 − 5.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.0
         Feb. − 2.3 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 2.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Mar. − 4.1 − 4.0 − 3.4 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
 
 
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
2019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2019         Nov. 1,150.8 123.9 28.4 373.2 95.2 116.2 2.6 23.5 4.6 1,011.1 0.9 0.7 31.9 0.4
         Dec. 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2020         Jan. 1,149.1 124.5 28.7 366.3 93.4 114.4 2.5 24.2 4.4 1,010.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
         Feb. 1,160.4 122.9 28.5 362.9 94.8 116.0 2.6 24.3 4.5 1,020.0 0.7 0.6 32.7 0.4
         Mar. 1,146.9 122.2 26.8 350.9 91.6 110.4 1.9 23.5 3.8 1,013.0 0.7 0.6 30.3 0.4
Changes*
2018 + 33.6 − 7.8 + 1.5 − 14.3 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 10.5 − 0.3 + 45.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
2019 + 40.6 − 15.9 + 1.1 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 11.5 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 1.9 + 27.4 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.3
2019         Nov. + 17.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.8 + 9.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 7.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 −
         Dec. − 10.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 11.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0
2020         Jan. + 8.3 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 3.2 − 3.3 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 11.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 −
         Feb. + 11.3 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 3.4 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 9.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 −
         Mar. − 13.5 − 0.7 − 1.7 − 12.0 − 3.2 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2018 20 233.4 39.4 0.0 15.7 11.9 110.2 25.7 25.8 2.8 20.4 174.3 10.0 3.3 11.7 86.6
2019 19 237.9 34.0 0.0 16.2 11.4 117.6 28.0 25.9 2.9 21.0 179.7 9.8 1.8 12.0 88.7
2020         Jan. 19 238.3 33.9 0.0 16.1 11.4 118.0 28.3 25.9 3.0 20.5 180.2 9.9 1.8 12.0 6.6
         Feb. 19 238.1 33.3 0.0 16.1 11.3 118.4 28.6 26.0 2.9 20.3 180.6 9.7 1.7 12.0 6.5         Mar. 19 239.6 33.7 0.0 16.2 11.2 119.2 28.9 25.9 2.9 21.9 180.4 9.6 1.7 12.2 6.8
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Jan. 11 164.4 18.1 − 6.7 8.5 91.9 24.1 11.6 1.8 18.2 116.9 9.6 1.8 8.3 4.2
         Feb. 11 164.2 17.5 − 6.7 8.4 92.1 24.4 11.7 1.8 17.9 117.1 9.4 1.7 8.3 4.2         Mar. 11 165.4 17.8 − 6.8 8.4 92.8 24.6 11.6 1.8 19.3 116.9 9.4 1.7 8.5 4.2
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Jan. 8 73.9 15.7 0.0 9.4 2.9 26.2 4.2 14.3 1.2 2.4 63.3 0.3 − 3.8 2.4
         Feb. 8 74.0 15.8 0.0 9.4 2.9 26.3 4.2 14.3 1.1 2.3 63.5 0.3 − 3.8 2.3         Mar. 8 74.2 15.9 0.0 9.4 2.9 26.4 4.3 14.4 1.1 2.6 63.5 0.3 − 3.8 2.5
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2018 27.0 2.1 7.4 45.2 25.1 40.2 15.9 4.3 4.8 3.7 19.5 16.6 6.8 6.6 5.5 0.2
2019 27.3 2.1 7.5 49.2 25.8 42.9 16.4 4.2 4.6 3.6 21.9 18.1 6.5 7.2 5.4 0.2
2020         Jan. 2.5 0.0 0.6 4.1 2.4 3.7 1.3 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.0 17.8 6.5 0.6 0.0
         Feb. 2.3 0.0 0.6 4.5 2.7 3.5 1.5 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.7 18.1 6.7 0.5 0.0         Mar. 2.3 0.1 0.7 4.9 2.7 4.2 1.8 0.3 0.4 0.3 2.1 18.2 6.6 0.6 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Jan. 1.6 0.0 0.3 2.9 1.5 2.9 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.6 13.3 3.5 0.5 0.0
         Feb. 1.5 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.6 2.7 1.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.4 13.4 3.7 0.4 0.0         Mar. 1.5 0.1 0.4 3.5 1.7 3.3 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.7 13.5 3.6 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Jan. 0.9 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.5 3.0 0.1 0.0
         Feb. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.5 1.1 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.7 3.0 0.1 0.0         Mar. 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.4 0.9 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.7 3.0 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV.  Banks
  
13.  Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with of which:
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2017 52 188 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2019         May 52 198 1,573.6 442.1 425.4 213.1 212.3 16.7 575.5 483.3 19.5 463.9 92.1 556.0 383.3
         June 53 199 1,556.2 429.4 412.4 216.7 195.7 17.0 576.2 478.8 19.5 459.3 97.4 550.6 378.2
         July 53 199 1,564.2 426.9 410.4 222.3 188.0 16.5 572.8 476.9 19.8 457.1 95.9 564.5 390.5
         Aug. 53 199 1,694.2 454.9 437.3 235.0 202.3 17.5 565.3 471.6 19.9 451.7 93.7 674.1 506.9
         Sep. 53 199 1,672.7 457.5 440.2 243.6 196.6 17.3 581.9 482.9 19.9 463.1 98.9 633.3 465.9
         Oct. 53 200 1,634.9 451.2 433.5 230.9 202.6 17.7 573.8 471.4 19.7 451.7 102.4 609.9 432.4
         Nov. 52 199 1,582.4 418.6 403.2 219.9 183.2 15.5 581.6 481.8 20.0 461.8 99.8 582.2 417.1
         Dec. 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020         Jan. 52 198 1,597.9 431.9 413.6 224.2 189.4 18.3 566.2 470.8 19.9 450.8 95.4 599.8 433.8
         Feb. 52 199 1,725.2 445.3 427.1 240.5 186.6 18.2 583.5 493.8 19.5 474.3 89.7 696.4 534.6
Changes *
2018 − 3 − 5 − 250.2 −101.0 −102.0 − 5.0 − 97.0 + 1.0 − 24.8 − 27.1 + 7.0 − 34.1 + 2.4 − 148.2 − 102.6
2019 + 3 + 15 + 51.5 − 4.7 − 7.7 + 23.9 − 31.6 + 2.9 + 12.6 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.7 + 30.6 + 49.6
2019         June + 1 + 1 − 16.0 − 10.1 − 10.5 + 3.6 − 14.1 + 0.4 + 6.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 6.2 − 4.0 − 2.7
         July − − + 6.9 − 4.5 − 3.9 + 5.6 − 9.6 − 0.6 − 8.1 − 6.0 + 0.3 − 6.3 − 2.1 + 12.8 + 10.3
         Aug. − − + 129.1 + 26.3 + 25.3 + 12.7 + 12.7 + 1.0 − 11.5 − 8.7 + 0.1 − 8.8 − 2.8 + 108.6 + 114.9
         Sep. − − − 22.5 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 8.6 − 7.4 − 0.4 + 11.9 + 7.4 − 0.0 + 7.4 + 4.5 − 41.7 − 43.5
         Oct. − + 1 − 36.2 − 4.0 − 4.5 − 12.7 + 8.2 + 0.5 − 2.1 − 6.3 − 0.1 − 6.2 + 4.2 − 21.9 − 30.4
         Nov. − 1 − 1 − 53.6 − 34.4 − 32.1 − 10.9 − 21.2 − 2.3 + 3.0 + 6.4 + 0.3 + 6.0 − 3.3 − 28.8 − 17.6
         Dec. − − 1 − 127.9 − 9.2 − 11.9 − 3.9 − 8.0 + 2.7 − 41.5 − 40.8 − 0.3 − 40.4 − 0.7 − 69.2 − 52.7
2020         Jan. − − + 144.8 + 24.6 + 24.4 + 8.1 + 16.3 + 0.2 + 31.9 + 34.7 + 0.3 + 34.4 − 2.8 + 88.3 + 72.0
         Feb. − + 1 + 126.9 + 12.9 + 13.0 + 16.4 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 16.2 + 22.0 − 0.5 + 22.5 − 5.9 + 96.2 + 100.2
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 −
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 −
2019         May 17 43 245.4 54.3 48.9 19.1 29.8 5.4 145.4 119.0 14.4 104.7 26.3 45.7 −
         June 17 43 249.3 57.4 51.9 19.1 32.7 5.6 146.8 120.5 14.3 106.2 26.3 45.1 −
         July 16 42 248.9 54.8 49.4 18.8 30.6 5.4 147.5 121.7 14.5 107.2 25.7 46.6 −
         Aug. 16 42 248.3 56.6 50.8 19.0 31.8 5.8 141.1 116.5 14.5 102.0 24.6 50.7 −
         Sep. 16 42 250.4 57.3 51.6 19.7 32.0 5.7 142.0 117.7 14.2 103.5 24.3 51.0 −
         Oct. 15 41 238.9 53.9 48.4 18.0 30.4 5.5 138.5 114.7 14.3 100.4 23.8 46.5 −
         Nov. 15 41 237.2 54.2 48.3 18.6 29.6 5.9 136.2 113.1 14.1 99.1 23.1 46.8 −
         Dec. 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 −
2020         Jan. 15 40 240.2 52.4 47.0 20.1 26.9 5.5 141.0 117.5 14.0 103.4 23.6 46.8 −
         Feb. 15 40 247.0 57.7 52.0 20.3 31.7 5.7 141.4 117.6 14.0 103.5 23.9 47.8 −
Changes *
2018 − 3 − 7 − 42.2 − 20.9 − 19.9 − 4.9 − 15.1 − 1.0 − 14.2 − 11.6 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 7.0 −
2019 − 2 − 2 − 7.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 3.5 + 0.5 + 3.0 − 1.9 − 9.1 −
2019         June − − + 5.0 + 3.5 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 −
         July − 1 − 1 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 1.5 −
         Aug. − − − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 6.8 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.1 + 4.1 −
         Sep. − − + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 −
         Oct. − 1 − 1 − 10.2 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 4.5 −
         Nov. − − − 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 −
         Dec. − − − 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 3.0 −
2020         Jan. − − 1 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 3.0 −
         Feb. − − + 6.4 + 5.1 + 4.9 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
May 2020
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of which:paper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
989.9 667.6 450.7 216.9 322.2 10.7 8.4 2.2 311.6 103.2 54.3 426.2 380.3 2019          May
979.6 670.4 468.5 201.8 309.2 12.0 9.4 2.6 297.2 94.4 54.4 427.8 376.0          June
960.5 660.0 451.8 208.2 300.5 13.5 10.8 2.7 287.0 105.8 53.7 444.2 390.6          July
964.6 659.6 455.0 204.6 305.0 16.3 13.6 2.7 288.7 101.9 53.9 573.9 508.6          Aug.971.2 657.5 459.5 198.0 313.7 15.8 13.0 2.7 297.9 108.1 53.7 539.7 468.3          Sep.
979.2 676.7 475.9 200.8 302.5 13.7 11.0 2.7 288.8 106.8 53.4 495.5 434.0          Oct.
945.8 644.9 465.2 179.7 300.9 14.9 12.2 2.7 286.0 107.3 53.6 475.8 416.2          Nov.894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1          Dec.
955.1 659.0 468.1 190.9 296.1 13.6 10.8 2.7 282.5 106.3 54.1 482.4 432.8 2020          Jan.
975.4 660.5 471.1 189.4 314.9 13.7 10.7 3.0 301.2 110.1 54.2 585.5 533.6          Feb.
Changes *
− 113.1 − 84.7 + 56.0 −140.8 − 28.3 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 23.8 − 9.4 + 2.0 − 139.7 − 105.7 2018− 7.2 + 2.4 + 24.4 − 22.0 − 9.6 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 10.9 + 3.0 − 0.6 + 52.0 + 58.5 2019
− 7.8 + 5.1 + 17.8 − 12.7 − 12.9 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 14.2 − 7.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 4.3 2019          June
− 21.0 − 12.2 − 16.7 + 4.6 − 8.9 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 10.4 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 16.3 + 14.6          July
+ 2.4 − 2.0 + 3.2 − 5.3 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 2.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.2 + 129.7 + 118.0          Aug.+ 4.8 − 3.8 + 4.5 − 8.2 + 8.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 5.2 − 0.1 − 34.2 − 40.3          Sep.
+ 10.4 + 21.5 + 16.4 + 5.0 − 11.0 − 2.1 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 9.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 44.2 − 34.3          Oct.
− 35.3 − 33.5 − 10.7 − 22.8 − 1.7 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 19.7 − 17.8          Nov.− 49.6 − 29.3 − 12.0 − 17.2 − 20.3 − 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 18.1 − 11.2 − 0.2 − 64.8 − 55.1          Dec.
+ 61.0 + 45.4 + 14.9 + 30.5 + 15.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 14.8 + 11.6 + 0.8 + 71.5 + 71.7 2020          Jan.
+ 19.7 + 0.9 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 18.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 18.6 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 103.1 + 100.8          Feb.
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 − 2018165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 − 2019
172.7 74.8 36.0 38.8 97.9 7.4 4.6 2.8 90.5 16.5 22.3 33.9 − 2019          May
177.0 74.7 37.9 36.8 102.4 7.7 4.9 2.8 94.6 16.5 22.4 33.3 −          June
176.4 72.8 37.6 35.3 103.6 7.7 4.9 2.8 95.9 16.5 22.3 33.7 −          July
175.8 74.7 37.9 36.7 101.1 8.3 5.6 2.7 92.8 16.5 22.3 33.8 −          Aug.178.0 76.0 39.0 37.1 101.9 7.0 4.3 2.8 94.9 16.5 22.4 33.5 −          Sep.
168.3 70.9 36.7 34.2 97.4 7.0 4.3 2.8 90.4 16.3 22.1 32.2 −          Oct.
167.3 70.7 36.7 34.0 96.6 6.9 4.2 2.7 89.7 16.1 22.1 31.6 −          Nov.165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 −          Dec.
170.1 70.5 37.3 33.2 99.6 6.4 3.6 2.7 93.2 16.5 21.7 32.0 − 2020          Jan.
176.3 73.5 38.6 35.0 102.7 6.8 4.1 2.7 95.9 16.4 21.7 32.7 −          Feb.
Changes *
− 37.4 − 25.8 − 13.7 − 12.0 − 11.7 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 8.8 + 1.3 − 1.8 − 4.3 − 2018− 6.7 − 3.2 + 0.5 − 3.8 − 3.5 − 2.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 2019
+ 5.2 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 1.5 + 4.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 2019          June
− 1.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          July
− 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 −          Aug.+ 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 −          Sep.
− 8.7 − 4.6 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 4.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.8 −          Oct.
− 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 −          Nov.− 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Dec.
+ 3.7 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 2020          Jan.
+ 6.0 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 −          Feb.
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
May 2020
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020         Mar.  p 13,608.6 136.1 135.7 1,820.2 ... ...
         Apr. . . . . . .
         May  p ... ... 139.4 ... ... ...
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020         Mar.  p 3,734,153 27.4 37,342 37,193 602,785 565,592 0
         Apr. . . . . . . .
         May  p 3,864,432 ... 38,644 38,496 ... ... ...
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020         Mar. 7,646 5,604 2,627 12,269 7,102 112 1,831
         Apr. . . . . . . .
         May 7,875 5,842 2,975 12,411 7,119 116 2,157
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020         Mar. 2,650,930 1,477 392,332 571,511 117,902
         Apr. . . . . .
         May 2,750,923 2,037 432,394 565,265 113,810
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2020
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / Base rates
% per annum
ECB interest rates Base rates
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2020 Apr. 15 224 224 0.00 - - - 7
Apr. 22 157 157 0.00 - - - 7
Apr. 29 266 266 0.00 - - - 7
May 6 346 346 0.00 - - - 7
May 13 266 266 0.00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2020 Apr. 15 4,638 4,638 2 … - - - 70
Apr. 22 18,906 18,906 2 … - - - 63
Apr. 29 36,657 36,657 2 … - - - 56
Apr. 30 694 694 2 … - - - 91
May 6 14,282 14,282 2 … - - - 49
May 13 6,817 6,817 2 … - - - 42
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the averageminimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this operation.
4. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2019 Oct. – 0.46 – 0.50 – 0.46 – 0.41 – 0.36 – 0.30
Nov. – 0.45 – 0.48 – 0.45 – 0.40 – 0.34 – 0.27
Dec. – 0.46 – 0.49 – 0.45 – 0.40 – 0.34 – 0.26
2020 Jan. – 0.45 – 0.50 – 0.46 – 0.39 – 0.33 – 0.25
Feb. – 0.45 – 0.51 – 0.47 – 0.41 – 0.36 – 0.29
Mar. – 0.45 – 0.51 – 0.48 – 0.42 – 0.37 – 0.27
Apr. – 0.45 – 0.51 – 0.43 – 0.25 – 0.19 – 0.11
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on the basisof real turnover according to the act/360 method and published via Reuters.  2 Euro
interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2020
44•
VI. Interest rates
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Mar. 0.23 62,652 1.20 217,159 0.02 67,395 0.85 29,229
Apr. 0.22 62,253 1.19 216,952 0.02 67,114 0.84 28,899
May 0.21 60,966 1.18 217,558 0.03 66,325 0.83 28,799
June 0.22 60,652 1.17 217,383 0.03 63,711 0.83 28,547
July 0.22 60,326 1.16 217,260 0.03 63,826 0.85 27,984
Aug. 0.22 60,071 1.15 217,527 0.02 66,066 0.84 27,809
Sep. 0.21 59,625 1.15 217,918 0.01 65,179 0.85 27,581
Oct. 0.21 58,785 1.14 217,872 – 0.01 64,731 0.85 27,684
Nov. 0.22 57,815 1.12 217,794 – 0.02 63,482 0.85 27,757
Dec. 0.23 57,910 1.12 219,819 – 0.05 66,312 0.84 27,528
2020 Jan. 0.23 57,198 1.11 220,060 – 0.05 65,777 0.83 27,355
Feb. 0.23 56,142 1.10 220,286 – 0.05 65,820 0.84 26,651
Mar. 0.24 54,034 1.10 219,797 – 0.07 68,925 0.82 26,158
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Mar. 2.27 4,424 1.85 25,905 2.39 1,210,350 7.16 49,935 3.50 86,453 3.78 314,929
Apr. 2.26 4,418 1.79 25,875 2.37 1,218,785 7.04 50,058 3.49 86,872 3.77 313,007
May 2.26 4,534 1.79 26,212 2.35 1,224,628 7.13 49,275 3.49 87,410 3.76 314,341
June 2.23 4,575 1.78 26,445 2.33 1,230,368 7.11 51,281 3.49 87,504 3.76 314,057
July 2.22 4,643 1.77 26,544 2.31 1,236,461 7.06 50,115 3.48 86,724 3.74 315,493
Aug. 2.16 4,658 1.76 26,765 2.29 1,243,945 7.08 49,280 3.46 87,412 3.74 316,798
Sep. 2.16 4,636 1.75 26,538 2.27 1,250,520 7.23 51,134 3.46 87,317 3.71 315,907
Oct. 2.11 4,749 1.73 26,605 2.24 1,257,680 7.16 49,728 3.45 87,489 3.69 317,081
Nov. 2.07 4,787 1.71 26,726 2.22 1,265,217 7.13 48,412 3.44 87,638 3.67 318,019
Dec. 2.07 4,610 1.71 26,616 2.20 1,268,612 7.12 50,916 3.44 87,320 3.65 316,610
2020 Jan. 2.05 4,755 1.69 26,351 2.18 1,271,558 7.18 49,713 3.43 87,413 3.63 317,814
Feb. 2.01 4,813 1.69 26,388 2.16 1,278,149 7.18 49,016 3.43 87,594 3.62 318,931
Mar. 2.04 4,755 1.68 26,516 2.14 1,284,215 7.33 49,209 3.42 87,283 3.61 318,805
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Mar. 2.21 159,432 1.69 155,413 2.02 713,389
Apr. 2.20 157,460 1.66 159,372 2.00 716,684
May 2.14 159,767 1.67 162,699 1.99 722,437
June 2.14 167,044 1.66 164,225 1.98 722,521
July 2.13 163,263 1.64 165,839 1.96 724,902
Aug. 2.14 163,138 1.64 167,486 1.95 729,505
Sep. 2.18 164,445 1.64 167,202 1.92 730,591
Oct. 2.19 160,244 1.63 169,633 1.91 735,730
Nov. 2.21 163,260 1.63 171,713 1.90 739,461
Dec. 2.24 162,074 1.64 171,388 1.88 737,455
2020 Jan. 2.20 161,563 1.64 169,238 1.86 741,004
Feb. 2.21 163,078 1.62 171,571 1.86 745,054
Mar. 2.05 182,411 1.62 174,632 1.84 746,742
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2020
45•
VI. Interest rates
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Mar. 0.01 1,451,707 0.29 5,595 0.34 837 0.73 978 0.13 543,711 0.25 37,036
Apr. 0.01 1,464,110 0.29 5,357 0.33 485 0.72 868 0.14 543,806 0.25 37,197
May 0.01 1,477,188 0.13 4,250 0.52 665 0.67 737 0.13 543,432 0.26 37,857
June 0.01 1,487,229 0.10 3,429 0.44 330 0.68 713 0.13 543,047 0.27 38,409
July 0.01 1,496,476 0.12 3,834 0.49 378 0.79 965 0.13 542,420 0.27 38,137
Aug. 0.01 1,507,758 0.15 3,511 0.39 522 0.73 907 0.12 541,175 0.26 37,798
Sep. 0.01 1,504,996 0.14 3,322 0.50 342 0.63 820 0.12 540,525 0.25 37,218
Oct. 0.01 1,519,599 0.17 2,945 0.44 404 0.99 956 0.12 539,574 0.23 36,402
Nov. 0.01 1,550,441 0.18 2,617 0.66 674 0.58 999 0.12 538,889 0.23 35,551
Dec. 0.01 1,548,036 0.08 3,590 0.49 729 0.60 818 0.12 539,678 0.21 34,476
2020 Jan. 0.01 1,550,487 0.14 4,181 0.44 640 0.63 939 0.11 536,842 0.19 32,999
Feb. 0.00 1,571,470 0.15 3,157 0.39 388 0.58 826 0.11 535,065 0.19 32,449
Mar. 0.00 1,567,321 0.12 2,538 0.40 286 0.60 658 0.11 531,723 0.18 31,794
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2019 Mar. – 0.03 443,524 0.01 15,807 0.07 389 0.65 299
Apr. – 0.03 451,668 0.01 14,136 0.09 374 0.34 278
May – 0.03 460,120 – 0.03 12,080 0.23 641 0.40 311
June – 0.03 448,314 – 0.09 10,189 0.19 421 0.25 190
July – 0.03 460,551 – 0.08 11,503 0.00 86 0.66 442
Aug. – 0.03 465,696 – 0.17 11,745 – 0.06 135 0.45 212
Sep. – 0.04 468,092 – 0.22 11,961 – 0.33 1,000 x .x .
Oct. – 0.04 477,961 – 0.20 10,900 – 0.06 155 x .x .
Nov. – 0.04 476,945 – 0.21 11,165 – 0.03 389 0.32 654
Dec. – 0.05 476,493 – 0.22 17,148 0.04 554 0.28 911
2020 Jan. – 0.06 468,336 – 0.11 18,221 0.12 278 0.34 158
Feb. – 0.06 462,673 – 0.25 12,289 – 0.04 158 x .x .
Mar. – 0.07 482,536 – 0.27 20,845 0.04 235 x .x .
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2019 Mar. 5.73 5.72 9,868 6.88 1,765 8.48 528 4.25 3,929 6.52 5,411
Apr. 5.83 5.76 9,830 6.86 1,767 8.44 504 4.36 3,762 6.47 5,564
May 5.86 5.80 9,893 6.79 1,839 8.80 428 4.46 3,770 6.45 5,695
June 6.06 5.98 8,345 7.01 1,554 9.23 425 4.52 3,222 6.68 4,698
July 6.17 6.11 10,570 7.13 2,173 9.19 493 4.63 3,859 6.79 6,219
Aug. 6.06 6.00 9,351 6.98 1,957 9.68 420 4.51 3,376 6.63 5,555
Sep. 5.92 5.87 8,928 6.72 1,837 9.41 461 4.44 3,178 6.42 5,289
Oct. 5.91 5.85 9,336 6.70 1,894 9.23 528 4.39 3,350 6.42 5,459
Nov. 5.75 5.73 8,369 6.60 1,654 8.54 493 4.36 3,056 6.32 4,821
Dec. 5.74 5.75 7,033 6.47 1,288 8.59 590 4.38 2,640 6.26 3,804
2020 Jan. 6.07 6.03 10,080 6.85 2,379 8.94 626 4.45 3,307 6.58 6,148
Feb. 5.81 5.81 9,284 6.65 1,995 8.58 538 4.41 3,155 6.34 5,591
Mar. 5.84 5.81 9,742 6.35 1,982 8.46 483 4.57 3,209 6.26 6,050
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2020
46•
VI. Interest rates
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2019 Mar. 1.90 5,598 1.77 1,515 1.68 2,497 2.51 772 1.92 2,329
Apr. 2.01 5,684 1.88 1,734 2.01 2,214 2.46 815 1.86 2,655
May 1.90 5,259 1.75 1,397 1.79 2,312 2.44 813 1.82 2,134
June 1.80 5,098 1.80 1,128 1.69 2,120 2.32 731 1.73 2,247
July 1.84 5,915 1.78 1,869 1.80 2,429 2.43 876 1.69 2,610
Aug. 1.79 4,740 1.71 1,047 1.76 1,855 2.53 657 1.60 2,228
Sep. 1.78 4,757 1.73 1,279 1.82 2,154 2.34 630 1.55 1,973
Oct. 1.83 4,987 1.68 1,481 1.96 2,229 2.40 635 1.52 2,123
Nov. 1.63 5,178 1.58 1,046 1.61 2,022 2.28 722 1.45 2,434
Dec. 1.63 6,393 1.74 1,399 1.66 2,662 2.07 1,016 1.44 2,715
2020 Jan. 1.67 5,644 1.62 1,608 1.63 2,341 2.32 782 1.50 2,521
Feb. 1.77 4,739 1.57 1,108 1.79 1,860 2.52 666 1.53 2,213
Mar. 1.73 5,749 1.77 1,428 1.70 2,347 2.44 823 1.53 2,579
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2019 Mar. 1.99 3,895 . . 1.95 1,539 2.53 580 1.86 1,776
Apr. 2.04 3,962 . . 2.09 1,654 2.46 619 1.83 1,689
May 1.95 3,864 . . 1.91 1,705 2.54 593 1.76 1,566
June 1.90 3,540 . . 1.94 1,397 2.43 515 1.70 1,628
July 1.92 4,264 . . 1.99 1,719 2.43 676 1.68 1,869
Aug. 1.91 3,192 . . 1.97 1,203 2.64 483 1.63 1,506
Sep. 1.79 3,219 . . 1.80 1,458 2.42 449 1.57 1,312
Oct. 1.78 3,572 . . 1.82 1,568 2.46 476 1.52 1,528
Nov. 1.74 3,478 . . 1.80 1,297 2.40 532 1.48 1,649
Dec. 1.79 4,258 . . 1.93 1,691 2.40 637 1.47 1,930
2020 Jan. 1.83 3,752 . . 1.98 1,420 2.47 559 1.51 1,773
Feb. 1.80 3,430 . . 1.82 1,301 2.57 518 1.53 1,611
Mar. 1.83 3,821 . . 1.89 1,544 2.48 638 1.52 1,639
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2019 Mar. 1.80 1.74 21,335 1.83 3,606 2.04 2,413 1.64 1,755 1.59 6,884 1.79 10,283
Apr. 1.72 1.67 23,105 1.76 4,326 2.04 2,570 1.48 2,074 1.53 7,760 1.72 10,701
May 1.68 1.63 22,629 1.74 3,609 2.00 2,560 1.50 2,030 1.46 7,324 1.67 10,715
June 1.63 1.57 20,164 1.65 3,245 1.98 2,280 1.44 1,695 1.41 6,429 1.61 9,760
July 1.54 1.49 25,672 1.64 4,571 1.98 2,743 1.43 2,107 1.34 8,473 1.49 12,348
Aug. 1.43 1.38 22,520 1.53 3,272 1.86 2,529 1.38 1,684 1.23 6,856 1.36 11,450
Sep. 1.34 1.28 21,803 1.45 3,348 1.88 2,182 1.38 1,613 1.14 6,714 1.24 11,294
Oct. 1.31 1.27 23,169 1.44 3,714 1.91 2,452 1.31 1,738 1.12 7,268 1.22 11,711
Nov. 1.31 1.26 22,234 1.41 3,066 1.84 2,206 1.30 1,663 1.09 6,889 1.25 11,475
Dec. 1.34 1.29 20,048 1.48 2,938 1.81 2,396 1.37 1,553 1.14 6,622 1.27 9,477
2020 Jan. 1.39 1.34 21,927 1.47 3,871 1.83 2,545 1.32 1,797 1.16 7,106 1.35 10,479
Feb. 1.33 1.28 20,546 1.36 2,902 1.82 2,019 1.33 1,499 1.13 6,555 1.26 10,474
Mar. 1.27 1.22 25,306 1.38 3,764 1.84 2,491 1.32 1,872 1.07 8,048 1.18 12,895
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2019 Mar. . 1.68 8,615 . . 2.06 732 1.43 768 1.51 2,924 1.77 4,191
Apr. . 1.63 9,886 . . 2.02 933 1.40 986 1.47 3,469 1.71 4,498
May . 1.56 9,434 . . 1.90 945 1.30 879 1.39 3,118 1.65 4,492
June . 1.52 8,277 . . 1.98 820 1.28 744 1.35 2,732 1.59 3,981
July . 1.44 10,426 . . 1.96 944 1.24 935 1.30 3,493 1.48 5,054
Aug. . 1.32 9,008 . . 1.90 732 1.19 762 1.17 2,860 1.35 4,654
Sep. . 1.22 8,966 . . 1.89 689 1.19 689 1.08 2,919 1.21 4,669
Oct. . 1.20 9,660 . . 1.82 818 1.09 799 1.06 3,118 1.20 4,925
Nov. . 1.19 9,173 . . 1.75 738 1.09 787 1.03 2,848 1.22 4,800
Dec. . 1.20 8,740 . . 1.79 758 1.15 719 1.07 2,898 1.19 4,365
2020 Jan. . 1.26 9,963 . . 1.77 891 1.14 888 1.07 3,130 1.30 5,054
Feb. . 1.18 8,867 . . 1.73 641 1.14 702 1.04 2,785 1.19 4,739
Mar. . 1.13 11,459 . . 1.76 824 1.15 925 0.98 3,675 1.13 6,035
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2020
47•
VI. Interest rates
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Mar. 7.98 40,531 7.97 32,533 14.75 4,355 3.06 80,843 3.07 80,447
Apr. 7.78 40,783 7.93 31,833 14.75 4,416 3.04 78,782 3.06 78,390
May 7.90 39,977 7.92 31,720 14.76 4,369 2.98 78,903 2.99 78,496
June 7.86 41,429 7.92 32,848 14.77 4,421 2.92 84,632 2.94 84,230
July 7.72 40,774 7.81 32,054 14.77 4,372 2.92 80,865 2.94 80,466
Aug. 7.79 40,128 7.84 31,484 14.78 4,450 2.91 81,292 2.92 80,923
Sep. 7.91 41,961 7.91 33,243 15.08 4,561 2.97 82,771 2.99 82,352
Oct. 7.81 40,630 7.80 32,063 15.05 4,479 2.96 79,242 2.98 78,810
Nov. 7.72 39,142 7.62 30,666 15.11 4,517 2.95 81,340 2.97 80,912
Dec. 7.62 41,902 7.69 32,556 15.11 4,576 3.05 79,862 3.07 79,476
2020 Jan. 7.72 40,805 7.65 32,270 15.13 4,497 2.99 80,217 3.00 79,819
Feb. 7.72 40,187 7.63 31,840 15.14 4,456 2.94 82,171 2.95 81,754
Mar. 7.89 40,211 7.64 32,857 15.19 4,364 2.77 88,805 2.78 88,517
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2019 Mar. 1.29 77,548 1.41 22,154 2.05 11,060 2.56 1,534 1.85 2,413 1.05 52,989 1.49 2,834 1.43 7,740
Apr. 1.21 81,708 1.38 21,675 2.10 10,283 2.46 1,606 1.76 2,570 0.95 55,315 1.26 3,354 1.44 9,686
May 1.19 75,507 1.38 19,256 2.12 9,981 2.52 1,587 1.76 2,560 0.91 51,534 1.45 3,207 1.40 7,824
June 1.18 84,377 1.28 25,393 2.08 10,633 2.51 1,407 1.65 2,280 0.94 58,540 1.21 3,408 1.40 9,077
July 1.19 85,200 1.32 22,605 2.08 10,553 2.52 1,630 1.59 2,743 0.91 56,383 1.69 4,920 1.24 10,074
Aug. 1.13 70,037 1.32 19,327 2.02 8,816 2.54 1,375 1.55 2,529 0.88 47,954 1.71 3,280 1.17 7,364
Sep. 1.18 81,376 1.27 23,112 1.98 10,331 2.46 1,320 1.42 2,182 1.00 55,486 1.53 2,877 1.03 10,138
Oct. 1.22 80,549 1.31 23,322 1.93 10,875 2.41 1,503 1.43 2,452 1.06 55,298 1.32 3,647 1.08 7,913
Nov. 1.27 72,910 1.33 19,516 2.04 10,266 2.48 1,416 1.42 2,206 1.10 48,917 1.43 3,070 1.09 7,990
Dec. 1.29 102,587 1.40 27,151 2.10 10,584 2.40 1,608 1.45 2,396 1.15 73,303 1.36 4,483 1.18 11,129
2020 Jan. 1.24 73,322 1.34 22,883 1.98 10,775 2.45 1,509 1.53 2,545 1.03 51,717 1.39 2,121 1.26 5,911
Feb. 1.19 65,885 1.36 17,452 1.95 9,727 2.45 1,329 1.47 2,019 0.98 43,225 1.30 3,425 1.07 7,058
Mar. 1.19 97,040 1.44 24,555 1.88 10,921 2.34 1,677 1.47 2,491 1.06 69,385 1.31 3,884 1.06 9,701
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2019 Mar. 1.49 11,158 . . 1.87 508 2.65 144 1.78 388 1.40 7,357 1.71 520 1.53 2,241
Apr. 1.39 10,596 . . 1.81 620 2.43 162 1.60 417 1.25 5,977 1.95 533 1.41 2,887
May x .x . . . 1.94 565 x .x . 1.58 381 1.50 6,363 2.17 355 1.49 2,156
June 1.47 10,380 . . 1.80 493 2.86 126 1.55 326 1.41 6,221 1.31 448 1.51 2,766
July 1.34 11,662 . . 1.80 595 2.81 152 1.46 466 1.22 6,100 1.63 1,548 1.26 2,801
Aug. 1.49 8,835 . . 1.96 474 2.53 152 1.28 357 1.45 4,757 2.16 957 1.15 2,138
Sep. 1.30 12,814 . . 1.86 487 2.80 113 1.26 378 1.27 7,572 1.95 1,094 1.03 3,170
Oct. 1.28 10,710 . . 1.64 630 2.52 140 1.24 362 1.24 6,623 1.72 588 1.11 2,367
Nov. 1.35 9,204 . . 1.87 465 2.47 129 1.19 329 1.47 4,566 1.66 800 0.95 2,915
Dec. 1.38 17,816 . . 1.71 553 2.43 174 1.28 402 1.41 11,704 1.46 1,422 1.17 3,561
2020 Jan. 1.23 9,108 . . 1.71 661 2.47 147 1.43 395 1.15 6,021 1.46 316 1.14 1,568
Feb. 1.48 8,690 . . 1.66 448 2.23 96 1.25 346 1.63 5,276 1.42 822 0.98 1,702
Mar. x .x . . . 1.74 548 x .x . 1.20 411 1.29 7,469 1.88 522 1.02 2,620
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
May 2020
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1. Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and fund Financial technical Non-financial Remaining
year/quarter Total deposits  1 securities Loans  2 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
 
2017         Q2 2,178.4 344.1 378.9 365.3 301.9 643.8 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6
         Q3 2,188.1 331.3 386.1 371.1 305.5 650.5 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.4
         Q4 2,212.7 321.1 387.0 354.3 336.1 671.3 2.9 48.3 34.3 57.3
2018         Q1 2,218.0 344.1 394.6 326.9 342.8 664.0 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.6
         Q2 2,226.3 346.8 400.1 319.6 346.3 669.9 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6
         Q3 2,224.8 326.3 401.1 327.9 349.4 677.8 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6
         Q4 2,213.5 318.3 400.4 330.4 349.7 665.8 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019         Q1 2,343.9 332.3 431.9 329.6 381.6 707.8 2.6 59.3 37.1 61.7
         Q2 2,405.7 336.9 449.4 338.5 388.2 734.0 3.6 57.8 37.1 60.3
         Q3 2,489.0 333.2 469.1 356.1 397.9 765.8 4.6 58.7 38.0 65.7
         Q4 2,485.4 317.6 449.6 354.6 404.4 792.3 3.6 65.6 39.8 57.9
Life insurance
2017         Q2 1,172.8 215.7 189.5 217.6 38.6 467.1 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3
         Q3 1,177.5 207.6 193.6 220.6 38.4 472.5 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0
         Q4 1,193.2 199.2 192.4 226.1 41.4 487.8 1.8 8.6 20.0 16.0
2018         Q1 1,187.6 212.5 198.8 206.7 43.1 481.8 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
         Q2 1,195.2 215.3 201.6 200.5 46.3 487.9 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
         Q3 1,194.1 199.7 201.6 209.0 47.3 493.9 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
         Q4 1,185.2 194.5 200.1 208.5 50.4 484.7 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019         Q1 1,238.0 202.8 213.4 205.9 52.7 516.7 1.6 10.4 20.2 14.1
         Q2 1,289.7 205.9 227.1 213.9 55.3 537.6 2.3 10.0 20.2 17.3
         Q3 1,346.9 205.4 241.9 224.8 57.8 561.7 3.1 10.4 20.8 20.9
         Q4 1,331.2 194.6 226.8 217.3 60.7 578.6 2.4 13.8 21.0 15.9
Non-life insurance
2017         Q2 603.7 116.8 103.9 91.2 58.5 160.4 0.4 33.3 9.1 30.1
         Q3 603.1 111.9 106.2 93.0 58.6 162.9 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4
         Q4 606.9 111.6 108.1 82.3 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.5 9.7 26.6
2018         Q1 623.2 120.2 112.7 75.1 72.1 167.0 0.3 34.6 9.8 31.5
         Q2 621.6 120.1 115.7 72.9 72.9 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
         Q3 617.9 116.3 116.1 72.8 73.7 168.9 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
         Q4 616.2 113.8 117.4 73.7 73.8 167.4 0.2 33.5 10.8 25.6
2019         Q1 655.4 119.2 128.0 74.2 75.8 177.0 0.3 38.1 11.1 31.7
         Q2 664.1 119.8 131.9 75.6 76.8 182.0 0.4 37.6 11.0 29.1
         Q3 680.1 116.9 136.6 79.2 78.5 188.7 0.4 38.7 11.4 29.8
         Q4 678.9 111.4 132.8 79.3 80.0 199.3 0.4 36.7 12.2 26.9
Reinsurance  3 
2017         Q2 401.9 11.6 85.5 56.5 204.8 16.3 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2
         Q3 407.5 11.8 86.3 57.5 208.5 15.1 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9
         Q4 412.6 10.3 86.5 45.9 224.0 17.6 0.7 8.3 4.7 14.7
2018         Q1 407.2 11.4 83.1 45.1 227.6 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
         Q2 409.5 11.5 82.9 46.1 227.1 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
         Q3 412.7 10.2 83.4 46.0 228.4 15.0 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
         Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019         Q1 450.5 10.2 90.5 49.5 253.1 14.0 0.7 10.8 5.8 15.9
         Q2 451.9 11.2 90.3 49.0 256.1 14.4 0.8 10.3 5.8 13.9
         Q3 462.0 10.9 90.7 52.1 261.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
         Q4 475.3 11.5 90.0 58.0 263.7 14.5 0.8 15.2 6.6 15.1
Pension funds  4 
2017         Q2 626.0 103.1 61.4 29.8 22.2 343.0 − 6.8 38.6 21.0
         Q3 636.5 101.1 62.9 29.7 23.7 351.7 − 7.0 39.2 21.2
         Q4 646.8 96.7 65.1 29.7 25.0 360.4 − 7.1 41.2 21.5
2018         Q1 650.6 94.6 64.8 30.1 25.5 365.2 − 7.4 41.7 21.4
         Q2 657.5 95.0 64.6 30.7 26.6 369.4 − 7.6 42.2 21.5
         Q3 663.5 92.3 64.5 30.8 27.1 376.6 − 7.9 42.9 21.5
         Q4 669.4 91.7 65.2 31.2 27.3 380.1 − 8.1 43.9 21.8
2019         Q1 687.2 89.7 69.4 31.3 28.0 393.4 − 8.2 44.9 22.3
         Q2 699.6 87.7 72.8 31.9 28.5 402.2 − 8.3 45.2 23.2
         Q3 714.8 85.6 76.1 32.1 29.3 414.4 − 8.3 45.4 23.6
         Q4 723.1 85.2 74.6 32.2 29.6 420.9 − 8.5 47.2 24.8
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- tained on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borr owers’ note loans
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- and registered Pfandbriefe. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by pri-
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. *Valuation of list- mary insurers, which is included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the insti-
ed securities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB’s securities data- tutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Accou nts. Pension funds
base. 1Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension sch emes for the
bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Including deposits re- self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
May 2020
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2. Liabilities
  
 € billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life/
Debt claims on
End of securities Shares and pension fund Financial Remainingyear/quarter Total issued Loans  
1 other equity Total reserves  2 Non-life derivatives liabilities Net worth  5 
Insurance corporations
 
2017         Q2 2,178.4 28.6 57.0 450.8 1,505.5 1,308.5 197.0 2.1 134.3 −
         Q3 2,188.1 28.5 58.4 455.6 1,513.1 1,317.2 195.9 2.3 130.2 −         Q4 2,212.7 28.3 62.6 466.0 1,523.0 1,335.0 187.9 2.2 130.6 −
2018         Q1 2,218.0 28.0 61.9 460.2 1,539.4 1,333.8 205.6 1.5 127.0 −
         Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 456.8 1,553.7 1,348.0 205.7 1.9 122.2 −         Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.3 1,545.4 1,344.1 201.4 2.0 122.4 −         Q4 2,213.5 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.3 1,332.4 197.9 1.6 124.6 −
2019         Q1 2,343.9 31.6 68.3 489.2 1,624.9 1,402.8 222.2 1.5 128.4 −
         Q2 2,405.7 31.9 69.3 489.7 1,685.2 1,463.9 221.3 1.8 127.8 −         Q3 2,489.0 31.7 69.2 487.9 1,765.7 1,539.4 226.3 2.2 132.3 −         Q4 2,485.4 31.7 75.5 512.7 1,710.3 1,494.3 216.0 1.9 153.3 −
Life insurance
2017         Q2 1,172.8 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.6 989.6 − 1.0 46.2 −
         Q3 1,177.5 4.1 12.3 121.5 994.0 994.0 − 1.1 44.5 −         Q4 1,193.2 4.1 12.8 121.9 1,007.5 1,007.5 − 1.1 45.8 −
2018         Q1 1,187.6 4.0 13.3 119.5 1,007.4 1,007.4 − 0.7 42.6 −
         Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.3 1,017.4 1,017.4 − 0.8 40.6 −         Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.0 1,013.7 1,013.7 − 0.9 41.9 −         Q4 1,185.2 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.7 1,000.7 − 0.5 42.1 −
2019         Q1 1,238.0 4.1 14.3 120.8 1,057.5 1,057.5 − 0.4 40.9 −
         Q2 1,289.7 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,106.5 1,106.5 − 0.4 42.4 −         Q3 1,346.9 3.7 15.4 116.0 1,168.6 1,168.6 − 0.6 42.6 −         Q4 1,331.2 3.6 18.5 127.7 1,124.9 1,124.9 − 0.5 56.0 −
Non-life insurance
2017         Q2 603.7 1.1 6.8 135.7 406.8 302.5 104.3 0.1 53.1 −
         Q3 603.1 1.1 6.9 137.5 406.8 305.8 101.1 0.1 50.7 −         Q4 606.9 1.1 6.7 141.3 405.9 309.8 96.1 0.1 51.8 −
2018         Q1 623.2 1.1 7.7 141.4 423.0 311.1 111.9 0.0 50.0 −
         Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 −         Q3 617.9 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 −         Q4 616.2 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.6 315.5 101.1 0.0 50.0 −
2019         Q1 655.4 1.1 9.3 144.6 449.5 329.5 120.0 0.0 50.9 −
         Q2 664.1 1.1 8.8 146.1 459.8 341.8 118.0 0.1 48.3 −         Q3 680.1 1.2 9.0 147.8 471.9 354.7 117.2 0.1 50.1 −         Q4 678.9 1.2 9.6 150.4 458.3 349.7 108.6 0.1 59.3 −
Reinsurance  3 
2017         Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −
         Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.9 1.1 35.0 −         Q4 412.6 23.1 43.1 202.8 109.6 17.7 91.9 1.0 33.1 −
2018         Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 −
         Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 −         Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 −         Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 −
2019         Q1 450.5 26.5 44.6 223.8 117.9 15.7 102.2 1.1 36.7 −
         Q2 451.9 26.6 46.1 221.8 118.9 15.6 103.3 1.3 37.2 −         Q3 462.0 26.8 44.7 224.1 125.3 16.1 109.1 1.5 39.6 −         Q4 475.3 26.9 47.4 234.5 127.1 19.8 107.4 1.3 38.1 −
Pension funds  4 
2017         Q2 626.0 − 6.9 7.1 557.1 557.1 − − 2.5 52.4
         Q3 636.5 − 6.9 7.3 563.0 563.0 − − 2.5 56.9         Q4 646.8 − 7.1 7.6 574.3 574.3 − − 2.7 55.2
2018         Q1 650.6 − 7.3 7.7 580.2 580.2 − − 2.7 52.7
         Q2 657.5 − 7.5 7.8 587.4 587.4 − − 2.8 52.0         Q3 663.5 − 7.7 7.8 593.4 593.4 − − 2.9 51.6         Q4 669.4 − 7.9 7.8 602.8 602.8 − − 3.2 47.6
2019         Q1 687.2 − 8.1 8.0 613.1 613.1 − − 3.3 54.8
         Q2 699.6 − 8.1 8.0 618.2 618.2 − − 3.3 62.1         Q3 714.8 − 8.2 8.1 625.8 625.8 − − 3.3 69.4         Q4 723.1 − 8.4 8.2 636.5 636.5 − − 3.4 66.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- tor. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “pension
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. 1Including de- funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company
posits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-e mployed. Social se-
and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Insurance technical reserves “life“ taking account of curity funds are not included. 5Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and
transitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the “non-life insurance“ sec- the liability item “Shares and other equity“. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
May 2020
VIII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities ities  3 Total 4 Bundesbank sectors  6 residents  7 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  5 
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 − 15,971 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,379
2014 64,775 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 − 12,124 − 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 − 66,330 121,164 61,659 − 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 − 10,012 43,951 164,148 − 58,012 187,500 34,660 − 92,768
2017 53,796 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 42,233 140,417 − 71,454 161,012 50,859 − 86,621
2018 61,984 16,630 33,251 12,433 − 29,055 45,354 99,011 − 24,417 67,328 56,100 − 37,028
2019 125,037 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 56,501 85,203 8,059 2,408 74,736 39,834
2019         May 42,872 42,665 20,104 1,599 20,962 207 14,300 4,099 4,010 6,191 28,572
         June 9,840 − 2,297 − 913 8,375 − 9,757 12,137 14,047 9,743 − 1,663 5,967 − 4,207
         July − 1,760 − 7,860 744 − 1,051 − 7,553 6,100 1,773 4,464 − 2,627 − 64 − 3,532
         Aug. 28,206 27,213 − 3,325 6,474 24,064 993 21,406 6,157 1,378 13,871 6,800
         Sep. 3,145 − 1,029 − 722 170 − 477 4,174 6,521 − 35 − 1,888 8,444 − 3,375
         Oct. − 37,327 − 38,176 − 17,186 3,290 − 24,280 849 − 11,175 − 8,976 505 − 2,704 − 26,152
         Nov. 45,338 38,355 13,461 6,468 18,426 6,983 28,913 5,649 7,457 15,807 16,425
         Dec. − 29,741 − 24,349 − 4,293 − 3,847 − 16,209 − 5,392 − 2,131 − 12,043 2,062 7,850 − 27,610
2020         Jan. 40,861 29,951 4,293 10,672 14,987 10,910 7,512 3,447 2,985 1,080 33,349
         Feb. 41,836 33,199 14,383 1,337 17,479 8,637 32,132 9,014 4,202 18,916 9,705
         Mar. − 134 3,808 − 4,577 − 5,524 13,910 − 3,942 − 11,907 17,837 4,747 − 34,491 11,773
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total 10 tutions  5 Other sectors  11 residents  12 
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,195
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 − 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 − 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 − 5,143 36,180 − 141
2017 53,024 15,570 37,454 51,372 7,031 44,341 1,652
2018 58,446 16,188 42,258 84,528 − 11,184 95,712 − 26,082
2019 45,092 9,076 36,015 48,611 − 1,119 49,730 − 3,519
2019         May 5,069 1,061 4,008 6,478 1,182 5,296 − 1,409
         June 920 475 445 136 − 295 431 784
         July 2,424 68 2,356 908 − 1,609 2,517 1,516
         Aug. 329 75 254 1,583 − 616 2,199 − 1,254
         Sep. 5,330 124 5,206 4,469 − 1,145 5,614 861
         Oct. 10,663 385 10,278 10,682 − 172 10,854 − 19
         Nov. 4,230 236 3,994 4,445 1,801 2,644 − 215
         Dec. 5,878 4,669 1,209 7,154 1,453 5,701 − 1,276
2020         Jan. 6,836 795 6,041 6,946 − 286 7,232 − 110
         Feb. 2,975 416 2,559 1,000 − 947 1,947 1,975
         Mar. − 2,539 566 − 3,105 5,172 − 7,442 12,614 − 7,711
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own 8Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices. 9Net pur-
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. chases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  re sidents;  
3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction transaction  values. 10Domestic and foreign shares. 11Residual; also including
values. 4Domestic and foreign debt securities. 5Book values; statistically adjusted. purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 12Net
6Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct in vestment) by
mutual funds. Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank. 7Net purchases or non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values. provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2020
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,421
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
2019 July 116,547 73,836 3,014 738 58,148 11,936 6,410 36,302
Aug. 113,666 61,206 1,851 – 46,927 12,428 8,352 44,107
Sep. 106,888 66,644 3,242 1,877 53,588 7,936 10,787 29,457
Oct. 102,837 65,365 1,947 31 54,709 8,678 9,740 27,732
Nov. 111,203 65,111 4,053 1,080 48,790 11,188 11,524 34,568
Dec. 61,994 39,959 570 10 33,766 5,613 4,268 17,767
6 2020 Jan. 151,486 82,405 7,081 1,350 64,648 9,326 19,477 49,604
Feb. 124,109 69,386 3,219 200 56,112 9,855 10,143 44,580
Mar. 115,687 55,555 7,719 4,505 39,366 3,966 10,448 49,684
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
2019 July 33,810 15,283 2,331 290 8,959 3,704 5,310 13,217
Aug. 24,543 5,751 341 – 2,515 2,895 6,676 12,116
Sep. 35,985 18,536 2,075 1,877 11,581 3,003 7,100 10,349
Oct. 27,395 10,263 1,381 31 6,522 2,329 7,450 9,682
Nov. 40,373 16,756 2,896 1,030 6,675 6,155 9,535 14,082
Dec. 16,946 9,899 540 10 6,824 2,525 2,729 4,317
6 2020 Jan. 50,576 27,474 7,032 1,250 13,813 5,379 8,300 14,802
Feb. 31,590 16,290 2,899 50 9,994 3,348 1,619 13,681
Mar. 30,173 13,702 3,859 1,905 5,832 2,106 865 15,607
Net sales 5
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 – 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302
2009 76,441 – 75,554 858 – 80,646 25,579 – 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 – 87,646 – 3,754 – 63,368 28,296 – 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
2019 July – 6,666 1,488 – 1,791 45 1,851 1,382 – 1,306 – 6,847
Aug. 23,134 – 3,541 680 – 918 – 2,828 – 474 6,041 20,634
Sep. – 531 – 804 484 1,560 2,787 – 5,636 720 – 446
Oct. – 32,609 – 16,242 244 – 1,286 – 12,310 – 2,890 3,080 – 19,448
Nov. 42,328 15,455 3,670 118 10,420 1,247 6,544 20,329
Dec. – 30,172 – 9,922 – 1,605 – 816 – 4,406 – 3,096 – 2,804 – 17,445
6 2020 Jan. 19,138 3,753 3,260 135 – 4,112 4,470 10,748 4,638
Feb. 27,420 10,817 2,633 – 679 9,318 – 455 436 16,168
Mar. 10,888 2,627 5,741 3,137 – 135 – 6,116 – 4,191 12,452
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification ofdebt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales less
redemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the
most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
May 2020
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
2019 July 3,147,222 1,237,965 170,714 49,054 702,662 315,535 328,744 1,580,512
Aug. 3,170,356 1,234,424 171,394 48,135 699,834 315,061 334,785 1,601,147
Sep. 3,169,825 1,233,620 171,879 49,695 702,621 309,425 335,505 1,600,700
Oct. 3,137,216 1,217,378 172,123 48,410 690,311 306,535 338,585 1,581,253
Nov. 3,179,544 1,232,833 175,793 48,528 700,730 307,782 345,130 1,601,582
Dec. 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 Jan. 3,132,103 1,182,330 179,415 47,491 686,211 269,213 348,115 1,601,658
Feb. 3,160,234 1,193,470 182,045 46,835 695,862 268,727 348,656 1,618,108
Mar. 3,166,736 1,191,689 187,630 49,962 692,064 262,034 344,136 1,630,911
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-March 2020
bis unter 2   1 051 386   450 860   48 961   13 998   291 573   96 328   72 671   527 855 
 2 bis unter 4    629 587   265 223   51 069   11 549   153 765   48 840   56 610   307 754 
 4 bis unter 6    472 994   204 787   35 324   9 986   115 522   43 955   50 356   217 851 
6 bis unter 8    331 587   123 724   27 590   6 211   57 000   32 922   30 904   176 959 
 8 bis unter 10    204 845   72 443   15 650   5 292   35 991   15 511   19 167   113 235 
 10 bis unter 15    135 950   31 899   6 192   1 285   14 247   10 176   26 564   77 486 
 15 bis unter 20    94 704   23 143   1 858   1 537   17 416   2 332   12 711   58 850 
 20 und darüber    245 683   19 610    986    104   6 550   11 971   75 152   150 921 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to change of domicile of issuers.
3 Calculated from month under review until final maturity for debt securities falling dueen bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for debt securities
not falling due en bloc.  4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 – 428 – 608 – 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 – 3,741 – 1,269 – 974 927,256
2010 174,596 – 1,096 3,265 497 178 – 486 – 993 – 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,700 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,747 1,950,224
2019 July 179,852 – 523 35 11 3 – 10 – 6 – 555 1,769,824
Aug. 179,826 – 26 40 93 –– 36 – 7 – 116 1,745,136
Sep. 182,330 2,504 71 1,918 488 – 65 145 – 54 1,799,024
3Oct. 183,777 – 94 79 – 5 – 40 – 8 – 129 1,867,235
Nov. 183,514 – 265 41 – –– 156 – 10 – 141 1,927,816
4Dec. 183,461 – 83 284 1 20 – 11 – 8 – 368 1,950,224
2020 Jan. 183,341 – 120 27 – – –– 29 – 118 1,928,328
4Feb. 183,247 33 67 5 –– 1 – 1 – 37 1,746,035
Mar. 181,792 – 1,455 78 40 – – 12 – 1,584 1,475,909
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
May 2020
 VIII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Corporate German German With a residual With a residual
maturity of bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share maturity of more
9 to (non- index share price index than 9 years and € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total up to 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1,000
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.062017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.642018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.962019 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2019         Nov. − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 0.0 0.2 2.2 144.67 112.86 571.40 13,236.38
         Dec. − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 0.0 0.2 2.1 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020         Jan. − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 0.0 0.3 2.0 144.88 113.14 565.28 12,981.97
         Feb. − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.1 1.8 146.02 114.54 516.08 11,890.35         Mar. − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 0.1 0.3 3.5 145.13 113.12 429.84 9,935.84
         Apr. − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.5 0.3 0.4 3.7 144.99 114.35 471.38 10,861.64
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of standing of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthl y figures are calcula-
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt ted on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annu al figures
securities and similar, debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero coupon are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts out- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which:
Sales of which: of which:
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0352012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4372013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 − 1,745 143,256 44,266 − 3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,8712016 156,985 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 − 3,172 161,057 40,787 − 6,9472017 153,484 94,921 29,560 − 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,562 156,002 4,938 1,048 151,064 57,514 − 2,5202018 131,958 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,263 138,254 2,979 − 2,306 135,275 30,569 − 6,298
2019 175,476 122,546 17,032 − 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 52,930 180,439 2,719 − 812 177,720 53,742 − 4,9612019         Sep. 12,434 9,233 2,629 164 1,645 831 6,604 3,201 12,989 890 64 12,099 3,137 − 555
         Oct. 14,574 11,592 322 − 115 − 1,543 647 11,270 2,982 14,123 719 114 13,404 2,868 451
         Nov. 18,431 12,313 2,646 − 232 1,764 1,048 9,668 6,118 18,296 217 118 18,079 6,000 135         Dec. 44,876 33,056 1,942 − 98 947 949 31,114 11,820 44,061 844 79 43,217 11,741 815
2020         Jan. 23,827 14,294 2,855 − 54 1,019 1,965 11,439 9,533 24,366 2,972 633 21,394 8,900 − 539
         Feb. 16,612 13,164 1,205 83 271 1,303 11,959 3,449 16,643 773 276 15,870 3,173 − 31         Mar. − 17,513 5,433 − 4,841 699 − 5,449 673 10,275 − 22,946 − 17,285 − 3,270 − 2,578 − 14,015 − 20,368 − 227
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
May 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 48.36 24.58 25.83 10.92 30.67 − 18.93 − 9.00 37.47 16.29
Debt securities − 7.53 5.24 − 1.50 2.34 2.48 0.60 − 1.26 − 0.59 − 0.26
Short-term debt securities − 2.97 1.42 − 0.39 0.84 0.87 − 0.08 − 1.26 0.33 0.61
Long-term debt securities − 4.56 3.82 − 1.12 1.51 1.61 0.68 − 0.00 − 0.92 − 0.87
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 3.64 0.64 0.00 0.05 0.47 0.54 − 0.24 − 0.46 0.16
Non-financial corporations − 0.61 0.59 1.10 − 0.10 0.39 0.70 − 0.25 0.31 0.34
Financial corporations − 0.52 1.40 − 0.85 0.17 0.70 − 0.11 0.08 − 0.71 − 0.11
General government − 2.50 − 1.34 − 0.24 − 0.02 − 0.62 − 0.05 − 0.07 − 0.05 − 0.07
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.88 4.60 − 1.51 2.29 2.02 0.06 − 1.02 − 0.13 − 0.42
Loans 56.18 − 25.68 2.08 − 4.10 − 13.01 12.09 − 6.82 − 7.55 4.36
Short-term loans 27.83 − 0.14 7.85 − 4.43 1.55 14.89 − 7.92 − 5.41 6.29
Long-term loans 28.35 − 25.54 − 5.78 0.33 − 14.55 − 2.80 1.09 − 2.14 − 1.93
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 24.02 − 10.65 − 9.13 2.87 − 5.46 0.83 − 5.73 − 7.05 2.82
Non-financial corporations 15.23 − 10.03 − 8.19 2.50 − 5.60 0.94 − 6.71 − 8.09 5.67
Financial corporations 8.42 − 0.97 − 1.03 0.28 0.05 − 0.13 0.96 1.01 − 2.87
General government 0.36 0.35 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.02
Loans to the rest of the world 32.17 − 15.03 11.21 − 6.97 − 7.55 11.26 − 1.09 − 0.50 1.54
Equity and investment fund shares 72.82 125.12 57.60 45.17 10.31 14.53 10.73 33.84 − 1.50
Equity 64.73 123.11 48.48 44.68 13.19 11.97 9.04 30.63 − 3.15
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 3.82 18.82 6.18 − 1.34 1.12 1.82 − 3.35 15.19 − 7.49
Non-financial corporations − 3.76 18.27 4.62 − 1.38 0.91 1.84 − 3.32 15.24 − 9.14
Financial corporations − 0.06 0.55 1.55 0.04 0.21 − 0.02 − 0.03 − 0.05 1.65
Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.62 0.68 4.94 − 15.14 0.00 0.34 1.17 2.68 0.75
Other equity  1 60.93 103.61 37.37 61.16 12.07 9.80 11.22 12.76 3.59
Investment fund shares 8.09 2.01 9.12 0.49 − 2.88 2.57 1.69 3.21 1.65
Money market fund shares − 0.85 − 0.53 1.82 − 0.14 0.27 − 0.03 0.23 − 0.03 1.66
Non-MMF investment fund shares 8.94 2.54 7.30 0.63 − 3.15 2.60 1.46 3.24 − 0.01
Insurance technical reserves 1.56 0.38 1.64 0.25 − 0.51 0.49 0.44 0.38 0.33
Financial derivatives 12.81 − 5.33 − 21.85 − 4.47 − 0.63 0.18 − 6.80 2.99 − 18.22
Other accounts receivable 163.59 8.17 − 57.12 0.61 − 36.35 27.55 − 40.83 − 3.60 − 40.24
Total 347.78 132.48 6.67 50.72 − 7.04 36.52 − 53.55 62.94 − 39.24
External financing
Debt securities 8.56 7.08 19.19 0.90 1.03 5.77 5.87 5.00 2.55
Short-term securities 0.60 4.08 2.74 0.38 − 0.32 1.23 1.75 0.46 − 0.70
Long-term securities 7.95 3.00 16.45 0.53 1.35 4.54 4.12 4.54 3.25
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 7.09 3.87 7.71 − 0.92 0.67 4.04 0.15 2.66 0.87
Non-financial corporations − 0.61 0.59 1.10 − 0.10 0.39 0.70 − 0.25 0.31 0.34
Financial corporations 9.16 3.28 6.01 − 0.54 0.24 2.44 0.89 2.36 0.31
General government 0.01 0.01 0.27 0.00 0.00 0.69 − 0.61 − 0.04 0.22
Households − 1.47 − 0.01 0.34 − 0.28 0.04 0.20 0.12 0.03 − 0.01
Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.46 3.21 11.48 1.82 0.36 1.73 5.72 2.34 1.69
Loans 100.17 127.58 76.27 35.96 9.38 23.67 37.96 11.23 3.41
Short-term loans 23.28 60.32 19.58 21.53 − 4.00 17.08 17.25 − 7.11 − 7.65
Long-term loans 76.89 67.26 56.69 14.44 13.38 6.59 20.71 18.34 11.05
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 52.26 72.33 49.49 25.90 − 0.71 20.65 17.31 − 6.12 17.65
Non-financial corporations 15.23 − 10.03 − 8.19 2.50 − 5.60 0.94 − 6.71 − 8.09 5.67
Financial corporations 37.76 81.03 55.29 23.04 5.42 23.25 23.18 2.05 6.81
General government − 0.73 1.33 2.40 0.36 − 0.54 − 3.54 0.85 − 0.08 5.17
Loans from the rest of the world 47.91 55.25 26.78 10.06 10.09 3.02 20.64 17.35 − 14.24
Equity 33.18 20.63 17.97 0.79 3.83 5.12 4.19 3.82 4.83
Listed shares of domestic sectors 8.46 73.17 − 24.49 5.21 43.50 4.46 − 34.74 15.17 − 9.38
Non-financial corporations − 3.76 18.27 4.62 − 1.38 0.91 1.84 − 3.32 15.24 − 9.14
Financial corporations 11.11 46.75 − 33.11 4.12 43.18 − 0.26 − 32.78 − 0.68 0.60
General government 0.51 0.53 − 0.01 0.09 0.13 − 0.04 0.04 0.04 − 0.05
Households 0.60 7.61 4.01 2.37 − 0.72 2.92 1.32 0.57 − 0.80
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 4.12 − 31.89 − 1.59 − 4.82 − 42.00 − 4.22 2.76 − 14.41 14.28
Other equity  1 28.84 − 20.65 44.05 0.41 2.33 4.88 36.17 3.06 − 0.06
Insurance technical reserves 6.89 6.04 6.04 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 3.69 − 4.19 − 12.07 − 0.06 − 8.90 3.62 0.65 4.49 − 20.83
Other accounts payable 60.05 22.64 8.44 5.31 − 16.56 12.84 − 17.91 16.45 − 2.93
Total 212.54 179.77 115.83 44.42 − 9.71 52.54 32.26 42.50 − 11.47
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
May 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 554.2 566.3 563.8 533.8 566.3 534.1 514.8 564.4 563.8
Debt securities 47.0 50.8 50.3 48.8 50.8 52.2 51.3 51.1 50.3
Short-term debt securities 3.5 4.9 3.9 4.1 4.9 4.8 3.6 3.9 3.9
Long-term debt securities 43.5 45.9 46.4 44.7 45.9 47.3 47.7 47.1 46.4
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.1 21.3 21.6 21.1 21.3 22.2 22.1 21.7 21.6
Non-financial corporations 4.0 4.5 5.2 4.1 4.5 5.2 5.0 5.3 5.2Financial corporations 12.7 13.8 13.6 13.3 13.8 14.0 14.2 13.6 13.6General government 4.4 3.0 2.8 3.6 3.0 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.8
Debt securities of the rest of the world 25.8 29.5 28.7 27.7 29.5 30.0 29.2 29.3 28.7
Loans 624.4 595.0 598.7 612.2 595.0 608.6 600.8 595.3 598.7
Short-term loans 495.1 491.1 499.9 493.9 491.1 506.7 498.4 494.1 499.9
Long-term loans 129.3 103.9 98.8 118.3 103.9 101.8 102.5 101.2 98.8
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 405.7 395.1 385.9 400.5 395.1 395.9 390.2 383.1 385.9
Non-financial corporations 297.8 287.8 279.6 293.4 287.8 288.7 282.0 273.9 279.6Financial corporations 97.6 96.7 95.6 96.6 96.7 96.5 97.5 98.5 95.6General government 10.3 10.6 10.7 10.5 10.6 10.6 10.7 10.7 10.7
Loans to the rest of the world 218.8 199.9 212.8 211.7 199.9 212.7 210.7 212.2 212.8
Equity and investment fund shares 2,140.3 2,090.9 2,317.8 2,220.9 2,090.9 2,189.6 2,198.3 2,232.1 2,317.8
Equity 1,968.7 1,924.5 2,127.9 2,044.8 1,924.5 2,013.4 2,017.8 2,045.5 2,127.9
Listed shares of domestic sectors 332.2 302.6 342.0 338.3 302.6 318.3 319.7 328.8 342.0
Non-financial corporations 325.3 296.0 332.9 330.4 296.0 311.3 312.1 321.4 332.9Financial corporations 6.8 6.6 9.0 7.9 6.6 7.0 7.7 7.3 9.0
Listed shares of the rest of the world 49.0 45.3 55.3 49.1 45.3 49.0 50.3 52.1 55.3
Other equity  
1 1,587.5 1,576.6 1,730.7 1,657.3 1,576.6 1,646.1 1,647.8 1,664.6 1,730.7
Investment fund shares 171.7 166.4 189.9 176.2 166.4 176.3 180.6 186.6 189.9
Money market fund shares 1.6 1.0 3.3 0.8 1.0 1.0 1.2 1.2 3.3Non-MMF investment fund shares 170.1 165.4 186.6 175.4 165.4 175.3 179.3 185.4 186.6
Insurance technical reserves 54.2 56.3 59.2 56.3 56.3 57.0 57.7 58.4 59.2Financial derivatives 49.5 43.5 45.9 41.3 43.5 49.0 48.2 57.1 45.9Other accounts receivable 1,122.5 1,153.2 1,229.4 1,189.8 1,153.2 1,198.6 1,178.9 1,203.4 1,229.4
Total 4,592.2 4,556.0 4,865.1 4,703.2 4,556.0 4,689.1 4,650.1 4,761.9 4,865.1
Liabilities
Debt securities 210.6 187.8 214.0 185.8 187.8 196.4 205.6 217.0 214.0
Short-term securities 3.4 6.1 8.8 6.5 6.1 7.4 9.1 9.5 8.8
Long-term securities 207.2 181.6 205.2 179.2 181.6 189.1 196.5 207.4 205.2
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 83.1 79.3 88.3 79.2 79.3 85.6 86.1 88.8 88.3
Non-financial corporations 4.0 4.5 5.2 4.1 4.5 5.2 5.0 5.3 5.2Financial corporations 64.4 60.7 68.2 60.8 60.7 65.2 66.4 68.9 68.2General government 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.4Households 14.5 14.0 14.4 14.2 14.0 14.4 14.5 14.5 14.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 127.4 108.5 125.7 106.6 108.5 110.8 119.5 128.1 125.7
Loans 1,642.4 1,762.5 1,841.2 1,755.8 1,762.5 1,789.5 1,824.8 1,839.5 1,841.2
Short-term loans 654.6 714.2 736.8 719.6 714.2 734.0 750.1 744.9 736.8
Long-term loans 987.9 1,048.3 1,104.4 1,036.2 1,048.3 1,055.5 1,074.7 1,094.6 1,104.4
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 1,236.6 1,294.1 1,342.7 1,302.8 1,294.1 1,315.3 1,331.6 1,326.0 1,342.7
Non-financial corporations 297.8 287.8 279.6 293.4 287.8 288.7 282.0 273.9 279.6Financial corporations 880.5 947.7 1,001.9 950.2 947.7 971.4 993.5 995.9 1,001.9General government 58.3 58.6 61.2 59.2 58.6 55.2 56.1 56.1 61.2
Loans from the rest of the world 405.8 468.4 498.6 453.0 468.4 474.1 493.2 513.6 498.6
Equity 3,078.3 2,707.0 3,108.1 2,962.1 2,707.0 2,806.1 2,894.0 2,900.3 3,108.1
Listed shares of domestic sectors 721.3 659.3 733.2 706.5 659.3 704.8 682.4 692.4 733.2
Non-financial corporations 325.3 296.0 332.9 330.4 296.0 311.3 312.1 321.4 332.9Financial corporations 149.6 161.9 157.4 141.0 161.9 173.7 145.9 145.7 157.4General government 46.0 41.6 51.8 43.6 41.6 44.3 45.0 47.9 51.8Households 200.4 159.8 191.1 191.5 159.8 175.5 179.5 177.4 191.1
Listed shares of the rest of the world 960.5 764.8 959.4 909.1 764.8 788.8 859.9 857.6 959.4
Other equity  
1 1,396.5 1,282.9 1,415.5 1,346.6 1,282.9 1,312.5 1,351.6 1,350.2 1,415.5
Insurance technical reserves 263.7 269.7 275.8 268.2 269.7 271.2 272.7 274.2 275.8Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 26.9 23.3 27.0 30.1 23.3 29.7 34.0 42.6 27.0
Other accounts payable 1,114.6 1,162.3 1,285.2 1,164.6 1,162.3 1,187.0 1,182.7 1,239.2 1,285.2
Total 6,336.5 6,112.6 6,751.3 6,366.5 6,112.6 6,279.9 6,413.7 6,512.9 6,751.3
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
May 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 105.96 135.24 139.32 27.25 53.34 24.97 42.19 23.62 48.55
Currency 19.46 27.20 32.31 6.95 8.98 3.97 8.36 10.33 9.65
Deposits 86.51 108.04 107.01 20.30 44.37 21.00 33.83 13.29 38.89
Transferable deposits 99.78 109.88 111.01 21.40 42.22 17.18 34.39 17.27 42.16
Time deposits − 4.03 6.79 1.47 1.43 2.23 1.86 − 0.79 − 0.30 0.70
Savings deposits
(including savings certificates) − 9.24 − 8.63 − 5.47 − 2.53 − 0.08 1.95 0.23 − 3.68 − 3.97
Debt securities − 8.39 1.61 − 1.86 1.71 0.57 0.50 0.61 − 1.35 − 1.61
Short-term debt securities − 0.20 − 0.13 − 0.53 − 0.01 0.26 − 0.23 − 0.13 − 0.19 0.01
Long-term debt securities − 8.19 1.74 − 1.33 1.72 0.31 0.72 0.73 − 1.16 − 1.62
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 5.12 2.23 − 2.95 1.17 0.96 0.69 0.28 − 1.53 − 2.38
Non-financial corporations − 1.45 − 0.10 0.21 − 0.13 0.19 0.21 0.08 − 0.04 − 0.04
Financial corporations − 2.68 2.79 − 2.23 1.36 0.79 0.56 0.27 − 1.31 − 1.76
General government − 0.99 − 0.46 − 0.92 − 0.06 − 0.02 − 0.09 − 0.07 − 0.18 − 0.59
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.28 − 0.62 1.08 0.54 − 0.39 − 0.19 0.33 0.18 0.77
Equity and investment fund shares 55.14 38.22 49.29 11.55 1.11 10.64 10.83 11.91 15.91
Equity 14.86 18.67 18.76 7.04 1.60 6.77 4.23 4.37 3.39
Listed shares of domestic sectors 0.85 9.36 6.56 2.62 − 0.08 4.29 1.42 1.11 − 0.25
Non-financial corporations 0.49 6.22 3.50 2.26 − 0.78 2.51 1.30 0.88 − 1.19
Financial corporations 0.36 3.14 3.07 0.36 0.70 1.77 0.12 0.24 0.94
Listed shares of the rest of the world 9.86 4.30 7.36 2.85 0.90 0.94 1.69 2.16 2.56
Other equity  1 4.16 5.00 4.84 1.57 0.77 1.54 1.13 1.09 1.08
Investment fund shares 40.28 19.55 30.52 4.50 − 0.49 3.87 6.60 7.54 12.52
Money market fund shares − 0.30 − 0.34 − 0.28 − 0.06 0.15 − 0.13 − 0.02 0.16 − 0.29
Non-MMF investment fund shares 40.58 19.90 30.80 4.57 − 0.64 4.00 6.62 7.38 12.81
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 20.23 15.80 13.55 3.15 6.25 3.36 3.41 3.41 3.36
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 37.42 28.18 27.71 6.21 6.99 8.71 7.04 5.18 6.78
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 35.52 29.79 26.84 7.42 4.52 6.81 5.79 6.75 7.48
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  2 − 23.92 0.11 13.29 − 1.69 − 14.44 28.56 − 4.48 10.37 − 21.15
Total 221.96 248.96 268.13 55.58 58.35 83.55 65.38 59.87 59.33
  External financing
Loans 55.38 68.30 80.81 22.43 15.07 15.83 23.78 24.79 16.40
Short-term loans − 2.19 2.44 0.92 1.83 0.53 0.47 0.87 − 0.62 0.20
Long-term loans 57.57 65.86 79.89 20.60 14.54 15.36 22.91 25.41 16.20
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 47.24 57.31 66.82 19.52 13.12 9.03 16.57 21.61 19.61
Consumer loans 11.25 11.14 14.42 2.36 2.67 6.15 6.56 3.67 − 1.96
Entrepreneurial loans − 3.11 − 0.14 − 0.43 0.55 − 0.73 0.65 0.66 − 0.49 − 1.25
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 49.99 61.72 73.41 19.41 13.67 12.51 21.22 21.09 18.60
Loans from other financial institutions 5.40 6.58 7.40 3.02 1.40 3.32 2.56 3.71 − 2.19
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 0.66 − 0.18 0.73 − 0.05 − 0.35 0.51 0.10 0.20 − 0.07
Total 56.04 68.13 81.54 22.38 14.71 16.34 23.88 24.99 16.34
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
May 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,314.1 2,451.1 2,590.4 2,397.8 2,451.1 2,476.1 2,518.3 2,541.9 2,590.4
Currency 193.8 221.0 253.3 212.0 221.0 224.9 233.3 243.6 253.3
Deposits 2,120.3 2,230.1 2,337.1 2,185.8 2,230.1 2,251.1 2,285.0 2,298.3 2,337.1
Transferable deposits 1,288.4 1,398.0 1,509.1 1,355.8 1,398.0 1,415.2 1,449.6 1,466.9 1,509.1Time deposits 245.4 252.4 253.9 250.2 252.4 254.3 253.5 253.2 253.9Savings deposits(including savings certificates) 586.5 579.7 574.2 579.8 579.7 581.6 581.9 578.2 574.2
Debt securities 122.5 117.5 121.3 121.2 117.5 121.2 123.1 122.5 121.3
Short-term debt securities 2.5 2.1 1.6 2.0 2.1 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.6
Long-term debt securities 120.0 115.4 119.7 119.1 115.4 119.3 121.3 120.9 119.7
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 82.9 80.2 81.4 82.8 80.2 83.3 84.5 83.4 81.4
Non-financial corporations 12.6 12.1 12.4 12.2 12.1 12.5 12.6 12.5 12.4Financial corporations 66.4 64.6 66.5 67.2 64.6 67.4 68.6 67.7 66.5General government 3.9 3.4 2.5 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.3 3.2 2.5
Debt securities of the rest of the world 39.6 37.4 39.9 38.4 37.4 37.9 38.6 39.2 39.9
Equity and investment fund shares 1,241.4 1,162.6 1,383.1 1,264.0 1,162.6 1,255.4 1,292.3 1,322.0 1,383.1
Equity 645.5 589.2 702.9 649.0 589.2 640.7 661.1 672.0 702.9
Listed shares of domestic sectors 227.9 184.1 223.6 218.6 184.1 203.7 210.1 209.3 223.6
Non-financial corporations 191.5 151.9 182.0 181.8 151.9 166.9 171.0 169.3 182.0Financial corporations 36.4 32.2 41.5 36.7 32.2 36.8 39.1 40.0 41.5
Listed shares of the rest of the world 103.1 100.1 135.6 113.6 100.1 116.4 120.0 126.1 135.6
Other equity  
1 314.5 305.0 343.6 316.9 305.0 320.6 331.0 336.7 343.6
Investment fund shares 595.9 573.4 680.3 615.0 573.4 614.7 631.2 650.0 680.3
Money market fund shares 2.7 2.4 2.2 2.2 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.5 2.2Non-MMF investment fund shares 593.2 571.1 678.1 612.8 571.1 612.5 628.9 647.5 678.1
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 360.1 375.9 389.4 369.6 375.9 379.3 382.7 386.1 389.4
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 991.4 1,011.1 1,039.6 1,006.2 1,011.1 1,020.0 1,027.2 1,032.6 1,039.6
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 846.5 875.4 902.3 866.8 875.4 882.2 888.0 894.8 902.3
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 31.1 29.6 32.2 31.8 29.6 30.6 31.5 32.3 32.2
Total 5,907.1 6,023.2 6,458.4 6,057.3 6,023.2 6,164.8 6,263.1 6,332.1 6,458.4
  Liabilities
Loans 1,711.8 1,775.5 1,857.3 1,760.4 1,775.5 1,791.2 1,816.1 1,840.9 1,857.3
Short-term loans 54.4 58.1 58.8 56.3 58.1 58.5 59.4 58.8 58.8
Long-term loans 1,657.3 1,717.4 1,798.6 1,704.2 1,717.4 1,732.7 1,756.7 1,782.1 1,798.6
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 1,247.3 1,307.8 1,378.2 1,294.6 1,307.8 1,316.7 1,337.2 1,358.8 1,378.2Consumer loans 211.8 218.1 231.4 215.5 218.1 224.1 229.7 233.3 231.4Entrepreneurial loans 252.7 249.7 247.7 250.4 249.7 250.4 249.2 248.8 247.7
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,610.0 1,667.2 1,741.6 1,653.5 1,667.2 1,679.6 1,701.8 1,722.9 1,741.6Loans from other financial institutions 101.8 108.4 115.8 107.0 108.4 111.7 114.2 117.9 115.8Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 17.2 17.2 18.4 18.4 17.2 19.0 19.1 19.5 18.4
Total 1,728.9 1,792.7 1,875.7 1,778.9 1,792.7 1,810.3 1,835.2 1,860.3 1,875.7
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
May 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2013 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 2.5 + 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014 + 17.0 + 15.5 + 2.0 − 3.9 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 + 28.6 + 16.6 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 37.1 + 13.6 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 8.6 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 40.3 + 8.1 + 11.3 + 9.9 + 11.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
2018 p + 62.4 + 20.1 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 15.9 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
2019 pe + 49.8 + 20.1 + 13.6 + 6.2 + 9.9 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3
2018         H1  p + 51.7 + 18.7 + 15.8 + 8.0 + 9.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.6
         H2  p + 10.7 + 1.4 − 3.0 + 5.7 + 6.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2019         H1  pe + 45.7 + 17.4 + 13.7 + 6.3 + 8.2 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  pe + 4.1 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2013 2,213.0 1,390.1 663.6 175.4 1.3 78.7 49.4 23.6 6.2 0.0
2014 2,215.2 1,396.1 657.8 177.8 1.4 75.7 47.7 22.5 6.1 0.0
2015 2,185.1 1,372.2 654.7 177.7 1.4 72.1 45.3 21.6 5.9 0.0
2016 p 2,169.0 1,366.4 637.7 179.2 1.1 69.2 43.6 20.3 5.7 0.0
2017 p 2,118.7 1,350.9 610.2 175.9 0.8 65.3 41.6 18.8 5.4 0.0
2018 p 2,068.6 1,323.5 595.7 167.6 0.7 61.9 39.6 17.8 5.0 0.0
2019 p 2,053.0 1,299.9 606.7 165.2 0.7 59.8 37.8 17.7 4.8 0.0
2018         Q1  p 2,095.5 1,338.3 599.5 174.7 1.0 64.1 40.9 18.3 5.3 0.0
         Q2  p 2,080.9 1,330.0 595.9 173.2 0.9 63.0 40.3 18.0 5.2 0.0
         Q3  p 2,081.0 1,336.2 594.9 167.9 0.8 62.7 40.2 17.9 5.1 0.0
         Q4  p 2,068.6 1,323.5 595.7 167.6 0.7 61.9 39.6 17.8 5.0 0.0
2019         Q1  p 2,078.0 1,325.0 606.1 166.5 0.7 61.7 39.3 18.0 4.9 0.0
         Q2  p 2,069.1 1,321.0 604.7 165.3 0.7 61.1 39.0 17.9 4.9 0.0
         Q3  p 2,086.6 1,328.5 615.3 164.9 0.6 61.1 38.9 18.0 4.8 0.0
         Q4  p 2,053.0 1,299.9 606.7 165.2 0.7 59.8 37.8 17.7 4.8 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2013 1,264.7 650.9 465.4 148.4 1,263.5 666.6 220.5 141.8 61.0 51.5 122.2 + 1.1 1,120.6
2014 1,313.9 673.0 482.3 158.5 1,296.9 691.3 227.5 147.1 60.5 47.1 123.4 + 17.0 1,160.0
2015 1,363.1 704.2 501.2 157.7 1,334.5 722.0 233.0 149.7 64.6 42.7 122.5 + 28.6 1,212.4
2016 p 1,425.6 738.6 524.3 162.7 1,388.5 754.3 240.7 158.6 68.2 37.8 128.9 + 37.1 1,269.8
2017 p 1,481.7 772.7 549.5 159.6 1,441.4 784.8 250.0 162.9 71.9 34.3 137.5 + 40.3 1,328.9
2018 p 1,552.9 807.7 572.5 172.7 1,490.5 806.1 259.3 169.4 78.4 31.7 145.7 + 62.4 1,387.3
2019 pe 1,608.6 832.8 597.8 177.9 1,558.8 845.9 271.7 179.8 85.3 27.5 148.6 + 49.8 1,437.7
As a percentage of GDP
2013 45.0 23.2 16.6 5.3 44.9 23.7 7.8 5.0 2.2 1.8 4.3 + 0.0 39.9
2014 44.9 23.0 16.5 5.4 44.3 23.6 7.8 5.0 2.1 1.6 4.2 + 0.6 39.6
2015 45.0 23.2 16.5 5.2 44.0 23.8 7.7 4.9 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 0.9 40.0
2016 p 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.3 24.1 7.7 5.1 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.5
2017 p 45.7 23.8 16.9 4.9 44.4 24.2 7.7 5.0 2.2 1.1 4.2 + 1.2 41.0
2018 p 46.4 24.2 17.1 5.2 44.6 24.1 7.8 5.1 2.3 0.9 4.4 + 1.9 41.5
2019 pe 46.8 24.2 17.4 5.2 45.4 24.6 7.9 5.2 2.5 0.8 4.3 + 1.4 41.8
Percentage growth rates
2013 + 2.5 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 1.0 − 18.9 + 7.9 . + 2.7
2014 + 3.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.8 − 8.4 + 1.0 . + 3.5
2015 + 3.7 + 4.6 + 3.9 − 0.5 + 2.9 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 6.7 − 9.4 − 0.7 . + 4.5
2016 p + 4.6 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 3.1 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.0 + 5.5 − 11.6 + 5.3 . + 4.7
2017 p + 3.9 + 4.6 + 4.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 2.7 + 5.4 − 9.3 + 6.7 . + 4.7
2018 p + 4.8 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 8.2 + 3.4 + 2.7 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 9.0 − 7.4 + 5.9 . + 4.4
2019 pe + 3.6 + 3.1 + 4.4 + 3.0 + 4.6 + 4.9 + 4.8 + 6.1 + 8.8 − 13.2 + 2.0 . + 3.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  
Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
May 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.3 642.3 + 14.0 1,490.9 1,430.7 + 60.2
2017         Q1  p 216.0 180.4 0.9 199.6 62.9 80.3 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 16.4 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 338.0 326.4 + 11.6
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.6 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.7 + 13.4
         Q3  p 219.6 180.4 3.5 215.9 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 3.8 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 346.1 343.2 + 2.8
         Q4  p 243.8 196.3 2.1 244.4 69.8 84.7 6.9 19.2 4.1 − 0.6 168.2 158.0 + 10.2 383.4 373.8 + 9.6
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
         Q4  p 255.2 203.9 2.2 262.1 73.1 89.7 6.2 20.3 9.6 − 6.9 174.6 163.4 + 11.2 400.7 396.4 + 4.3
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 230.4 71.0 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 10.5 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 366.8 + 7.5
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 233.4 67.5 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 22.8 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 371.9 + 24.3
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 436.1 418.9 + 17.2 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2017         Q1  p 88.2 82.9 + 5.3 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.0 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
         Q3  p 88.6 93.6 − 5.0 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
         Q4  p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.7 109.2 − 4.5 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 113.4 118.5 − 5.1 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 99.4 + 6.2 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 97.5 + 8.5 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 114.4 117.6 − 3.3 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
May 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2018         Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
         Q2 194,715 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 29,064 − 540 6,592
         Q3 189,015 161,683 84,952 69,414 7,317 27,579 − 248 7,579
         Q4 203,128 177,157 92,363 76,459 8,335 35,492 − 9,521 6,206
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 202,383 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 29,784 + 37 6,179
         Q3 193,918 166,676 86,117 72,677 7,882 27,569 − 327 7,402
         Q4 210,062 182,556 98,381 78,809 5,365 37,733 − 10,227 6,146
2020         Q1 ... 168,015 82,801 75,620 9,593 ... ... 6,855
2019         Mar. . 65,536 34,406 28,556 2,573 . . 2,090
2020         Mar. . 63,979 33,419 28,891 1,670 . . 2,285
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2018         Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
         Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912
         Q3 173,202 78,105 50,368 12,683 7,192 7,862 59,169 43,951 15,218 2,315 26,424 5,797 1,391 11,519
         Q4 190,161 86,001 58,409 15,204 7,513 4,876 60,581 44,994 15,587 4,257 31,936 6,109 1,276 13,004
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770
         Q3 179,020 81,267 53,668 13,614 7,607 6,379 61,057 45,976 15,081 2,221 26,654 6,485 1,336 12,344
         Q4 196,300 89,619 60,632 16,575 7,128 5,284 62,696 47,175 15,520 3,660 32,301 6,746 1,279 13,745
2020         Q1 181,350 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,114 13,335
2019         Mar. 70,888 41,924 15,856 15,895 8,899 1,273 16,213 11,608 4,605 11 10,067 2,281 392 5,352
2020         Mar. 69,635 42,951 16,616 16,420 7,412 2,503 14,461 10,234 4,228 6 9,233 2,652 331 5,655
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2019: 48.9:47.7:3.4. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2019: 24.0:76.0. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
May 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,377
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
         Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 18,827 14,548 3,853         Q3 10,423 4,353 3,886 2,752 2,128 1,677 531 674 3,592 1,463 464 278 18,128 13,764 3,919         Q4 15,436 4,860 4,543 2,197 1,956 1,650 545 749 3,645 1,752 481 231 17,224 13,713 3,140
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 17,959 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 19,163 14,869 3,881         Q3 10,519 4,624 3,667 2,770 2,251 1,639 515 668 3,923 1,824 474 264 17,118 12,659 4,019         Q4 15,379 5,086 4,507 2,281 2,035 1,745 538 730 4,223 1,798 488 237 17,422 13,861 3,190
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 ... ... ...
2019         Mar. 3,181 2,319 1,405 1,380 909 539 146 188 1,293 634 156 197 . . .
2020         Mar. 3,144 2,367 1,152 833 922 532 142 140 1,515 747 177 213 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,250
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 
p 326,455 232,001 93,728 324,999 277,645 20,955 + 1,455 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115         Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
May 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −
2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −
         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −
         Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −
         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −
         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −
         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −
         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,654
2019 p 251,167 233,127 14,500 252,133 77,403 40,655 41,541 15,010 17,575 14,401 11,261 − 966
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298
         Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415
         Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264
         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934
         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736
         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573
         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. 
sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
May 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 4,778 12,957 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 
p 47,244 46,528 43,951 4,978 13,042 11,737 2,358 1,769 + 3,293
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400         Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999         Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,202 3,251 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,229 3,251 2,835 561 384 − 510
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 1,198 3,232 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 1,205 3,237 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 1,288 3,277 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 1,288 3,296 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,213,009 12,438 662,788 190,555 43,616 1,303,612
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,215,168 12,774 634,589 190,130 44,576 1,333,098
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,185,113 85,952 621,988 186,661 44,630 1,245,882
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,168,989 205,391 599,089 179,755 41,318 1,143,4362017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,118,669 319,159 552,728 175,617 38,208 1,032,9582018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018  
p 2,068,562 364,731 508,799 181,077 37,030 976,925
2019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019  p 2,053,033 366,562 473,114 177,601 43,593 992,164
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1 2,144,575 239,495 586,013 178,219 40,475 1,100,372
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2 2,139,642 265,130 572,364 176,810 41,255 1,084,084         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941          Q3 2,134,509 290,214 560,322 176,646 42,855 1,064,472         Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95          Q4 2,118,669 319,159 552,728 175,617 38,208 1,032,958
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1  
p 2,095,460 329,387 530,067 176,495 37,156 1,022,355
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2  p 2,080,867 344,279 514,551 179,856 36,686 1,005,495
         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3  p 2,081,032 356,899 502,876 180,464 37,134 1,003,658
         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4  p 2,068,562 364,731 508,799 181,077 37,030 976,925
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1  p 2,078,029 359,884 499,280 179,512 35,669 1,003,684
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2  p 2,069,111 361,032 492,958 179,168 35,491 1,000,462
         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3  p 2,086,604 358,813 490,759 179,228 42,007 1,015,797
         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4  p 2,053,033 366,562 473,114 177,601 43,593 992,164
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
May 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
 
 
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other government
or quarter) Total and deposits  1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2013 2,213,009 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 100,535 545,347 . .
2014 2,215,168 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,833 533,074 . .
2015 2,185,113 14,303 65,676 1,499,098 85,121 520,914 . .
2016 2,168,989 15,845 69,715 1,484,378 91,300 507,752 . .
2017         Q1 2,144,575 12,891 60,798 1,479,171 89,093 502,622 . .
         Q2 2,139,642 15,196 54,362 1,486,822 83,528 499,734 . .
         Q3 2,134,509 16,161 48,197 1,489,440 82,720 497,992 . .
         Q4 2,118,669 14,651 48,789 1,484,573 82,662 487,994 . .
2018         Q1  p 2,095,460 12,472 48,431 1,479,589 70,141 484,828 . .
         Q2  p 2,080,867 12,636 54,932 1,465,767 67,050 480,482 . .
         Q3  p 2,081,032 15,607 59,989 1,465,858 64,601 474,977 . .
         Q4  p 2,068,562 14,833 52,572 1,456,512 72,044 472,601 . .
2019         Q1  p 2,078,029 15,663 64,225 1,460,757 66,480 470,904 . .
         Q2  p 2,069,111 12,868 56,259 1,462,920 70,203 466,861 . .
         Q3  p 2,086,604 17,586 62,620 1,465,799 75,035 465,565 . .
         Q4  p 2,053,033 14,595 49,219 1,458,483 64,565 466,171 . .
Central government
2013 1,390,061 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,970 122,474 2,696 10,303
2014 1,396,124 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,383 1,202 12,833
2015 1,372,206 14,303 49,512 1,139,039 45,256 124,095 2,932 13,577
2016 1,366,416 15,845 55,208 1,124,445 50,004 120,914 2,238 8,478
2017         Q1 1,350,579 12,891 45,510 1,124,430 48,082 119,666 2,465 7,469
         Q2 1,353,204 15,196 40,225 1,132,686 44,682 120,415 2,547 8,136
         Q3 1,352,593 16,161 34,216 1,136,873 45,235 120,108 2,674 10,160
         Q4 1,350,925 14,651 36,297 1,132,542 47,761 119,673 2,935 10,603
2018         Q1  p 1,338,267 12,472 35,923 1,133,372 37,211 119,290 2,867 9,887
         Q2  p 1,330,010 12,636 42,888 1,120,497 35,048 118,941 2,835 10,693
         Q3  p 1,336,199 15,607 46,614 1,119,053 36,633 118,293 2,614 10,260
         Q4  p 1,323,503 14,833 42,246 1,107,702 42,057 116,666 2,540 9,959
2019         Q1  p 1,324,990 15,663 50,032 1,103,095 39,126 117,073 2,437 11,528
         Q2  p 1,320,965 12,868 42,752 1,109,478 38,833 117,034 2,464 13,768
         Q3  p 1,328,487 17,586 48,934 1,105,789 38,766 117,412 2,347 13,717
         Q4  p 1,299,893 14,595 38,480 1,102,144 28,222 116,452 2,097 10,166
State government
2013 663,615 − 6,847 360,706 11,862 284,200 12,141 2,655
2014 657,819 − 8,391 361,916 19,182 268,330 14,825 2,297
2015 654,712 − 16,169 362,376 18,707 257,460 15,867 4,218
2016 637,673 − 14,515 361,996 16,116 245,046 11,408 3,376
2017         Q1 629,540 − 15,308 356,769 15,938 241,526 10,407 3,446
         Q2 623,182 − 14,167 356,521 14,792 237,702 11,180 3,417
         Q3 622,430 − 14,021 355,153 16,358 236,899 13,313 3,338
         Q4 610,241 − 12,543 354,688 15,112 227,898 14,326 3,539
2018         Q1  p 599,541 − 12,548 349,682 13,137 224,174 13,301 3,409
         Q2  p 595,880 − 12,073 348,833 13,485 221,488 14,271 3,579
         Q3  p 594,947 − 13,392 350,399 10,953 220,204 14,008 3,531
         Q4  p 595,702 − 10,332 352,376 14,307 218,687 14,385 3,331
2019         Q1  p 606,078 − 14,198 361,513 13,688 216,679 15,530 3,458
         Q2  p 604,749 − 13,512 357,673 19,670 213,893 17,948 3,353
         Q3  p 615,272 − 13,691 364,250 24,776 212,555 18,011 3,416
         Q4  p 606,711 − 10,745 360,988 23,053 211,924 15,349 3,010
Local government
2013 175,405 − − 646 25,325 149,435 2,523 530
2014 177,782 − − 1,297 26,009 150,476 1,959 734
2015 177,727 − − 2,047 26,887 148,793 2,143 463
2016 179,222 − − 2,404 26,414 150,403 1,819 566
2017         Q1 178,144 − − 2,645 25,452 150,047 1,966 697
         Q2 178,051 − − 2,672 25,263 150,116 1,963 819
         Q3 176,593 − − 2,687 24,477 149,429 1,871 927
         Q4 175,852 − − 3,082 23,952 148,818 1,881 1,064
2018         Q1  p 174,654 − − 2,427 22,778 149,450 1,811 1,072
         Q2  p 173,177 − − 2,561 22,443 148,172 1,977 1,090
         Q3  p 167,850 − − 2,703 20,503 144,644 2,132 1,123
         Q4  p 167,626 − 1 3,046 19,730 144,849 2,019 1,147
2019         Q1  p 166,506 − 1 2,960 19,092 144,453 2,285 1,153
         Q2  p 165,257 − 1 2,960 18,993 143,302 2,173 1,175
         Q3  p 164,858 − 1 3,015 19,025 142,818 2,233 1,211
         Q4  p 165,224 − 1 2,965 17,570 144,687 2,004 1,271
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
May 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,872
2014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,1222015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,6852016 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2017         Q1 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,226
         Q2 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,318         Q3 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,433         Q4 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2018         Q1  
p 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,610
         Q2  p 883 − − − 383 500 − 3,721
         Q3  p 790 − − − 400 390 − 3,841
         Q4  p 674 − − − 372 302 − 4,506
2019         Q1  p 707 − − − 437 270 − 4,114
         Q2  p 726 − − − 541 185 − 4,289
         Q3  p 578 − − − 375 203 − 4,247
         Q4  p 655 − − − 319 336 − 5,002
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 983,807 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,548
2008 1,015,846 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 74,6262009 1,082,101 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,048
2010 1,333,467 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 238,558
2011 1,343,515 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 211,7562012 1,387,361 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,4512013 1,390,061 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,4442014 1,396,124 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 177,771
2015 1,372,206 14,303 1,070 1,188,551 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,351
2016 1,366,416 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 170,9192017 1,350,925 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4352018 
p 1,323,503 14,833 921 1,149,948 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,723
2019 p 1,299,893 14,595 − 1,140,623 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,674
2017         Q1 1,350,579 12,891 995 1,169,939 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 167,748
         Q2 1,353,204 15,196 986 1,172,911 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,097         Q3 1,352,593 16,161 977 1,171,089 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,344         Q4 1,350,925 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,435
2018         Q1  
p 1,338,267 12,472 951 1,169,295 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,501
         Q2  p 1,330,010 12,636 941 1,163,385 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,989
         Q3  p 1,336,199 15,607 932 1,165,667 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,925
         Q4  p 1,323,503 14,833 921 1,149,948 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,723
2019         Q1  p 1,324,990 15,663 902 1,153,128 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,199
         Q2  p 1,320,965 12,868 852 1,152,230 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,867
         Q3  p 1,328,487 17,586 822 1,154,723 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 156,178
         Q4  p 1,299,893 14,595 − 1,140,623 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,674
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
May 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2018   2019
  2017   2018   2019   2017   2018   2019   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4
Item Index 2015 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 107.6 109.0 105.0 3.2 1.3 − 3.7 3.7 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.3 − 4.9 − 3.1 − 4.4
Construction 101.4 104.8 108.9 − 0.6 3.4 3.9 3.5 3.3 4.9 6.5 2.8 4.9 2.0
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and restaurant
services 104.4 106.2 108.8 2.9 1.8 2.4 3.0 0.8 1.2 2.3 1.7 3.6 2.1
Information and communication 106.4 109.7 112.9 3.5 3.1 2.9 2.9 3.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 3.1 2.8
Financial and insurance
activities 100.2 100.1 102.7 3.8 − 0.1 2.6 − 0.0 − 1.0 0.3 2.3 2.6 3.0 2.5
Real estate activities 99.0 100.1 101.5 − 1.0 1.1 1.5 1.1 1.0 0.9 0.8 1.6 1.7 1.8
Business services  1 105.7 108.0 108.8 3.7 2.2 0.8 3.4 1.8 1.0 1.2 0.5 0.9 0.6
Public services, education and
health 107.7 109.0 110.8 3.4 1.2 1.6 1.2 1.0 1.1 1.6 1.4 1.7 1.7
Other services 98.9 99.0 100.0 0.8 0.1 1.0 0.4 − 0.1 0.6 1.1 1.1 1.4 0.6
Gross value added 104.8 106.4 106.9 2.5 1.5 0.5 2.5 0.9 0.8 0.8 − 0.1 1.0 0.2
Gross domestic product  2 104.8 106.4 107.0 2.5 1.5 0.6 2.5 1.1 0.9 0.9 − 0.1 1.1 0.3
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 103.6 105.0 106.6 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.4 0.6 1.3 1.0 1.6 2.4 1.2
Government consumption 106.6 108.1 110.9 2.4 1.4 2.6 1.9 1.2 1.1 2.1 1.7 3.4 3.0
Machinery and equipment 107.1 111.8 112.5 4.0 4.4 0.6 5.9 3.4 3.4 2.9 1.2 1.7 − 2.6
Premises 104.6 107.2 111.4 0.7 2.5 3.9 2.7 2.6 4.0 6.8 2.4 4.0 2.7
Other investment  4 109.6 114.3 117.4 4.2 4.3 2.7 4.6 4.8 3.8 3.0 2.7 2.6 2.6
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.5 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 1.0 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 2.1 − 1.1
Domestic demand 105.5 107.7 108.8 2.4 2.1 1.0 2.0 2.4 2.4 1.8 1.3 0.5 0.4
Net exports  6 . . . 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.6 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.3 0.6 − 0.1
Exports 107.4 109.7 110.7 4.9 2.1 0.9 4.4 1.3 − 0.1 1.7 − 1.3 2.3 0.9
Imports 109.8 113.7 115.9 5.2 3.6 1.9 3.7 4.3 3.1 3.8 1.6 1.2 1.2
Gross domestic product  2 104.8 106.4 107.0 2.5 1.5 0.6 2.5 1.1 0.9 0.9 − 0.1 1.1 0.3
At current prices ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,697.0 1,743.7 1,794.0 2.9 2.8 2.9 2.8 2.2 3.0 2.2 3.2 3.7 2.5
Government consumption 644.3 665.6 699.4 3.9 3.3 5.1 3.7 3.3 3.0 4.5 4.2 5.9 5.6
Machinery and equipment 224.2 235.3 239.8 4.7 4.9 1.9 6.4 4.1 4.2 3.7 2.5 3.2 − 1.1
Premises 320.7 344.3 373.3 4.2 7.3 8.4 7.2 7.8 9.3 12.2 7.4 8.2 6.4
Other investment  4 121.0 128.1 133.7 5.8 5.9 4.4 6.2 6.6 5.5 4.7 4.4 4.2 4.2
Changes in inventories  5 7.4 21.3 − 12.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,014.5 3,138.3 3,228.1 3.8 4.1 2.9 3.9 4.2 4.8 3.8 3.5 2.1 2.1
Net exports 230.4 206.1 207.7 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,538.0 1,585.8 1,612.1 6.6 3.1 1.7 4.8 2.9 1.6 3.1 − 0.4 2.7 1.4
Imports 1,307.6 1,379.7 1,404.4 7.9 5.5 1.8 4.9 7.6 5.9 5.0 2.3 0.1 0.0
Gross domestic product  2 3,245.0 3,344.4 3,435.8 3.5 3.1 2.7 4.0 2.3 2.8 3.0 2.1 3.2 2.6
IV. Prices (2015 = 100)
Private consumption 102.2 103.7 105.0 1.5 1.5 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.6 1.3 1.2
Gross domestic product 102.2 103.8 106.0 1.0 1.5 2.2 1.4 1.2 1.9 2.0 2.2 2.1 2.3
Terms of trade 100.8 99.9 100.8 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.9 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.0 0.2 0.2 1.4 1.6
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,694.7 1,771.3 1,849.1 4.3 4.5 4.4 4.4 4.9 4.3 4.7 4.6 4.7 3.8
Entrepreneurial and property
income 735.8 731.8 712.4 2.1 − 0.5 − 2.6 2.8 − 4.8 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 4.5 − 0.5 − 3.4
National income 2,430.5 2,503.1 2,561.5 3.6 3.0 2.3 4.0 1.8 3.0 2.4 2.0 3.1 1.9
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,328.0 3,437.9 3,535.4 3.6 3.3 2.8 4.2 2.6 3.0 2.9 2.4 3.3 2.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2020. 1Professional, stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
scientific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
May 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
2. Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015 = 100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.59 29.45 36.98 2.27 10.89 10.31 9.95 12.73 14.16
Period
2016 101.5 105.3 98.6 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.6 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.1
2017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.8 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.32018
2 105.8 2 108.9 97.4 105.9 105.5 106.0 106.1 106.9 107.3 109.0 106.5 103.5
2019 r 102.5 112.7 90.4 101.7 101.8 101.4 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.5 92.0
 
2019         Q1 r 101.5 93.8 102.4 102.7 104.7 101.4 108.3 100.5 106.4 107.5 100.5 98.3
         Q2 r 102.7 113.8 83.6 102.3 103.4 102.2 103.1 99.6 104.9 104.9 102.7 95.5
         Q3 r 102.3 119.1 81.1 101.1 102.0 100.1 104.2 101.1 102.7 107.5 102.0 89.1
         Q4 r 103.4 124.2 94.3 100.5 97.2 102.0 109.2 102.7 97.2 106.0 108.6 84.9
2020         Q1 x,p 96.1 100.9 93.5 95.4 101.0 90.1 100.8 97.2 97.9 102.8 90.7 79.3
 
2019         Mar. r 112.4 112.8 101.1 113.2 112.4 115.1 118.9 107.5 115.3 119.6 116.3 109.6
         Apr. r 101.8 112.7 88.1 100.9 103.7 99.0 100.9 99.7 105.0 102.7 99.3 92.8
         May r 101.7 111.3 84.3 101.4 103.1 100.5 101.6 99.9 103.7 103.6 99.4 96.5
         June r 104.7 117.3 78.4 104.6 103.5 107.0 106.7 99.3 106.1 108.3 109.4 97.3
         July 3,r 103.5 122.0 81.4 102.0 103.7 101.0 99.6 101.6 104.4 105.5 102.9 91.1
         Aug. 3,r 96.7 113.8 80.3 95.0 98.4 91.2 95.8 98.6 97.2 103.1 94.0 76.8
         Sep. r 106.8 121.4 81.7 106.2 103.9 108.2 117.3 103.0 106.5 113.9 109.1 99.5
         Oct. r 105.0 121.8 91.8 103.0 104.9 99.6 114.0 107.2 104.5 108.6 100.5 89.9
         Nov. r 108.7 126.4 95.2 106.7 103.3 108.6 116.3 107.4 105.0 111.1 108.7 97.9
         Dec. r 96.6 124.4 95.9 91.8 83.3 97.7 97.2 93.6 82.2 98.2 116.6 66.8
2020         Jan. x 92.0 86.7 98.8 92.4 98.5 86.1 98.2 95.9 94.9 99.4 83.4 79.4
         Feb. x 96.8 97.4 91.7 97.1 100.8 94.2 102.5 95.6 98.3 102.5 91.4 90.0
         Mar. x,p 99.4 118.5 89.9 96.8 103.6 90.0 101.6 100.2 100.5 106.4 97.3 68.4
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2016 + 1.8 + 5.7 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.5
2017 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.12018
2 + 0.9 2 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 1.7
2019 r − 3.1 + 3.5 − 7.2 − 4.0 − 3.5 − 4.3 + 0.1 − 5.5 − 4.2 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 11.1
 
2019         Q1 r − 1.0 + 7.2 − 2.9 − 2.1 − 1.1 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 3.7 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 10.0
         Q2 r − 3.7 + 3.2 − 8.1 − 4.7 − 4.0 − 4.9 − 2.2 − 6.7 − 4.3 − 2.1 − 2.0 − 13.6
         Q3 r − 3.7 + 2.6 − 13.0 − 4.3 − 4.4 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 4.9 − 2.5 − 3.0 − 7.6
         Q4 r − 4.0 + 1.8 − 5.6 − 5.0 − 4.6 − 6.7 + 2.7 − 2.2 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 6.2 − 13.0
2020         Q1 x,p − 5.3 + 7.5 − 8.7 − 7.1 − 3.6 − 11.2 − 6.9 − 3.2 − 8.0 − 4.4 − 9.8 − 19.3
 
2019         Mar. r − 0.8 + 8.7 − 6.4 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 2.7 + 0.3 − 3.7 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 11.3
         Apr. r − 2.5 + 6.0 − 5.4 − 3.9 − 1.9 − 6.1 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 0.9 − 0.9 − 17.2
         May r − 4.1 + 0.5 − 7.1 − 4.7 − 4.4 − 3.9 − 1.1 − 8.3 − 4.9 − 1.8 − 2.2 − 10.6
         June r − 4.6 + 3.3 − 12.1 − 5.6 − 5.5 − 4.8 − 3.2 − 8.9 − 5.2 − 3.6 − 2.8 − 13.0
         July 3,r − 3.5 + 3.0 − 12.9 − 4.1 − 4.4 − 3.1 + 1.2 − 7.6 − 4.5 − 3.1 − 1.7 − 9.4
         Aug. 3,r − 3.7 + 2.7 − 15.2 − 4.0 − 4.3 − 1.9 + 0.8 − 10.3 − 5.5 − 2.3 − 4.2 − 4.6
         Sep. r − 4.0 + 2.1 − 10.9 − 4.7 − 4.5 − 3.5 − 1.3 − 9.9 − 4.7 − 2.2 − 3.1 − 8.2
         Oct. r − 4.5 + 1.2 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 3.9 − 8.2 + 1.6 − 3.3 − 6.9 − 3.4 − 7.5 − 13.8
         Nov. r − 2.3 + 3.6 − 3.8 − 3.4 − 3.6 − 4.3 + 3.8 − 0.9 − 6.3 − 3.1 − 4.1 − 9.2
         Dec. r − 5.2 + 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.2 − 6.4 − 7.7 + 2.6 − 2.2 − 9.1 − 5.5 − 6.8 − 17.1
2020         Jan. x − 1.5 + 15.0 − 9.6 − 3.0 − 2.4 − 3.6 − 2.5 − 3.3 − 6.1 − 1.2 − 5.0 − 7.5
         Feb. x − 1.8 + 4.5 − 5.3 − 2.6 − 0.1 − 5.7 − 2.6 + 1.0 − 4.4 + 0.2 − 6.3 − 9.5
         Mar. x,p − 11.6 + 5.1 − 11.1 − 14.5 − 7.8 − 21.8 − 14.6 − 6.8 − 12.8 − 11.0 − 16.3 − 37.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, Office. 3Influenced by a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; estimated and ad-
see Statistical Series − Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables III.1.a to justed in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the resul ts of the Quarterly Pro-
III.1.c. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of duction Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry,
the production sector in the base year 2015. 2As of January 2018 weights in respectively. 
structural and civil engineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
May 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
3. Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
Total
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.8
2016 100.7 + 0.9 98.9 − 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.0 − 0.8
2017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.9 − 5.1 103.5 − 7.2 105.4 − 4.1 107.0 − 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 − 5.0
2019         Mar. 116.9 − 3.9 114.1 − 5.9 118.8 − 3.0 115.2 − 0.7 128.5 + 4.6 110.9 − 2.5
         Apr. 104.3 − 4.1 105.1 − 8.4 103.6 − 1.9 105.6 + 0.8 115.0 + 1.1 102.5 + 0.7
         May 101.5 − 7.4 102.8 − 9.1 100.3 − 7.0 103.8 − 2.6 113.1 − 6.5 100.8 − 1.1
         June 108.4 − 3.5 105.3 − 8.1 110.8 + 0.3 105.4 − 8.5 121.0 − 1.3 100.2 − 11.2
         July 103.5 − 4.1 102.8 − 9.5 102.9 + 0.2 110.6 − 8.4 121.8 + 1.6 106.9 − 11.6
         Aug. 93.1 − 5.9 96.0 − 7.1 89.9 − 5.2 103.7 − 5.6 121.1 + 3.7 98.1 − 8.8
         Sep. 105.4 − 3.9 100.1 − 8.3 108.4 − 1.1 108.4 − 4.2 139.8 + 11.5 98.0 − 10.3
         Oct. 106.2 − 4.8 104.0 − 8.7 106.8 − 3.4 111.5 + 2.4 128.1 + 0.5 106.1 + 3.2
         Nov. 106.2 − 5.6 103.2 − 7.3 107.3 − 5.9 111.6 + 5.6 138.1 + 13.5 102.9 + 2.5
         Dec. 102.1 − 8.5 92.6 − 4.3 109.2 − 11.1 93.6 − 2.4 120.5 + 10.0 84.8 − 7.1
2020         Jan. 107.4 − 0.6 110.1 − 1.2 105.4 − 0.5 110.5 + 2.4 131.9 + 11.3 103.5 − 0.8
         Feb. 104.9 + 2.2 105.6 + 0.9 103.1 + 2.2 114.9 + 7.6 125.5 + 9.6 111.4 + 6.8
         Mar. p 98.2 − 16.0 106.9 − 6.3 90.5 − 23.8 115.7 + 0.4 124.7 − 3.0 112.8 + 1.7
From the domestic market
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.8 + 2.1 98.0 − 1.8 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.9 101.6 + 3.7 108.7 + 5.4 99.3 + 3.1
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 − 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 − 0.4
2019 101.2 − 5.6 99.1 − 8.7 102.9 − 3.5 101.2 − 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 − 2.7
2019         Mar. 112.3 − 6.2 109.3 − 8.5 115.5 − 5.0 107.8 − 0.3 127.4 + 4.9 101.2 − 2.3
         Apr. 100.1 − 4.0 100.0 − 7.3 100.7 − 1.7 96.2 − 0.5 108.6 − 4.1 92.0 + 1.0
         May 99.3 − 6.3 99.7 − 8.5 99.4 − 3.9 96.3 − 9.2 105.9 − 16.9 93.1 − 5.7
         June 100.7 − 6.5 99.2 − 10.6 102.6 − 3.0 96.2 − 5.3 105.7 − 8.5 93.0 − 4.0
         July 102.4 − 6.6 100.7 − 10.8 103.6 − 3.4 103.8 − 2.4 114.6 + 5.2 100.2 − 4.9
         Aug. 91.0 − 6.8 91.1 − 10.2 89.9 − 3.9 97.6 − 5.3 108.1 − 5.8 94.1 − 5.1
         Sep. 100.3 − 7.0 95.2 − 11.4 104.2 − 4.6 103.6 + 2.8 131.5 + 10.2 94.1 − 0.4
         Oct. 99.1 − 7.2 98.5 − 10.8 98.5 − 5.0 107.0 − 0.4 131.9 + 9.5 98.6 − 4.2
         Nov. 102.8 − 8.4 100.7 − 9.3 103.5 − 9.1 109.6 + 1.3 135.7 + 11.9 100.8 − 2.9
         Dec. 93.6 − 7.7 84.2 − 8.1 102.3 − 8.2 89.2 − 1.9 107.4 + 8.4 83.1 − 5.7
2020         Jan. 100.6 − 6.6 104.1 − 3.4 97.4 − 10.4 102.2 + 2.0 111.0 + 3.3 99.2 + 1.5
         Feb. 101.9 − 2.8 99.9 − 2.7 103.0 − 3.1 105.9 − 1.0 110.5 + 0.2 104.4 − 1.4
         Mar. p 95.7 − 14.8 100.8 − 7.8 89.3 − 22.7 108.8 + 0.9 109.7 − 13.9 108.5 + 7.2
From abroad
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.3 + 0.5 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.1 + 7.3 101.1 + 1.3
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.6 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.7 104.4 + 3.3
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 111.9 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 − 0.5 113.4 + 8.6
2019 107.6 − 4.8 108.3 − 5.5 106.9 − 4.5 111.5 − 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 − 6.6
2019         Mar. 120.3 − 2.2 119.2 − 3.2 120.8 − 1.8 121.0 − 1.0 129.3 + 4.3 118.3 − 2.7
         Apr. 107.5 − 4.2 110.7 − 9.3 105.3 − 2.1 112.9 + 1.7 120.1 + 5.2 110.6 + 0.5
         May 103.1 − 8.3 106.2 − 9.7 100.9 − 8.7 109.7 + 2.4 118.9 + 2.7 106.7 + 2.3
         June 114.3 − 1.2 111.8 − 5.7 115.8 + 2.2 112.5 − 10.6 133.4 + 3.9 105.7 − 15.4
         July 104.3 − 2.2 105.1 − 8.0 102.5 + 2.5 115.9 − 12.1 127.6 − 0.9 112.1 − 15.6
         Aug. 94.7 − 5.2 101.3 − 3.7 89.9 − 6.0 108.5 − 5.7 131.6 + 11.1 101.1 − 11.4
         Sep. 109.3 − 1.6 105.3 − 5.1 110.9 + 0.9 112.1 − 8.7 146.4 + 12.4 101.0 − 16.1
         Oct. 111.5 − 3.3 110.0 − 6.5 111.8 − 2.6 115.0 + 4.5 125.1 − 6.0 111.8 + 8.9
         Nov. 108.8 − 3.5 105.9 − 5.2 109.6 − 4.0 113.2 + 9.1 140.1 + 14.8 104.5 + 6.9
         Dec. 108.6 − 9.0 101.7 − 0.8 113.3 − 12.6 97.0 − 2.7 131.1 + 11.2 86.1 − 8.2
2020         Jan. 112.6 + 4.0 116.6 + 1.1 110.3 + 5.9 117.0 + 2.8 148.8 + 16.9 106.8 − 2.4
         Feb. 107.1 + 6.0 111.8 + 4.7 103.1 + 5.6 121.8 + 14.3 137.6 + 16.8 116.7 + 13.3
         Mar. p 100.1 − 16.8 113.4 − 4.9 91.2 − 24.5 121.1 + 0.1 136.7 + 5.7 116.1 − 1.9
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex-   
planatory notes, see Statistical Series − Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables  
III.2.a to III.2.c. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
May 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Structural engineering    
Residential Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering sector  2 Industrial clients
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2016 114.4 + 14.5 115.0 + 15.1 116.9 + 17.0 114.9 + 15.0 108.9 + 9.1 113.7 + 13.8 111.7 + 11.8 116.0 + 16.1
2017 122.4 + 7.0 123.1 + 7.0 123.1 + 5.3 123.4 + 7.4 121.8 + 11.8 121.6 + 6.9 119.8 + 7.3 125.0 + 7.82018 134.7 + 10.0 131.2 + 6.6 136.6 + 11.0 127.9 + 3.6 125.2 + 2.8 138.8 + 14.1 135.6 + 13.2 132.4 + 5.92019 146.0 + 8.4 145.0 + 10.5 150.2 + 10.0 142.2 + 11.2 138.9 + 10.9 147.1 + 6.0 147.9 + 9.1 141.3 + 6.7
 
2019         Feb. 132.9 + 7.1 129.4 + 9.7 119.0 + 5.5 134.4 + 7.9 145.2 + 31.8 137.0 + 4.4 132.4 − 2.8 141.9 + 21.3
         Mar. 171.7 + 17.9 163.7 + 16.7 170.4 + 22.9 158.1 + 15.5 162.9 + 3.2 180.9 + 19.1 166.1 + 20.9 178.8 + 12.2
         Apr. 153.1 + 12.7 149.0 + 14.0 149.8 + 6.2 151.6 + 20.5 136.9 + 19.7 157.9 + 11.4 145.5 + 14.6 163.9 + 14.8
         May 147.8 + 3.5 144.8 + 5.8 146.8 + 12.3 149.2 + 4.4 121.8 − 9.6 151.4 + 1.2 148.4 + 4.1 147.8 − 1.7         June 162.0 + 10.1 161.4 + 13.9 158.5 + 11.3 163.4 + 20.0 163.7 + 2.4 162.7 + 6.1 165.5 + 20.9 160.2 − 0.9
         July 153.9 + 8.2 148.0 + 4.2 154.6 + 8.6 142.1 − 1.2 148.0 + 9.7 160.8 + 12.9 152.5 + 5.6 155.1 + 11.0
         Aug. 134.6 + 4.6 135.5 + 13.1 139.3 + 10.8 131.2 + 12.4 139.2 + 24.0 133.6 − 3.9 137.2 + 7.5 129.0 − 2.2         Sep. 147.9 + 5.9 146.6 + 2.2 157.0 + 0.6 130.4 + 0.2 173.0 + 13.8 149.4 + 10.4 143.4 + 6.6 147.6 + 8.8
         Oct. 136.9 + 3.6 137.5 + 6.8 154.8 + 9.6 124.3 + 1.6 129.6 + 17.0 136.2 + 0.1 135.2 + 0.5 127.9 + 3.4
         Nov. 145.4 + 13.1 154.7 + 23.1 149.7 + 7.3 166.6 + 42.0 127.1 + 13.6 134.5 + 1.9 167.8 + 22.6 117.1 + 4.1         Dec. 148.2 − 1.3 148.9 + 2.2 178.2 + 7.0 131.1 − 3.0 119.1 + 2.4 147.3 − 5.2 154.3 − 5.7 122.9 − 1.4
2020         Jan. 129.3 + 10.1 134.0 + 10.8 137.4 + 11.0 134.1 + 8.2 122.8 + 23.0 123.9 + 9.3 140.9 + 11.2 111.3 + 8.3
         Feb. 134.5 + 1.2 143.0 + 10.5 148.3 + 24.6 140.9 + 4.8 133.1 − 8.3 124.6 − 9.1 139.3 + 5.2 120.6 − 15.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; exclu- adjusted business statistics, Table III.2.f. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Excluding
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series − Seasonally residential construction. 2 Including road construction. 
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of which:In stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, footwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.2 + 2.1 101.6 + 1.5 100.9 + 0.7 99.9 − 0.3 101.5 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.8
2017 107.6 + 5.0 105.8 + 3.5 105.9 + 4.2 108.1 + 7.1 106.2 + 6.3 103.0 + 1.5 107.7 + 3.7 120.4 + 9.72018 110.7 + 2.9 107.5 + 1.6 109.6 + 3.5 105.6 − 2.3 107.1 + 0.8 103.1 + 0.1 112.5 + 4.5 127.6 + 6.02019
3 114.8 + 3.7 110.8 + 3.1 112.1 + 2.3 106.3 + 0.7 108.7 + 1.5 107.1 + 3.9 118.4 + 5.2 137.7 + 7.9
 
2019         Feb. 101.7 + 5.7 98.7 + 4.8 101.3 + 3.1 82.6 + 5.4 94.4 + 1.8 94.6 + 4.9 110.6 + 6.3 120.1 + 11.2
         Mar. 115.7 + 4.4 112.1 + 4.1 113.9 + 3.4 104.0 + 3.9 106.0 + 1.8 114.9 + 7.5 117.9 + 4.7 133.2 + 5.7
         Apr. 115.1 + 1.7 110.8 + 0.9 113.4 + 0.6 109.8 − 8.3 93.4 + 2.9 115.2 + 1.3 116.9 + 3.5 134.3 + 8.8
         May 113.4 + 2.4 108.9 + 1.7 111.8 − 0.6 103.0 − 5.8 93.6 + 4.8 110.0 + 4.0 115.8 + 7.3 127.4 + 5.7         June 115.1 + 4.7 111.0 + 4.0 115.5 + 3.2 116.5 + 9.0 97.7 − 2.1 106.5 + 4.7 114.9 + 4.7 131.7 + 13.8
         July 115.4 + 4.2 111.7 + 3.0 114.0 + 2.9 105.4 − 0.3 95.8 − 0.4 108.3 + 5.5 120.0 + 3.5 136.6 + 10.2
         Aug. 111.1 + 4.2 107.6 + 3.6 111.0 + 3.4 99.9 + 1.5 102.1 + 5.0 100.8 + 4.6 114.5 + 4.1 124.1 + 6.5         Sep. 112.1 + 4.1 107.9 + 3.9 106.4 + 0.9 112.0 + 3.0 109.7 + 1.3 103.3 + 4.6 118.0 + 6.7 139.0 + 10.9
         Oct. 116.9 + 2.3 112.3 + 2.1 112.7 + 1.7 117.5 + 1.0 110.6 + 2.5 110.8 + 2.3 121.6 + 5.4 139.1 + 1.6
         Nov. 123.6 + 4.0 118.8 + 3.6 114.8 + 4.9 116.7 + 4.0 131.6 − 0.2 115.6 + 3.1 124.5 + 5.4 164.8 + 1.4         Dec. 133.1 + 3.3 128.2 + 2.3 127.6 + 0.9 120.0 − 2.0 156.7 − 0.4 113.3 + 3.3 132.5 + 6.3 172.3 + 12.0
2020         Jan. 107.7 + 3.6 103.8 + 2.4 103.8 + 1.6 87.8 + 0.2 114.4 + 1.9 96.4 + 4.7 120.6 + 6.1 137.1 + 5.2
         Feb. 105.8 + 4.0 101.4 + 2.7 108.4 + 7.0 80.4 − 2.7 97.9 + 3.7 97.2 + 2.7 115.3 + 4.2 129.7 + 8.0         Mar. 115.6 − 0.1 110.4 − 1.5 130.5 + 14.6 49.6 − 52.3 80.1 − 24.4 103.4 − 10.0 130.0 + 10.3 149.7 + 12.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value added kets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3As of January 2019 figures are provisional,
tax;  for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series − Seasonally adjusted business statis- partially revised, and particularly uncertain in recen t months due to estimates for miss-
tics, Table III.4.c. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Including stalls and mar- ing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
May 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legal
category
Solely of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary social Unem- Temporary Security
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies,  4, 6 
Thou- percentage Thou- percentage rate 4, 5 thou-
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2015 43,122 + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,655 + 1.2 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 44,248 + 1.4 32,234 + 2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,854 + 1.4 32,964 + 2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 r 45,236 r + 0.9 8 33,517 8 + 1.7 8 9,479 8 23,042 8 751 8 4,578 ... 8 599 2,267 827 9 5.0 774
2017         Q1 43,720 + 1.4 31,790 + 2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734 7 987 6.2 671
         Q2 44,153 + 1.3 32,064 + 2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 5.6 717
         Q3 44,436 + 1.4 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763
         Q4 44,684 + 1.3 32,759 + 2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 82 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1 44,380 + 1.5 32,563 + 2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 325 24 2,525 909 5.7 760
         Q2 44,776 + 1.4 32,802 + 2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 5.1 794
         Q3 45,016 + 1.3 33,040 + 2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
         Q4 45,244 + 1.3 33,452 + 2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019         Q1 r 44,889 r + 1.1 33,214 + 2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
         Q2 r 45,207 r + 1.0 33,388 + 1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 9 2,227 778 9,10 4.9 795
         Q3 r 45,345 r + 0.7 33,548 + 1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
         Q4 r 45,503 r + 0.6 8 33,920 8 + 1.4 8 9,549 8 23,386 8 738 8 4,520 ... 8 103 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020         Q1 11 45,036 11 + 0.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,385 960 5.2 683
2016         Dec. 44,016 + 1.3 31,848 + 2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan. 43,640 + 1.4 31,707 + 2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777 7 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb. 43,692 + 1.4 31,774 + 2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
         Mar. 43,829 + 1.4 31,930 + 2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr. 43,999 + 1.4 32,013 + 2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
         May 44,168 + 1.3 32,131 + 2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 5.6 714
         June 44,291 + 1.3 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July 44,330 + 1.4 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
         Aug. 44,371 + 1.4 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765
         Sep. 44,606 + 1.3 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
         Oct. 44,678 + 1.3 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
         Nov. 44,749 + 1.3 32,830 + 2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772
         Dec. 44,625 + 1.4 32,609 + 2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 194 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan. 44,326 + 1.6 32,504 + 2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 287 23 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb. 44,358 + 1.5 32,551 + 2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 359 23 2,546 927 5.7 764
         Mar. 44,456 + 1.4 32,660 + 2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778
         Apr. 44,632 + 1.4 32,782 + 2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
         May 44,812 + 1.5 32,857 + 2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 5.1 793
         June 44,885 + 1.3 32,870 + 2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
         July 44,918 + 1.3 32,844 + 2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
         Aug. 44,968 + 1.3 33,131 + 2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
         Sep. 45,161 + 1.2 33,422 + 2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
         Oct. 45,249 + 1.3 33,488 + 2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
         Nov. 45,312 + 1.3 33,513 + 2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
         Dec. 45,170 + 1.2 33,286 + 2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019         Jan. r 44,837 r + 1.2 33,156 + 2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
         Feb. r 44,877 r + 1.2 33,199 + 2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
         Mar. r 44,953 r + 1.1 33,286 + 1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
         Apr. r 45,113 r + 1.1 33,383 + 1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
         May r 45,236 r + 0.9 33,433 + 1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 9 2,236 772 9,10 4.9 792
         June r 45,272 r + 0.9 33,407 + 1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
         July r 45,284 r + 0.8 33,360 + 1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
         Aug. r 45,272 r + 0.7 33,610 + 1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
         Sep. r 45,480 r + 0.7 33,938 + 1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
         Oct. r 45,553 r + 0.7 33,966 + 1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
         Nov. r 45,565 r + 0.6 8 33,966 8 + 1.4 8 9,555 8 23,426 8 742 8 4,528 ... 8 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
         Dec. r 45,392 r + 0.5 8 33,720 8 + 1.3 8 9,469 8 23,331 8 694 8 4,525 ... 8 93 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020         Jan. r 45,036 r + 0.4 8 33,588 8 + 1.3 8 9,427 8 23,243 8 689 8 4,471 ... 8 123 2,426 985 5.3 668
         Feb. r 45,037 r + 0.4 8 33,589 8 + 1.2 8 9,418 8 23,256 8 682 8 4,450 ... 8 114 2,396 971 5.3 690
         Mar. 11 45,035 11 + 0.2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,335 925 5.1 691
         Apr. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and ployment Agency. In 2017 and 2018, the estimated values for Germany deviated
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official from the final data by a maximum of 0.2% for employees subjec t to social contribu-
figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: end tions, by a maximum of 0.4% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contribu-
of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the total tions, and by a maximum of 70.0% for cyclically induced short-time
civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seaso- work. 9Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the legal
nal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From January 2017 persons receiving category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II). 10From May 2019,
additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 11Initial preliminary estimate by
the same time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book the basis of the Federal Statistical Office. 
the Social Security Code (SGB III) 8Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Em-

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
May 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
7. Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which:  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  7 
prices ofindustrial
of which:
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Actual Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy rents struction the prices  of price index
Energy Services for (national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial
Total 2 Food 3 4, 5 2, 4 concept) index market  6 Exports Imports Energy  8 products  6 goods  4 housing materials  9 
Period 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.1 101.2 100.5 101.9 98.4 98.7 99.0 96.7 83.2 98.4
2017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.12018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.22019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8
10 111.6 102.4 101.7 110.0 108.1
 
2018         June 104.4 106.9 102.8 102.4 104.9 104.5 104.0 103.7 104.6 102.1 103.4 130.5 111.3
         July 105.2 106.6 101.7 102.3 107.4 104.7 104.4 103.9 107.1 102.2 103.3 129.9 105.8
         Aug. 105.2 106.4 102.3 103.1 107.0 104.8 104.5 111.0 104.2 110.5 102.4 103.3 130.5 105.7         Sep. 105.3 107.1 103.8 105.1 105.6 104.9 104.7 104.7 111.6 102.4 103.7 140.8 102.7
         Oct. 105.4 107.1 104.1 106.1 105.5 105.0 104.9 105.0 111.4 102.6 104.7 144.7 105.5
         Nov. 104.2 107.0 104.1 108.0 102.4 105.1 104.2 112.0 105.1 111.7 102.5 103.7 123.7 105.2         Dec. 104.4 107.0 103.8 103.5 104.0 105.2 104.2 104.7 111.6 102.1 102.4 111.4 103.2
2019         Jan. 103.4 107.4 102.9 101.5 102.9 105.4 103.4 105.1 111.5 102.2 102.2 112.3 104.4
         Feb. 103.9 107.9 103.4 101.7 103.6 105.6 103.8 114.0 105.0 112.1 102.3 102.5 114.3 109.4         Mar. 104.4 107.7 103.9 102.4 104.1 105.7 104.2 104.9 113.0 102.4 102.5 115.2 108.3
         Apr. 105.4 107.9 104.6 104.4 105.3 105.8 105.2 105.4 115.5 102.6 102.8 119.2 108.8
         May 105.7 108.3 104.6 106.1 105.3 105.9 105.4 115.0 105.3 115.7 102.5 102.7 116.6 106.6         June 106.0 108.4 104.1 104.9 106.6 106.1 105.7 104.9 115.1 102.3 101.3 102.8 108.6
         July 106.4 108.7 103.3 104.7 107.9 106.2 106.2 105.0 114.3 102.4 101.1 105.7 113.0
         Aug. 106.3 108.8 103.4 103.8 107.8 106.3 106.0 115.8 104.5 112.5 102.3 100.5 100.2 106.0         Sep. 106.2 108.8 104.7 103.8 106.9 106.4 106.0 104.6
10 110.0 102.4 101.1 105.9 107.5
         Oct. 106.3 108.6 105.0 103.8 106.9 106.6 106.1 104.4 110.4 102.4 101.0 105.7 107.1
         Nov. 105.4 109.0 105.2 103.7 104.9 106.7 105.3 116.4 104.4 112.2 102.4 101.5 110.5 106.9         Dec. 106.0 109.2 105.1 103.6 106.1 106.8 105.8 104.5 114.5 102.5 101.7 112.5 110.4
2020         Jan. 105.1 110.1 104.0 104.9 104.3 107.0 105.2 105.3 113.3 102.7 101.3 107.4 112.2
         Feb. 105.7 111.2 104.3 103.9 105.2 107.1 105.6 117.8 104.9 114.3 102.6 100.4 94.3 108.7         Mar. 105.8 111.0 105.2 101.6 105.5 107.3 105.7 104.1 113.9 101.9 96.9 61.3 104.9
         Apr. 106.2 112.2 105.4 98.6 106.7 107.4 106.1 ... ... ... ... 49.7 101.0
Annual percentage change  
  
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 16.8 − 1.6
2017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 10.0 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 19.7 + 8.82018 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 25.1 − 0.82019 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 4.6 + 1.1
10 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.0 − 11.7 + 1.8
 
2018         June + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 6.7 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 52.3 + 10.9
         July + 2.2 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 6.7 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 4.2 + 1.7 + 4.8 + 50.2 + 2.8
         Aug. + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 7.1 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 1.7 + 2.1 + 4.8 + 44.8 + 2.3         Sep. + 2.2 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 7.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 4.4 + 46.2 − 0.1
         Oct. + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 4.8 + 42.4 + 2.7
         Nov. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 9.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 5.2 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 3.1 + 12.1 + 1.3         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.4
2019         Jan. + 1.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.9
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 7.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 3.2         Mar. + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 6.8 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 3.2
         Apr. + 2.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.5
         May + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 5.1 + 1.9 + 10.8 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 10.2 − 5.2         June + 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 21.2 − 2.4
         July + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 18.6 + 6.8
         Aug. + 1.0 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 23.2 + 0.3         Sep. + 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 0.1
10 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 2.5 − 24.8 + 4.7
         Oct. + 0.9 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.5 − 27.0 + 1.5
         Nov. + 1.2 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 4.0 + 2.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.9 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 10.7 + 1.6         Dec. + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 7.0
2020         Jan. + 1.6 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 4.4 + 7.5
         Feb. + 1.7 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 17.5 − 0.6         Mar. + 1.3 + 3.1 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.8 + 0.8 − 0.5 − 5.5 − 46.8 − 3.1
         Apr. + 0.8 + 4.0 + 0.8 − 5.6 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... − 58.3 − 7.2
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on basis of the five digit structure set out in the European Classifi cation of Individual
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Consumption according to Purpose (ECOICOP). 5Electricity, gas and other fuels as
Materials: HWWI. 1Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. 2With well as transport fuels and lubricants, from January 2017 excluding lubricants. 6Exclu-
effect from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of ding value added tax. 7For the euro area, in euro. 8Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natu-
package holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series. 3Including alcoholic be- ral gas. 9Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 10From
verages and tobacco. 4Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the September 2019 onwards provisional figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
May 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- As
age age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2012 1,150.0 4.2 776.1 4.0 376.8 1.5 1,152.9 3.2 1,668.4 2.5 161.0 − 1.3 9.7
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 − 2.5 9.3
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.2 4.1 1,273.5 4.0 1,781.5 2.7 179.3 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.9 3.9 425.6 3.7 1,322.4 3.8 1,836.2 3.1 186.4 4.0 10.2
2017 1,394.0 4.2 932.0 3.9 441.5 3.7 1,373.4 3.9 1,894.4 3.2 197.4 5.9 10.4
2018 1,460.9 4.8 975.5 4.7 451.8 2.3 1,427.3 3.9 1,958.2 3.4 214.5 8.6 11.0
2019 1,522.8 4.2 1,021.8 4.7 471.0 4.2 1,492.7 4.6 2,013.7 2.8 219.7 2.4 10.9
2018         Q3 361.7 5.1 246.5 5.0 113.6 2.4 360.1 4.2 486.0 2.8 45.1 9.1 9.3
         Q4 403.3 4.6 269.0 4.4 112.8 2.5 381.8 3.9 497.5 3.5 48.4 8.6 9.7
2019         Q1 355.4 4.5 239.2 5.1 117.6 3.3 356.8 4.5 503.4 2.2 72.6 2.5 14.4
         Q2 371.5 4.4 243.8 4.9 116.4 4.3 360.1 4.7 496.8 3.0 51.1 1.7 10.3
         Q3 378.3 4.6 259.4 5.2 118.8 4.6 378.2 5.0 503.5 3.6 46.3 2.5 9.2
         Q4 417.5 3.5 279.4 3.9 118.2 4.8 397.6 4.1 510.0 2.5 49.8 3.0 9.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in February 2020. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2012 92.6 2.6 92.8 2.6 92.9 2.8 92.8 2.8 92.4 2.9
2013 94.9 2.5 95.1 2.4 95.1 2.5 95.0 2.5 94.4 2.2
2014 97.7 3.0 97.8 2.9 97.8 2.7 97.7 2.8 97.2 3.0
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.5
2017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.0 104.3 2.1 104.5 2.3 105.1 2.6
2018 107.1 2.8 107.1 2.9 107.1 2.7 107.4 2.7 108.4 3.1
2019 110.4 3.0 110.3 3.0 109.9 2.6 110.1 2.5 111.7 3.1
2018         Q4 119.2 2.9 119.2 2.9 119.1 2.7 108.3 2.8 118.5 3.1
2019         Q1 101.9 2.9 101.9 2.9 101.8 3.0 109.1 3.0 105.2 3.1
         Q2 103.0 2.1 103.0 2.1 102.9 2.2 109.8 2.2 109.2 3.2
         Q3 114.3 4.4 114.3 4.3 112.6 2.7 110.6 2.5 110.9 3.5
         Q4 122.2 2.5 122.1 2.5 122.1 2.5 110.8 2.4 121.5 2.5
2020         Q1 104.3 2.4 104.3 2.4 104.3 2.4 111.7 2.4 . .
2019         Sep. 103.3 2.6 103.3 2.6 103.4 2.5 110.7 2.6 . .
         Oct. 103.4 2.5 103.4 2.5 103.4 2.4 110.8 2.4 . .
         Nov. 157.9 2.6 157.8 2.5 157.7 2.7 110.8 2.3 . .
         Dec. 105.3 2.5 105.2 2.4 105.2 2.3 110.8 2.3 . .
2020         Jan. 104.3 2.5 104.2 2.5 104.2 2.4 111.6 2.4 . .
         Feb. 104.3 2.2 104.3 2.2 104.3 2.4 111.7 2.4 . .
         Mar. 104.4 2.5 104.4 2.5 104.5 2.5 111.9 2.5 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such February 2020. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
May 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
  
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
Non- Trade of which:
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2015 2,226.8 1,395.1 470.7 565.7 273.1 831.8 215.5 190.5 136.1 633.5 1,593.4 861.4 466.2 732.0 222.8 180.3
2016 2,367.7 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.82017 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.72018 
3 2,595.4 1,539.0 542.2 611.2 288.5 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.4 792.2 1,803.2 927.4 560.1 875.9 257.6 205.2
2017         H2 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2018         H1  3 2,551.8 1,533.0 541.7 602.5 288.3 1,018.8 250.1 236.1 143.3 775.6 1,776.2 909.4 541.0 866.7 254.7 210.2
         H2 2,595.4 1,539.0 542.2 611.2 288.5 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.4 792.2 1,803.2 927.4 560.1 875.9 257.6 205.2
2019         H1  p 2,709.0 1,659.5 551.1 682.7 314.5 1,049.4 269.3 241.7 144.0 779.7 1,929.3 1,025.8 615.2 903.4 301.7 210.9
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 62.7 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.1
2016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.12017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.22018 
3 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.8 9.9 7.9
2017         H2 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2018         H1  3 100.0 60.1 21.2 23.6 11.3 39.9 9.8 9.3 5.6 30.4 69.6 35.6 21.2 34.0 10.0 8.2
         H2 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.8 9.9 7.9
2019         H1  p 100.0 61.3 20.3 25.2 11.6 38.7 9.9 8.9 5.3 28.8 71.2 37.9 22.7 33.4 11.1 7.8
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2015 1,782.4 1,077.8 304.0 447.3 259.0 704.6 198.8 147.1 104.4 485.2 1,297.2 690.4 354.0 606.8 198.4 127.52016 1,910.1 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.92017 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.42018 
3 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.8
2017         H2 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.4
2018         H1  3 2,072.0 1,177.0 360.2 460.4 277.5 895.0 232.7 185.6 115.2 604.9 1,467.0 727.9 411.2 739.2 229.5 167.5
         H2 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.8
2019         H1  p 2,164.7 1,247.6 358.0 501.5 302.7 917.2 252.0 187.0 114.4 604.2 1,560.5 805.6 452.6 754.9 260.2 162.6
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.5 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.9 34.1 11.1 7.2
2016 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.42017 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.72018 
3 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
2017         H2 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2018         H1  3 100.0 56.8 17.4 22.2 13.4 43.2 11.2 9.0 5.6 29.2 70.8 35.1 19.9 35.7 11.1 8.1
         H2 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
2019         H1  p 100.0 57.6 16.5 23.2 14.0 42.4 11.6 8.6 5.3 27.9 72.1 37.2 20.9 34.9 12.0 7.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.72016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.92017 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.32018 
3 502.2 365.2 182.9 148.3 11.0 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.0 322.2 185.5 131.7 136.7 26.4 54.4
2017         H2 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2018         H1  3 479.8 356.0 181.4 142.1 10.8 123.8 17.4 50.5 28.1 170.7 309.2 181.6 129.8 127.6 25.2 42.7
         H2 502.2 365.2 182.9 148.3 11.0 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.0 322.2 185.5 131.7 136.7 26.4 54.4
2019         H1  p 544.2 412.0 193.2 181.3 11.9 132.2 17.3 54.7 29.7 175.5 368.8 220.2 162.6 148.6 41.6 48.3
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.32017 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.22018 
3 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.2 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.8 35.8 64.2 36.9 26.2 27.2 5.3 10.8
2017         H2 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2018         H1  3 100.0 74.2 37.8 29.6 2.3 25.8 3.6 10.5 5.9 35.6 64.4 37.8 27.1 26.6 5.2 8.9
         H2 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.2 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.8 35.8 64.2 36.9 26.2 27.2 5.3 10.8
2019         H1  p 100.0 75.7 35.5 33.3 2.2 24.3 3.2 10.1 5.5 32.2 67.8 40.5 29.9 27.3 7.6 8.9
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. 3From this point onwards: significant
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with p revious periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
May 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciation
and amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
Annual Annual change in Annual change in
per- per- per- per- per-
centage centage centage centage centage
Period change  4 change  4 % points  4 % % % change  4 % points  4 %%% € billion  3 € billion  3 € billion  3 
Total
2011 1,414.3 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.7 11.1 17.4 93.9 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 − 0.4 5.4 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 2.0 6.1 11.0
2013 1,541.1 − 0.6 187.2 − 2.8 12.2 − 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.5 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 2.0 5.9 11.1
2014 1,565.7 1.0 198.9 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.5 109.4 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.2
2015 1,635.4 6.9 196.2 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 18.1 91.7 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.7 11.6
2016 1,626.1 − 0.4 214.9 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.5 18.1 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,721.7 5.1 243.9 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.4 33.2 8.3 1.7 2.5 6.9 12.2
2018 6 1,709.6 0.7 233.4 − 0.8 13.7 − 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.7 − 6.2 7.6 − 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2014         H2 808.8 2.9 101.7 5.3 12.6 0.3 5.6 11.0 19.2 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.8 7.1 12.1
2015         H1 815.3 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 5.0 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.3 − 0.5 1.2 5.9 10.9
         H2 831.4 5.1 93.6 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.5 32.7 − 36.6 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.2 11.7
2016         H1 782.7 − 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 6.1 10.5 18.0 65.7 2.9 8.4 0.4 1.7 6.4 11.4
         H2 843.4 1.1 103.1 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.2 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.6 12.5
2017         H1 845.0 6.8 125.9 14.5 14.9 1.0 5.8 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.4 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.7
         H2 879.8 3.5 117.7 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.4 63.2 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.5 12.4
2018         H1  6 849.5 − 0.0 120.7 − 2.4 14.2 − 0.4 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.9 − 5.2 8.6 − 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
         H2 870.9 1.4 115.2 0.9 13.2 − 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.3 − 7.5 6.7 − 0.6 2.1 6.7 12.5
2019         H1  p 862.9 2.7 112.4 − 3.8 13.0 − 0.9 6.3 11.7 18.6 53.7 − 23.2 6.2 − 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
Groups with a focus on the production sector  5 
 
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.6 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 5.0 6.9 − 1.2 2.4 6.9 11.5
2012 1,173.8 7.8 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.8 10.3 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.9 6.1 9.8
2013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.8 − 2.5 11.8 − 0.2 5.1 10.3 15.7 74.5 − 5.7 6.3 − 0.3 1.6 5.8 10.5
2014 1,197.4 1.0 148.1 5.9 12.4 0.6 5.6 10.0 15.5 82.0 9.7 6.9 0.6 1.5 5.9 10.3
2015 1,282.5 7.0 144.0 − 2.6 11.2 − 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.0 65.2 − 19.8 5.1 − 1.8 2.1 6.5 10.3
2016 1,267.1 − 1.1 156.5 6.1 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 80.6 3.9 6.4 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,362.9 5.6 181.6 16.8 13.3 1.3 6.8 10.9 15.6 108.0 40.8 7.9 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
2018 6 1,334.9 1.0 169.1 − 1.6 12.7 − 0.3 6.8 10.6 15.6 95.5 − 7.1 7.2 − 0.6 2.7 6.8 10.9
2014         H2 613.1 3.1 73.8 7.9 12.0 0.6 4.4 9.8 16.0 35.8 10.6 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.4 10.8
2015         H1 636.4 8.8 80.1 7.9 12.6 − 0.1 5.4 10.2 15.5 48.8 5.6 7.7 − 0.2 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 646.7 5.3 63.9 − 13.2 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.6 16.4 − 52.4 2.5 − 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.7
2016         H1 611.3 − 2.5 84.0 1.4 13.7 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.8 50.7 − 7.0 8.3 − 0.4 2.9 6.4 10.0
         H2 655.9 0.4 72.6 12.0 11.1 1.2 6.2 11.3 16.4 29.9 34.5 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.6
2017         H1 678.7 7.3 98.5 18.8 14.5 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 64.0 37.6 9.4 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
         H2 684.9 3.9 83.1 14.5 12.1 1.2 6.9 11.7 16.5 44.0 45.8 6.4 1.9 3.4 7.2 10.8
2018         H1  6 665.8 − 0.1 90.9 − 3.9 13.7 − 0.5 6.5 10.8 16.7 57.1 − 6.0 8.6 − 0.6 2.9 6.6 11.5
         H2 678.8 2.1 80.6 1.2 11.9 − 0.1 6.2 11.1 15.9 39.8 − 8.6 5.9 − 0.7 1.9 6.4 10.9
2019         H1  p 673.0 2.5 79.8 − 8.0 11.9 − 1.4 7.1 10.6 15.9 39.7 − 26.2 5.9 − 2.4 1.7 5.8 9.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2011 335.3 1.7 45.9 7.7 13.7 0.8 6.0 10.4 20.7 19.7 − 0.4 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.2 13.8
2012 359.1 2.8 48.0 − 3.2 13.4 − 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 − 46.6 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.2
2013 362.0 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.5 13.4 − 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 82.0 6.9 2.9 2.4 5.9 12.5
2014 368.3 0.9 50.8 1.9 13.8 0.1 6.2 12.7 22.6 27.3 4.3 7.4 0.2 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.2 52.2 4.4 14.8 − 0.3 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 3.1 7.5 − 0.7 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.6 58.4 14.0 16.3 1.6 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 26.5 8.8 1.6 2.5 8.3 15.5
2017 358.7 3.2 62.3 7.6 17.4 0.7 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 10.2 9.6 0.6 2.4 7.5 15.1
2018 6 374.7 − 0.6 64.4 1.7 17.2 0.4 5.7 10.5 24.7 34.2 − 2.9 9.1 − 0.2 1.6 5.9 16.6
2014         H2 195.6 2.2 27.8 − 2.4 14.2 − 0.6 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 − 0.3 8.1 − 0.2 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.2 22.8 − 2.5 12.7 − 1.4 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 19.7 5.8 − 1.8 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.5 29.7 10.3 16.1 0.8 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.7 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.0 27.8 26.8 16.2 3.3 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 68.2 8.7 3.4 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 187.4 4.1 30.6 4.2 16.3 0.0 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.8 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2017         H1 166.3 4.4 27.4 − 0.4 16.5 − 0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 − 1.0 8.8 − 0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
         H2 195.0 2.0 34.7 14.9 17.8 2.1 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.2 20.8 9.9 1.5 3.0 8.2 17.9
2018         H1  6 183.7 0.5 29.8 3.4 16.2 0.5 4.0 9.7 22.9 15.8 − 1.0 8.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 5.1 15.5
         H2 192.1 − 1.6 34.6 0.3 18.0 0.3 6.8 12.1 25.6 18.4 − 4.3 9.6 − 0.3 2.7 7.2 17.8
2019         H1  p 189.9 3.8 32.7 11.3 17.2 1.2 5.6 12.7 24.8 14.0 − 9.5 7.4 − 1.0 0.3 5.4 15.2
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement stati stics, p. 3.
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly 4Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical S eries Seasonally
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, adjusted business statistics. 5Including groups in agriculture and forestry. 6From
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted this point onwards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability
return on sales. 3Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year with previous periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
May 2020
XII. External sector
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2019 2020
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q2 Q3 Q4 Dec. Jan. Feb.  p
Current account + 348,215 + 360,889 + 320,466 + 30,430 + 114,276 + 107,812 + 41,682 + 10,507 + 33,842A.
1. Goods
Exports 2,263,111 2,344,003 2,401,424 592,503 599,917 620,522 192,922 189,449 197,533Imports 1,917,509 2,043,714 2,079,126 518,301 514,350 523,681 162,089 178,021 164,964
Balance + 345,602 + 300,287 + 322,295 + 74,202 + 85,566 + 96,840 + 30,832 + 11,427 + 32,569
2. Services
Receipts 881,843 922,981 988,262 245,165 264,204 260,609 94,119 80,441 71,436Expenditure 810,312 806,691 920,194 242,025 219,084 264,006 94,732 73,438 66,943
Balance + 71,531 + 116,290 + 68,066 + 3,139 + 45,121 − 3,397 − 613 + 7,003 + 4,493
3. Primary income
Receipts 721,403 783,009 805,255 209,789 195,021 212,201 80,100 64,403 57,378Expenditure 654,066 687,780 724,348 228,045 174,175 166,883 60,045 52,600 46,460
Balance + 67,336 + 95,231 + 80,905 − 18,256 + 20,846 + 45,318 + 20,055 + 11,803 + 10,918
4. Secondary income
Receipts 108,685 109,744 112,138 29,326 26,331 29,703 11,785 8,185 8,823Expenditure 244,943 260,667 262,943 57,982 63,589 60,653 20,378 27,911 22,961
Balance − 136,257 − 150,922 − 150,803 − 28,655 − 37,258 − 30,949 − 8,592 − 19,726 − 14,138
Capital account − 20,324 − 35,020 − 19,864 − 15,441 + 1,994 − 2,241 + 151 + 678 + 2,136B.
Financial account (increase: +) + 340,702 + 373,373 + 278,348 − 2,069 + 105,380 + 82,821 + 9,225 + 3,861 + 44,585C.
1. Direct investment − 45,071 + 122,361 + 10,739 − 90,782 + 26,595 − 28,689 − 39,738 + 17,014 + 22,786
By resident units abroad + 247,139 − 206,058 + 127,572 − 86,401 + 178,397 − 74,824 − 102,437 + 21,405 + 34,062By non-resident units in the euro area + 292,209 − 328,417 + 116,830 + 4,380 + 151,802 − 46,137 − 62,700 + 4,391 + 11,276
2. Portfolio investment + 369,456 + 209,591 − 49,969 − 51,699 − 41,250 + 130,384 + 56,390 − 34,968 + 1,365
By resident units abroad + 661,568 + 209,426 + 405,209 + 52,069 + 151,341 + 140,105 + 29,167 + 86,676 + 30,279
Equity and
investment fund shares + 204,118 + 47,487 + 57,197 + 6,195 − 24,446 + 77,624 + 25,220 + 33,305 − 3,015
Long-term debt securities + 381,600 + 197,059 + 361,284 + 90,000 + 118,396 + 88,627 + 10,516 + 61,201 + 30,248Short-term debt securities + 75,847 − 35,122 − 13,272 − 44,125 + 57,390 − 26,146 − 6,569 − 7,830 + 3,046
By non-resident units in the euro area + 292,110 − 166 + 455,179 + 103,769 + 192,591 + 9,721 − 27,223 + 121,644 + 28,914
Equity and
investment fund shares + 416,140 + 147,720 + 285,400 + 45,461 + 151,413 + 80,116 + 29,851 + 27,679 + 28,527
Long-term debt securities − 136,723 − 67,392 + 182,691 + 69,303 + 15,281 − 21,876 − 6,466 + 61,465 + 25,614Short-term debt securities + 12,694 − 80,496 − 12,914 − 10,996 + 25,896 − 48,519 − 50,608 + 32,499 − 25,228
3. Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 25,380 + 92,450 + 36,976 + 32,800 + 4,206 − 5,433 − 12,107 + 8,053 + 14,954
4. Other investment − 7,991 − 76,054 + 277,366 + 104,799 + 115,690 − 10,927 + 4,220 + 12,779 + 6,588
Eurosystem − 175,956 − 132,038 + 142,971 + 6,553 + 34,446 − 36,411 − 98,161 + 100,094 − 6,602General government + 25,720 − 5,826 + 406 + 5,657 − 6,533 + 11,268 + 11,654 + 202 + 3,407MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 149,854 + 96,387 + 176,715 + 102,830 + 58,039 + 24,243 + 109,640 − 88,213 + 15,120Enterprises and households − 7,610 − 34,577 − 42,724 − 10,242 + 29,741 − 10,028 − 18,913 + 697 − 5,336
5. Reserve assets − 1,073 + 25,021 + 3,234 + 2,813 + 139 − 2,515 + 460 + 982 − 1,108
Net errors and omissions + 12,811 + 47,501 − 22,252 − 17,057 − 10,890 − 22,748 − 32,607 − 7,324 + 8,607D.
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary  
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
May 2020
XII. External sector
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.)  1 
of which:
Supple-
mentary Balance of of which: Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2005 + 106,942 + 156,563 − 6,515 − 37,580 + 19,300 − 31,341 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 8,172
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 − 4,687 − 31,777 + 40,499 − 32,014 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 20,796
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 − 1,183 − 32,465 + 35,620 − 33,390 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 − 3,947 − 29,122 + 24,063 − 34,147 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 − 6,605 − 17,642 + 54,524 − 34,764 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 − 6,209 − 25,255 + 51,306 − 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 − 9,357 − 29,930 + 69,087 − 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 − 11,388 − 30,774 + 65,658 − 38,703 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 − 12,523 − 39,321 + 63,284 − 43,413 − 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 − 14,296 − 25,303 + 57,752 − 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 − 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 − 15,405 − 18,516 + 69,262 − 38,854 − 48 + 234,392 − 2,213 − 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 − 19,921 − 20,987 + 76,199 − 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 − 7,708
2017 + 253,883 + 252,831 − 15,448 − 24,372 + 75,419 − 49,995 − 2,999 + 283,208 − 1,269 + 32,323
2018 + 247,377 + 226,181 − 20,456 − 19,686 + 89,453 − 48,571 + 436 + 236,936 + 392 − 10,877
2019 + 245,221 + 220,992 − 28,012 − 20,472 + 92,312 − 47,612 − 323 + 204,625 − 544 − 40,273
2017         Q2 + 50,439 + 64,217 − 3,961 − 5,866 + 4,083 − 11,995 − 310 + 70,571 + 385 + 20,441
         Q3 + 62,309 + 65,287 − 3,393 − 12,553 + 20,478 − 10,904 + 414 + 60,600 + 152 − 2,123
         Q4 + 72,464 + 59,651 − 6,472 − 2,974 + 28,816 − 13,029 − 3,322 + 80,237 − 1,446 + 11,094
2018         Q1 + 72,424 + 64,568 − 1,720 − 2,379 + 24,754 − 14,520 + 3,656 + 75,991 + 699 − 89
         Q2 + 65,001 + 65,174 − 3,051 − 2,912 + 8,042 − 5,302 − 508 + 61,968 − 374 − 2,526
         Q3 + 51,101 + 51,183 − 4,170 − 12,695 + 24,845 − 12,232 − 1,642 + 40,976 − 493 − 8,482
         Q4 + 58,852 + 45,257 − 11,515 − 1,700 + 31,812 − 16,517 − 1,069 + 58,001 + 560 + 219
2019         Q1 + 64,283 + 56,751 − 4,195 − 1,727 + 25,936 − 16,677 + 844 + 40,491 − 63 − 24,635
         Q2 + 53,524 + 52,954 − 7,003 − 3,913 + 10,714 − 6,232 − 406 + 42,597 + 444 − 10,520
         Q3 + 59,170 + 59,614 − 6,859 − 12,650 + 24,513 − 12,308 + 197 + 29,606 − 349 − 29,760
         Q4 + 68,245 + 51,674 − 9,954 − 2,182 + 31,148 − 12,395 − 958 + 91,930 − 576 + 24,643
2020         Q1  p + 64,955 + 53,341 − 3,585 − 1,319 + 26,950 − 14,016 − 508 + 16,713 + 133 − 47,734
2017         Oct. + 18,785 + 19,965 − 875 − 4,311 + 7,374 − 4,244 − 382 + 18,015 + 1,176 − 388
         Nov. + 26,478 + 23,885 − 2,044 − 872 + 7,946 − 4,481 − 634 + 27,908 − 270 + 2,064
         Dec. + 27,202 + 15,801 − 3,553 + 2,209 + 13,496 − 4,304 − 2,306 + 34,314 − 2,353 + 9,419
2018         Jan. + 20,752 + 18,283 − 1,303 − 1,115 + 8,716 − 5,132 + 3,658 + 34,045 − 121 + 9,634
         Feb. + 20,755 + 19,988 − 498 − 131 + 6,259 − 5,360 + 227 + 13,199 + 583 − 7,784
         Mar. + 30,916 + 26,297 + 81 − 1,133 + 9,780 − 4,028 − 230 + 28,747 + 236 − 1,939
         Apr. + 23,518 + 21,136 − 1,475 + 49 + 4,866 − 2,533 + 119 + 31,696 − 670 + 8,059
         May + 14,544 + 21,195 − 189 − 1,448 − 5,308 + 105 − 143 + 8,832 + 83 − 5,569
         June + 26,939 + 22,843 − 1,388 − 1,513 + 8,483 − 2,874 − 485 + 21,439 + 213 − 5,016
         July + 14,275 + 16,174 − 764 − 4,944 + 7,857 − 4,812 − 368 + 6,223 + 266 − 7,684
         Aug. + 16,805 + 17,232 − 1,536 − 5,192 + 8,462 − 3,697 − 41 + 23,333 − 640 + 6,569
         Sep. + 20,020 + 17,777 − 1,870 − 2,560 + 8,526 − 3,723 − 1,234 + 11,420 − 119 − 7,366
         Oct. + 18,495 + 18,411 − 1,812 − 4,210 + 8,651 − 4,357 − 945 + 3,533 + 700 − 14,017
         Nov. + 20,435 + 16,693 − 4,707 + 510 + 8,799 − 5,566 − 586 + 25,067 − 124 + 5,218
         Dec. + 19,921 + 10,153 − 4,995 + 2,000 + 14,362 − 6,595 + 462 + 29,401 − 17 + 9,018
2019         Jan. + 17,585 + 14,289 − 2,284 − 991 + 9,324 − 5,037 + 2,163 + 16,856 + 158 − 2,892
         Feb. + 15,828 + 17,760 − 1,453 − 393 + 6,479 − 8,018 + 143 + 15,799 + 112 − 172
         Mar. + 30,870 + 24,702 − 459 − 343 + 10,133 − 3,622 − 1,463 + 7,836 − 333 − 21,572
         Apr. + 20,649 + 17,561 − 2,277 − 697 + 7,453 − 3,668 − 73 + 20,138 + 547 − 439
         May + 13,326 + 19,161 − 2,905 − 237 − 6,395 + 797 − 37 + 5,567 + 182 − 7,722
         June + 19,549 + 16,232 − 1,821 − 2,979 + 9,656 − 3,361 − 296 + 16,892 − 285 − 2,360
         July + 19,361 + 21,451 − 2,739 − 4,756 + 7,265 − 4,599 + 201 + 8,459 + 348 − 11,104
         Aug. + 15,972 + 16,912 − 1,358 − 5,479 + 8,747 − 4,208 + 773 + 8,178 + 755 − 8,568
         Sep. + 23,836 + 21,251 − 2,762 − 2,415 + 8,501 − 3,501 − 777 + 12,970 − 1,452 − 10,088
         Oct. + 20,434 + 21,250 − 2,866 − 4,626 + 8,431 − 4,621 − 893 + 31,933 − 107 + 12,391
         Nov. + 23,086 + 17,642 − 2,549 + 285 + 8,727 − 3,568 − 498 + 34,531 − 356 + 11,943
         Dec. + 24,724 + 12,781 − 4,539 + 2,159 + 13,990 − 4,206 + 433 + 25,467 − 113 + 310
2020         Jan. + 16,837 + 14,555 − 548 − 740 + 10,175 − 7,153 + 301 − 5,959 + 898 − 23,097
         Feb. + 23,671 + 20,830 − 1,664 − 243 + 7,265 − 4,181 + 65 + 7,048 + 750 − 16,688
         Mar.  p + 24,447 + 17,956 − 1,373 − 336 + 9,510 − 2,683 − 874 + 15,623 − 1,514 − 7,950
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions resulting from the difference between the balance on the finan cial account
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account . 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
May 2020
 XII. External sector
 
 3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
  by country and group of countries*
 
 € million
 2019  2020
Group of countries/country  2017  2018  2019 Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar.  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,278,958 1,317,440 1,327,771 119,746 113,079 98,075 106,715 109,229 108,948
Imports 1,031,013 1,088,720 1,104,569 98,493 94,783 82,915 92,911 88,612 91,593Balance + 247,946 + 228,720 + 223,202 + 21,254 + 18,296 + 15,160 + 13,804 + 20,616 + 17,355
I. Exports 872,427 900,141 902,687 81,789 77,517 63,597 74,259 75,427 74,002European countries
Imports 699,677 744,575 748,016 65,327 64,059 55,922 60,521 62,077 61,502Balance + 172,749 + 155,566 + 154,671 + 16,463 + 13,458 + 7,675 + 13,738 + 13,350 + 12,500
Exports 664,410 696,480 698,365 62,886 60,555 49,374 58,107 58,591 55,597 1. EU Member States (27)
Imports 549,250 586,433 593,151 51,876 50,370 43,397 47,005 49,336 48,747Balance + 115,160 + 110,047 + 105,215 + 11,010 + 10,185 + 5,977 + 11,102 + 9,254 + 6,850
Euro area (19) Exports 471,213 492,469 492,253 43,939 41,974 34,783 40,845 40,918 38,290
countries Imports 378,700 405,810 409,220 35,511 34,105 30,104 32,054 33,934 33,992
Balance + 92,513 + 86,659 + 83,033 + 8,428 + 7,869 + 4,679 + 8,792 + 6,984 + 4,298
of which:
Austria Exports 62,656 65,027 66,076 5,898 5,512 4,581 5,322 5,406 5,208
Imports 40,686 42,994 44,051 3,753 3,645 3,125 3,345 3,615 3,572Balance + 21,970 + 22,033 + 22,025 + 2,144 + 1,868 + 1,456 + 1,977 + 1,791 + 1,636
Belgium and Exports 50,071 50,389 51,895 4,513 4,367 3,903 4,365 4,392 4,209
Luxembourg Imports 43,689 49,315 46,388 3,869 3,672 3,092 3,600 3,837 3,675
Balance + 6,381 + 1,074 + 5,507 + 644 + 695 + 810 + 765 + 555 + 534
France Exports 105,687 105,359 106,739 9,625 9,341 7,256 8,715 9,062 7,838
Imports 64,329 65,024 65,999 5,795 5,514 5,105 5,129 5,559 5,431Balance + 41,359 + 40,335 + 40,741 + 3,830 + 3,827 + 2,151 + 3,587 + 3,504 + 2,407
Italy Exports 65,422 69,813 68,096 6,130 5,821 4,906 5,666 5,767 5,053
Imports 55,342 60,223 57,212 4,975 4,889 4,257 4,321 4,920 4,702Balance + 10,080 + 9,591 + 10,884 + 1,155 + 932 + 649 + 1,344 + 847 + 351
Netherlands Exports 84,661 91,061 91,595 8,013 7,638 6,715 7,621 7,230 7,501
Imports 90,597 97,709 98,538 8,183 8,190 7,653 7,927 8,144 8,437Balance − 5,935 − 6,649 − 6,943 − 170 − 553 − 938 − 306 − 915 − 936
Spain Exports 43,067 44,184 44,319 3,970 3,702 3,092 3,652 3,636 3,390
Imports 31,396 32,399 33,184 2,801 2,759 2,299 2,626 2,880 2,620Balance + 11,671 + 11,785 + 11,135 + 1,169 + 943 + 793 + 1,027 + 756 + 770
Other EU Member Exports 193,198 204,011 206,112 18,947 18,581 14,591 17,262 17,673 17,307
States Imports 170,551 180,623 183,930 16,365 16,265 13,292 14,951 15,402 14,755
Balance + 22,647 + 23,388 + 22,182 + 2,582 + 2,316 + 1,298 + 2,311 + 2,270 + 2,552
Exports 208,016 203,661 204,321 18,903 16,962 14,223 16,151 16,836 18,405 2. Other European
Imports 150,427 158,142 154,865 13,450 13,688 12,525 13,516 12,740 12,755 countries
Balance + 57,589 + 45,519 + 49,456 + 5,453 + 3,273 + 1,698 + 2,636 + 4,096 + 5,650
of which:
Switzerland Exports 53,913 54,021 56,366 5,136 5,011 3,992 4,878 4,945 5,014
Imports 45,689 45,913 46,315 4,170 4,180 3,536 4,014 3,870 4,677Balance + 8,224 + 8,108 + 10,051 + 966 + 831 + 456 + 864 + 1,075 + 337
United Exports 85,440 82,164 78,889 7,333 6,044 5,137 5,969 6,069 7,399
Kingdom Imports 36,820 37,025 38,348 3,595 3,481 3,201 3,654 3,693 3,062
Balance + 48,620 + 45,139 + 40,541 + 3,738 + 2,563 + 1,936 + 2,314 + 2,377 + 4,337
II. Exports 403,490 413,483 421,517 37,621 35,299 34,240 32,205 33,567 34,777Non-European
Imports 328,606 342,980 355,279 33,039 30,588 26,863 32,223 26,362 29,920 countries
Balance + 74,884 + 70,503 + 66,238 + 4,582 + 4,711 + 7,377 − 18 + 7,204 + 4,857
Exports 25,431 22,524 23,749 1,903 1,792 1,957 1,909 1,914 2,000 1. Africa
Imports 20,428 22,542 24,439 2,258 2,123 2,054 2,098 1,722 1,808Balance + 5,003 − 18 − 690 − 355 − 331 − 97 − 189 + 192 + 191
Exports 154,644 158,952 165,354 15,070 13,707 11,801 12,452 13,440 14,079 2. America
Imports 89,927 92,444 99,901 9,663 8,272 7,831 8,587 7,962 9,028Balance + 64,717 + 66,508 + 65,454 + 5,407 + 5,435 + 3,971 + 3,865 + 5,478 + 5,051
of which:
Exports 111,805 113,341 118,659 11,067 9,873 8,453 9,029 9,539 10,240 United States
Imports 61,902 64,493 71,388 7,161 5,953 5,519 6,176 5,918 6,558Balance + 49,903 + 48,847 + 47,271 + 3,906 + 3,920 + 2,935 + 2,853 + 3,622 + 3,681
Exports 212,070 219,716 221,196 19,786 18,866 19,647 17,036 17,323 17,865 3. Asia
Imports 214,393 224,355 227,071 20,773 19,913 16,641 21,194 16,373 18,639Balance − 2,323 − 4,639 − 5,874 − 987 − 1,047 + 3,006 − 4,158 + 950 − 774
of which:
Middle East Exports 33,104 29,144 28,646 2,825 2,571 3,048 2,080 2,278 2,355
Imports 6,963 8,156 7,426 643 576 479 568 451 505Balance + 26,141 + 20,989 + 21,220 + 2,182 + 1,994 + 2,569 + 1,512 + 1,827 + 1,850
Japan Exports 19,546 20,436 20,662 1,917 1,596 1,323 1,635 1,643 1,603
Imports 22,955 23,710 23,978 2,179 2,030 1,607 2,123 1,825 2,102Balance − 3,410 − 3,275 − 3,316 − 262 − 434 − 284 − 488 − 183 − 499
Exports 86,141 93,004 95,984 8,625 8,166 8,321 7,302 6,763 7,478 People‘s Republic
Imports 101,837 106,065 109,890 10,421 9,859 8,621 10,406 7,425 7,994 of China  
2 
Balance − 15,695 − 13,061 − 13,907 − 1,796 − 1,693 − 300 − 3,104 − 661 − 516
Exports 53,425 54,995 54,136 4,639 4,698 4,476 4,579 4,867 4,677 New industrial countries
Imports 50,873 52,945 51,893 4,673 4,567 3,556 4,727 3,895 4,801 and emerging markets
Balance + 2,552 + 2,050 + 2,243 − 34 + 131 + 920 − 149 + 972 − 124 of Asia  3 
Exports 11,344 12,291 11,217 863 935 835 808 889 834 4. Oceania and
Imports 3,857 3,639 3,868 346 279 337 344 305 445 polar regions
Balance + 7,487 + 8,652 + 7,349 + 517 + 655 + 497 + 464 + 584 + 389
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, imports and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong.
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of
the current position. EU excluding UK. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
May 2020
XII. External sector
 
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2015 − 18,516 − 5,203 − 36,595 + 8,621 +12,602 − 3,920 − 1,216 + 3,161 + 1,114 + 68,506 − 358
2016 − 20,987 − 5,950 − 38,247 + 8,612 +15,790 − 7,156 − 1,520 + 3,092 + 474 + 76,800 − 1,076
2017 − 24,372 − 3,723 − 43,558 + 9,663 +14,759 − 8,181 − 690 + 2,177 − 521 + 77,314 − 1,374
2018 − 19,686 − 1,808 − 44,543 + 9,610 +17,240 − 7,477 − 358 + 3,324 − 1,065 + 91,442 − 924
2019 − 20,472 + 536 − 44,867 + 10,302 +17,889 − 9,330 − 2,798 + 3,568 − 1,347 + 94,453 − 793
2018         Q3 − 12,695 − 402 − 18,219 + 1,936 + 3,992 − 2,054 + 253 + 842 − 1,008 + 26,759 − 905
         Q4 − 1,700 − 598 − 10,194 + 3,398 + 5,743 − 1,905 − 246 + 675 − 93 + 28,708 + 3,198
2019         Q1 − 1,727 − 438 − 6,663 + 2,057 + 4,481 − 2,559 − 573 + 921 + 361 + 26,360 − 785
         Q2 − 3,913 + 422 − 10,296 + 2,592 + 4,366 − 1,921 − 1,204 + 934 − 537 + 13,434 − 2,183
         Q3 − 12,650 + 344 − 18,242 + 2,811 + 3,263 − 2,267 − 386 + 936 − 1,078 + 26,837 − 1,245
         Q4 − 2,182 + 208 − 9,665 + 2,841 + 5,778 − 2,584 − 635 + 777 − 93 + 27,821 + 3,420
2020         Q1  p − 1,319 − 439 − 5,386 + 1,857 + 4,119 − 2,247 − 921 + 793 + 412 + 27,532 − 995
2019         May − 237 + 105 − 2,910 + 646 + 1,834 − 809 + 81 + 276 − 191 − 4,663 − 1,541
         June − 2,979 + 103 − 5,228 + 796 + 1,196 − 58 − 556 + 371 − 157 + 10,042 − 229
         July − 4,756 + 46 − 5,632 + 1,275 + 732 − 965 − 666 + 257 − 383 + 8,050 − 402
         Aug. − 5,479 + 50 − 7,156 + 784 + 1,343 − 878 − 249 + 290 − 374 + 9,547 − 426
         Sep. − 2,415 + 248 − 5,454 + 753 + 1,189 − 424 + 529 + 389 − 321 + 9,239 − 417
         Oct. − 4,626 + 46 − 5,813 + 947 + 1,427 − 1,635 − 146 + 282 − 65 + 8,946 − 451
         Nov. + 285 + 261 − 2,016 + 737 + 1,254 − 439 − 152 + 257 − 32 + 9,147 − 387
         Dec. + 2,159 − 99 − 1,836 + 1,157 + 3,097 − 510 − 336 + 238 + 3 + 9,729 + 4,258
2020         Jan. − 740 + 43 − 1,694 + 893 + 1,144 − 810 − 804 + 290 + 113 + 10,413 − 351
         Feb. − 243 + 51 − 1,967 + 545 + 1,425 − 641 − 46 + 241 + 136 + 7,371 − 242
         Mar.  p − 336 − 533 − 1,725 + 419 + 1,549 − 796 − 72 + 262 + 163 + 9,748 − 401
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001 the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which: of which:
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which: resident and Non-produced
international non-resident Workers’ Capital income, wealth, non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2015 − 38,854 − 24,087 − 6,805 + 10,455 − 14,766 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 48 + 1,787 − 1,835
2016 − 40,931 − 25,417 − 11,516 + 10,739 − 15,514 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 2,142 + 3,219 − 1,077
2017 − 49,995 − 22,488 − 9,852 + 10,372 − 27,506 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 2,999 + 922 − 3,921
2018 − 48,571 − 28,524 − 10,098 + 10,275 − 20,047 − 5,152 − 5,142 + 436 + 3,453 − 3,017
2019 − 47,612 − 28,599 − 10,428 + 11,758 − 19,013 − 5,445 − 5,431 − 323 + 2,795 − 3,118
2018         Q3 − 12,232 − 7,502 − 2,050 + 1,207 − 4,729 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 1,642 − 568 − 1,074
         Q4 − 16,517 − 11,184 − 4,557 + 1,159 − 5,333 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 1,069 + 843 − 1,912
2019         Q1 − 16,677 − 12,363 − 2,794 + 2,093 − 4,314 − 1,360 − 1,358 + 844 + 652 + 192
         Q2 − 6,232 − 591 − 1,354 + 6,701 − 5,641 − 1,361 − 1,358 − 406 + 20 − 426
         Q3 − 12,308 − 7,712 − 1,890 + 1,616 − 4,595 − 1,363 − 1,358 + 197 + 1,271 − 1,073
         Q4 − 12,395 − 7,933 − 4,389 + 1,348 − 4,462 − 1,363 − 1,358 − 958 + 853 − 1,811
2020         Q1  p − 14,016 − 9,699 − 2,318 + 2,467 − 4,317 − 1,482 − 1,477 − 508 − 732 + 224
2019         May + 797 + 2,455 − 333 + 4,435 − 1,658 − 453 − 453 − 37 − 146 + 108
         June − 3,361 − 1,933 − 647 + 1,118 − 1,428 − 454 − 453 − 296 − 75 − 222
         July − 4,599 − 2,911 − 801 + 393 − 1,688 − 453 − 453 + 201 + 723 − 522
         Aug. − 4,208 − 2,683 − 629 + 386 − 1,525 − 455 − 453 + 773 + 906 − 132
         Sep. − 3,501 − 2,119 − 461 + 836 − 1,382 − 454 − 453 − 777 − 358 − 419
         Oct. − 4,621 − 3,216 − 970 + 230 − 1,405 − 454 − 453 − 893 − 425 − 468
         Nov. − 3,568 − 2,125 − 1,296 + 220 − 1,443 − 453 − 453 − 498 − 32 − 467
         Dec. − 4,206 − 2,591 − 2,123 + 899 − 1,615 − 455 − 453 + 433 + 1,309 − 876
2020         Jan. − 7,153 − 5,705 − 1,060 + 331 − 1,448 − 494 − 492 + 301 + 32 + 269
         Feb. − 4,181 − 2,689 − 645 + 1,049 − 1,492 − 494 − 492 + 65 − 267 + 331
         Mar.  p − 2,683 − 1,306 − 614 + 1,088 − 1,377 − 494 − 492 − 874 − 498 − 376
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
May 2020
XII. External sector
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2019 2020
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q3 Q4 Q1  p Jan. Feb. Mar.  p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 406,588 + 390,059 + 193,147 + 20,006 − 69,422 + 263,142 + 32,733 + 75,110 + 155,299
1. Direct investment + 143,931 + 148,042 + 100,824 + 12,164 + 4,327 + 49,414 + 6,370 + 23,602 + 19,442
Equity + 92,843 + 147,471 + 86,808 + 15,305 + 10,773 + 39,670 + 10,618 + 12,007 + 17,044
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 32,233 + 34,769 + 40,983 + 14,316 + 1,117 + 17,131 + 5,025 + 7,330 + 4,776
Debt instruments + 51,088 + 571 + 14,016 − 3,141 − 6,446 + 9,744 − 4,248 + 11,594 + 2,398
2. Portfolio investment + 115,466 + 83,229 + 123,681 + 21,730 + 32,768 + 10,483 + 25,240 + 13,313 − 28,070
Shares  2 + 14,673 + 9,613 + 14,248 − 265 + 9,407 + 4,843 + 4,797 + 1,228 − 1,182
Investment fund shares  3 + 58,562 + 28,263 + 52,930 + 10,728 + 20,920 − 9,964 + 9,533 + 3,449 − 22,946
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 42,724 + 41,577 + 54,493 + 14,068 + 4,408 + 14,930 + 6,406 + 8,474 + 50
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 492 + 3,776 + 2,009 − 2,800 − 1,968 + 674 + 4,504 + 163 − 3,992
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 10,974 + 23,126 + 22,383 + 2,976 + 1,772 + 31,906 + 3,771 + 3,046 + 25,088
4. Other investment  7 + 137,485 + 135,271 − 53,198 − 16,515 − 107,713 + 171,206 − 3,547 + 34,399 + 140,354
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 20,985 + 49,862 + 9,292 − 3,610 − 72,576 + 99,824 + 60,124 + 11,573 + 28,127
Long-term + 19,642 + 4,462 + 18,194 + 1,276 − 3,247 − 4,381 − 2,024 − 4,025 + 1,668Short-term − 40,627 + 45,400 − 8,901 − 4,885 − 69,329 + 104,205 + 62,149 + 15,598 + 26,459
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 5,827 + 37,324 + 12,667 + 9,961 − 1,882 + 23,867 + 12,716 + 12,898 − 1,748
Long-term − 2,291 + 17,182 + 10,566 + 2,224 + 5,775 + 16,844 + 1,424 + 1,920 + 13,501Short-term + 8,118 + 20,143 + 2,100 + 7,737 − 7,656 + 7,022 + 11,292 + 10,979 − 15,249
General government − 3,993 − 8,710 − 4,242 + 6,400 − 12,009 + 4,380 + 5,139 + 1,266 − 2,025
Long-term − 4,408 − 999 − 3,103 − 280 − 981 − 294 − 19 − 69 − 206Short-term + 415 − 7,711 − 1,139 + 6,680 − 11,028 + 4,674 + 5,158 + 1,335 − 1,819
Bundesbank + 156,637 + 56,795 − 70,915 − 29,266 − 21,247 + 43,136 − 81,526 + 8,662 + 116,000
5. Reserve assets − 1,269 + 392 − 544 − 349 − 576 + 133 + 898 + 750 − 1,514
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(increase: +) + 123,380 + 153,123 − 11,479 − 9,600 − 161,352 + 246,429 + 38,692 + 68,062 + 139,675
1. Direct investment + 105,218 + 143,602 + 45,136 + 23,848 − 20,859 + 32,911 + 3,029 + 13,521 + 16,361
Equity + 40,568 + 60,751 + 20,964 − 3,559 + 3,466 + 11,549 + 3,440 + 4,140 + 3,970
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 17,094 + 15,743 + 17,310 + 5,838 + 2,189 + 6,792 + 2,352 + 2,876 + 1,564
Debt instruments + 64,650 + 82,851 + 24,172 + 27,407 − 24,324 + 21,362 − 411 + 9,381 + 12,391
2. Portfolio investment − 89,846 − 73,978 + 28,479 − 200 − 38,738 + 48,025 + 32,700 + 11,491 + 3,834
Shares  2 − 705 − 30,651 − 6,392 + 1,180 − 2,801 − 6,004 − 110 + 1,817 − 7,712
Investment fund shares  3 − 2,519 − 6,298 − 4,963 − 1,272 + 1,400 − 797 − 539 − 31 − 227
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 72,291 − 41,376 + 32,911 − 8,125 − 20,338 + 28,226 + 14,903 + 11,328 + 1,995
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 14,330 + 4,348 + 6,923 + 8,018 − 16,999 + 26,601 + 18,446 − 1,623 + 9,778
3. Other investment  7 + 108,008 + 83,499 − 85,093 − 33,249 − 101,755 + 165,493 + 2,963 + 43,049 + 119,481
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 17,508 − 35,902 − 10,010 − 12,898 − 134,499 + 181,992 + 88,380 + 21,952 + 71,660
Long-term + 7,574 − 8,433 + 10,968 + 5,416 + 979 + 12,909 + 1,952 + 4,303 + 6,654Short-term + 9,935 − 27,469 − 20,978 − 18,314 − 135,479 + 169,083 + 86,428 + 17,649 + 65,006
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 22,063 + 14,829 + 21,959 − 1,616 − 2,994 + 25,600 − 1,598 + 19,061 + 8,137
Long-term + 6,881 + 7,805 + 12,412 + 5,630 + 1,609 + 5,973 − 668 + 5,219 + 1,422Short-term + 15,182 + 7,024 + 9,547 − 7,246 − 4,603 + 19,627 − 930 + 13,842 + 6,715
General government − 8,719 + 2,926 + 257 + 5,409 − 11,968 + 3,429 + 3,991 + 3,343 − 3,905
Long-term − 3,724 + 697 + 133 + 53 − 449 + 515 + 580 + 25 − 90Short-term − 4,996 + 2,230 + 124 + 5,356 − 11,519 + 2,914 + 3,411 + 3,319 − 3,816
Bundesbank + 77,156 + 101,646 − 97,299 − 24,143 + 47,706 − 45,528 − 87,810 − 1,307 + 43,590
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 283,208 + 236,936 + 204,625 + 29,606 + 91,930 + 16,713 − 5,959 + 7,048 + 15,623
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
May 2020
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col. 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  1 col. 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan.  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,475
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,673 474,172
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,688 439,293
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 673,626 487,345
2017         Aug. 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 620,268 469,616
         Sep. 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 618,490 496,709
         Oct. 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 600,419 485,496
         Nov. 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 576,562 515,270
         Dec. 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,673 474,172
2018         Jan. 1,114,774 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,665 882,043 53,165 617,080 497,694
         Feb. 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 636,808 511,171
         Mar. 1,158,983 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 939,229 923,466 53,924 678,955 480,029
         Apr. 1,139,056 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 917,971 902,364 54,115 633,741 505,314
         May 1,198,995 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 973,323 956,150 54,203 656,505 542,490
         June 1,213,511 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 991,577 976,266 54,857 701,011 512,500
         July 1,147,878 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 930,107 913,270 54,463 666,323 481,554
         Aug. 1,145,283 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 929,073 912,448 53,864 644,636 500,647
         Sep. 1,189,175 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,380 956,487 54,717 686,368 502,807
         Oct. 1,167,004 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 943,644 927,555 55,089 664,608 502,396
         Nov. 1,184,703 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 960,478 941,130 56,026 674,449 510,254
         Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,688 439,293
2019         Jan. 1,123,169 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,039 648,602 474,568
         Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 634,080 493,375
         Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 655,655 534,761
         Apr. 1,167,188 177,378 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,482 935,563 919,696 54,247 627,265 539,923
         May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 618,780 567,614
         June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 649,898 551,143
         July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 622,006 512,343
         Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 638,696 534,944
         Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 626,128 559,014
         Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 597,432 505,662
         Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 591,913 542,217
         Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 673,626 487,345
2020         Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 593,023 497,702
         Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 584,712 521,321
         Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 628,225 590,590
         Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 626,625 588,226
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to respective country designation), since November 2000 also bal ances with non-euro
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad. 4See
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5Euro opening
valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
May 2020
XII. External sector
 
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2016 877,815 246,093 631,722 421,163 210,558 196,385 14,173 1,055,685 132,817 922,868 725,655 197,213 124,628 72,5852017 897,685 218,669 679,016 453,895 225,121 211,461 13,660 1,107,500 142,473 965,027 764,104 200,923 130,887 70,0362018 929,542 234,581 694,961 463,631 231,330 217,163 14,167 1,210,748 143,373 1,067,374 860,496 206,878 135,879 70,9992019 947,344 225,353 721,991 489,939 232,052 216,675 15,377 1,257,797 162,100 1,095,697 888,066 207,630 134,394 73,236
2019         Oct. 959,356 231,272 728,084 490,474 237,610 222,326 15,284 1,279,339 160,925 1,118,414 910,702 207,711 132,127 75,585
         Nov. 975,951 231,776 744,176 504,687 239,489 223,931 15,558 1,290,924 159,360 1,131,564 924,558 207,006 132,203 74,803         Dec. 947,344 225,353 721,991 489,939 232,052 216,675 15,377 1,257,797 162,100 1,095,697 888,066 207,630 134,394 73,236
2020         Jan. 958,458 238,705 719,753 492,472 227,281 211,398 15,883 1,261,870 158,772 1,103,098 901,497 201,601 126,646 74,955
         Feb. 981,097 244,455 736,641 506,315 230,326 214,260 16,066 1,289,263 171,618 1,117,645 914,309 203,335 126,607 76,729         Mar. 975,723 239,183 736,540 505,659 230,882 214,926 15,956 1,304,776 171,902 1,132,873 929,910 202,964 126,914 76,050
Industrial countries 1
 
2016 755,412 242,057 513,355 375,714 137,641 125,011 12,629 947,398 128,821 818,577 686,094 132,483 95,528 36,9552017 772,453 214,489 557,964 407,332 150,632 138,468 12,164 996,642 135,429 861,213 722,238 138,975 104,007 34,9692018 797,729 229,243 568,486 414,749 153,737 141,316 12,421 1,087,622 129,997 957,625 816,833 140,793 105,841 34,9522019 813,636 220,138 593,498 438,408 155,090 141,574 13,515 1,117,738 134,150 983,588 842,104 141,484 106,245 35,239
2019         Oct. 822,145 226,531 595,614 438,587 157,028 143,578 13,450 1,157,412 148,649 1,008,763 866,653 142,110 105,813 36,297
         Nov. 838,961 226,909 612,052 451,518 160,534 146,873 13,662 1,164,847 145,308 1,019,538 877,866 141,672 105,940 35,732         Dec. 813,636 220,138 593,498 438,408 155,090 141,574 13,515 1,117,738 134,150 983,588 842,104 141,484 106,245 35,239
2020         Jan. 825,843 233,391 592,452 440,553 151,899 137,999 13,900 1,127,916 141,694 986,222 849,855 136,367 100,099 36,269
         Feb. 849,717 239,182 610,535 454,164 156,372 142,274 14,098 1,153,331 150,739 1,002,592 862,832 139,760 102,782 36,979         Mar. 844,626 233,795 610,831 454,810 156,021 142,035 13,986 1,171,796 155,463 1,016,333 877,651 138,682 101,918 36,763
EU Member States 1
 
2016 616,032 224,271 391,761 294,205 97,556 87,543 10,014 773,490 118,681 654,808 566,391 88,417 61,513 26,9042017 615,256 194,445 420,811 313,481 107,330 97,434 9,897 822,737 118,683 704,053 606,219 97,834 72,500 25,3352018 642,600 208,735 433,865 324,646 109,219 99,467 9,752 894,513 112,239 782,274 684,570 97,704 72,825 24,8792019 653,577 201,884 451,693 344,685 107,008 97,259 9,749 908,688 111,963 796,724 698,730 97,994 72,611 25,383
2019         Oct. 662,440 207,518 454,922 343,079 111,843 101,815 10,028 942,009 124,558 817,451 718,690 98,760 73,229 25,531
         Nov. 676,237 208,241 467,996 354,820 113,176 103,210 9,966 945,961 119,505 826,456 727,476 98,980 73,463 25,517         Dec. 653,577 201,884 451,693 344,685 107,008 97,259 9,749 908,688 111,963 796,724 698,730 97,994 72,611 25,383
2020         Jan. 666,990 214,956 452,033 345,305 106,728 97,065 9,663 926,782 118,644 808,137 712,334 95,803 69,711 26,092
         Feb. 680,671 221,271 459,401 348,960 110,441 100,465 9,976 942,296 125,936 816,360 717,930 98,431 71,988 26,443         Mar. 678,429 214,977 463,452 354,897 108,555 98,768 9,787 960,432 129,630 830,802 734,888 95,914 69,470 26,444
of which: Euro area 2
 
2016 450,914 171,302 279,612 214,911 64,701 57,972 6,729 613,595 70,202 543,393 487,188 56,204 41,334 14,8702017 451,219 150,346 300,873 228,761 72,112 64,643 7,469 650,641 75,398 575,243 509,470 65,773 50,395 15,3782018 466,584 156,425 310,159 238,570 71,588 64,391 7,197 723,072 68,499 654,573 588,121 66,452 50,655 15,7972019 484,879 156,743 328,135 257,791 70,344 62,945 7,399 733,299 68,393 664,906 597,241 67,664 50,955 16,710
2019         Oct. 483,473 158,199 325,274 252,384 72,890 65,429 7,461 756,027 73,167 682,860 615,450 67,411 50,704 16,707
         Nov. 491,834 156,805 335,028 260,521 74,507 67,023 7,484 758,223 71,813 686,410 618,846 67,564 50,955 16,609         Dec. 484,879 156,743 328,135 257,791 70,344 62,945 7,399 733,299 68,393 664,906 597,241 67,664 50,955 16,710
2020         Jan. 490,256 163,855 326,401 256,186 70,215 62,972 7,243 750,165 73,124 677,042 613,112 63,930 46,891 17,039
         Feb. 498,675 169,015 329,660 257,493 72,167 64,657 7,510 756,646 73,044 683,602 617,594 66,008 48,784 17,224         Mar. 496,543 168,756 327,787 256,818 70,969 63,635 7,334 767,757 80,184 687,573 622,770 64,803 47,540 17,264
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2016 120,992 2,790 118,203 45,433 72,770 71,226 1,544 105,344 1,070 104,274 39,561 64,713 29,100 35,6132017 123,582 2,746 120,836 46,495 74,341 72,845 1,496 105,033 1,307 103,726 41,867 61,859 26,881 34,9792018 129,738 3,551 126,187 48,753 77,435 75,688 1,747 111,571 1,861 109,710 43,663 66,046 30,030 36,0172019 131,614 3,644 127,971 51,181 76,789 74,928 1,862 113,805 1,756 112,049 45,962 66,087 28,117 37,970
2019         Oct. 135,259 3,316 131,943 51,540 80,404 78,570 1,834 111,268 1,686 109,581 44,050 65,532 26,275 39,257
         Nov. 134,896 3,322 131,574 52,820 78,754 76,857 1,896 113,763 1,803 111,960 46,692 65,267 26,226 39,042         Dec. 131,614 3,644 127,971 51,181 76,789 74,928 1,862 113,805 1,756 112,049 45,962 66,087 28,117 37,970
2020         Jan. 130,468 3,655 126,813 51,569 75,245 73,262 1,983 118,617 1,798 116,818 51,642 65,177 26,517 38,660
         Feb. 129,225 3,613 125,611 51,801 73,810 71,842 1,968 116,829 1,833 114,996 51,478 63,518 23,795 39,723         Mar. 129,119 3,876 125,242 50,497 74,745 72,775 1,970 118,387 1,902 116,485 52,259 64,226 24,967 39,260
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
May 2020
XII. External sector
 
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2018         Dec. 1.5849 1.5278 7.8398 7.4653 127.88 9.8055 10.2766 1.1293 0.89774 1.1384
2019         Jan. 1.5975 1.5196 7.7504 7.4657 124.34 9.7631 10.2685 1.1297 0.88603 1.1416
         Feb. 1.5895 1.4995 7.6485 7.4627 125.28 9.7444 10.4986 1.1368 0.87264 1.1351
         Mar. 1.5959 1.5104 7.5868 7.4625 125.67 9.7181 10.4999 1.1311 0.85822 1.1302
         Apr. 1.5802 1.5035 7.5489 7.4650 125.44 9.6233 10.4819 1.1319 0.86179 1.1238
         May 1.6116 1.5058 7.6736 7.4675 122.95 9.7794 10.7372 1.1304 0.87176 1.1185
         June 1.6264 1.5011 7.7937 7.4669 122.08 9.7465 10.6263 1.1167 0.89107 1.1293
         July 1.6061 1.4693 7.7151 7.4656 121.41 9.6587 10.5604 1.1076 0.89942 1.1218
         Aug. 1.6431 1.4768 7.8581 7.4602 118.18 9.9742 10.7356 1.0892 0.91554 1.1126
         Sep. 1.6162 1.4578 7.8323 7.4634 118.24 9.9203 10.6968 1.0903 0.89092 1.1004
         Oct. 1.6271 1.4581 7.8447 7.4693 119.51 10.1165 10.8023 1.0981 0.87539 1.1053
         Nov. 1.6181 1.4630 7.7571 7.4720 120.34 10.1087 10.6497 1.0978 0.85761 1.1051
         Dec. 1.6154 1.4640 7.7974 7.4720 121.24 10.0429 10.4827 1.0925 0.84731 1.1113
2020         Jan. 1.6189 1.4523 7.6832 7.4729 121.36 9.9384 10.5544 1.0765 0.84927 1.1100
         Feb. 1.6356 1.4485 7.6302 7.4713 120.03 10.1327 10.5679 1.0648 0.84095 1.0905
         Mar. 1.7788 1.5417 7.7675 7.4703 118.90 11.2943 10.8751 1.0591 0.89460 1.1063
         Apr. 1.7271 1.5287 7.6858 7.4617 116.97 11.3365 10.8845 1.0545 0.87547 1.0862
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.    
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
May 2020
XII.  External sector
 
12.  Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
Q1 1999 = 100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  4 
In real terms In real terms
of which: based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selected
consumer domestic national consumer Euro  area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 56 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.0 96.0 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.5 95.8 97.6 98.2 98.0 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 85.9 85.5 88.0 85.8 91.9 97.4 85.3 90.9 93.0 92.0 90.9
2001 87.8 87.0 86.6 86.4 90.6 86.8 91.8 96.5 86.2 90.3 93.0 91.4 90.82002 90.1 90.0 89.5 89.8 95.2 90.4 92.4 95.6 88.7 90.8 93.5 91.9 91.72003 100.7 101.1 100.5 100.8 107.1 101.2 95.9 94.7 97.9 95.1 97.0 96.5 96.72004 104.6 104.8 103.3 104.1 111.7 104.9 96.1 93.5 100.3 95.3 98.4 97.9 98.2
2005 102.9 103.3 101.1 102.0 109.6 102.3 94.8 92.0 99.3 93.0 98.4 96.8 96.5
2006 102.8 103.2 100.4 100.8 109.6 101.5 93.6 90.4 98.7 91.3 98.5 96.4 95.82007 106.1 105.8 102.2 103.0 113.0 103.4 94.5 89.6 102.6 91.6 100.8 97.8 97.02008 109.3 107.9 103.5 106.3 117.1 105.4 94.7 88.3 105.8 90.7 102.1 97.8 97.02009 110.7 108.7 104.4 111.7 120.2 106.4 95.1 89.1 105.3 91.4 101.7 97.9 97.4
2010 103.6 101.0 96.2 103.6 111.6 97.4 92.5 88.7 98.8 87.4 98.7 93.6 91.9
2011 103.3 100.0 94.1 101.9 112.3 96.9 92.1 88.4 98.1 86.5 98.1 92.7 91.22012 97.7 94.7 88.6 95.8 107.2 92.1 90.2 88.3 93.0 83.8 95.9 89.7 88.22013 101.0 97.5 91.3 98.4 111.8 94.9 92.4 88.8 98.2 85.7 98.1 91.4 90.12014 101.4 97.1 91.3 99.3 114.1 95.3 93.1 89.7 98.5 86.5 98.2 91.6 90.7
2015 91.7 87.6 83.0 89.0 105.7 87.0 90.1 90.4 89.6 82.6 94.6 86.9 86.2
2016 94.4 89.5 85.2
p 89.9 109.7 p 88.9 90.8 90.7 91.0 83.9 95.3 87.9 p 87.4
2017 96.6 91.4 86.0 p 90.3 112.0 p 90.0 91.8 90.6 93.7 84.4 96.6 89.0 p 88.3
2018 98.9 93.4 87.2 p 91.3 117.9 p 93.8 92.8 90.5 96.4 85.1 97.9 90.3 p 90.3
2019 97.3 91.2 85.7 p 88.8 116.7 p 91.5 91.9 90.7 93.6 84.3 96.6 89.1 p 89.1
2017         Nov. 98.5 93.1 87.6 p 91.5 115.0 p 92.0 92.9 90.5 96.5 85.2 97.9 90.1 p 89.6
         Dec. 98.8 93.3 115.3 p 92.1 98.0 90.2 p 89.7
2018         Jan. 99.4 93.9 116.1 p 92.8 98.3 90.4 p 90.0
         Feb. 99.6 93.9 88.0 p 91.9 117.3 p 93.6 93.3 90.5 97.9 85.4 98.3 90.4 p 90.1
         Mar. 99.7 94.2 117.7 p 94.0 98.5 90.7 p 90.4
         Apr. 99.5 94.0 117.9 p 94.1 98.5 90.5 p 90.4
         May 98.1 92.8 86.9 p 91.0 116.6 p 93.1 92.9 90.5 96.6 84.8 98.0 89.9 p 89.9
         June 97.9 92.6 116.7 p 93.0 97.7 89.8 p 89.8
         July 99.2 93.8 118.2 p 94.2 97.6 90.3 p 90.3
         Aug. 99.0 93.4 87.3 p 91.7 119.0 p 94.6 92.5 90.3 96.0 85.1 97.5 90.2 p 90.6
         Sep. 99.5 93.9 120.4 p 95.5 97.9 90.6 p 91.4
         Oct. 98.9 93.4 119.0 p 94.4 97.5 90.3 p 90.7
         Nov. 98.3 92.9 86.8 p 90.7 117.9 p 93.6 92.4 90.6 95.2 84.9 97.4 90.2 p 90.3
         Dec. 98.4 92.7 118.0 p 93.3 97.4 89.9 p 90.2
2019         Jan. 97.8 92.2 117.3 p 92.7 97.0 89.5 p 89.6
         Feb. 97.4 91.6 85.7 p 89.2 116.6 p 92.0 92.1 90.6 94.5 84.4 96.8 89.2 p 89.2
         Mar. 96.9 91.1 116.2 p 91.5 96.6 88.8 p 89.0
         Apr. 96.7 90.9 116.1 p 91.4 96.8 89.0 p 89.1
         May 97.4 91.4 85.6 p 88.9 117.0 p 91.9 92.0 90.7 94.0 84.3 96.8 89.2 p 89.4
         June 97.9 91.9 117.4 p 92.2 97.0 89.4 p 89.6
         July 97.5 91.3 116.5 p 91.3 96.9 89.2 p 89.2
         Aug. 98.1 91.8 86.0 p 89.1 117.6 p 92.0 91.8 90.7 93.4 84.4 96.8 89.4 p 89.5
         Sep. 97.4 91.1 116.7 p 91.2 96.4 89.1 p 89.0
         Oct. 97.4 90.9 116.6 p 91.0 96.4 88.9 p 88.9
         Nov. 96.7 90.2 85.5 p 88.2 116.0 p 90.3 91.6 90.9 92.7 84.3 96.2 88.5 p 88.5
         Dec. 96.7 90.1 116.0 p 90.2 96.1 88.5 p 88.5
2020         Jan. 96.2 p 89.3 115.5 p 89.4 96.1 p 88.2 p 88.1
         Feb. 95.6 p 88.6 ... ... 114.9 p 88.8 ... ... ... ... 95.8 p 87.9 p 87.9
         Mar. 98.1 p 91.0 119.3 p 92.2 p 96.8 p 89.3 p 89.9
         Apr. 97.5 p 90.1 119.2 p 91.8 p 96.1 p 88.8 p 89.7
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the group EER-19 (see footnote 1) and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Bra zil, Chile,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zeala nd,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailan d, Turkey and
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Venezuela. Due to the redenomination of the Venezuelan bolívar on2001, pp.  50-53, May 2007, pp.  31-35 and August 2017, pp.  41-43). For more 20  August  2018, the spot rate from 17  August  2018 is used since t hen. 3Annual
detailed information on methodology, see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from
(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, fr om 2015
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Austra- including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norw ay, Sweden,
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro area countries
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-1 9.6Euro area
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai- countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the gro up EER-38 (see
lable, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2010 and 2019, see the index attached 
to the January 2020 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
June 2019
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2019 and 2020 and 
an outlook for 2021
– The European banking package – revised 
rules in EU banking regulation
– Payment services in transition: instant pay -
ments, PSD2 and new competitors
– The costs of payment methods in the retail 
sector
July 2019
– Parallels in the exchange rate movements of 
major currencies– Crypto tokens in payments and securities 
settlement
August 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2019
– The impact of wages on prices in Germany:  
evidence from selected empirical analyses
– State government budgets: analysis of de -
tailed results for 2018
– Longer- term changes in the unsecured inter -
bank money market
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2018
October 2019
– The sustainable finance market: a stocktake
– The European market for investment funds 
and the role of bond funds in the low inter -
est rate environment
– Long- term outlook for the statutory pension 
insurance scheme
– Structural reforms in the euro area
November 2019
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
85•

December 2019
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2020 and 2021 and 
an outlook for 2022
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2018
– The relevance of surveys of expectations for 
the Deutsche Bundesbank
– The mixing of euro coins in Germany
January 2020
– The upswing in loans to enterprises in Ger -
many between 2014 and 2019
– Consequences of increasing protectionism
February 2020
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2020
– German balance of payments in 2019
– Households’ digital purchases in the balance  
of payments
– New benchmark rates, new challenges: 
introducing the €STR in the euro area
April 2020
– Sectoral portfolio adjustments in the euro 
area during the low interest rate period
– The EU budget and its financing: looking 
back and ahead
May 2020
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20202
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20202
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
11/ 2020  
On adjusting the one- sided Hodrick- Prescott 
filter 12/ 2020  
Measuring spatial price differentials: A compari -
son of stochastic index number methods
13/ 2020  
Central bank information shocks and exchange 
rates
14/ 2020  
The impact of uncertainty and certainty shocks
15/2020  
Demographics and the decline in firm entry: 
Lessons from a life-cycle model 
16/2020  
Dynamic pricing and exchange rate pass-through 
Evidence from transaction-level data 
17/2020  
Rebalancing the euro area: Is wage adjustment 
in Germany the answer? 
18/2020  
Doing more with less: The catalytic function of 
IMF lending and the role of program size 
19/2020  
Unconventional monetary policy shocks in the 
euro area and the sovereign-bank nexus 
20/2020  
The German housing market cycle: Answers to 
FAQs 
21/2020  
Foreign exchange interventions under a one-  
sided target zone regime and the Swiss franc 
22/2020  
Long-term outlook for the German statutory 
system 
23/2020  
Interbank risk assessment – A simulation ap -
proach
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
87•

24/ 2020  
Measuring price dynamics of package holidays 
with transaction data
25/ 2020  
Compilation of commercial property price 
indices  for Germany tailored for policy use
26/ 2020  
Stressed banks? Evidence from the largest- ever 
supervisory review
27/ 2020  
Loan supply and bank capital: A micro- macro 
linkage
28/ 2020  
On the credit- to- GDP gap and spurious 
 medium- term cyclesBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
May 2020  
88•

