Monthly Report
August 2020
Vol. 72  
No 8

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 14 August 2020.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  7
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  12
China’s foreign trade withstanding the global economic  crisis ............................................  15
How the coronavirus pandemic has impacted on the convergence  process of the central 
and eastern European EU Member States  ...........................................................................  22
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  28
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  29
Developments in the real portfolio returns of households in Germany  ................................  40
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  47
Recalculated weights for indicators of the German  economy’s price competitiveness  .........  49
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  61
Experimental seasonal and calendar adjustment of daily economic indicators  ...................  67
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  77
EU budget: Agreement on multi- annual financial framework for 2021 to 2027  
and one- off “Next Generation EU”  instrument in response to the coronavirus pandemic  .... 78
Excursus: How the coronavirus pandemic is affecting Germany’s public finances: 
 automatic stabilisers and measures  ....................................................................................  92Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
6

Overview
First signs of recovery after 
historic slump in economic 
activity
Within the space of just a few weeks in the first 
half of 2020, the coronavirus pandemic brought 
economic output to its knees in almost all parts 
of the world, throttling activity to a far greater 
extent even than the financial and economic 
crisis of 2008-09. Downturns were particularly 
severe in countries whose governments had 
felt impelled to take very far- reaching measures 
to contain the infection or had kept the restric -
tions in place for a protracted period. This was 
true of the United Kingdom, in particular. Con -
tractions were somewhat less pronounced in 
the euro area, in the United States and prob -
ably also in Japan. Most emerging market 
economies suffered substantial declines as 
well. One bright spot was the Chinese econ -
omy, which in the second quarter had already 
recouped the heavy losses from the beginning 
of the year.
Starting at the end of April, the relaxation of 
containment measures ushered in a certain de -
gree of normalisation in many countries. Both 
advanced and emerging market economies 
saw many people return to the workplace. 
Consumption of goods in a number of coun -
tries even returned to pre- crisis levels at the 
end of the second quarter. So far, industry and 
world trade have recovered more slowly. Ser -
vices sectors continued to lag far behind, as 
continued social distancing requirements are 
resulting in greater restrictions.
Business surveys indicate that the incipient re -
covery will continue. Given the depth of the 
slump, however, a return to normal activity 
levels is still a long way off. There is also a high 
risk of setbacks, especially with regard to the 
further course of the pandemic.The economic repercussions of the coronavirus 
pandemic and the extensive support measures 
taken to contain it also dominated events in 
global financial markets in the spring and sum -
mer of 2020. Market participants’ assessment 
of global economic developments was closely 
linked to the latest updates on infection figures 
and medical research results as well as reports 
on containment measures. Uncertainty lingered 
at high levels over the entire period. At the 
same time, monetary and fiscal policy support 
measures on both sides of the Atlantic stabil -
ised expectations. Faced with a lower inflation 
forecast, the Governing Council of the ECB an -
nounced at the beginning of June, amongst 
other things, that the envelope for the pan -
demic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) 
would be increased by €600 billion. In add -
ition, at the end of July, the EU Heads of State 
or Government agreed on a €750 billion recov -
ery fund to deal with the economic impact of 
the coronavirus pandemic (see the box on 
pp. 78 ff.). In the United States, the Federal Re -
serve reaffirmed its expansionary monetary pol -
icy stance and the continuation of its market 
stabilisation programmes, but refrained from 
taking additional monetary policy measures. 
With the above factors at play, government 
bond yields fluctuated markedly. In various 
euro area countries with tight public finances, 
they decreased significantly on balance. Fur -
thermore, interest spreads between corporate 
bonds and benchmark bonds narrowed. Equity 
markets saw a continuation of the recovery ob -
served since the end of March, even though 
uncertainty about future stock market develop -
ments remains heightened compared with pre -
vious years. An overall resurgence in investors’ 
risk appetite was the main factor driving the 
recovery in stocks. Foreign exchange markets 
once again saw marked shifts in exchange 
rates between individual currencies, which 
partly reflected the differing infection rates in 
the respective economies. Measured as a 
weighted average against the currencies of 19 Huge declines 
in economic 
output in large 
parts of the 
world
But lowest point 
of crisis prob -
ably already 
overUncertainty 
about economic 
fallout of pan -
demic hangs 
over financial 
marketsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
7

major trading partners, the euro appreciated by 
around 2½% on balance compared with the 
end of the first quarter of 2020.
In view of a significant downward revision to 
the expected path of inflation, the Governing 
Council of the ECB decided not only to increase 
the total volume of the PEPP but also to extend 
the horizon for net purchases under the pro -
gramme to at least the end of June 2021. It 
also decided to reinvest the maturing principal 
payments from securities purchased under this 
programme until at least the end of 2022. The 
Governing Council left the asset purchase pro -
gramme (APP) and the Eurosystem’s key inter -
est rates unchanged, however. Therefore, the 
main refinancing rate remains at 0%, while the 
interest rates on the marginal lending facility 
and the deposit facility are 0.25% and -0.5%, 
respectively.
On 24 June 2020, the fourth operation of the 
third series of targeted longer- term refinancing 
operations (TLTRO- III) was settled, and saw 
banks take up a total of €1,308.4 billion. The 
extremely favourable interest rate of up to -1% 
between June 2020 and June 2021, which is 
below the Eurosystem’s deposit facility rate, is 
likely to have been a key reason for the very 
strong demand.
Monetary developments in the second quarter 
of 2020 were also largely shaped by the 
coronavirus pandemic and the measures taken 
to contain it. There was strong growth in over -
night deposits, in particular, which meant that 
the steep increase in the broad monetary ag -
gregate M3 observed in the previous quarter 
continued into the reporting period. By the end 
of June, the annual growth rate of M3 had 
risen to 9.2%, a level last seen in the summer 
of 2008.
As for the counterparts, monetary growth in 
the second quarter was driven almost exclu -
sively by loans to residents. The largest contri -
bution was made by loans to the private sector, 
followed by securitised lending to government. The increases in these two positions were also 
closely linked to the effects of the coronavirus 
pandemic. The significantly expanded PEPP led 
to higher purchases of government bonds by 
the Eurosystem, and commercial banks, too, 
added substantially to their holdings of govern -
ment bonds in the second quarter on balance. 
The strong growth in lending was mainly attrib -
utable to loans to non- financial corporations, 
which are likely to have been stimulated by the 
various government support programmes and 
emergency measures taken by governments to 
prop up the corporate sector during the crisis. 
In contrast to this, loans to households, which 
until early 2020 had been on a stable upward 
path, weakened significantly, particularly in the 
countries that were especially affected by the 
pandemic.
The coronavirus pandemic caused a historic de -
cline in economic output in Germany, too. The 
Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate indi -
cated that real gross domestic product (GDP) in 
the second quarter of 2020 was just over one- 
tenth (-10.1%) down, after seasonal and calen -
dar adjustment, on what had already been a 
significantly depressed previous quarter. The 
decline in economic activity was unpreced -
ented not just in terms of its depth, but also for 
the speed at which it unfolded. May, however, 
saw an economic recovery set in after the first 
steps were taken to relax the general social dis -
tancing requirements.
The coronavirus crisis took its toll on large parts 
of the German economy. Second- quarter real 
value added is once again expected to have 
contracted more strongly in the manufacturing 
sector than it did in the services sector as a 
whole. That said, the picture was probably 
rather  mixed in the individual services sectors. 
Retail sales, for one, moved more or less side -
ways overall, benefiting in part from the uptick 
in  household spending on food as consider -
able restrictions were applied to food and bev -
erage service activities. By contrast, economic 
activity shrank dramatically in accommodation 
services, which bore the brunt of the general Monetary 
 policy: PEPP 
increased and 
extended
TLTRO- III sees 
very strong 
demand
Monetary devel -
opments shaped 
by coronavirus 
pandemic: 
strong increase 
in overnight 
deposits and …
… brisk growth 
in loans, 
particularly  to 
non- financial 
corporations 
and governmentGerman 
 economy sees 
historic slump 
in Q2
Coronavirus 
 crisis affects 
large parts 
of German 
economyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
8

social distancing requirements. Other 
consumption- related services such as travel 
agency activities, other recreational and cul -
tural activities and passenger transport con -
tinued to be severely affected by the crisis as 
well. Consequently, private consumption con -
tracted sharply on the demand side. The eco -
nomic fallout of the pandemic outside Ger -
many also took its toll on exports. Industrial 
investment in machinery and equipment prob -
ably saw an even steeper decline amidst uncer -
tainty surrounding global infection rates and 
the subdued outlook for growth. Construction 
investment, on the other hand, held up fairly 
well, contracting by less than the average rate 
overall. Government consumption expanded as 
extensive measures were rolled out to combat 
the pandemic, thereby boosting economic ac -
tivity.
German banks’ lending to the domestic private 
sector, which had been remarkably strong in 
the previous quarter, given the onset of the 
coronavirus crisis, did not continue at the same 
pace in the second quarter of 2020. Net lend -
ing, however, increased at roughly pre-outbreak 
rates. The largest contribution once again came 
from loans to households for house purchase, 
which expanded at a pace that was slightly 
higher still overall, despite showing signs of 
flagging towards the end of the quarter. Loans 
to non- financial corporations likewise saw 
strong inflows in the quarter under review on 
the back of extensive assistance loans from the 
Federal Government as well as additional finan -
cial support from state governments, which en -
terprises could apply for via their house banks. 
Respondents to the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) 
reported that credit standards and credit condi -
tions were tightened across all segments on 
balance.
The coronavirus crisis took a huge toll on the 
labour market in the spring, eating into em -
ployment over the course of the reporting 
quarter and causing unemployment to balloon. 
Measured against the depth of the economic 
slump, though, these adjustments were fairly modest. This is primarily because of the large- 
scale reductions made to the working hours of 
people still in employment. Widespread take-  
up of short- time work schemes brought stabil -
ity to both employment levels and incomes. 
Initial estimates by the Federal Employment 
Agency indicate that the number of people 
who had enrolled in short- time work schemes 
for economic reasons in May was 6.7 million. 
This equates to one in five employees subject 
to social security contributions – an unpreced -
ented figure in the history of the Federal Re -
public of Germany. As activity began to recover 
in May, however, the rise in unemployment and 
drop in employment eased significantly to -
wards the end of the reporting period. The la -
bour market still has not made a full recovery, 
though. Negotiated wage growth in the 
second quarter was again weaker than in the 
previous quarter, largely because of the social 
partners’ response to the ongoing pandemic 
and its impact on the economy.
In June, the Minimum Wage Commission 
unanimously recommended that the Federal 
Government significantly increase the statutory 
general minimum wage, raising it in four steps 
between January 2021 and July 2022 by a total 
of €1.10, or 11.8%, to €10.45 per hour. The 
large number of steps and the size of the in -
creases deviate from the Commission’s former 
calculation method, which was very much 
guided by collective wage developments. It re -
mains to be seen how the significant increase 
will impact on future wage negotiations and 
the employment situation for low- skilled work -
ers, particularly in eastern Germany, where the 
higher minimum wage will affect a much larger 
proportion of employees than in western Ger -
many.
The inflation rate was dampened in the second 
quarter mainly by falling energy prices. In sea -
sonally adjusted terms, consumer prices as 
measured by the Harmonised Index of Con -
sumer Prices (HICP) remained more or less un -
changed after rising by 0.3% in the first quarter 
of 2020. Developments by category of goods Fresh uptick in 
German banks’ 
loans to domes -
tic private sector
Significant 
adverse effects 
spill over to 
labour marketMinimum wage 
to increase 
gradually to 
€10.45 per hour 
in July 2022
Inflation rate 
dampened  
in Q2 mainly 
by energyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
9

exhibited two divergent trends. On the one 
hand, energy prices declined significantly 
amidst a sharp drop in crude oil prices in the 
second quarter. Inflation for non- energy indus -
trial goods also tailed off somewhat. On the 
other hand, there was another considerable in -
crease in food prices, while services prices also 
rebounded distinctly. The latter had been heav -
ily affected by the measures taken to contain 
the pandemic. Numerous services even had to 
be suspended temporarily, meaning that in 
some cases, particularly for these consumption 
segments, prices had to be estimated. How -
ever, according to the Federal Statistical Office, 
the quality of the HICP data was assured over -
all. Quarter- on- quarter inflation slowed to 
0.7%, down from 1.5% at the beginning of the 
year. By contrast, core inflation excluding food 
and energy declined only slightly, from 1.3% to 
1.1%.
The temporary cut in VAT rates was clearly re -
flected in consumer prices in July. Core inflation 
shrank from 1.1% to 0.7%, while the headline 
rate decreased even more sharply, dropping 
from the previous month’s 0.8% to 0.0%. Soft -
ening energy prices also played a role in this 
decline. The temporary VAT cut will probably 
push inflation rates into negative territory as 
the second half of 2020 progresses. VAT rates 
are scheduled to be reinstated at their previous 
levels in January 2021, however, which is ex -
pected to return inflation rates to (clearly) posi -
tive ground.
The significant slump in the first half-  year will 
probably give way to very strong growth in the 
German economy in the third quarter. From to -
day’s perspective, the clear and broad- based 
recovery in aggregate output that began right 
after the slump bottomed out in April looks set 
to continue. The recovery in industrial activity is 
likely to stimulate industrial investment in ma -
chinery and equipment. Private consumption is 
likewise expected to contribute robustly to the 
overall recovery, primarily because the 
pandemic- related restrictions have been eased 
considerably and infection rates appear to be largely under control. Not just that: the situ -
ation in the labour market has also stabilised 
somewhat recently. An added boost will be 
provided by fiscal policy measures, in particular 
the temporary VAT cut adopted as part of the 
recent economic stimulus package, which will 
buoy consumers’ mood for spending as well as 
their incomes. However, although the econ -
omy is making up ground, activity levels will re -
main well short of pre- crisis levels in the third 
quarter and beyond, not least because the 
pandemic still has not been contained in many 
countries around the world, which is hurting 
German exports. Another factor to consider is 
the acute uncertainty surrounding infection 
rates, which is dampening the willingness of 
enterprises in Germany and abroad to invest. 
This is likely to impede a full- blown recovery in 
demand for German industrial products. Eco -
nomic activity will also remain constrained in a 
number of domestic services sectors until ef -
fective medical treatment such as a vaccine be -
comes available.
German public finances have been making a 
significant contribution to stabilising the econ -
omy during the coronavirus crisis. Discretionary 
fiscal policy measures have been taken, and 
automatic stabilisers have been implemented 
via the existing social security and transfer sys -
tem without any active involvement on the part 
of fiscal policymakers. Tax revenue has fallen, 
whilst expenditure has not only continued, but 
has been pushed significantly higher in some 
cases – such as with the unemployment insur -
ance scheme – by the crisis. In addition, Ger -
many is heavily involved in the EU’s assistance 
and development programmes.
This contribution to stabilising the economy is 
leaving its mark on public finances. For one 
thing, the previous surplus for this year will 
switch to a heavy deficit. As things currently 
stand, this could be somewhere in the region 
of 7% of GDP . The expansionary fiscal stance, 
especially the measures prompted by the pan -
demic, is responsible for around two- thirds of 
the rise in the deficit, while the rest can be at -July inflation 
rate significantly 
depressed 
by VAT cut
German econ -
omy may be 
on the road to 
recovery in Q3, 
but economic 
slack is still 
 significantPublic finances 
stabilising the 
economy 
 significantly …
… while produ -
cing a high 
 deficit and 
sharply 
 rising debtDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
10

tributed to the automatic stabilisers. This year 
will probably see the debt ratio heading to -
wards 75%. Besides the deficit, this is also due 
to the loans and capital assistance granted to 
enterprises as well as falling nominal GDP 
growth (in the ratio’s denominator).
Next year will probably see the deficit shrink 
again as a large number of stabilisation meas -
ures are currently expected to come to an end. 
That said, public finances will continue to pro -
vide considerable support for economic activity 
and incomes. The solidarity surcharge is set to 
be lowered, for example, and child benefit is 
scheduled to rise. Compared with the current 
year, economic activity is likely to ease the bur -
den on public finances only slightly (through 
the automatic stabilisers). Wages and private 
consumption, for instance, are expected to re -
cover only slowly.
In June, the Federal budget saw the approval of 
what was already the second supplementary 
budget and a further instance of the escape 
clause being invoked. The revised Federal 
budget will see net borrowing rise sharply to 
almost €220 billion, in what represents an even 
more substantial breach of the standard thresh -
old under the debt brake by a revised amount 
of almost €120 billion in total. Note that while 
the escape clause allows the standard thresh -
old to be exceeded for a time, the amount ex -
ceeding that threshold needs to be repaid at 
some point in the future. In general, the debt 
brake enables additional cyclical or crisis- related 
debt to be raised. However, provisions such as 
the control account and the repayment obliga -
tions are designed to prevent such excessive 
levels of debt from becoming entrenched.
It is appropriate for the fiscal policy stance to 
be highly expansionary in the current crisis. 
Mounting deficits and debt are warranted for 
combatting the pandemic and its fallout and 
countering any lasting damage to the econ -
omy. This is why the EU fiscal rules, like the debt brake, permit the automatic stabilisers to 
take effect and deliver a major stabilising fiscal 
stimulus. The economic costs associated with 
the pandemic and the need for countermeas -
ures are likely to persist beyond 2020, so it 
would seem premature to return to the stand -
ard rules as early as next year and attempt to 
comply with the limits they set. On the con -
trary: it might actually make sense to roll out 
further stabilisation measures if the economic 
situation shows no major signs of improving 
over time. If new measures are introduced, 
though, these would need to be of a tempor -
ary nature, since this would ensure that the re -
sulting deficits are also temporary and that 
(much like the automatic stabilisers) they will 
recede automatically over time.
Mounting general government debt in Ger -
many is manageable from today’s perspective, 
but it is important not to lose sight of the risks 
and future challenges. Fiscal policy has been 
sound in recent years, not least thanks to the 
debt brake. This is why public finances are not 
in a critical position and enjoy a high level of 
confidence, despite the extensive burdens 
which the crisis has placed on the budget, as 
seen not least in interest rates for German 
debt, which are negative all the way up to long 
maturities. Nonetheless, fiscal policymakers 
should not count on interest rates being this 
low indefinitely, nor can it be ruled out that the 
pandemic will push the economy onto a lower 
growth path. This would also place a structural 
strain on public finances. Demographic change 
is likely to pose challenges as well, and it is also 
important to keep an eye on and service the 
joint debt that has now been agreed upon at 
the European level. If the economic recovery 
does take hold, it will therefore be crucial to 
restore a sound fiscal position. The standard 
budgetary rules would then need to be re -
instated, not least in order to uphold confi -
dence in public finances. This applies not just to 
Germany, but to other euro area Member 
States as well.Public finances 
to remain sup -
portive in 2021, 
too
Federal budget 
in crisis mode
Further fiscal 
stabilisation 
appropriate for 
the time beingReturn to stand -
ard budget rules 
if recovery takes 
holdDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
11

Global and European setting
Global economic 
 developments
Within the space of just a few weeks in the first 
half of 2020, the coronavirus pandemic brought 
economic output to its knees in almost all parts 
of the world, throttling activity to a far greater 
extent even than the global financial and eco -
nomic crisis of 2008-09. Downturns were par -
ticularly severe in countries whose govern -
ments had felt impelled to take very far-  
reaching measures to contain the spread of the 
infection or kept restrictions in place for a pro -
tracted period. This was true of the United 
Kingdom, in particular, where real gross do -
mestic product (GDP) fell by one- fifth in the 
second quarter compared with the already de -
pressed level recorded in the previous quarter. 
Contractions were somewhat less pronounced 
in the euro area, in the United States and prob -ably also in Japan. Most emerging market 
economies suffered substantial declines as 
well. One bright spot was the Chinese econ -
omy, which in the second quarter had already 
recouped the heavy losses from the beginning 
of the year.
When it became clear how severely many 
economies would be affected by the pandemic, 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) lowered 
its forecasts again in June. It now expects 
global GDP (calculated at purchasing power 
parity exchange rates) to decline by almost 5% 
in the current year before then returning to its 
pre- crisis level next year. However, this rebound 
would be due mainly to the rapid recovery of 
the Chinese economy, with losses outside 
China remaining considerable.1
However, the surprisingly good economic data 
coming out of some countries in the past few 
weeks and various political decisions suggest 
that the IMF’s outlook, at least for the short 
term, is a little overly pessimistic.2 Starting at 
the end of April, the relaxation of containment 
measures ushered in a certain degree of nor -
malisation in many countries. The impact of 
these steps can be seen, amongst other things, 
in mobility behaviour. In both industrial and 
emerging market economies, many people re -
turned to their workplaces and spent more 
time at retail establishments, restaurants and 
recreational facilities.3 Consumption of goods 
in a number of countries had even returned to 
pre- crisis levels by the end of the second quar -
ter. Catch- up and switching effects are likely to Huge declines in 
economic out -
put in large 
parts of the 
world …
… led IMF to 
revise global 
economic out -
look further 
downwards
But lowest point 
of crisis prob -
ably already 
passedReal GDP in selected major economies
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Bureau of Stat-
istics  of  China,  Eurostat,  Office  for  National  Statistics  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20859095100Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
859095100
7580859095100
Euro areaChina
7580859095100
1 See International Monetary Fund (2020a).
2 Even the IMF staff seem to have revised their June 
assessment somewhat at this point. At least for the United 
States, they now expect GDP to decline by 6½% this year, 
compared with -8% previously. See International Monetary 
Fund (2020b).
3 Google location data taken from mobile devices suggest 
that, in the first week of August, the time spent at retail 
establishments, restaurants and recreational facilities 
worldwide was still around 18% lower than at the start of 
the year, following a decline of around 55% in mid-  April.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
12

have played a role in this, as are government 
support measures, which, particularly in indus -
trial countries, offset a significant portion of 
direct income losses. New recovery packages, 
such as the one recently adopted in the Euro -
pean Union, are likely to provide a further 
boost to the economic recovery.
So far, industry and world trade have been 
slower to recover. Data from the CPB Nether -
lands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis show 
that global industrial production increased only 
marginally in May after being hit by severe 
slumps since the start of the year. This was due 
primarily to deep production cuts by major oil 
exporters. Other regions experienced an exten -
sive revival of industry.4 At the end of the quar -
ter, a further recovery was on the horizon, sup -
ported not least by production being ramped 
up in the automotive sector. Against this back -
drop, goods exports also picked up again in 
many countries. However, global industrial pro -
duction and world trade are likely to have con -
tinued to fall far short of pre- crisis levels.
Continued restrictions placed the greatest 
strain on the services sectors such as food ser -
vices and the events industry, in which it is dif -
ficult to enforce social distancing requirements, 
as well as on international tourism and eco -
nomic sectors dependent on it. Air traffic has 
been recording marked growth again for sev -
eral months now. However, the July figures 
were still just over one- third lower than pre-  
crisis levels. Given how long these restrictions 
have been in place and the uncertain outlook 
for the future, longer-  term damage might be 
an issue, especially for these sectors, e.g. in the 
form of a prolonged period of subdued invest -
ment or rising numbers of corporate insolven -
cies, which will then have a greater or lesser 
impact on other sectors of the economy.
The global economic recovery has therefore al -
ready begun, and business surveys indicate that 
this upward movement will continue. Given the 
depth of the slump, however, a return to nor -
mal activity levels is still a long way off. There is also a high risk of setbacks in view of, for in -
stance, the still almost unbridled growth in in -
fection rates in many emerging market econ -
omies and the resurgence of the pandemic in 
some industrial countries, especially in the 
United States.
As the global economy strengthened, com -
modity prices also recovered a good deal from 
May onwards. In addition to the prices of in -
dustrial commodities, crude oil prices rose, in 
particular. One of the main reasons for this was 
the lifting of mobility restrictions. This led to a 
marked upturn in energy demand. This was es -
pecially the case in China, where, following a 
considerable decline in the first quarter, crude Industry and 
world trade 
slow to recover
Services sectors 
continued to lag 
far behind
Start of recov -
ery, but risks 
exceptionally 
highCommodity 
prices recovered 
markedly from 
lows recorded 
at end-  AprilGlobal economic indicators*
Sources:  CPB,  Flightradar24,  national  data  and  Bundesbank 
calculations. * Groups of countries vary due to differences in 
data availability.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND J FMAM J J
2019 2020859095100December 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
859095100
30406080100Real retail sales
Industrial production
Reduced scale
Air traffic
4 Excluding Eastern Europe and Africa including the Middle 
East, the country groups to which the majority of oil 
producers complying with the agreed production cuts 
belong, global industrial production increased by 3% in 
May compared with the previous month. However, even 
going by this definition of other regions, production was 
still down by almost 12% compared with the level recorded 
at the end of 2019.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
13

oil consumption in the second quarter was al -
ready back above the previous year’s level. Oil 
prices were also propped up by supply- side ad -
justments. OPEC countries and their partners 
took the decision to significantly cut produc -
tion between May and July and for the most 
part subsequently stuck to the agreement. 
Other major oil- producing countries, such as 
the United States and Canada, also made fur -
ther significant reductions to their output. The 
price of a barrel of Brent crude oil, which had 
dropped below US$20 at one point around the 
end of April, had rebounded to around US$44 
as this report went to press. However, that still 
leaves prices almost 35% below the level re -
corded at the start of the year. Futures suggest 
only minor price increases in the months to 
come.
Following the decline in commodity prices, en -
ergy initially became considerably cheaper at 
the consumer level, thereby dampening global 
inflation. In industrial countries, the year- on- year increase in consumer prices decreased 
from 1.2% in March to 0.1% in May. In the 
aftermath of rising oil prices, the rate went 
back up to 0.6% in June. At the same time, 
however, the core inflation rate excluding en -
ergy and food dipped again slightly to 1%.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In China, where the pandemic first emerged, 
economic output had already bottomed out at 
the end of the first quarter. Since then, it has 
recovered surprisingly strongly. The official esti -
mate indicates that, having fallen by 6.8% in 
the first quarter, real GDP was already up by 
3.2% in the second quarter compared with the 
same period in 2019. The fact that infection 
rates appear to have been effectively brought 
under control prior to this was most likely key 
to the rapid recovery. Following disruptions in 
February as a result of the containment meas -
ures, industrial production was ramped up par -
ticularly strongly in recent months. This was 
boosted by strong foreign demand for personal 
protective equipment (see the box on pp. 15f.). 
In addition, once domestic car sales had re -
turned to normal, motor vehicle production 
rose sharply.
Despite the all in all fairly rapid improvement, 
the Chinese economy is still far from returning 
to normal. Activity in a number of sectors, es -
pecially services, remained subdued in the 
second quarter. Although the situation on the 
labour market improved somewhat, the un -
employment rate remained at a markedly ele -
vated level until the end of the period under 
review. Against this backdrop, it is not surpris -
ing that consumer price inflation decreased 
across the board in recent months. On average 
for the months from April to June, the core in -
flation rate excluding energy and food de -
creased to 1.0%, its lowest level since the start 
of 2010. The headline inflation rate fell even 
more sharply, to 2.7%.Consumer price 
inflation in 
industrial coun -
tries perceptibly 
subduedAlready very 
strong economic 
recovery 
observed in 
China, …
… but impact 
of the crisis 
remains clearly 
visibleWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and
food and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 7 August 2020, or 1 to 13 August 2020 for 
crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank15 2016 2017 2018 2019 202025304050607080Monthly averages, log scale
8090100110120130140
80901001101202015 = 100, US dollar basisCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beveragesIndustrial commoditiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
14

China’s foreign trade withstanding the global economic 
 crisis
The pandemic has also left a deep imprint 
on world trade in recent months. According 
to calculations by the CPB Netherlands Bur-
eau for Economic Policy Analysis, global 
trade in goods was down in April- May 2020 
by just over one- sixth on the year. Almost 
all major economies saw their foreign trade 
take a severe hit. The important exception 
was China, where second- quarter goods 
exports revenues in US dollar terms were at 
a similar level to the same period of the pre-
vious year. In July, exports were even up by 
7% in terms of value over the same period 
12 months earlier. One reason for this com-
paratively good performance is likely to 
have been orders from the beginning of the 
year, which, owing to the lockdown meas-
ures imposed at the time and the associ-
ated production cutbacks, could not be 
processed until later.1 However, such catch- 
up effects alone cannot explain China’s ro-
bust export performance in recent months.
Instead, China’s export sector benefi  ted sig-
nifi  cantly from strong additional demand 
for certain products which were particularly 
sought after in connection with the pan-
demic. These included computers and other 
IT equipment, exports of which generated 
nearly one- quarter more revenue on the 
year in the second quarter. In this context, 
the global transitioning of numerous em-
ployees to working from home is likely to 
have created an additional need for the ne-
cessary technology. Exports of personal pro-tective equipment rose even more strongly 
than those of IT products. In particular, de-
liveries of face masks, which had previously 
played a wholly negligible role in Chinese 
exports, surged. Between April and June, 
exports in the category of goods which in-
cludes masks alongside other special textile 
products amounted to US$31 billion, com-
pared with just US$1.7 billion a year earlier.2 
These products thus accounted for a size-
able 5% of total Chinese export revenues 
during that period.
Despite the considerable domestic eco-
nomic recovery and healthy export activity, 
Chinese imports did not, at fi  rst glance, 
hold up quite as well in the second quarter. 
In terms of value (denominated in US dol-
lars), they were down by just under one- 
tenth from the previous year’s level. How-
ever, the slump in commodity prices must 
also be taken into account. If only manufac-
turing goods are considered, the shortfall 
amounted to just 5%. Imports of machin-
ery, electronics and transport equipment 
even nearly maintained their previous year’s 
level.
Chinese foreign trade*
Sources: China’s General Administration of Customs, CPB and 
Bundesbank calculations. * Unadjusted figures denominated in 
US dollars. 1 Price adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020808590951001051102019 = 100, quarterly, seasonally adjusted, log scale
80859095100105
Apr.-
MayMemo item
Global goods trade1Goods exportsGoods imports
1 At the beginning of February, the authorities in large 
parts of the country extended the plant shutdowns be-
yond the Chinese Lunar New Year holiday. The subse-
quent resumption of production was very arduous. 
Against this backdrop, exports of goods fell by two- 
fi  fths in February.
2 Goods assigned the HS code 6307 (Other made- up 
articles, including dress patterns).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
15

The Indian economy suffered a particularly 
deep slump in recent months. Between the end 
of March and the start of May, the government 
imposed a strict lockdown, which had a severe 
impact on economic life. Industrial production 
in April fell by almost 60% on the year. Despite 
the measures taken, it was not possible to con -
tain the spread of the virus. Nevertheless, the 
government began to ease restrictions in May 
and June in view of the economic emergency. 
The economy has recovered somewhat since 
then. However, the increasing incidence rate 
throughout the reporting period is likely to hin -
der a rapid and widespread return to normal 
activity levels. India’s central bank cut its policy 
rate to 4.0% in May, but has since refrained 
from further monetary policy easing. This was 
also due to the rather sharp rise in prices. In the 
second quarter, the year- on- year rate of the 
consumer price index (CPI) stood at 6.5%.
The Brazilian economy also remains firmly in 
the grips of the pandemic. The marked decline in economic activity already seen at the end of 
the first quarter intensified considerably again 
in April. Private consumption, in particular, 
plummeted. A number of indicators suggest 
that the economic slump bottomed out at mid- 
quarter. Economic recovery was rather muted, 
though, probably in part due to the virus hith -
erto spreading unchecked. Overall, real GDP 
might have been around 10% lower in the 
second quarter than one year earlier. Consumer 
price inflation sank to 2.1% on the year in the 
second quarter, Brazil’s lowest inflation rate in 
more than 20 years. Following significant cuts 
in May and June, the country’s central bank 
lowered its policy rate further to 2%.
According to initial estimates published by Rus -
sia’s Federal State Statistics Service, economic 
output in Russia fell by 8.5% on the year in the 
past quarter. This was due chiefly to the fact 
that the government had ordered many busi -
nesses to shut down from the end of March to 
mid- May to contain the spread of the infection. Indian economy 
plunged into 
deep crisis as 
a result of 
pandemic Massive eco -
nomic slumps 
also seen in 
Brazil  …
… and RussiaThe essentially robust Chinese demand for 
imports has also proved to be a valuable 
support for German exporters in recent 
months. Compared with the previous year, 
revenue from goods exports to China in 
euro terms was down by only 4% in the second quarter. The losses were thus much 
smaller than in business with other trading 
partners. On the import side, the discrep-
ancy between imports from China and 
those from other countries was even 
greater. While total German imports fell 
sharply, German imports from China rose by 
18% on the year in terms of value. The 
enormous demand for masks and other 
medical protective equipment was a major 
factor. Owing to diverging export and im-
port trends, the German trade defi  cit with 
China expanded to just under €10 billion in 
the second quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms – the highest fi  gure ever measured. 
However, the defi  cit is likely to decline again 
going forward as imports from China are 
expected to return to normal.German imports of goods from China
Sources: Eurostat‘s COMEXT database, Federal Statistical Office 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Defined  in  accordance  with 
the dataset “EU trade since 2015 of COVID-19 medical sup-
plies”.
Deutsche Bundesbank05101520€ billion, two-month totals
Apr.-May
2020Apr.-May
2019All other
goodsMedical supplies
including masks1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
16

In addition, lower oil prices and the production 
cuts agreed with OPEC producers dampened 
economic activity. Short-  term indicators sug -
gest that the economy moved onto a recovery 
path following the easing of containment 
measures. However, activity levels still remained 
well short of pre- crisis levels, with retail sales in 
June still just under 8% below the previous 
year’s level after price adjustment. Consumer 
price inflation remained relatively low in the 
second quarter, at 3.1%. Against this backdrop, 
starting in March, the Russian central bank cut 
its policy rate in three steps by a total of 175 
basis points to 4.25% at the end of the report -
ing period.
United States
The US economy plunged into a severe 
pandemic- induced crisis in the first half of the 
year. According to the first official estimate, 
real GDP contracted by almost 10% after sea -
sonal adjustment in the second quarter com -
pared with the preceding quarter, in which it 
had already fallen by 1¼%. This was chiefly at -
tributable to the strict containment measures, 
such as restrictions on movement and business 
closures, as well as voluntary behavioural ad -
justments. All of this weighed particularly heav -
ily on the usually fairly steady private services 
consumption.5 However, investment in private 
housing construction and trade and industry 
was also down considerably. Exports even fell 
by almost one-  quarter after price adjustment. 
Alongside the export- oriented industrial sector, 
the tourism sector suffered heavily from the 
slump in foreign business. International travel 
restrictions also left a deep imprint on the im -
port side. The only reason why the decline in 
imports was not as sharp overall was because 
supplies from China rose substantially as its 
economy reopened.
By contrast, public sector demand rose slightly 
in the second quarter. This was mainly due to 
high government expenditure on services re -
lated to the implementation of government support measures.6 The bulk of the assistance 
measures adopted by the government, such as 
unemployment benefits and one- off payments, 
were aimed at cushioning households’ losses in 
earnings. This led to a sharp rise in households’ 
disposable income in the second quarter of just 
over 9% and – owing to depressed consump -
tion expenditure – to an increase in the saving 
ratio from 9.5% in the first quarter to almost 
26%.
The remarkably sharp quarter- on- quarter de -
cline in economic output should not detract 
from the fact that the US economy already left 
the trough of the crisis behind in May. Since 
then, almost all economic indicators, chiefly 
private consumption of goods, have been 
clearly pointing upwards again. The situation in 
the labour market also improved to some ex -
tent. In July, the unemployment rate fell to 
10.2%, 4.5 percentage points below its all- time 
high from April. However, the gap to its pre-  
crisis level is still considerable. Against this Dramatic slump 
in GDP in Q2
Fiscal policy pro -
viding bolstering 
effectRecovery prob -
ably faltering 
recentlyRestaurant visits in the United States
Source: OpenTable.
Deutsche BundesbankFeb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug.
2020100806040200
–––––Year-on-year percentage change, 7-day moving averages
5 In the second quarter alone, expenditure in this area fell 
by more than 13% on the quarter after price adjustment, 
after a decline of 2½% had already been recorded in the 
first quarter. In the previous 73 years, the sharpest decline 
had amounted to just -¾%.
6 Government expenditure on banking services related to 
the processing and administration of loan applications 
under the Paycheck Protection Program increased by 
around US$15 billion in the second quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
17

backdrop, it is worrying that the economic re -
covery appears to have been faltering in recent 
weeks. This is probably mainly due to the re -
newed sharp rise in new infections since mid-  
June. As a result, fear of contagion seems to be 
prompting many US residents to adopt more 
cautious consumption behaviour.7 In addition, 
the majority of US states have now suspended 
the planned easing of containment measures 
or even imposed new restrictions. These are 
aimed, in particular, at the restaurant industry 
and other service sectors with high contact 
risks. Especially those sectors that were particu -
larly hard hit by the pandemic are therefore ini -
tially unlikely to benefit from the prospective 
new fiscal demand impulses.8 The US central 
bank maintained its highly accommodative 
stance during the period under review, also 
owing to subdued consumer price inflation.
Japan
In Japan, the pandemic has so far taken a con -
siderably milder course than in other industrial 
countries. Nevertheless, according to the avail -
able indicators, economic output decreased 
further in the second quarter. This exacerbated 
the economic downturn, which had already 
begun in Japan at the end of 2019 with the in -
crease in VAT. Alongside the slump in domestic 
demand, weak foreign business weighed on 
the economy. The recession also took a toll on 
the labour market. The unemployment rate 
rose markedly and the number of persons on 
furlough climbed dramatically in the meantime. 
To support the economy, the Japanese govern -
ment adopted a comprehensive economic 
stimulus package, which includes direct assis -
tance and loans for enterprises as well as a 
one- off payment to every resident. Against this 
backdrop, too, the economy recovered to 
some degree at the turn of the quarter. How -
ever, the number of new infections has risen 
considerably in recent weeks, significantly ex -
ceeding the record highs from April. This is 
likely to hold back the economic recovery in 
the near future. The core inflation rate –  as measured by the year- on- year rate of the CPI 
excluding energy and food – was only margin -
ally positive in June at 0.1%. Against this back -
drop, the Japanese central bank maintained its 
highly accommodative policy stance.
United Kingdom
In no other advanced economy did economic 
output fall as sharply in the second quarter as it 
did in the United Kingdom.9 According to the 
first official estimate, real GDP decreased by a 
seasonally adjusted 20½% compared with the 
previous period. This was certainly also due to 
the fact that sweeping measures, which the 
government had not implemented until at a 
late stage compared with other countries, were 
in force for a longer period of time. Against the 
backdrop of restrictions on movement and 
business closures, economic activity in the 
hotel and restaurant sector virtually came to a 
standstill. Other services, such as culture and 
entertainment, education and health, were 
also severely affected. In addition, there were 
severe slumps in the construction and manu -
facturing sectors. The labour market situation 
deteriorated dramatically. Although the un -
employment rate remained unchanged in the 
second quarter at 3.9%, this figure does not 
take into account the almost 10 million em -
ployees on furlough who received continued 
wage payments from the government. At the 
same time, the upward pressure on prices 
eased significantly. In June, the year- on- year 
rate of the CPI stood at just 0.6%, mainly due 
to lower energy prices. The UK economy is 
likely to have picked up speed again in the third 
quarter, with a far- reaching easing of contain -Sharper decline 
in economic 
outputEconomy suffer -
ing particularly 
severe slump by 
international 
standards
7 The significance of voluntary behavioural adjustments 
was already evident in the early stages of the pandemic: in 
March of this year, high-  frequency indicators for mobility 
and spending behaviour fell in many places even before 
containment measures were introduced. In addition, the 
recovery began even before the easing of restrictions. See 
Chen et al. (2020).
8 The US Congress was negotiating a new fiscal package 
of at least 5% of GDP as this report went to press.
9 Looking at the first half of the year as a whole, the 
cumulative decline in GDP in Spain was almost as sharp.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
18

ment measures since the beginning of July as 
well as the fairly low number of new infections 
recorded recently. However, uncertainty with 
regard to the further course of the pandemic is 
expected to weigh on economic growth. More -
over, the uncertain outlook for future economic 
relations with the European Union is unsettling. 
The Bank of England recently saw downside 
risks to economic development, but did not 
ease its monetary policy stance any further.
Poland
Poland had managed to contain the pandemic 
by taking rigorous measures at an early stage. 
However, these measures weighed markedly 
on economic activity, which contracted by 
8.9% in the second quarter compared with the 
previous quarter. This brought an abrupt end to 
the previously buoyant upswing, as was the 
case in the other central and eastern European 
EU Member States (see the box on pp. 22 ff.). 
During the second quarter, however, restric -
tions were eased and aggregate economic ac -
tivity recovered markedly, with retail sales and 
industrial output climbing robustly in May and 
June, for instance. However, at the end of the 
period under review, they remained signifi -
cantly down on their pre-  crisis levels. Despite 
the sharp contraction in the economy as a 
whole, unemployment increased only slightly. 
This increase was tempered by government 
measures to support enterprises in paying 
wages. Consumer price inflation slowed only a 
little on the year to 3.3% in June. The core in -
flation rate excluding energy and food even in -
creased to 4.1%. Against the backdrop of the 
economic crisis, the Polish central bank never -
theless cut its policy rate by a further 40 basis 
points to 0.1%.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
The euro area economy also had to cope with 
severe downturns as a result of the pandemic. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, season -
ally adjusted real GDP fell by 12.1% in the 
second quarter compared with the preceding 
quarter, in which it had already dropped by 
3.6%.10 The slump was largely due to the 
measures taken from March onwards to con -
tain the coronavirus. In April, the level of activ -
ity was estimated to have been around one-  
quarter below the pre- pandemic level. Eco -
nomic activity recovered as the infection rate 
slowed and restrictions were eased. However, 
the recovery remained incomplete throughout 
the reporting period. An estimated 87% of the 
normal level was reached in May and around 
93% was attained in June.11
Not all economic sectors benefited equally 
from the easing of restrictions. Activity picked 
up substantially again, particularly in areas in 
which earlier strict restrictions were eased. 
These included, for example, parts of the retail 
trade, the sale of motor vehicles, the hotel and 
restaurant sector and also parts of industry. In 
some sectors, especially tourism, restrictions 
were not eased in many places until the end of 
June, while in other areas – especially with re -
gard to large events such as trade fairs – busi -
ness activity is still largely prohibited. Move -
ments of people between EU Member States 
and non- EU countries continue to be subject to 
considerable restrictions, which is affecting 
tourism in particular, but also industry. This is 
making it very difficult, in many cases, to pro -
vide services that have to be performed by em -
ployees on site. All in all, however, supply- side 
constraints are likely to have become less sig -
nificant. Economic activity is now being in -
creasingly encumbered by weak domestic and 
foreign demand. One contributing factor in this 
is that households continue to be cautious. Previously buoy -
ant upswing 
abruptly ended 
by coronavirus 
crisisSteep quarterly 
decline in real 
GDP; partial 
recovery over 
the course of 
the quarter
Eased adminis -
trative restric -
tions; increasing 
demand- side 
burdens
10 According to current calculations, the impairment of 
activity was therefore not quite as strong as the Eurosystem 
staff had assumed in the baseline scenario of the June 
projection. At that time, a decline of 13% had been 
expected. See European Central Bank (2020a).
11 In order to gain an overview of the monthly pattern of 
macroeconomic activity, the quarterly GDP series was 
broken down into monthly data using key economic 
indicators. For details on the methodology, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
19

Other key reasons are likely to be the deterior -
ation in the medium- term growth outlook and 
the considerable increase in uncertainty, which 
are weighing on enterprises’ propensity to in -
vest.12
Out of the expenditure components, private 
consumption was immediately hit hardest by 
the containment measures. Various consump -
tion options were temporarily eliminated or se -
verely hampered. As a result, the saving ratio 
already jumped to almost 17% in seasonally 
adjusted terms in the first quarter, compared 
with around 13% in the preceding quarters. It 
is likely to have remained at an elevated level in 
the second quarter, too. This contrasted with 
very substantial revenue losses in retail trade 
and among service providers. In April, for ex -
ample, seasonally adjusted retail sales were 
down on their pre- pandemic level by around 
one- fifth and the number of new motor vehicle 
registrations was down by roughly three-  
quarters. Following the easing of restrictions, 
retail sales rose steeply until June, probably 
partly owing to catch- up effects. By contrast, 
the passenger car market recovered only par -
tially. Income losses and heightened concerns 
about unemployment are likely to have left a 
mark here.Investment activity, too, suffered a setback in 
the second quarter. In this vein, construction 
activity in some countries was severely re -
stricted during the lockdown. However, it re -
covered rapidly after the containment meas -
ures were eased thanks to the positive orders 
situation. In other Member States, construction 
output was barely affected. Conversely, invest -
ment in machinery and equipment appears to 
have lost considerable momentum. In May, 
too, the industrial sector’s domestic sales of 
capital goods were still down on their pre-  
pandemic level by one- quarter.
Foreign trade was very slow to recover follow -
ing the severe slump in March and April. This is 
especially true of trade with non- euro area 
Member States, whereas intra- trade regained 
its footing somewhat faster. This is consistent 
with the fact that the pandemic recently ap -
peared to be largely under control in the EU, 
while the number of new cases was increasing 
in many parts of the world. Towards the end of 
the quarter, trade with non- euro area Member 
States only reached 85% of the pre- pandemic 
level. The sluggishness in sales was broadly 
spread across regions, with losses in trade with 
the United Kingdom being particularly high. Ex -
ports to China were a notable exception, even 
seeing a quarter- on- quarter rise in the second 
quarter. That said, exports to China had fallen 
considerably in the first quarter as the pan -
demic had broken out earlier there.
Although industrial output picked up again 
after restrictions were lifted – in some Member 
States, all non- essential production had been 
halted temporarily  – and adjustments were 
made to comply with increased hygiene re -
quirements, recovery was still sluggish. Cap -
acity utilisation in the manufacturing sector 
rose by only 4 percentage points to 72% be -
tween April and July, thus remaining well below 
its long-  term average of just over 80%. Con -Sharp drop in 
private con -
sumption; clear 
recovery over 
the course of 
the quarterMassive drop in 
investment
Major strain on 
foreign trade
Slow recovery in 
manufacturingEstimated monthly path for aggregate 
output in the euro area
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from Eurostat.
Deutsche BundesbankOct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June
2019 20207580859095100105Dec. 2019 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted, log scale
Quarterly 
average
Quarter-on-quarter 
percentage change
Month-on-month 
percentage change0 0.4– 0.7– 0.40.5
0.0
– 12.1– 3.67.3
16.4
– 16.9– 10.2Real GDP
12 For more information on the impact of uncertainty on 
investment activity, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016) and 
(2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
20

sumer goods output remained quite robust, 
but the situation of many manufacturers of 
intermediate and capital goods remained poor, 
not least because of their greater dependence 
on global economic developments. The auto -
motive industry, whose output in June reached 
three- quarters of the pre- crisis level, remained 
particularly affected.
A distinction should be made between services 
in those areas which remain subject to signifi -
cant administrative constraints or are avoided 
by consumers for precautionary reasons or due 
to inconvenience, and those in sectors which 
have not been subject to any notable restric -
tions or for which these restrictions have since 
been largely lifted. Among the latter, large 
parts of the bricks- and- mortar retail sector re -
covered and mail order business remained ex -
tremely buoyant. A number of customer- related 
services were also able to resume their activities 
after taking into account hygiene requirements. 
The information and communications sector 
was only marginally affected by the crisis. By 
contrast, activity in the hotel and restaurant 
sector remained considerably depressed. The 
recovery in business- related services, which in -
clude trade fairs and employment services, has 
also been weak so far.
No euro area country was spared the economic 
consequences of the pandemic. There were, 
however, significant differences depending on 
the prevalence of the infection and the nature 
and duration of the measures taken. Spain saw 
the sharpest drop in economic activity, where 
GDP in the second quarter was down by 18½% 
on the quarter. The main reason for this was 
that significant restrictive measures were in 
force for three months until the end of June. As 
a result, international tourism, which accounts 
for a major share of the Spanish economy, 
came to a standstill in the second quarter. The 
number of international visitors in that quarter 
was only around 1% of the corresponding fig -
ure for the previous year. Manufacturing and 
construction also suffered considerably. The cri -
sis had a severe impact on the labour market despite extensive measures to safeguard jobs, 
such as extending short- time working benefits. 
Between March and June, employment fell by 
just under 7% in seasonally adjusted terms.
According to an initial estimate, economic out -
put in France contracted by almost 14% in the 
second quarter. One reason for this was that 
activities outside the services sector, such as in 
the construction sector, were also severely re -
stricted at times. The economy made some 
progress in recovering as restrictions were 
gradually lifted. According to the Banque de 
France, economic activity was 9% below nor -
mal levels in June, after having lagged by 27% 
in April.13 The situation on the labour market 
also saw a slight improvement. The number of 
short- time workers fell considerably in June, 
and the unemployment rate also declined 
somewhat.
At 12½%, the drop in overall economic activity 
in Italy was actually smaller than in Spain and 
France despite the pandemic having prompted 
particularly strict measures very early on. Some 
of these measures were soon eased again, 
however, which is why the immediate drop Large differ -
ences in eco -
nomic recovery 
within services
Particularly 
sharp decline in 
Spain’s GDPGradual recov -
ery in France 
following sharp 
downturn
Sharp decline in 
Italy’s GDP giv -
ing way to fairly 
strong recoveryMeasures of uncertainty 
for the euro area*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from Eurostat, 
Haver Analytics, Global Insight and the Fama/French Data Lib-
rary. * A rise (fall) in the standardised indicators implies an in-
crease (decrease) in uncertainty. Data for the period up to April 
2020 are presented. 1 Based on the volatility of forecast errors 
of a comprehensive economically relevant dataset. 2 Based on 
the volatility of forecast errors of a great number of financial 
market variables.
Deutsche Bundesbank1996 00 05 10 15 2021012345
––+++++Monthly data
Macroeconomic uncertainty1
Financial market uncertainty 2
13 For more information, see Banque de France (2020a). In 
July, the lag behind the normal level narrowed to 
7%.  August is showing signs of stabilisation or a slight 
improvement (see Banque de France (2020b)).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
21

How the coronavirus pandemic has impacted on the 
convergence  process of the central and eastern European 
EU Member States
The central and eastern European EU Mem-
ber States1 had continued to experience 
quite strong economic growth up until the 
outbreak of the COVID- 19 economic crisis. 
Real gross domestic product (GDP) in this 
group of countries rose by 3.6% in 2019, 
following growth of 4.5% the previous 
year. Gross fi  xed capital formation, in par-
ticular, increased by a substantial 8.4%, 
aided in part by the infl  ow of EU funding. 
Unemployment rates fell to new lows, such 
as 2.0% in the Czech Republic or 3.3% in 
Poland, and wages, measured in terms of 
gross wages and salaries per employee, 
were up by 7.9%, almost as much as in the 
previous year.2 This meant that wage 
growth again signifi  cantly outpaced prod-
uctivity growth, which averaged 3.5%.3
Consumer prices, too, picked up signifi  -
cantly, especially in the non- euro area cen-
tral and eastern European EU Member 
States. Five countries exceeded this year’s 
reference value of 1.8% in the regular con-
vergence assessment.4 Only Croatia fulfi  lled 
the criterion.5 Moreover, in Poland, Ro-
mania and Hungary, infl  ation rates ex-
ceeded the respective monetary policy tar-
get corridors.6
Their strong GDP growth enabled the cen-
tral and eastern European EU Member 
States to make further progress in conver-
gence last year. They once again perceptibly 
reduced the gap between their incomes 
and the EU average. Measured in terms of 
nominal per capita GDP , in 2019 this group 
of countries attained 47.6% of the EU aver-
age, following 46.1% in 2018. In real terms, 
i.e. as measured by per capita GDP in pur-
chasing power standards, this was 74.8%, compared with 73.1% in the previous year. 
The Czech Republic remained the country 
showing the greatest convergence, at 
92.6% of the EU average per capita GDP , 
followed by Slovenia at 87% and Estonia at 
83.2%. The fi  gure for both Poland and 
Hungary was just over 72% of the EU aver-
age. Romania made the greatest progress, 
advancing by 3.4  percentage points to 
68.9%. In addition, according to the World 
Economic Forum (WEF) competitiveness in-
dicator, locational conditions in most of the 
countries in this group improved as well.7 
This meant that the conditions were in 
place for further progress towards conver-
gence.
However, the outbreak of the coronavirus 
pandemic brought the positive economic 
1 This group of countries comprises fi  ve EU Member 
States that belong to the euro area (Slovenia, Slovakia, 
Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania) and six other EU Mem-
ber States (Poland, Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania, 
Bulgaria and Croatia).
2 Aggregate of countries excluding Romania, where 
wage growth was overstated by one- off develop-
ments. The rate of average wage growth for this group 
of countries is calculated by weighting gross wages 
and salaries per employee (in local currency) with the 
relevant employment shares. See Deutsche Bundes-
bank (2019).
3 Average productivity growth for this group of coun-
tries is calculated by weighting the growth rates of real 
GDP per employed person in the countries in question 
with the relevant employment shares. Whether Ro-
mania is included or excluded is largely inconsequen-
tial.
4 The 12- month average infl  ation rates were 2.6% in 
Bulgaria, 2.8% in Poland, 2.9% in the Czech Republic, 
and 3.7% in both Hungary and Romania.
5 See European Central Bank (2020b).
6 Based on national consumer price indices, the rates 
of change of which can vary slightly from HICP infl  a-
tion rates.
7 The WEF’s Global Competitiveness Index 4.0 as-
sesses locational conditions on the basis of institutions, 
policies and other factors that can impact on product-
ivity. Cross- country averages were calculated based on 
population shares. For more information, see World 
Economic Forum (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
22

development to an abrupt halt. The central 
and eastern European EU Member States 
saw a need to impose quite stringent pre-
vention measures early on. According to 
the Oxford University index,8 the measures 
taken in those countries were often even 
more stringent than in Germany, for ex-
ample. Economic activity, especially private 
consumption, suffered considerably as a re-
sult. To make matters worse, the economic 
situation in all EU partner countries sud-
denly soured. In addition, the European 
automotive industry, in the value added 
process of which these countries had been 
becoming increasingly incorporated, was 
particularly hard hit by the crisis. As a result, 
as early as in the fi  rst quarter of 2020, GDP 
in this group of countries as a whole con-
tracted by 1.3%. Quarterly rates of change 
of GDP ranged from -5.2% in Slovakia to 
+0.3% in Romania as well as Bulgaria.
In the second quarter, GDP growth in all the 
countries under review is likely to have 
shrunk signifi  cantly. Although measures to 
contain the pandemic were eased during 
the second quarter, and economic activity 
subsequently picked up again, economic in-
dicators have so far shown only a partial re-
covery following the sharp declines in March and April. They are still well short of 
their pre- pandemic levels in many places, 
particularly for exports and industrial pro-
duction. This was particularly because the 
automotive industry is of major importance 
in some countries, particularly in Slovakia 
and the Czech Republic. In addition, tour-
ism, which had been particularly affected 
by the pandemic, is a key economic activity 
in a number of countries, including Croatia, 
Hungary and Bulgaria. It must be said, how-
ever, that, compared with the contraction 
in GDP in the EU as a whole, the average 
combined GDP of the central and eastern 
European EU Member States contracted 
somewhat less sharply.
The crisis also led to a deterioration in the 
labour market situation in the central and 
eastern European EU Member States. The 
unemployment rate went up in the second 
quarter to 4.4%. Consumer price infl  ation 
fell markedly in the second quarter, to 2.7% 
in the region’s non- euro area Member 
States and to as little as 0.5% in the region’s 
euro area Member States. Here, the decline 
in crude oil prices was passed through in Per capita GDP in central and eastern European EU Member States
As a percentage of mean per capita GDP in the EU,1 purchasing power adjusted
50 60 70 80 90
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. 1 EU-28 including the United Kingdom.
Deutsche BundesbankCzech RepublicSloveniaAverageSlovakia
EstoniaLithuaniaHungaryPolandLatviaCroatia
RomaniaBulgaria
20192018
8 Oxford COVID- 19 Government Response Tracker.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
23

full without being dampened by a currency 
depreciation.
The monetary and fi  scal policy response to 
the coronavirus crisis in these countries was 
essentially similar to that in the rest of the 
EU. Central banks cut policy rates and took 
a combination of measures intended to 
strengthen the liquidity of the banking sec-
tor and facilitate banks’ lending to enter-
prises. Governments, for their part, at-
tempted to contain the impact of the crisis 
on the economy through economic stimu-
lus packages and guarantees for enter-
prises, along with other measures to stabil-
ise income and employment. However, fi  s-
cal leeway was, in some cases, quite limited. 
According to OECD estimates, national fi  s-
cal measures in Bulgaria and Romania, for 
example, were limited to just over 1% of 
GDP .9 In the other central and eastern Euro-
pean countries, they were signifi  cantly 
larger.
In order to overcome the COVID- 19 crisis, 
central and eastern European countries 
have also, since the early stages of the cri-
sis, been receiving direct EU assistance, 
such as the newly created EU short- time 
work programme SURE. In July, the Euro-pean Council decided to provide additional 
fi  nancial assistance to cushion the effects of 
the pandemic, of which €672.5 billion will 
be provided under the Recovery and Resili-
ence Facility (RRF)10 (see the box on pp. 78ff.). 
As the distribution of funds is also based on 
per capita GDP , the shares of the central 
and eastern European EU Member States 
are comparatively large. Just over one- 
quarter of the RRF assistance is earmarked 
for them. As a percentage of GDP , this as-
sistance would account for around 10% of 
gross national income for Slovenia, the 
Czech Republic and Estonia, 11% for Hun-
gary, 12% for Lithuania and Poland, around 
13% for Latvia, Slovakia and Romania, just 
under 17% for Bulgaria and just under 18% 
for Croatia. The EU assistance motivated by 
the economic crisis is likely to more than 
offset the expected decline in regular EU 
funding for the central and eastern Euro-
pean EU Member States entailed by the 
2021-27 multiannual fi  nancial framework 
(MFF) and contribute to stabilising the eco-
nomic situation.
On the whole, it appears possible that some 
of the central and eastern European EU 
Member States have been better able to 
get through the crisis than some of the 
older EU Member States. Assistance from 
the EU budget could be a major factor here. 
In the medium term, central and eastern 
European countries could also benefi  t from 
the fact that enterprises have been re-
sponding to the experience of the crisis by 
reorganising international supply chains 
and further diversifying their supply chains.
9 See OECD (2020).
10 See European Council (2020).Stringency of government containment 
measures
Source: Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker.
Deutsche BundesbankJan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July
2020020406080100Index values, daily data
Central and eastern European EU Member StatesGermany
of which:
PolandDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
24

was deeper yet the subsequent recovery was 
quite strong, as seen in industrial output, con -
struction output, retail sales and motor vehicle 
sales. The total number of hours worked had 
already fallen considerably in the first quarter. 
Employment also went down, although this 
decline was tempered by government meas -
ures to safeguard jobs. According to the 
monthly data provided by the Italian National 
Institute of Statistics (Istat), the decline in em -
ployment has recently weakened significantly.
Belgium and Portugal similarly saw very severe 
GDP losses. In Austria, GDP contracted on a 
scale similar to that in Germany. In other euro 
area countries, the drop in activity was more 
moderate, ranging from 8.5% in the Nether -
lands to 3.2% in Finland.
As a result of the deterioration in labour mar -
kets in many countries, the number of persons 
in employment in the euro area fell in the 
second quarter by a seasonally adjusted 2.8% 
on the quarter. The standardised unemploy -
ment rate rose by 0.6 percentage point to 7.8% 
between March and June. The reason that this 
severe crisis has not left a deeper mark on the 
unemployment figures is probably because 
some of the restrictions were considered to be 
of a temporary nature. Existing or newly estab -
lished government programmes provided sup -
port in maintaining employment. In addition to 
a wide variety of short- time working arrange -
ments, these also comprised liquidity assistance 
for enterprises including social contribution de -
ferrals. However, it is likely to have become 
much more difficult to find a job for those who 
lost their jobs or for those looking for a job for 
the first time. According to European Commis -
sion surveys, labour shortages in manufactur -
ing and services had fallen by July to their low -
est levels since 2014 and 2010, respectively.
In the second quarter, consumer prices fell 
markedly on the quarter after seasonal adjust -
ment. This was chiefly attributable to the de -
crease in energy prices. By contrast, food 
prices, particularly those for unprocessed food, rose sharply. Services prices were also up mark -
edly, while prices for industrial goods excluding 
energy remained virtually unchanged. The gen -
eral rate of price increase as measured by the 
year- on- year increase in the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) fell very significantly 
from 1.1% to 0.2% in the second quarter. By 
contrast, the inflation rate excluding energy 
and food declined by only 0.2 percentage point 
to 0.9%. If volatile components such as travel 
services as well as clothing and footwear are 
also factored out, the rate remains at 1.1%. The 
measurement uncertainty caused by the pan -
demic declined significantly over the course of 
the second quarter.14
The range of national inflation rates widened 
by 1 percentage point in the second quarter Strong GDP 
losses in other 
Member States, 
too
Labour market 
situation deteri -
orated further
Euro area 
consumer  prices 
down in Q2 due 
to energyRange of national inflation rates in the 
euro area*
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations. * Highest and 
lowest inflation rates of all Member States.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020321012345
–––+++++Year-on-year percentage rates, range in percentage points, 
quarterly data
–4–3–2–10+1+2+3+4+5+6 HICP excluding food and energyHICP
MinimumRangeMaximum
14 The share of goods and services for which prices had to 
be estimated (“imputed”) narrowed from 32% in April to 
11% in June (see Eurostat (2020)). Initially there had been 
major limitations on measuring prices, especially for travel 
and cultural services.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
25

and spanned from -1.6% in Cyprus to 2.0% in 
Slovakia. The energy component was not the 
only factor behind this larger spread: the core 
inflation rate excluding energy and food also 
diverged somewhat more broadly, from -1.0% 
in Cyprus, where prices for travel services fell 
markedly, to 2.7% in Lithuania.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, season -
ally adjusted consumer prices in July rose 
slightly on the month. Likewise, the year- on- 
year figure of the HICP increased somewhat, 
from 0.3% in June to 0.4% in July.15 The core 
inflation rate excluding food and energy even 
expanded considerably from 0.8% to 1.2%. 
This was due, in particular, to the later and 
weaker summer sales effects in individual 
Member States compared with the previous 
year. This development masked the slowdown 
in the rise in prices for services and the price-  
dampening effect of the reduction in VAT rates 
in Germany.
Given that the euro area economy had already 
recovered significantly in the course of the 
second quarter, real GDP is expected to surge 
in the third quarter. Nonetheless, this will not 
offset the losses from the first half of the year. 
Rather, the recovery is even likely to progress 
much more slowly over the remainder of the 
third quarter than in the May to July period. 
With the areas in which restrictions have been lifted or largely eased having mostly returned 
to normal, the remaining restrictions and vol -
untary precautionary measures are weighing 
on the economy. Moreover, given the dynamic 
nature of the pandemic in many places, there 
are still no signs of a comprehensive improve -
ment in the global setting. The surveys also 
paint a mixed picture. Although the Purchasing 
Managers’ Index for the economy as a whole 
has risen strongly again in recent months and 
recently exceeded the expansion threshold,16 
the European Commission’s surveys indicate 
that sentiment amongst enterprises and house -
holds remained subdued despite some im -
provement. Confidence in manufacturing and 
services also remained well below its long- term 
average in July. Furthermore, it remains to be 
seen how effective the measures taken in many 
places to stabilise the economy and the labour 
market will be. Their full effect will only be seen 
once Member States have succeeded in keep -
ing the pandemic under control in the euro 
area and other parts of the world are able to 
contain it.Range of 
national year- 
on- year rates 
widening
Prices up slightly 
in July chiefly 
due to industrial 
goods excluding 
energy
Although strong 
GDP growth is 
expected in Q3, 
recovery will be 
slower over the 
course of the 
quarter
List of references
Banque de France (2020a), Update on business conditions at the end of June 2020, https://www.
banque-france.fr/sites/default/files/media/2020/08/12/update_on_business_conditions_in_france_
at_the_end_of_june_2020.pdf .
Banque de France (2020b), Update on business conditions in France at end-  July 2020, https://
www.banque-france.fr/sites/default/files/media/2020/08/20/update_on_business_conditions_in_
france_at_the_end_of_july_2020_0.pdf .
Chen, S., D. Igan, N. Pierri, and A.F. Presbitero (2020), Tracking the Economic Impact of COVID-  19 
and Mitigation Policies in Europe and the United States, IMF Working Paper, No 20/ 125.15 The share of imputed HICP data in July stood at 3%.
16 At the current end, the interpretation of this metric is 
made more difficult by the fact that many respondents 
appear to assess production growth over a longer period 
of time than intended by the question, which is aimed at a 
month-  on- month comparison. For example, the index did 
not exceed the “expansion threshold” of 50 points until 
July, despite the economic recovery in the preceding 
months.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
26

Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), The monthly development of aggregate output in the euro area, 
Monthly Report, May 2020, p. 21.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), Progress in the convergence process of the central and eastern 
European EU Member States, Monthly Report, August 2019, pp. 16-18.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), The macroeconomic impact of uncertainty, Monthly Report, Octo -
ber 2018, pp. 49-64.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Investment in the euro area, Monthly Report, January 2016, 
pp. 31-49.
European Central Bank (2020a), Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, 
June 2020, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/projections/html/ecb.projections202006_
eurosystemstaff~7628a8cf43.en.html .
European Central Bank (2020b), Convergence Report, June 2020.
European Council (2020), Special meeting of the European Council (17 to 21 July 2020) – Conclu -
sions, July 2020.
Eurostat (2020), Harmonised Indices of Consumer Prices – Methodology, https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/web/hicp/methodology .
International Monetary Fund (2020a), World Economic Outlook Update: A Crisis Like No Other, An 
Uncertain Recovery, June 2020.
International Monetary Fund (2020b), United States of America: Staff Concluding Statement of the 
2020 Article IV Mission, July 2020.
OECD (2020), OECD Economic Outlook, Vol. 2020 (1), June 2020.
World Economic Forum (2019), The Global Competitiveness Report 2019.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
27

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its monetary policy meeting in June 2020, 
the Governing Council of the European Central 
Bank (ECB) decided to expand the pandemic 
emergency purchase programme (PEPP) in two 
ways. First, it increased the envelope for the 
programme by €600 billion to a total of €1,350 
billion. Purchases will continue to be conducted 
in a flexible manner over time, across asset 
classes and among jurisdictions. Second, the 
Governing Council decided to extend the hori -
zon for net purchases under the PEPP to at 
least the end of June 2021. In any case, net 
asset purchases under the PEPP will continue to 
be conducted until the Governing Council 
judges that the coronavirus crisis phase is over. 
The Governing Council also decided to reinvest 
the maturing principal payments from secur -ities purchased under the PEPP until at least the 
end of 2022. In any case, the future roll- off of 
the PEPP portfolio will be managed to avoid 
interference with the appropriate monetary 
stance. The Governing Council left the asset 
purchase programme (APP) and the Eurosys -
tem’s key interest rates unchanged, meaning 
that the main refinancing rate remains at 0%, 
while the rate of the marginal lending facility 
stands at 0.25% and the deposit facility rate at 
-0.5%.
The Governing Council considered the expan -
sion of the PEPP to be an appropriate response 
to the pandemic- related downward revision to 
the inflation path expected for the coming 
years. It based this assessment on the new 
Euro system staff macroeconomic projections. 
Compared with March 2020, these projections 
have been revised substantially downwards 
over the entire projection horizon, despite the 
recovery anticipated for the second half of the 
year. Furthermore, the Governing Council sees 
the balance of risks around the baseline projec -
tion to the downside. Against this backdrop, 
the PEPP expansion is expected to further ease 
the general monetary policy stance, supporting 
funding conditions in the real economy, espe -
cially for businesses and households. The flex -
ible conduct of purchases will also allow the 
Governing Council to effectively stave off risks 
to the smooth transmission of monetary policy.
The Governing Council reconfirmed its very ac -
commodative monetary policy stance following 
its July meeting. Incoming information signals a 
resumption of euro area economic activity 
since May, with both high- frequency and sur -
vey indicators in May and June rebounding per -
ceptibly. At the same time, actual and expected 
job and income losses and the exceptionally 
elevated uncertainty continue to weigh on con -
sumer spending and business investment, in 
the Governing Council’s opinion. Headline in -
flation is currently being dampened by lower ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to increase and 
extend PEPP
PEPP expanded 
in response to 
downward revi -
sion of inflation 
outlook
Monetary policy 
stance confirmed  
after July meet -
ingMoney market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 From 
1 October 2019, EONIA calculated as €STR + 8.5 basis points. 
3 Three-month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. 
• Average 1 to 13 August 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 20200.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.3
––––––+++
01020 Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,3Basis
points% p.a.
EONIA1,2Three-month EURIBOR 1
Deposit facility rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate
€STR 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
28

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the two reserve maintenance periods 
under review running from 6 May 2020 to 
21 July 2020, liquidity needs stemming from 
autonomous factors rose by a substantial 
€310.1 billion to €1,868.8 billion (see the 
table below).1 This was due primarily to the 
sharp rise in government deposits with the 
Eurosystem. In the June- July 2020 period, 
they averaged €671.2 billion, which was 
€296.8 billion, or around 80%, higher than 
the average for the March- May 2020 period 
(see the chart on p. 30). Deposits held at 
the Bundesbank contained therein doubled 
to €205.0 billion. The rise in government 
deposits refl  ected the expected increase in 
governments’ economic stimulus expend-
iture. Continued high net demand for bank-
notes also contributed to the uptick in li-
quidity needs. In the wake of the corona-
virus pandemic, the volume of banknotes in 
circulation issued by the Eurosystem also rose sharply again, by €43.8 billion to 
€1,365.7 billion, with cumulative net bank-
note issuance by Germany increasing by 
€13.5 billion to €789.8 billion. The rise in 
the combined total of net foreign assets 
and other factors, which are considered to-
gether owing to liquidity- neutral valuation 
effects, had a liquidity- providing effect, by 
contrast. The €30.5 billion increase in the 
aggregate value reduced liquidity needs by 
a similar amount. Over the reporting period, 
the minimum reserve requirement climbed 
by €5.5 billion to €141.2 billion in the June- 
July 2020 reserve period, which led to an 
additional need for central bank liquidity. In 
1 Average of the fourth reserve maintenance period 
(June- July 2020) as compared to the average of the 
second reserve maintenance period of 2020 (March- 
May 2020), which was covered in the May 2020 issue 
of the Monthly Report.
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2020
6 May
to
9 June10 June
to
21 July
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  26.0 –  17.8
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) – 102.7 – 194.1
3. Net foreign assets 1 +  24.1 –  79.1
4. Other factors 1 –  41.9 + 127.4
Total – 146.5 – 163.6
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations –   0.3 +   0.5
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations + 118.5 + 417.3
c) Other operations + 202.7 + 181.3
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +   0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  28.1 –  56.1
Total + 292.8 + 543.0
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 146.3 + 379.4
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   3.7 –   1.8
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
29

Germany the reserve requirement went up 
by €1.7 billion to €38.8 billion.
In the reporting period, the outstanding 
tender volume increased considerably (see 
the chart on p. 32). At €1,402 billion for the 
June- July 2020 period, the average volume 
was €536 billion higher than in the March- 
May 2020 period. This increase was attrib-
utable primarily to the fourth operation of 
the third series of targeted longer- term refi  -
nancing operations (TLTRO- III), which was 
settled on 24  June and experienced very 
strong demand of €1,308 billion owing to 
the attractive conditions. There were 742 bidders; this high number underscored the 
broad interest in the operations. Even be-
fore the settlement of the fourth TLTRO- III 
operation, there was a visible increase in 
the outstanding tender volume as demand 
gradually picked up for the additional 
longer- term refi  nancing operations, which 
were used to bridge the gap until the fourth 
TLTRO- III operation. The outstanding tender 
volume of these operations rose to €389 
billion up to maturity, an increase of €77 
billion compared with the end of the 
March- May 2020 period. Demand for 
liquidity  in the fi  rst two pandemic emer-
gency longer- term refi  nancing operations 
(PELTROs ) totalled €16.5 billion. The bulk of 
this sum, €15.6 billion, was likewise settled 
on 24 June. The net liquidity effect on this 
day was reduced by the maturing of the 
additional longer- term refi  nancing oper-
ations amounting to €389 billion and of the 
fi  rst TLTRO- II operation amounting to €157 
billion. In addition, early voluntary repay-
ments of €214 billion were made on the re-
maining TLTRO- II operations. On balance, 
there was a net liquidity injection of €564 
billion on 24  June. In Germany, too, the 
outstanding volume of longer- term refi  nan-
cing operations grew considerably overall in 
the period under review and, at €235 bil-
lion, was more than twice as high as in the 
reference period. On the other hand, de-
mand in the regular tender operations, i.e. 
the main refi  nancing operations and three- 
month tenders, remained extremely low 
over the period under review.
It was not only the signifi  cant increase in 
the outstanding tender volume but also, to 
a lesser yet still large extent, the Eurosys-
tem’s asset purchase programmes which 
provided additional liquidity. Holdings under 
these programmes averaged €3,168 billion 
in the June- July 2020 period, around €384 
billion above that of the March- May 2020 
period. Factors in this development were 
the pandemic emergency purchase pro-
gramme (PEPP) and the asset purchase pro-
gramme (APP) (see the adjacent table).Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as 
at 7 August
2020
Active programmes 1
PSPP +  65.4 2,263.7
CBPP3 +   6.9 284.7
CSPP +  16.2 225.9
ABSPP –   0.7 30.1
PEPP + 280.0 453.9
Completed programmes 
SMP –   4.0 34.6
CBPP1 –   0.3 0.5
CBPP2 –   0.0 2.9
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive  (negative) 
sign. 1 Including end-of-quarter liquidity-neutral valuation ad-
justments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 20201,5001,2501,00075050025002505007501,000
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
30

On balance, excess liquidity rose signifi  -
cantly over the reporting period. The €171 
billion increase between the March- May 
and May- June periods was followed by a 
sharp rise by an additional €434 billion in 
the subsequent June- July period, with ex-
cess liquidity reaching an average of €2,561 
billion. However, the above- mentioned in-
crease in the autonomous factors slowed 
the rise in excess liquidity. Eurosystem banks 
used 98.4% of the exemption allowance 
under the two- tier system for remunerating 
excess reserve holdings in the June- July 
2020 period, a slight increase compared 
with the March- May 2020 period. In Ger-
many, utilisation was still below the Euro-
system average, but also rose slightly to 
97.8%. Moreover, the increase in reserve 
requirements caused the absolute exemp-
tion allowances to rise during the reporting 
period. However, given the much stronger 
growth in excess liquidity, excess reserves, 
remunerated at -0.50%, increased even fur-
ther (see the adjacent chart). This meant 
that, on average, around 33% of excess li-
quidity in the Eurosystem was exempted 
from remuneration at negative interest 
rates in the June- July 2020 period, com-
pared with around 41% in the March- May 
2020 period.
In the money market, interest rates fell dur-
ing the reporting period in the light of the 
considerable increase in excess liquidity (see 
the adjacent chart). The secured market 
saw overnight rates in GC Pooling decline 
for both the ECB basket and ECB EXTended 
basket (which contains an extended pool of 
collateral) by 3 basis points to -0.51% and 
-0.49%, respectively. Turnover on the GC 
Pooling platform also dropped: the secured 
transactions with a maturity of one day 
(ON, TN, SN; Deferred Funding Rate) gener-
ated average turnover of €10.7 billion in the 
June- July 2020 reserve period, while aver-
age turnover before allotment of the fourth 
TLTRO- III operation in the May- June 2020 
period was €14.5 billion. By comparison, 
the impact on the unsecured overnight rate 
€STR was more limited, which is likely to be partly due to the fact that €STR predomin-
antly contains transactions with non- banks. 
€STR fell by 1 basis point to -0.55% in the 
two reserve maintenance periods. In add-
ition, €STR volumes remained broadly stable 
before then rising by an average of around 
€1 billion to €42 billion following the settle-
ment of the fourth TLTRO- III operation. In 
longer- term segments of the secured mar-
ket (GC Pooling), turnover remained low for 
three- month transactions and declined 
overall in the six- month segment. The abun-
dance of longer- term central bank liquidity 
during the reporting period is likely to have 
had an even greater impact on this market 
than on the very short- term segments.Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1  Cur-
rent account holdings minus the minimum reserve requirement 
plus the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankMar. Apr. May June July Aug.
20200.60.50.40.30.20.10
––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
03006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,000 Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period 2Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling Overnight€STR
GermanyEuro areaTheoretical allowancesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
31

energy prices, and price pressures are expected 
to remain very subdued on account of the 
sharp decline in real GDP growth and the asso -
ciated significant increase in economic slack. 
Against this background, the Governing Coun -
cil takes the view that ample monetary stimulus 
remains necessary to support the economic re -
covery and safeguard medium- term price sta -
bility.
On 25 June 2020, the Governing Council de -
cided to set up a new backstop facility, called 
the Eurosystem repo facility for central banks 
(EUREP), to provide precautionary euro repo 
lines to central banks outside the euro area. 
Specifically, EUREP was created to address pos -
sible euro liquidity needs in case of market dys -
function resulting from the COVID-  19 shock 
that might adversely impact the smooth trans -
mission of ECB monetary policy. Under EUREP , 
the Eurosystem will provide euro liquidity to a 
broad set of central banks outside the euro 
area against adequate collateral, consisting of euro- denominated marketable debt securities 
issued by euro area central governments and 
supranational institutions. EUREP complements 
the ECB’s bilateral swap and repo lines and will 
be available until the end of June 2021.
APP holdings recorded on the balance sheet 
rose by €88.7 billion during the reporting 
period, which means that the stock of APP 
assets held by the Eurosystem on 7  August 
2020 came to a total of €2,804.3 billion (a 
breakdown of these holdings by individual 
asset purchase programme can be found in the 
box on pp.  29 ff.). The holdings are further -
more being influenced by the smoothing over 
time of reinvestments in line with the technical 
parameters agreed upon in December 2018 
and by the use of amortised cost accounting.1 
Securities holdings reported under the PEPP New repo facil -
ity to provide 
euro liquidity to 
non- euro area 
central banksAPP and PEPP 
add further to 
securities hold -
ings recorded 
on balance 
sheetOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,000€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesFirst series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operations
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
32

amounted to €453.9 billion on 7 August 2020, 
up by €301 billion.
On 24 June 2020, the fourth operation of the 
third series of targeted longer- term refinancing 
operations (TLTRO- III) was settled, and saw 
banks take up a total of €1,308.4 billion, the 
highest allotment to date in a single Eurosys -
tem refinancing operation. The twice- adjusted, 
extremely favourable interest rate of up to -1% 
between June 2020 and June 2021, which is 
below the Eurosystem’s deposit facility rate, is 
likely to have been a key reason for the brisk 
demand. At the same time, monetary policy 
counterparties voluntarily repaid €214 billion of 
funds from the second series of targeted 
longer- term refinancing operations (TLTRO- II). 
Furthermore, the first TLTRO- II operation ma -
tured, with an additional €158 billion being re -
paid. Moreover, the additional longer- term refi -
nancing operations (LTROs) which the Govern -
ing Council adopted in March to bridge the 
gap until the fourth TLTRO- III expired. These 
transactions saw an amount of €388.8 billion 
fall due for repayment. Together, the TLTRO- II 
and TLTRO- III series currently have an outstand -
ing volume of around €1,570 billion.
Demand in the second and third operations of 
the series of pandemic emergency longer- term 
refinancing operations (PELTROs), which were 
settled on 24  June and 6  August 2020, re -
mained relatively subdued, with credit institu -
tions taking up €15.6 billion and €5.7 billion.
Allocation of the fourth TLTRO and the con -
tinued asset purchases, in particular, caused ex -
cess liquidity to increase even more steeply 
than it had in the previous reporting period. At 
last count, the excess liquidity volume recently 
reached a new peak of €2,908 billion, up by 
around €786 billion. The liquidity- absorbing 
factors counterbalancing the increase in excess 
liquidity rose further as well (see the box on 
pp. 29 ff.).
Short- term money market rates declined overall 
in recent weeks. The unsecured euro overnight index average rate (EONIA), which is computed 
by applying a fixed spread to the euro short-  
term rate (€STR), trended slightly lower, closing 
the period under review at -0.47%. This was 
probably because of the continued strong in -
crease in excess liquidity, which caused the por -
tion of excess liquidity remunerated at the 
negative deposit facility rate to increase sharply 
as well. The introduction of the two- tier system 
(TTS) at the end of October 2019 reduced the 
share of banks’ excess reserves remunerated at 
the negative deposit facility rate and sent €STR 
and EONIA slightly higher at the time. Far 
stronger declines were registered by the three- 
month euro interbank offered rate (EURIBOR), 
which plummeted from -0.25% in mid- May to 
-0.46% as this report went to press. This more 
than reversed the sharp rise that this rate had 
previously recorded in March and April, leaving 
it currently roughly on a par with EONIA. How -
ever, in a departure from earlier episodes, this 
marked convergence of the three- month 
EURIBOR rate with EONIA is probably not being 
fuelled by mounting expectations of a rate cut 
in the next three months, given that money 
market forward rates are not signalling any 
such expectations. A more likely explanation is 
that the extensive provision of liquidity has sig -
nificantly eroded the importance of the factors 
that had driven the increase in the three- month 
EURIBOR rate in the first place. At the onset of 
the coronavirus crisis, these factors included, 
amongst others, an increased preference 
among market participants for very short ma -
turities and interest rate increases in neighbour -
ing market segments, which can serve as in -
puts in the calculation of EURIBOR.
Money market forward rates climbed signifi -
cantly at times in June, though they closed the 
period only a shade higher than their mid- May 
level. The low point of the curve has now 
shifted further into the future and is currently 
projected to reach -0.54% in the second quar -
ter of 2022. A 10-  basis-  point reduction in the 
deposit facility rate as from mid- 2021 is there -
fore not fully priced into forward rates, but the 
growing likelihood of one is. That said, market Fourth TLTRO- III 
attracts record 
demand
Demand for 
 PELTROs still 
weak
Excess liquidity 
hits new peaksShort- term 
money market 
rates down
Money market 
forward rates 
still pricing in a 
possible interest 
rate cutDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
33

participants’ expectations about how liquidity 
conditions will develop might also have a bear -
ing on how money market forward rates 
evolve. In the latest surveys, conducted ahead 
of the Governing Council’s monetary policy 
meeting in July, the median of survey partici -
pants’ responses was, just like in June, that 
they were not expecting the deposit facility 
rate to be reduced.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The coronavirus pandemic and the measures 
taken to contain it had a major bearing on 
monetary developments in the second quarter 
of 2020, with overnight deposits, in particular, 
registering strong gains. This meant that the 
steep increase in the broad monetary aggre -
gate M3 observed in the previous quarter con -
tinued into the reporting period. By the end of 
June, the annual growth rate of M3 had risen 
to 9.2%, a level last seen in the summer of 
2008.
As for the counterparts, monetary growth in 
the second quarter was driven almost exclu -
sively by credit to residents, with credit to the 
private sector making the largest contribution, 
followed by securitised lending to government. 
The increases in these two positions also had a 
great deal to do with the effects of the corona -
virus pandemic: The strong growth in credit to 
the private sector was mainly attributable to 
credit to non- financial corporations, which is 
likely to have been stimulated by the various 
government support programmes and emer -
gency measures taken by governments to prop 
up the corporate sector during the crisis. Many 
enterprises used these credits to bridge rev -
enue shortfalls and avoid future liquidity short -
ages. By contrast, loans to households, which 
until early 2020 had been on a stable upward 
path, weakened significantly, particularly in the 
countries that were especially affected by the 
pandemic. The significantly expanded overall 
volume of the asset purchase programmes led Monetary devel -
opments shaped 
by coronavirus 
pandemic: 
strong rise in 
overnight 
deposits and …
… brisk growth 
in credit, par -
ticularly to non- 
financial  corpor -
ations and 
government Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020246810
–+++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12
20246
–+++M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsYear-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households5Contribution of components in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general government
Percentage
change 
in M3Percentage change
in M3
Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
34

to higher purchases of government bonds by 
the Eurosystem. Other monetary financial insti -
tutions (MFIs) likewise added substantially to 
their holdings of government bonds in the 
second quarter on balance, which came as a 
result of the large- scale issuance of govern -
ment paper, for which domestic banks are the 
natural first buyers. Central governments set 
aside some of their borrowing to cover future 
expenditure on combatting the coronavirus cri -
sis by holding it in the form of deposits with 
the MFI sector, which dampened monetary 
growth when viewed in isolation.
Among the components, overnight deposits 
were a major driver of the money supply. Total 
inflows for the period once again far outpaced 
any other pre- outbreak quarter, though they 
were slightly down on the previous quarter’s 
figure. Lingering acute uncertainty surrounding 
the impact of the coronavirus pandemic prob -
ably encouraged market participants to stick to 
liquid investments and avoid longer- term finan -
cial commitments. Non- financial corporations 
also stepped up their holdings particularly 
strongly this quarter, followed by households. 
Continued strong demand for cash was an -
other phenomenon typically seen in a crisis 
situation. A monthly comparison, however, re -
veals that net inflows into overnight deposits 
and currency dwindled almost continuously until June compared with March, which could 
be read as indicating that conditions are return -
ing to normal, albeit very slowly.
Viewed in terms of counterparts, monetary 
growth was dominated by the uptick in domes -
tic credit, with credit to the private sector con -
tributing just over 5 percentage points to the 
annual rate of M3. Credit to general govern -
ment made a somewhat smaller contribution 
and consisted exclusively of net purchases of 
government bonds. This contrasted with a 
sharp upturn in euro area central government 
deposits with the MFI sector, which are being 
kept as a liquidity reserve for future expend -
iture on combatting the coronavirus crisis and 
dampened monetary growth when viewed in 
isolation. While the Eurosystem accounted for 
a large share of the government bond pur -
chases, other MFIs also boosted their stocks of 
mostly domestic government bonds on bal -
ance. Lending to the private sector was driven 
by loans to non- financial corporations in par -
ticular, while loans to non- monetary financial 
corporations saw some net repayments again 
recently, after posting robust growth in the pre -
vious quarter. Furthermore, securitised lending 
to the corporate sector recorded significant in -
flows in the second quarter on the back of the 
Eurosystem’s net purchases.Overnight 
deposits see 
strong inflows 
againDomestic credit 
dominates 
counterpartsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q1 2020 Q2 2020
Holdings against central government 2 63.2 262.9
Monetary aggregate M3 473.6 404.7
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 388.3 362.2
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 3.7 41.2
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 81.6 1.4
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities – 47.6 –  3.8
of which:
Capital and reserves 9.2 16.0
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 56.7 – 19.7Assets Q1 2020 Q2 2020
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 232.9 195.3
Loans 249.9 101.8
Loans, adjusted 1 242.2 111.1
Securities – 16.9 93.6
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 133.8 506.1
Loans 21.8 –  2.0
Securities 112.0 508.1
Net external assets 72.5 – 44.0
Other counterparts of M3 49.9 6.4
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
35

In the spring quarter, the increase in loans to 
non- financial corporations continued to be 
driven by the brisk demand for loans brought 
about by the crisis and once again matched the 
previous quarter’s level overall. Monthly inflows 
did, however, ease off again as the reporting 
quarter progressed, after loans had risen ex -
ceptionally sharply in March due to the crisis. 
Loans with short maturities of up to one year, 
which had contributed substantially to credit 
growth at the onset of the coronavirus pan -
demic, were redeemed in net terms, while 
longer-  dated loans, buoyed by government 
support measures, increased all the more.Lending developments were mixed in the large 
Member States. While the inflow in Germany 
moved in line with the average of the past two 
years, inflows in France, Spain and Italy were 
well up on the corresponding same- period fig -
ures. To a large extent, this mixed picture can 
be put down to Germany’s more upbeat econ -
omy, which meant that enterprises there 
needed less liquidity, relatively speaking, than 
their peers elsewhere in the euro area, as 
shown by the fact that German enterprises 
have made only partial use so far of the credit 
lines granted to them. Another explanatory 
factor is that the government- backed assis -
tance loans were offered relatively cheaply in 
some euro area countries. For instance, the ag -
gregate interest rate on loans to enterprises in 
France fell by around ½ percentage point over 
the course of the quarter under review. In Ger -
many, by contrast, that same interest rate rose 
slightly, particularly in the longer maturity 
buckets supported by government assistance 
loans.
Data reported by bank managers surveyed as 
part of the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) con -
firmed that demand- side factors were the main 
reason why credit growth was so robust. The 
latest round of the BLS revealed that the net 
percentage of banks which reported an uptick 
in demand for loans to enterprises in the 
second quarter of 2020 was even higher than 
in the previous three- month period. Respond -
ents stated that demand among small and 
medium- sized enterprises, buoyed by the at -
tractive terms offered in the government sup -
port programmes, was stronger than that 
shown by large firms. Banks reported that the 
brisker uptake of loans in response to the 
coronavirus crisis had mainly been brought 
about by the high financing needs for inventor -
ies and working capital as well as for refinan -
cing, debt restructuring and renegotiation. De -
mand was dampened, on the other hand, by 
declining funding requirements for fixed invest -
ment and for mergers, acquisitions and restruc -
turing. Euro area banks surveyed as part of the 
BLS left their lending policies more or less un -Brisk growth in 
loans to non- 
financial corpor -
ations buoyed 
by government 
support meas -
uresBLS data 
confirm  brisk 
demandMFI loans to the private non-financial 
sector in the euro area*
100102030405060708090100110120130140
–++++++++++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, seasonally adjusted
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–100+10+20+30+40+50+60+70
To households 3To non-financial corporations1
Total 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
36

changed in the second quarter of 2020 on bal -
ance.
In terms of loans to euro area households, the 
marked slowdown observed in the previous 
quarter in the wake of the coronavirus pan -
demic continued. The year- on- year rate of in -
crease fell further to 3.0% at the end of the 
quarter. Consumer loans, in particular, again 
recorded strong net outflows, although these 
declined somewhat over the course of the 
quarter. In the case of loans for house pur -
chase, net inflows remained weak in April in 
particular as a result of the crisis, but likewise 
recovered over time, bringing the overall quar -
terly increase close to the average level of the 
previous two years. By contrast, other loans, 
which mainly include loans to self- employed 
persons, rose comparatively sharply, particularly 
as a result of high contributions from Italy and 
Spain.
The data provided by the bank managers sur -
veyed in the BLS show that negative assess -
ments in the area of retail banking owing to 
the coronavirus crisis were more widespread 
than in the previous quarter. This concerned 
both the demand side and the supply side of 
lending. The net percentage of surveyed euro 
area banks reporting a decline in households’ 
demand for loans in the second quarter rose to 
its highest level since the financial crisis, while 
the net percentage of surveyed institutions re -
porting tighter credit standards for retail bank -
ing increased significantly. According to the 
banks, less favourable assessments of credit 
risks and a lower risk tolerance were reasons 
for this tightening. A considerable loss of con -
sumer confidence was cited by the banks sur -
veyed as the main reason for the decline in de -
mand. In the area of consumer loans and other 
loans, a sharp decline in the need for funds to 
finance durable consumer goods was cited as 
another major reason. With regard to loans for 
house purchase, the negative outlook in the 
housing market and households’ expectations 
of house price developments contributed sig -
nificantly to the decline in demand, according to banks’ assessments. For the third quarter, 
banks expect a net pick- up in demand for 
building loans to households alongside a fur -
ther tightening of standards.
Net inflows into securitised lending in the 
second quarter were higher than at any point 
since the start of monetary union. This devel -
opment was driven almost exclusively by net 
purchases of government- issued securities. 
These net purchases of government bonds 
mainly reflected the Eurosystem’s activities in 
the context of the asset purchase programmes 
(APP and PEPP), which were expanded again as 
a result of the crisis. However, commercial Lending to 
households 
remains weak
According to 
BLS, decline in 
loans to house -
holds has both 
demand- side 
and supply- side 
causes
Record inflows 
into securitised 
lending by the 
Eurosystem and 
commercial 
banksSecurities-based lending in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Eurosystem: debt 
securities only; other MFIs: debt securities and equity. 2 Shares 
and other equities.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20201000100200
–++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
of which
Eurosystem
MFIs excluding Eurosystem: equity 2MFIs excluding Eurosystem: debt securities
–200–1000+100+200+300+400+500+600+700Eurosystem
MFIs excluding EurosystemTo private non-banks1
To general governmentTotal
Totalof whichDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
37

banks also recorded a strong net increase in 
their holdings of government bonds. They 
boosted their holdings of government bonds 
issued in their home country in April and May, 
in particular. This is likely to have been due to 
the increased issuance of new government se -
curities as part of the fiscal pandemic meas -
ures. In June, commercial banks’ net purchases 
fell to their usual levels and were once again 
more broadly spread across the euro area. 
Bonds issued by private issuers were also in de -
mand in the second quarter, albeit to a much 
lesser extent and for the most part only by the 
Eurosystem as part of the asset purchase pro -
grammes. By contrast, given that stock prices 
were still subdued at the beginning of the 
second quarter and there was a high degree of 
uncertainty surrounding future price develop -
ments, it was not until the easing of contact 
restrictions began, which boosted hopes of a 
normalisation in the near term, that banks 
again made net acquisitions of shares and in -
vestment fund shares.
The MFI sector’s net external asset position 
slightly dampened monetary growth on bal -
ance in the quarter under review. According to 
the non- seasonally adjusted balance of pay -
ments data, thus far available only for April and 
May, this was due, in particular, to significantly 
lower current account surpluses in the euro 
area as a result of the weak global economic 
development in the wake of the crisis. In a 
countermovement to the previous quarter, 
both domestic non- MFIs and non- residents 
made net acquisitions of securities from the 
other respective economic area, as capital 
flows recovered somewhat as a result of rising 
turnover. However, net capital exports from the 
euro area predominated. Domestic non- MFIs 
purchased long- term bonds as well as shares 
and investment fund shares of foreign issuers. 
On balance, in light of higher risk premiums, 
non- residents sold long- term debt securities is -
sued by the domestic private non- MFI sector, 
while acquiring mainly short- term government 
debt securities as well as shares and investment 
fund shares.German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers was also dominated by a strong in -
crease in overnight deposits in the second 
quarter of 2020. At the same time, however, 
bank customers increasingly reduced their time 
deposits, which meant that growth in deposit 
business weakened considerably on balance 
compared with the exceptionally strong growth 
in the previous quarter. A key reason for this 
was the general government sector’s large-  
scale reduction in time deposits. It can be as -
sumed that this is linked to the high coronavirus- 
related financing needs of the general govern -
ment sector excluding central government. In 
addition, the easing of the situation in the fi -
nancial markets prompted financial corpor -
ations to shift a significant portion of their 
holdings of overnight deposits that were built 
up in the previous quarter back into more prof -
itable forms of investment.
By contrast, in the reporting quarter, house -
holds and non- financial corporations increased 
their holdings of highly liquid bank deposits 
even more significantly than in the previous 
quarter, with some funds being shifted out of 
longer- term bank deposits. In the quarter under 
review, these investors thus continued to show 
an exceptionally strong preference for liquidity, 
which probably also reflected the persistently 
high level of uncertainty about the future of 
the pandemic and the economic recovery path. 
The low interest rates additionally favoured this 
decision (see also the box on pp. 40 ff.). At the 
same time, the remarkably strong build- up of 
overnight deposits in the reporting quarter was 
supported by the fact that much of the other 
usual consumer spending for this time of year 
was not made due to pandemic- related restric -
tions.
German banks’ lending business with domestic 
customers was remarkably strong in the first 
quarter in the wake of the coronavirus crisis. Slight dampen -
ing impact on 
M3 from cross- 
border flows 
of goods and 
capitalRenewed expan -
sion of deposit 
business, but 
weaker than in 
previous quarter
Liquidity prefer -
ence of house -
holds and non- 
financial corpor -
ations remains 
high
Strong expan -
sion in credit 
business with 
non- banksDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
38

This did not continue with the same momen -
tum in the second quarter of 2020, with net 
lending instead expanding at a similar pace to 
that seen before the outbreak of the pandemic. 
In addition to increasing their lending to the 
domestic private sector, in the reporting period 
German banks once again recorded a marked 
increase in their holdings of securities issued by 
public issuers. The upturn in lending to the 
general government sector observed as of 
March is likely to reflect this sector’s increased 
financing needs as a result of the coronavirus 
crisis, which are attributable not least to exten -
sive support measures to cope with the eco -
nomic consequences of the pandemic.
The largest net inflows in the reporting quarter 
were recorded by loans to non- financial cor -
porations. Overall, growth was somewhat 
weaker than in the previous quarter, although 
this was solely attributable to short- term loans. 
These were cut substantially in the reporting 
period, which can largely be seen as a counter -
movement to the strong increase in the previ -
ous quarter that was driven by crisis- induced 
liquidity bottlenecks. By contrast, medium and 
long-  term loans to non-  financial corporations 
increased significantly more strongly in the re -
porting quarter than in the previous three-  
month period. This development can be attrib -
uted not least to the Federal Government’s ex -
tensive coronavirus assistance loans and other 
funding programmes of state governments 
that enterprises can access via their principal 
banks. In addition, banks reported that, as of 
March, they increasingly granted principal re -
payment deferrals to their corporate custom -
ers, which viewed in isolation also increases net 
lending.
At the same time, the banks surveyed in the 
BLS made their lending policy in corporate 
banking more restrictive across all major eco -
nomic sectors. This is a direct response to the 
economic consequences of the coronavirus cri -
sis. For one thing, the proportion of banks 
tightening their credit standards was higher 
than the proportion of banks reporting an eas -Longer- term 
loans to 
enterprises  up 
sharply, bol -
stered by 
government  
guarantees
According to 
BLS, supply- side 
policy more 
restrictive overallMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2020
Q1 Q2
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 89.3 64.4
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years 1.5 – 10.8
over 2 years – 8.9 – 15.4
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 9.0 2.0
over 3 months – 2.5 –  2.5
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 3.1 0.3
Securities 6.1 6.7
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 46.8 27.1
of which: to households 3 20.9 14.1
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 19.1 15.7
Securities – 1.1 –  2.7
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Data adjusted for statis-
tical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and 
general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and 
quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 202001234% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
39

Developments in the real portfolio returns of households 
in Germany
Like in other countries, nominal interest 
rates in Germany remain at historically low 
levels. For the general public, this is mainly 
visible in the slim nominal rates paid on 
bank deposits, an asset class which trad-
itionally accounts for a signifi  cant share of 
German households’ fi  nancial assets. Over 
the last few years, interest rates on bank 
deposits have been close to 0%, which, 
taken in isolation, dampens the returns that 
households can generate on their fi  nancial 
assets.
Interest payments are the only source of in-
come that bank deposits can generate, 
whereas income fl  ows from other types of 
fi  nancial asset, such as shares, debt secur-
ities, investment fund shares and claims on 
insurance corporations, also depend on 
price effects. In addition to this, shares and 
investment funds that invest in equities commonly pay out dividends as well. Any 
attempt to calculate households’ real total 
portfolio return needs to consider not just 
interest payments but these other compon-
ents as well.
This box outlines how the returns on the 
various types of fi  nancial asset and the total 
return on households’ fi  nancial assets in 
Germany have evolved up until the fi  rst 
quarter of 2020. Fluctuations in the pur-
chasing power of nominal returns due to 
infl  ation are taken into account, so all re-
turns are analysed in real terms.1
The chart below depicts the evolution of 
real returns on the main types of fi  nancial 
asset in the portfolio of households in Ger-
1 A detailed account of how real returns are calculated 
can be found in Deutsche Bundesbank (2015).
Real returns on various types of financial asset held by households in Germany*
504030201001020304050
–––––+++++Annual return at end of year/end of quarter, % p.a.
1991 95 00 05 10 15 19
Sources: Assekurata, German Insurance Association (Gesamtverband der Deutschen Versicherungswirtschaft) and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. * Adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index (CPI). 1 Data on the annual return on investment fund shares are only 
available as from Q4 1995. 2 Data on nominal deposit interest rates are based on the Bundesbank's interest rate statistics until 2002 
and on the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics as from 2003. The period prior to 2003 and the years from 2003 onwards can there-
fore only be compared to a limited degree.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 20–20–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25+30Enlarged scale
Claims on insurance corporationsInvestment fund shares1Debt securities
Currency and deposits 2SharesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
40

many between 1991 and the fi  rst quarter of 
2020.2 Currency and deposits are the most 
important asset class in household port-
folios, with a current share of around 40%. 
For much of the period, they have generally 
yielded a low real return that has also been 
relatively immune to volatility. While there 
have also been instances in the past when 
the real return dropped below zero, it has 
been mired deep in the red for quite some 
time now (since mid- 2016). The situation is 
similar for debt securities, whose return has 
likewise been almost consistently negative 
in real terms since mid- 2015, largely against 
the background of the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programme (APP). As for insur-
ance claims, a dwindling infl  ation rate 
helped the real return recover slightly from 
the historic low it recorded in 2018. None-
theless, it remains at a low level. Rising cap-
ital market prices saw returns on shares and 
investment fund shares climb sharply up 
until the end of 2019. The positive stock 
market performance at the end of 2019 
was probably down to a number of factors, 
including a handful of upbeat global eco-Contributions of individual types of financial asset* to the real total return of households 
in Germany
* Weighted according to share of total financial assets. Adjusted for inflation using the consumer price index (CPI).
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 20–3–2–10+1+2+3+4Annual return at end of year/end of quarter
Claims on insurance corporationsInvestment fund sharesShares Contributions in percentage points
Debt securities
Currency and deposits
1991 95 00 05 10 15 19420246810
––+++++
Real total return (% p.a.)Enlarged scale
Contributions to the real total return of households in Germany
642024681012
–––++++++Annual return at end of year/end of quarter
1992 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 20–3–2–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Contributions in percentage points
Real total return (% p.a.)Inflation componentPortfolio componentNominal return componentEnlarged scale2 The following is an updated version of the box from 
the August 2019 edition of the Bundesbank’s Monthly 
Report; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
41

nomic indicators and easing political uncer-
tainty, as markets welcomed news that the 
UK general election had produced a clear 
majority and the United States and China 
had reached an initial trade agreement. Re-
turns on shares and investment fund shares 
then fell sharply at the end of the fi  rst quar-
ter of 2020, mainly because the COVID- 19 
pandemic and uncertainty surrounding its 
potential economic fallout sent capital mar-
ket prices lower.3
The real total portfolio return (see the top 
chart on p. 41) is calculated on the basis of 
the structure of households’ fi  nancial assets, 
which involves weighting the returns on the 
various asset types according to their share 
of the total portfolio and adjusting the fi  g-
ures for consumer price infl  ation. Thus cal-
culated, the real total return is found to 
have risen from -0.1% to around 3.3% over 
the course of 2019. However, as securities 
prices fl  oundered, especially in the light of 
the coronavirus pandemic, it fell at the be-
ginning of 2020 and, at -2.0%, was clearly back in negative territory at the end of the 
period under review. This is its sharpest de-
cline since the New Economy bubble burst.
Viewed in multiyear terms, the contribution 
made by bank deposits, which has been 
persistently negative since the end of 2016, 
has consistently dragged down the real 
total return overall. The contribution made 
by securities returns, meanwhile, has been 
fairly volatile. While it weighed on the total 
return in the fi  nal quarter of 2018 and at 
the beginning of 2020 in particular, it was 
signifi  cantly positive at the end of 2019. The 
only positive contribution throughout – al-
beit a minor one – stemmed from claims on 
insurance corporations.
The real total return can be presented not 
just in terms of the different types of fi  nan-
cial asset but also as a stylised breakdown 
Structure of German households' financial assets
1 Besides other accounts receivable, this also comprises other equity.
Deutsche Bundesbank%, end-of-quarter data
Other depositsClaims on insurance corporations
Investment fund sharesOther1
Debt securities
Shares
Currency and transferable deposits
1991 95 00 05 10 15 2001020304050607080901003 For more information about capital market develop-
ments in the fi  rst quarter of 2020, see Deutsche Bun-
desbank (2020a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
42

ing of standards. In addition, the surveyed 
banks also made further restrictive adjustments 
to their credit terms and conditions. The main 
reason cited by surveyed bank managers for 
the tightening of the standards was their much 
less favourable assessment of the sector-  
specific or firm- specific situation as well as of 
borrowers’ creditworthiness. In addition, the 
surveyed banks once again saw increased 
downside risks in terms of the general eco -
nomic situation, the economic outlook and the 
recoverability of borrowers’ collateral. The re -
strictive influence of these factors increased 
again compared with the previous quarter’s 
survey, despite extensive government guaran -
tees being provided through the special pro -
gramme of the KfW. In addition, according to 
the banks, the cost of equity and funding con -
ditions in the money and capital markets also 
had a restrictive effect on credit standards. The 
BLS banks are planning a further cross- sectoral 
tightening of their lending policies in the 
second half of the year.The tighter credit terms and conditions were 
reflected in a further expansion of margins, ir -
respective of credit ratings. Furthermore, credit 
institutions tightened their collateral require -
ments to a greater extent than at any point 
since the introduction of the BLS in 2003. For 
the first time in six years, a significant share of 
banks also increased their non- interest rate 
charges.
By contrast, interest rates on loans to enter -
prises remained low on aggregate, despite ris -
ing in individual sub- categories.2 According to 
the MFI interest rate statistics, in the long- term 
maturity segment at the end of June, enter -
prises paid domestic banks 1.8% interest for 
small- scale loans and 1.3% for large- scale 
loans. Interest rates on short- term loans stood by nominal return, portfolio and infl  ation 
component (see the bottom chart on p. 41). 
The nominal return component approxi-
mates the extent to which the (given) nom-
inal return path – i.e. interest payments, 
price effects and dividend payouts – of the 
different fi  nancial asset types contributes to 
the total return. The portfolio component, 
meanwhile, is a rough proxy for moves in 
the nominal total return that can be attrib-
uted to changes in the composition of the 
total portfolio of fi  nancial assets; therefore, 
even if nominal returns and infl  ation rates 
remain constant, a shift into higher- yielding 
types of fi  nancial asset can boost the total 
return. Lastly, the infl  ation component 
stands for the contribution of the infl  ation 
rate (measured by the consumer price 
index, CPI).
The nominal return component was gener-
ally the key determinant of the real total re-
turn throughout the reporting period. While 
its contribution was mostly positive in re-cent years, it turned negative at the end of 
2018 and at the beginning of 2020, mainly 
owing to bouts of sluggishness in capital 
markets. At the same time, the period 
under review saw the infl  ation component 
make a persistently negative contribution 
because the CPI has been hovering at posi-
tive rates of between 1.3% and 2.0% since 
2017. By and large, the portfolio compon-
ent had only a small impact on the total re-
turn. This is because the portfolio structure 
changes only gradually (see the chart on 
p. 42).4 Overall, the aggregate rise in the 
nominal return component over the course 
of 2019 signifi  cantly boosted the real total 
return at fi  rst. However, the price slumps in 
the capital market triggered by the corona-
virus pandemic pushed the real total return 
down to well below zero at the beginning 
of 2020.
4 For more information about changes in the structure 
of fi  nancial assets and developments in returns, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).
2 Small- volume longer- term loans account for the bulk of 
the “KfW express loans 2020”. These pandemic assistance 
loans to enterprises are priced at a relatively high interest 
rate of 3% and are likely to have been a key driver of inter -
est rate developments in this credit segment.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
43

at 1.9% and 1.2% respectively (see the chart 
on p. 45).
In addition to loans to non- financial corpor -
ations, loans to households also recorded per -
ceptible net inflows in the reporting quarter. 
However, these were solely attributable to 
loans for house purchase, which, despite a 
downward movement at the end of the quar -
ter, saw robust growth overall in the reporting 
quarter. On balance, the growth rate of loans 
for house purchase edged up once again, rising 
to 5.9% on the year.By contrast, the banks surveyed in the BLS re -
ported a marked decline in demand for hous -
ing loans. One possible reason for this devi -
ation is that BLS banks are asked to take into 
account all the information on demand devel -
opments available to them at the time. This in -
cludes not only the volume of signed loan 
agreements, but also newly received loan ap -
plications and loan requests. By contrast, MFI 
balance sheet statistics only cover agreed loan 
amounts that have already been paid out. In 
this respect, discrepancies may arise between 
these two data sources, especially in times of 
exceptionally strong movements and high un -
certainty. It remains to be seen whether the 
weakening momentum in the BLS data will be 
reflected in actual lending in the coming 
months.
BLS banks cited a decline in consumer confi -
dence due to the COVID-  19 pandemic as by far 
the most important reason for the reported fall 
in demand. In addition, some banks attributed 
the decline in demand to bank branch closures 
while lockdown measures were in place. By 
contrast, when viewed in isolation, the outlook 
in the housing market and households’ expect -
ations of house price developments continued 
to provide positive stimuli for housing loan de -
mand in the reporting quarter.
According to the BLS, credit standards for loans 
to households for house purchase were also 
tightened on balance in the second quarter of 
2020. The effects of the coronavirus pandemic, 
which under the previous survey were not yet 
visible in the standards, have thus now led to a 
tightening in this credit segment as well. Banks 
also carried out more rigorous tightening of 
the credit terms and conditions in loan agree -
ments, widening margins on riskier loans and 
reducing loan-  to- value ratios. Here, too, insti -
tutions cited the deterioration in their assess -
ment of credit risk and a lower risk tolerance as 
the main reasons for tightening credit stand -
ards and credit terms and conditions.Further sharp 
increase in loans 
to households, 
driven exclu -
sively by loans 
for house 
purchase According to 
BLS, standards 
for housing 
loans also 
tightened 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20–50+5+10+15+20+25€ billion, seasonally adjusted, three-month cumulated flowsLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
105051015202530
––++++++Non-financial corporations1
Households 2Total
Other lending
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer credit
Loans for house purchaseUp to 1 year
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 years
TotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
44

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q3 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20201.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
45

In contrast to loans for house purchase, banks 
recorded a marked (net) decline in consumer 
credit in the reporting quarter for the first time 
since the summer of 2012. This development 
was due in part to the considerable restrictions 
in many consumer- related services sectors re -
sulting from the coronavirus pandemic. In add -
ition, growing uncertainty about the income 
outlook dampened consumers’ propensity to 
buy.3 This is largely consistent with the BLS 
data.
Viewed in isolation, supply-  side policy also 
dampened consumer lending. For example, the 
banks surveyed in the BLS reported a further 
tightening of their credit standards in the 
second quarter in this segment as well. The net 
percentage of banks that tightened their stand -
ards reached levels last seen during the 
2008-09 financial crisis and the 2010 sovereign 
debt crisis. In addition, the surveyed banks 
tightened their terms and conditions for con -sumer loans and other loans. This tightening 
manifested itself primarily in the form of stricter 
limits on loan amounts.
Against the backdrop of the situation in the fi -
nancial markets, in response to the ad hoc 
questions in the July BLS, German banks re -
ported an overall deterioration in their funding 
situation compared with the previous quarter.
According to banks, the share of non-  
performing loans in the gross book value of 
loans – i.e. the NPL ratio – contributed only 
marginally to a tightening of their lending pol -
icy in the first half of 2020. In the second half 
of the year, however, banks are anticipating a 
significantly more restrictive impact, especially 
with regard to loans to enterprises.Consumer credit 
scaled back as a 
consequence of 
the crisis
According to 
BLS, credit sup -
ply policy for 
consumer loans 
again more 
restrictiveDeterioration in 
German banks’ 
funding environ -
ment
Impact of the 
NPL ratio on 
German banks’ 
lending policy 
marginally 
restrictive in the 
first six months 
of 2020
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), The current economic situation in Germany, Financial Markets, 
Monthly Report, February 2020, pp. 34-42.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), Acquisition of financial assets and the search for yield in Germany, 
Monthly Report, May 2020, pp. 38-41.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), Developments in the real portfolio returns of households in Ger -
many, Monthly Report, August 2019, pp. 32-35.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), German households’ saving and investment behaviour in light of 
the low- interest- rate environment, Monthly Report, October 2015, pp. 13-31.3 This is indicated by the GfK consumer climate index, 
which reached an all- time low in the reporting quarter.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
46

Financial markets
Financial market setting
The economic repercussions of the coronavirus 
pandemic and the extensive policy measures 
taken to contain them dominated events in the 
international financial markets in the second 
and third quarters of 2020. Market partici -
pants’ assessments of global economic devel -
opments were closely tied to the current infec -
tion rates and medical research outcomes at 
the time as well as reports on containment 
measures. Uncertainty remained high through -
out the entire period. At the same time, mon -
etary and fiscal policy support measures stabil -
ised expectations on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Faced with prospects of lower inflation, the 
Governing Council of the ECB announced at 
the beginning of June that, amongst other 
measures, the envelope for net purchases 
under the pandemic emergency purchase pro -
gramme (PEPP) would be increased by €600 
billion. Furthermore, at the end of July, the EU 
Heads of State or Government agreed on a re -
covery fund totalling €750 billion to tackle the 
economic repercussions of the coronavirus 
pandemic (see the box on pp.  78 ff.). In the 
United States, the Federal Reserve reaffirmed 
its expansionary monetary policy stance and 
the continuation of its market stabilisation pro -
grammes, but refrained from implementing 
additional monetary policy measures. With the 
above factors at play, yields on government 
bonds fluctuated markedly. In a number of 
euro area countries with tight public finances, 
yields dropped considerably in net terms. Fur -
thermore, the interest spreads between corpor -
ate bonds and benchmark bonds narrowed. 
Equity markets saw a continuation of the re -
covery observed since the end of March, even 
though uncertainty about future equity market 
developments remains heightened compared 
with previous years. An overall resurgence in 
investors’ risk appetite was the main factor 
driving the recovery in prices. Foreign exchange 
markets once again experienced marked shifts in exchange rates between individual curren -
cies, which partly reflected the differing infec -
tion rates in the respective economies. Meas -
ured as a weighted average against the curren -
cies of 19 major trading partners, the euro ap -
preciated on balance compared with the end 
of the first quarter of 2020.
Exchange rates
In net terms, the euro made gains against the 
US dollar in particular. Previously, the global 
spread of the coronavirus pandemic had trig -
gered a significant rise in risk aversion world -
wide, which led to increased demand for the 
US dollar especially around mid- March, thus 
causing it to appreciate markedly. Thereafter, 
the situation gradually turned around; from the 
second half of May, the growing risk appetite 
in the markets was even reflected in a notice -
able depreciation of the US dollar. The consid -
erable decline in the number of new corona -
virus infections in the euro area as well as the 
joint Franco- German proposal for a large- scale 
EU recovery package gave the euro an add -
itional boost. The decision made by the ECB 
Governing Council at the start of June to ex -
pand asset purchases under the PEPP was the 
main reason for the narrowing of spreads be -
tween German and both Greek and Italian 
bonds. In the foreign exchange markets, the 
monetary policy measures were assessed to be 
a hedge against the economic repercussions of 
the coronavirus crisis culminating in an ex -
tremely adverse scenario, ultimately causing 
the euro to profit. Shortly thereafter, the euro 
traded at US$1.14 before the meeting of the 
Federal Open Market Committee.
At that meeting, it was communicated that the 
United States would be faced with a low inter -
est environment for a longer period of time 
and that its economic outlook was highly de -
pressed. The implications for the US dollar were Financial mar -
kets shaped by 
uncertainty sur -
rounding the 
pandemic and 
real economic 
developments
Euro up consid -
erably against 
the US dollar …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
47

conflicting: on the one hand, the dollar was 
pushed down by falling US yields; on the other 
hand, the considerable rise in risk aversion was 
beneficial for the US dollar as a safe haven. The 
latter effect appeared to predominate and was 
amplified by the renewed acceleration in the 
global spread of coronavirus. This brought an 
end to the US dollar’s downward trend and, as 
of mid-  June, the exchange rate between the 
dollar and the euro initially moved sideways. 
However, this phase quickly proved to be tem -
porary, as the rate of new coronavirus infec -
tions in the United States again rose sharply, 
reaching their highest point so far in mid-  July. 
As a result, plans to ease lockdown measures were suspended in many US states. This uncer -
tainty surrounding the recovery in the US econ -
omy was also reflected in foreign exchange 
markets in July, causing further depreciation of 
the US dollar. In addition to this combination of 
factors, renewed tensions between the United 
States and China as well as weak economic 
data also weighed on the US dollar. By con -
trast, on the other side of the Atlantic, the 
agreement on the proposed EU recovery pack -
age strengthened the euro. At the beginning of 
August, the euro reached its highest value 
against the US dollar since mid- 2018 and 
traded most recently at US$1.18, representing 
an 8.0% increase over its value at the end of 
March.
Due to its impact on market sentiment, the 
rapid spread of coronavirus around the world 
also played a key role in the development of 
the exchange rate between the euro and the 
yen. In the event of heightened risk aversion in 
the financial markets, the yen generally tends 
to appreciate as a result of net capital inflows. 
Conversely, however, investors withdraw some 
of their money from the yen again as risk appe -
tite rises. On this basis, the yen’s weakness 
from mid- May can, similarly to that of the US 
dollar, be attributed to returning risk appetite in 
the markets. Following the June meeting of the 
ECB Governing Council, the euro reached its 
highest value against the yen up to that point 
in 2020, trading at 124 yen. While the slight dip 
in the euro/yen exchange rate thereafter was in 
line with the resurgence in risk aversion, it was 
not to last: rising numbers of new coronavirus 
infections in Japan depressed the outlook for 
the Japanese economy, which was slowly be -
ginning to stabilise again. Against the backdrop 
of the broadly based strength of the euro in the 
second half of July, this even caused the euro 
to reach its highest value against the yen since 
April 2019, peaking at 127 yen at the end of 
the reporting period. This represented a gain of 
6.5% against the yen compared with the ex -
change rate at the end of the first quarter.… and against 
the yen …Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries. An increase indicates an appreciation 
of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankMAM J J A
20201.051.101.151.20
115120125130135
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105Daily data, log scale
¥
£US$ against the ...
... US dollar
... yenLaunch exchange rate: 
€1 = US$1.1789 1
Launch exchange rate: €1 = ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange rate: €1 = £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate2
Q1 1999 = 100
Launch exchange rate: 103.23 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
48

Recalculated weights for indicators of the German 
 economy’s price competitiveness
To compare the price competitiveness of a 
country with that of an individual trading 
partner, it is the relative price or cost devel-
opments of the two countries – after con-
version using the bilateral exchange rate – 
that are contrasted. The picture of a coun-
try’s price competitiveness can be made 
more representative by determining the 
corresponding weighted average against a 
larger number of trading partners. The Bun-
desbank regularly calculates and publishes 
such indicators for Germany. Both concep-
tually and in terms of the calculation pro-
cedure used, these indicators are in line 
with the real effective exchange rates pub-
lished by the European Central Bank for the 
euro.1 The weights are measured using 
trade links2 and adjusted every three years 
to take account of current developments in 
foreign trade. Chain- linking the weighted 
index series ensures that there are no breaks 
in the time series when calculating effective 
nominal and real exchange rates. Weights 
based on data from 2013 to 2015 have 
been used to date. By contrast, the new 
weight matrix is derived from trade links 
over the period from 2016 to 2018 and ap-
plies retroactively as of 2016.
In contrast to the old weighting, for the fi  rst 
time the recalculated weights also include 
trade in services. In recent years, the vol-
ume of this item in foreign trade has risen, 
not only in absolute terms but also in pro-
portion to the total trade in goods. How-
ever, this share can fl  uctuate sharply from 
country to country.3 Cross- border trade in 
services is much more diffi   cult to capture; 
the corresponding raw data are therefore 
subject to more intricate pre- processing. 
For instance, here the reported bilateral 
fl  ows account for only around 55% of the 
actual trade in services,4 whereas almost all of the trade in goods is recorded. The bilat-
eral nature of trade relations, however, 
allows for improved coverage by mirroring 
fl  ows that have been recorded only on one 
side. Thus, if there is no information on 
country B’s imports of services from country 
A, country A’s exports of services to country 
B can be used on a provisional basis instead 
– assuming these fi  gures are available. Such 
a workaround improves coverage of service 
fl  ows by a further 24  percentage points. 
Using other minor adjustments boosts cov-
erage levels to just under 87%. The values 
that are still outstanding are then estimated 
using a gravity model.5
Expanding the calculation of trade weights 
to include trade in services was not the only 
change. The composition of the broad 
group of countries, which previously com-
prised 57 countries, was also adjusted. On 
the one hand, owing to data problems, 
Venezuela is no longer considered. On the 
other hand, fi  ve new countries were added: 
Colombia, Peru, Saudi Arabia, Ukraine and 
the United Arab Emirates. The broad group 
1 The calculation procedure is described in Schmitz et 
al. (2012).
2 Trade links include not only direct trade fl  ows but 
also competitive relationships in third markets (third- 
market effects). While direct trade fl  ows refer to direct 
bilateral trade between two given countries, third- 
market effects capture the fact that those two coun-
tries compete against one another not just in their re-
spective markets but on a global level.
3 Trade in services is particularly important in Luxem-
bourg, Cyprus, Ireland and Malta.
4 Coverage is much higher for the euro area countries. 
However, the calculation of third- market effects re-
quires the matrix of trade fl  ows across all considered 
trading partners to be complete.
5 Gravity models are based on Tinbergen (1962). The 
underlying idea is that bilateral trade fl  ows are, to a 
considerable extent, dependent on the distance be-
tween two countries and their respective economic 
size. By including additional explanatory variables, the 
gravity model estimated for the weight matrix achieves 
a high degree of explanatory power for fl  ows of trade 
in services.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
49

Weighting scheme for the price competitiveness indicator of the German 
 economy against a broad group of countries
In thousandths
Group of countries/countryCalculation period for the weights
2013 to 2015 2013 to 2015 2016 to 2018 2016 to 2018
Including trade in services?
no no no yes
Number of countries
57 61 61 61
Narrow group of countries 624.3 618.1 609.5 638.7
Austria 39.2 39.3 39.2 43.0
Belgium 46.1 45.3 44.6 40.5
Canada 7.5 7.6 7.1 7.3
Cyprus 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.8
Denmark 11.0 11.6 11.1 12.6
Estonia 1.1 1.1 1.2 1.2
Finland 8.0 7.9 8.2 8.2
France 80.6 80.5 71.9 74.0
Greece 2.6 2.6 2.6 4.2
Ireland 10.1 9.8 12.2 16.2
Italy 57.9 56.9 57.6 52.8
Japan 27.0 28.2 27.6 25.6
Latvia 1.0 1.0 1.1 1.0
Lithuania 2.1 2.1 2.2 2.2
Luxembourg 3.4 3.1 3.1 8.3
Malta 0.4 0.4 0.4 1.1
Netherlands 67.8 68.3 71.5 70.2
Norway 4.7 5.0 4.3 4.8
Portugal 6.7 6.8 7.1 7.0
Slovakia 14.4 14.3 14.5 12.2
Slovenia 5.2 5.2 5.6 5.0
Spain 32.2 31.3 33.1 33.7
Sweden 17.9 17.1 17.1 16.7
Switzerland 37.1 36.1 35.1 39.3
United Kingdom 56.1 54.6 50.8 57.6
United States 84.0 81.6 80.0 93.0
Medium-sized group 265.7 264.2 277.2 247.6
Australia 3.8 3.8 3.7 4.2
Bulgaria 2.9 2.9 3.3 3.2
China 117.4 114.8 115.8 98.1
Croatia 1.7 1.8 2.1 2.8
Czech Republic 33.2 33.8 37.3 32.4
Hong Kong SAR 10.9 11.1 10.4 9.7
Hungary 19.6 19.8 21.1 18.6
Korea, Republic of 18.5 17.5 17.5 15.5
Poland 39.6 40.2 45.2 41.6
Romania 11.4 11.5 13.7 12.8
Singapore 6.6 7.0 7.0 8.6
Countries additionally included in broad group 110.0 117.7 113.3 113.7
Algeria 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7
Argentina 1.8 1.8 1.5 1.9
Brazil 7.2 6.9 5.6 6.1
Chile 1.7 1.5 1.2 1.4
Colombia 0.9 0.7 0.9
Iceland 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.5
India 12.7 11.9 12.0 12.4
Indonesia 3.9 3.9 3.6 3.9
Israel 3.2 3.2 3.1 3.6
Malaysia 6.7 6.7 6.7 5.9
Mexico 9.2 9.0 9.9 9.5
Morocco 1.6 1.5 1.7 1.7
New Zealand 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.9
Peru 0.6 0.5 0.6
Philippines 2.6 2.8 2.8 2.8
Russia 16.8 15.6 12.7 12.8
Saudi Arabia 4.2 3.0 2.8
South Africa 5.7 5.2 5.4 5.8
Taiwan 9.5 9.1 9.9 8.5
Thailand 6.7 6.4 6.6 7.1
Turkey 18.8 17.6 17.2 15.9
Ukraine 2.6 2.5 2.6
United Arab Emirates 4.8 5.1 5.5
Venezuela 0.3
Total 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0 1,000.0
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
50

now comprises a total of 61 countries, of 
which 19 have the euro as their currency. 
However, in its Monthly Report, the Bun-
desbank will also continue to publish effect-
ive exchange rates of the euro area and 
Germany for the 38 country- strong 
medium- sized group, and, in addition, rates 
of Germany for a narrow group comprising 
27 countries.
The table on p. 50 shows Germany’s trade 
weights for four different calculations: fi  rst, 
for the method used to date excluding 
trade in services and for the old 2013-2015 
calculation period; second, after adjusting 
this method to refl  ect the extended group 
of countries; third, after extrapolating the 
previous method to the new calculation 
period with trade fi  gures from 2016 to 2018 
and the extended group of countries; and, 
fi  nally, for the new method taking into ac-
count trade in services, the extended group 
of countries and the new calculation period.
It should initially be noted that the adjust-
ment of the broad group of countries has 
no major impact on the distribution of 
weights as the fi  ve new countries in this 
group account for barely over 1% of Ger-
many’s trade links. However, the more up- 
to- date data obtained from using the 
2016-2018 instead of the 2013-2015 calcu-
lation period have a notable impact on the 
weights of individual countries. The import-
ance of France, the United States, the 
United Kingdom and Russia for German for-
eign trade has fallen considerably; by con-
trast, that of central European countries, 
such as Poland and the Czech Republic, as 
well as of the Netherlands, has risen.
As far as the inclusion of trade in services is 
concerned, it can be observed in general 
that there are very few euro area countries 
in which the share of foreign trade is as low 
as in Germany.6 This means that, in the case of Germany, including trade in services in 
the calculation of trade weights has a neg-
ligible impact for many trading partners. A 
more marked increase in weights can be 
observed, above all, for those major trading 
partners that are strongly service- oriented 
(mainly the United States, but also the 
United Kingdom and Switzerland). The op-
posite is true for those major trading part-
ners that are heavily dependent on manu-
facturing (mainly China, but also Italy and 
Belgium).
6 These include, in particular, Slovenia, Slovakia, Italy 
and Belgium.Price competitiveness indicator of the 
German economy*
* Against 37 countries, based on consumer price indices. 1 In-
verted scale: a rising curve (decline in values) indicates an in-
crease in price competitiveness.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 05 10 15 2084
88
92
96
100
104
0
0.3
0.6
0.9Deviation from calculation of weighting thus far
In percentage points, inverted scaleweights used thus far
new weights including the new 2016-2018 
weighting period
new weights including both 
the new 2016-2018 weighting period 
and trade in services
1999 Q1 = 100, log scale1Calculated on the basis ofDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
51

From mid-  May, the euro also recorded gains 
against the pound sterling. Alongside the 
strength of the euro, the disappointing round 
of negotiations on the future trade relationship 
between the EU and the United Kingdom 
played a major role in this. In June, the UK Gov -
ernment definitively ruled out the possibility of 
extending the transition period following the 
UK’s departure from the EU beyond the end of 
2020. This weighed on the pound, as did 
speculation surrounding a potential cut in the 
Bank Rate by the Bank of England. By contrast, 
the pound experienced a broadly based recov -
ery in July that was driven, amongst other 
things, by unexpected positive developments in 
the economy as well as additional fiscal meas -
ures in the UK. Due to its concurrent strength, 
however, the euro most recently traded at 
£0.90, which was 2.0% higher than its level at 
the end of March.
Measured as a weighted average against the 
currencies of 19 major trading partners, the euro appreciated on balance compared with 
the end of the first quarter of 2020 (+2.6%). 
Alongside the three currencies already dis -
cussed, the euro mainly recorded gains against 
the renminbi (+5.7%). To some extent, the ren -
minbi was dragged down by the most recent 
weakness of the US dollar, which traditionally 
has a strong influence on the renminbi’s ex -
change rate. By contrast, the euro recorded 
losses against the Swedish krona (-7.1%), the 
Norwegian krone (-8.6%), and the Australian 
dollar (-8.0%), with the latter two currencies 
benefiting primarily from the rebound in com -
modity prices. Outside the group of 19 partner 
currencies, the euro made noteworthy gains 
over the Turkish lira (+20.4%). It was not only 
the coronavirus pandemic that had a negative 
impact on the lira, but also Turkey’s monetary 
policy stance – which has been highly expan -
sionary for some time now  – as well as the 
steeply rising volume of loans and macrofinan -
cial risks. On balance, the euro recently traded 
at an all- time high against the lira.… but only 
makes moderate 
gains against 
the pound 
sterling Euro appreci -
ation in effective 
termsThe comparatively low volume of services in 
German foreign trade is also refl  ected in the 
impact of the recalculated trade weights on 
Germany’s price competitiveness (based on 
consumer price indices; see the chart on 
p.  51). Overall, Germany’s price competi-
tiveness is currently down by less than 
1 percentage point compared with the old 
calculation. The much larger share of this 
contraction is attributable to the inclusion 
of trade in services, while the extrapolation 
of the weight matrices to the 2016-2018 
period plays a smaller role. The deterior-
ation means that the weights of those 
countries over which Germany has a com-
petitive edge in terms of prices tend to de-
crease and –  vice versa  – the weights of 
those countries that have a competitive 
edge over Germany tend to increase. A 
considerable part of the deterioration is due 
to the weighting of China. According to the 
calculation based on consumer indices, Germany has clear competitive advantages 
over China, but China’s weight has declined 
by a total of almost 2 percentage points. 
Even if the overall impact of taking account 
of trade in services is rather small in Ger-
many’s case, this may be different for indi-
vidual trading partners, such as China. The 
effect is likely to be much greater for the 
price competitiveness of countries with a 
strong service- oriented focus, in particular. 
This is the case for the United States, for 
example.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
52

Securities markets and 
 portfolio investment
Bond market
During the reporting period, interest rates on 
government bonds in the major currency areas 
saw quite significant fluctuations. This also held 
true for the United States, where yields on ten- 
year US Treasuries rose slightly on balance by 
5 basis points to 0.7%. The pronounced move -
ments in yields reflected the high degree of un -
certainty among market participants about fu -
ture economic developments, which are chiefly 
shaped by infection rates and the policy meas -
ures taken. In addition, renewed tensions in 
the trade dispute between the United States 
and China depressed market sentiment. How -
ever, new economic data that were interpreted 
positively have recently spread optimism.
This uncertainty had a particular impact on the 
term premiums of US Treasuries, which fluctu -
ated heavily over the reporting period. The 
term premiums remained negative over the re -
porting period, meaning that, at present, in -
vestors receive a higher yield in terms of ex -
pected value if – instead of longer- term invest -
ments – they invest in papers with short matur -
ities on a revolving basis. This was an expression 
of the concern that short- term interest rates 
could be unexpectedly low in the future as a 
result of the pandemic. Furthermore, the Fed -
eral Reserve struck a more pessimistic tone at 
its monetary policy meeting at the end of July, 
assuming that macroeconomic developments 
would get going more sluggishly than previ -
ously expected. In addition, the Federal Reserve 
confirmed that it would be prepared to stabilise 
the financial system and – if necessary – pro -
vide more monetary policy accommodation.
Yields on ten- year Federal bonds (Bunds) have 
also fluctuated fairly significantly since the end 
of March, moving within a range of -0.6% to 
-0.3%. At -0.4%, the yield was most recently 6 
basis points higher than the level at the end of 
March. During the period under review, the ECB Governing Council decisions contributed 
to a temporary drop in interest rates. For in -
stance, on 30 April – the day of the ECB Gov -
erning Council’s monetary policy meeting – the 
yield on ten- year Bunds fell by 10 basis points. 
One factor that had a countervailing effect was 
that the Finance Agency issued a record vol -Ten- year US 
Treasury yields 
up slightly
Ten- year Bund 
yield slightly 
higher on 
balance Bond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source:  Bloomberg.  * Government  bonds  with  a  residual 
maturity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20200.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–––+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
GermanyJapanEuro areaUnited States
United
Kingdom
Yield curve in the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method),  based  on  listed  Federal  securities.  1 In  place  since 
18 September 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.80.60.40.2
––––
Residual maturity in years13 August 202031 March 2020% p.a.
Memo item:
Deposit 
facility rate1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
53

ume of Federal securities in the second quarter 
of 2020 (see also p. 85). Overall, at a total of 
€112½ billion in the second quarter (the latest 
period for which figures from the securities 
issues statistics are available), the volume of net 
public issuance in Germany significantly ex -
ceeded the Eurosystem’s purchase amount of 
€74½ billion for the same period. As a result, 
there was a considerable rise in the aggregate 
interest rate risk (duration risk) taken on to the 
balance sheets of private market participants. 
Typically, when greater duration risk is taken on 
to the balance sheets of private market partici -
pants, it is accompanied by rising yields. Due to 
the high volume of issuance, the scarcity pre -
mium of Bunds – the yield spread between ten- 
year Federal securities and an EONIA swap with 
the same maturity – decreased from its 2020 
peak in March, falling to less than 20 basis 
points. The interest rate spread over ten- year 
US Treasuries, which had narrowed significantly 
in the first quarter, widened only temporarily 
around the time of the ECB Governing Council decision at the end of April; most recently, it 
stood at 113 basis points and thus just under its 
level at the end of March.
On balance, the yield curve derived from the 
yields on Federal securities flattened somewhat 
compared to the end of March. Here, yields 
were negative across the entire maturity spec -
trum. At 21 basis points, the yield spread be -
tween ten- year and two- year maturities was 
recently marginally (-2 basis points) below its 
value at the end of March and thus at a very 
low level. It had only been lower for a short 
time in 2008. The term premium, which con -
tinued to fall in the reporting period, was the 
decisive factor behind this development.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP-  weighted average) narrowed 
compared to the end of March, falling by 32 
basis points to 63 basis points. Countries with 
tight public finances experienced especially 
steep declines in yields and saw their yield 
spreads – having previously widened in March – 
narrow relatively sharply. This was partly attrib -
utable to the monetary policy decisions dis -
cussed above as well as the assistance meas -
ures approved by the EU Council. For instance, 
immediately following the announcement of 
the ECB Governing Council decisions on 4 June, 
yields on Italian bonds fell by 13 basis points, 
while yields on German bonds rose by 3 basis 
points. From the markets’ perspective, the 
spreads were also reduced by the EU summit 
decisions that included high transfer payments 
and loans at favourable financing conditions. In 
this vein, the interest rate spread between ten- 
year Italian government bonds and ten-  year 
Bunds narrowed by around 20 basis points at 
the time of the EU summit. According to the 
decisions reached at the summit, Italy will re -
ceive the largest payments. Nevertheless, the 
credit default premiums for these countries 
most recently remained above their pre-  
pandemic levels.Yield curve of 
Federal secur -
ities somewhat 
flatter
Lower yield 
spreads on euro 
area govern -
ment bondsSpreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Bunds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy Spain
Ireland FranceGreece PortugalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
54

In the reporting period, yields on ten- year UK 
bonds (gilts) were down by 12 basis points in 
net terms, at 0.2%. This was because the Bank 
of England loosened its monetary policy stance 
further and decided to expand its asset pur -
chases. It kept its key rate at a historically low 
level of 0.1%.
At 0.0%, yields on ten- year Japanese govern -
ment bonds hovered around their level from 
the end of March and thus remained within 
what market participants believe to be the 
Bank of Japan’s target range for interest rates. 
Market participants’ assessments of the econ -
omy, which are currently in a constant state of 
flux in Japan, had essentially no impact on Jap -
anese yields.
Euro area forward inflation rates derived from 
inflation swaps for a period of five years start -
ing in five years’ time most recently stood at 
just under 1.3% and thus 30 basis points above 
their value at the end of March. This meant 
that forward inflation rates again hovered 
around their pre- pandemic level. At times dur -
ing the reporting period, this indicator stood at 
less than 1%. In particular, liquidity premiums 
that can also be transmitted to the swap mar -
ket through arbitrage relationships are likely to 
have been a cause of this low value during the 
tense situation in the financial markets at the 
start of the pandemic. A frequently used meas -
ure of liquidity is the yield spread between 
bonds issued by the Federal Government and 
bonds issued by the state- owned Kreditanstalt 
für Wiederaufbau  (KfW), as these bonds have 
the same credit rating. As measured by this in -
dicator, the liquidity premium has fallen by 24 
basis points since the end of March. Alongside 
the liquidity premium, rising crude oil prices 
have likely increased the market- based forward 
inflation rate, as has frequently been observed 
in the past. The risk- neutral density functions 
derived from inflation options for the five- year 
inflation expectations in the euro area revealed 
that the probability of deflation fell consider -
ably compared to the end of March, dropping 
to 6%. The risk- neutral probability of inflation rates lower than 1% declined from 94% to 
65% during the reporting period. Inflation risk 
premiums and liquidity premiums appeared to 
be largely responsible for the disparity between 
market- based inflation expectations and the 
expectations reported in surveys. At 1.9%, 
survey- based inflation expectations for the 
horizon of six to ten years (Consensus Fore -
cast), which are captured once per quarter, 
stood marginally above their April value in July 
(+5 basis points). Furthermore, Bundesbank 
studies revealed that unexpected developments 
in inflation during the reporting period had no 
influence on the (market- based) forward infla -
tion rate. According to this methodology, these 
inflation expectations are considered to be an -
chored, meaning that market participants see 
no reason to revise their inflation expectations 
in light of the low actual inflation rate at 
present.
Yields on European corporate bonds declined 
significantly during the period under review. Yields down 
in the United 
Kingdom 
No change in 
yields on Japan -
ese government 
bonds
Market- based 
forward inflation 
rate rises mark -
edly in the euro 
areaYield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBOXX indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20200100200300400500600700800900
100200300400High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB financial corporations 2
BBB non-financial corporations 2By rating categoryBasis points, daily dataDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
55

They had earlier seen rapid increases from 
around the beginning of the coronavirus pan -
demic until the end of March. Bonds issued by 
BBB- rated financial corporations with residual 
maturities of between seven and ten years 
were yielding 1.4% as this report went to press, 
down 152 basis points from the end of March. 
Yields on non- financial corporate bonds of 
equivalent maturity fell by 117 basis points to 
0.9%. On balance, the decline in yields was 
due, in particular, to the lower default risk re -
sulting from monetary and fiscal policy support 
measures as well as the indications of eco -
nomic recovery. This was also reflected in de -
clining CDS premiums. The yields on bonds is -
sued by enterprises with poorer credit ratings 
fell especially sharply; in the high- yield seg -
ment, bond yields have dropped by 289 basis 
points to 4.1% since the end of March.
Given that safe interest rates experienced a 
moderate overall rise during the reporting 
period, the yield spreads of corporate bonds over Bunds contracted somewhat more sharply 
than the yields on corporate bonds. At present, 
the yield spreads for BBB- rated bonds have 
thus again dipped below their respective five-  
year averages. In light of the continuing intrin -
sic economic risks, the spreads can be classified 
as comparatively small. This is presumably at -
tributable to the monetary and fiscal policy 
support measures that have been adopted, 
which have mitigated some of the risks borne 
by the private sector. By way of example, in 
April 2020 the Governing Council of the ECB 
decided to maintain the eligibility of market -
able assets that can be used as collateral for 
Eurosystem loans in the event of a rating down -
grade. Given the marked improvement in finan -
cing conditions, coupled with the simultaneous 
increased need for liquidity, the volume of non- 
financial corporate bonds issued in the euro 
area rose sharply. The bulk of these newly is -
sued instruments took the form of investment- 
grade bonds, in particular BBB- rated bonds.
Gross issuance in the German bond market 
reached a new record high of €518½ billion in 
the second quarter of 2020. It thus again sig -
nificantly exceeded the already high figure 
achieved in the first quarter (€394 billion). After 
deducting redemptions and taking account of 
changes in issuers’ holdings of their own 
bonds, the resulting figure of €158 billion 
shows that considerably more such bonds were 
issued than in the buoyant previous quarter 
(€67 billion), also in net terms. In addition, for -
eign borrowers placed debt securities worth 
€25½ billion in the German market. As a con -
sequence, funds totalling €183½ billion net 
were raised in the German bond market in the 
reporting period, thus setting a new record.
The public sector issued own debt securities in 
the net amount of €112½ billion in the quarter 
under review. This unprecedented volume was 
primarily brought about by the increased finan -
cing needs of the government resulting from 
the COVID-  19 pandemic. Central government 
mainly issued Treasury discount paper (Bubills: 
€56½ billion), but also Federal bonds with ma -Corporate bond 
yields down 
markedly
Yield spreads of 
corporate bonds 
narrowingBond market 
records high net 
sales
Record public 
sector issuanceInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2019 2020
Q2 Q1 Q2
Debt securities
Residents 24.9 28.7 116.4
Credit institutions 5.8 30.3 24.5
of which:
Foreign debt securities 7.7 19.3 8.5
Deutsche Bundesbank 3.6 11.9 78.6
Other sectors 15.5 – 13.5 13.3
of which:
Domestic debt securities 5.6 – 10.1 – 2.3
Non-residents 13.8 56.1 67.2
Shares
Residents 13.6 13.6 30.0
Credit institutions 0.5 –  8.7 1.6
of which:
Domestic shares 0.4 –  4.5 1.7
Non-banks 13.1 22.2 28.4
of which:
Domestic shares 2.9 12.2 13.3
Non-residents – 1.6 –  5.9 – 9.0
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 12.8 33.4 1.2
Investment in retail funds 4.7 –  1.2 7.5
of which:
Equity funds – 0.6 –  5.8 4.8
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
56

turities of 10 and 30 years (Bunds: €13 billion 
and €12 billion, respectively) and, for the first 
time, bonds with maturities of 15 and 7 years 
(€9½ billion and €2½ billion, respectively). 
Meanwhile, state and local government issued 
debt securities to the tune of €23½ billion net.
In the course of the second quarter, domestic 
enterprises placed debt securities worth €38 
billion net in the market, up from €6½ billion in 
the previous quarter. In doing so, they took ad -
vantage of the improved market access and the 
prevailing significantly more favourable finan -
cing conditions. This strong issuance activity 
was largely due to the fact that many enter -
prises were keen to secure liquidity in an envir -
onment of great uncertainty and declining 
sales. A further probable cause was the deci -
sion taken by the Governing Council of the ECB 
at the end of April to expand the corporate 
sector purchase programme (CSPP) to include 
commercial paper issued by non- financial cor -
porations and to lower the requirements for eli -
gible collateral.
German credit institutions increased their cap -
ital market debt by €7½ billion net in the quar -
ter under review. Overall, issuance was con -
fined to debt securities issued by specialised 
credit institutions (€12½ billion), while other 
bank debt securities and mortgage Pfandbriefe 
saw net redemptions (€4 billion and €1½ bil -
lion, respectively).
In the second quarter of 2020, the Bundesbank 
was the predominant buyer in the domestic 
bond market, acquiring paper in the net 
amount of €78½ billion, for the most part 
under the Eurosystem’s asset purchase pro -
grammes. Foreign investors added German 
debt securities worth €67 billion net to their 
portfolios, mainly in the form of public sector 
paper. This unusually high volume of German 
debt securities sold to non- residents arose from 
the vibrant issuance activity in the public sector, 
which was able to place the lion’s share of the 
new issues with established investor structures 
located abroad. Domestic credit institutions added debt securities worth €24½ billion to 
their portfolios, in most instances acquiring do -
mestic paper on balance. Domestic non- banks 
purchased debt securities for €13½ billion in 
net terms, solely acquiring foreign instruments.
Equity market
Global equity indices made significant gains in 
the reporting period. The recovery in prices 
kicked off in early April and continued apace 
almost until the end of the reporting period. 
This was due, not least, to the monetary and 
fiscal policy measures mentioned above and to 
a resumed increase in risk appetite. However, 
stock prices also benefited from some surpris -
ingly positive economic data, after several 
countries severely affected by the pandemic 
had relaxed the restrictive measures taken to 
protect their populations from contagion.Similarly high 
net issuance of 
corporate bonds
Slight rise in 
credit institu -
tions’ capital 
market debt
Purchases of 
debt securitiesMarked rise in 
equity prices 
worldwideEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesDaily data, beginning of 2018 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
708090100110120130
35405060708090100110120
2018 2019 2020Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
57

On balance, the US S&P 500 saw a 30.5% rise 
on its end- March level. The rebound recorded 
by the Japanese Nikkei 225 was somewhat 
weaker (+22.9%). Continental European stock 
markets likewise recorded a significant in -
crease, with the European EURO STOXX index 
going up by 21% and Germany’s CDAX record -ing an even stronger price hike of 28.5%.1 In 
the international equity markets, these shifts 
served to offset a large chunk of the price 
losses caused by the coronavirus pandemic in 
February and March. Latterly, the EURO STOXX 
index was 12.1% down on its level at the start 
of the coronavirus crisis,2 while the US S&P 500 
has managed to return to its pre- crisis level. 
The S&P 500 thus veered quite close to its all-  
time high, which had been reached just before 
the crisis began. At the same point during the 
2008-09 financial crisis, significant price losses 
were being seen on both sides of the Atlantic 
(EURO STOXX: -43.2%, S&P 500: -43.3%), and 
the price recovery did not set in until later.
The recent pick- up in equity prices was espe -
cially pronounced in the technology and auto -
motive sectors (+32.9% and +32.8%). In add -
ition, share prices of European industrial enter -
prises3 rose at an above average rate of 30.7%. 
Stock prices of companies whose lines of busi -
ness have been particularly hard hit by the 
coronavirus pandemic – for example, com -
panies operating in the travel and leisure indus -
try, such as airlines and hotels – also bounced 
back after enduring massive losses in the previ -
ous quarter (+29.8%). By contrast, financial 
stocks performed below average. On both 
sides of the Atlantic, higher credit default rates 
were anticipated, which might burden banks’ 
balance sheets going forward. Moreover, the 
persistently flat yield curve is putting a strain on 
the banking sector’s expected earnings from 
maturity transformation.
The driving factor behind the stock market 
gains was that market participants recently re -
duced the risk premia they demanded, despite 
the still heightened degree of stock price un -
Large chunk of 
COVID- induced 
price losses 
 offsetPrice gains vary 
across sectors, 
with banks per -
forming below 
average
High valuation 
level due to fall -
ing risk premia 
and lower safe 
interest ratesEarnings yield and volatility 
in the equity market
Sources: I/B/E/S, Refinitiv Datastream and Bundesbank calcula-
tions. 1 Survey reporting day and publication of earnings es-
timates by I/B/E/S. 2 Inverse price-earnings ratio based on an-
nual  earnings  estimates.  3 Implied  volatility  calculated  using 
the prices of index options with a maturity of 30 days.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 8056789Thursday weekly values1
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 8045678Earnings yield EURO STOXX 2
Earnings yield S&P 500 2VSTOXX 3
VIX 3Pre-crisis period
(1 Jan. 2018 – 19 Feb. 2020)Pandemic period
(From 20 Feb. 2020)Comparison of share price movements 
during the coronavirus crisis and the 
financial crisis
Source: Refinitiv Datastream. 1 Chosen starting points: Finan-
cial  crisis:  Insolvency  of  Lehman  Brothers  on  15 September 
2008;  Coronavirus:  outbreak  of  the  pandemic  in  Europe  on  
20 February 2020.
Deutsche BundesbankFinancial crisisCoronavirus pandemicEURO STOXX indexBeginning of crisis = 100,1 log scale
Days since crisis began60708090100110
270 240 210 180 150 120 90 60 30 0
1 The price losses incurred by Wirecard AG after it filed for 
insolvency, which came in at over 95%, depressed the 
overall index by no more than around 1 percentage point, 
viewed in isolation.
2 In this instance, the crisis is regarded as having com -
menced upon the outbreak of the coronavirus pandemic in 
Europe (notably Italy) on 20 February 2020.
3 The sub- index EURO STOXX Industrials encompasses 
such entities as transport and removal enterprises, building 
materials companies and mixed industrial groups.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
58

certainty.4 At the same time, they revised their 
earnings expectations downward, sometimes 
significantly so. In a dividend discount model 
framework, this downward revision tends to 
weigh on equity prices. However, earnings ex -
pectations have recently stabilised at a low 
level, given the latest economic data. From the 
model’s perspective, the lower earnings ex -
pectations for both the S&P 500 and the EURO 
STOXX index were more than offset by the re -
duction in risk premia. To a minor extent, lower 
safe interest rates contributed to higher equity 
prices. In effect, the implied cost of equity and 
earnings yields on both sides of the Atlantic 
stood close to multi- year lows, resulting in a 
comparatively high valuation of stock markets.
In the second quarter of 2020, domestic enter -
prises placed new shares worth €6 billion net in 
the German equity market, somewhat up on 
the first three months of the year (€2 billion). 
The outstanding volume of foreign shares in 
the German market rose by €15 billion over the 
same period. On balance, equities were ac -
quired almost exclusively by German non- banks 
(€28½ billion). Domestic credit institutions 
bought such paper for €1½ billion net, while 
foreign investors reduced their equity exposure 
in Germany by €9 billion on balance.
Mutual funds
Domestic investment companies recorded ra -
ther meagre inflows of €8½ billion in the re -
porting period, after posting an above average 
result in the first quarter, in which they raised 
funds totalling €32 billion. Most of these fresh 
funds were channelled to retail funds (€7½ bil -Stock market 
funding
Sales and pur -
chases of 
mutual fund 
sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2019 2020
Q2 Q1 Q2p
I. Current account + 53.4 + 65.4 + 38.5 
1. Goods 1 + 53.0 + 53.6 + 29.7 
2. Services 2 –  4.0 –  1.1 +  3.5 
3. Primary income + 10.7 + 27.0 + 14.8 
4. Secondary income –  6.2 – 14.0 –  9.5 
II. Capital account –  0.4 –  0.5 +  0.3 
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 42.6 + 33.9 + 41.9 
1. Direct investment +  6.3 + 21.6 +  3.3 
Domestic investment 
abroad + 29.6 + 51.7 +  5.5 
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 23.3 + 30.1 +  2.2 
2. Portfolio investment + 17.1 – 40.5 +  0.3 
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 28.1 +  8.7 + 58.8 
Shares 3 +  3.6 +  5.0 + 18.9 
Investment fund shares 4+  7.8 – 14.2 + 14.3 
of which:
Money market fund 
shares +  2.1 –  4.7 +  0.7 
Short-term debt 
 securities 5 –  0.9 +  2.1 +  2.0 
Long-term debt 
 securities 6 + 17.6 + 15.8 + 23.6 
of which:
Denominated in euro 7 + 14.3 + 12.1 + 17.9 
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities + 11.0 + 49.2 + 58.4 
Shares 3 –  1.6 –  6.1 –  9.0 
Investment fund shares –  1.2 –  0.8 +  0.2 
Short-term debt 
 securities 5 –  6.4 + 26.9 + 33.1 
Long-term debt 
 securities 6 + 20.2 + 29.3 + 34.2 
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 8 +  1.0 +  1.7 + 21.0 
3. Financial derivatives 9 + 11.1 + 32.1 + 31.5 
4. Other investment 10 +  7.7 + 20.6 +  6.5 
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 –  0.4 – 77.6 – 45.2 
Enterprises and 
 households 12 +  0.4 –  1.7 –  7.0 
General government +  0.1 +  0.9 –  0.3 
Bundesbank +  7.5 + 99.0 + 59.1 
5. Reserve assets +  0.4 +  0.1 +  0.2 
IV. Errors and omissions 13 – 10.4 – 31.0 +  3.2 
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Short- 
term: original maturity of up to one year. 6 Long- term: original 
maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 7 Including out-
standing foreign D- Mark bonds. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the Bundes-
bank. 12 Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corporations 
(excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial 
corporations, households and non- profi  t institutions serving 
households. 13 Statistical errors and omissions, resulting from 
the difference between the balance on the fi  nancial account 
and the balances on the current account and the capital ac-
count.
Deutsche Bundesbank4 Market participants’ uncertainty about future stock price 
developments – as measured by the implied volatility of 
equity indices calculated on the basis of options – waned 
over the reporting period after having surged at the end of 
March. At last count, however, the level of uncertainty re -
mained heightened on both sides of the Atlantic due to the 
aforementioned concerns and was well above its respect -
ive five- year averages. On top of this, the price of gold per 
fine ounce reached a new all- time high at the beginning of 
August, which can be interpreted as a further indication of 
continued uncertainty among market participantsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
59

lion). Of the various asset classes, mixed 
securities- based funds (€9½ billion) and open- 
end real estate funds (€3 billion) proved the 
most active in issuing new shares. By contrast, 
funds of funds and equity funds redeemed 
their own shares (€4 billion and €1 billion, re -
spectively). Foreign funds operating in the Ger -
man market attracted fresh funds totalling 
€14½ billion net in the second quarter of 2020. 
Domestic non- banks were the main buyers, 
adding fund shares worth €25½ billion to their 
portfolios. On balance, they showed a slight 
preference for foreign- issued paper. Non-  
resident investors bolstered their fund port -
folios only marginally, while domestic credit in -
stitutions disposed of €2½ billion worth of 
fund shares.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital exports of €½ bil -
lion in the second quarter of 2020. Direct in -
vestment likewise generated net outflows of 
funds, in this instance amounting to €3½ bil -
lion. There was a striking throttling of intra-  
group lending by enterprises in the light of the 
coronavirus pandemic, but this was more than 
offset in both directions by additional equity 
capital.
German- based enterprises stepped up their dir -
ect investment abroad by €5½ billion in the 
second quarter (following an increase of €51½ 
billion in the first three months of 2020). Paral -
lel to this, they augmented their equity capital 
by €23½ billion. Conversely, the value of new 
loans granted by them to affiliated enterprises remained €18 billion below the amount being 
repaid, presumably in order to preserve their 
own liquidity. In this regard, both loans and 
trade credits were affected. German enter -
prises invest in a large number of countries and 
regions throughout the world. In the second 
quarter of 2020, they invested relatively large 
sums in the Netherlands (€21½ billion) and 
France (€3½ billion). By contrast, there were 
significant return flows of funds from the 
United States (€10 billion), the United Kingdom 
(€6 billion) and Ireland (€3½ billion).
Direct investment funds flowing into Germany 
from foreign enterprises were up by €2 billion 
on balance between April and June; in the first 
quarter of 2020, the level of foreign investment 
had stood at €30 billion. These investors 
boosted their equity capital in Germany by 
€5½ billion, with reinvested earnings also play -
ing a role here. With respect to their level of 
lending to affiliated enterprises based in Ger -
many, however, repayments on existing loans 
outstripped the granting of new loans by €3½ 
billion. In this regard, the blow dealt to trade 
credits mirrored the collapse in international 
trade in goods. By contrast, foreign firms were 
willing to grant additional loans, albeit to a 
modest extent. This was mainly possible thanks 
to loans from branches located abroad to their 
German parent companies (“reverse invest -
ment”). This is a typical way in which special 
financing vehicles pass on proceeds from se -
curities issuance. Additional direct investment 
came mainly from the Netherlands (€10½ bil -
lion), France (€3 billion) and the United States 
(€2½ billion). The largest outflows were re -
corded to the United Kingdom (€3 billion) and 
Malta and Belgium (€2½ billion each).Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad sees 
capital outflowsFDI in Germany 
generates cap -
ital inflows
List of references
Schmitz, M., M. De Clercq, M. Fidora, B. Lauro and C. Pinheiro (2012), Revisiting the Effective 
Exchange  Rates of the Euro, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 134.
Tinbergen, J. (1962), Shaping the World Economy: Suggestions for an International Economic 
Policy  , Twentieth Century Fund, New York.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
60

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
The coronavirus pandemic caused a historic de -
cline in economic output in Germany. The Fed -
eral Statistical Office’s flash estimate indicated 
that, after seasonal and calendar adjustment, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) fell by just 
over one- tenth (-10.1%) in the second quarter 
of 2020 compared with what had already been 
a significantly depressed previous quarter.1 The 
decline in economic activity was unpreced -
ented, not just in terms of its depth. In fact, 
measures taken by government agencies, en -
terprises and consumers in Germany and 
abroad to contain the pandemic meant that 
the pace of the collapse was also unpreced -
ented, after economic activity had still been 
pointing upwards into the first half of March. 
An economic recovery was already beginning 
to emerge in May, however, after the first steps 
were taken to ease the general social distan -
cing requirements. Current indicators suggest 
that this upward movement is continuing dur -
ing the summer months. As a result, aggregate 
output is likely to expand again sharply in the 
third quarter. Expansionary monetary and fiscal 
policy measures, such as the economic stimulus 
package recently adopted by the Federal Gov -
ernment, provide additional support to the 
economy.
The coronavirus crisis took its toll on large parts 
of the German economy. Second- quarter real 
value added is once again expected to have 
contracted more strongly in the manufacturing 
sector than it did in the services sector. That 
said, the picture was probably rather mixed in 
the individual services sectors. Retail sales, for 
one, moved more or less sideways overall, benefiting from the uptick in household spend -
ing on food as restaurants and other caterers 
were subject to considerable restrictions. By 
contrast, economic activity shrank dramatically 
in the hotel and restaurant sector, which was 
particularly hard hit by the general social dis -
tancing requirements. Other consumption-  
related areas such as travel agencies, other rec -
reational and cultural service providers and pas -
senger transport continued to be severely af -
fected by the crisis as well. Against this 
backdrop, private consumption fell extremely 
sharply. Owing to the economic impact of 
the pandemic abroad (see the comments on 
pp. 12 ff.), exports also plummeted. Industrial 
investment in machinery and equipment prob -
ably saw an even steeper decline amidst uncer -
tainty surrounding global infection rates going 
forward and the subdued economic outlook. 
Construction investment, on the other hand, German econ -
omy sees his -
toric slump in 
Q2
Coronavirus 
crisis  took its toll 
on large parts 
of German 
economy Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20949698100102104106108
–12–9–6–30+3Price and seasonally adjusted
2015 = 100, log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1
1 From the second quarter of 2020 onwards, the Federal 
Statistical Office is publishing an initial flash estimate of 
GDP just 30 days after the end of the quarter, which is 
roughly two weeks earlier than has previously been the 
case. The timelier publication date means that the results 
contain a higher share of estimates. See Federal Statistical 
Office (2020a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
61

proved quite robust in the face of the pan -
demic, contracting by less than the average 
rate overall. Meanwhile, government consump -
tion expanded as extensive measures were 
rolled out to combat the pandemic, thereby 
supporting economic activity.
In real terms, German exports of goods fell by 
just over one- fifth in the second quarter of 
2020. Against the backdrop of the worldwide 
spread of the coronavirus, the decline was very 
broadly based in regional terms. The volume of 
goods delivered to the euro area and to non-  
euro area countries declined at a similar rate, 
with the euro area recording losses somewhat earlier, but deliveries also showing signs of a 
recovery earlier. The picture was also largely 
homogenous in terms of the value of exports 
to the individual partner countries. Only the 
Chinese business stood out, with deliveries to 
this country rising significantly in value terms 
contrary to the general trend. This was partly 
because the pandemic peaked earlier in the 
People’s Republic. The nationwide containment 
measures were eased there from mid- February 
onwards, and demand for German products re -
covered gradually thereafter. Breaking down 
total German goods exports by category of 
goods, the volume of capital goods exports 
showed the strongest decrease. The exception -
ally weak motor vehicle exports had a particu -
larly dampening effect, but German exporters 
also suffered a substantial decline in deliveries 
of intermediate and consumer goods.
Private consumption is likely to have seen a 
massive drop in the second quarter of 2020. 
Consumption expenditure fell extremely sharply 
in the areas particularly affected by temporary 
contact restrictions and the uncertainty caused 
by the pandemic. This is especially true of the 
hotel and restaurant sector. On an average of 
April and May – the most recent months for 
which statistics are available – real turnover fell 
by just under two- thirds compared with the 
first quarter. Motor vehicle dealers were also 
confronted with dramatic declines in sales. In 
the second quarter, car registrations were just 
over one- third down on the previous quarter. 
In addition to the government- enforced clos -
ure of car sales outlets in April, this decline was 
probably also due to the increased uncertainty, 
which led to many customers holding back 
with their new car purchases. Private expend -
iture on travel and other leisure and cultural 
services is also likely to have fallen dramatically. 
By contrast, real retail sales were exceptionally 
robust during the coronavirus crisis and only 
marginally down on the quarter, with develop -
ments in different trading areas balancing each 
other out. For example, sales in the bricks- and- 
mortar retail trade with textiles, clothing and 
footwear fell abruptly and on a massive scale Extremely sharp 
decline in 
exportsMassive drop 
in private 
consumption 708090100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20758090100110
90100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 1758090100110
€ bnto non-euro area countriesmonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
62

as a result of the measures to curb the spread 
of the virus. Online and mail order sales mean -
while surged. Sales of food and beverages 
were also markedly higher than in the previous 
quarter in value terms, probably partly due to 
substitution effects.
Commercial investment in machinery and 
equipment is expected to have plummeted dra -
matically in the second quarter of 2020. The 
sudden increase in uncertainty in the wake of 
the coronavirus crisis is likely to have severely 
dampened enterprises’ willingness to invest. 
Furthermore, there was, at least temporarily, no 
need to invest in expanding capacity due to the 
sharp decline in demand and thus also overall 
capacity utilisation. This picture is confirmed by 
the economic indicators. Imports of capital 
goods, for example, fell very sharply in terms of 
value. Furthermore, nominal domestic sales in 
the capital goods sector plummeted sharply, 
even excluding the extremely weak motor ve -
hicle sales. Car registrations by commercial 
owners and registration figures for commercial 
vehicles were also down markedly.
Construction investment is likely to have seen 
only a comparatively moderate decline in the 
second quarter of 2020. The fact that the 
measures taken to contain the pandemic had a 
relatively small impact on construction activity 
was a factor here. In addition, part of this de -
crease was due to the very strong first quarter, 
in which construction activity had been tem -
porarily boosted by mild weather conditions. 
The seasonally adjusted nominal turnover in 
the main construction sector available up to 
May suggests that investment in residential 
property may have fallen more sharply than 
that in commercial buildings.
In the second quarter of 2020, German imports 
of goods contracted by one- eighth in real 
terms. The contraction in the volume of im -
ports from non- euro area countries was some -
what smaller than that in deliveries from the 
euro area. This was related to the very sharp 
rise in imports from the People’s Republic of China. In addition to possible catch-  up effects 
after the measures to contain the pandemic 
were eased there, large deliveries of medical 
protective equipment were another factor (see 
the box on pp. 15ff.).
Sectoral trends
The consequences of the coronavirus crisis put 
a massive strain on German industry in the 
second quarter of 2020. Industrial output 
started to recover visibly in May and June, but 
over the spring months it was still on average 
around one- fifth below the previous quarter’s 
already depressed level (-19¼%) in seasonally 
adjusted terms. Developments in the automo -
tive sector stood out, with output falling by just 
under half. Both supply and demand forces 
played a role here. For example, at the height 
of the crisis, car dealerships were ordered to 
close as part of the measures to contain the 
pandemic. This led to a widespread breakdown 
of sales channels for the sector. Furthermore, 
many consumers are likely to have postponed 
their car purchases for the time being owing to 
a deterioration in income prospects and a sud -
den increase in uncertainty overall. In addition, 
temporary border closures severely disrupted 
supply chains in this industry. As a result, pro -
duction in the capital goods sector overall de -
clined disproportionately sharply. However, 
manufacturers of intermediate and consumer 
goods also reported a very significant drop in 
output on a quarterly average.
According to the ifo Institute, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing 
has increased again significantly since April, 
after having fallen rapidly before. The counter -
movement in the capital goods sector was par -
ticularly strong. Manufacturers of consumer 
goods also reported markedly higher capacity 
utilisation in July compared with April’s low. By 
contrast, capacity utilisation in the intermediate 
goods sector was even somewhat lower in the 
period under review than in the previous survey 
in April.Dramatic 
collapse  in 
commercial  
investment in 
machinery and 
equipment
By contrast, 
probably only 
moderate 
decline in 
construction  
investment
Imports of 
goods down 
by one- eighthIndustrial output 
fell by one- fifth 
in second 
 quarter
Capacity utilisa -
tion levels up 
againDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
63

The construction sector has been relatively un -
scathed by the coronavirus crisis. In the second 
quarter of 2020, seasonally adjusted construc -
tion output fell by 4¼% on the quarter, signifi -
cantly less than in many other sectors. In add -
ition, some of this decline was due to weather 
conditions. The main construction sector experi -
enced a markedly smaller decline in activity than 
the finishing trades. The fact that the sector saw 
no major drop in production during the crisis 
was probably partly because skilled workers 
were still available despite the partial closure of 
the borders. According to the ifo Institute, the 
share of construction firms that reported a short -
age of skilled labour as hampering production 
remained relatively stable, even in April which 
was heavily affected by the general contact ban.
Contact restrictions related to the coronavirus 
pandemic posed great difficulties for the ser -
vices sector in the second quarter. Economic 
activity in this sector is likely to have declined 
quite substantially in the quarter as a whole, mainly owing to the very weak April. However, 
there was considerable divergence in develop -
ments in the individual services sectors. Accord -
ing to information regarding the assessment of 
the business situation provided by the ifo Insti -
tute, activity in the real estate business is likely 
to have contracted by less than the average 
rate. There was also only a slight decline in real 
retail sales. By contrast, the decline in sales in 
wholesale trade, which is more heavily depend -
ent on industrial activity, is likely to have been 
more pronounced (statistical data are only 
available for April and May). The motor vehicle 
trade and, above all, the hotel and restaurant 
sector probably lost even more turnover.
Labour market
The coronavirus crisis took a huge toll on the 
labour market in the spring. Employment fell 
sharply over the course of the reporting quarter 
and unemployment rose rapidly. Measured 
against the depth of the economic slump, how -
ever, these adjustments were fairly modest. This 
is primarily because of the large- scale reductions 
made to working hours. Positive balances on 
working time accounts were scaled back signifi -
cantly and short- time work was used extensively. 
In particular, widespread take- up of short- time 
work schemes stabilised both employment levels 
and income. With economic activity beginning 
to improve from May, the rise in unemployment 
and drop in employment slowed significantly to -
wards the end of the reporting period. However, 
the situation on the labour market has not yet 
recovered, as it usually responds to economic 
changes with a certain time lag.
Initial estimates by the Federal Employment 
Agency indicate that 6.7 million people partici -
pated in short-  time work schemes for eco -
nomic reasons in May.2 This equates to one in Coronavirus cri -
sis leaves only 
small traces in 
construction
Heterogeneous 
situation in the 
services sectorLabour market 
severely 
impacted, …Output in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20707580859095100105110
8590951001051101151201251301352015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
monthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1
2 The figure for April was 6.1 million people. At the begin -
ning of July, the Federal Employment Agency had provi -
sionally reported 6.8 million persons in short- time work for 
April. This figure has since been revised downwards with 
the second estimate.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
64

five employees subject to social security contri -
butions – an unprecedented figure in the his -
tory of the Federal Republic of Germany. The 
average number of hours lost per short- time 
worker remained comparatively high in May at 
44%, albeit lower than April’s figure of 49%. 
The volume of work lost consequently corres -
ponded to 2.9 million full-  time employees. In 
the past, short- time work for economic reasons 
has been an instrument primarily used by the 
manufacturing sector as cyclical volatility is par -
ticularly pronounced there. The nature of the 
crisis means that many services sectors are also 
affected this time. The Federal Employment 
Agency’s initial provisional estimates by sector 
illustrate the extent of the use of short- time 
work in April, the month most affected by the 
general contact restrictions.3 The automotive 
industry had the highest share of employees 
subject to social security contributions on 
short- time work, namely more than half, fol -
lowed by business and support services (e.g. 
travel agencies), where the percentage was 
one- third. In the retail sector, the share is likely 
to have been more than one- fifth. The hotel 
and restaurant sector was also particularly hard 
hit, reporting short- time work for just over 1 
million employees in March and April, which 
corresponds to a share of 92%.4 The number of 
short- time workers is likely to have reached its 
peak in May. The notifications of short- time 
work peaked back in April at 8 million employ -
ees, and have since dropped massively to 
190,000 between 1 and 26 July.
Employment declined considerably in the 
course of the second quarter. In June, season -
ally adjusted employment was 1.6%, or just 
under 750,000 persons, below the level of Feb -
ruary 2020, which marked the peak before the … but short- 
time work 
dampens effects 
on unemploy -
ment and 
employment
Employment 
down consider -
ably, mini- jobs 
hit hardestLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020July42.543.043.544.044.545.045.5
30.030.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.0–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200+400+600JulySeasonally adjusted, quarterly data
JulyMillion
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Apr.-
May
3 See Federal Employment Agency (2020a).
4 The Federal Employment Agency has not yet published 
any data on realised short- time work in the hotel and res -
taurant sector. Reference is therefore made to the reported 
notifications. See Federal Employment Agency (2020b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
65

onset of the coronavirus crisis.5 The decline 
covered virtually all forms of employment. Per -
sons in exclusively low- paid part- time employ -
ment were hit the hardest in relative terms, 
with their number falling by 6½% between 
February and May alone (more recent data are 
not yet available). These employment contracts 
are the most unstable, as the firing and hiring 
costs for employers are relatively low and the 
jobs often require only a small amount of 
company- specific human capital. Moreover, 
they are disproportionately used in sectors 
heavily affected by the containment measures, 
such as the hotel and restaurant sector, trade, 
arts, entertainment and recreation and per -
sonal services. It is not possible to apply for 
short- time working for such workers. If they 
are persons in the education system, un -
employed or pensioners, the loss of employ -
ment is not visible in the unemployment statis -
tics. Nevertheless, the number of jobs subject 
to social security contributions also fell signifi -
cantly over a three- month period. During this 
short period of time, almost one in ten jobs 
were lost in the hotel and restaurant sector and 
temporary agency employment alone.
The rise in unemployment caused by the 
coronavirus crisis did not continue towards the 
end of the period under review. The number of 
unemployed persons registered with the Fed -eral Employment Agency continued to grow 
sharply in April and May but the ascent already 
flattened significantly in June. In July, un -
employment then declined slightly in seasonally 
adjusted terms, owing to a lower number of 
young people registered as unemployed and 
more labour market policy measures than is 
normal for the time of year.6 At 2.92 million, 
there were 659,000 more persons registered as 
unemployed than in March, when numbers 
were not yet significantly affected by the pan -
demic owing to the early cut- off date. The un -
employment rate rose by 1.4 percentage points 
to 6.4%. First, in addition to some statistical 
one- off effects, the fact that labour market pol -
icy measures had to be restricted owing to con -
tact restrictions was a factor here. This explains, 
in particular, the higher number of persons re -
ceiving the basic welfare allowance.7 The num -
ber of underemployed persons without short-  
time work – a broader category – therefore in -
creased significantly less sharply, at 480,000, in 
the same period than the number of registered 
unemployed. Second, the use of short- time 
work and other measures to reduce working 
hours had a massive dampening effect on the 
rise in unemployment. The number of un -
employed persons receiving unemployment 
benefits under the statutory unemployment in -
surance scheme (SGB III) has risen by 400,000 
since March. This corresponds to three- fifths of 
the total increase in registered unemployment. 
With regard to inflows and outflows, the rise in 
unemployment was due not only to the higher 
number of persons registering as unemployed, 
Unemployment 
did not rise any 
further in JulyPersons in short-time work for economic 
reasons*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Number of short-time 
workers whose entitlement is based on Section 96 SGB III, un-
adjusted figures. From February 2020, provisional figures.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 2001234567Millions, monthly data
5 In the most recent publication, the number of persons in 
employment was revised upwards moderately in the period 
up to and including February 2020 and downwards per -
ceptibly from March 2020, with the strongest revision in 
April 2020.
6 In July 2020, considerably fewer young people became 
unemployed after completing their training than in previ -
ous years, which could be due to final examinations being 
postponed during the coronavirus crisis. As a result, the 
number of younger unemployed persons rose significantly 
less than is normal for the time of the year and fell by 
28,000 in seasonally adjusted terms. The decline in labour 
market policy measures, also usual for July, was weaker in 
2020 than in previous years. The relief provided by labour 
market policy instruments therefore increased in seasonally 
adjusted terms.
7 See Federal Employment Agency (2020c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
66

Experimental seasonal and calendar adjustment 
of daily economic indicators
The coronavirus crisis has heightened de-
mand for indicators that allow a more 
timely assessment of economic develop-
ments than classic economic indicators. As 
a consequence, increased use has recently 
been made of daily and weekly data, which 
are available quickly.1 The digitalisation 
trend of recent years means that these data 
are easier to access.
Like monthly and quarterly data, daily indi-
cators contain periodically recurring intra- 
year patterns, which mask the underlying 
economic trend and extraordinary develop-
ments and thus render economic analysis 
more diffi   cult. For instance, daily consump-
tion of electricity in Germany displays two 
periodic patterns. The fi  rst is the annual 
pattern, the day- of- the- year effect (see the 
adjacent chart). Electricity consumption is 
highest in winter, gradually falls from Janu-
ary into the spring and reaches its lowest 
level during the time of the summer holi-
days, before gradually rising again until De-
cember. Looking at the year as a whole, this 
results in a marked U- shaped pattern, which 
is interrupted by a sharp drop between 
Christmas and the New Year.
The second periodic pattern in terms of 
daily electricity consumption is evident in 
the weekly cycle, the day- of- the- week ef-
fect (see the chart on p. 68). Signifi  cantly 
more electricity is typically consumed be-
tween Monday and Friday than at the 
weekend, especially on Sundays. There is 
likewise a clear decline in consumption on 
bank holidays and bridge days. Similar pat-
terns are also evident in other time series 
for which daily data are available and make 
it diffi   cult to draw conclusions about cyc-lical developments. All this illustrates the 
need for seasonal and calendar adjustment 
of daily data. Since the intra- year profi  les 
differ from time series to time series, such 
specifi  c details can be taken into account 
only through a high degree of series- specifi  c 
modelling.
Monthly and quarterly time series dominate 
the offi   cial economic statistics. As a conse-
quence, the defi  nitions of seasonal and cal-
endar effects and the methods and proced-
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).Seasonal and calendar adjustment of 
selected daily economic indicators
Sources:  Federal  Network  Agency,  Federal  Office  for  Goods 
Transport, Federal Statistical Office, Flightradar and Hystreet. 
1 The number of people on inner-city high streets. Time series 
is too short to adjust for day-of-the-year effect.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20200.91.11.31.51.7TWh
0501001502002015 =100
Thous.
050100150200250
Pedestrian frequency1Global flight movementsTruck toll mileage indexConsumption of electricityUnadjusted data
Seasonally and calendar adjustedAdjusted only for the day-of-the-week 
effect and calendar adjustedDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
67

ures for adjusting them are likewise tailored 
to these time series frequencies. There are 
therefore currently no European guidelines 
on the seasonal adjustment of weekly or 
daily data. Concepts for the seasonal and 
calendar adjustment of daily data and the 
software based on them are also still being 
developed.2 An extension of seasonal and 
trend decomposition using LOESS (STL), 
which was developed at the Bundesbank, is 
currently being used for the seasonal ad-
justment of daily economic indicators – a 
procedure which has already proved suc-
cessful in adjusting daily cash issuance.3 The 
recurring movements within one week, one 
month and one year are successively elimin-
ated and additional calendar effects are es-
timated and eliminated using a regression 
model.
Each data- based estimate requires a suffi   -
cient number of observations that refl  ect 
the situation that is being assessed at least 
to a similar extent. As a consequence, the 
procedures currently in place allow abrupt 
changes in the structure of weekly fl  uctu-
ations to be determined only with a time 
lag. Looking at the daily truck toll mileage 
index, for instance, the week- day pattern 
changes as a result of temporary Saturday driving bans in the summer months and be-
cause, in the time series, the fl  uctuations 
around Christmas and New Year deviate 
from the usual seasonal fi  gure.4 While this 
means that strong volatility sometimes re-
mains even in the adjusted daily data, these 
and other irregular factors largely offset one 
other in monthly data. For analytical pur-
poses, it may therefore be advantageous to 
consolidate several daily values and to look 
at, for example, weekly averages.
In addition to such changes in the weekly 
pattern, estimating calendar effects for 
daily time series is a particular challenge. As 
a rule, the time series changes markedly not 
only on the bank holidays themselves, but 
also on the preceding and following days. 
In the case of fi  xed bank holidays, i.e. ones 
that always fall on the same date, the effect Consumption of electricity in Germany
Deutsche Bundesbank49 50 51 52 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 15 16 17 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 28 29 30 32
Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug.
2019 20200.91.01.11.21.31.41.51.6TWh, daily data
CWIntroduction 
of COVID-19 
measures
Corpus
Christi WhitsunAscension
 DayLabour
Day Easter New Year Christmas
14 27 31 18Unadjusted data
seasonally and calendar adjusted
2 Extensions of the X- 11 approach and ARIMA model- 
based seasonal adjustment as well as structural time 
series models are particularly promising (see, for 
example , Ladiray et al. (2018)). Extensions of the 
seasonal- trend decomposition using LOESS (STL) also 
provide promising results (see Cleveland et al. (1990), 
Ollech (2018)). The aim is to implement suitable pro-
cedures in the JDemetra+ seasonal adjustment soft-
ware, which is being developed as part of a cooper-
ation between the National Bank of Belgium (NBB) and 
the Bundesbank.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2018).
4 See Cox et al. (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
68

sometimes depends on which day of the 
week it falls on. For instance, energy con-
sumption falls more sharply on Labour Day 
if it falls on a weekday rather than on a 
Sunday, which may, in turn, make it more 
diffi   cult to estimate holiday effects (referred 
to as cross effects).
For a comprehensive picture of the state of 
the economy, adjusted time series based on 
daily, monthly or quarterly data are ana-
lysed together. It is sometimes diffi   cult to 
compare seasonally adjusted time series 
with different frequencies. One reason for 
this is that several periodic patterns overlap 
in daily data, as already explained using the 
example of electricity consumption; these 
patterns are often more closely interlinked 
with each other and with other time series 
components than is the case with monthly 
and quarterly data. Amongst other things, 
this can lead to observations being classi-
fi  ed as outliers in the seasonal adjustment 
of daily data that are not identifi  able as out-
liers in monthly time series of the same indi-
cator. It is also important to note that addi-
tive time series decomposition may be use-ful for daily data, whereas multiplicative 
time series decomposition might be better 
for monthly data.5 Another challenge is the 
aggregation of seasonal and calendar- 
adjusted daily data to monthly data, which 
is carried out to allow comparisons. This is 
true of electricity data where a simple sum-
mation causes residual seasonality in the 
monthly series as months differ in length. 
The above- mentioned aspects make it more 
diffi   cult to maintain the relationship be-
tween time series of different frequencies, 
even if the same adjustment methods are 
used in all periods.
One of the main reasons why daily data are 
interesting is that they are available more 
quickly than other series that have a lower 
frequency, but correlate with them. The 
empirical correlation of indicators with daily 
observations with selected monthly and 
quarterly economic indicators is shown in 
the table above. Monthly and quarterly 
averages of daily data were calculated.
5 This applies, for example, to the truck toll mileage 
index. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).Empirical measures on the dependence between time series with daily 
 observations and selected economic indicators*
On the basis of changes from the preceding period (seasonally and calendar adjusted)
IndicatorAggregation to
monthly data quarterly data
Reference 
period 
from … to 
June 2020 CorrelationReliability 
of sign as a 
percentage 1Reference 
period 
from … to 
Q2 2020 CorrelationReliability 
of sign as a 
percentage 1
Consumption of electricity
Industrial output Feb. 2015 0.33 53.9 Q2 2015 0.74 66.7
GDP , real – – 0.72 61.9
Truck toll mileage index
Industrial output Feb. 2008 0.52 47.0 Q2 2008 0.86 71.4
Retail, real 0.52 55.7 0.55 67.4
GDP , real – – 0.78 73.5
Global fl  ight movements
Exports, real June 2016 0.94 57.1 Q4 2016 0.98 80.0
GDP , real – – 0.98 73.3
Pedestrian frequency
Retail, real June 2018 0.69 40.0 Q4 2018 2 – –
* Aggregation through averaging. 1 Agreement of signs of change from the preceding period as a percentage of all observa-
tions. 2 The small number of observations means that no meaningful correlation can be calculated.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
69

but also to jobseekers not being recruited into 
employment.
Leading labour market indicators have re -
covered significantly since their low in April but 
they remain in contractionary territory. This is 
true of both the ifo employment barometer 
and the employment and unemployment com -
ponents of the labour market barometer of the 
Institute for Employment Research (IAB), which 
all try to capture developments over the next 
three months from different perspectives. Ac -
cording to the indicators, employment is ex -
pected to decline further in the third quarter, 
but at a slower pace than in the recent past, 
and unemployment is likely to rise slightly. The 
aggregate supply of jobs as determined in the 
IAB’s survey of companies fell considerably up 
to June 2020. The number of job vacancies re -
ported to the Federal Employment Agency was 
also down in the period up to July. One factor 
is likely to have been that many enterprises 
only gradually verified the accuracy of data on current job vacancies at the Federal Employ -
ment Agency and reported the withdrawal of 
vacancies. The inflow of new job offers re -
ported to the Federal Employment Agency is a 
fairly positive signal for the labour market. 
After these had more than halved from March 
to April alone, more vacancies are now being 
reported to the Federal Employment Agency 
again. In July, the level was only around one-  
fifth below the pre- crisis level. The Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s BA-  X job index, which re -
cords existing and new vacancies reported to 
the Federal Employment Agency, thus stabil -
ised, too.
Wages and prices
Negotiated wage growth in the second quarter 
was again weaker than in the preceding quar -
ter. This was largely attributable to social part -
ners’ reaction to the ongoing pandemic and its 
economic impact. As a result, low wage agree -Leading indica -
tors recovered 
significantly, but 
still in contrac -
tionary territory
Negotiated 
wage growth 
less strong, 
actual earnings 
probably downLooking, for example, at the respective 
rates of change compared with the previ-
ous period in terms of actual electricity con-
sumption and industrial output, the correl-
ation is comparatively low on a monthly 
basis. On a quarterly basis, it is signifi  cantly 
higher, driven by the large rates of change 
in the second quarter of 2020. Moreover, at 
54%, the reliability of the sign in the period- 
to- period comparison is low on a monthly 
basis, but increases to 67% on a quarterly 
basis. This means that, on average, the 
signs of the change over the quarter do not 
match in around one in three cases.6 By 
contrast, global fl  ight movements are highly 
correlated with real exports on a monthly 
basis, while the reliability of the sign is fairly 
low.7 When viewed on a quarterly basis, the 
correlation between fl  ight movements and 
both real exports and real gross domestic 
product is 0.98. The reliability of the sign is 
73% and 80%, respectively.Given the challenges outlined above, sea-
sonal adjustment of high- frequency indica-
tors and their use in the timely monitoring of 
economic events is currently still experimen-
tal. Meanwhile, the trend towards greater 
digitalisation means that the use of same- 
day indicators as supplementary information 
for economic analysis, especially in periods 
of rapid economic change, is likely to in-
crease further.8 This requires further meth-
odological work, which should also help 
harmonise procedures at the European level, 
for example by supplementing the European 
guidelines on seasonal adjustment.
6 This is likely to be the case more often if the rates of 
change are close to zero.
7 Unlike the indicator of the reliability of the sign, the 
calculated correlations are vulnerable to outliers such 
as the COVID- 19 effect. When viewed up to December 
2019, the correlation between fl  ight movements and 
foreign trade is only 0.23, for instance. The reliability 
of the sign is 47%.
8 See European Commission (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
70

ments were concluded in some cases, gradual 
increases negotiated last year were postponed 
by several months and wage negotiations in 
sectors with expiring collective agreements 
(and thus possible wage increases) were 
delayed. In addition, there were moderate in -
cremental wage increases from longer- term 
collective wage agreements of previous years. 
Including ancillary agreements, negotiated 
rates of pay rose by 1.9% year- on- year in the 
second quarter, following an increase of 2.3% 
in the first quarter. Actual earnings are likely to 
have declined owing to widespread short- time 
work and the reduction in paid overtime.
In most cases, the social partners continued to 
prioritise protecting jobs over raising wages in 
the second quarter. For instance, previously 
agreed wage increases were postponed by 
three months in the printing industry and by 
one year in textile services. In several sectors, 
the social partners agreed on ways of topping 
up short- time working benefits. However, ne -
gotiations are currently proving more conten -
tious in sectors with higher wage demands: in 
the main construction sector, the industrial 
trade union, IG BAU, demanded wage in -
creases of 6.8%, but no less than €230 of 
monthly additional income, and compensation 
for travel time to and from construction sites. 
As no agreement was reached, arbitration was 
initiated. Negotiations with office cleaning 
companies, in which IG BAU demanded a sig -
nificant rise in the sectoral minimum wages of 
€1.20 per hour and a wage hike of 6.5% for all 
other pay categories, were broken off without 
any agreement.
In June, the Minimum Wage Commission 
unanimously recommended that the Federal 
Government raise the statutory general min -
imum wage significantly. The Federal Minister 
for Labour and Social Affairs announced that 
he would follow this recommendation. The 
minimum wage is to be raised in four steps by 
a total of €1.10, or 11.8%, to €10.45 per hour 
from July 2022. With this high number of steps 
and the scale of the increases, the Commission has deviated from the former calculation 
method, which was heavily geared towards the 
past trend in negotiated wages. It remains to 
be seen how the large raise will affect future 
wage negotiations and the employment situ -
ation of unskilled workers. This particularly ap -
plies to eastern Germany, where the higher 
minimum wage will affect a much larger pro -
portion of employees than in western Ger -
many.
The inflation rate was primarily dampened by 
the decline in energy prices in the second quar -
ter of 2020. In seasonally adjusted terms, con -
sumer prices as measured by the Harmonised 
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) remained 
more or less unchanged after rising by 0.3% in 
the first quarter of 2020. Developments by cat -
egory of goods exhibited two divergent trends. 
Energy prices declined significantly in the 
second quarter amidst a sharp drop in crude oil 
prices related to the coronavirus pandemic. In -
flation in non- energy industrial goods also 2020 wage 
round: focus 
mostly on pro -
tecting jobs, but 
also clear wage 
demands in 
some cases
Incremental 
minimum wage 
increase to 
€10.45 per hour 
in July 2022Inflation rate 
mainly damp -
ened by energy 
in Q22013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202000.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–0.50+0.5+1.0%
Q1Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 The wage 
drift is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual 
earnings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQuarterlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
71

tailed off somewhat, in line with prices at the 
upstream stages of the economy. Food prices, 
meanwhile, rose significantly once again, and 
services also became markedly more expensive. 
The latter were especially hard hit by the con -
tainment measures introduced in response to 
the coronavirus crisis. Numerous services even 
had to be suspended temporarily, meaning that 
in some cases, particularly for these consump -
tion segments, prices had to be estimated.8 Al-
though the Federal Statistical Office has stated 
that the quality of the HICP data was assured 
overall, potential distortions as a result of esti -
mates of the HICP sub- components in question 
should nonetheless be taken into consideration in the interpretation.9 Quarter- on- quarter infla -
tion slowed to 0.7%, down from 1.6% at the 
beginning of the year. By contrast, core infla -
tion excluding energy and food declined only 
slightly, from 1.3% to 1.1%.
The temporary cut in VAT rates was clearly re -
flected in consumer prices in July.10 The head -
line inflation rate fell to 0.0% from a level of 
0.8% in the previous month.11 Energy prices 
declined more sharply once again despite 
higher crude oil prices. Electricity and gas tar -
iffs, which are not normally adjusted in the 
summer, also became cheaper. Food inflation, 
which was previously very high, declined 
roughly in line with the VAT rate. Compared 
with the previous year, prices for industrial 
goods excluding energy even fell markedly 
again for the first time since 2005. Special 
offers probably also played a role here along -
side the reduction in VAT. By contrast, services 
inflation remained virtually constant. This is 
partly because just under half of all services are 
exempt from VAT, whereas VAT is generally 
payable on goods. However, the inflation rate 
for services subject to VAT also fell only slightly. 
One factor that likely played a role here is that 
many services sectors were particularly affected 
by restrictions relating to the coronavirus pan -
demic, such as additional hygiene and safety 
measures and a drop in sales, meaning that 
they had to bear higher costs. The decline in July inflation 
rate significantly 
depressed by 
VAT cut
Export pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20209396100104
96100104108
96100104108
0123
+++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2Producer prices1
%2015 = 100, log scale
96100104
JulyImport prices
July
8 From April, official price measurement increasingly had 
difficulties regarding the on- site collection of prices and the 
non- availability of entire consumption segments, especially 
in the services sector (e.g. visits to the hairdresser) and in 
travel (e.g. package holidays or private hotel accommoda -
tion). In some cases, missing price data were estimated 
(imputed) on the basis of past values in consultation with 
Eurostat. The share of consumer prices in the German HICP 
for which no data could be obtained was the highest in 
April, at 27%, and fell steadily from 13% in May to 8% in 
June (see Federal Statistical Office 2020b).
9 Following the resumption of business activity, hairdress -
ers and beauticians, in particular, experienced above-  
 average inflation.
10 On 3 June 2020, the coalition government announced 
that it would cut VAT from 1 July to 31 December 2020. To 
this end, the standard VAT rate for goods and services was 
reduced from 19% to 16% and the reduced VAT rate for 
goods was lowered from 7% to 5%. See pp. 95ff.
11 The inflation rate as measured by the national Con -
sumer Price Index (CPI) was -0.1%, down from 0.9%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
72

industrial goods excluding energy meant that 
inflation excluding food and energy shrank 
from 1.1% to 0.7% overall.12
The temporary VAT cut will probably push infla -
tion rates into negative territory in the second 
half of 2020. VAT rates are scheduled to return 
to their previous levels in January 2021, how -
ever, which should mean that inflation rates re -
turn to (clearly) positive territory.13
Order books and outlook
The significant slump in the first half-  year will 
probably give way to very strong growth in the 
German economy in the third quarter of 2020. 
From today’s perspective, the clear and broad- 
based recovery in aggregate output that began 
right after the slump bottomed out in April 
looks set to continue. The orders situation in 
industry has improved considerably of late. The 
sharp rise in short- term expectations for ex -
ports and production suggests that industrial 
output and exports of goods will continue to 
recover during the summer months. Sentiment 
has also improved significantly in other sectors 
of the economy. This picture is confirmed by 
timely “hard” indicators – the truck toll mileage 
index continued to increase markedly in July. 
According to data provided by the German As -
sociation of the Automotive industry (VDA), the 
number of passenger cars manufactured in 
Germany surged at the beginning of the sum -
mer and was therefore barely below February’s 
pre- crisis level after seasonal adjustment. The 
recovery in industrial activity should stimulate 
industrial investment in machinery and equip -
ment again. Private consumption is likewise ex -
pected to contribute robustly to the overall re -
covery, primarily because the pandemic- related 
restrictions have been eased considerably and 
infection rates appear to be under control. Not 
just that: the situation in the labour market has 
also stabilised somewhat recently. An added 
boost will be provided by fiscal measures, in 
particular the temporary VAT cut adopted as 
part of the recent economic stimulus package, which are helping loosen consumers’ purse 
strings. The Bundesbank’s weekly activity index 
(WAI), which is based on a selection of high-  
frequency and timely indicators from various 
economic sectors (see the box on pp. 67 ff.), 
shows that German economic output is clearly 
picking up again following the trough caused 
by the coronavirus crisis.14
However, the economy is likely to recover much 
more slowly than it contracted during the ex -
tremely abrupt and deep crash. Although the 
economy is making up ground, activity levels 
will remain well short of pre- crisis levels in the 
third quarter and beyond, not least because 
the pandemic still has not been contained in 
many countries around the world and these 
countries are still suffering the economic con -
sequences. This is hurting German exports. An -
other factor to consider is the acute uncertainty 
surrounding infection rates going forward, 
which is dampening the willingness of enter -
prises in Germany and abroad to invest. This is 
likely to impede a full-  blown recovery in de -
mand for German industrial products. Eco -
nomic activity will remain constrained in a 
number of domestic services sectors until ef -
fective medical treatment such as a vaccine be -
comes available.Dampening 
effect of VAT cut 
will only last 
until the end of 
2020
German econ -
omy on a road 
to recovery in 
Q3 2020, …… but is still far 
off the pre- crisis 
level
12 Non- availability of price representatives owing to the 
coronavirus pandemic played almost no role in the report -
ing month of July. According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice, only just under 3% of the German HICP basket of 
goods had to be estimated.
13 The renewed rise in tax rates from January 2021 would, 
in purely arithmetical terms, increase the HICP rate by 
1.8 percentage points up to June 2021, followed by a posi -
tive base effect of also 1.8  percentage points from July 
2021. Based on the latest June projection, which expects 
an inflation rate of 1½%, the HICP rate could therefore 
climb to just over 3% in the second half of 2021. However, 
in contrast to this purely mechanical perspective, the 
changes to the VAT rate will probably not be passed on to 
consumers in full and there is likely to be a time lag, as al -
ready seen in July, which could lead to less pronounced 
volatility in consumer prices.
14 The WAI describes how trend- adjusted economic activ -
ity has evolved over the past 13 weeks compared with the 
previous 13 weeks. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a). 
Current figures can be found online at https://www.
bundesbank.de/en/statistics/economic-activity-and-prices/
weekly-activity-index/weekly-activity-index-for-the-german-  
economy-833976Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
73

Sentiment in the German economy has recently 
brightened significantly. The ifo business cli -
mate index partially recovered from its all- time 
low at the start of the second quarter and rose 
for the third time in a row in July 2020. How -
ever, the individual index components have 
evolved in very different ways in recent months. 
Business expectations rose significantly, while 
the assessment of the current business situ -
ation improved perceptibly more slowly. Large 
differences were observed across the individual 
sectors. In the manufacturing sector, business 
expectations and the assessment of the current 
business situation were particularly divergent. 
By contrast, enterprises in the retail trade sector 
were even roughly as positive again in their as -
sessment of the business situation as before 
the crisis. The hotel and restaurant sector, 
which had previously been particularly hard hit 
by the containment measures, recently also re -
ported a massive improvement in its assess -
ment of the business situation, which was 
nevertheless deep in negative territory and was 
thus far from its pre- crisis level. Business condi -
tions in the main construction sector improved 
only marginally; however, even at the lowest 
point of the recession, they remained well in 
positive territory.
The orders situation in German industry has im -
proved slightly of late. Following the dramatic 
downward slide in March and April, incoming 
orders rose sharply again in May and June in 
seasonally adjusted terms. However, this only 
made up for just over two- thirds of the slump 
caused by the pandemic. The recovery is likely 
to have continued in July. According to the ifo 
Institute’s survey results, the assessment of the 
stocks of outstanding orders improved percep -
tibly at the beginning of the third quarter. 
However, on average, new orders over the 
spring months were down on the previous 
quarter’s level by just under one- quarter. 
Broken down by region, the inflow of new 
orders from abroad fell particularly sharply, 
with both demand from the euro area and 
from non- euro area countries declining to a 
similar extent. By contrast, the decline in do -Sentiment in the 
German econ -
omy consider -
ably improved
Recent slight 
improvement in 
the orders situ -
ation in industryDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source  of  the  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office. 
1 Only calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2060708090100110120
–30–20–100+10
60708090100110120
60708090100110
90100110120130140
–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scaleLog scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
%%Total
MonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
74

mestic orders was noticeably smaller. This dis -
crepancy, however, was partly attributable to 
large- scale domestic orders. Looking at the in -
dustrial sectors, there was a shortage of new 
orders mainly for enterprises in the intermedi -
ate and capital goods sectors. By contrast, the 
consumer goods sector experienced a mark -
edly smaller reduction in demand for its prod -
ucts.
Construction activity in Germany is likely to re -
main buoyant in the third quarter of 2020. In 
April and May – the most recent months for 
which statistics are available – incoming orders 
in the main construction sector saw a steep 
seasonally adjusted fall compared with the pre -
vious quarter. This was largely due to weaker 
demand for construction work in housing and 
commercial buildings construction, which was 
probably related to the considerably height -
ened uncertainty caused by the coronavirus 
pandemic. However, this decline was from a 
very high level, meaning that construction 
firms’ order books are likely still well filled. At 
the same time, the number of building permits 
for housing construction, which is also an im -
portant leading indicator for the sector, rose 
again over the same period. More timely indi -
cators also signal that construction activity did 
not decline perceptibly in the period under re -
view. According to the ifo Institute, the utilisa -tion of equipment in the main construction in -
dustry remained much higher than average in 
July and the reach of orders even rose slightly.
Household consumption is likely to increase 
sharply in the third quarter of 2020, recouping 
a large part of the losses suffered previously. In 
particular, positive stimuli are expected in retail 
and motor vehicle trade as well as in the hotel 
and restaurant sector. One important factor 
here is that the containment measures have 
been eased considerably and that the labour 
market outlook for employees has not deterior -
ated further recently. The temporary reduction 
in VAT, which was agreed as part of the Federal 
Government’s latest fiscal package, is also help -
ing loosen consumers’ purse strings. The con -
sumer climate index, calculated by the Gesell -
schaft für Konsumforschung  (GfK) and forecast 
for the month of August, recovered further 
from its record low. There was a particularly 
significant increase in propensity to purchase in 
July and a surge in private new passenger car 
registrations. However, private consumption is 
likely to initially remain markedly below its pre- 
crisis level. It is burdened by the still high level 
of uncertainty, and some areas of consumption 
are still subject to restrictions relating to the 
pandemic. This is particularly true of the travel 
industry, passenger transport and other leisure 
and cultural services.Construction 
sector still in 
very good shape 
in Q3Private con -
sumption is 
likely to recoup 
a large part of 
the pandemic- 
induced shortfall 
in Q3
List of references
Cleveland, R. B., W. S. Cleveland, J. E. McRae and I. Terpenning (1990), STL: A Seasonal-  Trend 
 Decomposition Procedure Based on Loess, Journal of Official Statistics, 6, pp. 3-73.
Cox, M., J. Triebel, S. Linz, C. Fries, L. F. Flores, A. Lorenz, D. Ollech, A. Dietrich, J. LeCrone and 
K.  Webel (2020), Täglicher Lkw-  Maut- Fahrleistungsindex aus digitalen Prozessdaten der Lkw-  
Mauterhebung, Wirtschaft und Statistik , No 4/ 2020, pp. 63-76.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), A weekly activity index for the German economy, Monthly Report, 
May 2020, pp. 68-70.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), A description of the method used for the seasonal adjustment of 
the daily truck toll mileage index, https://www.bundesbank.de/resource/blob/832910/8c03beb2b
30f8f26d8a72286b437916e/mL/lkw-maut-fahrleistungsindex-data.pdf .Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
75

Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Seasonal adjustment of daily data, Monthly Report, March 2018, 
p. 40.
European Commission (2020), A European Strategy for Data, https://ec.europa.eu/digital-  
single-market/en/policies/building-european-data-economy .
Eurostat (2015), ESS guidelines on seasonal adjustment, Luxembourg: Publications Office of the 
European Union.
Federal Employment Agency (2020a), Auswirkungen der Corona- Krise auf den Arbeitsmarkt, 
Berichte : Arbeitsmarkt kompakt , Nuremberg, July 2020, p. 7.
Federal Employment Agency (2020b), Berichte: Blickpunkt Arbeitsmarkt – Monatsbericht zum 
Arbeits- und Ausbildungsmarkt , Nuremberg, May 2020, p. 10.
Federal Employment Agency (2020c), Auswirkungen der Corona- Krise auf die Arbeitslosigkeit 
– Berechnung des Corona- Effekts, Berichte: Blickpunkt Arbeitsmarkt – Monatsbericht zum Arbeits- 
und Ausbildungsmarkt , Nuremberg, July 2020, p. 12.
Federal Statistical Office (2020a), Gross domestic product in the 2nd quarter of 2020 down 10.1% 
on the previous quarter, press release No 287 of 30 July 2020, available at: https://www.destatis.
de/EN/Press/2020/07/PE20_287_811.html .
Federal Statistical Office (2020b), Impact of the corona crisis on the CPI/ HICP price collection, 
method report of 13  August 2020, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Themes/Economy/Prices/
Consumer-Price-Index/Methods/corona-cpi-hicp.pdf?__blob=publicationFile .
Ladiray, D., J. Palate, G. L. Mazzi and T. Proietti (2018), Seasonal Adjustment of Daily and Weekly 
Data, in G. L. Mazzi, D. Ladiray and D. A. Rieser, (eds.), Handbook on Seasonal Adjustment, Luxem -
bourg: Publications Office of the European Union, pp. 757-783.
Ollech, D. (2018), Seasonal Adjustment of Daily Time Series, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion 
Paper No 41/ 2018.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
76

Public finances*
General government budget
German public finances have been playing a 
significant stabilising role during the corona -
virus crisis. Fiscal policy is supporting the 
healthcare system, businesses and households 
as well as providing economic stimuli. In add -
ition, Germany is heavily involved in the EU’s 
assistance and recovery programmes. The out -
look for public finances remains strongly de -
pendent on the pandemic and how it unfolds 
both nationally and internationally. Uncertainty 
surrounds not just the budgetary burdens 
caused by the economic slump but also the ex -
tent to which government assistance is being 
taken up. Additional fiscal policy measures 
could also be taken.
However, there are clear signs that the general 
government surplus (2019: 1½% of gross do -
mestic product (GDP)) will swing into a high 
deficit this year. This deficit could be as high as 
around 7% of nominal GDP . Its drivers are the 
economic downturn (i.e. the automatic stabil -
isers) and the government’s expansionary fiscal 
stance. The latter mainly reflects the fiscal re -
sponse to the crisis and explains around two-  
thirds of the increase in the deficit. The debt 
ratio is likely to move towards 75% this year 
(end- 2019: 60%). Alongside the deficit, this in -
crease is due to the fact that loans and capital 
assistance to enterprises are being financed by 
additional government debt. This new debt in -
volves a higher level of government financial 
assets (rising credit claims and government 
equity investment). Therefore, the deficit as de -
fined in the national accounts is not affected by 
this (for more on the contribution of public fi -
nances to stabilisation, see pp. 92 ff.). More -
over, the debt ratio is also rising because nom -
inal GDP (and hence the denominator of the 
ratio) is declining.
Next year will probably see the deficit shrink 
again, as a large number of stabilisation meas -ures are currently expected to come to an end. 
That said, public finances will continue to pro -
vide considerable support for economic activity 
and incomes. Although the measures that are 
due to come to an end (such as aid for busi -
nesses and lower VAT rates) are the main 
sources of this support, new – less extensive – 
expansionary measures are also envisaged. The 
solidarity surcharge is to be partly abolished, 
child benefits and the child tax allowance in -
creased and a basic pension introduced. In 
order to support the economy, the government 
will pay a higher grant to stabilise the renew -
able energy (EEG) levy than was agreed in the 
climate package. Another deficit- increasing 
factor is the fact that payments to the Euro -
pean Union are set to rise significantly. Brexit is 
a major reason behind this, as it pushes up Ger -
many’s financing share. The new EU off- budget 
entity could result in additional revenue (see 
p.  81). Compared with the current year, eco -
nomic activity is likely to ease the burden on 
public finances only slightly (i.e. the automatic 
stabilisers will largely continue to work; see 
p. 94). Amongst other things, wages and private 
consumption – key reference variables of public 
finances – are expected to recover only slowly.
The current fiscal stance is appropriate. In a 
downturn, the automatic stabilisers should be 
allowed to operate freely – and fiscal policy 
that provides additional support is important 
given the severity of the current crisis. The 
European and national budget rules contain es -
cape clauses for this purpose. The economic 
costs associated with the pandemic and the 
need for countermeasures are likely to persist Public finances 
strongly sup -
porting econ -
omy during 
coronavirus 
crisis 
High deficit and 
rising debt: 
automatic 
and active 
stabilisation Public finances 
to remain sup -
portive in 2021, 
too
Expansionary 
public finances 
appropriate
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No data for the second quarter of 2020 are yet 
available for local government or the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes. These will be 
analysed in the short commentaries in upcoming issues of 
the Monthly Report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
77

EU budget: Agreement on multi- annual fi  nancial framework 
for 2021 to 2027 and one- off “Next Generation EU” 
 instrument in response to the coronavirus pandemic
On 21 July 2020, the European Council of 
Heads of State or Government agreed on 
two things: fi  rst, the main features of the 
new multi- annual financial framework 
(MFF) for the EU budget from 2021 to 2027, 
and second, a one- off, debt- fi  nanced off- 
budget entity (Next Generation EU – NGEU) 
to help manage the impact of the corona-
virus crisis.1
The MFF for 2021 to 2027: under strain 
due to Brexit
According to the MFF for 2021 to 2027, the 
maximum total fi  gure for expenditure in the 
regular EU budget is set at €1.074 trillion in 
the years ahead.2 At 1.06% of the EU’s GNI, 
this is somewhat larger than the current 
MFF (1% of the GNI of the EU- 28), but only 
because the latter still includes the United 
Kingdom as an EU Member State. Excluding 
the United Kingdom, however, the current 
MFF equates to 1.13% of the correspond-
ingly adjusted fi  gure for EU GNI. The ex-
penditure structure of the EU budget has 
not been fundamentally changed from that 
of the current MFF. Spending areas with a 
clear European focus will only see moderate 
reinforcement.3 However, in addition to the 
regular budget, the new NGEU special fund 
should also be taken into consideration. It 
will provide a distinct boost to regular EU 
programmes, too, with the allocation cri-
teria for the funding geared more to EU 
structural policy than to the current crisis. 
Funding is also distributed through SURE, 
the EU programme designed to support 
short- time work schemes, which is more 
closely linked to the crisis.4On the revenue side, the own resources 
ceiling is to be raised to 1.4% of EU GNI. 
This limit specifi  es the maximum amount of 
funds that the EU can request annually from 
Member States to fund the EU budget.5 
Amongst other things, the considerable 
gap between this limit and the expenditure 
ceiling provides a buffer for unexpected 
events and secures the loans taken up from 
the EU – but excluding those for the new 
NGEU, which is subject to separate arrange-
ments.
Germany’s payments to the regular EU 
budget are set to increase in the next seven 
years. According to media reports, the Fed-
eral Ministry of Finance expects its average 
annual payments to be €10 billion higher 
than under the current fi  nancial framework. 
The United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the 
EU plays a key role in this. The lack of con-
tributions from the United Kingdom will 
markedly increase the share of fi  nancing 
provided by all of the other Member States 
– including Germany. This will only partially 
be offset by lower spending.
1 What happens next: The agreement reached by the 
European Council covers the policy guidelines for the 
MFF. Looking ahead, the MFF regulation will need to 
be drafted. Furthermore, it must still be approved by 
the European Parliament and the ruling on own funds 
must still be ratifi  ed by the Member States (in Ger-
many, for example, this requires parliamentary ap-
proval).
2 Technical background information: Unless stated 
otherwise, the EU- 27 countries are meant. All euro fi  g-
ures are expressed using constant 2018 prices. For the 
annual budget plans, the appropriations are adjusted 
for the real change in EU gross national income (EU 
GNI) plus a fi  xed price component of 2%.
3 For more information about the reform debate in 
this area, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, 
April 2020, p. 57.
4 For more details on SURE, see Deutsche Bundes-
bank, Monthly Report, May 2020, p. 87 f.
5 For more details on the own resources ceiling, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, April 2020, 
p. 46.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
78

Next Generation EU one- off instrument: 
debt- fi  nanced transfers and loans
The regular budget plan is accompanied by 
the one- off NGEU crisis package comprising 
assistance loans and transfers, which are to 
be committed by 2023 and disbursed by 
the end of 2026. While the regular budget 
is continuously balanced using own re-
sources (i.e. mainly through transfers by the 
Member States), NGEU is intended to be 
initially fi  nanced through debt. A total of 
€750 billion (5.4% of EU GNI in 2019) is 
earmarked for this purpose. The debt will 
be repaid through the debt service pay-
ments of the Member States that receive 
NGEU loans, and by tapping into future EU 
budgets. In order cover the borrowing for 
NGEU, the own resources ceiling will be 
raised by 0.6% of EU GNI annually until 
2058.6 In this context, individual Member 
States may, in some years, be requested to 
temporarily make payments that are higher 
than their share of fi  nancing in the EU 
budget. This is intended to create scope for 
debt service payments. The comprehensive 
coverage overall and, not least, the poten-
tially greater recourse to individual coun-
tries with high credit ratings should ensure 
that the newly issued EU debt achieves a 
good rating in the capital markets.7
Under NGEU, €360 billion will be granted 
to Member States as loans and €390 billion 
as non- repayable transfers. The EU treaties 
do not actually provide for the credit fi  nan-
cing of the EU budget. Although the EU has 
also incurred capital market debt in the 
past, it did so at relatively small volumes 
and only so that it could, in turn, issue 
loans.8 The EU’s debt was thus balanced by 
claims of the same amount, and the EU 
budget showed no (national accounts) def-
icits or surpluses. Extensive defi  cits will now 
emerge at the EU level when the debt- 
fi  nanced NGEU transfers are disbursed. When the loans taken up by the EU for this 
purpose mature, future EU budgets will 
need to exhibit corresponding surpluses. 
Repayment is scheduled to start in 2028 at 
the latest and extend until 2058. The large- 
scale borrowing under NGEU and the 
planned defi  cits in this off- budget item are 
justifi  ed on the basis of the exceptional cir-
cumstances presented by the coronavirus 
crisis.
Formally, NGEU consists of two parts: fi  rst, 
the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF), 
which is directly related to the crisis, and 
second, additional funds for regular EU pro-
grammes. The RRF comprises transfers of 
€312.5 billion (2.2% of EU GNI in 2019) and 
loans totalling €360 billion (2.6% of EU GNI 
in 2019). Disbursement is conditional on re-
form and investment plans, which are to be 
submitted by the Member States, assessed 
by the European Commission, and ap-
proved by the Council of Ministers. One or 
more Member States can object, thus delay-
ing the payments. The allocation key for the 
RRF transfers to the Member States is to be 
determined in advance. It is intended that 
70% of the RRF transfers (just under €219 
billion) will have been committed by the 
end of 2022. Allocation to the various 
countries will be based on population fi  g-
ures for 2019 (the larger the population, the 
more funds), economic strength in 2019 
(the lower the per capita GDP , the more 
funds) and the unemployment rate from 
2015 to 2019 (the higher the rate, the more 
funds). The remaining 30% of transfers (just 
6 The statement explains that the own resources ceil-
ing will be raised to cover loans taken up as a result of 
the coronavirus crisis. This may therefore also cover 
the borrowing already agreed for the SURE scheme.
7 For more information about the approach taken by 
rating agencies, see Fitch, EU MFF Proposal Consistent 
with ‘AAA’ Debt Coverage Metric, June 2020.
8 As at mid- 2020, this fi  gure stood at €66½ billion, or 
½% of the EU’s GDP in 2019. The SURE loans, which 
were agreed in April, may increase the debt by up to 
€100 billion.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
79

under €94 billion) are to be committed by 
the end of 2023. By replacing the un-
employment rate indicator with an indica-
tor for the slump in GDP in 2020 and 2021, 
crisis- related developments will then have a 
certain bearing on how these are distrib-
uted. Overall, however, the allocation of 
transfers is largely not geared to how se-
verely a Member State has been affected by 
the coronavirus crisis.
While allocated transfers will benefi  t each 
Member State that receives them, countries 
are only likely to take up loans if their own 
fi  nancing costs are higher, because it is 
planned that the interest rates of the loan 
programmes will be based on the EU’s 
credit conditions. By contrast, countries 
with equally good or even better interest 
rate conditions are likely to forego the loan 
option. As a rule, the maximum volume of 
the loans for each EU Member State will 
not exceed 6.8% of its GNI. If all EU coun-tries with fi  nancing conditions that are less 
favourable than those of the EU were to 
take up the maximum volume in loans, the 
total credit limit of €360 billion would be 
almost completely exhausted.
Taking into account the aforementioned al-
location key for the transfers, if only the 
specifi  ed group of countries uses the loans 
in full, the funds will be distributed among 
the countries as follows: in relation to its 
GNI, Croatia benefi  ts the most, followed by 
Bulgaria and Greece (see the chart above). 
Overall, central and eastern European EU 
countries, with their comparatively low per 
capita GDP , will benefi  t relatively strongly 
(see also the box on pp. 22ff. of this Report), 
as will southern European Member States, 
where unemployment rates have been 
stubbornly high for a while now. Austria, 
Denmark, Finland, Germany, Luxembourg, 
the Netherlands and Sweden will receive 
funding of less than 1% of their GNI. Under Recovery and Resilience Facility – expected use of funds by EU Member States
Sources: European Commission and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 3 6 9 12 15 18 
0 30 60 90 120 150 180LuxembourgDenmarkGermanyNetherlandsAustriaSwedenFinlandBelgiumFranceIrelandMaltaSloveniaCzech RepublicEstoniaItalyHungaryCyprusSpainLithuaniaPolandPortugalLatviaSlovakiaRomaniaGreeceBulgariaCroatia€ billion As a percentage of GNI 2019
LuxembourgMaltaDenmarkFinlandCyprusEstoniaAustriaSwedenLatviaSloveniaBelgiumLithuaniaNetherlandsCroatiaBulgariaSlovakiaHungaryIrelandCzech RepublicGermanyPortugalRomaniaGreeceFrancePolandSpainItalyGrants LoansDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
80

these assumptions, just under half of the 
total volume of funding is allocated to Italy 
and Spain.
Member States are responsible for EU debt 
via the EU budget. The loan programmes 
will only burden the EU budget if the coun-
tries that have taken out loans default on 
their interest or principal repayments. In any 
case, however, the joint debt for transfer 
payments must be serviced by tapping into 
future EU budgets, with the EU Member 
States ultimately contributing in line with 
their future shares of funding. To fi  nance 
the EU budget, the European Council has 
also fl  oated the idea of creating a number 
of additional sources of income (tax on 
plastic waste, digital levy, carbon border ad-
justment mechanism, fi  nancial transaction 
tax). These could fl  ow directly into the EU 
budget or via the Member States’ public fi  -
nances. Although they lessen the need for 
existing own resources, it is ultimately still 
up to European taxpayers to fund the EU 
budget and the expenditure items it con-
tains for NGEU.
Following the United Kingdom’s withdrawal 
from the EU, Germany’s share of funding 
for the EU budget amounts to around one- 
quarter. Accordingly, around €190 billion of 
the additional EU debt (€750 billion) can be 
assigned to Germany. The planned transfers 
of €390 billion will lead to EU defi  cits. In 
line with Germany’s fi  nancing share, its cu-
mulative share of the defi  cit over the years 
will come to around €100 billion, or roughly 
3% of its 2019 GDP fi  gure. That said, a 
Member State’s specifi  c share will also de-
pend on its future GDP levels and its rele-
vant share of fi  nancing in the EU budget at 
the time. The annual contributions may also 
rise, if, for example, the option of temporar-
ily calling for more own resources from indi-
vidual Member States is used. On the other 
hand, according to the current allocation key, transfers amounting to €22 billion are 
set to fl  ow to Germany.
Solidarity is welcome, but long- term 
joint debt is worrying
EU Member States will use NGEU to provide 
mutual support in the form of transfers and 
loans, thus tackling the fallout from the 
coronavirus pandemic together. The add-
itional transfers between the EU countries 
will be distributed via the EU budget. Redis-
tributions of this kind have always been 
common practice – in the area of cohesion 
policy, for example. Ultimately, their scope 
and design must be decided at the political 
level and still need to be fl  eshed out. Final 
agreement is therefore still pending.
The assistance measures agreed by the 
European Council are aimed less at stabilis-
ing economic activity or addressing the spe-
cifi  c burdens presented by the crisis, and 
more towards funding forward- looking re-
form programmes. The allocation proced-
ures are intended to ensure that the funds 
are used appropriately. The more successful 
the reforms, the faster the EU – and above 
all the individual Member States receiving 
particular support  – will be able to over-
come the coronavirus crisis. However, it 
must also be said that the growth- 
enhancing impact of EU funds has had a 
mixed track record to date.9
By contrast, the large- scale debt fi  nancing, 
especially for transfers, breaks worrying 
new ground. Borrowing at the EU level is 
not actually provided for in the EU treaties. 
The large- scale EU debt is therefore being 
justifi  ed as an exceptional and temporary 
crisis management tool. From an economic 
9 For more information on the effectiveness of cohe-
sion policy, see, for example, Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Monthly Report, April 2020, p. 57.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
81

beyond 2020, so it would seem premature to 
return to the standard rules as early as next 
year and attempt to comply with the limits they 
set. On the contrary: it might actually make 
sense to roll out further stabilisation measures 
if the economic situation shows no major signs 
of improving over time. If additional measures 
are introduced, though, these would need to 
be of a temporary nature, since this would en -
sure that the resulting deficits are also tempor -
ary and that (much like the automatic stabil -
isers) they recede automatically with time.
German government debt has been growing 
considerably during the crisis. This is justified by 
the need to effectively combat the pandemic 
and its consequences and to counteract lasting 
economic damage. Fiscal policy has been 
sound in recent years, not least thanks to the 
debt brake. This is why public finances are not 
in a critical position and enjoy a high level of 
confidence, despite the extensive burdens that 
the crisis has placed on the budget, as seen not least in interest rates for German debt, which 
are negative all the way up to long maturities. 
Nonetheless, fiscal policymakers should not 
count on interest rates being this low indefin -
itely. And if the pandemic pushes the economy 
onto a lower growth path, this would place a 
structural strain on public finances and limit fis -
cal room for manoeuvre. Demographic change 
is likely to pose challenges as well, and it is also 
important to keep an eye on and service the 
joint debt that has now been agreed upon at 
the European level (see pp. 78 ff.). If the eco -
nomic recovery does take hold, it will in any 
case be crucial to restore a sound fiscal pos -
ition. Budget rules would then need to be re -
instated, not least in order to uphold confi -
dence in public finances. This applies not just to 
Germany, but to other euro area Member 
States as well.Return to stand -
ard budget rules 
if recovery takes 
holdperspective, the absence of substantial EU 
debt so far has been a pivotal aspect of a 
regulatory framework that is organised in a 
decentralised manner, with Member States 
largely owning their fi  nancial affairs. Con-
versely, significantly closer integration 
would be needed to maintain the balance 
between liability and control for perman-
ently large- scale Community debt. This 
would fi  rst necessitate considerable trans-
fers of national sovereignty to the EU level.
Matters would become critical if, amongst 
other things, the notion were to arise that 
new EU borrowing would not entail any 
costs for the Member States. This is not the 
case. EU debt will be a burden on future 
European taxpayers, even if the debt does 
not show up in the national statistics. The 
Member States must still make the interest 
and principal repayments. That is why the 
new obligations under the joint EU debt need to be taken on board when assessing 
national public fi  nances. And with regard to 
fi  scal rules, it is all the more important, 
going forward, that these rules ensure the 
reduction of high debt ratios and sustain-
ability of public fi  nances in all Member 
States.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
82

Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
The coronavirus crisis and government support 
measures took a heavy toll on tax revenue in 
the second quarter of 2020 (-21%; see the ad -
jacent chart and the table on p. 84). Tax rev -
enue had still grown in the first quarter, by 
3.5%. Tax revenue thus fell by 9% overall in the 
first half of the year.
In the second quarter, wage tax fell by 7% on 
the year. The sharp rise in short- time work, in 
particular, is likely to have played an important 
part in this.1 In addition, child benefits in -
creased significantly. In mid- 2019, they had 
been raised by €10 per child. Since they are de -
ducted from wage tax revenue, this depresses 
the growth rate. Profit-  related taxes fell by a 
total of 46%. One element of coronavirus aid is 
providing swift tax relief to businesses. Corpor -
ation tax was particularly affected, and as -
sessed income tax somewhat less so. This was 
mainly due to lower advance payments in each 
case. Additionally, enterprises were reimbursed 
for earlier advance payments and were able to 
defer taxes due. There was also a steep drop in 
non- assessed taxes on earnings – chiefly invest -
ment income tax on dividends – which is likely 
to be attributable in part to reduced dividends. 
Moreover, some shareholders’ meetings are 
probably taking place later on, either as normal 
or because of COVID-  19, delaying dividend 
payouts. The annual growth rates could there -
fore return to a somewhat more favourable 
level as the year progresses. VAT revenue fell 
sharply by 25%. Private consumption was 
down considerably, but coronavirus assistance 
is likely to have contributed to this, in particu -
lar. Enterprises were able to defer tax payments 
and receive reimbursements of a special ad -
vance payment made in February.
The official tax estimate from May projects a 
10% drop in tax revenue for 2020 as a whole. This is mainly because of the economic crisis, 
which is seeing wages, profits and private con -
sumption plummet. In the case of income tax, 
shrinking economic output means that pro -
gressive taxation, by way of exception, is hav -
ing a negative impact and pushing revenue 
down further. In addition, measures leading to 
tax shortfalls were taken before and during the 
coronavirus crisis, including, for example, the 
Family Relief Act ( Familienentlastungsgesetz ) of 
2018 and the options to defer income tax, cor -
poration tax and VAT granted in March 2020, 
plus the second Coronavirus Tax Assistance Act 
(Corona-  Steuerhilfegesetz ) passed in June. The 
latter is expected to cause further shortfalls of 
€23½ billion this year. This is chiefly due to the 
temporary VAT cut, the one- off child bonus2 
and expanded tax loss carryback options. Fac -
toring in the new tax package, tax revenue is 
estimated to decline by 13% this year.
According to the official tax estimate, a rapid 
recovery is not expected in subsequent years.  Slump in tax 
revenue in Q2
Economic crisis 
and support 
measures a 
heavy strain in 
some casesStrongly declin -
ing revenue for 
year as a wholeTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020252015105051015
–––––+++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
1 Short- time work reduces wages, and short- time working 
benefits are not taxed. For the purposes of income tax as -
sessment, however, short-  time working benefits are fac -
tored in when the tax rate is determined ( Progressionsvor -
behalt ). This leads to higher tax rates, which in turn leads 
to a moderate increase in tax revenue in the following year.
2 The child bonus is deducted from cash revenue. In the 
national accounts, however, it is recorded – like child bene -
fits  – as a monetary transfer, which partly increases ex -
penditure and partly reduces revenue.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
83

New measures will place an added strain on 
revenue. Above and beyond the June tax pack -
age, there are plans to raise child benefits and 
the child tax allowance again next year. Fur -
thermore, the income tax scale is to be ad -
justed in 2021 and 2022 in order to raise the 
basic income tax allowance up to the minimum 
subsistence level and offset bracket creep. 
Owing to the extremely high level of uncer -
tainty prevailing when the tax estimate was 
prepared in May, an unscheduled update will 
take place in September. The draft central gov -
ernment budget for 2021 and the medium-  
term fiscal plan up to 2024 should then be 
based on this.
Central government budget
Central government recorded a high deficit of 
€44 billion3 in the second quarter, compared 
with a surplus of €7 billion in the second quar -
ter of 2019. Revenue fell by 28% (€27 billion), mainly because of a 24% drop in tax revenue 
(€22 billion). In addition, revenue from entre -
preneurial activity was negative: €3½ billion of 
the Bundesbank’s profit received in the previ -
ous quarter was derecognised and transferred 
to the Investment and Repayment Fund (nega -
tive revenue). Expenditure rose sharply, by 27% 
(€24½ billion). Crisis assistance for small busi -
nesses accounted for a large share of this (€15 
billion). According to the health fund, compen -
sation payments to hospitals for unoccupied 
beds also came to nearly €6 billion. By contrast, 
expenditure on the basic allowance grew by a 
fairly muted €½ billion.
The economic stimulus package agreed at the 
beginning of June has now been reflected in a 
second supplementary budget for this year. It 
envisages a €62 billion increase in net borrow -
ing, for a new total of €218 billion. To this end, Tax estimate will 
be updated in 
September
High deficit 
in Q2 due to 
pandemic Second supple -
mentary budget, 
for economic 
stimulus 
package Tax revenue
 
Type of taxH1Estimate 
for 2020 1Q2
2019 2020 2019 2020
Year-on-year changeYear- on- 
year 
change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 360.5 327.7 – 32.8 –  9.1 –  9.8 185.3 146.4 – 39.0 – 21.0
of which:
Wage tax 105.4 104.1 –  1.2 –  1.1 –  3.4 54.4 50.8 –  3.7 –  6.8
Profi  t-related taxes 67.8 53.8 – 14.0 – 20.6 – 24.7 35.7 19.2 – 16.5 – 46.3
Assessed income tax 3 33.5 29.3 –  4.2 – 12.5 – 25.3 16.1 10.6 –  5.4 – 33.8
Corporation tax 17.3 10.8 –  6.4 – 37.2 – 41.3 8.1 2.3 –  5.7 – 71.0
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 14.3 9.9 –  4.3 – 30.3 – 10.6 10.3 5.0 –  5.3 – 51.4
Withholding tax on 
interest income  and 
capital  gains 2.7 3.7 +  1.0 + 35.7 + 22.4 1.3 1.2 –  0.1 –  5.3
VAT4 119.5 104.3 – 15.2 – 12.7 –  9.1 59.1 44.3 – 14.8 – 25.1
Other 
consumption-related 
taxes 5 42.3 40.4 –  1.9 –  4.5 –  5.1 22.1 19.9 –  2.2 – 10.1
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of May 2020. 2 Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 4 VAT and im-
port VAT. 5  Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate prod-
ucts, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 As in the previous year, interest payments from the be -
ginning of July were recorded ahead of time.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
84

the debt brake escape clause was activated 
again. Further tax shortfalls of €27 billion are to 
be covered. Of this amount, €20 billion is at -
tributable to measures included in the eco -
nomic stimulus package, such as the temporary 
lowering of VAT rates. It also takes into account 
the May tax estimate, which had produced rev -
enue shortfalls of €7 billion compared with the 
first supplementary budget. Substantial add -
itional expenditure was also included, in par -
ticular €28 billion for central government’s off- 
budget entities, €24½ billion for transfers to 
smaller enterprises, €14½ billion for loans and 
grants to the social security funds, €11½ billion 
for additional payments to hospitals (particu -
larly for keeping beds unoccupied), and €5 bil -
lion to strengthen Deutsche Bahn’s equity cap -
ital. On balance, however, spending authorisa -
tions are only €24 billion higher because buf -
fers from the first supplementary budget were 
eliminated. This concerned the appropriation 
for transfers to microenterprises (-€32 billion), 
on the one hand, and the elimination of the 
extensive global additional spending item of 
€55 billion, on the other.
Moreover, the reserve (formerly the refugee re -
serve) is now being spared. While previous 
plans had envisaged a withdrawal of €10½ bil -
lion this year, additional borrowing (under the 
escape clause) will now take its place. There is 
criticism of this approach4 as reserves are usu -
ally established to weather difficult times. What 
would in fact be questionable is if the funds 
were to be used to finance new measures after 
the current exceptional period. However, given 
the extreme uncertainty extending into the me -
dium term, it seems understandable in eco -
nomic terms to retain the existing reserve as a 
safety buffer for the period after use has been 
made of the escape clause. If, after this excep -
tional situation has ended, there is still a major 
structural deficit and macroeconomic develop -
ments have not yet fully firmed up, having this 
buffer could make the continuing adjustment 
process milder. The resultant extended consoli -
dation process would probably also be in line 
with the European budget rules.5 Any funds left over in the reserve even after this could be 
used to cushion unanticipated negative devel -
opments in the future:6 in other words, unex -
pected shocks that do not yet justify activating 
the escape clause, but which are already 
weighing heavily on economic developments 
and thus on public finances.
In this context, it should also be noted that 
while the escape clause allows the standard 
thresholds of the debt brake to be exceeded 
for a time, the amount exceeding those thresh -
olds needs to be repaid at some point in the 
future. The standard threshold for structural 
net borrowing is 0.35% of GDP . The amount by 
which this is planned to be additionally ex -
ceeded can be derived from the higher net bor -Reserve spared, 
borrowing cor -
respondingly 
higher
Additional struc -
tural borrowing 
under the debt 
brake …Central government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
1 Including interest expenditure recorded ahead of time in Q2 
(€7 billion).
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4504030201001020
–––––++
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30
2018
20202018Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192020
2019€ billion
111
4 See, for example, Research and Documentation Services 
of the German Bundestag (2020).
5 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017a), p. 32.
6 For more details, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), 
pp. 82 f.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
85

rowing entitlement in several steps (see the 
table above):
– The second supplementary budget is based 
on another downward revision of nominal 
GDP . A further €3½ billion, which is re -
garded as a cyclical burden, is thus excluded 
from the debt brake (structural limit) (see 
point 6 in the table).
– Financial transactions, which are likewise ex -
cluded from the structural limit, account for 
additional expenditure of €14½ billion (loans 
to the Federal Employment Agency and cap -
ital injection for Deutsche Bahn; see point 5 
in the table).
– Also to be excluded are payments of €25 bil -
lion to off- budget entities (after deducting 
their moderate additional expenditure); 
these will go to special funds which are in -
cluded in the debt brake, i.e. consolidated 
with the central government core budget under this rule. The funds transferred by 
central government are simultaneously re -
corded as revenue for these entities and are 
not disbursed by them in the current year 
(see point 7 in the table). Compared with 
the first supplementary budget, the higher 
net borrowing in the core budget for trans -
fers to these off- budget entities and the im -
provement of their balances thus level out in 
the (consolidated) structural result. This will 
only be diminished once funds from the spe -
cial funds are disbursed in subsequent years 
(which, incidentally, is when the economic 
stimuli will first take effect). The prefunding 
of the special funds’ expenditure therefore 
has no effect on the debt brake. However, it 
limits the transparency of central govern -
ment budgeting.
All in all, planned structural net borrowing (see 
point 8 in the table) under the second supple -
mentary budget is up by €19 billion compared 
with the first supplementary budget. The debt … will increase 
repayments 
required laterKey central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
€ billion
Item2019 2020
Provisional 
actual BudgetSupplemen-
tary budgetSecond sup-
plementary 
budget
 1. Fiscal balance 13.3 – 11.0 – 167.0 – 218.1
 2. Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3
 3. Transfer to (–)/withdrawal from (+) reserves – 13.5 10.6 10.6 –
 4. Net borrowing (1.+2.+3.) – – – 156.0 – 217.8
 5. Balance of fi  nancial transactions 0.0 –  0.3 –   0.3 –  14.6
 6. Cyclical component in the budget procedure 1 –  2.9 –  0.5 –  50.1 –  53.6
 7. Balance of incorporated off-budget entities 0.7 –  5.9 –   5.9 19.1
Digitalisation Fund (as of 2018) 0.3 –  1.0 –   1.0 –   1.0
Energy and Climate Fund 1.8 –  3.8 –   3.8 20.4
Flood Assistance Fund –  0.6 –  0.5 –   0.7 –   0.7
All-day schools (as of 2020) 1.0 1.0 1.8
Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –  0.9 –  1.6 –   1.3 –   1.3
 8. Structural net borrowing (4.–5.–6.+7.)
(repayment: +; borrowing: –) 3.5 –  5.1 – 111.5 – 130.4
 9. Structural balance (8.–2.–3.) 16.8 – 16.1 – 122.4 – 130.8
10. Structural balance adjusted for updated estimate of potential 
output 2 0.8 20.7 – 135.2 – 147.1
11. Debt brake ceiling (–0.35% of GDP 3) – 11.5 – 11.7 –  11.7 –  11.7
12. Amount credited to the control account (8.–11.) 15.0 6.6 – –
13. Credit balance on the control account 52.2 43.7 52.2 52.2
14. Amount exceeding ceiling (11.–8.) – – 99.8 118.7
15. Outstanding repayment amount – – 99.8 118.7
16. Size of refugee reserve 48.2 18.7 37.6 48.2
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. * For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public fi  nances, 
Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68 f. 1  Simplifi  ed procedure applied: 2019 adjusted to national accounts fi  gures published in February 
2020, the 2020 supplementary budget adjusted to the Federal Government’s March 2020 expectations, and the second supplementary 
budget adjusted to the Federal Government’s 2020 spring projection. 2 Potential output based on the Federal Government’s 2020 spring 
projection. 3 GDP: gross domestic product. Here, this refers to GDP in the year before the budget is prepared.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
86

brake escape clause had to be activated a 
second time for this purpose. The debt permit -
ted by way of exception is still to be repaid over 
20 years starting in 2023. As a result, the an -
nual repayment amount is going up by €1 bil -
lion to €6 billion.
However, it is still very difficult to estimate how 
much central government will actually borrow 
this year. At present, the economy looks to be 
brightening somewhat, if anything, but less fa -
vourable developments or the need for add -
itional measures cannot be ruled out.
The draft central government budget for next 
year is set to be approved by the Federal Cab -
inet in the second half of September 2020. The 
benchmark figures of mid- March did not yet 
consider the consequences of the coronavirus 
pandemic for the central government budget 
and thus did not envisage any net borrowing. 
This means that severe burdens now have to 
be taken into account. According to the tax es -
timate from May 2020 and factoring in the tax 
relief provided by the economic stimulus pack -
age, central government will see revenue short -
falls of around €27 billion. The planned second 
Family Relief Act will be accompanied by fur -
ther tax revenue losses of €3 billion. High add -
itional expenditure will also be incurred, with 
investment programmes and the planned in -
crease in central government’s contribution to 
accommodation costs for persons able to work 
who receive the basic allowance accounting 
for around €10 billion altogether, deserving 
special mention in this context. An additional 
factor is the guarantee that social contribution 
rates will be kept below 40% overall, which 
could result in additional expenditure of well 
over €20 billion. Return flows in subsequent 
years, which would then put pressure on con -
tribution rates, do not appear likely.7 In add -
ition to the core budget, the debt brake also 
includes some off- budget entities; their (con -
solidated) balances therefore influence adher -
ence to its upper limit. A large deficit is ex -
pected here, particularly for the Energy and 
Climate Fund (around €10 billion). Deducting the cyclical burden of €11 billion shown in the 
spring projection, the structural balance shrinks 
by approximately €60 billion compared with 
the benchmark figures from March. If the eco -
nomic situation does not improve significantly 
more quickly than expected by many, use of 
the escape clause once again in 2021 would be 
understandable.
Compared with the benchmark figures, the 
May estimate forecasts tax revenue shortfalls of 
just over €20 billion for central government in 
2022. Furthermore, burdens arising from the 
new tax package and the planned second Fam -
ily Relief Act will total €6½ billion. Additional 
expenditure on investment programmes and 
central government’s contribution to accom -
modation costs, coupled with additional spend -
ing by the Energy and Climate Fund, will also 
play a role here. Given all the uncertainty, ad -
hering to the debt brake will likely still pose a 
significant challenge.
Central government’s off- budget entities 
posted a surplus of €4½ billion in the second 
quarter,8 compared with a figure of €1½ billion 
one year earlier. This increase was ultimately 
driven by inflows of €3½ billion to the Invest -
ment and Repayment Fund from the Bundes -
bank’s profit distribution. Outflows from the 
Economic Stabilisation Fund to finance special 
coronavirus loans from the Kreditanstalt für 
Wiederaufbau (KfW) and for capital injections 
to Lufthansa were not yet recorded.
However, the Economic Stabilisation Fund’s ex -
penditure is likely to play a decisive role in de -
velopments over the remainder of the year. The 2020 budget 
outturn still diffi -
cult to forecast
Central govern -
ment budget 
will continue to 
be shaped by 
pandemic next 
yearBurdens foresee -
able for 2022, 
too
Surplus from 
Bundesbank 
profit for central 
government’s 
off- budget 
entities in Q2
Coronavirus aid 
to dominate as 
2020 progresses
7 If instead of loans, grants – which do not involve return 
flows – are envisaged, it would make sense not to record a 
financial transaction. It would then be unnecessary to fac -
tor such transactions out of the structural deficit under the 
debt brake.
8 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping. SoFFin’s deficit is also 
factored out. It is based on funds transferred to refinance 
the bad bank FMSW. In return, the direct debt of FMSW, 
which is attributable to central government, is also fac -
tored out.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
87

fund can provide loans and capital injections to 
larger enterprises to support them in the event 
of liquidity or solvency problems caused by the 
coronavirus crisis. In addition, it refinances the 
KfW’s coronavirus loans. However, it is cur -
rently not expected to fully tap its credit facility 
of €200 billion.
As a general rule, it would seem important, in 
order to stabilise the economy, to support en -
terprises that are at risk of insolvency due to 
the coronavirus but which have an otherwise 
sustainable business model – although this as -
sessment is uncertain and may be prone to 
error. It cannot be ruled out that the measures 
taken so far will be insufficient. Additionally, 
therefore, the options for loss carrybacks dur -
ing the crisis could be further expanded for af -
fected enterprises (for example, by raising the 
ceilings and factoring in more years as well as 
local business tax).9 Smaller enterprises are re -
ceiving support in the form of bridging aid. 
However, the Economic Stabilisation Fund’s 
standardised government capital injections 
globally authorised under state aid law are only 
available to larger enterprises. Consideration 
could be given to granting access to smaller 
and medium- sized enterprises if the existing 
central and state government instruments 
prove insufficient. This would then, not least, 
entail restrictions on dividend payouts and re -
muneration, as has been the case so far for 
larger enterprises. However, extensive interven -
tions in corporate policy seem both difficult to 
implement and rather implausible.
State government budgets10
In the second quarter of 2020, the impact of 
the coronavirus crisis was clearly reflected in 
the federal states’ core budgets. Following a 
surplus of €4 billion a year earlier, they now re -
corded a significant deficit of €26 billion. How -
ever, the picture that this paints of the current 
overall situation of the state government 
budgets is limited. Some federal states have set 
up new pandemic- related off- budget entities, and the financial ties and budgetary develop -
ments in connection with this are not readily 
apparent in this context. The interlinkages be -
tween the core budgets and these off- budget 
entities are rather complex and varied across 
federal states. Relief owing, for example, to 
transfers from the special funds and burdens 
arising from the prefunding of these funds 
through the core budgets both appear to be 
reflected in the quarterly figures.11
Revenue in the state governments’ core 
budgets grew by a significant 6½%; however, 
their expenditure rose much more sharply, by 
39%. Although tax revenue slumped on the 
revenue side (-21%), receipts from public ad -
ministrations, by contrast, were more than 
twice as high as in the previous year. This was 
due, not least, to central government’s assis -
tance programme for microenterprises, which 
was administered via the federal states. On the 
expenditure side, payments to public author -
ities rose significantly (+65%). Part of this in -
crease was attributable to state- specific assis -
tance programmes for local governments, 
whilst another part was due to transfers to spe -
cial funds providing coronavirus- related sup -
port. Furthermore, other operating expend -
iture, in particular, rose very sharply (+91%). It 
appears that significant coronavirus- related 
payments to enterprises and hospitals were re -
corded under this expenditure item.
In the current year, the updated state govern -
ment budget plans anticipate a very high def -
icit, potentially exceeding €50 billion, in their 
core budgets. Off- budget entities are also likely 
to see deficits, following significant surpluses in Broader support 
for enterprises 
worth consider -
ing
Significant core 
budget deficits 
in Q2; new 
special  funds 
severely impair 
transparencyRevenue and 
expenditure also 
driven by inter -
governmental 
cash flows
Very high deficit 
for year as a 
whole …
9 Local governments would have to be compensated for 
lower revenue from local business tax, as some could lose 
substantial parts of their revenue.
10 The data on state government budgets are based on 
the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.
11 Comprehensive overviews are not available, even 
though the effects of such interconnectedness could be 
significant. For North Rhine-  Westphalia, for example, a 
€7½ billion burden on the core budget was reported for 
the second quarter in connection with the prefunding of a 
coronavirus special fund (transfer of €10 billion to the spe -
cial fund; return flows of €2½ billion to the core budget to 
finance approved state government measures).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
88

previous years. Various new special funds in 
Bavaria and Hesse, for example, have their own 
multi- year credit authorisations. Some special 
funds receive extensive transfers from the core 
budgets, such as in North Rhine-  Westphalia. In 
total, such off- budget entities are likely to be 
able to access funds of around €75 billion. 
These funds are intended to finance crisis-  
related budgetary burdens and economic sta -
bilisation programmes.
In consolidated terms, the expenditure of core 
and off-  budget entities is likely to rise sharply 
this year. Central government assistance for en -
terprises, for example, is being channelled 
through state government budgets and is often 
supplemented by state- specific immediate as -
sistance programmes. On top of this are, in 
particular, compensation payments for the loss 
of earnings owing to the closure of childcare 
facilities under the Protection against Infection 
Act (Infektionsschutzgesetz ) and other operat -
ing expenditure intended to contain the pan -
demic. In addition, as stipulated in the eco -
nomic stimulus package, the state governments 
and central government are each expected to 
offset half of the estimated local business tax 
shortfalls incurred at the local government level 
(€12 billion). Many non- city states are support -
ing their local governments further by sharing 
costs linked to the crisis (e.g. lost fees for day 
care facilities for small children). Moreover, 
state government finances are being burdened 
by considerable tax shortfalls. The latest tax es -
timate gives a figure of €37 billion for these 
(comparison of the May 2020 tax estimate with 
that of October 2019, plus the economic stimu -
lus package).
The pandemic is likely to continue putting se -
vere strain on the federal states next year. Ac -
cording to current expectations, business aid 
and payments made under the Protection 
against Infection Act will come to an end. 
However, tax revenue is still likely to be signifi -
cantly subdued. Based on the tax estimate, rev -
enue is set to decline to the tune of €17 billion 
(again comparing the May 2020 tax estimate with that of October 2019, plus the economic 
stimulus package). In addition, tax revenue will 
fall by €3 billion as a result of the planned 
second Family Relief Act. As the provision in 
Germany’s Basic Law ( Grundgesetz ) for central 
government’s contribution to the local business 
tax compensation scheme for local govern -
ment is planned to be limited to the current 
year, the federal states would be required to 
provide comparable funds alone next year. In 
order to stabilise local government finances, it 
would also seem worth considering preventing 
federal states from passing on their own cor -
responding shortfalls in local government fi -
nancial equalisation schemes. On the whole, it 
would be in the interest of the federal states to 
tackle the existing problems caused, not least, 
by highly volatile local business tax revenue by 
implementing a fundamental reform of local 
government finances.12… due to 
sharply rising 
expenditure 
amid waning 
tax revenue
Pandemic will 
continue to put 
severe strain on 
federal states 
next yearState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4252015105051015
–––––+++
–20–15–10–50+5+10+15+20+25
2018
20202018Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192020
2019€ billion
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
89

Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
The statutory pension insurance scheme re -
corded a deficit of just under €1 billion in the 
second quarter. At the same time last year, it 
had posted a surplus of €½ billion. Contribu -
tion receipts declined slightly overall as a result 
of the coronavirus pandemic. However, total 
revenue (including transfers from central gov -
ernment) still rose by 1%. Expenditure increased 
by only 2½%. In addition to the pension adjust -
ment of just under 3½% on average across Germany in the middle of last year, this also 
reflected a somewhat higher number of pen -
sions. A one- off effect was the main factor be -
hind the subdued growth in expenditure – in 
the second quarter of the previous year, 
mothers’ pensions were paid out retroactively 
after being raised at the beginning of the year.
With an average increase of just over 3½% 
across Germany, pensions were raised to a 
slightly greater extent at mid- year than they 
had been one year earlier. Expenditure growth 
in the second half of the year is expected to 
accelerate correspondingly slightly. On the rev -
enue side, despite all the uncertainty, it seems 
plausible that revenue will develop somewhat 
more favourably again in the latter half of the 
year than in the second quarter. However, a 
deficit is also likely to be recorded in the latter 
half of the year, following a shortfall of €3 bil -
lion in the first half. Owing to its high starting 
level, the sustainability reserve will nevertheless 
probably remain close to its upper limit of 1.5 
times the scheme’s monthly expenditure.
Growth in contribution receipts is expected to 
be very slow in the coming year. The labour 
market is likely to follow the overall economic 
recovery with a lag, and the weakness in the 
economy is likely to dampen wage adjust -
ments. This and the sluggish development of 
VAT will also curb the central government 
transfers linked to them. By contrast, changes 
in VAT rates will not play a role here. On the 
expenditure side, the high pension adjustment 
in July will initially continue to have an impact. 
It will thus be the next adjustment in mid- 2021 
that reflects the unfavourable development of 
per capita wages this year. In addition, the 
number of pension recipients is likely to in -
crease somewhat more strongly owing to 
demographic changes. The finances of the 
pension insurance scheme are thus likely to de -
teriorate further.13Significantly 
worse result in 
Q2 amid sub -
dued revenueClear deficit for 
year as a whole, 
but high 
reserves remain
Further sharp 
deterioration in 
finances next 
year …Finances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently re-
vised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202020192018
2018
2020 20192018 2019 202002468
2018 2019 202002468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
€ billion
13 The basic pension, which will be introduced next year, is 
to be financed with increased central government funds.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
90

Going forward, the sustainability reserve is 
likely to reach its lower limit of 0.2 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure much more 
quickly than previously expected. According to 
the Federal Government’s pension insurance 
report published in autumn 2019, the contribu -
tion rate would have remained unchanged 
until 2024 (at 18.6%). In 2025, it would have 
had to rise in order to comply with the lower 
limit. This is now likely to be necessary much 
sooner. If the contribution rate reaches the 
upper threshold of 20% (valid until 2025), the 
remaining funding gaps will have to be closed 
by central government. The replacement rate is 
likely to rise strongly and to significantly exceed 
the guaranteed level of 48%; as the pension 
increase will be high, actual earnings may fall. 
The fact that pensions are rising more strongly 
than wages this year will continue to have an 
impact in the future. The pension formula 
would, in principle, provide for a corresponding 
amount of compensation in the coming year. 
However, it does not allow for pension cuts. In 
addition, a catch- up factor for subsequent 
years conceived for this eventuality was tem -
porarily suspended until mid-  2026 under the 
2018 pension benefits package.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency was substan -
tially affected by the coronavirus crisis in the 
second quarter, recording a core budget def -
icit14 of €9 billion following a surplus of €½ bil -
lion in the previous year. Revenue fell by a sig -
nificant 9%. This was mainly due to increased 
short- time working and rising unemployment. 
However, the contribution rate cut from 2.5% 
to 2.4% also played a major role, coming in at 
just under 4 percentage points. On the revenue 
side, the reduced volume of work placed a 
greater strain on the Federal Employment 
Agency than on other social security fund insti -
tutions, as its contribution shortfalls are not 
offset by another government budget. Expend -
iture more than doubled compared with the 
previous year. Spending on unemployment benefits rose by 33% to €5 billion. Payments 
for short- time working benefits even multiplied 
to €8 billion (previous year: €200 million). This 
sum also includes the social contributions of 
around €3½ billion currently being paid by the 
Federal Employment Agency. At the height of 
the lockdown, it appears that around one- fifth 
of employees subject to social security contri -
butions were in short- time work. However, 
since enterprises prefinance short- time work, a 
large share of the burdens from the second … and contribu -
tion rate rise 
over time with 
initially higher- 
than- guaranteed 
replacement 
rate
High deficit in 
Q2 due to steep 
rise in expend -
itureFinances of the
Federal Employment Agency *
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q496303
–––+
–12–9–6–30+3+6Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202020192018
2020201920182018 2019 2020–200+20+40+60+80+100+120
2018 2019 202020020406080100120
–++++++
Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
14 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are thus recorded as expenditure here, worsening 
the core budget balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
91

quarter are unlikely to be reflected in the Fed -
eral Employment Agency’s balance sheets until 
the current quarter.
Overall, a very high Federal Employment 
Agency deficit is expected for the current year. 
Expenditure will rise sharply on the year. The 
Federal Employment Agency is thus making a 
major contribution to economic stabilisation. 
Short- time working benefits account for the 
largest share of this spending, not least due to 
the temporary assumption of social contribu -
tions. In addition, expenditure on unemploy -
ment benefits is rising sharply. Special rules in 
place are also contributing to this: persons 
whose entitlement to unemployment benefits 
expires no later than the end of the year can 
continue receiving these benefits for up to an 
additional three months. On the revenue side, 
significantly lower contribution receipts are ex -
pected. This is primarily due to the lower con -
tribution rate, but the declining number of em -
ployees and lower wages as a result of short-  
time work are also factors. In order to finance 
the deficit, the Federal Employment Agency 
can initially draw on its large reserves (end-  
2019: €25½ billion). In addition, the second 
supplementary budget to the central govern -
ment budget envisages a multi- year loan of 
€9½ billion. This will probably serve primarily 
to bridge the gap until the reserves are fully li -
quid. However, it is also likely to be needed to 
cover a shortfall that exceeds the reserves.
For the years 2020 and 2021, the coalition gov -
ernment intends to prevent increases in social 
contribution rates through central government 
transfers, if necessary. Next year, the Federal 
Employment Agency will probably require ex -
tensive funds for this purpose. In the years that 
follow, the labour market is likely to recover 
again, and financial pressure at the Federal Em -
ployment Agency is expected to ease accord -
ingly. All in all, it seems possible that the Fed -
eral Employment Agency will then be able to 
proceed with its day- to- day operations without 
major contribution rate changes or further cen -
tral government assistance.Excursus: How the corona -
virus pandemic is affecting 
Germany’s public finances: 
automatic stabilisers and 
measures
Germany’s public finances have been playing a 
major stabilising role during the coronavirus cri -
sis. However, the effect that this contribution is 
having on public finances is complex, as evi -
denced by the sometimes wide variation in fig -
ures being discussed. Figures cited may refer to 
public finances overall or just those at the cen -
tral government level. Cyclical effects on the 
general government budget (the automatic 
stabilisers) may have been factored in, or the 
focus may rest solely on active measures. Fur -
thermore, figures may include measures at dif -
ferent stages: already implemented, planned, 
anticipated or generally approved. The exten -
sive authorisations for government loan guar -
antees and capital assistance to enterprises are 
an example of this last category. They some -
times make Germany stand out in international 
comparisons as having high volumes of aid. As 
things stand today, however, it looks unlikely 
that the authorised volumes will be fully util -
ised. Lastly, there are differences in the way 
measures are reflected in public finances. In 
some cases, they lead to a higher deficit and 
debt level, whilst in others they have no impact 
on the deficit and can only be seen in the debt 
level. Sometimes, though, they affect neither 
the deficit nor the debt level.
The following takes a closer look at how the 
coronavirus crisis is manifesting in Germany’s 
public finances. It is based on the Bundesbank’s 
latest fiscal estimate for the current and com -Significant def -
icit for year as a 
whole
Extensive central 
government 
assistance next 
year; subse -
quent stabilisa -
tion possibleImpact of 
coronavirus 
pandemic and 
fiscal stabilisa -
tion on public 
finances com -
plex
Picture painted 
by the Bundes -
bank’s fiscal 
estimateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
92

ing year.15 The detailed quantification of the 
pandemic’s impact on public finances pre -
sented below is for illustrative purposes and ul -
timately shows only a snapshot. Uncertainty is 
still very high, in terms of both macroeconomic 
and fiscal developments as well as with respect 
to any further measures that may be taken.
Impact of automatic stabilisers 
and active fiscal policy on 
 deficit and debt
Overview
The coronavirus crisis is leading to a significant 
decline in general government (national ac -
counts) fiscal balances, which are the focus of 
this section. The surplus of 2019 is veering into 
a high deficit this year. General government 
deficits are predominantly being financed 
through additional government debt and the 
(Maastricht) debt level is rising. Only a relatively 
small portion of the deficits are not affecting 
the debt level since they are financed from fi -
nancial assets (e.g. by using cash reserves).16
The general government balance is being af -
fected, for one, by the cyclical effects of the 
crisis. These automatic stabilisers cushion some 
of the economic downturn without the gov -
ernment actively taking steps, through – for in -
stance – reduced tax receipts or the existing 
unemployment insurance scheme. However, 
active fiscal stabilisation measures have also 
been implemented (with the period between 
mid- March and the end of June 2020 being 
covered here).
Of the effects dealt with here, two- thirds are 
accounted for by active stabilisation measures 
and one- third by automatic stabilisers in the 
current year. According to the Bundesbank’s 
estimate, taken together they squeeze the gen -
eral government budget by 7¾% of (nominal) 
GDP .17 Overall, the decline in the fiscal balance 
is actually slightly stronger still due to the al -ready expansionary fiscal stance prior to the 
coronavirus pandemic.
The overall impact of coronavirus- related ef -
fects on the general government budget will 
then subside by more than half in 2021. This is 
mainly owing to the fact that the measures are 
largely temporary and focused on the current 
year. By contrast, the automatic stabilisers will, 
in large part, continue to operate, even though 
economic output will be climbing significantly 
again. This is mainly due to some of the macro -
economic reference variables relevant for the 
general government budget exhibiting a time 
lag during the crisis. For example, annual aver -
age unemployment will continue to rise in 
2021, while growth in wages and private con -
sumption will still be muted.
Automatic stabilisers
The cyclical impact on public finances can be 
estimated in various ways. The disaggregated 
approach applied here is based on the individ -
ual macroeconomic reference variables, such as 
wages, private consumption or unemployment. 
For those variables, a trend is estimated, and 
deviations from that trend are then logged as Deficits predom -
inantly financed 
by government 
debt
Automatic 
cyclical  effects 
and active 
stabilisation  
measures …
… leading to a 
high deficit in 
the current yearDeficit to fall in 
2021 as meas -
ures come to 
an end
Cyclical effects 
call for differen -
tiated estimation 
using disaggre -
gated procedure
15 Background information on the Bundesbank projection: 
It is based on national accounts data and the Maastricht 
debt level along with the forecast from the end of May, 
updated to include the economic stimulus package agreed 
in June; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b). Model simula -
tions are used to estimate the feedback effects of the eco -
nomic package on the general government budget via the 
automatic stabilisers. Non-fiscal arrangements are not 
covered. These include adjustments to insolvency law (e.g. 
suspension of the obligation to file for insolvency until the 
end of September, limitation of management liability in the 
event of insolvency caused by the coronavirus pandemic) 
or the possibility of deferring payments such as rent or loan 
instalments.
16 A detailed account of the relationship between the fis -
cal balance and changes in the Maastricht debt level can 
be found in Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), pp. 65ff.
17 Technical background information: Estimates for meas -
ures may differ from official figures, such as those con -
tained in budget plans or draft legislation. The automatic 
stabilisers covered here correspond to the change in the 
cyclical component of the general government fiscal bal -
ance compared with 2019. The cyclical components are 
estimated using the Bundesbank’s disaggregated cyclical 
adjustment procedure; see Deutsche Bundesbank (2006). 
This has been slightly modified over time (for example, a 
smoothing parameter of 100 is now used in the Hodrick-  
Prescott filter).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
93

cyclical influences. From there, the respective 
cyclical impact on the general government 
budget is derived: where the wage bill exhibits 
a negative trend deviation, this leads to a nega -
tive cyclical effect on taxes, for example. This 
allows for a more differentiated picture of cyc -
lical effects, compared with aggregated esti -
mation methods which generally draw on GDP 
(rather than the individual macroeconomic ref -
erence variables). It is likely that private con -
sumption, wages and labour volumes are tak -
ing a relatively harder hit in the coronavirus 
crisis than has been observed in the past. As a 
result, wage tax, VAT, social contributions and 
labour market- related expenditure are respond -
ing unusually strongly to the present downturn 
in GDP .
A considerable degree of uncertainty is in -
volved in estimating the cyclical impact on the 
general government budget, regardless of 
which method is used.18 It is especially high in 
the current situation: the results are influenced by expectations concerning macroeconomic 
developments over the medium term and as -
sessments of the potential impact of the 
coronavirus crisis (e.g. in relation to insolven -
cies and structural unemployment). However, it 
is primarily the level of cyclical effects in a given 
year that is uncertain and liable to revision and 
not so much the extent of change, which is the 
focus of the present analysis (in our case, the 
changes compared with 2019).
The calculations using the Bundesbank proced -
ure indicate that the deficit will increase by 
2¾% of nominal GDP this year owing to auto -
matic stabilisers. The wage- dependent stabil -
isers exert the strongest effect, most notably 
because wage tax and social contributions ac -
count for by far the largest volume among the 
cyclically sensitive budget categories. The 
consumption-  dependent stabiliser carries the 
second highest budgetary weight. Its effect is 
relatively minor because private consumption 
and private residential construction (which is 
subject to VAT) are less affected by the eco -
nomic downturn than, for example, profits.
The negative cyclical effects will abate only 
slightly in the coming year, even though eco -
nomic growth will pick up again. This is due to 
wages, private consumption and the labour 
market – which are particularly important fac -
tors for the general government budget – ex -
hibiting a time lag during the crisis. As a result, 
some aspects of the crisis year of 2020 will not 
be reflected in the general government budget 
until 2021. Labour market- related spending will 
see a shift: cyclical short- time work, which is 
very sensitive, will fall sharply while cyclical un -
employment will experience another increase.
Heightened 
estimation  
uncertainty 
 during the crisisAutomatic sta -
bilisers a major 
support in 
2020 …
… and set to 
recede only min -
imally in 2021Automatic stabilisers*
* Bundesbank estimate; for more on the method, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2006). Automatic stabiliser defined as change in 
cyclical government fiscal balance compared with 2019. Social 
contributions payable on unemployment benefits and pensions 
eliminated, as effects on revenue and expenditure balance out. 
The consumption-dependent stabiliser also applies to private 
residential construction by way of VAT.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021–3.0–2.5–2.0–1.5–1.0–0.50+0.5As a percentage of GDP
... private
    consump-
    tion
... unem-
    ployment
... other... profits... wagesEffect via ...
18 For detailed information on the different features of 
cyclical adjustment procedures, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2017b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
94

Fiscal policy measures19
The government initially introduced extensive 
fiscal measures to support the healthcare sys -
tem and mitigate the economic repercussions 
of the coronavirus pandemic for enterprises 
and private households. This was followed in 
June by an additional comprehensive package 
designed, inter alia, to stimulate demand. Ac -
cording to the Bundesbank’s estimate, in com -
bination with each other, the measures will 
push the general government deficit up by 5% 
of GDP in 2020. Spending, in particular, was 
scaled up, while the contribution made by the 
revenue side (e.g. tax cuts) is small, in relative 
terms. Come 2021, the impact of the measures 
in the budget will amount to just 1% of GDP .
Overall, special support measures for enter -
prises carry the most weight in quantitative 
terms, with the immediate assistance for enter -
prises, the self- employed and freelancers play -
ing the most consequential role. Short-  time 
working benefits were also expanded, with a 
key factor being that the Federal Employment 
Agency is paying the associated social contri -
butions this year. As with unemployment bene -
fit I, pre- existing short- time working benefits 
are counted among the automatic stabilisers. 
The capital transfers to Deutsche Bahn, local 
public transport companies and cultural institu -
tions are also significant in terms of support for 
enterprises. In addition, enterprises can take 
advantage of investment grants and various 
special tax arrangements. The core purpose of 
the special tax arrangements is to enhance li -
quidity. Enterprises are once more able, on a 
temporary basis, to apply the declining balance 
method of depreciation when handling 
movable assets and can make use of expanded 
tax loss carryback options. In addition, enter -
prises can be reimbursed special advance VAT 
payments and it has been made easier to have 
prepayments of taxes on earnings reduced. 
Furthermore, import VAT will fall due one 
month later from next year onwards. These 
measures, which are largely geared towards li -
quidity, essentially shift the collection of gen -eral government tax revenue to a later point in 
time: receipts will be lower to begin with and 
will later be commensurately higher.20Extensive fiscal 
policy measures 
cushioning the 
effects of the 
coronavirus 
pandemic
Support meas -
ures for enter -
prises and …Measures affecting the deficit*
* Bundesbank  estimate  of  impact  on  government  fiscal  bal-
ance. 1 Transfers to enterprises and private households include 
all measures that essentially provide relief and do not entail any 
repayment obligation. Liquidity assistance for enterprises com-
prises special tax arrangements that provide only temporary re-
lief and will be offset in subsequent years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 2021543210
–––––As a percentage of GDP
–6–5–4–3–2–10+1 By sector/transmission channel1Revenue
Expenditure
Transfers to enterprises
Liquidity assistance for
enterprises
Transfers to 
private households
Reduction of VAT rates
and EEG levy
Government investment
Spending on
health protection
19 For further information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2020b), pp.  28 f., and Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), 
pp. 73 ff.
20 Statistical background information: Tax deferrals, which 
also have a liquidity- boosting effect, are not included here. 
Although they bring about a shift in tax revenue in terms of 
actual cash inflow, they are captured in the national ac -
counts on an accruals basis: since deferral has no effect on 
the point of booking, the national accounts balance is un -
affected. The accrual accounting method is generally ap -
plied for the national accounts. However, in Germany the 
prevailing approach taken with taxes in the national ac -
counts sees cash receipts recorded on a time- adjusted basis 
(phase shift), following an optional methodology available.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
95

Private households are being supported primar -
ily through easier access to the basic allowance 
(unemployment benefit II), partial replacement 
of lost earnings due to the absence of child -
care, and provision of a child bonus.
The reduced VAT rates and the higher grant to 
stabilise the renewable energy (EEG) levy from 
2021 alleviate some of the pressure on enter -
prises and private households. In addition, in -
creased general government spending is exert -
ing a direct impact on domestic demand.
Health protection measures visible in the fiscal 
balance, include, in particular, additional ex -
penditure on personal protective equipment, 
intensive care beds, promoting the develop -
ment of a vaccine and providing information to 
the general public. Moreover, the government 
is compensating the healthcare sector for much 
of the revenue shortfalls resulting from the re -
strictions on operations and procedures unre -
lated to the coronavirus that this year has 
brought.
Measures only visible in debt21
The measures described above increase the na -
tional accounts deficit and, for the most part, 
debt as well. In addition to these, there are other government support measures, which (at 
least initially) only show up in the debt level 
and not in the national accounts deficit. This is 
the case when the government engages in bor -
rowing and uses that debt to form financial 
assets, which it does when it issues loans or 
acquires equity shares. This also includes situ -
ations where public promotional banks borrow 
in order to grant loans on the government’s 
behalf and with extensive government guaran -
tees. In many cases, central government pro -
grammes are being run through the KfW. And 
some federal states are calling on their promo -
tional banks, too. In these cases, the debt and 
the corresponding credit claim are assigned to 
the government. Maastricht debt rises, while 
the national accounts deficit remains un -
changed. Deferred corporate taxes are another 
case in point. Here, again, the additional gov -
ernment debt is offset by a financial asset (tax 
claim).
It is particularly difficult to predict the extent to 
which government assistance loans will ultim -
ately be granted and capital injections will be 
provided. The Bundesbank’s estimate reckons 
with a figure of around 5% of GDP . The associ -
ated debt will fall again in the future when the 
financial assets are realised, that is to say when 
enterprises repay the loans to the government 
or the government sells its equity.
Going forward, the government will also gen -
erate income through its loans, guarantees and 
equity investments. This income will improve 
the fiscal balance, but will be relatively modest. … private 
households, 
plus …
… broader stim -
uli for demand
Health 
 protectionOnly visible in 
the debt level: 
government- 
guaranteed 
loans, equity 
investments, tax 
deferrals …
… which are 
potentially high 
in volume 
and …
… carry risksFiscal policy measures during 
the coronavirus pandemic*
* Bundesbank estimate.
Deutsche Bundesbank2020 202105101520253035404550As a percentage of GDP
Stabilisation contribution 
visible in fiscal balanceOther debt-increasing 
measuresAdditional authorisations 
for loan guarantees and 
capital contributions
21 This is a simplified presentation. The refinancing of the 
KfW’s coronavirus programmes through the Economic Sta -
bilisation Fund is not discussed any further, for example. An 
in- depth description of how the general government sector 
and Maastricht debt are defined is provided in Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2018), pp. 59 ff. The article explains in more 
detail, for instance, when non- government units/ transac -
tions are transferred to the government sector for statistical 
purposes (rerouting) and how claims and liabilities are con -
solidated within the government sector. It also explains 
when government- guaranteed liabilities or equity invest -
ments are recorded as transactions with an impact on the 
deficit and what it looks like when assets default or guar -
antees are called.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
96

There is risk involved in that the financial assets 
could lose value or default.
Authorised volumes 
for support  measures
So far, this excursus has dealt with describing 
the projected impact of the coronavirus crisis 
on public finances. The authorised budgetary 
envelopes for government- guaranteed loans 
and equity investments, in particular, are set far 
higher, however. In addition to the funds that 
are assumed to have been called in the Bun -
desbank’s estimate, central and state govern -
ment are endowed with budgetary authorisa -
tions amounting to almost 35% of GDP . If these 
were to be utilised to the full, the debt ratio 
would rise well above 100%. That looks un -
likely as things stand today, though. Also, the 
macroeconomic projection underlying the fiscal 
estimate disregards the part of the authorised 
volumes which the Bundesbank assumes will 
remain untapped. For this reason, the amount 
of the authorised volumes expected to be un -
used is only shown separately here and not as 
part of the core fiscal stabilisation contribution 
amount.
International comparisons 
of government stabilisation 
measures
By contrast, some international comparisons 
do not draw such a distinction and factor in the 
total value of amounts authorised under the 
budget when quantifying stabilisation meas -ures. This kind of approach leaves Germany po -
tentially sticking out with figures that are far 
above average.22 If the particular nature of the 
stabilisation contributions described fails to be 
made transparent, there is a risk that the differ -
ent volumes will not be properly classified.
Another aspect that can make international 
comparisons more difficult concerns 
government- guaranteed loans to enterprises: 
assistance measures which are economically 
comparable can show up in public finances in 
very different ways – specifically in the general 
government debt level. In Germany, as de -
scribed above, they are elevating general gov -
ernment debt: since the loans are being granted 
through state-owned promotional banks on 
the government’s behalf and with a compre -
hensive government guarantee attached, they 
are recorded in the government sector. The as -
sociated borrowing and lending by the KfW are 
thus attributed to central government, for ex -
ample. In some other countries, such govern -
ment credit guarantees are not granted through 
state- owned promotional banks. The relevant 
transactions (and guarantees) therefore have 
no or only a very limited impact on general 
government debt. Depending on the probabil -
ity of default, however, they may even entail a 
greater risk for public finances.Authorised 
scope for loans 
and equity 
investments 
probably far 
from being fully 
utilisedInternational 
comparisons: 
transparent 
presentation  
needed for an 
accurate picture
Representation 
of credit guar -
antees in public 
finances some -
times subject to 
international dif -
ferences
List of references
Anderson J., E. Bergamini, S. Brekelmans, A. Cameron, Z. Darvas, M. Domínguez Jíménez and 
C. Midões (2020a), The fiscal response to the economic fallout from the coronavirus, Bruegel 
datasets, 5  August 2020, available at https://www.bruegel.org/publications/datasets/
covid-national-dataset  (accessed on 14 August 2020).22 This can be seen in some international comparisons of 
fiscal policy measures taken in response to coronavirus 
(see, amongst others, Anderson et al. (2020a), Inter -
national Monetary Fund (2020)). Anderson et al. (2020b) 
point out that there are sizeable discrepancies between as -
sistance available and assistance take- up, mentioning Ger -
many specifically.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
97

Anderson, J., F. Papadia and N. Véron (2020b), Government- guaranteed bank lending: beyond the 
headline numbers, Bruegel Blog, 14  July 2020, available at www.bruegel.org/2020/07/
government-guaranteed-bank-lending-beyond-the-headline-numbers  (accessed on 14  August 
2020).
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), Reform of local government finances: making financing crisis-  
proof and stable, Monthly Report, July 2020, pp. 10 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), Outlook for the German economy for 2020 to 2022, Monthly 
Report , June 2020, pp. 13-31.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), Public finances, Monthly Report, May 2020, pp. 73-84.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019), European Stability and Growth Pact: individual reform options, 
Monthly Report, April 2019, pp. 77-90.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Maastricht debt: methodological principles, compilation and devel -
opment in Germany, Monthly Report, April 2018, pp. 57-78.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017a), Design and implementation of the European fiscal rules, Monthly 
Report, June 2017, pp. 29-44.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017b), Federal states’ cyclical adjustment in the context of the debt brake, 
Monthly Report, March 2017, pp. 33-56.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2006), A disaggregated framework for analysing public finances: Germa -
ny’s fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, pp. 61-76.
International Monetary Fund (2020), Fiscal Monitor Database of Country Fiscal Measures in 
Response  to the COVID-  19 Pandemic, IMF Fiscal Affairs Department, 12 June 2020, available at 
https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/imf-and-covid19/Fiscal-Policies-Database-in-Response-to-COVID-19  
(accessed on 14 August 2020).
Research and Documentation Services of the German Bundestag (2020), Zur Frage der Verfas -
sungsmäßigkeit des Zweiten Nachtragshaushaltsgesetzes 2020, 7 August 2020, available at https://
www.bundestag.de/resource/blob/708820/c1194398125ad4871298971c79673a19/WD-4-080- 20-  
pdf-data.pdf  (accessed on 14 August 2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
98

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates/base rates  ........................................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  78 •
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ....................................................  78 •
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
8. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
9. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
August 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 EONIA  5,7 EURIBOR  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2018         Oct. 6.8 4.4 3.9 3.7 2.9 2.9 0.7 − 0.37 − 0.32 1.3
         Nov. 6.7 4.3 3.8 3.9 2.6 2.8 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2         Dec. 6.6 4.3 4.2 3.9 2.8 3.0 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.31 1.1
2019         Jan. 6.2 4.1 3.8 4.1 2.7 2.9 0.9 − 0.37 − 0.31 1.0
         Feb. 6.7 4.5 4.3 4.3 3.0 3.2 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.9         Mar. 7.5 5.2 4.7 4.6 2.7 3.0 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
         Apr. 7.4 5.3 4.8 4.8 2.7 3.2 1.2 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.7
         May 7.1 5.2 4.8 4.8 2.2 2.8 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.7         June 7.2 5.0 4.6 4.9 2.2 3.1 2.2 − 0.36 − 0.33 0.4
         July 7.8 5.5 5.2 5.2 2.1 3.0 2.0 − 0.37 − 0.36 0.2
         Aug. 8.4 6.2 5.8 5.6 2.3 3.3 1.7 − 0.36 − 0.41 − 0.1         Sep. 7.9 5.9 5.7 5.7 2.2 3.3 1.8 − 0.40 − 0.42 − 0.1
         Oct. 8.4 6.1 5.7 5.6 2.4 3.7 1.6 − 0.46 − 0.41 − 0.0
         Nov. 8.3 5.9 5.6 5.4 2.1 3.4 1.8 − 0.45 − 0.40 0.1         Dec. 8.0 5.7 4.9 5.2 2.0 3.3 1.6 − 0.46 − 0.40 0.2
2020         Jan. 7.9 5.5 5.2 5.2 1.9 3.2 1.2 − 0.45 − 0.39 0.2
         Feb. 8.1 5.6 5.5 6.0 1.9 3.2 0.8 − 0.45 − 0.41 − 0.0         Mar. 10.4 7.4 7.5 7.1 3.6 4.2 0.2 − 0.45 − 0.42 0.2
         Apr. 11.9 8.3 8.2 8.2 4.8 4.3 0.0 − 0.45 − 0.25 0.3
         May 12.5 9.1 8.9 8.8 6.1 4.9 0.1 − 0.46 − 0.27 0.2         June 12.6 9.2 9.2 ... 6.9 4.6 − 0.5 − 0.46 − 0.38 0.2
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.46 − 0.44 0.0
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, overnight index average. 6 Euro interbank offered rate. 7 See also footnotes to Table
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by VI.4, p. 43  .8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2. External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which: Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 EUR 1 = USD ...
2018         Oct. + 33,054 + 23,473 + 2,031 + 65,883 − 37,023 + 12,311 − 38,391 − 750 1.1484 99.7 95.5
         Nov. + 28,196 + 26,011 + 20,869 − 68,303 + 26,234 + 17,194 + 42,287 + 3,456 1.1367 99.2 95.0         Dec. + 38,106 + 23,495 + 58,244 − 39,918 + 97,561 + 277 − 2,800 + 3,124 1.1384 99.3 94.8
2019         Jan. + 10,691 + 8,203 + 32,935 + 30,759 − 18,911 + 3,934 + 19,714 − 2,561 1.1416 98.8 94.3
         Feb. + 20,185 + 25,388 − 8,869 + 27,787 − 40,958 − 3,651 + 7,668 + 285 1.1351 98.4 93.8         Mar. + 39,447 + 31,730 + 70,407 + 46,335 − 31,139 + 5,097 + 45,041 + 5,073 1.1302 97.9 93.2
         Apr. + 13,456 + 23,780 − 30,376 − 5,349 − 44,236 + 13,331 + 2,641 + 3,237 1.1238 97.7 93.1
         May + 1,023 + 26,462 + 8,426 − 19,375 − 50,130 + 9,017 + 67,069 + 1,845 1.1185 98.2 93.4         June + 15,038 + 25,969 + 14,314 − 61,807 + 23,713 + 10,415 + 44,262 − 2,269 1.1293 98.8 93.9
         July + 34,601 + 34,551 + 32,390 − 14,580 − 27,295 + 10,250 + 58,566 + 5,449 1.1218 98.4 93.4
         Aug. + 35,337 + 22,724 + 24,435 + 31,806 − 8,150 − 3,913 + 4,062 + 629 1.1126 98.9 93.9         Sep. + 42,408 + 28,326 + 52,641 + 12,639 − 6,831 − 2,134 + 54,908 − 5,939 1.1004 98.2 93.1
         Oct. + 35,923 + 36,483 + 45,091 + 42,633 + 35,411 + 6,310 − 40,157 + 894 1.1053 98.1 92.9
         Nov. + 29,123 + 29,422 + 23,056 − 31,396 + 42,268 + 291 + 15,765 − 3,870 1.1051 97.5 92.2         Dec. + 39,680 + 30,759 + 11,860 − 44,237 + 66,412 − 12,133 + 1,359 + 458 1.1113 97.4 92.1
2020         Jan. − 6,703 + 9,183 − 9,579 + 15,189 − 53,158 + 16,440 + 10,967 + 984 1.1100 97.0 91.4
         Feb. + 18,409 + 29,131 + 26,156 + 19,395 − 31,268 + 16,883 + 22,255 − 1,108 1.0905 96.3 90.7         Mar. + 26,926 + 38,086 + 7,562 − 13,974 − 111,045 + 8,927 + 120,103 + 3,551 1.1063 99.0 93.1
         Apr. + 9,869 + 13,023 − 5,655 − 20,988 + 151,135 + 3,954 − 141,440 + 1,684 1.0862 98.2 p 92.7
         May − 10,517 + 15,431 + 18,570 − 11,659 + 32,013 + 1,496 − 4,895 + 1,615 1.0902 98.4 p 92.8         June ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1255 99.8 p 94.0
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1463 100.5 p 94.7
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary Tables XII.10 and 12, pp.
82-83   .2Including employee stock options. 3Against the
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 1Monthly averages, see also currencies of the EER-19 group. 4 Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area
 
3. General economic indicators
  
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2017 2.6 1.9 2.6 5.7 3.3 2.3 1.5 9.1 1.7 3.82018 1.9 1.5 1.3 4.8 1.5 1.8 1.9 8.5 0.8 4.32019 1.3 1.4 0.6 4.3 1.2 1.5 1.9 5.6 0.3 2.2
2019         Q1 1.4 1.4 1.0 4.8 0.4 1.4 0.8 4.4 0.1 3.1
         Q2 1.3 1.3 − 0.3 3.9 1.4 1.9 3.0 5.6 0.2 2.0         Q3 1.4 1.6 1.2 4.8 2.0 2.0 3.0 6.3 0.8 2.9         Q4 1.0 1.3 0.2 3.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 5.9 0.0 1.0
2020         Q1 − 3.1 − 2.3 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 − 5.3 − 1.2 5.1 − 5.6 − 1.5
         Q2 − 15.0 ... − 11.7 ... ... − 19.3 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 2
 Annual percentage change
2017 3.0 2.9 3.4 4.2 3.4 2.4 4.1 − 2.2 3.6 8.62018 0.7 1.2 1.0 4.9 3.3 0.4 1.8 − 5.0 0.7 2.02019 − 1.3 4.8 − 4.3 0.1 1.9 0.4 − 0.7 2.8 − 1.0 0.8
2019         Q1 − 0.3 3.1 − 2.2 5.4 0.5 1.0 1.7 0.9 0.0 − 0.8
         Q2 − 1.3 5.9 − 5.0 2.0 2.8 1.6 0.6 0.4 − 0.8 1.4         Q3 − 1.6 4.3 − 4.9 − 1.6 3.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 4.7 − 1.2 2.5         Q4 − 2.0 5.9 − 5.1 − 5.1 1.2 − 0.7 − 5.0 4.7 − 2.1 0.0
2020         Q1 − 6.1 − 0.3 − 6.7 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 7.8 − 1.2 6.8 − 11.3 − 2.3
         Q2
e − 20.3 − 11.7 p − 22.1 − 13.6 − 5.2 − 23.8 − 7.9 p − 1.4 − 25.4 − 5.1
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 As a percentage of full capacity
2017 82.9 81.8 86.6 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 79.5 76.8 74.52018 83.8 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.42019 82.3 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2019         Q2 82.7 81.3 85.3 73.5 80.8 85.1 71.7 76.9 77.5 76.9
         Q3 81.8 81.2 83.9 72.5 81.6 84.3 71.8 74.1 77.0 75.9         Q4 81.0 80.7 82.6 69.9 78.6 83.4 72.1 78.0 76.8 75.5
2020         Q1 80.8 79.7 82.9 70.7 78.4 82.6 72.3 75.5 76.5 74.7
         Q2 68.3 72.8 71.4 63.3 77.2 62.4 67.3 56.7 − 69.1         Q3 72.1 73.4 74.4 66.0 76.0 72.8 70.3 69.6 64.5 70.8
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 4
 As a percentage of civilian labour force
2017 9.0 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.1 21.5 6.8 11.3 8.72018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 8.7 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.52019 7.5 5.4 3.2 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020         Jan. 7.4 5.1
e 3.2 4.7 6.7 7.9 16.2 4.8 9.5 6.9
         Feb. 7.2 5.0 e 3.2 4.7 6.8 7.6 15.9 4.8 9.2 6.9
         Mar. 7.2 5.1 e 3.7 4.8 6.9 7.6 14.5 5.3 8.4 7.4
         Apr. 7.5 5.3 e 4.2 6.0 7.1 8.8 15.7 5.4 6.8 9.0
         May 7.7 5.4 e 4.5 7.0 7.2 8.2 17.0 5.6 8.3 9.8
         June 7.8 5.5 e 4.5 ... 7.3 7.7 ... 5.3 8.8 10.1Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
August 2020
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.92018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.62019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020         Feb. 1.2 1.0 1.7 2.0 1.1 1.6 0.4 0.9 0.2 2.3
         Mar. 0.7 0.4 1.3 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.2 0.5 0.1 1.4
         Apr. 0.3 0.0 0.8 − 0.9 − 0.3 0.4 − 0.9 − 0.3 0.1 − 0.1
         May 0.1 − 0.2 0.5 − 1.8 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.9         June 0.3 0.2 0.8 − 1.6 0.1 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.1
         July
e 0.4 e 1.7 5 0.0 e − 1.2 e 0.7 e 0.9 e − 1.9 e − 0.4 e 0.9 e 0.1
 
 General government financial balance 6
 As a percentage of GDP
2017 − 1.0 − 0.7 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 2.9 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.82018 − 0.5 − 0.8 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 2.3 1.0 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.82019 − 0.6 − 1.9 1.5 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 3.0 1.5 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.2
 
 General government debt 6
 As a percentage of GDP
2017 87.8 101.7 65.3 9.3 61.3 98.3 176.2 67.7 134.1 39.32018 85.8 99.8 61.9 8.4 59.6 98.1 181.2 63.5 134.8 37.22019 84.1 98.6 59.8 8.4 59.4 98.1 176.6 58.8 134.8 36.9
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical and are provisional. 1  Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted. 2  Manu-
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day vari ations. 3  Manufacturing: 

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1
 Annual percentage change
4.2 1.8 6.5 2.9 2.5 3.5 3.0 4.8 2.9 4.4 20173.6 3.1 7.3 2.4 2.4 2.6 3.9 4.1 2.3 4.1 20183.9 2.3 4.7 1.7 1.6 2.2 2.4 2.4 2.0 3.2 2019
4.2 0.2 6.2 1.6 2.0 2.4 3.7 3.3 2.5 3.1 2019          Q1
3.8 3.1 4.2 1.7 1.9 1.9 2.4 2.5 1.8 3.0          Q23.8 3.1 3.7 1.8 1.7 2.1 1.5 2.4 1.9 3.4          Q33.8 2.8 4.8 1.6 0.8 2.3 2.1 1.7 1.7 3.4          Q4
2.4 − 0.2 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 3.7 − 2.3 − 3.7 0.9 2020          Q1
... ... ... ... − 12.8 ... ... ... − 22.1 ...          Q2
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
6.8 3.7 8.8 1.3 5.8 3.5 3.3 8.1 3.2 8.1 20175.2 − 1.1 1.3 0.6 4.9 0.1 4.4 5.3 0.4 6.9 20183.5 − 3.4 1.2 − 0.9 0.2 − 2.2 0.5 2.8 0.5 4.1 2019
4.7 − 1.6 − 1.8 − 1.4 5.7 − 3.9 6.8 3.7 − 0.2 6.4 2019          Q1
5.5 − 1.1 0.5 − 1.4 0.1 − 1.7 3.0 3.2 1.4 2.5          Q24.1 − 2.0 3.9 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5 − 2.9 2.5 0.7 4.4          Q3
− 0.1 − 8.8 1.9 − 0.9 − 4.2 0.5 − 4.7 1.6 0.3 3.3          Q4
− 2.2 − 10.4 10.8 − 1.2 − 6.0 − 1.3 − 7.4 − 2.7 − 6.6 − 1.5 2020          Q1
− 7.3 ...
p − 5.9 p − 8.6 ... − 24.0 − 28.1 p − 17.4 p − 24.5 ...          Q2
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 201777.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 201877.3 79.8 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
76.9 79.7 78.2 84.3 87.2 79.4 89.1 84.8 80.4 66.0 2019          Q2
77.5 80.3 75.9 84.1 86.7 80.1 89.4 83.6 80.8 64.2          Q377.2 79.0 78.0 84.0 85.3 77.4 84.1 83.8 79.3 63.6          Q4
76.4 83.4 78.8 83.2 84.8 80.6 82.2 83.0 80.0 63.3 2020          Q1
70.0 53.8 61.1 75.2 73.9 71.7 77.1 71.9 70.9 47.4          Q271.9 76.3 68.0 76.3 77.2 71.9 78.3 76.1 71.5 49.2          Q3
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
7.1 5.5 4.0 4.9 5.6 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.3 11.1 20176.2 5.6 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 20186.3 5.6 3.4 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
6.1 5.7 3.4 3.0 4.4 6.8 6.1 4.2 13.8 6.1 2020          Jan.
6.3 5.8 3.4 2.9 4.5 6.4 6.1 4.2 13.6 6.0          Feb.6.6 6.6 3.5 2.9 4.7 6.2 5.8 4.3 14.5 6.7          Mar.
8.6 7.5 4.1 3.4 5.0 6.3 6.4 4.7 15.4 8.9          Apr.
9.3 7.7 4.3 3.6 5.9 5.9 6.5 4.8 15.4 10.2          May9.4 7.7 4.2 4.3 5.7 7.0 6.6 4.8 15.6 9.8          JuneDeutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
August 2020
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
 Annual percentage change
3.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 20172.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 20182.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
2.8 1.8 1.1 1.3 2.2 0.5 3.1 2.0 0.9 1.0 2020          Feb.
1.7 0.3 1.2 1.1 1.6 0.1 2.4 0.7 0.1 0.1          Mar.
0.9 − 0.8 1.1 1.0 1.5 − 0.1 2.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 1.2          Apr.
0.2 − 1.6 0.9 1.1 0.6 − 0.6 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 1.4          May0.9 − 0.4 1.0 1.7 1.1 0.2 1.8 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 2.2          June
0.9
e 0.1 e 0.8 e 1.6 ... e 0.0 e 1.8 e − 0.3 e − 0.7 e − 2.1          July
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.5 1.3 3.3 1.3 − 0.8 − 3.0 − 1.0 0.0 − 3.0 2.0 20170.6 3.1 1.9 1.4 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.0 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.7 20180.3 2.2 0.5 1.7 0.7 0.2 − 1.3 0.5 − 2.8 1.7 2019
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
39.1 22.3 50.3 56.9 78.3 126.1 51.3 74.1 98.6 93.9 201733.8 21.0 45.6 52.4 74.0 122.0 49.4 70.4 97.6 100.6 201836.3 22.1 43.1 48.6 70.4 117.7 48.0 66.1 95.5 95.5 2019
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter. 4 unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5  Influenced by a temporary
Monthly data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on reduction of value added tax. 6  According to Maastricht Treaty definition. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
August 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2018         Nov. 92.0 91.6 12.1 0.4 2.0 74.6 37.5 − 37.1 4.0 − 4.2 − 1.0 3.6 5.6
         Dec. − 88.9 − 69.3 − 20.9 − 19.5 − 21.4 4.1 − 159.8 − 163.9 6.9 16.5 0.1 − 8.2 − 1.5
2019         Jan. 124.8 69.5 14.5 55.3 43.7 1.9 189.2 187.3 19.8 − 8.8 0.1 26.2 2.3
         Feb. 53.9 42.8 17.6 11.2 24.8 27.4 − 26.0 − 53.4 20.4 0.3 − 0.1 25.8 − 5.5         Mar. 15.0 41.0 1.4 − 26.0 − 26.1 74.7 0.4 − 74.3 9.0 − 2.4 0.0 − 4.2 15.5
         Apr. 69.1 90.1 27.1 − 21.0 − 20.5 − 15.6 107.8 123.5 − 16.1 − 5.0 0.2 − 10.2 − 1.2
         May 39.0 36.7 12.7 2.4 3.2 63.5 69.9 6.3 11.0 − 2.9 0.6 7.6 5.7         June − 0.4 23.0 − 13.5 − 23.4 − 22.6 78.1 − 15.3 − 93.5 41.8 19.9 1.1 6.2 14.7
         July 49.7 61.3 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 14.3 35.0 165.1 130.1 0.7 − 21.9 0.4 5.0 17.2
         Aug. 25.2 19.2 − 7.9 5.9 5.7 − 3.9 26.6 30.5 − 16.2 − 15.5 − 0.4 − 7.3 7.0         Sep. 6.6 26.5 25.9 − 19.9 − 13.7 41.8 − 45.7 − 87.5 36.1 25.1 − 1.1 − 1.4 13.5
         Oct. 43.6 63.2 − 9.3 − 19.6 − 25.7 17.3 16.2 − 1.1 − 11.2 − 1.9 − 1.5 − 20.0 12.1
         Nov. 54.5 55.0 31.0 − 0.5 3.3 10.4 − 21.5 − 31.9 19.1 0.8 − 0.8 4.8 14.3         Dec. − 118.4 − 79.5 − 24.9 − 38.9 − 20.6 − 21.8 − 299.1 − 277.3 − 7.3 7.2 − 1.4 − 5.8 − 7.3
2020         Jan. 101.9 51.8 1.8 50.2 28.0 24.5 295.6 271.1 − 5.3 − 6.4 − 1.0 13.2 − 11.2
         Feb. 60.7 50.1 20.1 10.7 22.1 41.5 92.7 51.2 − 2.8 − 3.0 − 0.7 − 3.3 4.2         Mar. 322.3 179.8 − 21.5 142.6 128.3 − 5.3 99.9 105.2 − 33.3 0.8 − 1.0 − 43.0 10.0
         Apr. 293.0 101.7 54.5 191.3 180.3 − 101.3 16.2 117.5 − 33.5 − 8.8 − 1.1 − 3.9 − 19.7
         May 289.8 117.8 28.3 172.0 176.7 7.6 − 41.8 − 49.4 17.8 4.0 − 0.8 − 2.7 17.4         June 137.9 − 14.1 19.6 151.9 160.5 74.5 − 143.5 − 218.0 1.8 − 7.5 − 1.1 − 4.0 14.3
  
  
b) German contribution
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturitieson non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  
2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2018         Nov. 20.0 18.5 0.9 1.5 2.5 15.1 − 3.7 − 18.8 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 3.0 − 1.4
         Dec. − 5.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 33.5 3.6 37.1 − 1.1 0.7 − 0.3 − 9.1 7.5
2019         Jan. 16.3 15.0 0.3 1.3 − 1.3 67.9 21.1 − 46.8 2.1 − 5.7 − 0.5 14.0 − 5.7
         Feb. 12.5 16.4 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 1.4 24.3 − 15.4 − 39.6 6.6 − 0.8 0.1 12.6 − 5.2         Mar. 9.7 17.2 0.1 − 7.5 − 4.8 − 32.1 13.9 46.1 − 4.0 − 3.2 0.2 − 4.4 3.4
         Apr. 7.6 12.7 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 6.1 19.2 14.8 − 4.5 − 6.6 − 2.7 0.2 − 4.0 0.0
         May 19.3 19.8 0.5 − 0.5 1.4 11.8 2.4 − 9.3 9.1 − 1.7 0.6 7.5 2.6         June 25.7 26.4 4.3 − 0.7 1.2 − 8.0 10.3 18.3 11.5 1.5 0.6 2.4 7.1
         July 9.5 7.8 0.0 1.6 − 0.8 42.6 6.3 − 36.4 0.8 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 4.4
         Aug. 25.2 19.9 1.0 5.2 5.5 − 13.6 2.4 16.0 − 6.2 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 3.7 2.3         Sep. 5.7 11.8 − 0.8 − 6.1 − 1.3 − 2.8 − 24.3 − 21.5 4.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.0 5.6
         Oct. 10.2 11.0 1.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 56.3 2.4 − 53.9 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 3.6 2.5
         Nov. 25.3 20.4 5.2 4.9 3.9 − 23.5 − 17.6 5.9 3.0 − 1.9 − 0.9 1.6 4.2         Dec. − 4.4 1.5 0.8 − 5.9 − 1.1 − 38.9 − 47.5 − 8.6 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 5.8 2.7
2020         Jan. 16.3 9.5 1.9 6.8 2.6 74.7 37.7 − 37.0 − 9.0 − 2.6 − 1.5 3.8 − 8.6
         Feb. 24.5 25.4 4.3 − 0.9 1.2 − 4.3 14.1 18.4 − 4.6 − 1.2 − 0.6 4.8 − 7.6         Mar. 47.3 31.4 − 6.1 15.9 14.3 − 34.3 18.5 52.8 − 8.3 − 3.7 − 0.7 − 8.2 4.3
         Apr. 33.0 16.0 1.3 16.9 14.8 − 28.8 8.9 37.6 − 23.8 − 5.1 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 15.8
         May 58.3 27.1 10.0 31.2 32.7 11.7 − 22.1 − 33.8 2.3 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 1.2 5.4         June 26.2 2.4 3.5 23.8 25.9 − 45.5 − 20.8 24.7 − 8.0 − 7.1 − 1.0 − 7.7 7.8
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report, p.
30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
August 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 a) Euro area 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which: ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl. money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
7.3 67.0 − 88.3 88.1 97.1 5.3 91.8 − 11.2 2.1 31.5 0.3 − 2.6 2018          Nov.
− 59.9 − 85.4 − 53.6 49.9 49.0 18.0 31.1 − 4.7 5.5 − 14.2 1.3 7.6          Dec.
66.8 60.6 − − 20.4 − 22.4 − 39.9 − 13.1 − 26.8 3.3 14.2 15.6 5.4 − 7.1 2019          Jan.
18.6 3.2 − 39.2 46.4 40.2 3.2 37.0 − 0.4 6.6 0.2 − 8.3 − 0.0          Feb.
− 21.7 − 20.4 − 122.7 139.8 133.5 6.2 127.3 − 6.5 12.8 − 7.3 0.7 − 19.0          Mar.
− 33.1 28.9 − 73.8 55.5 46.2 7.4 38.9 2.5 6.7 22.3 14.3 − 0.4          Apr.
17.8 − 7.4 − 81.0 88.6 87.6 5.1 82.5 − 12.4 13.4 − 7.7 − 9.7 5.8          May33.6 − 71.2 − 73.5 87.3 98.4 7.5 90.8 − 14.5 3.4 − 20.7 − 11.9 − 2.0          June
− 13.0 47.0 − 50.0 31.1 25.7 9.0 16.7 1.4 4.0 17.9 21.1 − 5.2          July
6.3 − 81.9 − 113.1 110.1 86.1 1.3 84.7 19.1 4.9 4.7 18.0 − 13.5          Aug.5.8 43.0 − − 36.6 − 18.6 − 1.3 3.2 − 4.4 − 15.6 − 1.7 − 17.9 − 13.9 − 0.4          Sep.
− 37.7 51.3 − 58.5 45.7 60.3 3.0 57.3 − 10.1 − 4.5 42.1 1.4 6.5          Oct.
− 1.1 − 53.3 − 100.2 103.0 122.0 6.5 115.5 − 17.6 − 1.5 − 14.7 3.1 − 0.7          Nov.− 66.5 − 26.6 − − 39.7 1.9 7.5 16.7 − 9.2 − 9.3 3.6 − 33.6 − 22.5 − 18.3          Dec.
84.6 42.3 − 4.9 − 44.5 − 52.4 − 7.7 − 44.7 0.3 7.6 − 7.1 34.8 13.9 2020          Jan.
43.7 − 34.6 − 95.9 82.7 84.2 5.2 79.0 − 1.2 − 0.3 19.7 − 4.7 4.9          Feb.
4.7 − 6.9 − 352.5 320.8 300.1 23.8 276.3 16.2 4.5 30.0 − 19.4 26.9          Mar.
72.1 − 14.8 − 167.9 174.6 175.1 20.7 154.4 − 15.3 14.7 − 4.6 19.9 − 18.0          Apr.
100.9 − 37.1 − 215.9 225.7 189.2 20.1 169.1 16.5 20.0 9.6 − 1.3 − 9.2          May123.3 − 1.8 − 89.0 75.4 85.8 13.2 72.6 − 21.3 10.9 − 42.7 19.6 − 4.3          June
 
 
  b) German contribution 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  10 
of which: Components of the money stockIntra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl. money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
9.7 − 8.2 2.5 1.0 32.8 38.6 − 4.1 0.5 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.5 2018          Nov.
− 5.4 − 27.6 4.0 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.3 − 3.3 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.8          Dec.
− 18.5 103.9 − 9.6 7.5 − 3.4 − 14.3 9.6 0.3 0.9 0.0 0.0 2019          Jan.
− 2.7 20.3 2.9 0.4 12.5 8.3 3.6 1.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7          Feb.
17.7 − 58.0 2.5 1.2 21.8 20.9 − 1.5 2.2 0.0 − 0.2 0.3          Mar.
− 15.2 33.9 3.9 2.1 14.7 17.9 − 3.7 0.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.6          Apr.
19.0 − 20.1 4.0 0.8 23.0 23.8 0.4 − 0.3 − 1.3 0.1 0.4          May
3.7 − 7.7 3.0 2.1 10.3 10.3 − 1.4 − 0.4 1.7 − 0.0 0.2          June
− 27.1 74.0 3.6 3.2 4.4 7.2 − 3.3 − 0.6 1.0 0.1 0.1          July
10.7 − 26.8 5.8 − 0.7 33.9 26.1 5.7 − 1.2 3.1 0.0 0.3          Aug.
9.9 − 6.6 4.9 0.8 − 4.7 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 0.1 1.7          Sep.
− 19.8 74.2 4.3 0.2 14.7 18.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.3          Oct.
8.2 − 29.5 4.5 0.7 20.0 24.1 − 3.4 − 0.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2          Nov.
− 2.0 − 32.4 4.9 3.4 − 4.5 − 0.4 − 6.6 0.6 1.8 − 0.1 0.0          Dec.
− 5.6 108.0 2.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 7.8 5.9 − 3.0 − 1.0 − 0.1 3.4 2020          Jan.
24.4 − 14.0 4.9 0.1 14.5 17.7 1.2 − 1.7 − 0.6 0.1 − 2.2          Feb.
7.5 − 71.9 12.2 0.9 85.7 93.3 − 0.4 − 3.4 − 0.3 0.4 − 3.8          Mar.
17.9 8.6 3.2 4.3 1.5 9.9 − 8.1 0.1 1.7 − 0.1 − 1.9          Apr.
28.6 − 9.3 0.3 5.3 48.4 43.4 6.2 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.4          May57.8 − 69.3 − 0.4 4.7 0.1 9.9 − 7.7 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.3          June
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
August 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
  
 
AssetsLending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro area Otheryear/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  
2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2018         May 26,904.3 18,104.1 13,514.0 11,201.8 1,504.4 807.8 4,590.1 1,019.9 3,570.2 5,531.8 3,268.5
         June 26,765.0 18,099.1 13,482.4 11,193.8 1,501.5 787.1 4,616.7 1,016.8 3,599.9 5,448.6 3,217.3
         July 26,770.5 18,156.1 13,547.1 11,235.8 1,523.9 787.3 4,609.0 1,012.7 3,596.3 5,455.3 3,159.0
         Aug. 26,807.8 18,127.6 13,530.9 11,227.3 1,524.1 779.5 4,596.7 1,001.7 3,595.0 5,477.5 3,202.7         Sep. 26,763.1 18,146.6 13,538.6 11,248.0 1,508.3 782.3 4,608.1 1,000.7 3,607.4 5,457.8 3,158.6
         Oct. 27,077.1 18,151.7 13,555.3 11,266.2 1,510.9 778.1 4,596.4 1,002.6 3,593.8 5,667.4 3,258.0
         Nov. 27,216.6 18,243.5 13,638.0 11,337.8 1,516.2 784.1 4,605.5 1,001.0 3,604.5 5,694.7 3,278.5         Dec. 26,990.0 18,173.2 13,568.7 11,295.5 1,502.0 771.2 4,604.5 1,002.8 3,601.8 5,557.1 3,259.8
2019         Jan. 27,392.5 18,309.1 13,637.4 11,345.0 1,517.2 775.3 4,671.7 1,015.9 3,655.8 5,770.3 3,313.0
         Feb. 27,436.5 18,354.8 13,683.9 11,368.3 1,528.3 787.3 4,670.9 1,001.2 3,669.7 5,763.8 3,317.9         Mar. 27,733.7 18,397.2 13,735.5 11,413.7 1,526.2 795.7 4,661.7 1,001.4 3,660.3 5,841.6 3,494.9
         Apr. 27,886.9 18,468.4 13,828.8 11,472.8 1,529.8 826.1 4,639.6 1,001.1 3,638.6 5,942.4 3,476.2
         May 28,185.6 18,497.0 13,854.0 11,494.6 1,549.1 810.4 4,643.0 1,000.3 3,642.7 6,027.7 3,660.8         June 28,305.8 18,522.1 13,874.9 11,521.2 1,552.5 801.2 4,647.1 1,000.0 3,647.1 5,991.6 3,792.1
         July 28,772.3 18,601.9 13,939.3 11,583.8 1,550.8 804.7 4,662.6 1,002.8 3,659.8 6,208.8 3,961.6
         Aug. 29,374.1 18,658.9 13,961.4 11,612.8 1,549.4 799.3 4,697.5 1,003.1 3,694.4 6,311.5 4,403.7         Sep. 29,193.8 18,651.7 13,971.3 11,595.9 1,566.6 808.7 4,680.4 996.7 3,683.7 6,300.2 4,241.9
         Oct. 28,966.1 18,689.3 14,042.5 11,660.5 1,550.5 831.5 4,646.8 1,002.5 3,644.3 6,259.5 4,017.3
         Nov. 29,017.9 18,729.5 14,099.5 11,684.5 1,569.3 845.7 4,630.0 998.6 3,631.4 6,270.8 4,017.6         Dec. 28,328.2 18,591.7 14,008.9 11,617.1 1,544.1 847.6 4,582.8 981.0 3,601.8 5,930.8 3,805.7
2020         Jan. 29,021.2 18,722.8 14,063.0 11,668.9 1,543.2 850.9 4,659.7 1,003.4 3,656.3 6,302.3 3,996.2
         Feb. 29,486.7 18,767.7 14,102.3 11,697.5 1,563.5 841.3 4,665.4 992.2 3,673.2 6,414.4 4,304.6         Mar. 30,019.9 19,013.9 14,239.3 11,884.6 1,557.6 797.2 4,774.6 1,006.7 3,767.9 6,484.7 4,521.2
         Apr. 30,447.6 19,308.0 14,348.7 11,933.3 1,613.0 802.4 4,959.2 1,018.0 3,941.3 6,584.9 4,554.8
         May 30,494.9 19,606.0 14,464.8 12,020.8 1,641.4 802.6 5,141.1 1,013.7 4,127.5 6,465.3 4,423.7         June 30,412.3 19,759.7 14,449.8 11,980.6 1,652.4 816.7 5,309.9 1,005.0 4,304.9 6,303.7 4,348.9
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2018         May 6,148.1 4,248.4 3,280.8 2,824.1 186.8 269.8 967.6 306.5 661.1 1,226.7 673.0
         June 6,120.9 4,264.2 3,297.3 2,838.8 187.5 271.0 966.9 304.3 662.7 1,201.8 654.9
         July 6,089.3 4,274.2 3,307.9 2,849.4 187.0 271.5 966.3 304.9 661.4 1,194.2 620.9
         Aug. 6,121.9 4,279.7 3,313.6 2,863.9 183.8 265.9 966.0 300.5 665.5 1,189.8 652.4         Sep. 6,119.7 4,295.4 3,331.0 2,880.3 184.8 265.9 964.4 297.5 666.9 1,194.5 629.8
         Oct. 6,154.2 4,303.6 3,339.1 2,888.2 185.3 265.6 964.5 300.8 663.7 1,208.1 642.4
         Nov. 6,177.4 4,323.4 3,356.8 2,905.6 188.1 263.0 966.7 299.8 666.9 1,202.7 651.3         Dec. 6,194.1 4,317.4 3,353.6 2,903.7 187.8 262.2 963.7 296.4 667.3 1,208.5 668.2
2019         Jan. 6,252.9 4,333.5 3,366.6 2,917.4 188.8 260.4 966.9 299.2 667.7 1,232.6 686.9
         Feb. 6,243.9 4,343.3 3,382.0 2,932.6 189.2 260.2 961.3 296.6 664.7 1,221.0 679.6         Mar. 6,392.0 4,373.9 3,414.7 2,963.7 189.7 261.3 959.2 293.9 665.3 1,265.4 752.8
         Apr. 6,408.7 4,379.3 3,427.3 2,976.4 189.1 261.9 951.9 294.8 657.1 1,278.2 751.2
         May 6,524.8 4,402.6 3,446.8 2,995.6 190.0 261.1 955.8 293.1 662.8 1,284.5 837.7         June 6,619.8 4,431.8 3,473.1 3,017.0 194.4 261.7 958.6 291.2 667.5 1,294.2 893.7
         July 6,698.2 4,445.3 3,481.1 3,024.8 194.0 262.3 964.2 293.7 670.5 1,312.3 940.7
         Aug. 6,973.5 4,478.6 3,501.8 3,044.3 196.5 261.0 976.8 293.5 683.3 1,330.9 1,163.9         Sep. 6,872.6 4,462.9 3,497.0 3,040.4 196.0 260.5 965.9 288.3 677.6 1,311.9 1,097.8
         Oct. 6,769.9 4,466.0 3,506.4 3,049.0 195.9 261.4 959.5 291.6 667.9 1,303.7 1,000.3
         Nov. 6,785.4 4,490.1 3,527.4 3,064.8 199.7 262.9 962.6 292.6 670.0 1,289.6 1,005.8         Dec. 6,716.1 4,480.4 3,527.3 3,064.0 197.9 265.4 953.1 288.5 664.6 1,236.4 999.3
2020         Jan. 6,847.7 4,503.3 3,537.5 3,071.5 198.2 267.8 965.8 292.8 673.0 1,290.1 1,054.4
         Feb. 7,028.5 4,531.0 3,562.2 3,092.6 203.2 266.4 968.8 290.8 678.0 1,306.1 1,191.4         Mar. 7,148.1 4,567.1 3,589.0 3,128.9 202.1 258.0 978.1 292.4 685.7 1,321.3 1,259.6
         Apr. 7,258.0 4,605.2 3,606.5 3,143.8 206.5 256.1 998.7 294.8 703.9 1,346.6 1,306.2
         May 7,230.4 4,666.4 3,640.1 3,167.2 215.9 257.1 1,026.2 293.8 732.5 1,326.0 1,238.1         June 7,225.2 4,693.0 3,641.9 3,164.7 220.7 256.6 1,051.1 291.5 759.6 1,304.4 1,227.8
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on
p.12   ).
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
August 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which: up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,126.1 12,502.4 11,690.4 11,761.7 6,547.6 810.5 217.7 1,901.0 2,231.0 54.0 2018          May
1,137.6 12,613.5 11,776.6 11,843.5 6,623.2 821.3 214.9 1,895.3 2,235.2 53.7          June
1,145.3 12,605.9 11,760.3 11,825.5 6,603.4 817.0 212.1 1,900.1 2,239.8 53.1          July
1,148.3 12,595.3 11,752.9 11,802.7 6,593.5 812.0 208.9 1,890.6 2,245.0 52.7          Aug.1,150.4 12,662.2 11,780.0 11,831.5 6,656.7 796.3 205.9 1,878.0 2,242.3 52.3          Sep.
1,152.2 12,639.5 11,788.3 11,848.3 6,668.8 812.8 203.6 1,872.0 2,239.0 52.1          Oct.
1,157.5 12,719.4 11,861.8 11,912.4 6,750.6 801.6 200.7 1,866.9 2,241.2 51.3          Nov.1,175.4 12,713.3 11,926.3 11,989.2 6,799.1 800.5 200.7 1,888.7 2,248.7 51.5          Dec.
1,162.4 12,768.0 11,911.1 11,976.6 6,777.8 798.0 199.4 1,888.0 2,262.2 51.3 2019          Jan.
1,165.6 12,833.0 11,959.7 12,005.4 6,806.3 795.2 196.8 1,887.9 2,268.0 51.2          Feb.1,171.7 12,947.7 12,078.5 12,135.0 6,931.6 785.8 199.5 1,886.3 2,280.5 51.3          Mar.
1,179.1 12,958.1 12,120.9 12,180.6 6,970.5 788.5 201.8 1,880.4 2,287.8 51.5          Apr.
1,184.2 13,059.3 12,198.6 12,257.0 7,049.7 775.7 201.4 1,876.7 2,301.5 52.1          May1,191.7 13,181.7 12,288.1 12,335.7 7,122.9 762.3 198.3 1,894.2 2,304.7 53.2          June
1,200.7 13,178.8 12,300.1 12,350.5 7,148.0 767.4 198.9 1,873.6 2,309.0 53.7          July
1,202.0 13,283.3 12,388.8 12,438.5 7,227.7 782.1 201.0 1,860.5 2,313.8 53.4          Aug.1,205.2 13,298.4 12,383.2 12,446.2 7,222.9 768.9 200.8 1,886.9 2,313.7 53.0          Sep.
1,208.2 13,292.6 12,422.6 12,487.1 7,284.6 758.4 201.3 1,883.1 2,310.5 49.4          Oct.
1,214.7 13,388.9 12,520.7 12,572.4 7,387.7 740.7 200.6 1,885.1 2,309.7 48.6          Nov.1,231.5 13,311.3 12,508.3 12,583.4 7,391.8 738.6 200.2 1,892.5 2,314.2 46.2          Dec.
1,223.8 13,359.5 12,460.6 12,555.4 7,362.8 734.6 200.1 1,890.8 2,322.3 44.7 2020          Jan.
1,229.0 13,477.0 12,528.4 12,615.5 7,430.7 731.7 198.6 1,888.4 2,322.0 44.1          Feb.1,252.7 13,774.3 12,781.8 12,902.7 7,697.8 759.6 192.1 1,882.6 2,327.5 43.1          Mar.
1,273.5 13,994.9 12,952.1 13,064.1 7,851.7 762.2 188.1 1,876.5 2,343.4 42.1          Apr.
1,293.5 14,299.6 13,161.0 13,261.7 8,008.7 779.4 188.3 1,880.2 2,363.8 41.4          May1,306.7 14,473.5 13,204.8 13,306.0 8,067.9 762.4 186.7 1,872.9 2,375.5 40.7          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
250.2 3,693.8 3,568.4 3,425.0 2,048.0 154.6 33.0 610.2 539.0 40.3 2018          May
252.7 3,716.5 3,574.0 3,423.0 2,039.4 165.5 32.6 607.2 538.5 39.8          June
256.0 3,694.1 3,571.0 3,429.7 2,053.1 161.2 32.2 605.8 538.0 39.4          July
256.4 3,703.1 3,568.1 3,417.3 2,051.8 153.7 34.0 601.1 537.7 38.9          Aug.256.1 3,737.2 3,588.3 3,437.1 2,076.9 153.2 33.2 597.4 537.8 38.6          Sep.
256.3 3,730.6 3,595.8 3,453.9 2,092.2 155.1 33.6 596.9 538.0 38.1          Oct.
257.2 3,774.2 3,632.0 3,482.3 2,127.4 149.8 33.2 595.9 538.5 37.4          Nov.260.0 3,766.4 3,629.3 3,481.1 2,120.4 152.5 33.7 596.7 540.6 37.2          Dec.
267.6 3,737.2 3,622.2 3,471.2 2,113.7 154.3 33.5 592.1 540.9 36.7 2019          Jan.
268.0 3,747.2 3,634.2 3,474.2 2,117.5 153.9 33.2 591.0 541.8 36.7          Feb.269.1 3,785.8 3,652.3 3,490.2 2,136.2 152.2 33.0 587.7 544.0 37.1          Mar.
271.3 3,782.3 3,667.4 3,506.4 2,156.4 151.2 32.8 584.8 544.1 37.2          Apr.
272.1 3,824.2 3,689.1 3,523.2 2,176.6 149.4 32.7 582.9 543.7 37.9          May274.2 3,837.7 3,697.8 3,528.6 2,183.2 147.8 32.3 583.5 543.3 38.4          June
277.3 3,812.4 3,701.4 3,532.6 2,191.7 147.0 31.6 581.4 542.7 38.1          July
276.6 3,849.7 3,730.3 3,550.9 2,213.2 149.7 31.7 576.9 541.5 37.8          Aug.277.4 3,853.5 3,722.1 3,546.0 2,213.9 146.4 31.5 576.1 540.8 37.2          Sep.
277.6 3,848.5 3,734.8 3,571.5 2,240.3 148.6 31.2 575.2 539.9 36.4          Oct.
278.4 3,874.7 3,753.7 3,580.0 2,257.7 143.0 30.8 573.7 539.2 35.6          Nov.281.8 3,863.9 3,744.4 3,574.3 2,250.5 144.8 31.0 573.5 540.0 34.5          Dec.
281.2 3,850.4 3,733.8 3,572.3 2,255.2 145.3 31.0 570.6 537.2 33.0 2020          Jan.
281.3 3,890.4 3,750.4 3,576.3 2,265.3 142.0 31.3 569.8 535.4 32.5          Feb.282.2 3,982.8 3,830.4 3,655.2 2,346.4 147.3 30.5 567.2 532.0 31.8          Mar.
286.5 3,997.3 3,828.9 3,665.7 2,359.6 149.2 30.0 563.6 532.2 31.1          Apr.
291.8 4,080.7 3,885.8 3,710.9 2,396.9 158.3 29.0 563.6 532.5 30.7          May296.5 4,132.2 3,873.6 3,711.6 2,410.7 152.1 29.6 557.0 532.6 29.7          June
volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra -Eurosystem
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability ite ms“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
August 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont’d)
  
 
Liabilities (cont’d)Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed maturities of At agreed notice of  
2 
Money
over of which: market of which:
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund Denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inatedyear/month ment Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  
3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2018         May 345.3 395.4 196.6 87.2 29.8 51.0 26.0 4.7 253.0 252.5 507.7 2,100.8 1,439.0
         June 366.7 403.3 199.6 91.7 29.9 51.9 25.7 4.7 247.4 246.8 498.4 2,095.8 1,438.6
         July 374.6 405.8 203.3 88.4 30.9 52.8 25.7 4.7 254.0 253.5 509.0 2,077.8 1,432.3
         Aug. 377.4 415.1 208.7 90.6 31.0 54.4 25.9 4.6 257.8 257.3 507.3 2,084.9 1,439.1         Sep. 414.4 416.3 211.2 87.8 32.4 54.8 25.5 4.6 247.2 246.7 486.2 2,109.6 1,457.3
         Oct. 375.6 415.5 213.2 84.0 32.3 55.7 25.8 4.5 237.4 236.9 511.5 2,165.4 1,474.6
         Nov. 383.1 423.9 218.9 85.1 33.6 56.3 25.7 4.3 268.8 268.4 511.8 2,162.9 1,469.0         Dec. 322.5 401.6 203.7 78.7 34.2 56.9 23.8 4.3 254.5 254.2 513.3 2,158.0 1,471.8
2019         Jan. 389.2 402.2 196.8 86.0 34.9 55.8 24.2 4.5 270.1 269.6 524.5 2,176.2 1,484.6
         Feb. 407.9 419.6 207.3 92.2 34.2 56.3 25.1 4.5 270.5 269.7 516.3 2,205.0 1,506.2         Mar. 386.0 426.7 212.1 92.6 35.4 56.7 25.5 4.4 272.7 272.3 520.2 2,185.7 1,489.6
         Apr. 352.9 424.6 212.2 91.4 34.5 56.9 25.3 4.4 295.0 294.6 532.3 2,174.9 1,488.0
         May 370.7 431.6 216.9 94.9 33.4 57.0 25.1 4.3 287.4 287.0 522.6 2,191.0 1,497.2         June 404.2 441.8 224.4 94.6 35.1 58.1 25.2 4.4 266.0 265.7 510.6 2,182.2 1,493.8
         July 391.2 437.1 221.5 93.8 34.1 58.2 25.2 4.4 284.1 283.8 533.0 2,189.1 1,492.7
         Aug. 397.4 447.4 228.3 97.2 34.1 58.3 25.3 4.3 289.0 288.5 550.9 2,173.6 1,484.1         Sep. 402.9 449.3 231.4 98.0 31.7 58.9 25.0 4.2 257.0 256.5 537.1 2,181.1 1,484.7
         Oct. 365.0 440.5 224.5 95.5 32.3 59.1 25.2 3.9 298.8 298.3 538.6 2,174.5 1,488.3
         Nov. 363.9 452.6 235.7 95.5 33.8 59.1 24.8 3.8 284.3 283.7 541.6 2,187.8 1,493.0         Dec. 297.4 430.4 224.7 85.9 33.7 59.1 23.6 3.6 250.3 249.8 520.3 2,154.0 1,486.9
2020         Jan. 381.8 422.3 209.6 92.6 33.2 59.5 23.2 4.1 243.4 242.9 555.2 2,188.0 1,500.4
         Feb. 425.5 436.0 219.8 96.8 32.8 59.2 23.3 4.0 263.2 262.7 550.5 2,191.7 1,498.1         Mar. 430.2 441.4 232.8 93.3 31.0 58.2 22.3 3.9 293.2 292.6 531.0 2,179.3 1,485.4
         Apr. 502.3 428.6 233.8 84.0 29.4 56.4 21.1 3.8 289.0 288.6 550.7 2,162.3 1,473.6
         May 603.1 434.7 245.8 81.7 28.4 54.7 20.3 3.8 297.8 297.5 549.4 2,135.3 1,469.7         June 726.4 441.1 259.4 82.4 24.6 51.8 19.4 3.4 254.8 254.6 568.9 2,113.1 1,457.7
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2018         May 51.4 217.4 68.6 74.9 25.7 44.5 3.1 0.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 536.8 274.3
         June 69.1 224.5 70.7 79.2 25.6 45.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 2.0 531.3 274.8
         July 48.1 216.4 63.4 76.6 26.5 46.2 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.8 1.9 526.6 277.0
         Aug. 61.7 224.1 67.3 78.9 26.4 47.7 3.1 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.9 527.7 282.0         Sep. 73.9 226.2 69.6 76.9 27.8 48.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.9 536.3 287.6
         Oct. 56.1 220.6 66.1 73.9 28.0 48.9 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 1.9 544.5 286.9
         Nov. 65.7 226.3 69.4 74.8 28.7 49.7 3.1 0.7 1.3 1.3 2.2 544.9 290.3         Dec. 60.3 225.0 74.6 67.5 29.3 49.9 3.0 0.6 0.8 0.8 2.2 532.5 283.4
2019         Jan. 41.8 224.2 67.1 74.8 30.0 48.7 3.0 0.6 1.7 1.7 2.2 546.6 294.1
         Feb. 38.8 234.3 71.8 80.3 29.3 49.1 3.1 0.6 2.0 2.0 2.2 560.4 302.9         Mar. 56.4 239.2 75.9 80.0 30.3 49.4 3.1 0.6 11.4 11.4 2.0 557.3 298.2
         Apr. 41.2 234.7 73.6 78.4 29.4 49.6 3.1 0.6 12.5 12.5 1.9 552.8 293.5
         May 60.3 240.7 77.4 81.7 28.3 49.6 3.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 2.0 560.1 300.1         June 64.0 245.1 80.4 81.5 29.0 50.6 3.1 0.5 12.9 12.9 2.0 558.0 301.8
         July 36.9 242.9 79.6 80.7 28.2 50.8 3.1 0.5 13.9 13.9 2.0 559.4 296.9
         Aug. 47.6 251.2 84.7 83.8 28.1 50.9 3.2 0.5 16.9 16.7 2.0 557.3 295.0         Sep. 57.3 250.3 84.6 85.0 25.8 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.5 1.3 2.2 563.5 297.7
         Oct. 37.4 239.6 76.3 82.4 26.1 51.3 3.1 0.5 1.2 1.0 2.1 555.2 299.2
         Nov. 45.4 249.3 83.4 83.9 27.4 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.7 1.5 1.9 560.4 302.2         Dec. 43.4 246.2 89.5 75.4 27.0 51.0 2.9 0.4 3.5 3.4 1.8 551.4 301.6
2020         Jan. 37.8 240.2 77.8 81.4 26.6 51.3 2.7 0.4 2.5 2.4 1.8 560.9 306.5
         Feb. 62.2 251.9 85.5 86.0 26.3 50.9 2.8 0.4 2.0 1.8 1.8 563.9 310.3         Mar. 69.7 257.9 97.6 82.5 24.7 49.8 2.8 0.4 1.7 1.6 2.2 553.0 310.7
         Apr. 87.5 244.0 94.7 74.4 23.7 48.3 2.7 0.4 3.4 3.3 2.1 550.6 306.2
         May 116.2 253.6 108.0 72.9 22.9 46.7 2.8 0.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 543.1 305.4         June 174.0 246.5 106.1 74.1 19.5 44.0 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 1.8 533.3 297.7
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market
p. 10    ).9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
August 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item:
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (from 2002 German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which: MonetaryIntra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
35.2 29.7 2,035.9 4,708.0 2,701.2 0.9 3,004.2 − 7,994.8 11,419.5 12,067.6 6,747.7 147.0 2018          May
38.6 28.9 2,028.3 4,564.0 2,672.3 24.1 2,911.9 − 8,086.6 11,529.1 12,168.0 6,706.1 150.2          June
37.8 24.1 2,015.9 4,612.7 2,667.5 7.1 2,891.1 − 8,080.6 11,518.5 12,159.0 6,693.9 152.4          July
39.8 24.1 2,020.9 4,649.3 2,663.2 17.7 2,884.1 − 8,082.1 11,519.2 12,166.7 6,686.5 155.5          Aug.40.6 22.1 2,046.9 4,574.8 2,663.2 23.4 2,846.0 − 8,152.5 11,566.5 12,185.1 6,699.8 157.9          Sep.
39.6 23.7 2,102.1 4,704.7 2,709.2 − 14.4 2,971.7 − 8,160.1 11,581.4 12,226.4 6,795.6 149.7          Oct.
38.9 21.7 2,102.3 4,659.6 2,711.2 6.6 3,018.8 − 8,256.6 11,668.3 12,313.3 6,792.3 153.3          Nov.47.5 20.7 2,089.8 4,503.3 2,727.3 8.7 2,936.1 − 8,302.9 11,714.7 12,363.6 6,818.5 149.8          Dec.
36.3 23.9 2,116.1 4,696.6 2,752.7 10.8 3,031.2 − 8,264.1 11,693.2 12,349.0 6,868.4 151.7 2019          Jan.
33.2 26.1 2,145.8 4,661.2 2,740.5 15.1 3,029.3 − 8,305.1 11,741.1 12,389.0 6,886.1 150.4          Feb.16.0 22.5 2,147.2 4,647.4 2,766.8 23.2 3,198.4 − 8,442.9 11,886.7 12,519.2 6,912.7 151.9          Mar.
17.0 21.4 2,136.5 4,770.1 2,761.0 14.1 3,202.5 − 8,488.9 11,942.5 12,591.4 6,890.6 151.5          Apr.
23.4 22.1 2,145.4 4,776.2 2,774.6 26.3 3,364.1 − 8,576.2 12,032.4 12,675.1 6,910.2 149.7          May20.0 21.6 2,140.6 4,640.6 2,830.3 33.7 3,469.1 − 8,670.3 12,114.6 12,741.2 6,980.8 155.2          June
16.1 21.3 2,151.6 4,796.8 2,878.9 25.8 3,685.2 − 8,699.0 12,150.2 12,798.2 7,020.3 151.7          July
2.7 20.7 2,150.1 4,854.7 2,940.4 − 2.9 4,083.0 − 8,787.9 12,264.2 12,915.0 7,067.0 152.7          Aug.3.2 19.0 2,158.9 4,803.5 2,942.8 25.6 3,943.0 − 8,789.8 12,251.1 12,883.2 7,104.7 153.4          Sep.
7.5 19.9 2,147.1 4,768.1 2,935.0 34.3 3,716.0 − 8,847.2 12,293.4 12,936.7 7,077.5 152.9          Oct.
6.8 19.5 2,161.5 4,770.3 2,922.8 31.6 3,675.8 − 8,972.4 12,401.2 13,041.6 7,080.9 157.9          Nov.
− 11.3 19.2 2,146.1 4,452.2 2,913.8 25.2 3,469.5 − 8,975.4 12,396.0 12,995.6 7,061.3 152.0          Dec.
− 0.5 21.9 2,166.6 4,759.4 2,951.2 24.8 3,715.9 − 8,927.1 12,357.3 13,006.2 7,116.8 154.9 2020          Jan.
3.5 23.4 2,164.8 4,817.3 2,967.9 26.9 3,963.2 − 9,012.5 12,441.7 13,104.4 7,128.4 156.9          Feb.
33.9 21.6 2,123.8 4,906.1 2,930.7 9.1 4,143.4 − 9,311.8 12,761.4 13,457.5 7,042.4 152.5          Mar.
15.8 21.5 2,125.1 5,050.4 2,946.9 − 24.8 4,204.6 − 9,489.9 12,940.2 13,629.6 7,050.9 153.0          Apr.
6.6 22.4 2,106.4 4,949.8 2,952.7 − 32.1 4,048.9 − 9,680.9 13,164.7 13,844.2 7,039.2 154.7          May3.7 21.1 2,088.3 4,711.4 2,984.2 − 6.5 4,006.2 − 9,767.0 13,239.7 13,932.9 7,041.2 154.7          June
 German contribution ( € billion) 
19.0 13.1 504.7 997.9 662.3 − 1,044.2 1,297.9 374.9 2,116.6 2,946.8 2,982.4 1,862.6 − 2018          May
17.0 12.5 501.8 996.0 666.2 − 1,070.1 1,277.7 378.5 2,110.1 2,954.5 2,987.3 1,860.9 −          June
16.7 11.9 498.0 967.9 665.4 − 1,019.3 1,250.8 381.6 2,116.5 2,954.1 2,986.4 1,855.4 −          July
18.3 12.0 497.4 966.5 672.6 − 1,024.8 1,273.6 386.9 2,119.1 2,953.0 2,986.4 1,858.4 −          Aug.17.8 11.0 507.4 979.8 670.9 − 1,059.4 1,251.7 390.8 2,146.5 2,978.4 3,010.4 1,863.3 −          Sep.
20.2 11.0 513.2 952.8 676.1 − 1,031.2 1,277.1 394.6 2,158.3 2,990.0 3,025.5 1,873.8 −          Oct.
19.4 10.3 515.2 932.7 675.8 − 1,041.8 1,288.0 397.1 2,196.8 3,024.9 3,058.2 1,874.7 −          Nov.17.7 10.1 504.6 967.9 689.9 − 1,063.4 1,297.9 401.1 2,195.0 3,021.7 3,052.5 1,879.0 −          Dec.
18.2 9.6 518.7 920.7 690.0 − 971.6 1,326.1 391.5 2,180.7 3,017.3 3,049.1 1,886.9 − 2019          Jan.
19.1 8.2 533.2 882.8 684.4 − 966.0 1,330.9 394.4 2,189.4 3,030.9 3,062.3 1,895.1 −          Feb.19.2 8.3 529.8 958.7 695.9 − 1,031.3 1,412.2 396.9 2,212.1 3,054.7 3,095.5 1,900.4 −          Mar.
18.6 8.2 525.9 953.9 692.7 − 985.8 1,398.5 400.8 2,230.0 3,069.0 3,110.2 1,890.7 −          Apr.
18.9 8.4 532.9 944.9 702.5 − 1,016.3 1,496.1 404.8 2,254.0 3,093.0 3,133.5 1,906.3 −          May19.7 7.6 530.7 957.2 722.3 − 1,013.1 1,542.9 407.8 2,263.6 3,100.7 3,142.8 1,926.0 −          June
19.7 7.9 531.9 925.0 735.6 − 950.3 1,600.3 411.4 2,271.3 3,104.7 3,148.2 1,938.3 −          July
20.3 7.6 529.4 944.3 757.0 − 980.7 1,826.9 417.2 2,297.9 3,135.9 3,182.8 1,952.6 −          Aug.22.3 7.4 533.8 927.2 755.6 − 992.1 1,761.2 422.1 2,298.5 3,131.2 3,164.7 1,954.3 −          Sep.
20.7 6.7 527.8 867.4 750.0 − 918.5 1,664.0 426.3 2,316.5 3,147.7 3,178.4 1,941.3 −          Oct.
21.4 5.8 533.1 877.7 749.1 − 951.9 1,671.9 430.8 2,341.2 3,168.5 3,199.3 1,943.1 −          Nov.21.0 6.1 524.3 863.5 750.1 − 999.8 1,681.4 435.8 2,340.1 3,161.1 3,193.6 1,933.9 −          Dec.
23.9 6.7 530.2 831.0 757.2 − 900.5 1,744.6 437.9 2,333.0 3,157.1 3,192.1 1,942.8 − 2020          Jan.
21.7 6.8 535.4 850.2 764.8 − 912.0 1,867.4 442.7 2,350.9 3,174.6 3,207.0 1,953.8 −          Feb.18.4 6.3 528.3 901.4 757.6 − 990.7 1,940.1 455.0 2,444.0 3,263.9 3,292.5 1,935.1 −          Mar.
15.9 6.9 527.8 942.0 759.1 − 1,003.6 2,007.1 458.2 2,454.3 3,266.4 3,294.7 1,930.3 −          Apr.
14.9 7.3 520.8 917.3 756.1 − 1,003.8 1,932.8 458.5 2,505.0 3,323.2 3,349.8 1,918.3 −          May14.8 7.1 511.4 939.7 768.9 − 1,074.0 1,922.5 458.1 2,516.8 3,327.2 3,351.7 1,911.3 −          June
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to three months (excluding central govern ments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to two years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the over two years and at agreed notice of over three months, debt securities w ith
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two maturities of over two years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
August 2020
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2018         July 635.1 2.1 744.2 0.1 2,558.4 652.2 0.0 1,183.6 263.4 533.8 1,306.9 3,142.6
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 637.5 3.0 739.9 0.1 2,589.7 671.2 0.0 1,192.2 239.1 519.1 1,348.7 3,212.0
         Oct. 625.2 6.9 727.8 0.1 2,622.8 631.8 0.0 1,194.3 283.1 504.4 1,369.0 3,195.1
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 625.1 6.8 726.4 0.1 2,642.3 635.9 0.0 1,202.4 240.2 542.9 1,379.4 3,217.7
2019         Jan. 655.8 7.9 723.8 0.1 2,652.8 640.0 0.0 1,218.8 231.3 618.2 1,332.1 3,190.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 665.5 6.0 723.1 0.1 2,645.8 637.6 0.0 1,209.2 257.3 571.4 1,364.8 3,211.7
         Apr. 678.6 5.7 720.3 0.1 2,635.9 619.6 0.0 1,215.8 270.5 555.6 1,379.0 3,214.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 689.7 5.5 718.6 0.4 2,630.6 601.9 0.0 1,228.2 248.2 561.9 1,404.6 3,234.7
         July 710.3 4.6 700.1 0.0 2,620.4 570.8 0.0 1,240.8 295.9 592.2 1,335.7 3,147.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 720.2 3.0 692.5 0.0 2,612.4 555.7 0.0 1,251.1 268.5 621.2 1,331.5 3,138.3
         Oct. 758.5 2.0 668.5 0.0 2,608.7 456.6 0.0 1,252.7 298.6 641.3 1,388.5 3,097.8
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 773.3 1.8 663.7 0.0 2,618.8 257.9 0.0 1,262.9 226.6 648.1 1,662.1 3,182.9
2020         Jan. 768.6 2.9 616.1 0.0 2,639.1 254.6 0.0 1,282.2 211.8 654.3 1,623.7 3,160.6
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 767.1 1.4 615.9 0.0 2,666.7 244.6 0.0 1,277.1 268.6 618.4 1,642.3 3,164.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 926.3 0.6 865.7 0.0 2,784.2 271.8 0.0 1,321.9 374.4 788.6 1,820.2 3,413.8         June 950.4 0.3 984.2 0.0 2,986.9 299.9 0.0 1,347.9 477.1 830.5 1,966.5 3,614.4
         July 871.3 0.8 1,401.5 0.0 3,168.2 356.0 0.0 1,365.7 671.2 703.1 2,345.9 4,067.5
Deutsche Bundesbank
2018         July 151.9 0.4 91.8 0.0 547.6 196.8 0.0 280.0 69.4 − 194.1 439.6 916.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 152.1 0.4 91.5 0.0 556.2 192.9 0.0 282.0 65.2 − 178.9 439.0 913.9
         Oct. 148.1 0.5 88.5 0.0 563.5 160.0 0.0 282.6 81.3 − 183.4 460.0 902.6
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 146.9 0.6 88.1 0.0 570.0 148.0 0.0 283.6 69.6 − 185.2 489.5 921.2
2019         Jan. 155.8 1.7 87.6 0.1 570.4 153.1 0.0 293.4 60.5 − 144.9 453.7 900.1
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 158.3 0.6 87.6 0.0 569.5 163.3 0.0 294.3 49.3 − 157.0 466.0 923.7
         Apr. 160.8 0.6 86.7 0.0 563.7 172.5 0.0 296.1 61.2 − 199.4 481.6 950.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 163.6 0.6 86.1 0.0 565.2 166.3 0.0 299.6 58.0 − 213.6 505.3 971.1
         July 169.4 0.7 85.3 0.0 563.1 150.1 0.0 303.0 65.7 − 175.0 474.5 927.7
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 172.5 0.5 84.9 0.0 562.7 150.1 0.0 305.6 57.6 − 157.6 464.9 920.6
         Oct. 182.8 0.4 82.8 0.0 560.0 151.5 0.0 306.5 70.8 − 159.4 456.6 914.7
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 186.9 0.4 82.4 0.0 566.1 82.2 0.0 307.6 55.9 − 135.3 525.4 915.3
2020         Jan. 186.0 0.9 74.0 0.0 567.9 73.6 0.0 311.7 52.7 − 95.7 486.5 871.8
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 185.0 0.4 74.0 0.0 573.7 65.4 0.0 311.2 64.4 − 125.0 517.1 893.7
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 238.0 0.2 106.8 0.0 585.3 76.3 0.0 324.1 102.0 − 174.5 602.8 1,003.2         June 248.7 0.1 122.5 0.0 623.1 85.0 0.0 326.4 137.6 − 172.6 618.1 1,029.5
         July 222.1 0.5 235.2 0.0 655.9 108.2 0.0 331.5 205.0 − 238.1 707.1 1,146.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
August 2020
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 9.9 + 0.3 − 13.1 + 0.0 + 38.5 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 13.2 + 45.4 + 31.3 − 47.0 − 41.2 2018          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 2.4 + 0.9 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 31.3 + 19.0 + 0.0 + 8.6 − 24.3 − 14.7 + 41.8 + 69.4          Sep.
− 12.3 + 3.9 − 12.1 + 0.0 + 33.1 − 39.4 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 44.0 − 14.7 + 20.3 − 16.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 19.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 − 42.9 + 38.5 + 10.4 + 22.6          Dec.
+ 30.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 16.4 − 8.9 + 75.3 − 47.3 − 26.8 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 9.7 − 1.9 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 9.6 + 26.0 − 46.8 + 32.7 + 20.8          Mar.
+ 13.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 18.0 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 13.2 − 15.8 + 14.2 + 2.7          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 11.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 17.7 + 0.0 + 12.4 − 22.3 + 6.3 + 25.6 + 20.3          June
+ 20.6 − 0.9 − 18.5 − 0.4 − 10.2 − 31.1 + 0.0 + 12.6 + 47.7 + 30.3 − 68.9 − 87.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 9.9 − 1.6 − 7.6 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 15.1 + 0.0 + 10.3 − 27.4 + 29.0 − 4.2 − 9.1          Sep.
+ 38.3 − 1.0 − 24.0 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 99.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 30.1 + 20.1 + 57.0 − 40.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 14.8 − 0.2 − 4.8 + 0.0 + 10.1 −198.7 + 0.0 + 10.2 − 72.0 + 6.8 + 273.6 + 85.1          Dec.
− 4.7 + 1.1 − 47.6 + 0.0 + 20.3 − 3.3 + 0.0 + 19.3 − 14.8 + 6.2 − 38.4 − 22.3 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 27.6 − 10.0 + 0.0 − 5.1 + 56.8 − 35.9 + 18.6 + 3.5          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 159.2 − 0.8 + 249.8 + 0.0 + 117.5 + 27.2 + 0.0 + 44.8 + 105.8 +170.2 + 177.9 + 249.7          May
+ 24.1 − 0.3 + 118.5 + 0.0 + 202.7 + 28.1 + 0.0 + 26.0 + 102.7 + 41.9 + 146.3 + 200.6          June
− 79.1 + 0.5 + 417.3 + 0.0 + 181.3 + 56.1 + 0.0 + 17.8 + 194.1 −127.4 + 379.4 + 453.1          July
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 10.2 + 23.9 − 26.4 − 27.2 2018          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 4.2 + 15.2 − 0.6 − 2.5          Sep.
− 4.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 32.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 16.1 − 4.5 + 21.1 − 11.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.6 − 12.0 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 11.7 − 1.8 + 29.5 + 18.5          Dec.
+ 8.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 + 9.7 − 9.2 + 40.2 − 35.9 − 21.1 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 11.2 − 12.0 + 12.3 + 23.6          Mar.
+ 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 12.0 − 42.5 + 15.6 + 26.5          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 6.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.2 − 14.2 + 23.7 + 21.0          June
+ 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 7.6 + 38.6 − 30.7 − 43.5          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 8.1 + 17.4 − 9.6 − 7.1          Sep.
+ 10.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 13.2 − 1.8 − 8.3 − 5.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 − 69.3 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 14.9 + 24.1 + 68.8 + 0.6          Dec.
− 0.9 + 0.4 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 1.8 − 8.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 3.2 + 39.6 − 38.9 − 43.5 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 11.7 − 29.3 + 30.7 + 21.9          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 53.0 − 0.2 + 32.9 − 0.0 + 11.6 + 10.9 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 37.6 − 49.6 + 85.6 + 109.5          May
+ 10.7 − 0.1 + 15.7 + 0.0 + 37.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 35.6 + 2.0 + 15.3 + 26.3          June
− 26.6 + 0.4 + 112.6 − 0.0 + 32.8 + 23.2 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 67.5 − 65.5 + 89.0 + 117.3          July
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
August 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
  
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claimsexternal loans residents with banks, arising from
As at Gold and other denominated security the creditreporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility underdate assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2020 Jan.                 3 4,664.0 470.7 347.3 80.5 266.8 21.5 17.1 17.1 −
                              10 4,655.8 470.7 344.2 80.5 263.7 19.5 16.7 16.7 −
                              17 4,660.3 470.7 345.3 80.5 264.8 19.9 15.5 15.5 −
                              24 4,674.4 470.7 345.5 80.5 265.0 20.3 15.3 15.3 −
                              31 4,671.4 470.7 346.0 80.5 265.5 19.9 15.3 15.3 −
         Feb.                 7 4,668.9 470.7 347.2 80.5 266.7 20.9 15.9 15.9 −
                              14 4,679.7 470.7 344.6 80.5 264.1 22.3 14.5 14.5 −
                              21 4,688.3 470.7 345.7 80.5 265.2 23.0 14.5 14.5 −
                              28 4,691.9 470.7 345.8 80.0 265.8 23.9 14.8 14.8 −
         Mar.                 6 4,702.2 470.7 346.4 80.0 266.4 24.0 16.6 16.6 −
                              13 4,704.2 470.7 348.9 80.0 268.9 22.8 14.7 14.7 −
                              20 4,927.3 470.7 349.3 80.0 269.3 124.4 13.9 13.9 −
                              27 5,062.7 470.6 349.9 80.0 269.9 139.3 13.9 13.9 −
         Apr.                 3 5,199.8 509.9 357.2 80.9 276.3 148.3 13.2 13.2 −
                              10 5,257.5 509.9 358.3 82.4 275.9 148.8 13.0 13.0 −
                              17 5,282.9 509.8 358.2 83.0 275.2 148.6 12.5 12.5 −
                              24 5,347.0 509.8 360.4 83.6 276.7 150.1 13.7 13.7 −
2020 May                 1 5,395.2 509.8 359.7 83.6 276.1 151.6 12.9 12.9 −
                                8 5,451.0 509.8 359.0 83.6 275.4 153.8 13.8 13.8 −
                              15 5,505.5 509.8 360.3 84.5 275.8 153.1 12.7 12.7 −
                              22 5,555.3 509.8 361.3 84.5 276.8 152.7 13.3 13.3 −
                              29 5,596.1 509.8 362.0 84.6 277.4 153.2 13.4 13.4 −
         June                 5 5,655.4 509.8 362.5 84.6 277.9 153.3 14.6 14.6 −
                              12 5,630.3 509.8 362.2 85.0 277.1 86.1 13.1 13.1 −
                              19 5,636.4 509.8 361.3 85.1 276.2 63.8 12.6 12.6 −
                              26 6,236.1 509.8 361.0 85.1 276.0 50.7 13.3 13.3 −
         July                 3 6,289.0 548.8 358.0 84.3 273.7 37.5 13.3 13.3 −
                              10 6,309.2 548.8 356.9 84.3 272.6 35.7 13.6 13.6 −
                              17 6,322.6 548.8 356.3 84.3 272.0 35.4 13.3 13.3 −
                              24 6,351.4 548.7 357.1 84.3 272.8 32.9 12.9 12.9 −
                              31 6,360.8 548.7 357.0 85.9 271.1 32.4 13.6 13.6 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 Jan.                 3 1,737.3 146.6 52.8 20.7 32.1 1.4 0.6 0.6 −
                              10 1,701.8 146.6 53.2 20.7 32.5 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
                              17 1,688.3 146.6 53.2 20.7 32.5 0.0 1.4 1.4 −
                              24 1,660.0 146.6 53.3 20.7 32.6 0.0 1.2 1.2 −
                              31 1,700.8 146.6 53.6 20.7 32.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
         Feb.                 7 1,695.0 146.6 53.8 20.7 33.1 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
                              14 1,694.8 146.6 53.8 20.7 33.1 0.0 1.2 1.2 −
                              21 1,697.1 146.6 54.3 20.7 33.6 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
                              28 1,714.7 146.6 54.4 20.6 33.8 0.0 1.4 1.4 −
         Mar.                 6 1,735.7 146.6 53.5 20.6 32.9 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
                              13 1,785.7 146.6 53.3 20.6 32.7 0.0 1.3 1.3 −
                              20 1,843.9 146.6 52.7 20.6 32.1 39.0 1.0 1.0 −
                              27 1,864.1 146.5 52.9 20.6 32.3 37.5 1.5 1.5 −
         Apr.                 3 1,916.4 158.7 54.9 20.8 34.1 43.8 1.1 1.1 −
                              10 1,923.4 158.7 55.3 21.1 34.2 45.3 1.0 1.0 −
                              17 1,905.4 158.7 55.5 21.3 34.2 46.0 0.7 0.7 −
                              24 1,909.6 158.7 55.9 21.6 34.3 47.4 1.0 1.0 −
2020 May                 1 1,938.0 158.7 56.0 21.6 34.4 47.8 0.2 0.2 −
                                8 1,963.2 158.7 56.4 21.6 34.8 48.7 0.8 0.8 −
                              15 1,995.5 158.7 56.5 21.7 34.8 49.2 0.3 0.3 −
                              22 1,996.4 158.7 56.2 21.7 34.5 49.7 0.5 0.5 −
                              29 1,979.8 158.7 56.0 21.7 34.3 49.8 0.5 0.5 −
         June                 5 2,001.7 158.7 56.5 21.7 34.8 49.9 2.0 2.0 −
                              12 2,003.6 158.6 56.1 21.7 34.4 32.4 0.9 0.9 −
                              19 2,047.0 158.6 55.4 21.7 33.7 23.7 0.4 0.4 −
                              26 2,197.3 158.6 55.3 21.7 33.6 19.1 1.3 1.3 −
         July                 3 2,215.8 170.7 54.9 21.6 33.3 9.3 1.3 1.3 −
                              10 2,199.9 170.7 55.1 21.6 33.5 7.8 1.1 1.1 −
                              17 2,230.8 170.7 54.7 21.6 33.1 6.5 1.3 1.3 −
                              24 2,217.8 170.7 54.7 21.6 33.2 5.1 1.0 1.0 −
                              31 2,257.3 170.7 54.8 22.3 32.5 3.8 1.7 1.7 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrum ents are valued at the
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB. 
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
August 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for governmentfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    As atopera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
617.7 1.5 616.2 − − 0.0 − 22.5 2,846.7 2,631.9 214.8 23.4 297.2 2020 Jan.                  3
617.3 1.1 616.2 − − 0.0 − 25.1 2,850.7 2,637.0 213.7 23.4 288.2                               10
617.0 0.8 616.2 − − 0.0 − 34.4 2,853.5 2,641.4 212.1 23.4 280.7                               17
617.1 1.0 616.2 − − 0.0 − 33.7 2,860.2 2,649.3 210.9 23.4 288.1                               24
617.7 1.6 616.1 − − 0.0 − 40.1 2,860.6 2,652.2 208.4 23.4 277.6                               31
617.0 0.8 616.1 − − − − 35.8 2,859.8 2,655.3 204.5 23.3 278.3          Feb.                  7
617.2 0.9 616.1 − − 0.2 − 34.1 2,865.5 2,663.1 202.5 23.3 287.4                               14
617.2 1.0 616.1 − − 0.1 − 39.3 2,870.9 2,669.5 201.4 23.3 283.6                               21
617.2 1.7 615.5 − − − − 36.5 2,873.3 2,671.9 201.3 23.3 286.4                               28
616.9 1.4 615.5 − − 0.0 − 49.1 2,874.5 2,674.7 199.8 23.3 280.7          Mar.                  6
617.7 2.2 615.5 − − 0.0 − 46.1 2,879.8 2,680.0 199.8 23.3 280.2                               13
726.1 1.5 724.6 − − 0.0 − 37.6 2,899.6 2,697.4 202.2 23.3 282.3                               20
826.1 1.1 825.0 − − 0.0 − 32.3 2,925.7 2,721.0 204.7 23.3 281.5                               27
869.2 0.4 868.7 − − − − 32.1 2,959.7 2,755.0 204.7 23.3 287.1          Apr.                  3
888.6 0.3 888.2 − − 0.0 − 35.4 2,997.4 2,791.8 205.6 23.3 282.9                               10
893.1 0.2 892.9 − − − − 39.7 3,017.2 2,812.3 204.9 23.3 280.5                               17
911.9 0.2 911.8 − − 0.0 − 40.1 3,052.4 2,846.8 205.6 23.3 285.3                               24
948.9 0.3 948.6 − − − − 34.4 3,067.9 2,865.9 202.0 23.3 286.7 2020 May                  1
963.2 0.3 962.8 − − − − 31.0 3,113.4 2,910.8 202.7 23.3 283.6                                 8
969.9 0.3 969.7 − − − − 37.3 3,156.5 2,954.1 202.4 23.3 282.7                               15
979.4 0.2 979.2 − − 0.0 − 35.7 3,197.9 2,995.5 202.4 23.3 281.8                               22
998.0 0.5 997.5 − − 0.1 − 34.4 3,222.6 3,019.9 202.7 23.3 279.2                               29
1,012.4 0.4 1,012.0 − − 0.0 − 36.1 3,262.1 3,058.8 203.3 23.3 281.3          June                  5
1,026.2 0.4 1,025.8 − − 0.0 − 30.7 3,297.9 3,094.9 203.0 23.3 280.9                               12
1,026.3 0.5 1,025.8 − − 0.0 − 34.9 3,325.9 3,123.2 202.7 23.3 278.6                               19
1,590.1 0.7 1,589.4 − − 0.0 − 39.3 3,365.1 3,162.5 202.7 23.3 283.4                               26
1,590.8 1.4 1,589.4 − − − − 37.3 3,391.9 3,188.4 203.5 22.8 288.7          July                  3
1,590.5 1.1 1,589.4 − − − − 33.3 3,416.2 3,213.5 202.8 22.8 291.3                               10
1,590.5 1.0 1,589.4 − − 0.0 − 33.1 3,435.2 3,232.5 202.7 22.8 287.3                               17
1,590.6 1.1 1,589.4 − − 0.0 − 37.7 3,462.8 3,259.7 203.2 22.8 285.9                               24
1,590.0 1.1 1,588.9 − − − − 34.0 3,477.5 3,274.7 202.8 22.8 284.7                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
74.7 0.7 74.0 − − 0.0 − 2.1 568.3 568.3 − 4.4 886.5 2020 Jan.                  3
74.6 0.6 74.0 − − 0.0 − 4.4 565.7 565.7 − 4.4 851.2                               10
74.5 0.5 74.0 − − 0.0 − 6.5 567.3 567.3 − 4.4 834.4                               17
74.6 0.6 74.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 568.7 568.7 − 4.4 804.0                               24
74.4 0.4 74.0 − − 0.0 − 6.3 571.1 571.1 − 4.4 842.7                               31
74.4 0.4 74.0 − − − − 5.4 571.9 571.9 − 4.4 836.0          Feb.                  7
74.5 0.4 74.0 − − 0.2 − 5.1 573.0 573.0 − 4.4 836.2                               14
74.5 0.5 74.0 − − 0.1 − 6.2 574.8 574.8 − 4.4 835.1                               21
74.5 0.5 74.0 − − 0.0 − 5.7 575.5 575.5 − 4.4 852.2                               28
74.2 0.2 74.0 − − 0.0 − 8.8 575.8 575.8 − 4.4 869.4          Mar.                  6
74.5 0.5 74.0 − − 0.0 − 7.5 573.2 573.2 − 4.4 925.0                               13
86.7 0.5 86.3 − − 0.0 − 8.4 574.8 574.8 − 4.4 930.2                               20
100.7 0.7 100.0 − − 0.0 − 7.2 577.3 577.3 − 4.4 936.1                               27
108.4 0.2 108.2 − − 0.0 − 9.3 582.7 582.7 − 4.4 953.1          Apr.                  3
110.7 0.1 110.6 − − 0.0 − 7.1 588.7 588.7 − 4.4 952.2                               10
111.7 0.1 111.7 − − − − 7.3 583.7 583.7 − 4.4 937.5                               17
114.8 0.0 114.8 − − 0.0 − 7.7 590.9 590.9 − 4.4 928.9                               24
116.3 0.0 116.3 − − − − 7.7 596.7 596.7 − 4.4 950.1 2020 May                  1
119.4 0.0 119.4 − − 0.0 − 6.9 605.6 605.6 − 4.4 962.2                                 8
120.9 0.1 120.8 − − 0.0 − 7.3 614.7 614.7 − 4.4 983.4                               15
122.1 0.0 122.1 − − 0.0 − 6.4 625.9 625.9 − 4.4 972.5                               22
125.0 0.3 124.7 − − 0.1 − 5.8 632.0 632.0 − 4.4 947.6                               29
126.1 0.3 125.8 − − 0.0 − 11.5 638.5 638.5 − 4.4 954.2          June                  5
138.3 0.3 138.0 − − 0.0 − 6.6 641.8 641.8 − 4.4 964.4                               12
138.2 0.1 138.0 − − 0.0 − 6.8 647.1 647.1 − 4.4 1 012.4                               19
284.0 0.2 283.8 − − 0.0 − 5.9 655.0 655.0 − 4.4 1 013.7                               26
284.8 1.0 283.8 − − − − 7.2 660.6 660.6 − 4.4 1 022.6          July                  3
284.6 0.8 283.8 − − 0.0 − 5.4 662.5 662.5 − 4.4 1 008.5                               10
284.5 0.7 283.8 − − 0.0 − 5.3 669.4 669.4 − 4.4 1 034.0                               17
284.7 1.0 283.8 − − 0.0 − 5.6 676.1 676.1 − 4.4 1 015.4                               24
284.7 0.9 283.8 − − 0.0 − 5.1 682.1 682.1 − 4.4 1 049.9                               31

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
August 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
  
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilitiesaccounts to euro(covering Fine- area creditthe tuning Deposits institutions Debt
As at Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Otherdate liabilities lation  
1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 3
 
2020 Jan.                 3 4,664.0 1,289.1 1,867.2 1,638.3 228.9 − − − 5.5 − 312.5 180.9 131.7
                              10 4,655.8 1,280.0 1,907.6 1,665.0 242.6 − − − 5.0 − 318.9 188.0 130.9
                              17 4,660.3 1,274.3 1,906.5 1,648.1 258.3 − − − 6.2 − 355.3 225.9 129.4
                              24 4,674.4 1,270.2 1,889.1 1,608.3 280.9 − − − 6.8 − 398.5 271.6 127.0
                              31 4,671.4 1,273.9 1,900.4 1,640.4 260.0 − − − 7.0 − 372.8 244.6 128.2
         Feb.                 7 4,668.9 1,274.5 1,925.6 1,690.6 235.0 − − − 6.6 − 345.1 218.4 126.6
                              14 4,679.7 1,274.8 1,881.7 1,658.5 223.2 − − − 7.1 − 397.0 268.0 129.0
                              21 4,688.3 1,275.1 1,851.7 1,624.0 227.7 − − − 7.1 − 440.7 312.0 128.8
                              28 4,691.9 1,278.7 1,866.2 1,609.6 256.6 − − − 6.9 − 420.2 296.9 123.2
         Mar.                 6 4,702.2 1,280.4 1,910.0 1,661.7 248.3 − − − 9.9 − 383.9 258.2 125.8
                              13 4,704.2 1,286.0 1,883.7 1,599.5 284.1 − − − 8.1 − 397.5 271.4 126.1
                              20 4,927.3 1,304.8 1,913.4 1,712.9 200.4 − − 0.0 8.3 − 462.8 329.4 133.4
                              27 5,062.7 1,313.1 2,021.5 1,809.0 212.5 − − − 8.0 − 480.8 349.5 131.3
         Apr.                 3 5,199.8 1,319.5 2,116.4 1,865.6 250.9 − − − 9.1 − 479.6 348.5 131.2
                              10 5,257.5 1,327.1 2,129.5 1,867.2 262.4 − − − 8.2 − 505.4 377.3 128.1
                              17 5,282.9 1,326.9 2,133.8 1,861.8 272.0 − − − 7.9 − 519.3 391.1 128.2
                              24 5,347.0 1,329.7 2,133.2 1,801.5 331.6 − − 0.0 9.4 − 563.9 435.3 128.6
2020 May                 1 5,395.2 1,334.1 2,188.7 1,826.9 361.8 − − 0.0 9.3 − 534.9 403.8 131.0
                                8 5,451.0 1,339.2 2,262.3 2,007.9 254.3 − − − 8.1 − 508.9 382.4 126.5
                              15 5,505.5 1,344.0 2,237.4 1,968.4 269.0 − − − 8.4 − 576.0 455.0 121.0
                              22 5,555.3 1,348.2 2,245.0 1,945.4 299.6 − − − 9.6 − 630.5 505.1 125.5
                              29 5,596.1 1,353.3 2,274.3 1,952.0 322.4 − − − 8.2 − 646.2 518.4 127.8
         June                 5 5,655.4 1,356.8 2,323.2 1,961.2 362.0 − − 0.0 12.5 − 653.0 524.3 128.7
                              12 5,630.3 1,359.2 2,327.1 2,080.5 246.5 − − 0.0 9.3 − 701.4 569.7 131.7
                              19 5,636.4 1,360.7 2,253.3 1,985.7 267.6 − − − 7.2 − 799.2 668.9 130.4
                              26 6,236.1 1,363.2 2,830.2 2,531.0 299.2 − − − 7.9 − 828.3 699.3 128.9
         July                 3 6,289.0 1,368.2 2,919.4 2,500.4 418.9 − − − 9.2 − 764.1 702.8 61.3
                              10 6,309.2 1,372.0 2,957.8 2,498.1 459.7 − − − 8.2 − 741.9 674.8 67.1
                              17 6,322.6 1,372.7 2,916.1 2,463.7 452.4 − − − 6.9 − 792.6 724.7 67.9
                              24 6,351.4 1,374.6 2,928.6 2,638.8 289.8 − − 0.0 6.8 − 816.0 750.9 65.1
                              31 6,360.8 1,377.8 2,997.8 2,650.4 347.4 − − − 6.0 − 760.8 697.7 63.1
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 Jan.                 3 1,737.3 311.7 569.1 510.4 58.7 − − − 1.7 − 88.1 46.9 41.3
                              10 1,701.8 308.8 570.3 507.3 63.1 − − − 1.3 − 76.9 39.1 37.9
                              17 1,688.3 308.1 558.2 486.5 71.7 − − − 2.0 − 94.7 52.3 42.5
                              24 1,660.0 307.6 544.4 470.7 73.8 − − − 2.6 − 88.1 56.9 31.3
                              31 1,700.8 309.2 586.0 520.5 65.5 − − − 2.8 − 74.7 39.6 35.1
         Feb.                 7 1,695.0 310.2 580.6 524.1 56.5 − − − 2.0 − 72.2 41.3 30.9
                              14 1,694.8 311.2 555.4 501.1 54.3 − − − 2.0 − 99.6 68.8 30.8
                              21 1,697.1 313.0 564.0 506.7 57.3 − − − 0.8 − 98.5 69.3 29.2
                              28 1,714.7 310.1 579.7 510.5 69.3 − − − 1.4 − 96.0 65.5 30.5
         Mar.                 6 1,735.7 311.5 603.4 533.1 70.4 − − − 2.6 − 101.3 71.4 29.9
                              13 1,785.7 313.3 614.1 523.7 90.4 − − − 1.7 − 131.1 89.6 41.5
                              20 1,843.9 323.9 635.0 570.0 65.0 − − 0.0 1.6 − 149.5 104.3 45.2
                              27 1,864.1 330.2 646.7 584.4 62.3 − − − 2.9 − 156.3 111.5 44.7
         Apr.                 3 1,916.4 321.2 708.0 645.3 62.7 − − − 4.9 − 137.2 95.5 41.6
                              10 1,923.4 324.5 695.8 633.1 62.8 − − − 3.6 − 143.3 101.8 41.5
                              17 1,905.4 323.7 696.3 625.3 71.0 − − − 3.4 − 119.6 92.4 27.1
                              24 1,909.6 324.7 679.7 575.5 104.2 − − − 3.5 − 129.4 104.3 25.1
2020 May                 1 1,938.0 323.6 696.9 585.2 111.7 − − − 3.6 − 124.7 101.0 23.7
                                8 1,963.2 324.5 712.6 650.0 62.6 − − − 3.1 − 128.2 105.2 23.0
                              15 1,995.5 325.4 701.8 637.2 64.6 − − − 2.8 − 166.7 136.3 30.4
                              22 1,996.4 326.3 695.4 595.7 99.8 − − − 3.7 − 185.7 154.6 31.2
                              29 1,979.8 328.2 701.7 594.6 107.1 − − − 2.8 − 167.5 136.1 31.4
         June                 5 2,001.7 328.6 706.4 600.1 106.2 − − − 6.6 − 181.5 152.4 29.1
                              12 2,003.6 329.4 708.6 647.6 61.0 − − − 3.7 − 190.2 165.0 25.3
                              19 2,047.0 329.3 707.6 646.2 61.4 − − − 2.1 − 235.9 207.7 28.2
                              26 2,197.3 330.2 836.6 761.1 75.5 − − − 3.1 − 264.0 236.0 27.9
         July                 3 2,215.8 332.5 874.1 733.5 140.7 − − − 4.2 − 228.7 221.2 7.5
                              10 2,199.9 334.0 884.5 734.8 149.8 − − − 3.0 − 200.3 192.8 7.5
                              17 2,230.8 334.4 879.8 718.7 161.1 − − − 2.2 − 231.0 223.5 7.4
                              24 2,217.8 334.6 874.0 786.5 87.4 − − − 1.8 − 228.1 220.8 7.3
                              31 2,257.3 334.2 908.2 812.3 95.9 − − − 1.4 − 233.6 226.6 7.0
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8%
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as anitems for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1In accordance with the accounting value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
August 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to  area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    As atdenominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    reporting credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
1 accounts reserves    date liabilities  2 
Eurosystem 3
 
265.8 8.0 7.4 7.4 − 57.4 277.2 − 466.6 107.2 2020 Jan.                  3
222.8 8.3 7.4 7.4 − 57.4 274.5 − 466.6 107.3                               10
196.8 8.9 7.0 7.0 − 57.4 274.1 − 466.6 107.3                               17
181.7 8.7 7.0 7.0 − 57.4 281.2 − 466.6 107.1                               24
189.4 7.9 7.0 7.0 − 57.4 282.0 − 466.6 107.0                               31
187.5 9.6 6.7 6.7 − 57.4 282.2 − 466.6 107.0          Feb.                  7
187.9 8.2 6.3 6.3 − 57.4 285.9 − 466.6 107.0                               14
179.0 8.6 6.5 6.5 − 57.4 288.0 − 466.6 107.5                               21
187.4 8.1 7.4 7.4 − 57.4 285.4 − 466.6 107.6                               28
180.7 9.2 6.1 6.1 − 57.4 290.4 − 466.6 107.6          Mar.                  6
195.5 7.9 5.8 5.8 − 57.4 288.3 − 466.6 107.6                               13
308.8 7.2 6.0 6.0 − 57.4 284.2 − 466.6 107.9                               20
316.1 7.2 5.8 5.8 − 57.4 277.4 − 466.6 108.8                               27
321.0 7.3 6.0 6.0 − 57.9 267.1 − 507.1 108.9          Apr.                  3
331.2 7.3 5.8 5.8 − 57.9 268.9 − 507.1 108.9                               10
334.2 6.9 6.3 6.3 − 57.9 273.7 − 507.1 108.9                               17
343.4 7.5 6.8 6.8 − 57.9 279.1 − 507.1 109.1                               24
360.2 7.5 6.7 6.7 − 57.9 279.7 − 507.1 109.1 2020 May                  1
364.9 8.1 7.0 7.0 − 57.9 278.6 − 507.1 108.9                                 8
369.6 7.9 7.1 7.1 − 57.9 281.2 − 507.1 108.9                               15
352.6 8.7 7.0 7.0 − 57.9 279.7 − 507.1 108.9                               22
348.3 9.0 6.9 6.9 − 57.9 275.9 − 507.1 108.9                               29
346.2 8.1 7.5 7.5 − 57.9 274.1 − 507.1 108.9          June                  5
270.0 7.7 8.5 8.5 − 57.9 273.2 − 507.1 108.9                               12
251.0 7.8 8.1 8.1 − 57.9 275.2 − 507.1 108.9                               19
238.1 7.4 8.1 8.1 − 57.9 278.9 − 507.1 109.0                               26
230.0 6.9 7.4 7.4 − 57.1 274.7 − 542.9 109.0          July                  3
228.9 6.1 7.7 7.7 − 57.1 277.5 − 542.9 109.0                               10
237.0 6.0 7.5 7.5 − 57.1 274.6 − 542.9 109.0                               17
227.2 5.6 7.9 7.9 − 57.1 275.6 − 542.9 109.0                               24
224.2 5.7 7.4 7.4 − 57.1 272.1 − 542.9 109.0                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
132.4 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.9 33.6 435.8 144.2 5.7 2020 Jan.                  3
109.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 34.0 435.8 144.2 5.7                               10
90.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 33.9 435.8 144.2 5.7                               17
81.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 34.6 435.8 144.2 5.7                               24
90.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.9 34.9 437.9 144.2 5.7                               31
91.8 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.9 34.6 438.1 144.2 5.7          Feb.                  7
88.3 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.9 34.8 438.1 144.2 5.7                               14
81.8 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.9 35.1 438.1 144.2 5.7                               21
89.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 − 14.9 29.5 442.7 144.2 5.7                               28
79.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 29.4 442.7 144.2 5.7          Mar.                  6
88.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 29.4 442.7 144.2 5.7                               13
96.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 29.7 442.7 144.2 5.7                               20
90.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 14.9 29.6 442.7 144.2 5.7                               27
82.6 0.0 − − − 15.0 29.1 455.0 157.8 5.7          Apr.                  3
93.6 − − − − 15.0 29.1 455.0 157.8 5.7                               10
99.7 0.0 − − − 15.0 29.3 455.0 157.8 5.7                               17
109.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.0 29.5 455.0 157.8 5.7                               24
122.9 − 0.2 0.2 − 15.0 29.5 458.2 157.8 5.7 2020 May                  1
127.8 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 15.0 29.7 458.2 157.8 5.7                                 8
131.6 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.0 29.8 458.2 157.8 5.7                               15
118.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.0 29.9 458.2 157.8 5.7                               22
112.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 15.0 30.1 458.5 157.8 5.7                               29
110.8 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 15.0 30.1 458.5 157.8 5.7          June                  5
103.2 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.0 30.4 458.5 157.8 5.7                               12
104.2 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.0 30.3 458.5 157.8 5.7                               19
96.1 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 15.0 29.7 458.5 157.8 5.7                               26
99.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.8 29.3 458.1 168.8 5.7          July                  3
99.7 0.0 0.7 0.7 − 14.8 30.2 458.1 168.8 5.7                               10
105.3 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.8 30.4 458.1 168.8 5.7                               17
100.7 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.8 30.6 458.1 168.8 5.7                               24
99.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.8 30.6 460.5 168.8 5.7                               31
 
basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/li ability related to bank-
banknotes issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note issue“. 2For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DEM banknotes still in circu-
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according lation. 3 Source: ECB. 
to the aforementioned accounting procedure and the value of euro banknotes put

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities itiessheet Cash issued issued
Period total  
1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.12012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.72013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.02014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.02017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.12018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.02019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2018         Sep. 7,799.9 35.8 2,267.8 1,846.4 1,577.7 268.7 421.4 291.0 130.4 3,854.6 3,447.2 3,006.3 2,708.5
         Oct. 7,845.2 36.9 2,286.9 1,855.6 1,588.6 267.0 431.4 298.1 133.2 3,858.3 3,447.8 3,009.7 2,711.9
         Nov. 7,881.2 36.8 2,303.5 1,872.8 1,605.2 267.6 430.8 295.9 134.8 3,874.4 3,460.7 3,023.7 2,727.7         Dec. 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 36.7 2,267.3 1,827.4 1,559.5 267.8 439.9 304.8 135.1 3,878.8 3,468.7 3,032.2 2,737.6
         Feb. 7,935.7 36.9 2,304.8 1,862.5 1,591.5 271.1 442.3 304.8 137.5 3,893.1 3,477.0 3,044.8 2,751.0         Mar. 8,121.3 37.0 2,343.5 1,885.9 1,614.7 271.2 457.6 319.3 138.4 3,921.0 3,488.4 3,059.8 2,765.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 38.2 2,354.4 1,893.6 1,625.2 268.5 460.8 321.6 139.1 3,928.3 3,492.4 3,068.0 2,774.1
         May 8,280.9 37.9 2,376.8 1,919.0 1,648.5 270.5 457.8 317.9 139.9 3,944.5 3,509.1 3,085.5 2,790.5         June 8,321.9 37.9 2,332.5 1,869.9 1,600.4 269.6 462.6 321.6 141.0 3,972.1 3,530.5 3,108.0 2,809.6
         July 8,372.1 37.4 2,311.4 1,845.2 1,575.0 270.2 466.2 324.2 142.0 3,984.9 3,539.6 3,114.5 2,815.1
         Aug. 8,645.5 38.3 2,327.7 1,857.2 1,589.6 267.6 470.5 327.6 142.9 4,009.7 3,554.6 3,127.0 2,827.3         Sep. 8,550.4 38.0 2,323.6 1,835.8 1,569.4 266.4 487.8 344.3 143.5 4,001.0 3,562.6 3,139.5 2,839.7
         Oct. 8,445.6 39.3 2,312.0 1,810.4 1,543.9 266.5 501.6 358.5 143.1 4,008.1 3,569.7 3,149.2 2,847.6
         Nov. 8,509.2 40.1 2,361.5 1,860.2 1,590.2 270.0 501.3 358.1 143.2 4,027.4 3,586.5 3,166.8 2,863.7         Dec. 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020         Jan. 8,482.2 39.4 2,293.1 1,800.7 1,531.5 269.2 492.4 348.1 144.3 4,033.9 3,591.5 3,173.1 2,867.5
         Feb. 8,666.7 40.3 2,308.1 1,815.4 1,545.5 269.9 492.7 348.9 143.8 4,055.3 3,606.4 3,190.1 2,885.8         Mar. 8,912.6 48.1 2,421.0 1,920.7 1,651.9 268.8 500.4 357.5 142.8 4,096.9 3,641.9 3,215.5 2,915.9
         Apr. 9,014.6 48.6 2,442.9 1,943.2 1,674.0 269.2 499.7 355.0 144.8 4,115.5 3,656.4 3,225.2 2,926.3
         May 8,915.3 48.1 2,395.2 1,896.4 1,631.8 264.6 498.8 355.2 143.6 4,149.8 3,682.9 3,247.5 2,946.1         June 9,026.3 46.0 2,542.0 2,056.2 1,787.9 268.2 485.8 343.5 142.3 4,153.4 3,683.1 3,249.8 2,949.1
 Changes 3
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.82013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.62014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.02017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.12018 101.8 8.5 − 29.2 − 49.7 − 53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.82019 483.4 2.8 20.7 − 3.8 − 2.3 − 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2018         Oct. 36.4 1.1 15.0 8.5 10.3 − 1.8 6.5 6.1 0.4 3.8 0.5 3.4 3.2
         Nov. 38.5 − 0.1 17.2 17.6 16.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.0 1.6 16.7 13.4 14.4 16.1         Dec. − 100.0 3.8 − 114.6 − 104.0 − 104.3 0.2 − 10.6 − 10.9 0.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 1.6 − 0.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 − 3.9 79.5 59.2 58.8 0.5 20.3 20.0 0.3 17.0 12.6 10.0 11.4
         Feb. 31.1 0.1 36.8 34.8 31.7 3.0 2.1 − 0.4 2.5 15.5 9.5 13.7 14.5         Mar. 124.6 0.2 32.4 25.5 26.3 − 0.8 6.9 6.5 0.4 12.4 10.7 14.4 14.6
         Apr. 33.9 1.2 10.8 7.7 10.5 − 2.8 3.1 2.4 0.7 7.6 4.4 8.4 8.9
         May 124.6 − 0.3 22.1 25.4 23.2 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.9 0.7 16.3 16.3 17.4 16.2         June 50.5 0.0 − 42.3 − 48.3 − 47.7 − 0.6 6.0 4.8 1.2 27.8 21.7 22.9 19.4
         July 49.8 − 0.5 − 23.0 − 25.4 − 26.0 0.6 2.4 1.5 0.9 12.1 9.1 6.8 5.6
         Aug. 265.9 0.8 14.8 11.4 14.2 − 2.8 3.4 2.7 0.7 23.9 14.6 12.3 11.9         Sep. − 100.4 − 0.3 − 19.8 − 19.0 − 18.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.3 0.6 7.9 8.2 12.1 12.1
         Oct. − 93.5 1.2 − 9.8 − 24.8 − 25.0 0.2 15.0 15.3 − 0.3 8.8 8.1 10.5 8.8
         Nov. 55.4 0.8 48.2 49.3 45.9 3.3 − 1.1 − 1.2 0.1 18.6 16.6 17.3 15.8         Dec. − 187.4 3.3 − 129.3 − 99.6 − 96.3 − 3.3 − 29.7 − 29.4 − 0.3 − 6.1 − 1.2 2.2 1.6
2020         Jan. 162.1 − 4.0 61.4 40.5 37.7 2.8 21.0 19.6 1.4 13.0 6.8 4.7 3.1
         Feb. 193.8 0.8 20.5 18.6 13.8 4.8 1.9 0.5 1.3 21.8 15.0 17.2 18.3         Mar. 251.0 7.9 113.4 105.3 106.1 − 0.9 8.2 8.8 − 0.6 44.3 36.8 26.5 31.0
         Apr. 96.1 0.5 20.8 21.8 21.5 0.3 − 1.1 − 3.0 1.9 18.2 14.2 9.8 10.5
         May − 40.6 − 0.6 22.6 22.4 19.3 3.1 0.2 1.3 − 1.1 27.3 24.9 20.5 18.0         June 113.3 − 2.1 148.1 160.8 157.3 3.6 − 12.7 − 11.7 − 1.0 4.4 1.3 3.3 4.0
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro area
to non-banks in other Member States residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which: Secur- of which: Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
297.8 440.9 263.4 177.5 407.4 283.7 171.7 123.6 29.6 94.0 1,028.7 770.3 613.1 2018          Sep.
297.8 438.1 265.4 172.7 410.5 287.6 176.1 122.9 31.0 91.9 1,037.4 780.7 625.6          Oct.
296.0 437.0 264.5 172.5 413.7 290.8 177.8 122.9 30.9 92.1 1,032.1 777.3 634.5          Nov.297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2          Dec.
294.6 436.5 265.9 170.6 410.1 291.8 179.6 118.3 28.9 89.5 1,049.5 794.1 670.0 2019          Jan.
293.8 432.2 263.3 168.9 416.1 294.1 181.5 122.0 28.8 93.1 1,037.8 781.6 663.2          Feb.294.1 428.5 260.6 168.0 432.6 311.4 197.8 121.2 28.9 92.4 1,084.1 826.7 735.7          Mar.
293.8 424.5 260.8 163.7 435.9 315.7 202.0 120.2 29.6 90.5 1,099.5 840.3 734.2          Apr.
295.0 423.6 259.2 164.4 435.5 317.7 205.0 117.8 29.4 88.4 1,101.0 839.1 820.6          May298.5 422.5 257.7 164.7 441.6 320.9 207.2 120.7 29.0 91.7 1,103.8 841.8 875.6          June
299.4 425.0 260.2 164.8 445.3 322.2 209.5 123.1 29.0 94.1 1,114.6 851.7 923.8          July
299.7 427.6 260.2 167.4 455.1 330.1 216.8 125.0 28.9 96.1 1,122.3 857.7 1,147.5          Aug.299.8 423.2 255.1 168.1 438.3 313.4 200.6 124.9 28.8 96.1 1,106.8 841.9 1,081.1          Sep.
301.6 420.5 257.1 163.4 438.4 313.1 201.3 125.3 30.1 95.2 1,102.8 842.5 983.5          Oct.
303.1 419.8 257.7 162.0 440.8 315.2 201.0 125.6 30.5 95.1 1,091.3 828.7 989.0          Nov.303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5          Dec.
305.6 418.3 258.6 159.8 442.4 316.4 203.8 126.0 29.8 96.2 1,078.6 819.6 1,037.1 2020          Jan.
304.3 416.3 256.5 159.8 448.9 322.8 206.6 126.2 29.9 96.3 1,088.6 829.3 1,174.5          Feb.299.6 426.4 258.5 167.9 455.0 325.2 212.8 129.8 29.5 100.3 1,104.4 838.8 1,242.1          Mar.
298.8 431.2 259.2 172.0 459.1 329.0 217.4 130.2 31.1 99.1 1,119.2 852.3 1,288.4          Apr.
301.4 435.4 258.3 177.1 466.9 334.5 220.6 132.3 31.0 101.3 1,102.1 840.8 1,220.2          May300.7 433.3 257.8 175.5 470.3 331.4 215.4 138.9 29.3 109.6 1,076.1 816.5 1,208.8          June
Changes 3
− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
− 9.8 − 46.2 − 19.1 − 27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 − 11.4 − 1.5 − 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 − 17.7 − 8.6 − 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 − 32.1 − 33.3 330.3 2019
0.2 − 2.9 1.9 − 4.8 3.3 4.5 4.1 − 1.2 1.4 − 2.6 4.0 3.5 12.6 2018          Oct.
− 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 3.3 3.3 1.5 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 − 4.0 − 2.2 8.8          Nov.
1.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 3.5 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.3 − 1.5 3.5 3.5 16.1          Dec.
− 1.4 2.6 2.4 0.2 4.4 5.1 3.2 − 0.8 0.3 − 1.0 16.5 15.8 19.8 2019          Jan.
− 0.8 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 1.7 6.0 2.4 2.2 3.7 − 0.0 3.7 − 14.5 − 15.1 − 6.9          Feb.− 0.2 − 3.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 1.7 3.0 2.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 1.2 16.1 17.2 63.6          Mar.
− 0.4 − 4.0 0.2 − 4.2 3.1 4.2 4.3 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 15.8 14.1 − 1.5          Apr.
1.2 − 1.0 − 1.7 0.7 − 0.1 2.3 3.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 0.0 − 2.8 86.5          May3.5 − 1.2 − 1.5 0.3 6.1 3.4 2.7 2.6 − 0.4 3.1 10.5 9.9 54.5          June
1.2 2.2 2.5 − 0.2 3.0 1.3 2.1 1.7 − 0.0 1.8 4.4 4.1 56.8          July
0.4 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 9.3 7.5 7.0 1.8 − 0.1 1.9 2.6 1.2 223.7          Aug.0.0 − 4.0 − 4.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 21.9 − 21.7 − 66.4          Sep.
1.7 − 2.4 2.1 − 4.6 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.5 1.3 − 0.8 3.9 7.7 − 97.7          Oct.
1.5 − 0.8 0.6 − 1.4 2.1 1.7 − 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 − 17.6 − 19.3 5.3          Nov.0.7 − 3.4 − 3.0 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 3.5 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 47.9 − 44.3 − 7.5          Dec.
1.6 2.1 3.9 − 1.8 6.2 3.2 4.5 3.0 0.4 2.6 36.0 35.9 55.6 2020          Jan.
− 1.1 − 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.1 6.8 6.7 2.8 0.1 0.1 − 0.0 13.5 12.5 137.3          Feb.− 4.5 10.2 2.0 8.3 7.5 3.3 6.5 4.2 − 0.4 4.6 17.8 11.2 67.6          Mar.
− 0.7 4.5 0.6 3.9 4.0 3.7 4.3 0.3 1.6 − 1.3 10.4 9.3 46.3          Apr.
2.5 4.4 − 0.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 − 1.2 1.6 − 0.6 2.2 − 23.0 − 18.2 − 67.0          May
− 0.7 − 1.9 − 0.3 − 1.6 3.1 − 3.4 − 5.2 6.5 − 1.8 8.3 − 25.7 − 23.9 − 11.5          June
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home Member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country States Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.92012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.22013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.82014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.22017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.52018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.02019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2018         Sep. 7,799.9 1,220.4 1,034.2 186.2 3,594.0 3,473.8 2,017.5 879.0 273.7 577.3 538.4 108.8 48.2
         Oct. 7,845.2 1,227.0 1,034.3 192.7 3,614.3 3,494.1 2,039.3 877.8 273.4 577.0 538.6 108.8 47.3
         Nov. 7,881.2 1,244.5 1,046.8 197.7 3,646.1 3,527.4 2,074.8 875.8 271.5 576.8 539.1 106.2 47.1         Dec. 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 1,238.4 1,040.5 197.9 3,646.4 3,530.1 2,074.3 877.3 277.3 578.4 541.4 104.9 45.9
         Feb. 7,935.7 1,258.4 1,046.6 211.8 3,658.9 3,544.0 2,083.6 880.9 281.8 579.5 542.4 103.3 44.6         Mar. 8,121.3 1,281.9 1,050.1 231.8 3,676.8 3,554.7 2,095.7 877.1 280.6 582.0 544.7 109.9 51.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 1,298.3 1,061.2 237.0 3,689.3 3,569.8 2,117.1 870.5 276.7 582.2 544.7 105.8 47.5
         May 8,280.9 1,291.2 1,057.1 234.1 3,721.9 3,599.3 2,147.3 869.5 277.3 582.5 544.4 108.1 50.1         June 8,321.9 1,292.1 1,048.3 243.8 3,728.4 3,595.5 2,144.7 868.1 274.5 582.6 544.0 116.0 56.6
         July 8,372.1 1,291.9 1,055.1 236.8 3,728.8 3,605.7 2,160.6 863.3 271.9 581.8 543.4 110.3 51.1
         Aug. 8,645.5 1,306.3 1,062.2 244.1 3,754.1 3,626.8 2,182.9 863.7 276.0 580.2 542.2 114.6 54.3         Sep. 8,550.4 1,299.7 1,038.3 261.4 3,745.4 3,618.0 2,179.8 859.2 273.5 579.0 541.5 115.2 55.7
         Oct. 8,445.6 1,313.5 1,050.3 263.2 3,761.4 3,633.5 2,201.7 854.6 270.4 577.2 540.6 114.1 51.4
         Nov. 8,509.2 1,326.4 1,057.3 269.1 3,791.3 3,663.8 2,238.9 849.3 266.7 575.6 539.9 115.8 52.6         Dec. 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020         Jan. 8,482.2 1,293.2 1,033.0 260.2 3,775.6 3,647.0 2,229.5 846.8 267.2 570.7 537.5 116.3 54.3
         Feb. 8,666.7 1,313.5 1,047.8 265.7 3,794.5 3,664.6 2,249.1 847.1 270.3 568.4 535.8 117.0 55.2         Mar. 8,912.6 1,418.4 1,135.8 282.6 3,853.2 3,705.0 2,299.1 841.5 268.6 564.4 532.5 135.5 72.3
         Apr. 9,014.6 1,426.3 1,156.6 269.6 3,872.7 3,729.4 2,339.0 826.7 259.6 563.8 532.6 130.3 65.2
         May 8,915.3 1,386.1 1,112.0 274.0 3,913.5 3,764.4 2,370.9 829.9 266.6 563.6 532.9 136.6 70.6         June 9,026.3 1,503.5 1,230.4 273.1 3,906.1 3,754.5 2,381.1 810.8 256.1 562.5 532.8 139.2 71.1
 Changes 4
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.42013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.32014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.92017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.82018 101.8 − 20.1 − 25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 − 18.8 − 6.5 − 4.3 1.2 − 4.3 2.32019 483.4 12.6 − 10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 − 30.6 − 6.6 − 3.4 − 0.6 10.6 8.7
2018         Oct. 36.4 5.4 − 0.4 5.9 19.1 19.3 21.1 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.0
         Nov. 38.5 17.7 12.6 5.1 32.1 33.5 35.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.1 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.2         Dec. − 100.0 − 30.3 − 24.8 − 5.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 1.3 − 3.1 − 4.2 1.7 2.0 − 1.7 − 2.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 24.8 18.9 6.0 3.6 3.0 − 1.2 4.4 10.1 − 0.2 0.3 0.4 1.0
         Feb. 31.1 19.6 5.6 13.9 12.0 13.3 9.0 3.2 4.1 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 − 1.4         Mar. 124.6 19.3 2.7 16.6 15.7 9.5 11.1 − 4.1 − 1.4 2.5 2.2 5.7 6.3
         Apr. 33.9 16.4 11.2 5.2 12.6 15.1 21.4 − 6.6 − 3.9 0.2 0.1 − 4.1 − 4.3
         May 124.6 − 7.3 − 4.2 − 3.1 32.4 29.5 30.1 − 0.9 0.6 0.3 − 0.3 2.3 2.7         June 50.5 2.1 − 8.2 10.3 7.3 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 2.8 0.2 − 0.4 7.9 6.6
         July 49.8 − 1.3 6.3 − 7.6 − 0.7 9.3 15.4 − 5.2 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 5.8 − 5.6
         Aug. 265.9 13.7 6.8 6.9 24.7 20.5 21.9 0.2 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 4.2 3.1         Sep. − 100.4 − 19.2 − 21.7 2.5 − 9.5 − 9.5 − 3.5 − 4.7 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 0.7 0.5 1.3
         Oct. − 93.5 15.0 12.5 2.5 17.1 16.2 22.5 − 4.5 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 4.2
         Nov. 55.4 11.9 6.6 5.3 29.1 29.5 36.7 − 5.7 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.7 1.5 1.1         Dec. − 187.4 − 82.4 − 46.4 − 36.0 − 12.2 − 13.2 − 7.3 − 5.4 − 4.9 − 0.5 0.6 0.7 2.2
2020         Jan. 162.1 49.3 22.2 27.2 − 3.4 − 3.5 − 2.0 2.9 5.3 − 4.5 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.4
         Feb. 193.8 20.0 14.6 5.4 18.5 17.3 19.4 0.2 3.0 − 2.2 − 1.7 0.6 0.9         Mar. 251.0 104.6 87.7 16.9 58.9 40.4 50.1 − 5.6 − 1.7 − 4.0 − 3.4 18.5 17.1
         Apr. 96.1 7.0 20.3 − 13.3 18.8 24.0 39.6 − 15.0 − 9.2 − 0.7 0.1 − 5.3 − 7.1
         May − 40.6 22.0 16.8 5.2 34.0 33.3 29.9 3.6 7.3 − 0.2 0.3 1.2 0.1         June 113.3 117.4 118.4 − 0.9 − 7.4 − 9.9 8.1 − 16.9 − 10.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 2.5 0.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which: from Money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- repos with
of which: of which: central non-banks fund euro Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 201663.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 201756.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 201859.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
57.8 17.4 2.8 2.5 11.5 9.2 1.3 2.0 1,034.7 33.9 681.7 687.2 578.7 2018          Sep.
58.6 17.2 2.8 2.5 11.4 9.7 2.4 2.0 1,044.7 36.2 666.9 687.8 600.0          Oct.
56.3 15.0 2.8 2.5 12.5 10.0 1.3 2.4 1,048.3 34.6 643.3 688.1 607.3          Nov.56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7          Dec.
56.2 15.3 2.8 2.5 11.5 10.1 1.7 2.4 1,048.1 32.1 636.9 688.3 640.1 2019          Jan.
55.9 14.9 2.8 2.5 11.7 10.0 2.0 2.3 1,067.9 32.2 621.9 684.9 639.5          Feb.55.4 14.9 2.8 2.5 12.1 10.5 11.4 2.1 1,065.3 32.7 666.8 699.3 717.8          Mar.
55.5 15.0 2.8 2.5 13.7 11.2 12.5 2.0 1,060.0 32.1 698.4 696.3 697.8          Apr.
55.2 14.8 2.8 2.5 14.4 12.0 11.2 2.0 1,071.8 32.4 688.6 703.5 790.6          May56.6 16.1 2.8 2.5 17.0 14.0 12.9 2.0 1,071.1 33.1 676.3 706.6 832.5          June
56.4 15.6 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 13.9 2.1 1,075.3 33.4 667.9 709.9 882.4          July
57.5 17.4 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 16.9 2.2 1,072.7 33.9 676.2 713.0 1,103.9          Aug.56.8 15.2 2.7 2.4 12.2 10.9 1.5 2.3 1,077.8 35.7 671.4 719.2 1,033.2          Sep.
60.1 17.8 2.7 2.4 13.8 10.6 1.2 2.2 1,067.5 33.4 657.4 711.0 931.3          Oct.
60.6 18.3 2.7 2.4 11.7 10.6 1.7 2.0 1,076.7 33.7 653.6 723.6 933.9          Nov.59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6          Dec.
59.4 17.1 2.7 2.4 12.3 10.8 2.5 1.8 1,078.0 36.0 622.5 712.5 996.0 2020          Jan.
59.2 15.3 2.6 2.4 12.9 11.2 2.0 1.9 1,087.4 34.6 638.8 714.0 1,114.6          Feb.60.6 16.5 2.6 2.4 12.8 11.2 1.7 2.5 1,074.1 30.8 674.1 713.4 1,175.2          Mar.
62.4 17.6 2.6 2.4 13.0 11.1 3.4 2.4 1,078.1 29.6 704.0 693.5 1,234.2          Apr.
63.4 16.4 2.6 2.4 12.5 10.8 2.2 2.2 1,076.9 28.8 693.7 686.4 1,154.4          May65.4 19.2 2.6 2.4 12.5 11.8 0.9 2.1 1,074.0 28.6 696.8 702.0 1,140.9          June
Changes 4
− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
− 6.4 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 2.1 2.1 − 2.6 0.3 30.0 − 5.9 − 36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 − 0.5 22.3 0.1 − 47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
0.8 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.1 5.5 2.2 − 18.1 − 0.7 24.1 2018          Oct.
− 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.5 − 1.0 0.3 4.4 − 1.6 − 23.1 0.5 7.6          Nov.
0.5 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 0.5 − 0.6 0.0 − 12.7 − 2.6 − 66.2 8.0 4.7          Dec.
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.4 0.9 0.0 13.9 0.2 61.2 − 7.3 31.7 2019          Jan.
− 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 17.8 − 0.0 − 16.4 − 4.0 1.9          Feb.− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.6 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 0.4 15.8 11.6 68.4          Mar.
0.1 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 0.8 1.1 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.5 31.6 − 3.0 − 19.4          Apr.
− 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.0 11.8 0.2 − 10.4 7.2 92.3          May
1.4 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.5 2.0 1.7 0.0 3.4 0.9 − 8.2 4.8 39.5          June
− 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.0 − 4.2 − 2.8 1.0 0.1 1.0 0.2 − 11.7 2.2 59.2          July
1.1 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.1 0.1 − 5.4 0.4 5.8 2.3 221.7          Aug.
− 0.8 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.1 0.1 1.3 1.7 − 8.3 5.3 − 69.0          Sep.
3.4 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 6.5 − 2.1 − 9.7 − 6.9 − 102.1          Oct.
0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 0.2 0.4 − 0.2 5.6 0.2 − 7.2 11.5 4.2          Nov.
− 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 9.2 − 1.3 − 90.5 6.4 0.7          Dec.
0.3 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 − 0.5 1.1 − 0.1 11.0 3.5 59.9 − 17.2 61.4 2020          Jan.
− 0.3 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.4 − 0.6 0.1 8.6 − 1.4 15.5 1.3 130.4          Feb.
1.4 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 0.6 − 11.9 − 3.8 36.2 − 0.3 63.2          Mar.
1.8 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 1.7 − 0.1 1.6 − 1.3 27.6 − 20.7 60.3          Apr.
1.1 − 1.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 5.1 − 0.6 − 21.9 3.5 − 82.0          May2.0 2.7 − 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 − 1.3 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 0.7 3.1 16.1 − 11.0          June
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
  
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2020         Jan. 1,532 8,529.4 560.0 2,368.0 1,875.1 489.4 4,349.9 390.9 3,271.6 0.4 676.0 111.6 1,139.9
         Feb. 1,533 8,714.7 555.1 2,399.0 1,901.1 494.0 4,377.0 396.5 3,289.0 0.5 677.7 105.3 1,278.3         Mar. 1,533 8,963.4 675.5 2,418.4 1,919.2 495.1 4,414.1 418.6 3,298.5 0.4 679.8 105.5 1,349.9
         Apr. 1,531 9,064.2 635.2 2,490.7 1,990.1 496.6 4,437.5 420.0 3,317.7 0.3 680.8 105.7 1,395.1
         May 1,530 8,968.3 638.6 2,431.2 1,929.3 497.4 4,470.6 427.6 3,335.7 0.3 684.9 98.0 1,329.9         June 1,530 9,082.2 819.6 2,384.2 1,880.4 498.9 4,459.5 405.3 3,339.4 0.3 690.7 98.1 1,320.8
Commercial banks 6
2020         May 258 3,790.9 341.9 967.0 880.1 86.0 1,420.7 266.1 937.7 0.2 205.4 36.3 1,024.9
         June 259 3,864.9 429.6 966.0 880.3 84.9 1,409.3 250.0 935.3 0.2 209.9 36.4 1,023.6
   Big banks 7
2020         May 3 2,265.5 89.0 530.3 494.7 35.5 663.8 134.8 418.1 0.1 104.2 30.6 951.9
         June 3 2,309.5 141.4 525.0 489.9 35.1 659.8 125.6 417.3 0.1 107.3 30.7 952.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2020         May 146 1,098.0 137.5 260.8 211.4 49.0 628.3 85.0 444.3 0.1 94.6 5.0 66.4
         June 146 1,115.1 167.5 255.2 206.6 48.3 623.5 80.6 442.9 0.1 96.2 5.0 64.0
   Branches of foreign banks
2020         May 109 427.4 115.5 176.0 173.9 1.5 128.7 46.3 75.3 0.0 6.6 0.7 6.6
         June 110 440.4 120.7 185.9 183.8 1.5 126.0 43.8 75.1 0.1 6.5 0.7 7.0
Landesbanken
2020         May 6 881.0 60.5 266.5 202.9 63.1 419.5 52.8 316.3 0.0 45.9 8.7 125.8
         June 6 879.3 72.1 260.9 197.7 62.6 414.0 47.2 315.5 0.0 46.5 8.7 123.5
Savings banks
2020         May 378 1,394.2 103.8 177.1 60.0 116.9 1,077.6 48.9 857.8 0.0 170.0 14.8 20.9
         June 378 1,402.5 108.3 177.1 58.3 118.6 1,081.5 48.8 860.2 0.0 171.7 14.8 20.8
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2020         May 841 1,018.5 40.5 181.2 70.6 110.4 757.0 33.6 604.8 0.0 118.5 17.8 22.1
         June 841 1,029.2 45.4 183.8 70.8 112.8 759.6 33.8 607.8 0.0 117.9 17.8 22.6
Mortgage banks
2020         May 10 234.9 2.2 24.5 14.5 9.9 199.5 3.0 176.7 − 19.8 0.2 8.6
         June 10 242.1 8.4 26.7 17.1 9.3 198.5 3.1 175.7 − 19.7 0.2 8.4
Building and loan associations
2020         May 19 240.5 1.8 47.6 31.3 16.3 186.7 1.0 159.9 . 25.9 0.3 4.1
         June 18 240.7 1.5 47.1 30.8 16.3 187.6 1.0 160.8 . 25.9 0.3 4.1
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2020         May 18 1,408.2 88.0 767.2 669.9 94.8 409.6 22.2 282.4 0.0 99.4 20.0 123.4
         June 18 1,423.5 154.3 722.5 625.3 94.4 408.9 21.4 284.1 0.0 99.2 20.0 117.8
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2020         May 143 1,329.5 199.1 402.1 362.2 38.9 581.8 122.0 362.3 0.1 91.7 3.2 143.3
         June 144 1,358.9 226.9 405.6 365.8 39.1 572.8 114.4 360.3 0.2 93.3 3.2 150.3
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2020         May 34 902.1 83.7 226.1 188.3 37.4 453.2 75.8 287.1 0.1 85.1 2.5 136.7
         June 34 918.5 106.2 219.8 181.9 37.6 446.7 70.6 285.2 0.1 86.8 2.5 143.3
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,787.7 558.8 1,228.9 3,906.0 2,356.9 270.6 665.9 41.5 577.2 543.4 35.3 1,180.6 552.1 1,103.0 2020          Jan.
1,817.4 567.0 1,250.3 3,931.2 2,383.5 272.9 665.0 40.3 575.0 541.7 34.9 1,193.1 552.4 1,220.6          Feb.1,961.6 610.8 1,350.8 3,985.6 2,451.1 269.7 659.5 32.3 570.9 538.3 34.4 1,177.3 556.2 1,282.7          Mar.
1,990.2 579.8 1,410.3 4,015.9 2,488.4 270.1 653.6 41.2 570.2 538.4 33.7 1,177.6 539.2 1,341.3          Apr.
1,939.0 590.8 1,348.1 4,056.2 2,527.2 276.2 650.2 40.0 570.0 538.7 32.6 1,172.9 533.3 1,266.9          May2,065.1 603.9 1,461.1 4,042.0 2,532.5 270.4 638.0 36.8 569.0 538.6 32.1 1,179.5 539.0 1,256.6          June
Commercial banks 6
924.6 425.0 499.5 1,611.1 1,083.1 166.1 250.7 37.6 98.2 93.0 12.9 165.6 176.1 913.6 2020          May
1,008.8 429.3 579.5 1,602.9 1,078.5 166.9 246.6 34.7 98.1 93.0 12.8 169.9 176.2 907.1          June
Big banks 7
435.6 190.8 244.8 777.6 498.3 99.3 95.9 37.5 82.6 78.2 1.5 121.0 83.0 848.4 2020          May
478.2 178.4 299.8 777.8 501.6 98.2 93.9 34.6 82.6 78.4 1.5 126.2 82.9 844.4          June
Regional banks and other commercial banks
247.2 102.5 144.7 667.9 467.6 40.9 132.8 0.1 15.3 14.5 11.3 44.0 83.3 55.6 2020          May
273.5 106.5 166.9 661.5 461.7 42.6 130.9 0.2 15.1 14.3 11.2 43.2 83.5 53.4          June
Branches of foreign banks
241.8 131.8 110.0 165.6 117.2 26.0 22.0 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.6 9.9 9.6 2020          May
257.1 144.3 112.8 163.6 115.3 26.1 21.8 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.5 9.8 9.3          June
Landesbanken
257.8 49.9 207.9 267.4 131.2 47.7 82.0 2.3 6.2 6.2 0.2 188.4 42.9 124.5 2020          May
265.0 57.1 208.0 262.3 133.2 44.4 78.4 2.0 6.2 6.2 0.2 186.0 42.9 123.1          June
Savings banks
153.5 7.6 145.9 1,052.4 730.0 13.8 14.6 − 280.4 260.6 13.7 18.1 124.0 46.2 2020          May
161.0 7.0 154.0 1,051.9 730.6 13.6 14.4 − 279.9 260.8 13.4 18.0 126.9 44.6          June
 
Credit cooperatives
 
133.1 2.2 130.9 756.4 524.3 30.0 13.3 − 184.7 178.5 4.2 10.6 85.3 33.0 2020          May
142.3 2.7 139.6 756.9 528.3 29.3 10.8 − 184.3 178.2 4.1 10.6 87.8 31.7          June
Mortgage banks
54.8 3.3 51.5 66.9 2.2 3.8 60.8 − − − . 96.2 10.6 6.5 2020          May
62.9 3.1 59.9 65.5 2.2 3.3 60.1 − − − . 96.6 10.7 6.3          June
Building and loan associations
25.5 2.8 22.7 190.1 3.3 2.4 183.9 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.7 12.3 10.8 2020          May
27.2 4.5 22.7 188.3 3.3 1.2 183.3 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.7 12.2 11.3          June
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
389.7 99.9 289.8 111.8 53.2 12.3 44.8 0.1 − − . 692.3 82.0 132.3 2020          May
397.8 100.4 297.5 114.2 56.4 11.7 44.6 0.1 − − . 696.8 82.3 132.4          June
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
495.6 248.4 247.2 598.3 448.6 50.4 75.7 2.4 19.2 18.9 4.3 34.1 64.2 137.4 2020          May
524.1 257.0 267.1 592.7 441.1 52.8 75.4 1.9 19.2 18.8 4.3 35.8 64.2 142.0          June
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
253.9 116.6 137.2 432.7 331.4 24.5 53.6 2.4 18.9 18.6 4.3 33.5 54.3 127.8 2020          May
267.0 112.7 154.3 429.1 325.8 26.7 53.6 1.9 18.8 18.5 4.2 35.3 54.4 132.7          June
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to Ap ril 2018)
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Br anches (with
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking cat egories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  
1 
End of year or month *
 
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.82011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.82017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.52018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.92019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2019         Jan. 36.5 451.8 1,346.4 1,106.7 0.0 0.8 238.9 6.1 3,405.3 3,003.3 0.2 1.0 400.8
         Feb. 36.6 471.9 1,361.8 1,118.8 0.0 0.8 242.1 6.1 3,413.6 3,014.0 0.2 0.3 399.0         Mar. 36.8 476.4 1,380.3 1,137.3 0.0 1.0 242.0 6.0 3,425.0 3,026.0 0.3 1.0 397.7
         Apr. 38.0 501.2 1,363.8 1,123.2 0.0 0.8 239.8 6.0 3,428.9 3,034.7 0.2 1.1 393.0
         May 37.7 517.6 1,371.8 1,129.7 0.0 0.8 241.3 5.5 3,445.6 3,049.5 0.2 1.5 394.4         June 37.7 477.9 1,362.5 1,121.2 0.0 1.0 240.3 5.2 3,467.1 3,067.0 0.2 1.3 398.5
         July 37.2 460.1 1,355.5 1,113.6 0.0 0.9 241.0 5.1 3,476.1 3,075.1 0.2 2.3 398.6
         Aug. 38.0 462.1 1,365.8 1,126.4 0.0 0.9 238.4 4.8 3,491.7 3,087.2 0.2 2.9 401.4         Sep. 37.8 452.7 1,354.1 1,115.7 0.0 0.8 237.6 4.7 3,499.8 3,094.5 0.2 3.8 401.3
         Oct. 39.0 529.1 1,252.1 1,013.6 0.0 0.9 237.6 4.6 3,506.7 3,104.5 0.2 3.4 398.6
         Nov. 39.9 529.6 1,301.7 1,059.6 0.0 1.1 241.0 4.6 3,523.5 3,121.1 0.2 3.3 398.9         Dec. 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020         Jan. 39.2 515.2 1,256.9 1,015.4 0.0 0.8 240.7 4.6 3,528.4 3,125.8 0.3 3.3 399.1
         Feb. 40.0 509.4 1,280.0 1,035.2 0.0 0.9 243.8 5.0 3,544.7 3,141.9 0.3 4.6 397.8         Mar. 47.9 621.7 1,273.0 1,029.4 0.0 1.0 242.6 5.1 3,580.0 3,174.1 0.2 5.1 400.6
         Apr. 48.4 582.3 1,334.6 1,090.6 0.0 1.2 242.8 5.0 3,594.3 3,185.3 0.2 7.2 401.6
         May 47.8 586.2 1,291.8 1,044.7 0.0 1.1 246.0 6.0 3,620.9 3,204.2 0.1 10.1 406.4         June 45.7 767.6 1,270.4 1,019.6 0.0 1.1 249.6 6.9 3,621.1 3,206.6 0.2 8.0 406.2
Changes *
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.92012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.72013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.82014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.92017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.62018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.22019 + 2.8 + 59.7 − 63.0 − 61.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 5.5
2019         Jan. − 3.9 + 35.6 + 23.0 + 23.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.8 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 3.1
         Feb. + 0.1 + 20.1 + 15.3 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 8.3 + 10.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.7         Mar. + 0.2 + 3.8 + 22.0 + 22.7 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 12.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.8
         Apr. + 1.2 + 24.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.7
         May − 0.3 + 16.4 + 8.0 + 6.5 − − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 16.7 + 14.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.5         June − 0.0 − 39.7 − 9.2 − 8.4 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 21.5 + 17.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 4.1
         July − 0.5 − 17.7 − 7.2 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0
         Aug. + 0.8 + 1.9 + 10.3 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.2 + 15.6 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 2.8         Sep. − 0.2 − 9.4 − 9.2 − 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.1 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.1
         Oct. + 1.2 + 76.4 − 102.1 − 102.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.8
         Nov. + 0.9 + 0.4 + 49.6 + 46.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 16.8 + 16.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3         Dec. + 3.3 − 53.0 − 46.9 − 43.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
2020         Jan. − 4.0 + 38.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 0.8 − 5.9 + 23.1 + 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 16.3 + 16.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.3         Mar. + 7.8 +112.4 − 7.0 − 5.9 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 35.3 + 32.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 2.8
         Apr. + 0.5 − 39.4 + 61.6 + 61.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 14.4 + 11.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.0
         May − 0.6 + 3.9 + 16.9 + 13.7 − − 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 24.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.8         June − 2.1 +181.4 − 21.4 − 25.0 − − 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
− 17.8 90.8 1,039.4 114.9 924.6 0.0 4.7 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 578.5 36.7 33.8 2019          Jan.
− 17.8 90.8 1,045.6 118.2 927.4 0.0 4.7 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 579.5 36.1 34.0          Feb.− 17.6 90.9 1,049.4 122.3 927.1 0.0 4.7 3,565.3 2,101.1 846.4 582.0 35.8 33.9          Mar.
− 17.5 90.7 1,060.8 131.5 929.3 0.0 4.6 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 582.3 35.4 33.9          Apr.
− 17.5 91.2 1,056.4 121.5 934.9 0.0 4.6 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 582.5 35.2 33.7          May− 17.5 90.9 1,047.1 122.5 924.6 0.0 4.6 3,609.5 2,150.7 841.2 582.7 34.9 33.4          June
− 17.1 91.0 1,053.9 123.2 930.6 0.0 4.5 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 581.8 34.8 32.9          July
− 17.1 90.3 1,061.4 127.7 933.7 0.0 4.5 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 580.3 34.7 32.7          Aug.− 17.0 90.0 1,037.5 121.4 916.1 0.0 4.5 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 579.0 34.4 32.6          Sep.
− 17.1 90.1 1,049.3 129.3 920.0 0.0 4.5 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 577.2 34.1 32.5          Oct.
− 17.1 90.2 1,055.9 126.6 929.4 0.0 4.5 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 575.7 33.8 32.5          Nov.− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5          Dec.
− 16.9 90.0 1,031.4 125.4 906.0 0.0 4.4 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 570.7 32.6 32.3 2020          Jan.
− 16.9 86.1 1,046.8 133.2 913.6 0.0 4.4 3,675.9 2,254.4 820.8 568.5 32.2 32.8          Feb.− 16.9 86.3 1,134.7 147.5 987.2 0.0 4.3 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 564.5 31.8 32.5          Mar.
− 17.1 86.4 1,154.9 141.2 1,013.6 0.0 4.3 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 563.8 31.1 32.8          Apr.
− 19.4 78.8 1,110.9 131.6 979.3 0.0 7.1 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 563.6 30.7 33.3          May− 20.8 78.8 1,229.5 131.4 1,098.0 0.0 9.4 3,766.3 2,387.3 786.1 562.6 30.3 33.4          June
Changes *
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018− − 0.7 + 0.1 − 8.6 + 1.6 − 10.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 2019
− − 0.2 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 9.4 + 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2019          Jan.
− − − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Feb.− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.4 + 12.0 − 3.8 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Mar.
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 9.2 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.3 − 10.0 + 5.7 − + 0.0 + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          May− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.2 + 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.7 + 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5          July
− + 0.0 − 0.6 + 7.6 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 0.0 − + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2          Aug.− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 21.4 − 6.3 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          Sep.
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 11.8 + 7.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 6.7 − 2.7 + 9.4 − + 0.0 + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 0.2 − 45.8 − 19.3 − 26.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec.
− − 0.3 − 0.4 + 21.2 + 18.2 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 2020          Jan.
− − 0.0 − 3.9 + 15.4 + 7.8 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 17.7 + 19.3 + 1.1 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4          Feb.− − 0.1 + 0.2 + 87.9 + 14.3 + 73.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar.
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 20.2 − 6.2 + 26.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2          Apr.
− + 2.2 − 0.2 + 15.6 − 4.6 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 2.7 + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6          May− + 1.5 + 0.0 + 118.6 − 0.2 + 118.8 − 0.0 + 2.3 − 9.0 + 8.9 − 16.4 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1          June
including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium marketbanknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesand Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.32011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.62017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.52018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.12019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2019         Jan. 0.2 1,031.6 787.8 518.2 269.6 1.3 242.5 3.1 784.3 511.1 119.4 391.8 6.0 267.2
         Feb. 0.2 1,031.8 785.3 511.5 273.7 1.7 244.8 3.2 782.0 504.5 110.6 393.9 5.9 271.5         Mar. 0.2 1,092.9 845.1 565.9 279.2 2.0 245.8 3.2 799.2 519.8 122.8 397.0 7.8 271.6
         Apr. 0.2 1,106.2 858.3 579.0 279.3 2.8 245.2 3.3 807.9 529.0 130.3 398.7 6.6 272.2
         May 0.2 1,090.6 840.9 564.1 276.8 2.8 246.8 3.6 820.1 542.9 140.2 402.7 6.4 270.8         June 0.2 1,109.3 857.3 578.3 279.0 3.1 248.9 3.8 816.2 535.9 135.8 400.1 6.6 273.6
         July 0.2 1,099.0 844.6 563.6 281.0 3.3 251.1 3.8 829.3 548.2 143.9 404.3 8.6 272.5
         Aug. 0.2 1,099.5 844.9 562.8 282.1 3.4 251.1 3.9 850.7 564.8 158.0 406.8 9.4 276.4         Sep. 0.2 1,120.8 867.0 583.4 283.5 3.9 249.9 3.9 826.7 539.6 131.1 408.5 8.6 278.5
         Oct. 0.2 1,132.8 880.2 590.3 289.9 3.8 248.8 3.9 826.5 544.3 140.7 403.7 9.2 273.0
         Nov. 0.2 1,122.8 870.5 585.6 284.9 3.4 248.9 3.8 828.1 541.1 136.8 404.3 9.9 277.1         Dec. 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020         Jan. 0.2 1,111.1 859.7 578.2 281.5 2.7 248.7 3.8 821.5 536.9 133.0 403.8 7.7 277.0
         Feb. 0.2 1,119.0 865.9 590.7 275.2 2.9 250.2 3.8 832.3 543.7 136.8 406.9 8.6 279.9         Mar. 0.3 1,145.4 889.8 615.5 274.4 3.0 252.5 3.5 834.1 543.2 135.7 407.5 11.7 279.2
         Apr. 0.3 1,156.2 899.6 626.2 273.4 2.8 253.8 3.5 843.1 552.5 142.6 410.0 11.4 279.2
         May 0.3 1,139.4 884.7 613.2 271.5 3.3 251.4 3.7 849.7 559.2 152.6 406.5 12.1 278.4         June 0.3 1,113.8 860.8 592.4 268.5 3.7 249.3 3.8 838.4 538.2 134.7 403.5 15.8 284.5
Changes *
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.62012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.52013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.62014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.52017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.42018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.72019 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 11.3 − 21.9 + 10.7 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 26.8 + 19.9 + 12.7 + 7.3 + 3.0 + 3.8
2019         Jan. − 0.0 + 17.6 + 16.1 + 14.5 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 22.2 + 21.4 + 19.4 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.9
         Feb. + 0.0 − 1.8 − 4.4 − 7.7 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 8.3 − 9.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 4.2         Mar. + 0.0 + 28.2 + 27.8 + 24.7 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 2.5 − 3.4 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 2.0
         Apr. + 0.0 + 13.7 + 13.5 + 13.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.6 + 7.7 + 1.9 − 1.1 + 0.7
         May − 0.0 − 17.6 − 19.4 − 16.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 12.1 + 13.9 + 10.0 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 1.6         June + 0.0 + 23.8 + 21.3 + 15.8 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.4
         July − 0.0 − 15.1 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 7.7 + 2.2 + 2.0 − 1.6
         Aug. + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 19.0 + 14.5 + 13.9 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.7         Sep. − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.5 − 11.3 − 10.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 1.6
         Oct. + 0.0 + 18.1 + 18.9 + 9.8 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 7.5 + 10.1 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.2
         Nov. − 0.0 − 14.2 − 13.8 − 6.7 − 7.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 6.1 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 0.7 + 3.7         Dec. + 0.0 − 53.1 − 51.2 − 50.3 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 29.1 − 24.9 − 24.9 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.9
2020         Jan. − 0.0 + 42.2 + 41.2 + 43.2 − 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 23.1 + 21.1 + 21.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.9
         Feb. + 0.0 + 6.5 + 4.7 + 11.5 − 6.8 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.1 + 6.4 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 2.8         Mar. + 0.0 + 27.5 + 24.9 + 25.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.6
         Apr. + 0.0 + 7.4 + 6.5 + 5.5 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4
         May − 0.0 − 22.7 − 21.4 − 22.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1         June + 0.0 − 23.5 − 21.8 − 19.6 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 9.8 − 19.7 − 17.5 − 2.2 + 3.7 + 6.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 201032.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 201811.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.7 21.5 674.5 405.5 269.1 182.9 86.1 0.0 268.4 132.7 135.8 77.9 57.9 0.1 2019          Jan.
11.8 21.7 699.2 430.9 268.3 181.1 87.3 0.0 241.7 110.2 131.5 73.6 57.8 0.1          Feb.13.0 21.5 762.8 464.1 298.7 209.1 89.6 1.3 259.1 113.8 145.3 87.7 57.6 0.1          Mar.
13.0 22.3 787.1 441.7 345.4 255.0 90.4 1.3 268.4 124.2 144.2 86.9 57.3 0.1          Apr.
13.0 22.3 783.6 482.4 301.2 210.0 91.2 1.3 261.3 120.7 140.6 83.6 57.0 0.1          May12.8 22.3 787.2 471.3 315.9 225.1 90.7 1.3 265.6 126.9 138.8 81.8 56.9 0.1          June
12.8 22.0 768.5 460.7 307.8 214.3 93.5 1.3 262.9 126.2 136.7 79.5 57.2 0.1          July
12.8 22.0 779.4 436.0 343.4 247.8 95.6 1.3 274.2 127.1 147.1 90.2 56.9 0.1          Aug.12.8 22.2 806.6 440.4 366.2 269.8 96.4 1.3 244.6 123.1 121.5 63.1 58.4 0.1          Sep.
12.6 21.8 787.8 430.9 356.9 259.3 97.6 1.1 251.8 119.9 131.9 73.3 58.6 0.1          Oct.
12.6 21.6 790.4 452.4 338.0 239.5 98.5 1.1 251.6 120.5 131.1 72.4 58.7 0.1          Nov.11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1          Dec.
11.4 21.4 756.2 433.4 322.8 223.1 99.8 − 247.8 121.8 126.0 68.1 57.8 0.1 2020          Jan.
11.4 19.0 770.5 433.8 336.7 230.1 106.6 − 255.3 129.1 126.2 66.5 59.6 0.1          Feb.11.4 19.0 826.9 463.3 363.6 250.9 112.6 − 269.0 146.3 122.7 62.8 60.0 0.1          Mar.
11.4 19.0 835.3 438.6 396.7 288.0 108.7 − 274.1 143.0 131.1 69.9 61.2 0.1          Apr.
11.4 19.0 828.1 459.2 368.9 260.8 108.0 − 280.8 150.9 129.9 67.9 62.0 0.1          May11.3 19.1 835.5 472.5 363.0 247.2 115.9 − 275.7 145.2 130.5 69.5 61.1 0.1          June
Changes *
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018− 0.3 − 0.9 − 9.5 − 49.4 + 39.8 + 28.0 + 11.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 2019
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 31.6 + 34.9 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 0.7 − + 36.9 + 22.5 + 14.5 + 14.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2019          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 24.8 − 1.2 − 2.2 + 1.0 − − 27.2 − 22.6 − 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Feb.+ 1.3 − 0.2 + 32.9 + 22.7 + 10.2 + 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 1.6 + 3.5 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.8 + 24.4 − 22.2 + 46.6 + 45.9 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 10.4 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 −          Apr.
− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2 + 40.4 − 44.6 − 45.3 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 7.2 − 7.9 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.0 + 7.2 − 9.6 + 16.8 + 14.6 + 2.2 − + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          June
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 22.0 − 12.0 − 10.0 − 12.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 2.4 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 25.9 + 34.3 + 32.8 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.6 + 10.0 + 10.3 − 0.4 −          Aug.− 0.0 + 0.1 + 9.8 − 3.1 + 12.9 + 12.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 2.3 − 18.6 − 20.0 + 1.4 + 0.0          Sep.
− 0.2 − 0.3 − 14.6 − 8.1 − 6.5 − 8.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.7 + 10.9 + 10.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 20.3 − 20.9 − 21.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.− 1.1 − 0.2 − 106.0 −111.5 + 5.5 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 20.7 − 7.7 − 12.9 − 11.4 − 1.6 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 73.0 + 92.9 − 19.8 − 21.6 + 1.7 − + 16.7 + 9.2 + 7.6 + 7.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Jan.
− 0.0 − 2.4 + 13.3 + 5.0 + 8.4 + 5.9 + 2.5 − + 7.3 + 7.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.0          Feb.+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 57.2 + 29.9 + 27.3 + 21.1 + 6.2 − + 14.2 + 17.4 − 3.2 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 − 25.9 + 31.9 + 33.0 − 1.1 − + 4.4 − 3.7 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 1.2 − 0.0          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 15.3 + 9.3 − 24.6 − 24.6 + 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.9 + 13.9 − 5.1 − 13.1 + 8.0 − − 4.7 − 5.6 + 0.9 + 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.0          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.62011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.02017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.02018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.82019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2019         Jan. 3,405.3 3,003.5 255.8 230.8 230.3 0.5 25.0 24.5 0.5 3,149.4 2,738.4
         Feb. 3,413.6 3,014.2 257.6 235.4 234.9 0.5 22.2 22.4 − 0.2 3,156.0 2,746.4         Mar. 3,425.0 3,026.3 261.6 241.0 240.4 0.6 20.6 20.2 0.4 3,163.4 2,755.8
         Apr. 3,428.9 3,034.9 256.3 235.0 234.3 0.7 21.4 21.0 0.4 3,172.6 2,769.9
         May 3,445.6 3,049.7 257.3 236.6 235.7 0.9 20.7 20.1 0.6 3,188.3 2,785.8         June 3,467.1 3,067.2 271.3 249.8 249.2 0.6 21.5 20.8 0.7 3,195.8 2,795.2
         July 3,476.1 3,075.3 270.3 243.8 243.2 0.6 26.5 24.9 1.6 3,205.9 2,807.7
         Aug. 3,491.7 3,087.4 266.2 238.8 238.3 0.5 27.4 25.0 2.4 3,225.5 2,825.7         Sep. 3,499.8 3,094.7 269.2 246.1 245.6 0.6 23.1 19.9 3.2 3,230.6 2,831.0
         Oct. 3,506.7 3,104.7 261.6 237.1 236.5 0.6 24.5 21.6 2.8 3,245.1 2,849.5
         Nov. 3,523.5 3,121.3 262.6 239.8 239.2 0.6 22.8 20.1 2.7 3,260.9 2,864.3         Dec. 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020         Jan. 3,528.4 3,126.0 261.5 236.3 235.7 0.6 25.2 22.6 2.6 3,266.9 2,874.2
         Feb. 3,544.7 3,142.3 264.8 240.0 239.3 0.7 24.8 20.8 4.0 3,279.9 2,888.9         Mar. 3,580.0 3,174.3 288.4 261.9 261.1 0.8 26.4 22.2 4.2 3,291.6 2,892.2
         Apr. 3,594.3 3,185.5 285.0 255.6 254.9 0.7 29.4 22.9 6.5 3,309.3 2,908.0
         May 3,620.9 3,204.4 285.3 254.3 253.2 1.1 31.1 22.0 9.1 3,335.6 2,931.7         June 3,621.1 3,206.8 278.9 248.5 247.6 0.8 30.4 23.3 7.2 3,342.2 2,939.8
Changes *
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.42012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.92013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.62014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.82017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.42018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.02019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2019         Jan. + 10.8 + 13.1 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 5.6
         Feb. + 8.3 + 10.7 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 6.5 + 8.0         Mar. + 10.9 + 12.0 + 4.1 + 5.7 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.8
         Apr. + 3.8 + 8.5 − 4.7 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 13.4
         May + 16.7 + 14.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.7 + 16.0         June + 21.5 + 17.6 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 13.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.4
         July + 9.2 + 8.2 − 1.0 − 6.1 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 10.2 + 12.9
         Aug. + 15.6 + 12.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 19.8 + 18.2         Sep. + 8.1 + 7.3 + 3.1 + 7.4 + 7.3 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 5.1 + 0.8 + 5.1 + 4.8
         Oct. + 6.9 + 10.0 − 7.4 − 8.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 14.4 + 18.4
         Nov. + 16.8 + 16.7 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 15.9 + 14.9         Dec. − 1.9 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.5
2020         Jan. + 6.8 + 6.5 + 1.1 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 7.2
         Feb. + 16.3 + 16.2 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.3 + 13.0 + 14.7         Mar. + 35.3 + 32.1 + 23.6 + 21.9 + 21.8 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 11.7 + 3.3
         Apr. + 14.4 + 11.2 − 3.3 − 6.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 2.3 + 17.7 + 15.9
         May + 24.1 + 16.4 − 2.2 − 3.9 − 4.2 + 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 26.3 + 23.7         June + 0.2 + 2.5 − 6.4 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 6.6 + 7.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 20102,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 20182,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5 2019
2,507.3 283.1 2,224.2 231.1 16.5 411.1 241.4 19.3 222.0 169.7 − 1.3 2019          Jan.
2,516.1 284.2 2,231.9 230.3 16.5 409.6 240.8 18.9 221.9 168.7 − 1.3          Feb.2,525.3 286.6 2,238.7 230.5 16.3 407.6 240.4 18.7 221.7 167.2 − 1.3          Mar.
2,539.8 291.3 2,248.5 230.0 16.2 402.7 239.8 18.4 221.4 162.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,554.8 293.7 2,261.1 231.0 16.3 402.5 239.1 18.2 220.9 163.4 − 1.3          May2,560.3 294.3 2,266.1 234.9 16.2 400.6 237.0 17.9 219.0 163.7 − 1.3          June
2,571.9 295.2 2,276.8 235.8 15.8 398.2 235.4 17.4 218.0 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,588.9 298.3 2,290.5 236.8 15.9 399.7 235.2 17.4 217.8 164.5 − 1.2          Aug.2,594.1 297.2 2,296.8 236.9 15.8 399.6 235.2 17.0 218.2 164.4 − 1.2          Sep.
2,611.0 299.7 2,311.3 238.5 15.9 395.6 235.5 16.9 218.6 160.1 − 1.2          Oct.
2,624.4 301.6 2,322.8 240.0 15.9 396.5 237.6 17.6 220.0 158.9 − 1.2          Nov.2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5          Dec.
2,631.8 300.0 2,331.8 242.4 15.7 392.7 236.0 17.0 219.0 156.7 − 1.2 2020          Jan.
2,646.4 302.5 2,344.0 242.5 15.7 391.0 235.7 17.2 218.5 155.3 − 1.2          Feb.2,654.8 304.5 2,350.2 237.5 15.6 399.4 236.3 17.2 219.1 163.1 − 1.2          Mar.
2,671.3 307.2 2,364.1 236.7 15.9 401.3 236.4 17.3 219.1 164.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,692.9 310.7 2,382.2 238.9 18.1 403.9 236.3 17.4 218.9 167.6 − 1.3          May2,701.4 310.8 2,390.6 238.4 19.6 402.4 234.5 17.1 217.4 167.9 − 1.2          June
Changes *
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018+ 126.0 + 18.9 + 107.2 + 6.8 − 0.8 − 17.8 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 12.3 − + 0.1 2019
+ 8.0 + 0.5 + 7.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 − − 0.2 2019          Jan.
+ 8.7 + 1.1 + 7.6 − 0.7 − − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.0 − −          Feb.+ 9.1 + 2.1 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.5 − + 0.0          Mar.
+ 13.9 + 4.5 + 9.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 15.0 + 2.4 + 12.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − − 0.0          May+ 5.6 + 0.6 + 5.0 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.2 − − 0.0          June
+ 11.7 + 1.0 + 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 17.1 + 3.3 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 4.7 − 0.7 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 16.8 + 2.4 + 14.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 13.4 + 1.9 + 11.6 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − + 0.3          Dec.
+ 5.3 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 − − 0.3 2020          Jan.
+ 14.6 + 2.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.3 − + 0.0          Feb.+ 8.3 + 2.1 + 6.3 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 7.8 − − 0.0          Mar.
+ 16.7 + 2.7 + 14.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Apr.
+ 21.5 + 3.5 + 18.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May+ 8.4 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 0.5 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.3 − − 0.1          June

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2018 2,727.0 1,382.2 1,391.2 1,116.4 274.8 1,483.6 392.7 139.3 116.5 71.9 138.7 53.2 50.6 157.3
2019         June 2,809.5 1,469.6 1,427.8 1,182.8 244.9 1,539.7 405.2 150.3 120.5 76.2 140.5 54.4 50.5 161.5
         Sep. 2,839.6 1,487.2 1,450.4 1,197.0 253.4 1,551.7 411.6 150.1 118.6 77.4 139.9 54.8 50.1 166.2         Dec. 2,864.8 1,512.1 1,470.4 1,213.0 257.4 1,560.5 416.1 146.6 119.0 77.1 141.6 54.2 50.3 168.2
2020         Mar. 2,915.9 1,533.2 1,488.6 1,225.8 262.8 1,598.9 421.9 155.8 120.1 79.4 143.5 54.5 52.5 176.4
         June 2,949.0 1,558.5 1,510.6 1,246.6 263.9 1,613.5 423.2 164.5 120.6 80.8 138.1 55.4 56.6 175.2
 Short-term lending
2018 227.6 − 7.2 − 7.2 195.9 4.1 35.5 4.9 14.7 48.3 3.7 4.9 28.02019         June 249.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 217.3 4.6 42.9 7.2 16.5 48.6 4.7 5.2 29.3
         Sep. 245.6 − 8.4 − 8.4 213.6 5.0 41.1 5.3 16.7 48.0 4.4 4.5 30.1         Dec. 238.4 − 8.1 − 8.1 206.2 4.7 35.9 5.6 15.7 48.6 3.8 4.6 27.0
2020         Mar. 261.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 230.3 4.9 43.4 6.7 17.1 49.5 4.1 6.1 34.6
         June 247.6 − 8.2 − 8.2 217.9 4.7 44.5 6.1 16.9 41.8 4.2 5.4 33.4
 Medium-term lending
2018 282.6 − 35.4 − 35.4 202.5 15.4 24.9 4.5 12.5 19.0 4.5 10.6 49.02019         June 294.3 − 36.0 − 36.0 212.6 16.1 26.1 5.2 13.5 19.5 4.5 10.4 49.0
         Sep. 297.1 − 36.4 − 36.4 215.4 16.5 27.3 4.9 13.7 19.6 4.7 10.0 50.1         Dec. 301.3 − 36.6 − 36.6 219.5 16.6 28.5 4.9 13.9 19.7 4.6 10.2 52.0
2020         Mar. 304.5 − 36.9 − 36.9 222.8 17.0 29.7 5.1 13.9 20.4 4.5 10.4 51.3
         June 310.8 − 37.7 − 37.7 229.8 17.6 33.6 5.2 14.2 19.6 4.5 13.4 50.2
 Long-term lending
2018 2,216.8 1,382.2 1,348.6 1,116.4 232.2 1,085.2 373.2 78.9 107.2 44.7 71.4 45.0 35.1 80.32019         June 2,266.1 1,469.6 1,383.8 1,182.8 200.9 1,109.8 384.5 81.3 108.1 46.2 72.4 45.3 34.9 83.2
         Sep. 2,296.8 1,487.2 1,405.6 1,197.0 208.6 1,122.7 390.2 81.8 108.5 46.9 72.3 45.7 35.6 85.9         Dec. 2,325.1 1,512.1 1,425.7 1,213.0 212.7 1,134.9 394.8 82.2 108.6 47.6 73.3 45.8 35.5 89.2
2020         Mar. 2,350.2 1,533.2 1,443.4 1,225.8 217.6 1,145.7 400.0 82.7 108.4 48.4 73.6 45.9 36.0 90.6
         June 2,390.6 1,558.5 1,464.7 1,246.6 218.1 1,165.8 400.8 86.4 109.3 49.7 76.7 46.6 37.8 91.6
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2019         Q2 + 43.8 + 16.3 + 20.1 + 13.5 + 6.7 + 26.8 + 6.9 + 5.8 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 1.0
         Q3 + 29.8 + 18.0 + 22.4 + 15.4 + 7.0 + 12.0 + 6.1 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 4.8         Q4 + 25.3 + 20.1 + 20.0 + 13.9 + 6.1 + 9.2 + 4.6 − 3.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.0
2020         Q1 + 51.0 + 15.6 + 17.8 + 12.4 + 5.4 + 38.2 + 5.4 + 9.2 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 8.2
         Q2 + 30.6 + 17.8 + 21.0 + 13.7 + 7.3 + 17.1 + 5.2 + 8.8 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 4.4 + 0.9 + 4.1 − 4.0
 Short-term lending
2019         Q2 + 9.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Q3 − 3.6 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.3 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8         Q4 − 7.0 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 7.5 − 0.2 − 5.2 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 3.2
2020         Q1 + 22.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 24.2 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 7.6
         Q2 − 16.0 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 14.9 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 4.2
 Medium-term lending
2019         Q2 + 7.4 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Q3 + 3.5 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.3         Q4 + 4.2 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 1.9
2020         Q1 + 3.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.7
         Q2 + 6.2 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 + 7.4 + 0.7 + 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.0
 Long-term lending
2019         Q2 + 27.0 + 16.3 + 18.9 + 13.5 + 5.5 + 12.7 + 6.1 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.5
         Q3 + 30.0 + 18.0 + 21.3 + 15.4 + 5.9 + 12.7 + 5.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.7         Q4 + 28.1 + 20.1 + 20.1 + 13.9 + 6.2 + 12.6 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.3
2020         Q1 + 25.1 + 15.6 + 17.3 + 12.4 + 4.9 + 10.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.4
         Q2 + 40.4 + 17.8 + 20.4 + 13.7 + 6.8 + 24.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 3.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.2
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
756.0 237.0 47.3 196.9 432.6 48.0 1,228.4 994.8 233.7 172.9 8.3 15.0 3.7 2018
785.8 247.4 51.6 199.3 441.1 48.6 1,254.6 1,018.8 235.9 175.6 8.0 15.2 3.8 2019          June
794.7 252.9 50.9 200.6 444.7 48.3 1,272.5 1,035.0 237.5 176.4 8.5 15.4 3.8          Sep.803.6 264.5 51.1 193.9 447.5 47.6 1,288.4 1,050.4 238.0 176.5 7.9 15.9 3.9          Dec.
816.6 273.2 54.2 196.6 450.6 48.0 1,301.0 1,062.8 238.2 178.0 7.9 16.0 3.9 2020          Mar.
822.2 277.8 55.9 198.5 447.1 48.1 1,319.4 1,083.5 235.9 176.9 7.3 16.2 3.9          June
Short-term lending
55.9 12.0 8.1 10.4 24.0 5.2 31.2 3.1 28.2 1.5 8.3 0.5 − 201863.0 12.5 10.2 10.6 24.6 5.6 31.3 3.4 28.0 1.9 8.0 0.5 0.0 2019          June
63.5 13.5 9.5 10.7 24.3 5.4 31.5 3.4 28.1 1.6 8.5 0.5 0.0          Sep.65.0 14.4 9.7 10.2 23.9 4.9 31.6 3.3 28.2 1.3 7.9 0.7 0.0          Dec.
69.0 14.8 12.2 11.1 23.8 5.2 30.0 3.4 26.6 1.4 7.9 0.7 0.0 2020          Mar.
65.5 14.8 11.9 11.4 21.8 4.7 29.0 3.4 25.6 1.4 7.3 0.7 0.0          June
Medium-term lending
77.5 14.8 9.9 21.3 31.5 3.5 79.6 19.9 59.7 56.4 − 0.5 0.1 201884.4 16.6 11.0 22.4 32.2 3.6 81.2 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 2019          June
85.1 17.5 11.2 22.6 32.0 3.7 81.3 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          Sep.85.7 18.1 11.0 22.9 31.9 3.5 81.4 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec.
87.4 19.1 11.6 23.3 31.9 3.6 81.2 19.8 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 2020          Mar.
89.0 19.7 12.6 23.5 31.6 3.5 80.4 20.0 60.4 56.9 − 0.6 0.0          June
Long-term lending
622.6 210.2 29.2 165.3 377.2 39.3 1,117.6 971.8 145.8 115.0 − 14.0 3.7 2018638.5 218.3 30.3 166.3 384.3 39.4 1,142.0 995.5 146.5 115.8 − 14.2 3.8 2019          June
646.1 222.0 30.3 167.3 388.4 39.2 1,159.7 1,011.7 147.9 116.7 − 14.4 3.7          Sep.652.9 232.0 30.4 160.9 391.7 39.1 1,175.5 1,027.1 148.3 117.1 − 14.7 3.8          Dec.
660.2 239.3 30.5 162.3 394.9 39.3 1,189.8 1,039.5 150.2 118.6 − 14.8 3.8 2020          Mar.
667.7 243.3 31.4 163.6 393.7 39.9 1,210.0 1,060.1 149.9 118.5 − 14.9 3.8          June
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 15.5 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 4.3 − 0.1 + 16.9 + 13.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q2
+ 9.0 + 5.6 − 0.7 + 1.2 + 3.6 − 0.3 + 17.9 + 16.3 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 9.1 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 15.9 + 15.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
+ 13.0 + 4.9 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 0.5 + 12.6 + 12.3 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 10.0 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 13.4 + 15.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
Short-term lending
+ 3.5 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 2019          Q2
+ 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 4.0 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2020          Q1
− 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 −          Q2
Medium-term lending
+ 4.3 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.8 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2019          Q2
+ 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 1.8 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 1.8 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2
Long-term lending
+ 7.7 + 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 12.8 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q2
+ 7.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 3.9 − 0.2 + 17.4 + 16.0 + 1.4 + 1.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 7.0 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 15.5 + 15.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
+ 7.3 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.2 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.8 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 11.6 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 5.7 + 0.6 + 15.7 + 15.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.62018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.52019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2019         July 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 210.7 623.2 54.0 569.2 581.8 34.8 32.9 14.9 0.2
         Aug. 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 214.7 619.7 54.1 565.5 580.3 34.7 32.7 14.9 0.6         Sep. 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 214.8 615.5 51.8 563.7 579.0 34.4 32.6 15.2 0.3
         Oct. 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 211.7 614.3 51.8 562.6 577.2 34.1 32.5 15.1 0.5
         Nov. 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 207.5 613.4 52.4 561.0 575.7 33.8 32.5 14.9 0.5         Dec. 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2020         Jan. 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 208.4 611.3 52.4 558.9 570.7 32.6 32.3 14.8 0.5
         Feb. 3,675.9 2,254.4 820.8 212.2 608.6 52.2 556.4 568.5 32.2 32.8 14.6 0.3         Mar. 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 212.7 602.8 50.1 552.7 564.5 31.8 32.5 14.6 0.6
         Apr. 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 206.0 595.6 48.5 547.1 563.8 31.1 32.8 14.4 1.5
         May 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 214.1 590.6 47.1 543.5 563.6 30.7 33.3 14.4 0.3         June 3,766.3 2,387.3 786.1 206.7 579.5 44.3 535.1 562.6 30.3 33.4 14.3 0.2
Changes*
2018 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 3.5 − 7.3 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 1.4 − 1.22019 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 0.8 − 24.9 − 4.1 − 20.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.3
2019         July + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 3.8 − 3.7 − 1.4 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 2.0
         Aug. + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 + 4.0 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5         Sep. − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 4.2 − 2.4 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3
         Oct. + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 4.2 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0         Dec. − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
2020         Jan. − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 17.7 + 19.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 2.1 − 3.7 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr. + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 6.8 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.9
         May + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 + 8.1 − 4.9 − 1.3 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2         June − 9.0 + 8.9 − 16.4 − 7.4 − 9.0 − 2.8 − 6.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2019         July 234.6 66.2 160.6 80.7 79.9 27.3 52.6 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.2 −
         Aug. 245.2 73.5 163.7 83.7 80.0 27.3 52.7 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.3 0.2         Sep. 242.8 72.0 162.9 85.1 77.9 25.0 52.9 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.2 0.2
         Oct. 234.5 66.0 160.7 82.5 78.2 25.2 53.0 3.6 4.2 24.7 2.3 0.2
         Nov. 245.6 74.7 163.2 83.9 79.3 26.4 52.8 3.6 4.2 24.7 2.2 0.2         Dec. 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2020         Jan. 236.9 69.1 160.5 81.6 78.9 25.7 53.2 3.2 4.1 24.4 2.2 0.2
         Feb. 247.0 74.8 164.8 86.7 78.1 25.4 52.7 3.3 4.1 25.0 2.2 0.2         Mar. 238.6 72.7 158.6 83.1 75.5 23.8 51.7 3.2 4.1 25.0 2.1 0.2
         Apr. 228.7 73.9 147.8 75.1 72.7 22.8 50.0 3.1 4.0 25.3 2.1 0.2
         May 232.1 81.1 143.9 73.5 70.4 22.0 48.4 3.1 4.0 26.0 2.1 0.2         June 221.4 75.4 139.1 75.0 64.1 18.5 45.5 2.9 3.9 25.8 2.1 0.2
Changes*
2018 + 16.9 + 3.6 + 13.5 + 2.0 + 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2019 + 17.1 + 11.8 + 5.8 + 7.8 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2
2019         July − 6.1 − 2.1 − 4.0 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Aug. + 10.5 + 7.3 + 3.2 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2         Sep. − 2.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 + 1.1 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Oct. − 8.3 − 6.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov. + 11.1 + 8.7 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0         Dec. − 8.5 + 0.0 − 8.3 − 7.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
2020         Jan. − 0.2 − 5.6 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Feb. + 10.1 + 5.7 + 4.3 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − −         Mar. − 8.4 − 2.1 − 6.3 − 3.6 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Apr. − 9.9 + 1.2 − 10.8 − 8.0 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.3 + 7.2 − 3.9 − 1.6 − 2.4 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 −         June − 10.7 − 5.7 − 4.8 + 1.5 − 6.3 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.62018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.52019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2019         July 3,382.3 2,100.3 673.3 130.0 543.3 26.7 516.6 578.1 30.6 8.2 12.7 0.2
         Aug. 3,393.3 2,115.6 670.6 131.0 539.7 26.8 512.8 576.5 30.5 8.0 12.7 0.4         Sep. 3,386.3 2,113.4 667.3 129.7 537.6 26.8 510.9 575.3 30.2 7.9 12.9 0.2
         Oct. 3,409.9 2,141.1 665.4 129.2 536.1 26.6 509.5 573.6 29.9 7.9 12.9 0.3
         Nov. 3,429.2 2,169.8 657.7 123.6 534.1 25.9 508.2 572.1 29.6 7.8 12.8 0.4         Dec. 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2020         Jan. 3,421.2 2,166.0 659.2 126.8 532.4 26.7 505.7 567.5 28.5 7.9 12.6 0.4
         Feb. 3,428.9 2,179.6 656.0 125.5 530.5 26.8 503.7 565.2 28.1 7.7 12.4 0.2         Mar. 3,477.9 2,232.2 656.9 129.6 527.3 26.2 501.0 561.2 27.6 7.5 12.4 0.5
         Apr. 3,513.1 2,271.6 653.8 130.9 522.8 25.7 497.1 560.7 27.1 7.4 12.3 1.4
         May 3,543.3 2,295.2 660.9 140.6 520.2 25.2 495.1 560.5 26.7 7.4 12.3 0.2         June 3,545.0 2,311.9 647.1 131.7 515.4 25.8 489.6 559.7 26.3 7.5 12.3 0.1
Changes*
2018 + 100.8 + 135.7 − 24.3 − 5.5 − 18.8 − 1.3 − 17.5 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 4.1 − 1.3 − 1.22019 + 105.4 + 144.0 − 31.5 − 8.6 − 22.9 − 1.5 − 21.4 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.4
2019         July + 13.3 + 17.9 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1
         Aug. + 10.9 + 15.3 − 2.7 + 1.0 − 3.7 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3         Sep. − 6.5 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3
         Oct. + 23.7 + 27.7 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. + 19.3 + 28.7 − 7.7 − 5.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec. − 5.3 − 8.2 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
2020         Jan. − 2.7 + 4.3 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 7.7 + 13.6 − 3.2 − 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 49.0 + 52.6 + 0.9 + 4.1 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr. + 35.2 + 39.5 − 3.2 + 1.2 − 4.4 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.9
         May + 27.1 + 20.6 + 7.1 + 9.7 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.2         June + 1.7 + 14.5 − 11.6 − 8.9 − 2.7 + 0.6 − 3.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.62018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.52019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2019         July 1,035.2 604.4 412.5 81.7 330.8 15.9 314.9 7.1 11.2 2.2 10.2 0.2
         Aug. 1,036.6 608.6 409.7 83.1 326.7 15.8 310.8 7.1 11.2 2.2 10.2 0.4         Sep. 1,033.6 608.9 406.4 82.3 324.1 15.8 308.3 7.2 11.1 2.2 10.4 0.2
         Oct. 1,045.5 622.3 405.2 82.8 322.4 15.5 306.9 7.0 11.0 2.4 10.4 0.3
         Nov. 1,036.2 620.2 398.2 77.9 320.3 14.9 305.4 6.9 10.9 2.4 10.3 0.4         Dec. 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2020         Jan. 1,030.8 616.3 397.5 81.7 315.8 15.4 300.3 6.6 10.5 2.4 10.2 0.4
         Feb. 1,020.4 608.8 394.7 81.2 313.5 15.6 297.9 6.5 10.4 2.4 10.0 0.2         Mar. 1,080.3 665.3 398.2 87.3 310.9 15.4 295.5 6.5 10.3 2.3 10.0 0.5
         Apr. 1,087.9 674.4 397.0 89.9 307.2 15.1 292.0 6.2 10.2 2.3 9.8 1.4
         May 1,095.7 676.0 403.5 99.2 304.2 14.5 289.7 6.2 10.1 2.4 9.9 0.2         June 1,090.9 685.7 389.2 90.0 299.1 14.5 284.6 6.2 9.9 2.4 9.8 0.1
Changes*
2018 − 3.2 + 25.1 − 27.2 − 5.9 − 21.3 + 0.3 − 21.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.22019 − 3.4 + 30.4 − 32.8 − 4.8 − 28.0 − 1.6 − 26.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.4
2019         July + 5.3 + 8.7 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1
         Aug. + 1.4 + 4.2 − 2.8 + 1.4 − 4.2 − 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3         Sep. − 2.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3
         Oct. + 12.1 + 13.5 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. − 9.4 − 2.2 − 7.0 − 4.9 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec. − 4.7 − 5.8 + 1.5 + 3.2 − 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
2020         Jan. − 0.7 + 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. − 10.5 − 7.6 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 60.0 + 56.6 + 3.5 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr. + 7.6 + 9.2 − 1.2 + 2.5 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.9
         May + 4.8 − 1.4 + 6.4 + 9.4 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2         June − 4.8 + 7.5 − 12.1 − 9.2 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.12018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.72019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2020         Jan. 2,390.4 1,549.7 1,511.6 269.7 1,081.7 160.2 38.1 261.7 248.3 20.6 190.3 37.4
         Feb. 2,408.6 1,570.8 1,531.6 272.1 1,098.2 161.3 39.2 261.3 247.9 20.4 191.1 36.3         Mar. 2,397.6 1,566.8 1,526.8 266.9 1,098.7 161.2 40.0 258.7 245.5 19.8 189.8 35.9
         Apr. 2,425.3 1,597.1 1,556.7 275.9 1,117.7 163.0 40.5 256.7 243.9 19.2 188.9 35.8
         May 2,447.6 1,619.2 1,578.5 279.0 1,134.8 164.6 40.7 257.4 244.2 19.4 189.0 35.8         June 2,454.0 1,626.2 1,585.3 275.2 1,143.8 166.3 40.9 257.9 244.6 19.9 189.2 35.5
Changes*
2018 + 104.0 + 110.5 + 109.7 + 20.3 + 83.1 + 6.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 5.8 − 0.32019 + 108.8 + 113.6 + 111.8 + 18.5 + 88.7 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.7
2020         Jan. − 2.0 + 2.5 + 3.7 + 3.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 1.2 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0
         Feb. + 18.2 + 21.1 + 20.0 + 2.5 + 16.4 + 1.1 + 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1         Mar. − 10.9 − 4.0 − 4.8 − 5.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 2.6 − 2.4 − 0.7 − 1.3 − 0.4
         Apr. + 27.6 + 30.3 + 29.9 + 9.0 + 19.0 + 1.9 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.1
         May + 22.3 + 22.0 + 21.8 + 3.1 + 17.1 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0         June + 6.5 + 7.0 + 6.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.72018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.02019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2020         Jan. 236.9 10.8 5.3 1.1 4.3 0.1 11.6 59.5 20.9 22.7 15.0 0.9 12.8
         Feb. 247.0 11.2 5.3 1.5 4.3 0.1 11.6 63.2 19.9 27.4 15.0 0.9 13.4         Mar. 238.6 11.2 5.4 1.4 4.3 0.1 11.6 67.1 23.0 28.2 15.0 0.9 13.4
         Apr. 228.7 11.1 5.5 1.4 4.2 0.1 11.6 68.4 26.1 26.4 15.1 0.9 13.7
         May 232.1 10.8 5.4 1.3 4.1 0.1 11.6 68.7 26.8 26.0 15.0 0.9 14.4         June 221.4 11.8 6.2 1.5 4.1 0.1 11.4 63.8 23.1 25.2 14.7 0.9 14.4
Changes*
2018 + 16.9 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.52019 + 17.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.0
2020         Jan. − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − + 0.0 + 5.7 − 0.2 + 5.5 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.2
         Feb. + 10.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 3.7 − 1.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.6         Mar. − 8.4 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.9 + 3.0 + 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Apr. − 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3
         May + 3.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7         June − 10.7 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.9 − 3.8 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
14.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 201713.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 201813.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 − 2019
13.4 45.1 216.6 11.2 205.4 561.0 554.0 7.0 18.0 5.5 2.4 − 2020          Jan.
13.5 44.3 217.0 11.2 205.8 558.7 551.8 6.9 17.7 5.4 2.4 −          Feb.13.3 42.3 216.4 10.8 205.6 554.8 547.9 6.9 17.3 5.2 2.5 −          Mar.
12.8 41.1 215.7 10.6 205.1 554.5 547.7 6.8 16.9 5.1 2.4 −          Apr.
13.2 41.4 216.0 10.6 205.4 554.3 547.6 6.7 16.6 5.0 2.4 −          May13.3 41.6 216.3 11.2 205.0 553.5 546.8 6.7 16.4 5.1 2.4 −          June
Changes*
− 0.2 + 0.4 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.2 − 4.5 − 3.9 − 0.6 − 5.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 2018− 0.4 − 3.8 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 2019
+ 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 4.2 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 2020          Jan.
+ 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − −          Feb.− 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 3.9 − 3.9 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Mar.
− 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Apr.
+ 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          May+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          June
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
61.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 201765.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 201865.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 − 2019
57.8 29.9 8.5 14.0 5.3 0.0 108.9 13.0 49.3 45.6 1.0 − 2020          Jan.
61.0 33.0 8.7 14.0 5.3 0.0 111.6 16.6 49.1 44.8 1.1 −          Feb.58.5 30.6 8.7 13.8 5.3 0.0 101.9 13.7 44.8 42.3 1.1 −          Mar.
57.5 30.3 8.3 13.6 5.3 0.0 91.7 12.0 39.0 39.8 0.8 −          Apr.
62.3 34.8 8.8 13.4 5.2 0.0 90.2 14.1 37.4 37.9 0.9 −          May58.8 31.8 8.6 13.3 5.1 0.0 87.0 14.4 39.7 32.1 0.8 −          June
Changes*
+ 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 +10.8 − 0.1 − 2018− 0.8 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2019
− 7.5 − 7.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 2.1 + 2.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 2020          Jan.
+ 3.3 + 3.1 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − + 2.7 + 3.6 − 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 −          Feb.− 2.6 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.6 − 2.9 − 4.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 −          Mar.
− 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 10.2 − 1.7 − 5.8 − 2.5 − 0.2 −          Apr.
+ 4.7 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − − 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 −          May− 3.5 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 3.2 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 5.8 − 0.1 −          June
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At 3 on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.22018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.92019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2020         Feb. 575.0 568.5 535.9 305.5 32.6 23.0 6.5 5.8 0.1 34.9 32.2 24.4 2.6
         Mar. 570.9 564.5 532.5 299.6 32.0 22.4 6.4 5.8 0.1 34.4 31.8 24.1 2.6
         Apr. 570.2 563.8 532.6 298.9 31.2 21.8 6.4 5.8 0.1 33.7 31.1 23.8 2.6
         May 570.0 563.6 532.9 296.2 30.8 21.3 6.4 5.8 0.1 32.6 30.7 23.6 1.9         June 569.0 562.6 532.8 295.4 29.8 20.3 6.4 5.8 0.1 32.1 30.3 23.3 1.9
Changes*
2018 − 4.7 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 9.1 − 6.5 − 3.6 − 2.62019 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 21.3 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 . − 5.3 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.2
2020         Feb. − 2.3 − 2.2 − 1.7 − 2.7 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Mar. − 4.1 − 4.0 − 3.4 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0
         Apr. − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.7 − 0.7 − 0.3 −
         May − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.7         June − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
  
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiablerate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  
1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.52018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.42019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2020         Feb. 1,160.4 122.9 28.5 362.9 94.8 116.0 2.6 24.3 4.5 1,020.0 0.7 0.6 32.7 0.4
         Mar. 1,146.9 122.2 26.8 350.9 91.6 110.4 1.9 23.5 3.8 1,013.0 0.7 0.6 30.3 0.4
         Apr. 1,146.0 119.7 25.4 348.4 84.4 101.7 1.7 27.3 3.5 1,017.0 0.7 0.7 31.6 0.4
         May 1,141.5 121.0 24.9 337.5 80.7 97.4 1.8 27.4 3.6 1,016.7 0.8 0.7 31.4 0.4         June 1,148.1 126.4 27.7 344.5 86.5 107.0 1.7 27.1 3.4 1,014.0 0.8 0.7 31.4 0.4
Changes*
2018 + 33.6 − 7.8 + 1.5 − 14.3 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 10.5 − 0.3 + 45.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.02019 + 40.6 − 15.9 + 1.1 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 11.5 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 1.9 + 27.4 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.3
2020         Feb. + 11.3 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 3.4 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 9.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 −
         Mar. − 13.5 − 0.7 − 1.7 − 12.0 − 3.2 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 7.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 −
         Apr. − 0.9 − 2.5 − 1.5 − 2.5 − 7.2 − 8.7 − 0.2 + 3.8 − 0.3 + 4.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.2 − 0.0
         May − 4.5 + 1.3 − 0.4 − 10.9 − 3.7 − 4.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0         June + 6.6 + 5.4 + 2.7 + 6.9 + 5.8 + 9.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2018 20 233.4 39.4 0.0 15.7 11.9 110.2 25.7 25.8 2.8 20.4 174.3 10.0 3.3 11.7 86.6
2019 19 237.9 34.0 0.0 16.2 11.4 117.6 28.0 25.9 2.9 21.0 179.7 9.8 1.8 12.0 88.7
2020         Apr. 19 239.8 33.2 0.0 16.3 11.2 119.7 29.2 25.8 2.9 22.1 180.0 9.9 1.7 12.3 6.1
         May 19 240.5 33.1 0.0 16.3 11.2 120.2 29.5 25.9 2.9 22.6 180.3 9.8 1.7 12.3 6.6         June 18 240.7 32.3 0.0 16.3 11.1 121.0 29.7 25.9 2.9 24.2 179.8 8.4 1.7 12.2 6.3
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Apr. 11 165.5 17.3 − 6.9 8.4 93.2 24.9 11.5 1.8 19.6 116.5 9.6 1.7 8.5 3.9
         May 11 166.1 17.3 − 6.9 8.3 93.6 25.2 11.5 1.8 20.1 116.7 9.5 1.7 8.5 4.2         June 10 166.3 16.6 − 6.9 8.2 94.3 25.4 11.5 1.8 21.5 116.6 8.1 1.7 8.4 4.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Apr. 8 74.3 15.9 0.0 9.4 2.9 26.5 4.3 14.3 1.2 2.5 63.6 0.3 − 3.8 2.2
         May 8 74.4 15.8 0.0 9.4 2.8 26.6 4.4 14.4 1.2 2.5 63.6 0.3 − 3.8 2.5         June 8 74.4 15.7 0.0 9.4 2.8 26.7 4.3 14.4 1.2 2.7 63.3 0.3 − 3.8 2.3
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2018 27.0 2.1 7.4 45.2 25.1 40.2 15.9 4.3 4.8 3.7 19.5 16.6 6.8 6.6 5.5 0.2
2019 27.3 2.1 7.5 49.2 25.8 42.9 16.4 4.2 4.6 3.6 21.9 18.1 6.5 7.2 5.4 0.2
2020         Apr. 2.1 0.0 0.7 5.2 2.8 4.2 1.8 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.0 18.6 6.6 0.5 0.0
         May 2.5 0.0 0.7 4.5 2.5 3.9 1.6 0.3 0.4 0.3 1.9 18.2 6.6 0.5 0.0         June 2.1 0.0 0.9 4.5 2.5 4.2 1.7 0.3 0.4 0.3 2.1 18.7 6.6 0.6 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Apr. 1.3 0.0 0.4 4.0 2.0 3.3 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.6 13.9 3.6 0.4 0.0
         May 1.6 0.0 0.3 3.2 1.6 2.9 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.6 13.3 3.5 0.4 0.0         June 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.5 1.8 3.2 1.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 1.7 14.0 3.6 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Apr. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.2 0.8 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.7 3.0 0.1 0.0
         May 0.9 0.0 0.4 1.3 0.9 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.9 3.1 0.1 0.0         June 0.8 0.0 0.6 1.1 0.7 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.7 3.0 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV.  Banks
  
13.  Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
    
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks(MFIs)   with of which:
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial
branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in thesubsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  
7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2017 52 188 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.92018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.02019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2019         Aug. 53 199 1,694.2 454.9 437.3 235.0 202.3 17.5 565.3 471.6 19.9 451.7 93.7 674.1 506.9
         Sep. 53 199 1,672.7 457.5 440.2 243.6 196.6 17.3 581.9 482.9 19.9 463.1 98.9 633.3 465.9
         Oct. 53 200 1,634.9 451.2 433.5 230.9 202.6 17.7 573.8 471.4 19.7 451.7 102.4 609.9 432.4
         Nov. 52 199 1,582.4 418.6 403.2 219.9 183.2 15.5 581.6 481.8 20.0 461.8 99.8 582.2 417.1         Dec. 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020         Jan. 52 198 1,597.9 431.9 413.6 224.2 189.4 18.3 566.2 470.8 19.9 450.8 95.4 599.8 433.8
         Feb. 52 199 1,725.2 445.3 427.1 240.5 186.6 18.2 583.5 493.8 19.5 474.3 89.7 696.4 534.6         Mar. 52 199 1,888.5 483.7 465.3 248.9 216.4 18.4 590.4 495.8 20.5 475.3 94.6 814.4 650.7
         Apr. 52 199 1,875.4 473.2 455.1 261.5 193.7 18.0 584.5 492.6 20.5 472.1 91.9 817.8 646.0
         May 52 198 1,823.5 442.7 425.6 248.0 177.6 17.2 571.6 475.7 19.6 456.1 95.9 809.2 632.1
Changes *
2018 − 3 − 5 − 250.2 −101.0 −102.0 − 5.0 − 97.0 + 1.0 − 24.8 − 27.1 + 7.0 − 34.1 + 2.4 − 148.2 − 102.62019 + 3 + 15 + 51.5 − 4.7 − 7.7 + 23.9 − 31.6 + 2.9 + 12.6 + 0.9 − 0.3 + 1.2 + 11.7 + 30.6 + 49.6
2019         Sep. − − − 22.5 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 8.6 − 7.4 − 0.4 + 11.9 + 7.4 − 0.0 + 7.4 + 4.5 − 41.7 − 43.5
         Oct. − + 1 − 36.2 − 4.0 − 4.5 − 12.7 + 8.2 + 0.5 − 2.1 − 6.3 − 0.1 − 6.2 + 4.2 − 21.9 − 30.4
         Nov. − 1 − 1 − 53.6 − 34.4 − 32.1 − 10.9 − 21.2 − 2.3 + 3.0 + 6.4 + 0.3 + 6.0 − 3.3 − 28.8 − 17.6         Dec. − − 1 − 127.9 − 9.2 − 11.9 − 3.9 − 8.0 + 2.7 − 41.5 − 40.8 − 0.3 − 40.4 − 0.7 − 69.2 − 52.7
2020         Jan. − − + 144.8 + 24.6 + 24.4 + 8.1 + 16.3 + 0.2 + 31.9 + 34.7 + 0.3 + 34.4 − 2.8 + 88.3 + 72.0
         Feb. − + 1 + 126.9 + 12.9 + 13.0 + 16.4 − 3.4 − 0.1 + 16.2 + 22.0 − 0.5 + 22.5 − 5.9 + 96.2 + 100.2         Mar. − − + 163.4 + 38.8 + 38.6 + 8.4 + 30.2 + 0.2 + 8.6 + 3.5 + 1.0 + 2.5 + 5.1 + 118.1 + 116.4
         Apr. − − − 13.6 − 12.1 − 11.7 + 12.6 − 24.2 − 0.5 − 9.6 − 6.3 + 0.1 − 6.4 − 3.2 + 2.8 − 6.4
         May − − 1 − 50.5 − 27.0 − 26.4 − 13.5 − 12.9 − 0.6 − 4.4 − 9.4 − 1.0 − 8.4 + 5.0 − 7.1 − 9.0
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 −2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 −
2019         Aug. 16 42 248.3 56.6 50.8 19.0 31.8 5.8 141.1 116.5 14.5 102.0 24.6 50.7 −
         Sep. 16 42 250.4 57.3 51.6 19.7 32.0 5.7 142.0 117.7 14.2 103.5 24.3 51.0 −
         Oct. 15 41 238.9 53.9 48.4 18.0 30.4 5.5 138.5 114.7 14.3 100.4 23.8 46.5 −
         Nov. 15 41 237.2 54.2 48.3 18.6 29.6 5.9 136.2 113.1 14.1 99.1 23.1 46.8 −         Dec. 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 −
2020         Jan. 15 40 240.2 52.4 47.0 20.1 26.9 5.5 141.0 117.5 14.0 103.4 23.6 46.8 −
         Feb. 15 40 247.0 57.7 52.0 20.3 31.7 5.7 141.4 117.6 14.0 103.5 23.9 47.8 −         Mar. 15 40 246.2 55.7 49.3 19.5 29.9 6.4 143.9 121.7 15.1 106.7 22.1 46.7 −
         Apr. 14 39 244.4 50.8 44.2 19.7 24.5 6.6 143.9 120.6 15.4 105.3 23.3 49.6 −
         May 14 39 245.7 52.1 45.9 19.4 26.5 6.2 142.9 119.2 15.6 103.6 23.7 50.8 −
Changes *
2018 − 3 − 7 − 42.2 − 20.9 − 19.9 − 4.9 − 15.1 − 1.0 − 14.2 − 11.6 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 7.0 −2019 − 2 − 2 − 7.2 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 2.3 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 3.5 + 0.5 + 3.0 − 1.9 − 9.1 −
2019         Sep. − − + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 −
         Oct. − 1 − 1 − 10.2 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 4.5 −
         Nov. − − − 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 −         Dec. − − − 1.0 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 3.2 + 3.4 + 0.3 + 3.1 − 0.2 − 3.0 −
2020         Jan. − − 1 + 4.0 − 0.6 − 0.2 + 1.7 − 2.0 − 0.4 + 1.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.7 + 3.0 −
         Feb. − − + 6.4 + 5.1 + 4.9 + 0.3 + 4.6 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 1.0 −         Mar. − − − 0.6 − 2.1 − 2.7 − 0.9 − 1.8 + 0.7 + 2.6 + 4.3 + 1.1 + 3.2 − 1.7 − 1.1 −
         Apr. − 1 − 1 − 2.5 − 5.2 − 5.3 + 0.2 − 5.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 1.7 + 1.1 + 3.0 −
         May − − + 3.0 + 2.0 + 2.3 − 0.3 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 1.1 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
August 2020
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of which:paper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
964.6 659.6 455.0 204.6 305.0 16.3 13.6 2.7 288.7 101.9 53.9 573.9 508.6 2019          Aug.
971.2 657.5 459.5 198.0 313.7 15.8 13.0 2.7 297.9 108.1 53.7 539.7 468.3          Sep.
979.2 676.7 475.9 200.8 302.5 13.7 11.0 2.7 288.8 106.8 53.4 495.5 434.0          Oct.
945.8 644.9 465.2 179.7 300.9 14.9 12.2 2.7 286.0 107.3 53.6 475.8 416.2          Nov.894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1          Dec.
955.1 659.0 468.1 190.9 296.1 13.6 10.8 2.7 282.5 106.3 54.1 482.4 432.8 2020          Jan.
975.4 660.5 471.1 189.4 314.9 13.7 10.7 3.0 301.2 110.1 54.2 585.5 533.6          Feb.
1,030.8 718.6 458.6 260.0 312.3 15.1 12.0 3.1 297.2 97.2 54.7 705.7 650.4          Mar.
1,028.3 725.0 474.8 250.2 303.4 14.6 11.9 2.7 288.7 92.2 55.0 699.9 644.4          Apr.
994.0 695.4 484.1 211.3 298.7 15.3 13.1 2.2 283.3 93.5 54.7 681.2 630.2          May
Changes *
− 113.1 − 84.7 + 56.0 −140.8 − 28.3 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 23.8 − 9.4 + 2.0 − 139.7 − 105.7 2018− 7.2 + 2.4 + 24.4 − 22.0 − 9.6 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 − 10.9 + 3.0 − 0.6 + 52.0 + 58.5 2019
+ 4.8 − 3.8 + 4.5 − 8.2 + 8.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 5.2 − 0.1 − 34.2 − 40.3 2019          Sep.
+ 10.4 + 21.5 + 16.4 + 5.0 − 11.0 − 2.1 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 9.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 44.2 − 34.3          Oct.
− 35.3 − 33.5 − 10.7 − 22.8 − 1.7 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 19.7 − 17.8          Nov.− 49.6 − 29.3 − 12.0 − 17.2 − 20.3 − 2.2 − 2.1 − 0.1 − 18.1 − 11.2 − 0.2 − 64.8 − 55.1          Dec.
+ 61.0 + 45.4 + 14.9 + 30.5 + 15.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 14.8 + 11.6 + 0.8 + 71.5 + 71.7 2020          Jan.
+ 19.7 + 0.9 + 3.0 − 2.1 + 18.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 18.6 + 3.4 + 0.1 + 103.1 + 100.8          Feb.+ 56.0 + 58.5 − 12.5 + 71.0 − 2.5 + 1.4 + 1.5 − 0.1 − 3.9 − 12.8 + 0.5 + 120.2 + 116.8          Mar.
− 4.6 + 4.5 + 16.3 − 11.8 − 9.0 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 8.6 − 5.6 + 0.3 − 5.8 − 6.1          Apr.
− 29.9 − 25.4 + 9.3 − 34.7 − 4.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 5.2 + 2.8 − 0.3 − 18.6 − 14.2          May
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 − 2018165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 − 2019
175.8 74.7 37.9 36.7 101.1 8.3 5.6 2.7 92.8 16.5 22.3 33.8 − 2019          Aug.
178.0 76.0 39.0 37.1 101.9 7.0 4.3 2.8 94.9 16.5 22.4 33.5 −          Sep.
168.3 70.9 36.7 34.2 97.4 7.0 4.3 2.8 90.4 16.3 22.1 32.2 −          Oct.
167.3 70.7 36.7 34.0 96.6 6.9 4.2 2.7 89.7 16.1 22.1 31.6 −          Nov.165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 −          Dec.
170.1 70.5 37.3 33.2 99.6 6.4 3.6 2.7 93.2 16.5 21.7 32.0 − 2020          Jan.
176.3 73.5 38.6 35.0 102.7 6.8 4.1 2.7 95.9 16.4 21.7 32.7 −          Feb.176.1 75.1 39.8 35.3 101.0 6.7 4.1 2.6 94.3 15.6 21.3 33.3 −          Mar.
175.3 76.8 43.3 33.6 98.5 6.9 4.4 2.5 91.6 15.8 20.8 32.4 −          Apr.
177.7 76.5 42.2 34.3 101.2 7.1 4.5 2.5 94.2 15.5 20.8 31.7 −          May
Changes *
− 37.4 − 25.8 − 13.7 − 12.0 − 11.7 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 8.8 + 1.3 − 1.8 − 4.3 − 2018− 6.7 − 3.2 + 0.5 − 3.8 − 3.5 − 2.5 − 2.5 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 1.7 − 0.4 − 1.8 − 2019
+ 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 2019          Sep.
− 8.7 − 4.6 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 4.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.8 −          Oct.
− 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 −          Nov.− 0.8 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 −          Dec.
+ 3.7 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.8 + 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 2020          Jan.
+ 6.0 + 2.9 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.5 −          Feb.− 0.1 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.4 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.6 − 0.8 − 0.4 + 0.7 −          Mar.
− 1.1 + 1.5 + 3.5 − 2.0 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.2 − 0.5 − 1.0 −          Apr.
+ 3.4 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 3.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 −          May
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
August 2020
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.02015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.02016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.02017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.02018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.02019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020         May 13,977.4 139.8 139.4 1,966.5 1,827.1 0.0
         June 14,156.1 141.6 141.2 2,345.9 2,204.8 0.0         July  
p 14,276.1 142.8 142.4 ... ... ...
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 02016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 02017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 22018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 12019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020         May 3,864,432 27.6 38,644 38,496 618,119 579,624 1
         June 3,899,357 27.5 38,994 38,845 707,227 668,382 2         July  
p 3,932,404 27.5 39,324 39,176 ... ... ...
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,3122015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,5782016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,8592017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,6992018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,6582019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020         May 7,875 5,842 2,975 12,411 7,119 116 2,157
         June 7,974 5,798 3,005 12,590 7,233 113 2,133         July 7,904 6,091 2,959 12,756 7,323 112 2,030
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,1462016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,7762017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,8942018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,6212019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020         May 2,750,923 2,037 432,394 565,265 113,810
         June 2,778,169 1,763 445,138 564,663 109,621         July 2,822,031 1,792 438,067 564,545 105,970
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / Base rates
% per annum
ECB interest rates Base rates
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2020 July 15 1,026 1,026 0.00 - - - 7
July 22 1,125 1,125 0.00 - - - 7
July 29 1,144 1,144 0.00 - - - 7
Aug. 5 954 954 0.00 - - - 7
Aug. 12 1,005 1,005 0.00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2020 June 24 1,308,433 1,308,433 2      … - - - 1099
June 24 15,611 15,611 2      … - - - 463
June 25 1,290 1,290 2      … - - - 98
July 30 148 148 2      … - - - 91
Aug. 6 5,684 5,684 2      … - - - 420
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2020 Jan. – 0.45 – 0.50 – 0.46 – 0.39 – 0.33 – 0.25
Feb. – 0.45 – 0.51 – 0.47 – 0.41 – 0.36 – 0.29
Mar. – 0.45 – 0.51 – 0.48 – 0.42 – 0.37 – 0.27
Apr. – 0.45 – 0.51 – 0.43 – 0.25 – 0.19 – 0.11
May – 0.46 – 0.51 – 0.46 – 0.27 – 0.14 – 0.08
June – 0.46 – 0.52 – 0.49 – 0.38 – 0.22 – 0.15
July – 0.46 – 0.53 – 0.51 – 0.44 – 0.35 – 0.28
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 untilSeptember 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. Since
October 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 June 0.22 60,652 1.17 217,383 0.03 63,711 0.83 28,547
July 0.22 60,326 1.16 217,260 0.03 63,826 0.85 27,984
Aug. 0.22 60,071 1.15 217,527 0.02 66,066 0.84 27,809
Sep. 0.21 59,625 1.15 217,918 0.01 65,179 0.85 27,581
Oct. 0.21 58,785 1.14 217,872 – 0.01 64,731 0.85 27,684
Nov. 0.22 57,815 1.12 217,794 – 0.02 63,482 0.85 27,757
Dec. 0.23 57,910 1.12 219,819 – 0.05 66,312 0.84 27,528
2020 Jan. 0.23 57,198 1.11 220,060 – 0.05 65,777 0.83 27,355
Feb. 0.23 56,142 1.10 220,286 – 0.05 65,820 0.84 26,651
Mar. 0.24 54,034 1.10 219,797 – 0.07 68,925 0.82 26,158
Apr. 0.24 52,567 1.09 219,117 – 0.07 71,964 0.82 25,694
May 0.24 53,093 1.08 219,267 – 0.08 80,523 0.83 24,937
June 0.25 53,752 1.07 218,668 – 0.05 77,282 0.85 24,172
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 June 2.23 4,575 1.78 26,445 2.33 1,230,368 7.11 51,281 3.49 87,504 3.76 314,057
July 2.22 4,643 1.77 26,544 2.31 1,236,461 7.06 50,115 3.48 86,724 3.74 315,493
Aug. 2.16 4,658 1.76 26,765 2.29 1,243,945 7.08 49,280 3.46 87,412 3.74 316,798
Sep. 2.16 4,636 1.75 26,538 2.27 1,250,520 7.23 51,134 3.46 87,317 3.71 315,907
Oct. 2.11 4,749 1.73 26,605 2.24 1,257,680 7.16 49,728 3.45 87,489 3.69 317,081
Nov. 2.07 4,787 1.71 26,726 2.22 1,265,217 7.13 48,412 3.44 87,638 3.67 318,019
Dec. 2.07 4,610 1.71 26,616 2.20 1,268,612 7.12 50,916 3.44 87,320 3.65 316,610
2020 Jan. 2.05 4,755 1.69 26,351 2.18 1,271,558 7.18 49,713 3.43 87,413 3.63 317,814
Feb. 2.01 4,813 1.69 26,388 2.16 1,278,149 7.18 49,016 3.43 87,594 3.62 318,931
Mar. 2.04 4,755 1.68 26,516 2.14 1,284,212 7.33 49,209 3.42 87,284 3.61 318,802
Apr. 1.99 4,673 1.66 26,483 2.12 1,291,221 7.17 45,827 3.41 86,755 3.59 319,658
May 1.97 4,752 1.66 26,603 2.10 1,299,073 7.03 44,605 3.41 86,303 3.57 320,868
June 1.98 4,629 1.65 26,701 2.09 1,303,323 7.05 46,437 3.41 86,047 3.56 319,549
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 June 2.14 167,044 1.66 164,225 1.98 722,521
July 2.13 163,263 1.64 165,839 1.96 724,902
Aug. 2.14 163,138 1.64 167,486 1.95 729,505
Sep. 2.18 164,445 1.64 167,202 1.92 730,591
Oct. 2.19 160,244 1.63 169,633 1.91 735,730
Nov. 2.21 163,260 1.63 171,713 1.90 739,461
Dec. 2.24 162,074 1.64 171,388 1.88 737,455
2020 Jan. 2.20 161,563 1.64 169,238 1.86 741,004
Feb. 2.21 163,078 1.62 171,571 1.86 745,054
Mar. 2.05 182,434 1.62 174,636 1.84 746,742
Apr. 1.98 185,780 1.63 177,975 1.83 752,025
May 1.95 181,594 1.62 182,819 1.82 761,686
June 2.02 172,763 1.65 185,310 1.81 767,635
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 June 0.01 1,487,229 0.10 3,429 0.44 330 0.68 713 0.13 543,047 0.27 38,409
July 0.01 1,496,476 0.12 3,834 0.49 378 0.79 965 0.13 542,420 0.27 38,137
Aug. 0.01 1,507,758 0.15 3,511 0.39 522 0.73 907 0.12 541,175 0.26 37,798
Sep. 0.01 1,504,996 0.14 3,322 0.50 342 0.63 820 0.12 540,525 0.25 37,218
Oct. 0.01 1,519,599 0.17 2,945 0.44 404 0.99 956 0.12 539,574 0.23 36,402
Nov. 0.01 1,550,441 0.18 2,617 0.66 674 0.58 999 0.12 538,889 0.23 35,551
Dec. 0.01 1,548,036 0.08 3,590 0.49 729 0.60 818 0.12 539,678 0.21 34,476
2020 Jan. 0.01 1,550,487 0.14 4,181 0.44 640 0.63 939 0.11 536,842 0.19 32,999
Feb. 0.00 1,571,470 0.15 3,157 0.39 388 0.58 826 0.11 535,065 0.19 32,449
Mar. 0.00 1,567,320 0.12 2,538 0.40 286 0.60 658 0.11 531,723 0.18 31,794
Apr. 0.00 1,597,323 0.14 3,086 0.49 308 0.69 601 0.11 531,921 0.18 31,083
May 0.00 1,619,447 0.19 3,300 0.59 1,117 0.60 629 0.11 532,140 0.17 30,662
June 0.00 1,626,406 0.17 3,283 0.78 1,455 0.69 854 0.11 532,294 0.18 29,670
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2019 June – 0.03 448,314 – 0.09 10,189 0.19 421 0.25 190
July – 0.03 460,551 – 0.08 11,503 0.00 86 0.66 442
Aug. – 0.03 465,696 – 0.17 11,745 – 0.06 135 0.45 212
Sep. – 0.04 468,092 – 0.22 11,961 – 0.33 1,000 x .x .
Oct. – 0.04 477,961 – 0.20 10,900 – 0.06 155 x .x .
Nov. – 0.04 476,945 – 0.21 11,165 – 0.03 389 0.32 654
Dec. – 0.05 476,493 – 0.22 17,148 0.04 554 0.28 911
2020 Jan. – 0.06 468,336 – 0.11 18,221 0.12 278 0.34 158
Feb. – 0.06 462,673 – 0.25 12,289 – 0.04 158 x .x .
Mar. – 0.07 482,538 – 0.27 20,845 0.04 235 x .x .
Apr. – 0.08 495,710 – 0.17 33,483 0.48 288 0.18 78
May – 0.08 501,848 – 0.24 37,552 0.55 707 0.30 259
June – 0.08 510,769 – 0.33 31,980 0.37 633 0.38 313
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2019 June 6.06 5.98 8,345 7.01 1,554 9.23 425 4.52 3,222 6.68 4,698
July 6.17 6.11 10,570 7.13 2,173 9.19 493 4.63 3,859 6.79 6,219
Aug. 6.06 6.00 9,351 6.98 1,957 9.68 420 4.51 3,376 6.63 5,555
Sep. 5.92 5.87 8,928 6.72 1,837 9.41 461 4.44 3,178 6.42 5,289
Oct. 5.91 5.85 9,336 6.70 1,894 9.23 528 4.39 3,350 6.42 5,459
Nov. 5.75 5.73 8,369 6.60 1,654 8.54 493 4.36 3,056 6.32 4,821
Dec. 5.74 5.75 7,033 6.47 1,288 8.59 590 4.38 2,640 6.26 3,804
2020 Jan. 6.07 6.03 10,080 6.85 2,379 8.94 626 4.45 3,307 6.58 6,148
Feb. 5.81 5.81 9,284 6.65 1,995 8.58 538 4.41 3,155 6.34 5,591
Mar. 5.84 5.81 9,742 6.35 1,982 8.46 483 4.57 3,209 6.26 6,050
Apr. 6.31 6.21 7,843 6.08 1,482 8.11 361 5.06 2,291 6.59 5,190
May 5.93 5.80 7,945 6.23 1,620 7.79 494 4.49 2,843 6.39 4,608
June 5.86 5.71 8,770 6.41 1,841 8.42 413 4.39 3,258 6.34 5,099
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2019 June 1.80 5,098 1.80 1,128 1.69 2,120 2.32 731 1.73 2,247
July 1.84 5,915 1.78 1,869 1.80 2,429 2.43 876 1.69 2,610
Aug. 1.79 4,740 1.71 1,047 1.76 1,855 2.53 657 1.60 2,228
Sep. 1.78 4,757 1.73 1,279 1.82 2,154 2.34 630 1.55 1,973
Oct. 1.83 4,987 1.68 1,481 1.96 2,229 2.40 635 1.52 2,123
Nov. 1.63 5,178 1.58 1,046 1.61 2,022 2.28 722 1.45 2,434
Dec. 1.63 6,393 1.74 1,399 1.66 2,662 2.07 1,016 1.44 2,715
2020 Jan. 1.67 5,644 1.62 1,608 1.63 2,341 2.32 782 1.50 2,521
Feb. 1.77 4,739 1.57 1,108 1.79 1,860 2.52 666 1.53 2,213
Mar. 1.73 5,746 1.76 1,425 1.70 2,347 2.44 821 1.53 2,578
Apr. 1.71 6,505 1.95 2,109 1.73 2,042 2.04 944 1.60 3,519
May 1.80 6,580 1.96 2,043 1.98 2,118 2.07 833 1.63 3,629
June 1.83 6,501 1.95 2,438 1.82 2,240 2.43 1,070 1.63 3,191
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2019 June 1.90 3,540 . . 1.94 1,397 2.43 515 1.70 1,628
July 1.92 4,264 . . 1.99 1,719 2.43 676 1.68 1,869
Aug. 1.91 3,192 . . 1.97 1,203 2.64 483 1.63 1,506
Sep. 1.79 3,219 . . 1.80 1,458 2.42 449 1.57 1,312
Oct. 1.78 3,572 . . 1.82 1,568 2.46 476 1.52 1,528
Nov. 1.74 3,478 . . 1.80 1,297 2.40 532 1.48 1,649
Dec. 1.79 4,258 . . 1.93 1,691 2.40 637 1.47 1,930
2020 Jan. 1.83 3,752 . . 1.98 1,420 2.47 559 1.51 1,773
Feb. 1.80 3,430 . . 1.82 1,301 2.57 518 1.53 1,611
Mar. 1.83 3,818 . . 1.89 1,544 2.48 636 1.52 1,638
Apr. 1.75 4,582 . . 1.88 1,402 2.02 752 1.60 2,428
May 1.81 5,056 . . 2.03 1,460 2.14 633 1.64 2,963
June 1.86 4,702 . . 1.83 1,501 2.46 806 1.68 2,395
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2019 June 1.63 1.57 20,164 1.65 3,245 1.98 2,280 1.44 1,695 1.41 6,429 1.61 9,760
July 1.54 1.49 25,672 1.64 4,571 1.98 2,743 1.43 2,107 1.34 8,473 1.49 12,348
Aug. 1.43 1.38 22,520 1.53 3,272 1.86 2,529 1.38 1,684 1.23 6,856 1.36 11,450
Sep. 1.34 1.28 21,803 1.45 3,348 1.88 2,182 1.38 1,613 1.14 6,714 1.24 11,294
Oct. 1.31 1.27 23,169 1.44 3,714 1.91 2,452 1.31 1,738 1.12 7,268 1.22 11,711
Nov. 1.31 1.26 22,234 1.41 3,066 1.84 2,206 1.30 1,663 1.09 6,889 1.25 11,475
Dec. 1.34 1.29 20,048 1.48 2,938 1.81 2,396 1.37 1,553 1.14 6,622 1.27 9,477
2020 Jan. 1.39 1.34 21,927 1.47 3,871 1.83 2,545 1.32 1,797 1.16 7,106 1.35 10,479
Feb. 1.33 1.28 20,546 1.36 2,902 1.82 2,019 1.33 1,499 1.13 6,555 1.26 10,474
Mar. 1.27 1.22 25,314 1.38 3,761 1.83 2,503 1.32 1,872 1.07 8,045 1.18 12,894
Apr. 1.29 1.25 24,541 1.51 5,102 1.78 2,525 1.32 1,822 1.11 7,769 1.22 12,425
May 1.37 1.33 22,361 1.65 5,153 1.93 3,000 1.47 1,643 1.12 6,872 1.27 10,845
June 1.38 1.34 22,793 1.63 5,171 1.94 2,235 1.59 1,947 1.17 7,983 1.28 10,628
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2019 June . 1.52 8,277 . . 1.98 820 1.28 744 1.35 2,732 1.59 3,981
July . 1.44 10,426 . . 1.96 944 1.24 935 1.30 3,493 1.48 5,054
Aug. . 1.32 9,008 . . 1.90 732 1.19 762 1.17 2,860 1.35 4,654
Sep. . 1.22 8,966 . . 1.89 689 1.19 689 1.08 2,919 1.21 4,669
Oct. . 1.20 9,660 . . 1.82 818 1.09 799 1.06 3,118 1.20 4,925
Nov. . 1.19 9,173 . . 1.75 738 1.09 787 1.03 2,848 1.22 4,800
Dec. . 1.20 8,740 . . 1.79 758 1.15 719 1.07 2,898 1.19 4,365
2020 Jan. . 1.26 9,963 . . 1.77 891 1.14 888 1.07 3,130 1.30 5,054
Feb. . 1.18 8,867 . . 1.73 641 1.14 702 1.04 2,785 1.19 4,739
Mar. . 1.13 11,461 . . 1.76 828 1.15 925 0.98 3,673 1.13 6,035
Apr. . 1.16 11,495 . . 1.70 951 1.21 939 1.03 3,594 1.14 6,011
May . 1.24 10,084 . . 1.86 1,046 1.31 835 1.05 3,065 1.22 5,138
June . 1.26 10,090 . . 1.84 803 1.41 935 1.10 3,656 1.25 4,696
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 June 7.86 41,429 7.92 32,848 14.77 4,421 2.92 84,632 2.94 84,230
July 7.72 40,774 7.81 32,054 14.77 4,372 2.92 80,865 2.94 80,466
Aug. 7.79 40,128 7.84 31,484 14.78 4,450 2.91 81,292 2.92 80,923
Sep. 7.91 41,961 7.91 33,243 15.08 4,561 2.97 82,771 2.99 82,352
Oct. 7.81 40,630 7.80 32,063 15.05 4,479 2.96 79,242 2.98 78,810
Nov. 7.72 39,142 7.62 30,666 15.11 4,517 2.95 81,340 2.97 80,912
Dec. 7.62 41,902 7.69 32,556 15.11 4,576 3.05 79,862 3.07 79,476
2020 Jan. 7.72 40,805 7.65 32,270 15.13 4,497 2.99 80,217 3.00 79,819
Feb. 7.72 40,187 7.63 31,840 15.14 4,456 2.94 82,171 2.95 81,754
Mar. 7.89 40,211 7.64 32,857 15.19 4,364 2.77 88,805 2.78 88,517
Apr. 7.73 36,930 7.35 30,063 15.19 4,262 2.71 85,888 2.72 85,702
May 7.60 35,719 7.23 28,731 15.24 4,194 2.66 83,133 2.67 82,928
June 7.63 37,486 7.39 30,074 15.22 4,183 2.86 81,829 2.87 81,584
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2019 June 1.18 84,377 1.28 25,393 2.08 10,633 2.51 1,407 1.65 2,280 0.94 58,540 1.21 3,408 1.40 9,077
July 1.19 85,200 1.32 22,605 2.08 10,553 2.52 1,630 1.59 2,743 0.91 56,383 1.69 4,920 1.24 10,074
Aug. 1.13 70,037 1.32 19,327 2.02 8,816 2.54 1,375 1.55 2,529 0.88 47,954 1.71 3,280 1.17 7,364
Sep. 1.18 81,376 1.27 23,112 1.98 10,331 2.46 1,320 1.42 2,182 1.00 55,486 1.53 2,877 1.03 10,138
Oct. 1.22 80,549 1.31 23,322 1.93 10,875 2.41 1,503 1.43 2,452 1.06 55,298 1.32 3,647 1.08 7,913
Nov. 1.27 72,910 1.33 19,516 2.04 10,266 2.48 1,416 1.42 2,206 1.10 48,917 1.43 3,070 1.09 7,990
Dec. 1.29 102,587 1.40 27,151 2.10 10,584 2.40 1,608 1.45 2,396 1.15 73,303 1.36 4,483 1.18 11,129
2020 Jan. 1.24 73,322 1.34 22,883 1.98 10,775 2.45 1,509 1.53 2,545 1.03 51,717 1.39 2,121 1.26 5,911
Feb. 1.19 65,885 1.36 17,452 1.95 9,727 2.45 1,329 1.47 2,019 0.98 43,225 1.30 3,425 1.07 7,058
Mar. 1.20 96,389 1.44 24,539 1.88 10,920 2.34 1,666 1.47 2,503 1.06 69,385 1.31 3,884 1.14 9,067
Apr. 1.35 80,293 1.53 22,726 1.90 8,269 2.05 1,460 1.76 2,525 1.25 53,150 1.27 3,999 1.15 9,620
May 1.38 70,416 1.50 19,086 1.83 8,544 2.23 1,466 2.03 3,000 1.20 41,644 1.27 3,723 1.25 9,345
June 1.36 86,389 1.45 30,035 1.93 10,537 2.35 1,714 1.81 2,235 1.18 53,209 1.69 4,895 1.26 12,072
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2019 June 1.47 10,380 . . 1.80 493 2.86 126 1.55 326 1.41 6,221 1.31 448 1.51 2,766
July 1.34 11,662 . . 1.80 595 2.81 152 1.46 466 1.22 6,100 1.63 1,548 1.26 2,801
Aug. 1.49 8,835 . . 1.96 474 2.53 152 1.28 357 1.45 4,757 2.16 957 1.15 2,138
Sep. 1.30 12,814 . . 1.86 487 2.80 113 1.26 378 1.27 7,572 1.95 1,094 1.03 3,170
Oct. 1.28 10,710 . . 1.64 630 2.52 140 1.24 362 1.24 6,623 1.72 588 1.11 2,367
Nov. 1.35 9,204 . . 1.87 465 2.47 129 1.19 329 1.47 4,566 1.66 800 0.95 2,915
Dec. 1.38 17,816 . . 1.71 553 2.43 174 1.28 402 1.41 11,704 1.46 1,422 1.17 3,561
2020 Jan. 1.23 9,108 . . 1.71 661 2.47 147 1.43 395 1.15 6,021 1.46 316 1.14 1,568
Feb. 1.48 8,690 . . 1.66 448 2.23 96 1.25 346 1.63 5,276 1.42 822 0.98 1,702
Mar. x .x . . . 1.74 548 x .x . 1.20 411 1.29 7,469 1.88 522 1.02 2,620
Apr. 1.34 9,734 . . 1.72 492 1.56 243 1.22 556 1.39 5,375 1.44 513 1.15 2,555
May 1.48 7,873 . . 2.02 471 1.73 171 1.90 865 1.43 4,286 1.72 336 1.16 1,744
June 1.39 13,750 . . 1.81 558 2.05 224 1.71 776 1.31 8,391 1.64 1,048 1.28 2,753
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets *
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesInsurance
technical
reservesNon-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations
2017 Q3 2,188.1 331.3 386.1 371.1 305.5 650.5 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.4
Q4 2,212.7 321.1 387.0 354.3 336.1 671.3 2.9 48.3 34.3 57.3
2018 Q1 2,218.0 344.1 394.6 326.9 342.8 664.0 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.6
Q2 2,226.3 346.8 400.1 319.6 346.3 669.9 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6
Q3 2,224.8 326.3 401.1 327.9 349.4 677.8 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6
Q4 2,213.5 318.3 400.4 330.4 349.7 665.8 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019 Q1 2,343.9 332.3 431.9 329.6 381.6 707.8 2.6 59.3 37.1 61.7
Q2 2,405.7 336.9 449.4 338.5 388.2 734.0 3.6 57.8 37.1 60.3
Q3 2,489.0 333.2 469.1 356.1 397.9 765.8 4.6 58.7 38.0 65.7
Q4 2,485.4 317.6 449.6 354.6 404.4 792.3 3.6 65.6 39.8 57.9
2020 Q1 2,420.3 316.7 453.0 364.0 382.4 733.3 4.4 68.5 38.4 59.5
    Life insurance
2017 Q3 1,177.5 207.6 193.6 220.6 38.4 472.5 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0
Q4 1,193.2 199.2 192.4 226.1 41.4 487.8 1.8 8.6 20.0 16.0
2018 Q1 1,187.6 212.5 198.8 206.7 43.1 481.8 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
Q2 1,195.2 215.3 201.6 200.5 46.3 487.9 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
Q3 1,194.1 199.7 201.6 209.0 47.3 493.9 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
Q4 1,185.2 194.5 200.1 208.5 50.4 484.7 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019 Q1 1,238.0 202.8 213.4 205.9 52.7 516.7 1.6 10.4 20.2 14.1
Q2 1,289.7 205.9 227.1 213.9 55.3 537.6 2.3 10.0 20.2 17.3
Q3 1,346.9 205.4 241.9 224.8 57.8 561.7 3.1 10.4 20.8 20.9
Q4 1,331.2 194.6 226.8 217.3 60.7 578.6 2.4 13.8 21.0 15.9
2020 Q1 1,287.4 190.1 229.3 220.5 61.7 533.7 2.2 13.9 20.0 16.0
    Non-life insurance
2017 Q3 603.1 111.9 106.2 93.0 58.6 162.9 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4
Q4 606.9 111.6 108.1 82.3 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.5 9.7 26.6
2018 Q1 623.2 120.2 112.7 75.1 72.1 167.0 0.3 34.6 9.8 31.5
Q2 621.6 120.1 115.7 72.9 72.9 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
Q3 617.9 116.3 116.1 72.8 73.7 168.9 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
Q4 616.2 113.8 117.4 73.7 73.8 167.4 0.2 33.5 10.8 25.6
2019 Q1 655.4 119.2 128.0 74.2 75.8 177.0 0.3 38.1 11.1 31.7
Q2 664.1 119.8 131.9 75.6 76.8 182.0 0.4 37.6 11.0 29.1
Q3 680.1 116.9 136.6 79.2 78.5 188.7 0.4 38.7 11.4 29.8
Q4 678.9 111.4 132.8 79.3 80.0 199.3 0.4 36.7 12.2 26.9
2020 Q1 670.1 110.9 134.1 79.9 78.5 186.3 0.3 38.6 12.1 29.4
    Reinsurance 3
2017 Q3 407.5 11.8 86.3 57.5 208.5 15.1 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9
Q4 412.6 10.3 86.5 45.9 224.0 17.6 0.7 8.3 4.7 14.7
2018 Q1 407.2 11.4 83.1 45.1 227.6 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
Q2 409.5 11.5 82.9 46.1 227.1 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
Q3 412.7 10.2 83.4 46.0 228.4 15.0 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019 Q1 450.5 10.2 90.5 49.5 253.1 14.0 0.7 10.8 5.8 15.9
Q2 451.9 11.2 90.3 49.0 256.1 14.4 0.8 10.3 5.8 13.9
Q3 462.0 10.9 90.7 52.1 261.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Q4 475.3 11.5 90.0 58.0 263.7 14.5 0.8 15.2 6.6 15.1
2020 Q1 462.8 15.7 89.7 63.6 242.2 13.3 1.9 16.0 6.3 14.1
Pension funds 4
2017 Q3 636.5 101.1 62.9 29.7 23.7 351.7 – 7.0 39.2 21.2
Q4 646.8 96.7 65.1 29.7 25.0 360.4 – 7.1 41.2 21.5
2018 Q1 650.6 94.6 64.8 30.1 25.5 365.2 – 7.4 41.7 21.4
Q2 657.5 95.0 64.6 30.7 26.6 369.4 – 7.6 42.2 21.5
Q3 663.5 92.3 64.5 30.8 27.1 376.6 – 7.9 42.9 21.5
Q4 669.4 91.7 65.2 31.2 27.3 380.1 – 8.1 43.9 21.8
2019 Q1 687.2 89.7 69.4 31.3 28.0 393.4 – 8.2 44.9 22.3
Q2 699.6 87.7 72.8 31.9 28.5 402.2 – 8.3 45.2 23.2
Q3 714.8 85.6 76.1 32.1 29.3 414.4 – 8.3 45.4 23.6
Q4 726.6 85.2 75.0 32.6 29.8 423.0 – 8.5 47.6 24.9
2020 Q1 708.8 81.4 72.4 32.4 29.6 410.8 – 8.6 48.3 25.3
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I super-
visory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  * Valuation of
listed securities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities data-
base. 1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered
bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including deposits retainedon assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and regis-
tered Pfandbriefe.  3 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insur-
ers, which is included there.  4 The term "pension funds" refers to the institutional sec-
tor "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise
company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed.
Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Insurance technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity TotalLife/
claims on
pension fund
reserves  2 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  5
Insurance corporations
2017 Q3 2,188.1 28.5 58.4 455.6 1,513.1 1,317.2 195.9 2.3 130.2 –
Q4 2,212.7 28.3 62.6 466.0 1,523.0 1,335.0 187.9 2.2 130.6 –
2018 Q1 2,218.0 28.0 61.9 460.2 1,539.4 1,333.8 205.6 1.5 127.0 –
Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 456.8 1,553.7 1,348.0 205.7 1.9 122.2 –
Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.3 1,545.4 1,344.1 201.4 2.0 122.4 –
Q4 2,213.5 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.3 1,332.4 197.9 1.6 124.6 –
2019 Q1 2,343.9 31.6 68.3 489.2 1,624.9 1,402.8 222.2 1.5 128.4 –
Q2 2,405.7 31.9 69.3 489.7 1,685.2 1,463.9 221.3 1.8 127.8 –
Q3 2,489.0 31.7 69.2 487.9 1,765.7 1,539.4 226.3 2.2 132.3 –
Q4 2,485.4 31.7 75.5 512.7 1,710.3 1,494.3 216.0 1.9 153.3 –
2020 Q1 2,420.3 31.8 82.2 463.8 1,714.7 1,475.7 239.0 2.4 125.5 –
    Life insurance
2017 Q3 1,177.5 4.1 12.3 121.5 994.0 994.0 – 1.1 44.5 –
Q4 1,193.2 4.1 12.8 121.9 1,007.5 1,007.5 – 1.1 45.8 –
2018 Q1 1,187.6 4.0 13.3 119.5 1,007.4 1,007.4 – 0.7 42.6 –
Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.3 1,017.4 1,017.4 – 0.8 40.6 –
Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.0 1,013.7 1,013.7 – 0.9 41.9 –
Q4 1,185.2 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.7 1,000.7 – 0.5 42.1 –
2019 Q1 1,238.0 4.1 14.3 120.8 1,057.5 1,057.5 – 0.4 40.9 –
Q2 1,289.7 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,106.5 1,106.5 – 0.4 42.4 –
Q3 1,346.9 3.7 15.4 116.0 1,168.6 1,168.6 – 0.6 42.6 –
Q4 1,331.2 3.6 18.5 127.7 1,124.9 1,124.9 – 0.5 56.0 –
2020 Q1 1,287.4 3.6 19.1 114.0 1,109.7 1,109.7 – 0.6 40.4 –
    Non-life insurance
2017 Q3 603.1 1.1 6.9 137.5 406.8 305.8 101.1 0.1 50.7 –
Q4 606.9 1.1 6.7 141.3 405.9 309.8 96.1 0.1 51.8 –
2018 Q1 623.2 1.1 7.7 141.4 423.0 311.1 111.9 0.0 50.0 –
Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 –
Q3 617.9 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 –
Q4 616.2 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.6 315.5 101.1 0.0 50.0 –
2019 Q1 655.4 1.1 9.3 144.6 449.5 329.5 120.0 0.0 50.9 –
Q2 664.1 1.1 8.8 146.1 459.8 341.8 118.0 0.1 48.3 –
Q3 680.1 1.2 9.0 147.8 471.9 354.7 117.2 0.1 50.1 –
Q4 678.9 1.2 9.6 150.4 458.3 349.7 108.6 0.1 59.3 –
2020 Q1 670.1 1.3 9.8 141.0 469.5 345.2 124.3 0.1 48.4 –
    Reinsurance 3
2017 Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.9 1.1 35.0 –
Q4 412.6 23.1 43.1 202.8 109.6 17.7 91.9 1.0 33.1 –
2018 Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 –
Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 –
Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 –
Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 –
2019 Q1 450.5 26.5 44.6 223.8 117.9 15.7 102.2 1.1 36.7 –
Q2 451.9 26.6 46.1 221.8 118.9 15.6 103.3 1.3 37.2 –
Q3 462.0 26.8 44.7 224.1 125.3 16.1 109.1 1.5 39.6 –
Q4 475.3 26.9 47.4 234.5 127.1 19.8 107.4 1.3 38.1 –
2020 Q1 462.8 26.9 53.3 208.8 135.4 20.8 114.6 1.7 36.7 –
Pension funds 4
2017 Q3 636.5 – 6.9 7.3 564.5 564.5 – – 2.5 55.3
Q4 646.8 – 7.1 7.6 574.3 574.3 – – 2.7 55.2
2018 Q1 650.6 – 7.3 7.7 580.2 580.2 – – 2.7 52.7
Q2 657.5 – 7.5 7.8 587.4 587.4 – – 2.8 52.0
Q3 663.5 – 7.7 7.8 593.4 593.4 – – 2.9 51.6
Q4 669.4 – 7.9 7.8 602.8 602.8 – – 3.2 47.6
2019 Q1 687.2 – 8.1 8.0 613.1 613.1 – – 3.3 54.8
Q2 699.6 – 8.1 8.0 618.2 618.2 – – 3.3 62.1
Q3 714.8 – 8.2 8.1 625.8 625.8 – – 3.3 69.4
Q4 726.6 – 8.4 8.2 639.7 639.7 – – 3.4 66.8
2020 Q1 708.8 – 8.6 8.3 639.7 639.7 – – 3.4 48.7
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I super-
visory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including de-
posits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Insurance technical reserves "life" taking account of tran-
sitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance" sector.3 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is in-
cluded there.  4 The term "pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension
funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company
pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social secu-
rity funds are not included.  5 Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and the
liability item "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2008 76,490 66,139 –45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . – 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 – 538 –114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 – 19,945
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 53,796 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 42,233 140,417 – 71,454 161,012 50,859 – 86,621
2018 61,984 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 45,354 99,011 – 24,417 67,328 56,100 – 37,028
2019 125,037 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 56,501 85,203 8,059 2,408 74,736 39,834
2019 Aug. 28,206 27,213 – 3,325 6,474 24,064 993 21,406 6,157 1,378 13,871 6,800
Sep. 3,145 – 1,029 – 722 170 – 477 4,174 6,521 – 35 – 1,888 8,444 – 3,375
Oct. – 37,327 –38,176 –17,186 3,290 –24,280 849 – 11,175 – 8,976 505 – 2,704 – 26,152
Nov. 45,338 38,355 13,461 6,468 18,426 6,983 28,913 5,649 7,457 15,807 16,425
Dec. – 29,741 –24,349 – 4,293 – 3,847 –16,209 – 5,392 – 2,131 – 12,043 2,062 7,850 – 27,610
2020 Jan. 40,861 29,951 4,293 10,672 14,987 10,910 7,512 3,447 2,985 1,080 33,349
Feb. 41,836 33,199 14,383 1,337 17,479 8,637 32,132 9,014 4,202 18,916 9,705
Mar. 2,160 3,798 – 4,596 – 5,516 13,910 – 1,638 – 10,935 17,837 4,747 – 33,519 13,095
Apr. 37,012 31,119 2,401 15,964 12,755 5,893 40,472 5,669 17,982 16,821 – 3,460
May 81,153 79,902 – 1,777 16,851 64,828 1,251 40,102 9,749 35,151 – 4,798 41,050
June 65,461 46,987 6,646 5,328 35,013 18,474 35,805 9,099 25,469 1,237 29,657
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2008 – 29,452 11,326 – 40,778 2,743 – 23,079 25,822 – 32,195
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 – 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 53,024 15,570 37,454 51,372 7,031 44,341 1,652
2018 58,446 16,188 42,258 84,528 – 11,184 95,712 – 26,082
2019 45,092 9,076 36,015 29,463 – 1,119 30,582 15,629
2019 Aug. 329 75 254 1,583 – 616 2,199 – 1,254
Sep. 5,330 124 5,206 4,469 – 1,145 5,614 861
Oct. 10,663 385 10,278 10,682 – 172 10,854 – 19
Nov. 4,230 236 3,994 4,445 1,801 2,644 – 215
Dec. 5,878 4,669 1,209 – 11,994 1,453 – 13,447 17,872
2020 Jan. 6,836 795 6,041 6,946 – 286 7,232 – 110
Feb. 2,975 416 2,559 1,000 – 947 1,947 1,975
Mar. – 2,200 566 – 2,766 5,605 – 7,442 13,047 – 7,805
Apr. 4,869 235 4,634 10,760 – 1,266 12,026 – 5,891
May 7,487 1,370 6,117 9,396 371 9,025 – 1,909
June 8,677 4,402 4,275 9,887 2,509 7,378 – 1,210
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,421
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
2019 Oct. 102,837 65,365 1,947 31 54,709 8,678 9,740 27,732
Nov. 111,203 65,111 4,053 1,080 48,790 11,188 11,524 34,568
Dec. 61,994 39,959 570 10 33,766 5,613 4,268 17,767
6 2020 Jan. 151,486 82,405 7,081 1,350 64,648 9,326 19,477 49,604
Feb. 124,109 69,386 3,219 200 56,112 9,855 10,143 44,580
Mar. 115,696 55,561 7,719 4,505 39,367 3,970 10,452 49,684
Apr. 175,116 69,399 4,405 4,750 51,309 8,936 23,003 82,713
May 170,970 56,055 9 125 48,088 7,833 28,199 86,715
June 166,866 71,305 6,736 1,750 53,696 9,123 18,489 77,072
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
2019 Oct. 27,395 10,263 1,381 31 6,522 2,329 7,450 9,682
Nov. 40,373 16,756 2,896 1,030 6,675 6,155 9,535 14,082
Dec. 16,946 9,899 540 10 6,824 2,525 2,729 4,317
6 2020 Jan. 50,576 27,474 7,032 1,250 13,813 5,379 8,300 14,802
Feb. 31,590 16,290 2,899 50 9,994 3,348 1,619 13,681
Mar. 30,174 13,703 3,859 1,905 5,833 2,106 865 15,607
Apr. 41,373 10,274 2,165 1,300 5,943 866 8,561 22,538
May 65,814 12,372 9 125 8,134 4,104 12,419 41,024
June 60,954 17,909 5,561 1,500 5,198 5,649 9,125 33,920
Net sales 5
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 – 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302
2009 76,441 – 75,554 858 – 80,646 25,579 – 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 – 87,646 – 3,754 – 63,368 28,296 – 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
2019 Oct. – 32,609 – 16,242 244 – 1,286 – 12,310 – 2,890 3,080 – 19,448
Nov. 42,328 15,455 3,670 118 10,420 1,247 6,544 20,329
Dec. – 30,172 – 9,922 – 1,605 – 816 – 4,406 – 3,096 – 2,804 – 17,445
6 2020 Jan. 19,138 3,753 3,260 135 – 4,112 4,470 10,748 4,638
Feb. 27,420 10,817 2,633 – 679 9,318 – 455 436 16,168
Mar. 10,873 2,608 5,741 3,137 – 134 – 6,136 – 4,187 12,452
Apr. 34,368 3,134 1,210 4,324 – 1,083 – 1,317 11,594 19,640
May 82,872 1,010 – 1,593 – 604 4,536 – 1,330 14,387 67,476
June 47,906 10,140 3,362 1,664 5,404 – 289 2,856 34,910
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification ofdebt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales less
redemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the
most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
2019 Oct. 3,137,216 1,217,378 172,123 48,410 690,311 306,535 338,585 1,581,253
Nov. 3,179,544 1,232,833 175,793 48,528 700,730 307,782 345,130 1,601,582
Dec. 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 Jan. 3,132,103 1,182,330 179,415 47,491 686,211 269,213 348,115 1,601,658
Feb. 3,160,234 1,193,470 182,045 46,835 695,862 268,727 348,656 1,618,108
Mar. 2 3,161,739 1,191,655 187,630 49,962 692,049 262,015 2 339,172 1,630,911
Apr. 3,204,248 1,200,654 188,949 54,307 696,203 261,194 351,258 1,652,335
May 3,282,783 1,199,035 189,074 57,391 693,994 258,576 365,185 1,718,563
June 2 3,328,101 2 1,205,256 192,323 59,050 697,627 2 256,256 368,003 1,754,841
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-June 2020
bis unter 2   1 087 315   440 255   52 266   14 094   290 047   83 848   72 276   574 784 
 2 bis unter 4    685 328   285 457   50 495   18 243   163 439   53 279   59 293   340 578 
 4 bis unter 6    478 576   205 283   37 025   11 626   111 570   45 063   57 105   216 188 
6 bis unter 8    338 296   132 682   26 732   7 467   64 956   33 527   36 637   168 976 
 8 bis unter 10    246 336   65 291   16 935   4 475   30 773   13 109   24 074   156 971 
 10 bis unter 15    141 083   33 363   6 124   2 189   12 564   12 486   32 312   75 409 
 15 bis unter 20    93 846   22 303   1 757    852   17 471   2 223   9 772   61 771 
 20 und darüber    257 320   20 622    989    104   6 808   12 721   76 534   160 164 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Increase due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the most recent date
are provisional. Revisions are not specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 – 428 – 608 – 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 – 3,741 – 1,269 – 974 927,256
2010 174,596 – 1,096 3,265 497 178 – 486 – 993 – 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,700 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,747 1,950,224
3 2019 Oct. 183,777 – 94 79 – 5 – 40 – 8 – 129 1,867,235
Nov. 183,514 – 265 41 – –– 156 – 10 – 141 1,927,816
4Dec. 183,461 – 83 284 1 20 – 11 – 8 – 368 1,950,224
2020 Jan. 183,341 – 120 27 – – –– 29 – 118 1,928,328
4Feb. 183,247 33 67 5 –– 1 – 1 – 37 1,746,035
Mar. 181,792 – 1,455 78 40 – – 12 – 1,584 1,475,909
Apr. 181,785 – 4 77 – –– 22 – 1 – 58 1,657,055
May 181,471 – 314 163 87 26 – 576 – 1 – 12 1,741,382
June 180,095 – 1,376 136 4 1 – 1,112 – 350 – 56 1,788,641
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 2.9 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 Feb. – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.1 0.1 1.8 146.02 114.54 516.08 11,890.35
Mar. – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.6 – 0.5 0.1 0.3 3.5 145.13 113.12 429.84 9,935.84
Apr. – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.5 0.3 0.4 3.7 144.99 114.35 471.38 10,861.64
May – 0.1 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 0.1 0.2 2.0 144.54 112.80 502.26 11,586.85
June – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.0 0.1 1.6 145.24 113.18 525.07 12,310.93
July – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 0.0 1.3 145.85 113.27 522.53 12,313.36
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2008 2,598 –7,911 –14,409 –12,171 –11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 –16,625 –9,252 27,940 19,761 –8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 –5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 –14,995 –8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,484 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,562 156,002 4,938 1,048 151,064 57,514 –2,520
2018 131,958 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,263 138,254 2,979 –2,306 135,275 30,569 –6,298
2019 175,476 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 52,930 180,439 2,719 – 812 177,720 53,742 –4,961
2019 Dec. 44,876 33,056 1,942 – 98 947 949 31,114 11,820 44,061 844 79 43,217 11,741 815
2020 Jan. 23,827 14,294 2,855 – 54 1,019 1,965 11,439 9,533 24,366 2,972 633 21,394 8,900 – 539
Feb. 16,612 13,164 1,205 83 271 1,303 11,959 3,449 16,643 773 276 15,870 3,173 – 31
Mar. –22,365 4,783 –5,255 699 –5,862 673 10,038 –27,148 –22,138 –3,270 –2,578 –18,868 –24,570 – 228
Apr. 3,766 –1,760 2,799 – 166 2,318 294 –4,558 5,526 3,539 – 656 – 387 4,195 5,913 227
May 9,255 3,378 2,921 – 156 2,471 380 457 5,877 9,666 143 – 164 9,523 6,041 – 411
June 9,936 7,065 1,789 – 181 1,634 471 5,276 2,871 9,547 –2,048 15 11,595 2,856 389
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
August 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2018 2019 2020 
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 46.39 21.80 25.89 29.59 − 18.76 − 9.14 37.45 16.34 0.21
Debt securities − 7.53 5.24 − 2.18 2.49 0.60 − 1.26 − 0.59 − 0.94 − 0.17
Short-term debt securities − 2.97 1.42 − 1.31 0.87 − 0.08 − 1.26 0.33 − 0.31 − 0.22
Long-term debt securities − 4.55 3.82 − 0.87 1.61 0.68 − 0.00 − 0.92 − 0.63 0.05
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 3.64 0.65 − 0.47 0.47 0.54 − 0.24 − 0.46 − 0.31 0.02
Non-financial corporations − 0.61 0.59 0.51 0.39 0.70 − 0.25 0.31 − 0.25 − 0.04Financial corporations − 0.52 1.40 − 0.56 0.70 − 0.11 0.08 − 0.71 0.18 − 0.08General government − 2.50 − 1.34 − 0.41 − 0.62 − 0.05 − 0.07 − 0.05 − 0.24 0.15
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.88 4.60 − 1.71 2.02 0.06 − 1.02 − 0.13 − 0.63 − 0.19
Loans 56.22 − 25.67 2.23 − 13.00 12.13 − 6.79 − 7.51 4.40 − 1.00
Short-term loans 27.83 − 0.14 7.85 1.55 14.89 − 7.92 − 5.41 6.29 − 1.34
Long-term loans 28.39 − 25.53 − 5.63 − 14.55 − 2.76 1.13 − 2.11 − 1.89 0.34
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 24.05 − 10.63 − 8.98 − 5.45 0.87 − 5.70 − 7.01 2.86 − 1.17
Non-financial corporations 15.23 − 10.03 − 8.19 − 5.60 0.94 − 6.71 − 8.09 5.67 − 1.29Financial corporations 8.42 − 0.97 − 1.03 0.05 − 0.13 0.96 1.01 − 2.87 0.11General government 0.40 0.36 0.24 0.09 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.00
Loans to the rest of the world 32.17 − 15.03 11.21 − 7.55 11.26 − 1.09 − 0.50 1.54 0.17
Equity and investment fund shares 72.73 125.23 57.62 10.37 14.47 10.71 33.85 − 1.41 50.64
Equity 64.64 123.22 48.61 13.25 11.90 9.02 30.64 − 2.96 49.77
Listed shares of domestic sectors − 3.82 18.82 6.18 1.12 1.82 − 3.35 15.19 − 7.49 − 1.51
Non-financial corporations − 3.76 18.27 4.62 0.91 1.84 − 3.32 15.24 − 9.14 − 1.32Financial corporations − 0.06 0.55 1.55 0.21 − 0.02 − 0.03 − 0.05 1.65 − 0.19
Listed shares of the rest of the world 7.62 0.68 4.94 0.00 0.34 1.17 2.68 0.75 0.99
Other equity  
1 60.84 103.72 37.49 12.12 9.74 11.20 12.77 3.79 50.28
Investment fund shares 8.09 2.01 9.01 − 2.88 2.57 1.69 3.21 1.55 0.87
Money market fund shares − 0.85 − 0.53 1.82 0.27 − 0.03 0.23 − 0.03 1.66 − 1.80Non-MMF investment fund shares 8.94 2.54 7.19 − 3.15 2.60 1.46 3.24 − 0.11 2.67
Insurance technical reserves 1.56 0.38 1.65 − 0.51 0.49 0.44 0.38 0.33 0.32Financial derivatives − 11.32 2.15 0.79 7.33 1.08 − 7.31 − 3.68 10.70 − 1.16Other accounts receivable 163.48 9.31 − 51.99 − 33.75 26.60 − 37.74 − 3.36 − 37.49 − 5.20
Total 321.54 138.44 34.00 2.50 36.62 − 51.09 56.55 − 8.07 43.64
External financing
Debt securities 8.56 7.08 19.19 1.03 5.77 5.87 5.00 2.55 5.78
Short-term securities 0.60 4.08 2.74 − 0.32 1.23 1.75 0.46 − 0.70 1.60
Long-term securities 7.95 3.00 16.45 1.35 4.54 4.12 4.54 3.25 4.18
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 7.09 3.87 7.01 0.67 4.04 0.17 2.66 0.14 1.38
Non-financial corporations − 0.61 0.59 0.51 0.39 0.70 − 0.25 0.31 − 0.25 − 0.04Financial corporations 9.16 3.28 5.69 0.24 2.45 0.91 2.37 − 0.02 1.89General government 0.01 0.01 0.47 0.00 0.69 − 0.61 − 0.04 0.42 − 0.10Households − 1.47 − 0.01 0.34 0.04 0.20 0.12 0.03 − 0.01 − 0.37
Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.46 3.21 12.18 0.36 1.73 5.70 2.34 2.41 4.40
Loans 100.21 127.59 76.59 9.38 23.71 38.00 11.27 3.61 24.38
Short-term loans 23.28 60.32 19.58 − 4.00 17.08 17.25 − 7.11 − 7.65 4.63
Long-term loans 76.93 67.28 57.01 13.38 6.63 20.75 18.38 11.26 19.75
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 52.30 72.34 49.81 − 0.71 20.69 17.35 − 6.08 17.85 7.57
Non-financial corporations 15.23 − 10.03 − 8.19 − 5.60 0.94 − 6.71 − 8.09 5.67 − 1.29Financial corporations 37.80 81.04 55.62 5.43 23.29 23.22 2.09 7.03 13.37General government − 0.73 1.33 2.38 − 0.54 − 3.54 0.85 − 0.08 5.15 − 4.51
Loans from the rest of the world 47.91 55.25 26.78 10.09 3.02 20.64 17.35 − 14.24 16.81
Equity 33.18 20.63 17.97 3.83 5.12 4.19 3.82 4.83 6.51
Listed shares of domestic sectors 8.46 73.23 − 24.47 43.51 4.47 − 34.72 15.17 − 9.39 7.22
Non-financial corporations − 3.76 18.27 4.62 0.91 1.84 − 3.32 15.24 − 9.14 − 1.32Financial corporations 11.11 46.75 − 33.11 43.18 − 0.26 − 32.78 − 0.68 0.60 1.64General government 0.51 0.53 − 0.01 0.13 − 0.04 0.04 0.04 − 0.05 0.20Households 0.60 7.67 4.03 − 0.71 2.93 1.33 0.57 − 0.80 6.69
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 4.12 − 31.96 − 1.61 − 42.01 − 4.23 2.75 − 14.41 14.28 − 5.97
Other equity  
1 28.84 − 20.65 44.05 2.33 4.88 36.17 3.06 − 0.06 5.26
Insurance technical reserves 6.89 6.04 6.04 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 1.35 − 0.49 − 1.38 − 0.36 1.19 − 2.06 2.69 − 3.21 1.94
Other accounts payable 60.05 22.64 8.44 − 16.56 12.84 − 17.91 16.45 − 2.93 − 9.71
Total 210.23 183.48 126.85 − 1.17 50.15 29.59 40.74 6.36 30.41
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
August 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2018 2019 2020 
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 550.8 560.2 556.8 560.2 528.2 508.7 558.4 556.8 577.2
Debt securities 47.0 50.8 49.6 50.8 52.2 51.3 51.1 49.6 47.9
Short-term debt securities 3.5 4.9 3.7 4.9 4.8 3.6 3.9 3.7 3.4
Long-term debt securities 43.5 45.9 45.9 45.9 47.3 47.7 47.1 45.9 44.4
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.1 21.3 21.1 21.3 22.2 22.1 21.7 21.1 20.4
Non-financial corporations 4.0 4.5 5.0 4.5 5.2 5.0 5.3 5.0 4.6Financial corporations 12.7 13.8 13.6 13.8 14.0 14.2 13.6 13.6 13.0General government 4.4 3.0 2.6 3.0 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.6 2.7
Debt securities of the rest of the world 25.8 29.5 28.4 29.5 30.0 29.2 29.3 28.4 27.5
Loans 620.9 591.4 595.3 591.4 605.1 597.4 591.8 595.3 593.9
Short-term loans 495.1 491.1 499.9 491.1 506.7 498.4 494.1 499.9 498.2
Long-term loans 125.8 100.3 95.4 100.3 98.3 99.0 97.8 95.4 95.7
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 402.1 391.5 382.5 391.5 392.4 386.7 379.7 382.5 381.4
Non-financial corporations 297.8 287.8 279.6 287.8 288.7 282.0 273.9 279.6 278.3Financial corporations 97.6 96.7 95.6 96.7 96.5 97.5 98.5 95.6 95.8General government 6.7 7.1 7.3 7.1 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.3 7.3
Loans to the rest of the world 218.8 199.9 212.8 199.9 212.7 210.7 212.2 212.8 212.6
Equity and investment fund shares 2,140.3 2,090.9 2,317.8 2,090.9 2,189.6 2,198.3 2,232.1 2,317.8 2,103.3
Equity 1,968.7 1,924.5 2,127.8 1,924.5 2,013.4 2,017.8 2,045.5 2,127.8 1,927.2
Listed shares of domestic sectors 332.2 302.6 342.0 302.6 318.3 319.7 328.8 342.0 288.4
Non-financial corporations 325.3 296.0 332.9 296.0 311.3 312.1 321.4 332.9 281.4Financial corporations 6.8 6.6 9.0 6.6 7.0 7.7 7.3 9.0 7.0
Listed shares of the rest of the world 49.0 45.3 55.3 45.3 49.0 50.3 52.1 55.3 50.1
Other equity  
1 1,587.5 1,576.6 1,730.6 1,576.6 1,646.1 1,647.8 1,664.6 1,730.6 1,588.7
Investment fund shares 171.7 166.4 190.0 166.4 176.3 180.6 186.6 190.0 176.1
Money market fund shares 1.6 1.0 3.2 1.0 1.0 1.2 1.2 3.2 1.4Non-MMF investment fund shares 170.1 165.4 186.8 165.4 175.3 179.3 185.4 186.8 174.7
Insurance technical reserves 54.2 56.3 59.2 56.3 57.0 57.7 58.4 59.2 59.9Financial derivatives 34.1 33.4 31.5 33.4 31.4 32.6 32.1 31.5 44.9Other accounts receivable 1,122.5 1,153.2 1,229.4 1,153.2 1,198.6 1,178.9 1,203.4 1,229.4 1,178.9
Total 4,570.0 4,536.2 4,839.6 4,536.2 4,662.0 4,624.9 4,727.3 4,839.6 4,606.0
Liabilities
Debt securities 210.6 187.8 214.0 187.8 196.4 205.6 217.0 214.0 229.3
Short-term securities 3.4 6.1 8.8 6.1 7.4 9.1 9.5 8.8 14.0
Long-term securities 207.2 181.6 205.2 181.6 189.1 196.5 207.4 205.2 215.2
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 83.1 79.3 88.2 79.3 85.6 86.1 88.8 88.2 84.7
Non-financial corporations 4.0 4.5 5.0 4.5 5.2 5.0 5.3 5.0 4.6Financial corporations 64.4 60.7 68.3 60.7 65.2 66.4 68.9 68.3 66.8General government 0.1 0.1 0.6 0.1 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.6 0.5Households 14.5 14.0 14.4 14.0 14.4 14.5 14.5 14.4 12.8
Debt securities of the rest of the world 127.4 108.5 125.8 108.5 110.8 119.5 128.1 125.8 144.6
Loans 1,638.9 1,759.0 1,838.0 1,759.0 1,786.0 1,821.3 1,836.1 1,838.0 1,862.7
Short-term loans 654.6 714.2 736.8 714.2 734.0 750.1 744.9 736.8 741.4
Long-term loans 984.3 1,044.8 1,101.2 1,044.8 1,052.0 1,071.2 1,091.2 1,101.2 1,121.3
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 1,233.0 1,290.5 1,339.4 1,290.5 1,311.8 1,328.1 1,322.5 1,339.4 1,347.1
Non-financial corporations 297.8 287.8 279.6 287.8 288.7 282.0 273.9 279.6 278.3Financial corporations 876.9 944.2 998.7 944.2 967.9 990.0 992.5 998.7 1,011.6General government 58.3 58.6 61.1 58.6 55.2 56.1 56.1 61.1 57.2
Loans from the rest of the world 405.8 468.4 498.6 468.4 474.1 493.2 513.6 498.6 515.6
Equity 3,078.3 2,707.0 3,108.1 2,707.0 2,806.1 2,894.0 2,900.3 3,108.1 2,579.1
Listed shares of domestic sectors 721.3 659.3 733.3 659.3 704.8 682.4 692.4 733.3 595.2
Non-financial corporations 325.3 296.0 332.9 296.0 311.3 312.1 321.4 332.9 281.4Financial corporations 149.6 161.9 157.4 161.9 173.7 145.9 145.7 157.4 126.2General government 46.0 41.6 51.8 41.6 44.3 45.0 47.9 51.8 41.8Households 200.4 159.8 191.1 159.8 175.5 179.5 177.4 191.1 145.7
Listed shares of the rest of the world 960.5 764.8 959.3 764.8 788.8 859.9 857.6 959.3 689.2
Other equity  
1 1,396.5 1,282.9 1,415.5 1,282.9 1,312.5 1,351.6 1,350.2 1,415.5 1,294.7
Insurance technical reserves 263.7 269.7 275.8 269.7 271.2 272.7 274.2 275.8 277.3Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 63.1 65.3 77.1 65.3 69.6 83.9 92.6 77.1 97.6
Other accounts payable 1,114.5 1,162.2 1,286.1 1,162.2 1,186.7 1,182.3 1,238.7 1,286.1 1,240.0
Total 6,369.0 6,151.0 6,799.1 6,151.0 6,315.9 6,459.8 6,558.9 6,799.1 6,285.9
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
August 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
    
  € billion
2018 2019 2020 
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 107.93 138.02 140.17 54.42 24.80 42.34 23.63 49.41 24.14
Currency 21.42 29.98 33.17 10.05 3.80 8.50 10.34 10.52 19.55
Deposits 86.51 108.04 107.01 44.37 21.00 33.83 13.29 38.89 4.59
Transferable deposits 99.78 109.88 111.01 42.22 17.18 34.39 17.27 42.16 18.74Time deposits − 4.03 6.79 1.47 2.23 1.86 − 0.79 − 0.30 0.70 − 3.11Savings deposits(including savings certificates) − 9.24 − 8.63 − 5.47 − 0.08 1.95 0.23 − 3.68 − 3.97 − 11.04
Debt securities − 8.39 1.62 − 1.85 0.55 0.51 0.60 − 1.35 − 1.62 − 1.36
Short-term debt securities − 0.20 − 0.13 − 0.53 0.26 − 0.23 − 0.13 − 0.19 0.02 − 0.03
Long-term debt securities − 8.19 1.74 − 1.33 0.29 0.73 0.73 − 1.16 − 1.63 − 1.33
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 5.11 2.24 − 2.93 0.96 0.69 0.28 − 1.52 − 2.38 − 0.15
Non-financial corporations − 1.45 − 0.10 0.21 0.19 0.21 0.08 − 0.04 − 0.04 − 0.31Financial corporations − 2.68 2.81 − 2.22 0.80 0.57 0.27 − 1.31 − 1.75 − 0.37General government − 0.99 − 0.46 − 0.92 − 0.02 − 0.09 − 0.07 − 0.18 − 0.58 0.53
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 3.27 − 0.62 1.07 − 0.41 − 0.18 0.32 0.18 0.76 − 1.21
Equity and investment fund shares 55.17 38.44 49.91 1.15 10.72 10.90 11.96 16.33 20.87
Equity 14.88 18.84 18.94 1.62 6.83 4.29 4.40 3.43 13.77
Listed shares of domestic sectors 0.85 9.44 6.61 − 0.06 4.31 1.43 1.11 − 0.24 8.11
Non-financial corporations 0.49 6.28 3.52 − 0.77 2.52 1.31 0.88 − 1.19 6.50Financial corporations 0.36 3.16 3.09 0.71 1.79 0.12 0.23 0.95 1.62
Listed shares of the rest of the world 9.87 4.37 7.46 0.91 0.97 1.72 2.19 2.58 3.10
Other equity  
1 4.16 5.03 4.86 0.77 1.55 1.13 1.10 1.08 2.55
Investment fund shares 40.29 19.60 30.97 − 0.47 3.89 6.61 7.57 12.91 7.10
Money market fund shares − 0.30 − 0.22 − 0.25 0.17 − 0.12 − 0.01 0.18 − 0.30 0.30Non-MMF investment fund shares 40.59 19.82 31.23 − 0.65 4.01 6.62 7.39 13.20 6.80
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 20.23 15.80 13.55 6.25 3.36 3.41 3.41 3.37 3.04
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 37.42 28.18 24.91 6.99 8.71 7.04 5.18 3.98 8.38
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 35.52 29.79 29.80 4.52 6.81 5.79 6.75 10.45 11.57
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  
2 − 25.91 − 2.90 11.50 − 15.54 28.64 − 4.79 9.93 − 22.28 23.44
Total 221.96 248.95 267.98 58.35 83.55 65.29 59.51 59.64 90.08
  External financing
Loans 55.38 68.30 80.92 15.07 15.83 23.78 24.79 16.51 12.77
Short-term loans − 2.19 2.44 0.92 0.53 0.47 0.87 − 0.62 0.20 − 1.58
Long-term loans 57.57 65.86 79.99 14.54 15.36 22.91 25.41 16.31 14.35
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 47.24 57.31 66.93 13.12 9.03 16.57 21.61 19.72 15.34Consumer loans 11.25 11.14 14.42 2.67 6.15 6.56 3.67 − 1.96 − 2.67Entrepreneurial loans − 3.11 − 0.14 − 0.43 − 0.73 0.65 0.66 − 0.49 − 1.25 0.10
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 49.99 61.72 73.41 13.67 12.51 21.22 21.09 18.60 15.52Loans from other financial institutions 5.40 6.58 7.50 1.40 3.32 2.56 3.71 − 2.09 − 2.75Loans from general government and restof the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable 0.66 − 0.18 0.69 − 0.35 0.51 0.10 0.20 − 0.11 − 0.13
Total 56.04 68.13 81.61 14.71 16.34 23.88 24.99 16.40 12.65
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
August 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2018 2019 2020 
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,317.5 2,457.2 2,597.4 2,457.2 2,482.0 2,524.3 2,548.0 2,597.4 2,621.5
Currency 197.1 227.1 260.2 227.1 230.9 239.4 249.7 260.2 279.8
Deposits 2,120.3 2,230.1 2,337.1 2,230.1 2,251.1 2,285.0 2,298.3 2,337.1 2,341.7
Transferable deposits 1,288.4 1,398.0 1,509.1 1,398.0 1,415.2 1,449.6 1,466.9 1,509.1 1,527.8Time deposits 245.4 252.4 253.9 252.4 254.3 253.5 253.2 253.9 250.8Savings deposits(including savings certificates) 586.5 579.7 574.2 579.7 581.6 581.9 578.2 574.2 563.2
Debt securities 122.5 117.6 121.4 117.6 121.2 123.1 122.5 121.4 109.0
Short-term debt securities 2.5 2.1 1.6 2.1 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.6 1.5
Long-term debt securities 120.0 115.4 119.7 115.4 119.3 121.3 120.9 119.7 107.5
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 82.9 80.2 81.4 80.2 83.3 84.5 83.4 81.4 72.3
Non-financial corporations 12.6 12.1 12.4 12.1 12.5 12.6 12.5 12.4 11.0Financial corporations 66.4 64.6 66.5 64.6 67.4 68.6 67.7 66.5 58.2General government 3.9 3.4 2.5 3.4 3.4 3.3 3.2 2.5 3.1
Debt securities of the rest of the world 39.6 37.4 39.9 37.4 37.9 38.6 39.2 39.9 36.8
Equity and investment fund shares 1,241.5 1,162.6 1,383.2 1,162.6 1,255.4 1,292.4 1,322.0 1,383.2 1,220.3
Equity 645.5 589.2 703.2 589.2 640.7 661.1 672.1 703.2 616.3
Listed shares of domestic sectors 227.9 184.1 223.7 184.1 203.7 210.1 209.3 223.7 171.7
Non-financial corporations 191.5 151.9 182.1 151.9 166.9 171.0 169.3 182.1 138.7Financial corporations 36.4 32.2 41.6 32.2 36.8 39.1 40.0 41.6 33.0
Listed shares of the rest of the world 103.1 100.1 135.8 100.1 116.4 120.0 126.1 135.8 117.0
Other equity  
1 314.5 305.0 343.7 305.0 320.6 331.0 336.7 343.7 327.6
Investment fund shares 595.9 573.4 680.0 573.4 614.7 631.2 650.0 680.0 604.0
Money market fund shares 2.7 2.4 2.2 2.4 2.2 2.3 2.5 2.2 2.5Non-MMF investment fund shares 593.2 571.1 677.8 571.1 612.5 628.9 647.5 677.8 601.5
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 360.1 375.9 389.4 375.9 379.3 382.7 386.1 389.4 392.5
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 991.4 1,011.1 1,036.8 1,011.1 1,020.0 1,027.2 1,032.6 1,036.8 1,045.6
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 846.5 875.4 905.2 875.4 882.2 888.0 894.8 905.2 916.8
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 31.1 29.6 32.0 29.6 30.6 31.5 32.3 32.0 31.4
Total 5,910.5 6,029.4 6,465.4 6,029.4 6,170.8 6,269.2 6,338.3 6,465.4 6,337.2
  Liabilities
Loans 1,711.8 1,775.5 1,857.4 1,775.5 1,791.2 1,816.1 1,840.9 1,857.4 1,870.3
Short-term loans 54.4 58.1 58.8 58.1 58.5 59.4 58.8 58.8 57.2
Long-term loans 1,657.3 1,717.4 1,798.7 1,717.4 1,732.7 1,756.7 1,782.1 1,798.7 1,813.1
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 1,247.3 1,307.8 1,378.3 1,307.8 1,316.7 1,337.2 1,358.8 1,378.3 1,393.7Consumer loans 211.8 218.1 231.4 218.1 224.1 229.7 233.3 231.4 228.8Entrepreneurial loans 252.7 249.7 247.7 249.7 250.4 249.2 248.8 247.7 247.8
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,610.0 1,667.2 1,741.6 1,667.2 1,679.6 1,701.8 1,722.9 1,741.6 1,757.2Loans from other financial institutions 101.8 108.4 115.9 108.4 111.7 114.2 117.9 115.9 113.1Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 17.2 17.2 18.2 17.2 19.0 19.1 19.5 18.2 19.5
Total 1,728.9 1,792.7 1,875.7 1,792.7 1,810.3 1,835.2 1,860.3 1,875.7 1,889.8
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
August 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2013 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 2.5 + 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014 + 17.0 + 15.5 + 2.0 − 3.9 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 + 28.6 + 16.6 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 37.1 + 13.6 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 8.6 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 40.3 + 8.1 + 11.3 + 9.9 + 11.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
2018 p + 62.4 + 20.1 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 15.9 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
2019 pe + 50.4 + 20.1 + 16.4 + 4.7 + 9.2 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3
2018         H1  p + 51.7 + 18.7 + 15.8 + 8.0 + 9.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.6
         H2  p + 10.7 + 1.4 − 3.0 + 5.7 + 6.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2019         H1  pe + 45.3 + 17.6 + 13.2 + 6.3 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  pe + 5.1 + 2.4 + 3.1 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2013 2,213.0 1,390.1 663.6 175.4 1.3 78.7 49.4 23.6 6.2 0.0
2014 2,215.2 1,396.1 657.8 177.8 1.4 75.7 47.7 22.5 6.1 0.0
2015 2,185.1 1,372.2 654.7 177.7 1.4 72.1 45.3 21.6 5.9 0.0
2016 p 2,169.0 1,366.4 637.7 179.2 1.1 69.2 43.6 20.3 5.7 0.0
2017 p 2,118.7 1,350.9 610.2 175.9 0.8 65.3 41.6 18.8 5.4 0.0
2018 p 2,068.6 1,323.5 595.7 167.6 0.7 61.9 39.6 17.8 5.0 0.0
2019 p 2,053.0 1,299.9 606.7 165.2 0.7 59.8 37.8 17.7 4.8 0.0
2018         Q1  p 2,095.5 1,338.3 599.5 174.7 1.0 64.1 40.9 18.3 5.3 0.0
         Q2  p 2,080.9 1,330.0 595.9 173.2 0.9 63.0 40.3 18.0 5.2 0.0
         Q3  p 2,081.0 1,336.2 594.9 167.9 0.8 62.7 40.2 17.9 5.1 0.0
         Q4  p 2,068.6 1,323.5 595.7 167.6 0.7 61.9 39.6 17.8 5.0 0.0
2019         Q1  p 2,078.0 1,325.0 606.1 166.5 0.7 61.7 39.3 18.0 4.9 0.0
         Q2  p 2,069.1 1,321.0 604.7 165.3 0.7 61.1 39.0 17.9 4.9 0.0
         Q3  p 2,086.6 1,328.5 615.3 164.9 0.6 61.1 38.9 18.0 4.8 0.0
         Q4  p 2,053.0 1,299.9 606.7 165.2 0.7 59.8 37.8 17.7 4.8 0.0
2020         Q1  p 2,107.4 1,327.8 629.0 166.6 0.8 61.3 38.6 18.3 4.8 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2013 1,264.7 650.9 465.4 148.4 1,263.5 666.6 220.5 141.8 61.0 51.5 122.2 + 1.1 1,120.6
2014 1,313.9 673.0 482.3 158.5 1,296.9 691.3 227.5 147.1 60.5 47.1 123.4 + 17.0 1,160.0
2015 1,363.1 704.2 501.2 157.7 1,334.5 722.0 233.0 149.7 64.6 42.7 122.5 + 28.6 1,212.4
2016 p 1,425.6 738.6 524.3 162.7 1,388.5 754.3 240.7 158.6 68.2 37.8 128.9 + 37.1 1,269.8
2017 p 1,481.7 772.7 549.5 159.6 1,441.4 784.8 250.0 162.9 71.9 34.3 137.5 + 40.3 1,328.9
2018 p 1,552.9 807.7 572.5 172.7 1,490.5 806.1 259.3 169.4 78.4 31.7 145.7 + 62.4 1,387.3
2019 pe 1,608.5 833.6 597.6 177.4 1,558.1 845.6 271.4 178.9 85.5 27.6 149.0 + 50.4 1,438.3
As a percentage of GDP
2013 45.0 23.2 16.6 5.3 44.9 23.7 7.8 5.0 2.2 1.8 4.3 + 0.0 39.9
2014 44.9 23.0 16.5 5.4 44.3 23.6 7.8 5.0 2.1 1.6 4.2 + 0.6 39.6
2015 45.0 23.2 16.5 5.2 44.0 23.8 7.7 4.9 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 0.9 40.0
2016 p 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.3 24.1 7.7 5.1 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.5
2017 p 45.7 23.8 16.9 4.9 44.4 24.2 7.7 5.0 2.2 1.1 4.2 + 1.2 41.0
2018 p 46.4 24.2 17.1 5.2 44.6 24.1 7.8 5.1 2.3 0.9 4.4 + 1.9 41.5
2019 pe 46.8 24.3 17.4 5.2 45.4 24.6 7.9 5.2 2.5 0.8 4.3 + 1.5 41.9
Percentage growth rates
2013 + 2.5 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 1.0 − 18.9 + 7.9 . + 2.7
2014 + 3.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.8 − 8.4 + 1.0 . + 3.5
2015 + 3.7 + 4.6 + 3.9 − 0.5 + 2.9 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 6.7 − 9.4 − 0.7 . + 4.5
2016 p + 4.6 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 3.1 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.0 + 5.5 − 11.6 + 5.3 . + 4.7
2017 p + 3.9 + 4.6 + 4.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 2.7 + 5.4 − 9.3 + 6.7 . + 4.7
2018 p + 4.8 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 8.2 + 3.4 + 2.7 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 9.0 − 7.4 + 5.9 . + 4.4
2019 pe + 3.6 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 4.9 + 4.7 + 5.6 + 9.2 − 13.0 + 2.3 . + 3.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
August 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.4 799.4 11.2 975.3 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 35.0 684.7 676.0 + 8.6 1,573.8 1,530.1 + 43.7
2017         Q1  p 216.0 180.4 0.9 199.6 62.9 80.3 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 16.4 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 338.0 326.4 + 11.6
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.6 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.7 + 13.4
         Q3  p 219.6 180.4 3.5 215.9 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 3.8 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 346.1 343.2 + 2.8
         Q4  p 243.8 196.3 2.1 244.4 69.8 84.7 6.9 19.2 4.1 − 0.6 168.2 158.0 + 10.2 383.4 373.8 + 9.6
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
         Q4  p 255.2 203.9 2.2 262.1 73.1 89.7 6.2 20.3 9.6 − 6.9 174.6 163.4 + 11.2 400.7 396.4 + 4.3
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 230.4 71.0 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 10.5 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 366.8 + 7.5
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 233.4 67.5 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 22.8 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 371.9 + 24.3
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
         Q4  p 269.3 210.6 3.2 272.1 76.1 87.5 5.1 22.5 7.7 − 2.8 181.9 172.6 + 9.3 420.9 414.4 + 6.5
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.4 2.5 239.1 75.6 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 5.7 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 381.7 − 1.7
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.3 419.5 + 17.9 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2017         Q1  p 88.2 82.9 + 5.3 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.0 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
         Q3  p 88.6 93.6 − 5.0 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
         Q4  p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.7 109.2 − 4.5 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 113.4 118.5 − 5.1 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 99.4 + 6.2 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 97.5 + 8.5 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 115.6 118.2 − 2.6 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 102.4 + 3.2 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
August 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,3682018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,7752019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2018         Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
         Q2 194,715 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 29,064 − 540 6,592         Q3 189,015 161,683 84,952 69,414 7,317 27,579 − 248 7,579         Q4 203,128 177,157 92,363 76,459 8,335 35,492 − 9,521 6,206
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 202,383 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 29,784 + 37 6,179         Q3 193,918 166,676 86,117 72,677 7,882 27,569 − 327 7,402         Q4 210,062 182,556 98,381 78,809 5,365 37,733 − 10,227 6,146
2020         Q1 198,351 168,099 83,086 75,420 9,593 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 ... 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 ... ... 6,922
2019         June . 74,879 39,147 33,117 2,615 . . 2,060
2020         June . 60,105 32,457 27,069 580 . . 2,307
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,1412018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,5712019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2018         Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
         Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912         Q3 173,202 78,105 50,368 12,683 7,192 7,862 59,169 43,951 15,218 2,315 26,424 5,797 1,391 11,519         Q4 190,161 86,001 58,409 15,204 7,513 4,876 60,581 44,994 15,587 4,257 31,936 6,109 1,276 13,004
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770         Q3 179,020 81,267 53,668 13,614 7,607 6,379 61,057 45,976 15,081 2,221 26,654 6,485 1,336 12,344         Q4 196,300 89,619 60,632 16,575 7,128 5,284 62,696 47,175 15,520 3,660 32,301 6,746 1,279 13,745
2020         Q1 181,350 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,114 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175
2019         June 80,665 48,733 19,498 14,250 8,166 6,819 19,906 14,946 4,960 1 9,678 1,848 499 5,786
2020         June 65,343 38,170 18,083 12,345 5,054 2,688 16,334 12,402 3,932 − 2 8,331 2,154 357 5,238
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2019: 48.9:47.7:3.4. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2019: 24.0:76.0. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
August 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,377
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
         Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 18,827 14,548 3,853         Q3 10,423 4,353 3,886 2,752 2,128 1,677 531 674 3,592 1,463 464 278 18,128 13,764 3,919         Q4 15,436 4,860 4,543 2,197 1,956 1,650 545 749 3,645 1,752 481 231 17,224 13,713 3,140
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 17,959 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 19,163 14,869 3,881         Q3 10,519 4,624 3,667 2,770 2,251 1,639 515 668 3,923 1,824 474 264 17,118 12,659 4,019         Q4 15,379 5,086 4,507 2,281 2,035 1,745 538 730 4,223 1,798 488 237 17,422 13,861 3,190
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 ... ... ...
2019         June 3,589 2,723 904 712 766 588 178 217 1,100 513 148 87 . . .
2020         June 2,663 2,202 1,106 713 782 611 156 98 1,199 742 148 65 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,250
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115         Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
August 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −         Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,0412018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,6542019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298         Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415         Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
August 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 4,778 12,957 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 
p 47,244 46,528 43,951 4,978 13,042 11,737 2,358 1,769 + 3,293
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400         Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999         Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,202 3,251 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,229 3,251 2,835 561 384 − 510
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 1,198 3,232 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 1,205 3,237 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 1,288 3,277 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 1,288 3,296 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 1,288 3,280 3,067 633 489 + 249
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,213,009 12,438 662,788 190,555 43,616 1,303,612
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,215,168 12,774 634,589 190,130 44,576 1,333,098
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,185,113 85,952 621,988 186,661 44,630 1,245,882
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,168,989 205,391 599,089 179,755 41,318 1,143,4362017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,118,669 319,159 552,728 175,617 38,208 1,032,9582018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018  
p 2,068,562 364,731 508,799 181,077 37,030 976,925
2019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019  p 2,053,033 366,562 478,608 177,601 43,593 986,670
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1 2,144,575 239,495 586,013 178,219 40,475 1,100,372
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2 2,139,642 265,130 572,364 176,810 41,255 1,084,084         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941          Q3 2,134,509 290,214 560,322 176,646 42,855 1,064,472         Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95          Q4 2,118,669 319,159 552,728 175,617 38,208 1,032,958
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1  
p 2,095,460 329,387 530,067 176,495 37,156 1,022,355
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2  p 2,080,867 344,279 514,551 179,856 36,686 1,005,495
         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3  p 2,081,032 356,899 502,876 180,464 37,134 1,003,658
         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4  p 2,068,562 364,731 508,799 181,077 37,030 976,925
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1  p 2,078,029 359,884 499,280 179,512 35,669 1,003,684
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2  p 2,069,111 361,032 492,958 179,168 35,491 1,000,462
         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3  p 2,086,604 358,813 490,759 179,228 42,007 1,015,797
         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4  p 2,053,033 366,562 478,608 177,601 43,593 986,670
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1  p 2,107,432 368,446 497,859 180,477 52,215 1,008,435
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
August 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2013 2,213,009 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 100,535 545,347 . .
2014 2,215,168 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,833 533,074 . .2015 2,185,113 14,303 65,676 1,499,098 85,121 520,914 . .2016 2,168,989 15,845 69,715 1,484,378 91,300 507,752 . .
2017         Q1 2,144,575 12,891 60,798 1,479,171 89,093 502,622 . .
         Q2 2,139,642 15,196 54,362 1,486,822 83,528 499,734 . .         Q3 2,134,509 16,161 48,197 1,489,440 82,720 497,992 . .         Q4 2,118,669 14,651 48,789 1,484,573 82,662 487,994 . .
2018         Q1  
p 2,095,460 12,472 48,431 1,479,589 70,141 484,828 . .
         Q2  p 2,080,867 12,636 54,932 1,465,767 67,050 480,482 . .
         Q3  p 2,081,032 15,607 59,989 1,465,858 64,601 474,977 . .
         Q4  p 2,068,562 14,833 52,572 1,456,512 72,044 472,601 . .
2019         Q1  p 2,078,029 15,663 64,225 1,460,757 66,480 470,904 . .
         Q2  p 2,069,111 12,868 56,259 1,462,920 70,203 466,861 . .
         Q3  p 2,086,604 17,586 62,620 1,465,799 75,035 465,565 . .
         Q4  p 2,053,033 14,595 49,219 1,458,483 64,565 466,171 . .
2020         Q1  p 2,107,432 11,564 70,949 1,473,057 87,627 464,235 . .
Central government
2013 1,390,061 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,970 122,474 2,696 10,303
2014 1,396,124 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,383 1,202 12,8332015 1,372,206 14,303 49,512 1,139,039 45,256 124,095 2,932 13,5772016 1,366,416 15,845 55,208 1,124,445 50,004 120,914 2,238 8,478
2017         Q1 1,350,579 12,891 45,510 1,124,430 48,082 119,666 2,465 7,469
         Q2 1,353,204 15,196 40,225 1,132,686 44,682 120,415 2,547 8,136         Q3 1,352,593 16,161 34,216 1,136,873 45,235 120,108 2,674 10,160         Q4 1,350,925 14,651 36,297 1,132,542 47,761 119,673 2,935 10,603
2018         Q1  
p 1,338,267 12,472 35,923 1,133,372 37,211 119,290 2,867 9,887
         Q2  p 1,330,010 12,636 42,888 1,120,497 35,048 118,941 2,835 10,693
         Q3  p 1,336,199 15,607 46,614 1,119,053 36,633 118,293 2,614 10,260
         Q4  p 1,323,503 14,833 42,246 1,107,702 42,057 116,666 2,540 9,959
2019         Q1  p 1,324,990 15,663 50,032 1,103,095 39,126 117,073 2,437 11,528
         Q2  p 1,320,965 12,868 42,752 1,109,478 38,833 117,034 2,464 13,768
         Q3  p 1,328,487 17,586 48,934 1,105,789 38,766 117,412 2,347 13,717
         Q4  p 1,299,893 14,595 38,480 1,102,144 28,222 116,452 2,097 10,166
2020         Q1  p 1,327,816 11,564 56,680 1,104,214 38,473 116,884 1,987 8,074
State government
2013 663,615 − 6,847 360,706 11,862 284,200 12,141 2,655
2014 657,819 − 8,391 361,916 19,182 268,330 14,825 2,2972015 654,712 − 16,169 362,376 18,707 257,460 15,867 4,2182016 637,673 − 14,515 361,996 16,116 245,046 11,408 3,376
2017         Q1 629,540 − 15,308 356,769 15,938 241,526 10,407 3,446
         Q2 623,182 − 14,167 356,521 14,792 237,702 11,180 3,417         Q3 622,430 − 14,021 355,153 16,358 236,899 13,313 3,338         Q4 610,241 − 12,543 354,688 15,112 227,898 14,326 3,539
2018         Q1  
p 599,541 − 12,548 349,682 13,137 224,174 13,301 3,409
         Q2  p 595,880 − 12,073 348,833 13,485 221,488 14,271 3,579
         Q3  p 594,947 − 13,392 350,399 10,953 220,204 14,008 3,531
         Q4  p 595,702 − 10,332 352,376 14,307 218,687 14,385 3,331
2019         Q1  p 606,078 − 14,198 361,513 13,688 216,679 15,530 3,458
         Q2  p 604,749 − 13,512 357,673 19,670 213,893 17,948 3,353
         Q3  p 615,272 − 13,691 364,250 24,776 212,555 18,011 3,416
         Q4  p 606,711 − 10,745 360,988 23,053 211,924 15,349 3,010
2020         Q1  p 628,987 − 14,273 373,155 31,725 209,834 12,628 3,091
Local government
2013 175,405 − − 646 25,325 149,435 2,523 530
2014 177,782 − − 1,297 26,009 150,476 1,959 7342015 177,727 − − 2,047 26,887 148,793 2,143 4632016 179,222 − − 2,404 26,414 150,403 1,819 566
2017         Q1 178,144 − − 2,645 25,452 150,047 1,966 697
         Q2 178,051 − − 2,672 25,263 150,116 1,963 819         Q3 176,593 − − 2,687 24,477 149,429 1,871 927         Q4 175,852 − − 3,082 23,952 148,818 1,881 1,064
2018         Q1  
p 174,654 − − 2,427 22,778 149,450 1,811 1,072
         Q2  p 173,177 − − 2,561 22,443 148,172 1,977 1,090
         Q3  p 167,850 − − 2,703 20,503 144,644 2,132 1,123
         Q4  p 167,626 − 1 3,046 19,730 144,849 2,019 1,147
2019         Q1  p 166,506 − 1 2,960 19,092 144,453 2,285 1,153
         Q2  p 165,257 − 1 2,960 18,993 143,302 2,173 1,175
         Q3  p 164,858 − 1 3,015 19,025 142,818 2,233 1,211
         Q4  p 165,224 − 1 2,965 17,570 144,687 2,004 1,271
2020         Q1  p 166,557 − 1 3,127 19,355 144,074 2,073 1,199
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
August 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,872
2014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,1222015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,6852016 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2017         Q1 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,226
         Q2 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,318         Q3 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,433         Q4 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2018         Q1  
p 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,610
         Q2  p 883 − − − 383 500 − 3,721
         Q3  p 790 − − − 400 390 − 3,841
         Q4  p 674 − − − 372 302 − 4,506
2019         Q1  p 707 − − − 437 270 − 4,114
         Q2  p 726 − − − 541 185 − 4,289
         Q3  p 578 − − − 375 203 − 4,247
         Q4  p 655 − − − 319 336 − 5,002
2020         Q1  p 759 − − − 271 488 − 4,324
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 983,807 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,548
2008 1,015,846 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 74,6262009 1,082,101 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,048
2010 1,333,467 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 238,558
2011 1,343,515 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 211,7562012 1,387,361 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,4512013 1,390,061 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,4442014 1,396,124 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 177,771
2015 1,372,206 14,303 1,070 1,188,551 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,351
2016 1,366,416 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 170,9192017 1,350,925 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4352018 
p 1,323,503 14,833 921 1,149,948 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,723
2019 p 1,299,893 14,595 − 1,140,623 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,674
2017         Q1 1,350,579 12,891 995 1,169,939 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 167,748
         Q2 1,353,204 15,196 986 1,172,911 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,097         Q3 1,352,593 16,161 977 1,171,089 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,344         Q4 1,350,925 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,435
2018         Q1  
p 1,338,267 12,472 951 1,169,295 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,501
         Q2  p 1,330,010 12,636 941 1,163,385 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,989
         Q3  p 1,336,199 15,607 932 1,165,667 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,925
         Q4  p 1,323,503 14,833 921 1,149,948 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,723
2019         Q1  p 1,324,990 15,663 902 1,153,128 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,199
         Q2  p 1,320,965 12,868 852 1,152,230 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,867
         Q3  p 1,328,487 17,586 822 1,154,723 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 156,178
         Q4  p 1,299,893 14,595 − 1,140,623 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,674
2020         Q1  p 1,327,816 11,564 . 1,160,895 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 155,358
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
August 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
    
  
  2018   2019   2020
  2017   2018   2019   2017   2018   2019   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1
Item Index 2015 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector(excluding construction) 107.6 109.0 105.2 3.2 1.3 − 3.5 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.1 − 4.8 − 2.8 − 4.2 − 6.2Construction 101.4 104.8 108.6 − 0.6 3.4 3.5 3.3 4.9 6.3 2.6 4.8 1.3 4.0Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 104.4 106.2 108.5 2.9 1.8 2.1 0.8 1.2 2.2 1.5 3.3 1.5 − 3.0Information and communication 106.4 109.7 112.6 3.5 3.1 2.6 3.9 2.9 2.7 2.7 3.0 2.1 1.5Financial and insuranceactivities 100.2 100.1 102.6 3.8 − 0.1 2.5 − 1.0 0.3 2.1 2.7 2.9 2.3 1.4Real estate activities 99.0 100.1 101.4 − 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.0 0.9 0.6 1.4 1.5 1.6 0.3Business services  
1 105.7 108.0 108.7 3.7 2.2 0.7 1.8 1.0 1.0 0.3 0.7 0.7 − 1.2
Public services, education andhealth 107.7 109.0 110.8 3.4 1.2 1.7 1.0 1.1 1.6 1.5 2.0 1.7 0.6Other services 98.9 99.0 100.0 0.8 0.1 1.0 − 0.1 0.6 1.1 1.1 1.3 0.6 − 2.8
Gross value added 104.8 106.4 106.9 2.5 1.5 0.4 0.9 0.8 0.8 − 0.1 1.0 0.1 − 1.8Gross domestic product  
2 104.8 106.4 107.0 2.5 1.5 0.6 1.1 0.9 0.9 − 0.1 1.2 0.2 − 1.9
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 103.6 105.0 106.7 1.3 1.3 1.6 0.6 1.3 1.2 1.8 2.3 1.2 − 2.2
Government consumption 106.6 108.1 111.0 2.4 1.4 2.7 1.2 1.1 2.2 1.8 3.7 3.0 2.2Machinery and equipment 107.1 111.8 112.5 4.0 4.4 0.6 3.4 3.4 2.9 1.2 1.7 − 2.6 − 9.2Premises 104.6 107.2 111.3 0.7 2.5 3.8 2.6 4.0 6.8 2.5 4.1 2.2 4.8Other investment  
4 109.6 114.3 117.4 4.2 4.3 2.7 4.8 3.8 3.0 2.7 2.6 2.6 2.7
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.5 0.3 − 0.8 1.0 0.6 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 1.1 − 0.3
Domestic demand 105.5 107.7 109.0 2.4 2.1 1.2 2.4 2.4 2.1 1.7 0.8 0.2 − 1.1
Net exports  6 . . . 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.6 0.4 0.0 − 0.9
Exports 107.4 109.7 110.8 4.9 2.1 1.0 1.3 − 0.1 1.8 − 1.3 2.7 0.8 − 3.2Imports 109.8 113.7 116.6 5.2 3.6 2.5 4.3 3.1 4.8 2.5 2.0 0.9 − 1.7
Gross domestic product  
2 104.8 106.4 107.0 2.5 1.5 0.6 1.1 0.9 0.9 − 0.1 1.2 0.2 − 1.9
At current prices ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,697.0 1,743.7 1,795.4 2.9 2.8 3.0 2.2 3.0 2.3 3.4 3.7 2.5 − 0.6
Government consumption 644.3 665.6 698.9 3.9 3.3 5.0 3.3 3.0 4.6 4.2 6.0 5.2 4.4Machinery and equipment 224.2 235.3 239.8 4.7 4.9 1.9 4.1 4.2 3.7 2.5 3.2 − 1.1 − 7.8Premises 320.7 344.3 372.9 4.2 7.3 8.3 7.8 9.3 12.2 7.4 8.3 5.9 8.1Other investment  
4 121.0 128.1 133.7 5.8 5.9 4.4 6.6 5.5 4.7 4.4 4.2 4.2 4.3
Changes in inventories  5 7.4 21.3 − 6.2 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,014.5 3,138.3 3,234.7 3.8 4.1 3.1 4.2 4.8 4.2 4.0 2.4 1.9 0.8
Net exports 230.4 206.1 200.5 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,538.0 1,585.8 1,613.5 6.6 3.1 1.7 2.9 1.6 3.2 − 0.4 3.1 1.2 − 2.9Imports 1,307.6 1,379.7 1,412.9 7.9 5.5 2.4 7.6 5.9 6.0 3.2 1.0 − 0.3 − 2.7
Gross domestic product  
2 3,245.0 3,344.4 3,435.2 3.5 3.1 2.7 2.3 2.8 3.0 2.2 3.3 2.5 0.5
IV. Prices (2015 = 100)
Private consumption 102.2 103.7 105.1 1.5 1.5 1.3 1.5 1.7 1.2 1.6 1.4 1.3 1.7Gross domestic product 102.2 103.8 106.0 1.0 1.5 2.1 1.2 1.9 2.0 2.2 2.1 2.2 2.4Terms of trade 100.8 99.9 100.8 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.9 − 1.6 − 1.0 0.2 0.1 1.4 1.6 1.4
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,694.7 1,771.3 1,848.4 4.3 4.5 4.4 4.9 4.3 4.7 4.6 4.6 3.6 2.4Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 735.8 731.8 711.8 2.1 − 0.5 − 2.7 − 4.8 − 0.5 − 2.5 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 5.1
National income 2,430.5 2,503.1 2,560.2 3.6 3.0 2.3 1.8 3.0 2.3 2.1 3.1 1.6 0.1
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,328.0 3,437.9 3,534.8 3.6 3.3 2.8 2.6 3.0 2.9 2.5 3.4 2.5 0.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2020. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
August 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
2. Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015 = 100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.59 29.45 36.98 2.27 10.89 10.31 9.95 12.73 14.16
Period
2016 101.5 105.3 98.6 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.6 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.1
2017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.8 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.32018
2 105.8 2 108.9 97.4 105.9 105.5 106.0 106.1 106.9 107.3 109.0 106.5 103.5
2019 102.5 112.7 90.4 101.7 101.8 101.4 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.5 92.0
 
2019         Q2 102.7 113.8 83.6 102.3 103.4 102.2 103.1 99.6 104.9 104.9 102.7 95.5
         Q3 102.3 119.1 81.1 101.1 102.0 100.1 104.2 101.1 102.7 107.5 102.0 89.1         Q4 103.4 124.2 94.3 100.5 97.2 102.0 109.2 102.7 97.2 106.0 108.6 84.9
2020         Q1
r 96.4 100.2 94.0 95.9 101.1 90.5 101.5 99.0 98.0 103.5 91.3 79.1
         Q2 x 83.6 114.5 72.7 79.1 85.3 70.6 85.2 89.8 77.5 89.4 81.1 44.0
 
2019         June 104.7 117.3 78.4 104.6 103.5 107.0 106.7 99.3 106.1 108.3 109.4 97.3
         July 3 103.5 122.0 81.4 102.0 103.7 101.0 99.6 101.6 104.4 105.5 102.9 91.1
         Aug. 3 96.7 113.8 80.3 95.0 98.4 91.2 95.8 98.6 97.2 103.1 94.0 76.8
         Sep. 106.8 121.4 81.7 106.2 103.9 108.2 117.3 103.0 106.5 113.9 109.1 99.5
         Oct. 105.0 121.8 91.8 103.0 104.9 99.6 114.0 107.2 104.5 108.6 100.5 89.9
         Nov. 108.7 126.4 95.2 106.7 103.3 108.6 116.3 107.4 105.0 111.1 108.7 97.9         Dec. 96.6 124.4 95.9 91.8 83.3 97.7 97.2 93.6 82.2 98.2 116.6 66.8
2020         Jan.
r 92.2 86.0 99.3 92.7 98.6 86.1 98.7 97.6 95.0 99.8 83.3 79.6
         Feb. r 97.0 97.3 92.0 97.4 100.8 94.3 103.2 97.4 98.4 102.8 91.1 90.3
         Mar. r 99.9 117.3 90.6 97.6 103.9 91.0 102.7 102.1 100.5 107.9 99.5 67.4
         Apr. x 76.5 111.9 73.2 70.5 83.9 54.6 72.8 87.6 72.9 86.6 70.7 14.6
         May x 81.9 112.6 71.9 77.3 83.2 69.2 85.7 87.3 76.0 86.4 77.2 45.3
         June x,p 92.5 118.9 73.1 89.4 88.9 87.9 97.2 94.4 83.7 95.2 95.5 72.0
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2016 + 1.8 + 5.7 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.5
2017 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.12018
2 + 0.9 2 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 − 1.7
2019 − 3.1 + 3.5 − 7.2 − 4.0 − 3.5 − 4.3 + 0.1 − 5.5 − 4.2 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 11.1
 
2019         Q2 − 3.7 + 3.2 − 8.1 − 4.7 − 4.0 − 4.9 − 2.2 − 6.7 − 4.3 − 2.1 − 2.0 − 13.6
         Q3 − 3.7 + 2.6 − 13.0 − 4.3 − 4.4 − 2.9 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 4.9 − 2.5 − 3.0 − 7.6         Q4 − 4.0 + 1.8 − 5.6 − 5.0 − 4.6 − 6.7 + 2.7 − 2.2 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 6.2 − 13.0
2020         Q1
r − 5.0 + 6.8 − 8.2 − 6.7 − 3.5 − 10.8 − 6.2 − 1.4 − 7.9 − 3.7 − 9.2 − 19.5
         Q2 x − 18.6 + 0.6 − 13.0 − 22.7 − 17.5 − 30.9 − 17.3 − 9.9 − 26.1 − 14.7 − 21.0 − 54.0
 
2019         June − 4.6 + 3.3 − 12.1 − 5.6 − 5.5 − 4.8 − 3.2 − 8.9 − 5.2 − 3.6 − 2.8 − 13.0
         July 3 − 3.5 + 3.0 − 12.9 − 4.1 − 4.4 − 3.1 + 1.2 − 7.6 − 4.5 − 3.1 − 1.7 − 9.4
         Aug. 3 − 3.7 + 2.7 − 15.2 − 4.0 − 4.3 − 1.9 + 0.8 − 10.3 − 5.5 − 2.3 − 4.2 − 4.6
         Sep. − 4.0 + 2.1 − 10.9 − 4.7 − 4.5 − 3.5 − 1.3 − 9.9 − 4.7 − 2.2 − 3.1 − 8.2
         Oct. − 4.5 + 1.2 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 3.9 − 8.2 + 1.6 − 3.3 − 6.9 − 3.4 − 7.5 − 13.8
         Nov. − 2.3 + 3.6 − 3.8 − 3.4 − 3.6 − 4.3 + 3.8 − 0.9 − 6.3 − 3.1 − 4.1 − 9.2         Dec. − 5.2 + 0.5 − 7.0 − 6.2 − 6.4 − 7.7 + 2.6 − 2.2 − 9.1 − 5.5 − 6.8 − 17.1
2020         Jan.
r − 1.3 + 14.1 − 9.1 − 2.7 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 6.0 − 0.8 − 5.1 − 7.2
         Feb. r − 1.6 + 4.4 − 5.0 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 5.6 − 1.9 + 2.9 − 4.3 + 0.5 − 6.6 − 9.2
         Mar. r − 11.1 + 4.0 − 10.4 − 13.8 − 7.6 − 20.9 − 13.6 − 5.0 − 12.8 − 9.8 − 14.4 − 38.5
         Apr. x − 24.9 − 0.7 − 16.9 − 30.1 − 19.1 − 44.8 − 27.8 − 12.1 − 30.6 − 15.7 − 28.8 − 84.3
         May x − 19.5 + 1.2 − 14.7 − 23.8 − 19.3 − 31.1 − 15.6 − 12.6 − 26.7 − 16.6 − 22.3 − 53.1
         June x,p − 11.7 + 1.4 − 6.8 − 14.5 − 14.1 − 17.9 − 8.9 − 4.9 − 21.1 − 12.1 − 12.7 − 26.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, Office. 3Influenced by a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; estimated and ad-
see Statistical Series − Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables III.1.a to justed in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the resul ts of the Quarterly Pro-
III.1.c. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of duction Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry,
the production sector in the base year 2015. 2As of January 2018 weights in respectively. 
structural and civil engineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
August 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
3. Orders received by industry *
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age
Period 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
Total
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.82016 100.7 + 0.9 98.9 − 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.0 − 0.82017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.8 + 5.2 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.22018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.0 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.82019 104.9 − 5.1 103.5 − 7.2 105.4 − 4.1 107.0 − 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 − 5.0
2019         June 108.4 − 3.5 105.3 − 8.1 110.8 + 0.3 105.4 − 8.5 121.0 − 1.3 100.2 − 11.2
         July 103.5 − 4.1 102.8 − 9.5 102.9 + 0.2 110.6 − 8.4 121.8 + 1.6 106.9 − 11.6
         Aug. 93.1 − 5.9 96.0 − 7.1 89.9 − 5.2 103.7 − 5.6 121.1 + 3.7 98.1 − 8.8         Sep. 105.4 − 3.9 100.1 − 8.3 108.4 − 1.1 108.4 − 4.2 139.8 + 11.5 98.0 − 10.3
         Oct. 106.2 − 4.8 104.0 − 8.7 106.8 − 3.4 111.5 + 2.4 128.1 + 0.5 106.1 + 3.2
         Nov. 106.2 − 5.6 103.2 − 7.3 107.3 − 5.9 111.6 + 5.6 138.1 + 13.5 102.9 + 2.5         Dec. 102.1 − 8.5 92.6 − 4.3 109.2 − 11.1 93.6 − 2.4 120.5 + 10.0 84.8 − 7.1
2020         Jan. 107.4 − 0.6 110.1 − 1.2 105.4 − 0.5 110.5 + 2.4 131.9 + 11.3 103.5 − 0.9
         Feb. 104.9 + 2.2 105.6 + 0.9 103.1 + 2.2 114.9 + 7.6 125.5 + 9.6 111.4 + 6.8         Mar. 98.7 − 15.6 108.6 − 4.8 90.5 − 23.8 114.3 − 0.8 125.5 − 2.3 110.7 − 0.2
         Apr. 65.7 − 37.0 77.6 − 26.2 54.8 − 47.1 92.9 − 12.0 92.7 − 19.4 93.1 − 9.2
         May 71.4 − 29.7 77.0 − 25.1 64.8 − 35.4 96.3 − 7.2 115.2 + 1.9 90.2 − 10.5         June
p 96.1 − 11.3 87.2 − 17.2 101.2 − 8.7 100.4 − 4.7 119.3 − 1.4 94.2 − 6.0
From the domestic market
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.8 + 2.1 98.0 − 1.8 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.9 101.6 + 3.7 108.7 + 5.4 99.3 + 3.12018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 − 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 − 0.42019 101.2 − 5.6 99.1 − 8.7 102.9 − 3.5 101.2 − 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 − 2.7
2019         June 100.7 − 6.5 99.2 − 10.6 102.6 − 3.0 96.2 − 5.3 105.7 − 8.5 93.0 − 4.0
         July 102.4 − 6.6 100.7 − 10.8 103.6 − 3.4 103.8 − 2.4 114.6 + 5.2 100.2 − 4.9
         Aug. 91.0 − 6.8 91.1 − 10.2 89.9 − 3.9 97.6 − 5.3 108.1 − 5.8 94.1 − 5.1         Sep. 100.3 − 7.0 95.2 − 11.4 104.2 − 4.6 103.6 + 2.8 131.5 + 10.2 94.1 − 0.4
         Oct. 99.1 − 7.2 98.5 − 10.8 98.5 − 5.0 107.0 − 0.4 131.9 + 9.5 98.6 − 4.2
         Nov. 102.8 − 8.4 100.7 − 9.3 103.5 − 9.1 109.6 + 1.3 135.7 + 11.9 100.8 − 2.9         Dec. 93.6 − 7.7 84.2 − 8.1 102.3 − 8.2 89.2 − 1.9 107.4 + 8.4 83.1 − 5.7
2020         Jan. 100.6 − 6.6 104.1 − 3.4 97.4 − 10.4 102.2 + 2.0 111.0 + 3.3 99.2 + 1.5
         Feb. 101.9 − 2.8 99.9 − 2.7 103.0 − 3.1 105.9 − 1.0 110.5 + 0.2 104.4 − 1.4         Mar. 96.8 − 13.8 102.8 − 5.9 89.7 − 22.3 110.2 + 2.2 107.9 − 15.3 111.0 + 9.7
         Apr. 67.7 − 32.4 74.6 − 25.4 59.5 − 40.9 83.4 − 13.3 74.0 − 31.9 86.6 − 5.9
         May 74.9 − 24.6 75.1 − 24.7 72.3 − 27.3 91.6 − 4.9 109.8 + 3.7 85.5 − 8.2         June
p 105.0 + 4.3 82.1 − 17.2 126.2 + 23.0 94.6 − 1.7 109.8 + 3.9 89.4 − 3.9
From abroad
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.3 + 0.5 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.1 + 7.3 101.1 + 1.32017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.6 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.7 104.4 + 3.32018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 111.9 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 − 0.5 113.4 + 8.62019 107.6 − 4.8 108.3 − 5.5 106.9 − 4.5 111.5 − 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 − 6.6
2019         June 114.3 − 1.2 111.8 − 5.7 115.8 + 2.2 112.5 − 10.6 133.4 + 3.9 105.7 − 15.4
         July 104.3 − 2.2 105.1 − 8.0 102.5 + 2.5 115.9 − 12.1 127.6 − 0.9 112.1 − 15.6
         Aug. 94.7 − 5.2 101.3 − 3.7 89.9 − 6.0 108.5 − 5.8 131.6 + 11.1 101.1 − 11.4         Sep. 109.3 − 1.6 105.3 − 5.1 110.9 + 0.9 112.1 − 8.7 146.4 + 12.4 101.0 − 16.1
         Oct. 111.5 − 3.3 110.0 − 6.5 111.8 − 2.6 115.0 + 4.5 125.1 − 6.0 111.8 + 8.9
         Nov. 108.8 − 3.5 105.9 − 5.2 109.6 − 4.0 113.1 + 9.0 140.1 + 14.8 104.5 + 6.9         Dec. 108.6 − 9.0 101.7 − 0.8 113.3 − 12.6 97.0 − 2.7 131.1 + 11.2 86.1 − 8.2
2020         Jan. 112.6 + 4.0 116.6 + 1.1 110.3 + 5.9 117.0 + 2.8 148.8 + 16.9 106.8 − 2.5
         Feb. 107.1 + 6.0 111.8 + 4.7 103.1 + 5.6 121.8 + 14.3 137.6 + 16.8 116.7 + 13.3         Mar. 100.1 − 16.8 114.9 − 3.6 91.0 − 24.7 117.5 − 2.9 139.6 + 8.0 110.4 − 6.7
         Apr. 64.1 − 40.4 80.8 − 27.0 51.9 − 50.7 100.3 − 11.2 107.7 − 10.3 98.0 − 11.4
         May 68.8 − 33.3 79.0 − 25.6 60.3 − 40.2 100.0 − 8.8 119.6 + 0.6 93.8 − 12.1         June
p 89.4 − 21.8 92.7 − 17.1 86.1 − 25.6 104.9 − 6.8 127.0 − 4.8 97.8 − 7.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex-   
planatory notes, see Statistical Series − Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables  III.2.a to III.2.c. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
August 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Structural engineering    
Residential Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering sector  2 Industrial clients
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2016 114.4 + 14.5 115.0 + 15.1 116.9 + 17.0 114.9 + 15.0 108.9 + 9.1 113.7 + 13.8 111.7 + 11.8 116.0 + 16.1
2017 122.4 + 7.0 123.1 + 7.0 123.1 + 5.3 123.4 + 7.4 121.8 + 11.8 121.6 + 6.9 119.8 + 7.3 125.0 + 7.82018 134.7 + 10.0 131.2 + 6.6 136.6 + 11.0 127.9 + 3.6 125.2 + 2.8 138.8 + 14.1 135.6 + 13.2 132.4 + 5.92019 146.0 + 8.4 145.0 + 10.5 150.2 + 10.0 142.2 + 11.2 138.9 + 10.9 147.1 + 6.0 147.9 + 9.1 141.3 + 6.7
 
2019         May 147.9 + 3.6 144.8 + 5.8 146.8 + 12.3 149.2 + 4.4 121.8 − 9.6 151.4 + 1.2 148.4 + 4.1 147.8 − 1.7
         June 162.0 + 10.1 161.4 + 13.9 158.5 + 11.3 163.4 + 20.0 163.7 + 2.4 162.7 + 6.1 165.5 + 20.9 160.2 − 0.9
         July 153.9 + 8.2 148.0 + 4.2 154.6 + 8.6 142.1 − 1.2 148.0 + 9.7 160.8 + 12.9 152.5 + 5.6 155.1 + 11.0
         Aug. 134.6 + 4.6 135.5 + 13.1 139.3 + 10.8 131.2 + 12.4 139.2 + 24.0 133.6 − 3.9 137.2 + 7.5 129.0 − 2.2         Sep. 147.9 + 5.9 146.6 + 2.2 157.0 + 0.6 130.4 + 0.2 173.0 + 13.8 149.4 + 10.4 143.4 + 6.6 147.6 + 8.8
         Oct. 136.9 + 3.6 137.5 + 6.8 154.8 + 9.6 124.3 + 1.6 129.6 + 17.0 136.2 + 0.1 135.2 + 0.5 127.9 + 3.4
         Nov. 145.4 + 13.1 154.7 + 23.1 149.7 + 7.3 166.6 + 42.0 127.1 + 13.6 134.5 + 1.9 167.8 + 22.6 117.1 + 4.1         Dec. 148.2 − 1.3 148.9 + 2.2 178.2 + 7.0 131.1 − 3.0 119.1 + 2.4 147.3 − 5.2 154.3 − 5.7 122.9 − 1.3
2020         Jan. 129.3 + 10.1 134.0 + 10.8 137.4 + 11.0 134.1 + 8.2 122.8 + 23.0 123.9 + 9.3 140.9 + 11.2 111.3 + 8.3
         Feb. 134.5 + 1.2 143.0 + 10.5 148.3 + 24.6 140.9 + 4.8 133.1 − 8.3 124.6 − 9.1 139.3 + 5.2 120.5 − 15.1         Mar. 158.8 − 7.5 154.0 − 5.9 169.6 − 0.5 141.1 − 10.8 150.6 − 7.6 164.4 − 9.1 155.2 − 6.6 156.4 − 12.5
         Apr. 149.6 − 2.3 134.1 − 10.0 131.6 − 12.1 137.3 − 9.4 130.1 − 5.0 167.6 + 6.1 140.4 − 3.5 171.1 + 4.4
         May 138.9 − 6.1 124.1 − 14.3 146.7 − 0.1 103.1 − 30.9 127.9 + 5.0 156.2 + 3.2 121.5 − 18.1 154.2 + 4.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; exclu- adjusted business statistics, Table III.2.f. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Excluding
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series − Seasonally residential construction. 2 Including road construction. 
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of which:In stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, footwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.2 + 2.1 101.6 + 1.5 100.9 + 0.7 99.9 − 0.3 101.5 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.8
2017 107.6 + 5.0 105.8 + 3.5 105.9 + 4.2 108.1 + 7.1 106.2 + 6.3 103.0 + 1.5 107.7 + 3.7 120.4 + 9.72018 110.7 + 2.9 107.5 + 1.6 109.6 + 3.5 105.6 − 2.3 107.1 + 0.8 103.1 + 0.1 112.5 + 4.5 127.6 + 6.02019
3 114.8 + 3.7 110.8 + 3.1 112.1 + 2.3 106.4 + 0.8 108.7 + 1.5 107.1 + 3.9 118.4 + 5.2 137.7 + 7.9
 
2019         May 113.4 + 2.4 108.9 + 1.7 111.8 − 0.6 103.2 − 5.6 93.6 + 4.8 110.0 + 4.0 115.7 + 7.2 127.4 + 5.7
         June 115.1 + 4.7 111.0 + 4.0 115.5 + 3.2 116.8 + 9.3 97.6 − 2.2 106.5 + 4.7 114.9 + 4.7 131.7 + 13.8
         July 115.4 + 4.2 111.7 + 3.0 114.0 + 2.9 105.5 − 0.2 95.8 − 0.4 108.3 + 5.5 120.0 + 3.5 136.6 + 10.2
         Aug. 111.1 + 4.2 107.6 + 3.6 111.0 + 3.4 100.0 + 1.6 102.1 + 5.0 100.8 + 4.6 114.5 + 4.1 124.1 + 6.5         Sep. 112.1 + 4.1 107.9 + 3.9 106.4 + 0.9 112.2 + 3.2 109.8 + 1.4 103.3 + 4.6 118.0 + 6.7 139.0 + 10.9
         Oct. 116.9 + 2.3 112.3 + 2.1 112.7 + 1.7 117.7 + 1.2 110.6 + 2.5 110.8 + 2.3 121.6 + 5.4 139.1 + 1.6
         Nov. 123.6 + 4.0 118.8 + 3.6 114.8 + 4.9 116.9 + 4.2 131.8
+ 0.0 115.6 + 3.1 124.4 + 5.3 164.7 + 1.3
         Dec. 133.1 + 3.3 128.2 + 2.3 127.7 + 0.9 120.2 − 1.8 156.9 − 0.3 113.3 + 3.3 132.5 + 6.3 172.2 + 11.9
2020         Jan. 107.8 + 3.7 104.0 + 2.5 103.8 + 1.6 88.0 + 0.2 114.5 + 2.0 96.3 + 4.6 120.6 + 6.1 137.4 + 5.4
         Feb. 105.8 + 4.0 101.4 + 2.7 108.5 + 7.1 80.5 − 2.7 98.0 + 3.8 97.2 + 2.7 115.1 + 4.1 129.7 + 8.0         Mar. 117.6 + 1.6 112.3 + 0.2 131.0 + 15.0 48.9 − 53.1 82.8 − 21.9 106.0 − 7.7 135.8 + 15.4 152.9 + 14.8
         Apr. 110.0 − 4.4 104.6 − 5.6 125.2 + 10.4 29.5 − 73.2 57.0 − 39.0 99.5 − 13.6 114.0 − 2.4 170.0 + 26.6
         May 122.5 + 8.0 116.7 + 7.2 127.6 + 14.1 80.2 − 22.3 95.1 + 1.6 125.8 + 14.4 112.2 − 3.0 165.9 + 30.2         June 120.0 + 4.3 114.7 + 3.3 119.3 + 3.3 96.2 − 17.6 101.3 + 3.8 120.9 + 13.5 116.3 + 1.2 159.7 + 21.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value added kets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3As of January 2019 figures are provisional,
tax;  for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series − Seasonally adjusted business statis- partially revised, and particularly uncertain in recen t months due to estimates for miss-
tics, Table III.4.c. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Including stalls and mar- ing reports. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
August 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
6. Labour market * 
  
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legalcategory
Solely
of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary social Unem- Temporary Security
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies,  4, 6 
Thou- percentage Thou- percentage rate 4, 5 thou-
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2015 43,122 + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 r 43,661 r + 1.2 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 r 44,262 r + 1.4 32,234 + 2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 r 44,868 r + 1.4 32,964 + 2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 r 45,268 r + 0.9 33,518 + 1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 8 2,267 827 8 5.0 774
2017         Q2 r 44,166 r + 1.4 32,064 + 2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 5.6 717
         Q3 r 44,450 r + 1.4 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763
         Q4 r 44,699 r + 1.4 32,759 + 2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 82 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1 r 44,398 r + 1.5 32,563 + 2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 325 24 2,525 909 5.7 760
         Q2 r 44,790 r + 1.4 32,802 + 2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 5.1 794
         Q3 r 45,028 r + 1.3 33,040 + 2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
         Q4 r 45,257 r + 1.2 33,452 + 2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019         Q1 r 44,920 r + 1.2 33,214 + 2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
         Q2 r 45,240 r + 1.0 33,388 + 1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 8 2,227 778 8 4.9 795
         Q3 r 45,376 r + 0.8 33,548 + 1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
         Q4 r 45,538 r + 0.6 33,924 + 1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020         Q1 r 45,063 r + 0.3 9 33,634 9 + 1.3 9 9,437 9 23,279 9 685 9 4,455 ... 9 909 2,385 960 5.2 683
         Q2 10 44,666 10 − 1.3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,770 1,154 11 6.0 593
2017         Mar. r 43,842 r + 1.4 31,930 + 2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr. r 44,012 r + 1.4 32,013 + 2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
         May r 44,182 r + 1.3 32,131 + 2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 5.6 714
         June r 44,305 r + 1.4 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July r 44,344 r + 1.5 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
         Aug. r 44,385 r + 1.4 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765
         Sep. r 44,621 r + 1.3 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
         Oct. r 44,693 r + 1.3 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
         Nov. r 44,763 r + 1.4 32,830 + 2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772
         Dec. r 44,640 r + 1.4 32,609 + 2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 194 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan. r 44,345 r + 1.6 32,504 + 2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 287 23 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb. r 44,376 r + 1.5 32,551 + 2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 359 23 2,546 927 5.7 764
         Mar. r 44,472 r + 1.4 32,660 + 2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778
         Apr. r 44,646 r + 1.4 32,782 + 2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
         May r 44,826 r + 1.5 32,857 + 2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 5.1 793
         June r 44,898 r + 1.3 32,870 + 2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
         July r 44,930 r + 1.3 32,844 + 2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
         Aug. r 44,981 r + 1.3 33,131 + 2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
         Sep. r 45,173 r + 1.2 33,422 + 2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
         Oct. r 45,262 r + 1.3 33,488 + 2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
         Nov. r 45,325 r + 1.3 33,513 + 2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
         Dec. r 45,184 r + 1.2 33,286 + 2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019         Jan. r 44,866 r + 1.2 33,156 + 2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
         Feb. r 44,908 r + 1.2 33,199 + 2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
         Mar. r 44,985 r + 1.2 33,286 + 1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
         Apr. r 45,146 r + 1.1 33,383 + 1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
         May r 45,269 r + 1.0 33,433 + 1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 8 2,236 772 8 4.9 792
         June r 45,304 r + 0.9 33,407 + 1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
         July r 45,315 r + 0.9 33,360 + 1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
         Aug. r 45,305 r + 0.7 33,610 + 1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
         Sep. r 45,509 r + 0.7 33,938 + 1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
         Oct. r 45,578 r + 0.7 33,966 + 1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
         Nov. r 45,601 r + 0.6 33,968 + 1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
         Dec. r 45,434 r + 0.6 33,740 + 1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020         Jan. r 45,098 r + 0.5 33,608 + 1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
         Feb. r 45,093 r + 0.4 9 33,608 9 + 1.2 9 9,423 9 23,269 9 682 9 4,450 ... 9 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
         Mar. r 44,997 r + 0.0 9 33,633 9 + 1.0 9 9,436 9 23,281 9 674 9 4,357 ... 9 2,460 2,335 925 5.1 691
         Apr. r 44,734 r − 0.9 9 33,420 9 + 0.1 9 9,393 9 23,136 9 643 9 4,214 ... 9 6,101 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
         May r 44,642 r − 1.4 9 33,334 9 − 0.3 9 9,367 9 23,090 9 625 9 4,244 ... 9 6,699 2,813 1,172 11 6.1 584
         June 10 44,623 10 − 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
         July ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and Security Code (SGB III) 8Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Socia l Security Code (SGB
figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: end II). 9Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2018 and
of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the total 2019, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum
civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seaso- of 0.1% for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.7% for per-
nal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From January 2017 persons receiving sons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 55.3% for
additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at cyclically induced short-time work. 10Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-
the same time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social tical Office. 11 From May 2020, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
August 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
7. Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which:  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  7 
prices ofindustrial
of which:
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Actual Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy rents struction the prices  of price index
Energy Services for (national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial
Total 2 Food 3 4, 5 2, 4 concept) index market  6 Exports Imports Energy  8 products  6 goods  4 housing materials  9 
Period 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.1 101.2 100.5 101.9 98.4 98.7 99.0 96.7 83.2 98.4
2017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.12018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.22019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8
10 111.6 102.4 101.7 110.0 108.1
 
2018         Sep. 105.3 107.1 103.8 105.1 105.6 104.9 104.7 104.7 111.6 102.4 103.7 140.8 102.7
         Oct. 105.4 107.1 104.1 106.1 105.5 105.0 104.9 105.0 111.4 102.6 104.7 144.7 105.5
         Nov. 104.2 107.0 104.1 108.0 102.4 105.1 104.2 112.0 105.1 111.7 102.5 103.7 123.7 105.2         Dec. 104.4 107.0 103.8 103.5 104.0 105.2 104.2 104.7 111.6 102.1 102.4 111.4 103.2
2019         Jan. 103.4 107.4 102.9 101.5 102.9 105.4 103.4 105.1 111.5 102.2 102.2 112.3 104.4
         Feb. 103.9 107.9 103.4 101.7 103.6 105.6 103.8 114.0 105.0 112.1 102.3 102.5 114.3 109.4         Mar. 104.4 107.7 103.9 102.4 104.1 105.7 104.2 104.9 113.0 102.4 102.5 115.2 108.3
         Apr. 105.4 107.9 104.6 104.4 105.3 105.8 105.2 105.4 115.5 102.6 102.8 119.2 108.8
         May 105.7 108.3 104.6 106.1 105.3 105.9 105.4 115.0 105.3 115.7 102.5 102.7 116.6 106.6         June 106.0 108.4 104.1 104.9 106.6 106.1 105.7 104.9 115.1 102.3 101.3 102.8 108.6
         July 106.4 108.7 103.3 104.7 107.9 106.2 106.2 105.0 114.3 102.4 101.1 105.7 113.0
         Aug. 106.3 108.8 103.4 103.8 107.8 106.3 106.0 115.8 104.5 112.5 102.3 100.5 100.2 106.0         Sep. 106.2 108.8 104.7 103.8 106.9 106.4 106.0 104.6
10 110.0 102.4 101.1 105.9 107.5
         Oct. 106.3 108.6 105.0 103.8 106.9 106.6 106.1 104.4 110.4 102.4 101.0 105.7 107.1
         Nov. 105.4 109.0 105.2 103.7 104.9 106.7 105.3 116.4 104.4 112.2 102.4 101.5 110.5 106.9         Dec. 106.0 109.2 105.1 103.6 106.1 106.8 105.8 104.5 114.5 102.5 101.7 112.5 110.4
2020         Jan. 105.1 110.1 104.0 104.9 104.3 107.0 105.2 105.3 113.3 102.7 101.3 107.4 112.2
         Feb. 105.7 111.2 104.3 103.9 105.2 107.1 105.6 117.8 104.9 114.2 102.6 100.4 94.3 108.7         Mar. 105.8 111.0 105.2 101.6 105.5 107.3 105.7 104.1 113.8 101.9 96.9 61.3 104.9
         Apr. 106.2 112.2 105.4 98.6 106.7 107.4 106.1 103.4 112.6 101.5 95.2 49.7 101.0
         May 106.2 112.5 105.4 97.4 106.7 107.5 106.0 118.3 103.0 109.2 101.3 95.5 55.5 102.1         June 106.9 112.7 104.8 98.7 108.1 107.6 106.6 103.0 110.2 101.3 96.1 65.2 105.1
         July
11 106.4 11 110.2 11 102.5 11 98.0 11 109.4 11 107.7 11 106.1 ... ... ... ... 68.3 107.5
Annual percentage change  
  
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 16.8 − 1.6
2017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 10.0 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 19.7 + 8.82018 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 25.1 − 0.82019 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 4.6 + 1.1
10 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.0 − 11.7 + 1.8
 
2018         Sep. + 2.2 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 7.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 4.4 + 46.2 − 0.1
         Oct. + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 4.8 + 42.4 + 2.7
         Nov. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 9.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 5.2 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 3.1 + 12.1 + 1.3         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.4
2019         Jan. + 1.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.9
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 7.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 3.2         Mar. + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 6.8 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 3.2
         Apr. + 2.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.5
         May + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 5.1 + 1.9 + 10.8 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 10.2 − 5.2         June + 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 21.2 − 2.4
         July + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 18.6 + 6.8
         Aug. + 1.0 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 23.2 + 0.3         Sep. + 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 0.1
10 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 2.5 − 24.8 + 4.7
         Oct. + 0.9 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.5 − 27.0 + 1.5
         Nov. + 1.2 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 4.0 + 2.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.9 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 10.7 + 1.6         Dec. + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 7.0
2020         Jan. + 1.6 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 4.4 + 7.5
         Feb. + 1.7 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 17.5 − 0.6         Mar. + 1.3 + 3.1 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.8 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 5.5 − 46.8 − 3.1
         Apr. + 0.8 + 4.0 + 0.8 − 5.6 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 0.9 − 1.9 − 2.5 − 1.1 − 7.4 − 58.3 − 7.2
         May + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.8 − 8.2 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.2 − 5.6 − 1.2 − 7.0 − 52.4 − 4.2         June + 0.8 + 4.0 + 0.7 − 5.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 1.8 − 4.3 − 1.0 − 5.1 − 36.6 − 3.2
         July
11 + 0.0 11 + 1.4 11 − 0.8 11 − 6.4 11 + 1.4 11 + 1.4 11 − 0.1 ... ... ... ... − 35.4 − 4.9
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on Consumption according to Purpose (ECOICOP). 5Electricity, gas and other fuels as
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw well as transport fuels and lubricants, from January 2017 excludi ng lubricants. 6Exclu-
Materials: HWWI. 1Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. 2With ding value added tax. 7For the euro area, in euro. 8Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natu-
effect from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of ral gas. 9Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 10From
package holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series. 3Including alcoholic be- September 2019 onwards provisional figures. 11Influenced by a temporary reduc-
verages and tobacco. 4Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the tion of value added tax. 
basis of the five digit structure set out in the European Classification of Individual

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
August 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
    
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age
€ billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2012 1,150.0 4.2 776.1 4.0 376.8 1.5 1,152.9 3.2 1,668.4 2.5 161.0 − 1.3 9.7
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 − 2.5 9.32014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.2 4.1 1,273.5 4.0 1,781.5 2.7 179.3 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.9 3.9 425.6 3.7 1,322.4 3.8 1,836.2 3.1 186.4 4.0 10.22017 1,394.0 4.2 932.0 3.9 441.5 3.7 1,373.4 3.9 1,894.4 3.2 197.4 5.9 10.42018 1,460.9 4.8 975.5 4.7 451.8 2.3 1,427.3 3.9 1,958.2 3.4 214.5 8.6 11.02019 1,522.2 4.2 1,021.2 4.7 470.4 4.1 1,491.6 4.5 2,014.7 2.9 219.3 2.3 10.9
2018         Q4 403.3 4.6 269.0 4.4 112.8 2.5 381.8 3.9 497.5 3.5 48.4 8.6 9.7
2019         Q1 355.4 4.5 239.2 5.1 117.6 3.3 356.8 4.5 504.2 2.4 72.7 2.8 14.4
         Q2 371.7 4.5 243.9 5.0 116.4 4.3 360.3 4.8 497.9 3.2 51.2 2.0 10.3         Q3 378.2 4.6 259.3 5.2 118.8 4.6 378.0 5.0 503.2 3.6 46.1 2.2 9.2         Q4 416.9 3.4 278.8 3.6 117.6 4.3 396.5 3.8 509.4 2.4 49.3 1.9 9.7
2020         Q1 364.1 2.5 245.5 2.6 122.9 4.5 368.4 3.3 514.7 2.1 85.8 18.0 16.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in May 2020. *Households includ- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
ing non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2012 92.5 2.6 92.7 2.5 92.7 2.8 92.7 2.8 92.4 2.9
2013 94.8 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 94.4 2.22014 97.7 3.1 97.8 2.9 97.7 2.8 97.7 2.8 97.2 3.0
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.52017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.0 104.3 2.1 104.5 2.3 105.1 2.62018 107.1 2.8 107.1 2.8 107.1 2.7 107.4 2.7 108.4 3.12019 110.3 3.0 110.3 2.9 109.8 2.6 110.0 2.5 111.7 3.0
2019         Q1 101.8 2.9 101.9 2.9 101.8 3.0 109.1 3.0 105.2 3.1
         Q2 103.0 2.1 103.0 2.1 102.9 2.2 109.8 2.2 109.3 3.2         Q3 114.2 4.3 114.2 4.3 112.5 2.6 110.5 2.4 110.9 3.5         Q4 122.1 2.5 122.0 2.4 122.0 2.5 110.7 2.3 121.4 2.5
2020         Q1 104.3 2.4 104.2 2.3 104.3 2.4 111.6 2.4 107.1 1.8
         Q2 105.0 1.9 105.0 1.9 105.1 2.1 112.1 2.1 . .
2019         Dec. 105.2 2.4 105.1 2.3 105.1 2.2 110.7 2.2 . .
2020         Jan. 104.2 2.5 104.2 2.4 104.2 2.3 111.5 2.3 . .
         Feb. 104.3 2.2 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.4 111.6 2.4 . .         Mar. 104.3 2.5 104.3 2.4 104.4 2.4 111.8 2.4 . .
         Apr. 105.0 2.1 105.0 2.0 105.1 2.0 112.0 2.0 . .
         May 105.3 2.3 105.2 2.2 105.3 2.2 112.1 2.1 . .         June 104.7 1.5 104.7 1.4 104.8 2.1 112.2 2.1 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such May 2020. as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10.Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2016 2,367.7 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.8
2017 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
3 2018 2,595.4 1,539.0 542.2 611.2 288.5 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.4 792.2 1,803.2 927.4 560.1 875.9 257.6 205.2
p 2019 2,808.8 1,772.1 588.0 737.7 333.5 1,036.7 257.7 239.0 172.6 824.3 1,984.5 1,093.3 678.1 891.2 289.9 207.8
3 2018 H1 2,551.8 1,533.0 541.7 602.5 288.3 1,018.8 250.1 236.1 143.3 775.6 1,776.2 909.4 541.0 866.7 254.7 210.2
H2 2,595.4 1,539.0 542.2 611.2 288.5 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.4 792.2 1,803.2 927.4 560.1 875.9 257.6 205.2
2019 H1 2,709.3 1,659.8 551.1 683.0 314.5 1,049.4 269.3 241.7 144.1 779.7 1,929.6 1,026.1 615.5 903.5 301.9 210.9
pH2 2,808.8 1,772.1 588.0 737.7 333.5 1,036.7 257.7 239.0 172.6 824.3 1,984.5 1,093.3 678.1 891.2 289.9 207.8
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.1
2017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
3 2018 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.8 9.9 7.9
p 2019 100.0 63.1 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.9 9.2 8.5 6.2 29.4 70.7 38.9 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
3 2018 H1 100.0 60.1 21.2 23.6 11.3 39.9 9.8 9.3 5.6 30.4 69.6 35.6 21.2 34.0 10.0 8.2
H2 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.8 9.9 7.9
2019 H1 100.0 61.3 20.3 25.2 11.6 38.7 9.9 8.9 5.3 28.8 71.2 37.9 22.7 33.4 11.1 7.8
pH2 100.0 63.1 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.9 9.2 8.5 6.2 29.4 70.7 38.9 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2016 1,910.1 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.9
2017 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.4
3 2018 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.8
p 2019 2,236.8 1,345.1 388.2 548.5 319.7 891.7 240.3 181.6 135.2 636.4 1,600.4 861.0 502.1 739.4 252.0 156.3
3 2018 H1 2,072.0 1,177.0 360.2 460.4 277.5 895.0 232.7 185.6 115.2 604.9 1,467.0 727.9 411.2 739.2 229.5 167.5
H2 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.8
2019 H1 2,164.7 1,247.6 358.0 501.5 302.7 917.2 252.0 187.0 114.4 604.2 1,560.5 805.6 452.6 754.9 260.2 162.6
pH2 2,236.8 1,345.1 388.2 548.5 319.7 891.7 240.3 181.6 135.2 636.4 1,600.4 861.0 502.1 739.4 252.0 156.3
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.4
2017 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
3 2018 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
p 2019 100.0 60.1 17.4 24.5 14.3 39.9 10.7 8.1 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.5 22.5 33.1 11.3 7.0
3 2018 H1 100.0 56.8 17.4 22.2 13.4 43.2 11.2 9.0 5.6 29.2 70.8 35.1 19.9 35.7 11.1 8.1
H2 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
2019 H1 100.0 57.6 16.5 23.2 14.0 42.4 11.6 8.6 5.3 27.9 72.1 37.2 20.9 34.9 12.0 7.5
pH2 100.0 60.1 17.4 24.5 14.3 39.9 10.7 8.1 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.5 22.5 33.1 11.3 7.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.9
2017 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
3 2018 502.2 365.2 182.9 148.3 11.0 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.0 322.2 185.5 131.7 136.7 26.4 54.4
p 2019 572.0 427.0 199.8 189.2 13.7 145.0 17.4 57.5 37.4 187.9 384.1 232.3 176.1 151.8 37.9 51.5
3 2018 H1 479.8 356.0 181.4 142.1 10.8 123.8 17.4 50.5 28.1 170.7 309.2 181.6 129.8 127.6 25.2 42.7
H2 502.2 365.2 182.9 148.3 11.0 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.0 322.2 185.5 131.7 136.7 26.4 54.4
2019 H1 544.6 412.3 193.2 181.6 11.9 132.3 17.3 54.7 29.7 175.4 369.1 220.5 162.9 148.6 41.7 48.3
pH2 572.0 427.0 199.8 189.2 13.7 145.0 17.4 57.5 37.4 187.9 384.1 232.3 176.1 151.8 37.9 51.5
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.3
2017 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
3 2018 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.2 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.8 35.8 64.2 36.9 26.2 27.2 5.3 10.8
p 2019 100.0 74.7 34.9 33.1 2.4 25.3 3.0 10.1 6.5 32.9 67.2 40.6 30.8 26.6 6.6 9.0
3 2018 H1 100.0 74.2 37.8 29.6 2.3 25.8 3.6 10.5 5.9 35.6 64.4 37.8 27.1 26.6 5.2 8.9
H2 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.2 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.8 35.8 64.2 36.9 26.2 27.2 5.3 10.8
2019 H1 100.0 75.7 35.5 33.3 2.2 24.3 3.2 10.1 5.5 32.2 67.8 40.5 29.9 27.3 7.7 8.9
pH2 100.0 74.7 34.9 33.1 2.4 25.3 3.0 10.1 6.5 32.9 67.2 40.6 30.8 26.6 6.6 9.0
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From this point onwards: significant changes in
IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 – 0.4 5.4 10.2 17.5 95.7 – 7.7 6.2 – 0.9 2.0 6.1 11.0
2013 1,541.1 – 0.6 187.2 – 2.8 12.2 – 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.5 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 2.0 5.9 11.1
2014 1,565.7 1.0 198.9 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.5 109.4 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.2
2015 1,635.4 6.9 196.2 – 1.0 12.0 – 1.0 6.1 10.6 18.1 91.7 – 16.3 5.6 – 1.5 1.7 6.7 11.6
2016 1,626.1 – 0.4 214.9 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.5 18.1 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,721.7 5.1 243.9 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.4 33.2 8.3 1.7 2.5 6.9 12.2
6 2018 1,709.6 0.7 233.4 – 0.8 13.7 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.7 – 6.2 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
p 2019 1,768.2 2.6 234.5 0.5 13.3 – 0.3 6.9 12.3 19.2 106.3 – 17.5 6.0 – 1.5 1.5 5.9 11.8
2015 H1 815.3 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 – 0.4 5.0 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.3 – 0.5 1.2 5.9 10.9
H2 831.4 5.1 93.6 – 7.6 11.3 – 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.5 32.7 – 36.6 3.9 – 2.5 2.3 7.2 11.7
2016 H1 782.7 – 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 6.1 10.5 18.0 65.7 2.9 8.4 0.4 1.7 6.4 11.4
H2 843.4 1.1 103.1 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.2 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.6 12.5
2017 H1 845.0 6.8 125.9 14.5 14.9 1.0 5.8 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.4 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.7
H2 879.8 3.5 117.7 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.4 63.2 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.5 12.4
6 2018 H1 849.5 – 0.0 120.7 – 2.4 14.2 – 0.4 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.9 – 5.2 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 870.9 1.4 115.2 0.9 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.3 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.7 12.5
2019 H1 862.9 2.7 112.7 – 3.6 13.1 – 0.9 6.5 11.7 18.6 53.7 – 23.1 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
pH2 905.7 2.5 121.8 4.6 13.5 0.3 6.8 11.9 20.0 52.6 – 10.9 5.8 – 0.9 0.9 6.1 12.6
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2012 1,173.8 7.8 140.8 5.3 12.0 – 0.3 5.8 10.3 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 – 0.4 1.9 6.1 9.8
2013 1,179.0 – 0.8 138.8 – 2.5 11.8 – 0.2 5.1 10.3 15.7 74.5 – 5.7 6.3 – 0.3 1.6 5.8 10.5
2014 1,197.4 1.0 148.1 5.9 12.4 0.6 5.6 10.0 15.5 82.0 9.7 6.9 0.6 1.5 5.9 10.3
2015 1,282.5 7.0 144.0 – 2.6 11.2 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.0 65.2 – 19.8 5.1 – 1.8 2.1 6.5 10.3
2016 1,267.1 – 1.1 156.5 6.1 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 80.6 3.9 6.4 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,362.9 5.6 181.6 16.8 13.3 1.3 6.8 10.9 15.6 108.0 40.8 7.9 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,334.9 1.0 169.1 – 1.6 12.7 – 0.3 6.8 10.6 15.6 95.5 – 7.1 7.2 – 0.6 2.7 6.8 10.9
p 2019 1,376.3 2.1 161.2 – 3.9 11.7 – 0.7 6.6 11.3 16.6 71.8 – 23.1 5.2 – 1.8 1.2 5.7 10.0
2015 H1 636.4 8.8 80.1 7.9 12.6 – 0.1 5.4 10.2 15.5 48.8 5.6 7.7 – 0.2 2.1 6.1 10.0
H2 646.7 5.3 63.9 – 13.2 9.9 – 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.6 16.4 – 52.4 2.5 – 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.7
2016 H1 611.3 – 2.5 84.0 1.4 13.7 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.8 50.7 – 7.0 8.3 – 0.4 2.9 6.4 10.0
H2 655.9 0.4 72.6 12.0 11.1 1.2 6.2 11.3 16.4 29.9 34.5 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.6
2017 H1 678.7 7.3 98.5 18.8 14.5 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 64.0 37.6 9.4 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
H2 684.9 3.9 83.1 14.5 12.1 1.2 6.9 11.7 16.5 44.0 45.8 6.4 1.9 3.4 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 665.8 – 0.1 90.9 – 3.9 13.7 – 0.5 6.5 10.8 16.7 57.1 – 6.0 8.6 – 0.6 2.9 6.6 11.5
H2 678.8 2.1 80.6 1.2 11.9 – 0.1 6.2 11.1 15.9 39.8 – 8.6 5.9 – 0.7 1.9 6.4 10.9
2019 H1 673.0 2.5 80.0 – 7.8 11.9 – 1.3 7.1 10.6 16.0 39.7 – 26.2 5.9 – 2.4 1.7 5.8 9.4
pH2 703.4 1.7 81.2 0.3 11.6 – 0.2 5.9 10.8 16.5 32.2 – 19.0 4.6 – 1.2 0.6 5.2 11.1
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2012 359.1 2.8 48.0 – 3.2 13.4 – 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 – 46.6 3.9 – 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.2
2013 362.0 – 0.1 48.4 – 3.5 13.4 – 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 82.0 6.9 2.9 2.4 5.9 12.5
2014 368.3 0.9 50.8 1.9 13.8 0.1 6.2 12.7 22.6 27.3 4.3 7.4 0.2 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.2 52.2 4.4 14.8 – 0.3 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 – 3.1 7.5 – 0.7 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.6 58.4 14.0 16.3 1.6 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 26.5 8.8 1.6 2.5 8.3 15.5
2017 358.7 3.2 62.3 7.6 17.4 0.7 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 10.2 9.6 0.6 2.4 7.5 15.1
6 2018 374.7 – 0.6 64.4 1.7 17.2 0.4 5.7 10.5 24.7 34.2 – 2.9 9.1 – 0.2 1.6 5.9 16.6
p 2019 391.8 4.8 73.3 14.1 18.7 1.5 6.9 14.3 24.5 34.5 2.1 8.8 – 0.2 3.0 7.6 16.2
2015 H1 178.9 8.2 22.8 – 2.5 12.7 – 1.4 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 – 19.7 5.8 – 1.8 – 0.5 4.5 14.2
H2 184.7 4.5 29.7 10.3 16.1 0.8 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.7 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016 H1 171.5 1.0 27.8 26.8 16.2 3.3 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 68.2 8.7 3.4 1.0 6.4 14.9
H2 187.4 4.1 30.6 4.2 16.3 0.0 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.8 8.8 – 0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2017 H1 166.3 4.4 27.4 – 0.4 16.5 – 0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 – 1.0 8.8 – 0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
H2 195.0 2.0 34.7 14.9 17.8 2.1 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.2 20.8 9.9 1.5 3.0 8.2 17.9
6 2018 H1 183.7 0.5 29.8 3.4 16.2 0.5 4.0 9.7 22.9 15.8 – 1.0 8.6 – 0.1 – 0.9 5.1 15.5
H2 192.1 – 1.6 34.6 0.3 18.0 0.3 6.8 12.1 25.6 18.4 – 4.3 9.6 – 0.3 2.7 7.2 17.8
2019 H1 189.9 3.8 32.7 11.5 17.2 1.2 5.8 12.7 24.8 14.1 – 9.1 7.4 – 1.0 0.3 5.4 15.2
pH2 202.3 5.7 40.6 16.3 20.1 1.8 7.5 15.1 24.4 20.4 11.0 10.1 0.5 3.2 8.3 16.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From this point on-
wards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous pe-
riods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
August 2020
XII. External sector
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2019 2020
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q3 Q4 Q1 Mar. Apr. May  p
Current account + 348,321 + 354,366 + 316,912 + 112,346 + 104,726 + 38,632 + 26,926 + 9,869 − 10,517A.
1. Goods
Exports 2,262,690 2,343,289 2,404,758 600,072 620,397 577,862 198,328 143,693 148,288Imports 1,918,283 2,047,583 2,080,959 514,471 523,732 501,461 160,241 130,670 132,857
Balance + 344,409 + 295,704 + 323,797 + 85,601 + 96,664 + 76,400 + 38,086 + 13,023 + 15,431
2. Services
Receipts 884,226 927,290 993,024 264,082 260,784 221,218 71,117 60,648 62,943Expenditure 810,589 811,849 924,001 219,575 264,231 235,115 75,846 58,594 60,313
Balance + 73,639 + 115,445 + 69,022 + 44,506 − 3,448 − 13,898 − 4,730 + 2,054 + 2,630
3. Primary income
Receipts 717,874 777,687 800,158 195,094 210,011 180,966 60,291 58,887 55,807Expenditure 651,415 684,707 725,236 174,938 167,431 158,674 55,122 53,467 71,849
Balance + 66,459 + 92,980 + 74,922 + 20,157 + 42,581 + 22,292 + 5,169 + 5,420 − 16,043
4. Secondary income
Receipts 108,413 110,473 112,995 26,470 30,002 27,354 9,303 8,866 10,073Expenditure 244,597 260,233 263,824 64,388 61,074 73,518 20,904 19,495 22,608
Balance − 136,185 − 149,760 − 150,831 − 37,919 − 31,073 − 46,164 − 11,600 − 10,628 − 12,535
Capital account − 20,358 − 34,985 − 19,829 + 1,997 − 2,214 − 24 − 181 + 424 + 1,066B.
Financial account (increase: +) + 347,430 + 380,916 + 276,310 + 109,466 + 80,007 + 24,139 + 7,562 − 5,655 + 18,570C.
1. Direct investment − 40,567 + 126,099 + 15,215 + 29,865 − 33,000 + 20,610 − 13,974 − 20,988 − 11,659
By resident units abroad + 249,168 − 202,733 + 128,078 + 180,789 − 82,360 − 41,698 − 64,107 − 14,410 + 141,046By non-resident units in the euro area + 289,738 − 328,832 + 112,865 + 150,926 − 49,361 − 62,309 − 50,133 + 6,578 + 152,705
2. Portfolio investment + 373,606 + 224,007 − 59,846 − 42,276 + 144,091 − 195,471 − 111,045 + 151,135 + 32,013
By resident units abroad + 659,671 + 209,484 + 408,301 + 149,220 + 144,970 − 144,880 − 215,970 + 161,388 + 99,333
Equity and
investment fund shares + 206,186 + 51,904 + 65,614 − 15,475 + 78,126 − 52,085 − 78,213 + 34,435 + 27,398
Long-term debt securities + 377,230 + 191,370 + 351,923 + 106,866 + 92,564 − 40,836 − 99,478 + 33,747 + 54,727Short-term debt securities + 76,255 − 33,790 − 9,238 + 57,828 − 25,721 − 51,960 − 38,279 + 93,207 + 17,208
By non-resident units in the euro area + 286,061 − 14,524 + 468,149 + 191,496 + 879 + 50,592 − 104,925 + 10,254 + 67,320
Equity and
investment fund shares + 409,596 + 140,335 + 288,948 + 151,870 + 73,747 − 58,094 − 121,099 + 70,336 + 54,381
Long-term debt securities − 133,963 − 72,730 + 191,612 + 14,124 − 26,537 + 37,364 − 39,619 − 51,802 − 22,913Short-term debt securities + 10,429 − 82,127 − 12,411 + 25,503 − 46,332 + 71,323 + 55,794 − 8,280 + 35,852
3. Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 25,380 + 92,450 + 36,814 + 4,203 − 5,532 + 42,250 + 8,927 + 3,954 + 1,496
4. Other investment − 9,712 − 86,665 + 280,898 + 117,536 − 23,033 + 153,325 + 120,103 − 141,440 − 4,895
Eurosystem − 179,132 − 133,561 + 141,369 + 34,346 − 37,497 − 58,129 − 153,393 − 36,325 + 13,109General government + 25,542 − 6,644 + 97 − 6,529 + 11,188 + 3,961 + 1,402 + 1,538 − 4,150MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 153,019 + 97,910 + 185,951 + 68,725 + 12,116 + 112,036 + 178,617 − 115,370 − 10,324Enterprises and households − 9,146 − 44,368 − 46,525 + 20,993 − 8,842 + 95,456 + 93,477 + 8,717 − 3,530
5. Reserve assets − 1,279 + 25,021 + 3,231 + 139 − 2,518 + 3,427 + 3,551 + 1,684 + 1,615
Net errors and omissions + 19,464 + 61,533 − 20,774 − 4,877 − 22,506 − 14,469 − 19,183 − 15,948 + 28,021D.
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary  
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
August 2020
XII. External sector
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.)  1 
of which:
Supple-mentary Balance of of which: Errorstrade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  
2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2005 + 106,942 + 156,563 − 6,515 − 37,580 + 19,300 − 31,341 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 8,172
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 − 4,687 − 31,777 + 40,499 − 32,014 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 20,7962007 + 171,493 + 201,728 − 1,183 − 32,465 + 35,620 − 33,390 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,2732008 + 144,954 + 184,160 − 3,947 − 29,122 + 24,063 − 34,147 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 22,7252009 + 142,744 + 140,626 − 6,605 − 17,642 + 54,524 − 34,764 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 − 6,209 − 25,255 + 51,306 − 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 − 9,357 − 29,930 + 69,087 − 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 46,9022012 + 195,712 + 199,531 − 11,388 − 30,774 + 65,658 − 38,703 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 43,8822013 + 184,352 + 203,802 − 12,523 − 39,321 + 63,284 − 43,413 − 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,2242014 + 210,906 + 219,629 − 14,296 − 25,303 + 57,752 − 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 − 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 − 15,405 − 18,516 + 69,262 − 38,854 − 48 + 234,392 − 2,213 − 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 − 19,921 − 20,987 + 76,199 − 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 − 7,7082017 + 253,883 + 252,831 − 15,448 − 24,372 + 75,419 − 49,995 − 2,999 + 283,208 − 1,269 + 32,3232018 + 247,471 + 226,275 − 20,613 − 19,686 + 89,453 − 48,571 + 436 + 236,936 + 392 − 10,9712019 + 243,991 + 220,993 − 28,012 − 21,703 + 92,312 − 47,612 − 323 + 205,543 − 544 − 38,125
2017         Q3 + 62,309 + 65,287 − 3,393 − 12,553 + 20,478 − 10,904 + 414 + 60,600 + 152 − 2,123
         Q4 + 72,464 + 59,651 − 6,472 − 2,974 + 28,816 − 13,029 − 3,322 + 80,237 − 1,446 + 11,094
2018         Q1 + 72,518 + 64,662 − 1,877 − 2,379 + 24,754 − 14,520 + 3,656 + 75,991 + 699 − 183
         Q2 + 65,001 + 65,174 − 3,051 − 2,912 + 8,042 − 5,302 − 508 + 61,968 − 374 − 2,526         Q3 + 51,101 + 51,183 − 4,170 − 12,695 + 24,845 − 12,232 − 1,642 + 40,976 − 493 − 8,482         Q4 + 58,852 + 45,257 − 11,515 − 1,700 + 31,812 − 16,517 − 1,069 + 58,001 + 560 + 219
2019         Q1 + 64,255 + 56,751 − 4,195 − 1,755 + 25,936 − 16,677 + 844 + 40,491 − 63 − 24,607
         Q2 + 53,438 + 52,954 − 7,003 − 3,998 + 10,714 − 6,232 − 406 + 42,597 + 444 − 10,435         Q3 + 58,809 + 59,614 − 6,859 − 13,011 + 24,513 − 12,308 + 197 + 29,606 − 349 − 29,400         Q4 + 67,489 + 51,675 − 9,954 − 2,939 + 31,148 − 12,395 − 958 + 92,848 − 576 + 26,317
2020         Q1 + 65,440 + 53,573 − 2,210 − 1,125 + 27,016 − 14,024 − 541 + 33,927 + 133 − 30,971
         Q2  
p + 38,486 + 29,669 − 649 + 3,524 + 14,762 − 9,469 + 279 + 41,918 + 243 + 3,153
2018         Jan. + 20,752 + 18,283 − 1,303 − 1,115 + 8,716 − 5,132 + 3,658 + 34,045 − 121 + 9,634
         Feb. + 20,755 + 19,988 − 498 − 131 + 6,259 − 5,360 + 227 + 13,199 + 583 − 7,784         Mar. + 31,010 + 26,391 − 76 − 1,133 + 9,780 − 4,028 − 230 + 28,747 + 236 − 2,033
         Apr. + 23,518 + 21,136 − 1,475 + 49 + 4,866 − 2,533 + 119 + 31,696 − 670 + 8,059
         May + 14,544 + 21,195 − 189 − 1,448 − 5,308 + 105 − 143 + 8,832 + 83 − 5,569         June + 26,939 + 22,843 − 1,388 − 1,513 + 8,483 − 2,874 − 485 + 21,439 + 213 − 5,016
         July + 14,275 + 16,174 − 764 − 4,944 + 7,857 − 4,812 − 368 + 6,223 + 266 − 7,684
         Aug. + 16,805 + 17,232 − 1,536 − 5,192 + 8,462 − 3,697 − 41 + 23,333 − 640 + 6,569         Sep. + 20,020 + 17,777 − 1,870 − 2,560 + 8,526 − 3,723 − 1,234 + 11,420 − 119 − 7,366
         Oct. + 18,495 + 18,411 − 1,812 − 4,210 + 8,651 − 4,357 − 945 + 3,533 + 700 − 14,017
         Nov. + 20,435 + 16,693 − 4,707 + 510 + 8,799 − 5,566 − 586 + 25,067 − 124 + 5,218         Dec. + 19,921 + 10,153 − 4,995 + 2,000 + 14,362 − 6,595 + 462 + 29,401 − 17 + 9,018
2019         Jan. + 17,593 + 14,289 − 2,284 − 983 + 9,324 − 5,037 + 2,163 + 16,856 + 158 − 2,900
         Feb. + 15,816 + 17,760 − 1,453 − 405 + 6,479 − 8,018 + 143 + 15,799 + 112 − 160         Mar. + 30,845 + 24,702 − 459 − 368 + 10,133 − 3,622 − 1,463 + 7,836 − 333 − 21,547
         Apr. + 20,631 + 17,561 − 2,277 − 715 + 7,453 − 3,668 − 73 + 20,138 + 547 − 420
         May + 13,305 + 19,161 − 2,905 − 258 − 6,395 + 797 − 37 + 5,567 + 182 − 7,701         June + 19,502 + 16,232 − 1,821 − 3,025 + 9,656 − 3,361 − 296 + 16,892 − 285 − 2,314
         July + 19,395 + 21,451 − 2,739 − 4,723 + 7,265 − 4,599 + 201 + 8,459 + 348 − 11,137
         Aug. + 15,937 + 16,912 − 1,358 − 5,514 + 8,747 − 4,208 + 773 + 8,178 + 755 − 8,533         Sep. + 23,477 + 21,251 − 2,762 − 2,774 + 8,501 − 3,501 − 777 + 12,970 − 1,452 − 9,730
         Oct. + 18,923 + 21,250 − 2,866 − 6,137 + 8,431 − 4,621 − 893 + 32,238 − 107 + 14,208
         Nov. + 23,282 + 17,643 − 2,549 + 480 + 8,727 − 3,568 − 498 + 34,837 − 356 + 12,053         Dec. + 25,284 + 12,782 − 4,539 + 2,718 + 13,990 − 4,206 + 433 + 25,773 − 113 + 55
2020         Jan. + 16,607 + 14,306 − 744 − 740 + 10,194 − 7,153 + 301 + 248 + 898 − 16,660
         Feb. + 23,347 + 20,495 − 1,664 − 243 + 7,275 − 4,181 + 65 + 18,172 + 750 − 5,239         Mar. + 25,486 + 18,772 + 199 − 142 + 9,547 − 2,690 − 907 + 15,507 − 1,514 − 9,073
         Apr. + 9,093 + 4,155 − 536 + 791 + 8,471 − 4,324 + 132 + 13,506 + 950 + 4,281
         May + 6,986 + 9,365 + 870 + 1,142 − 88 − 3,432 + 65 + 2,104 + 33 − 4,948         June  
p + 22,407 + 16,150 − 983 + 1,591 + 6,378 − 1,712 + 81 + 26,309 − 740 + 3,820
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions resulting from the difference between the balance on the finan cial account
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account . 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
August 2020
 XII. External sector
 
 3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
  by country and group of countries*
 
 € million
 2020
Group of countries/country  2017  2018  2019 Feb. Mar. Apr. May June  p Jan./June  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,278,958 1,317,440 1,327,772 576,847 109,163 108,931 75,801 80,204 96,117
Imports 1,031,013 1,088,720 1,104,568 499,423 88,881 91,708 72,156 73,217 80,542Balance + 247,946 + 228,720 + 223,204 + 77,424 + 20,282 + 17,223 + 3,645 + 6,987 + 15,575
I. Exports 872,427 900,141 902,684 394,831 75,435 74,128 50,258 54,239 66,545European countries
Imports 699,677 744,575 747,986 331,965 62,373 61,697 45,288 47,452 54,629Balance + 172,749 + 155,566 + 154,698 + 62,865 + 13,062 + 12,431 + 4,970 + 6,787 + 11,916
Exports 664,410 696,480 698,382 304,005 58,509 55,689 38,283 42,330 51,180 1. EU Member States (27)
Imports 549,250 586,433 593,152 263,695 49,381 48,771 35,259 38,429 44,809Balance + 115,160 + 110,047 + 105,230 + 40,310 + 9,128 + 6,918 + 3,024 + 3,902 + 6,371
Euro area (19) Exports 471,213 492,469 492,195 212,361 40,784 38,363 26,488 29,872 36,067
countries Imports 378,700 405,810 409,259 182,488 33,944 33,998 24,806 26,686 30,924
Balance + 92,513 + 86,659 + 82,936 + 29,874 + 6,840 + 4,365 + 1,682 + 3,187 + 5,143
of which:
Austria Exports 62,656 65,027 66,096 28,936 5,407 5,222 3,899 4,276 4,798
Imports 40,686 42,994 44,095 19,339 3,631 3,565 2,806 2,769 3,212Balance + 21,970 + 22,033 + 22,001 + 9,597 + 1,776 + 1,656 + 1,094 + 1,507 + 1,586
Belgium and Exports 50,071 50,389 51,899 23,301 4,365 4,228 3,100 3,139 4,105
Luxembourg Imports 43,689 49,315 46,408 20,064 3,821 3,695 2,972 2,891 3,136
Balance + 6,381 + 1,074 + 5,492 + 3,236 + 544 + 532 + 128 + 249 + 969
France Exports 105,687 105,359 106,673 44,258 9,049 7,828 4,825 6,129 7,750
Imports 64,329 65,024 65,997 28,013 5,558 5,383 3,491 3,968 4,440Balance + 41,359 + 40,335 + 40,676 + 16,246 + 3,492 + 2,445 + 1,334 + 2,161 + 3,310
Italy Exports 65,422 69,813 68,074 29,059 5,745 5,053 3,350 4,375 4,894
Imports 55,342 60,223 57,230 25,460 4,980 4,696 3,238 3,883 4,321Balance + 10,080 + 9,591 + 10,843 + 3,599 + 764 + 357 + 112 + 492 + 573
Netherlands Exports 84,661 91,061 91,606 40,969 7,187 7,510 5,944 5,902 6,814
Imports 90,597 97,709 98,511 44,550 8,085 8,452 6,620 6,676 6,842Balance − 5,935 − 6,649 − 6,905 − 3,581 − 898 − 942 − 676 − 774 − 27
Spain Exports 43,067 44,184 44,311 18,064 3,615 3,385 1,955 2,357 3,108
Imports 31,396 32,399 33,189 15,349 2,897 2,620 1,811 2,227 3,056Balance + 11,671 + 11,785 + 11,122 + 2,715 + 718 + 765 + 144 + 130 + 52
Other EU Member Exports 193,198 204,011 206,187 91,644 17,725 17,326 11,795 12,458 15,113
States Imports 170,551 180,623 183,893 81,208 15,437 14,772 10,453 11,743 13,885
Balance + 22,647 + 23,388 + 22,294 + 10,436 + 2,288 + 2,553 + 1,342 + 715 + 1,228
Exports 208,016 203,661 204,301 90,825 16,926 18,439 11,975 11,909 15,365 2. Other European
Imports 150,427 158,142 154,833 68,270 12,992 12,926 10,030 9,023 9,820 countries
Balance + 57,589 + 45,519 + 49,468 + 22,555 + 3,934 + 5,513 + 1,946 + 2,886 + 5,545
of which:
Switzerland Exports 53,913 54,021 56,367 28,481 4,952 5,014 4,378 4,384 4,876
Imports 45,689 45,913 46,275 23,041 3,851 4,649 3,499 3,609 3,472Balance + 8,224 + 8,108 + 10,092 + 5,439 + 1,101 + 365 + 879 + 775 + 1,404
United Exports 85,440 82,164 78,871 31,337 6,151 7,430 3,230 3,436 5,028
Kingdom Imports 36,820 37,025 38,337 18,118 3,696 3,100 3,050 2,169 2,437
Balance + 48,620 + 45,139 + 40,534 + 13,219 + 2,455 + 4,331 + 180 + 1,267 + 2,591
II. Exports 403,490 413,483 421,496 181,279 33,492 34,790 25,449 25,906 29,494Non-European
Imports 328,606 342,980 355,360 166,624 26,380 29,847 26,740 25,630 25,756 countries
Balance + 74,884 + 70,503 + 66,136 + 14,655 + 7,112 + 4,943 − 1,290 + 276 + 3,737
Exports 25,431 22,524 23,734 10,037 1,912 2,000 1,425 1,187 1,605 1. Africa
Imports 20,428 22,542 24,442 8,912 1,732 1,804 1,129 899 1,216Balance + 5,003 − 18 − 708 + 1,124 + 181 + 196 + 296 + 288 + 389
Exports 154,644 158,952 165,358 67,169 13,375 14,055 8,657 8,659 9,979 2. America
Imports 89,927 92,444 99,885 45,933 7,963 9,033 7,779 6,323 6,248Balance + 64,717 + 66,508 + 65,473 + 21,236 + 5,412 + 5,023 + 878 + 2,337 + 3,731
of which:
Exports 111,805 113,341 118,659 48,849 9,533 10,221 6,277 6,473 7,321 United States
Imports 61,902 64,493 71,359 33,361 5,892 6,557 5,910 4,409 4,450Balance + 49,903 + 48,847 + 47,301 + 15,488 + 3,641 + 3,663 + 366 + 2,064 + 2,871
Exports 212,070 219,716 221,185 98,860 17,317 17,900 14,774 14,797 17,084 3. Asia
Imports 214,393 224,355 227,165 109,705 16,384 18,569 17,533 18,022 17,989Balance − 2,323 − 4,639 − 5,979 − 10,844 + 933 − 669 − 2,759 − 3,225 − 905
of which:
Middle East Exports 33,104 29,144 28,636 11,911 2,271 2,388 1,684 1,686 1,810
Imports 6,963 8,156 7,430 2,911 455 506 428 373 572Balance + 26,141 + 20,989 + 21,205 + 9,000 + 1,816 + 1,882 + 1,255 + 1,313 + 1,239
Japan Exports 19,546 20,436 20,663 8,723 1,649 1,603 1,131 1,424 1,283
Imports 22,955 23,710 23,995 10,745 1,829 2,100 1,637 1,378 1,670Balance − 3,410 − 3,275 − 3,332 − 2,022 − 180 − 496 − 506 + 46 − 387
Exports 86,141 93,004 95,973 44,227 6,745 7,479 7,240 7,158 8,306 People‘s Republic
Imports 101,837 106,065 109,955 55,540 7,413 7,939 9,374 10,709 9,692 of China  
2 
Balance − 15,695 − 13,061 − 13,982 − 11,313 − 669 − 460 − 2,135 − 3,551 − 1,386
Exports 53,425 54,995 54,144 25,532 4,869 4,679 3,763 3,486 4,164 New industrial countries
Imports 50,873 52,945 51,903 24,730 3,903 4,804 3,807 3,685 3,813 and emerging markets
Balance + 2,552 + 2,050 + 2,241 + 802 + 967 − 125 − 43 − 199 + 351 of Asia  3 
Exports 11,344 12,291 11,219 5,213 888 835 594 1,263 827 4. Oceania and
Imports 3,857 3,639 3,869 2,075 302 442 299 387 304 polar regions
Balance + 7,487 + 8,652 + 7,350 + 3,139 + 586 + 393 + 295 + 876 + 523
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, imports and aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong.
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of
the current position. EU excluding UK. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
August 2020
XII. External sector
 
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
  
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  
2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2015 − 18,516 − 5,203 − 36,595 + 8,621 +12,602 − 3,920 − 1,216 + 3,161 + 1,114 + 68,506 − 358
2016 − 20,987 − 5,950 − 38,247 + 8,612 +15,790 − 7,156 − 1,520 + 3,092 + 474 + 76,800 − 1,0762017 − 24,372 − 3,723 − 43,558 + 9,663 +14,759 − 8,181 − 690 + 2,177 − 521 + 77,314 − 1,3742018 − 19,686 − 1,808 − 44,543 + 9,610 +17,240 − 7,477 − 358 + 3,324 − 1,065 + 91,442 − 9242019 − 21,703 + 536 − 46,098 + 10,302 +17,889 − 9,330 − 2,798 + 3,568 − 1,347 + 94,453 − 793
2018         Q4 − 1,700 − 598 − 10,194 + 3,398 + 5,743 − 1,905 − 246 + 675 − 93 + 28,708 + 3,198
2019         Q1 − 1,755 − 438 − 6,692 + 2,057 + 4,481 − 2,559 − 573 + 921 + 361 + 26,360 − 785
         Q2 − 3,998 + 422 − 10,382 + 2,592 + 4,366 − 1,921 − 1,204 + 934 − 537 + 13,434 − 2,183         Q3 − 13,011 + 344 − 18,603 + 2,811 + 3,263 − 2,267 − 386 + 936 − 1,078 + 26,837 − 1,245         Q4 − 2,939 + 208 − 10,422 + 2,841 + 5,778 − 2,584 − 635 + 777 − 93 + 27,821 + 3,420
2020         Q1 − 1,125 − 452 − 5,386 + 1,857 + 4,387 − 2,259 − 926 + 785 + 407 + 27,603 − 994
         Q2  
p + 3,524 − 1,263 − 1,490 + 2,434 + 4,931 − 1,510 − 1,303 + 786 − 49 + 17,193 − 2,382
2019         Aug. − 5,514 + 50 − 7,191 + 784 + 1,343 − 878 − 249 + 290 − 374 + 9,547 − 426
         Sep. − 2,774 + 248 − 5,813 + 753 + 1,189 − 424 + 529 + 389 − 321 + 9,239 − 417
         Oct. − 6,137 + 46 − 7,324 + 947 + 1,427 − 1,635 − 146 + 282 − 65 + 8,946 − 451
         Nov. + 480 + 261 − 1,821 + 737 + 1,254 − 439 − 152 + 257 − 32 + 9,147 − 387         Dec. + 2,718 − 99 − 1,277 + 1,157 + 3,097 − 510 − 336 + 238 + 3 + 9,729 + 4,258
2020         Jan. − 740 + 43 − 1,694 + 893 + 1,144 − 810 − 804 + 290 + 112 + 10,433 − 351
         Feb. − 243 + 51 − 1,967 + 545 + 1,425 − 641 − 46 + 241 + 136 + 7,381 − 242         Mar. − 142 − 546 − 1,725 + 419 + 1,818 − 808 − 77 + 254 + 159 + 9,789 − 401
         Apr. + 791 − 348 − 194 + 907 + 1,659 − 880 − 963 + 267 + 12 + 8,982 − 523
         May + 1,142 − 555 − 117 + 747 + 1,456 − 632 − 434 + 242 + 27 + 1,339 − 1,454         June  
p + 1,591 − 360 − 1,179 + 780 + 1,816 + 3 + 95 + 278 − 88 + 6,871 − 405
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001 the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which: of which:
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which: resident and Non-produced
international non-resident Workers’ Capital income, wealth, non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2015 − 38,854 − 24,087 − 6,805 + 10,455 − 14,766 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 48 + 1,787 − 1,835
2016 − 40,931 − 25,417 − 11,516 + 10,739 − 15,514 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 2,142 + 3,219 − 1,0772017 − 49,995 − 22,488 − 9,852 + 10,372 − 27,506 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 2,999 + 922 − 3,9212018 − 48,571 − 28,524 − 10,098 + 10,275 − 20,047 − 5,152 − 5,142 + 436 + 3,453 − 3,0172019 − 47,612 − 28,599 − 10,428 + 11,758 − 19,013 − 5,445 − 5,431 − 323 + 2,795 − 3,118
2018         Q4 − 16,517 − 11,184 − 4,557 + 1,159 − 5,333 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 1,069 + 843 − 1,912
2019         Q1 − 16,677 − 12,363 − 2,794 + 2,093 − 4,314 − 1,360 − 1,358 + 844 + 652 + 192
         Q2 − 6,232 − 591 − 1,354 + 6,701 − 5,641 − 1,361 − 1,358 − 406 + 20 − 426         Q3 − 12,308 − 7,712 − 1,890 + 1,616 − 4,595 − 1,363 − 1,358 + 197 + 1,271 − 1,073         Q4 − 12,395 − 7,933 − 4,389 + 1,348 − 4,462 − 1,363 − 1,358 − 958 + 853 − 1,811
2020         Q1 − 14,024 − 9,690 − 2,318 + 2,477 − 4,334 − 1,482 − 1,477 − 541 − 741 + 200
         Q2  
p − 9,469 − 5,515 − 2,262 + 3,832 − 3,954 − 1,480 − 1,477 + 279 + 481 − 202
2019         Aug. − 4,208 − 2,683 − 629 + 386 − 1,525 − 455 − 453 + 773 + 906 − 132
         Sep. − 3,501 − 2,119 − 461 + 836 − 1,382 − 454 − 453 − 777 − 358 − 419
         Oct. − 4,621 − 3,216 − 970 + 230 − 1,405 − 454 − 453 − 893 − 425 − 468
         Nov. − 3,568 − 2,125 − 1,296 + 220 − 1,443 − 453 − 453 − 498 − 32 − 467         Dec. − 4,206 − 2,591 − 2,123 + 899 − 1,615 − 455 − 453 + 433 + 1,309 − 876
2020         Jan. − 7,153 − 5,705 − 1,060 + 331 − 1,448 − 494 − 492 + 301 + 32 + 269
         Feb. − 4,181 − 2,689 − 645 + 1,049 − 1,492 − 494 − 492 + 65 − 267 + 331         Mar. − 2,690 − 1,296 − 614 + 1,097 − 1,394 − 494 − 492 − 907 − 507 − 400
         Apr. − 4,324 − 2,961 − 483 + 243 − 1,363 − 494 − 492 + 132 + 192 − 60
         May − 3,432 − 2,212 − 688 + 2,307 − 1,221 − 493 − 492 + 65 − 36 + 101         June  
p − 1,712 − 342 − 1,091 + 1,282 − 1,370 − 494 − 492 + 81 + 324 − 243
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
August 2020
XII. External sector
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2019 2020
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q4 Q1 Q2  p Apr. May June  p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 406,588 + 390,059 + 213,212 − 49,356 + 268,942 + 132,442 + 29,305 + 16,540 + 86,597
1. Direct investment + 143,931 + 148,042 + 119,972 + 23,475 + 51,695 + 5,526 − 13,644 + 8,891 + 10,278
Equity + 92,843 + 147,471 + 105,956 + 29,921 + 41,164 + 23,361 + 10,401 + 7,058 + 5,903
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 32,233 + 34,769 + 40,983 + 1,117 + 16,572 + 4,725 + 4,051 − 593 + 1,268
Debt instruments + 51,088 + 571 + 14,016 − 6,446 + 10,531 − 17,836 − 24,045 + 1,834 + 4,375
2. Portfolio investment + 115,466 + 83,229 + 123,681 + 32,768 + 8,730 + 58,756 + 17,129 + 13,112 + 28,515
Shares  2 + 14,673 + 9,613 + 14,248 + 9,407 + 4,988 + 18,865 + 5,710 + 5,984 + 7,171
Investment fund shares  3 + 58,562 + 28,263 + 52,930 + 20,920 − 14,167 + 14,274 + 5,526 + 5,877 + 2,871
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 42,724 + 41,577 + 54,493 + 4,408 + 15,801 + 23,570 + 4,915 + 4,553 + 14,101
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 492 + 3,776 + 2,009 − 1,968 + 2,107 + 2,048 + 978 − 3,303 + 4,373
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 10,974 + 23,126 + 22,383 + 1,772 + 32,058 + 31,526 + 13,749 + 5,421 + 12,355
4. Other investment  7 + 137,485 + 135,271 − 52,280 − 106,796 + 176,326 + 36,391 + 11,121 − 10,918 + 36,188
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 20,985 + 49,862 + 9,292 − 72,576 + 104,408 − 47,096 + 11,118 − 18,914 − 39,300
Long-term + 19,642 + 4,462 + 18,194 − 3,247 − 4,261 − 1,101 + 1,892 + 1,097 − 4,091Short-term − 40,627 + 45,400 − 8,901 − 69,329 + 108,669 − 45,995 + 9,226 − 20,011 − 35,210
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 5,827 + 37,324 + 13,584 − 964 + 24,397 + 22,262 + 17,055 + 9,939 − 4,732
Long-term − 2,291 + 17,182 + 10,566 + 5,775 + 9,160 + 5,744 + 3,798 + 1,594 + 352Short-term + 8,118 + 20,143 + 3,018 − 6,739 + 15,237 + 16,518 + 13,256 + 8,345 − 5,083
General government − 3,993 − 8,710 − 4,242 − 12,009 + 4,385 + 1,024 + 1,396 + 870 − 1,241
Long-term − 4,408 − 999 − 3,103 − 981 − 289 − 144 + 72 + 117 − 332Short-term + 415 − 7,711 − 1,139 − 11,028 + 4,674 + 1,168 + 1,324 + 753 − 909
Bundesbank + 156,637 + 56,795 − 70,915 − 21,247 + 43,136 + 60,201 − 18,448 − 2,812 + 81,461
5. Reserve assets − 1,269 + 392 − 544 − 576 + 133 + 243 + 950 + 33 − 740
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(increase: +) + 123,380 + 153,123 + 7,670 − 142,203 + 235,015 + 90,524 + 15,799 + 14,437 + 60,288
1. Direct investment + 105,218 + 143,602 + 64,284 − 1,710 + 30,053 + 2,178 − 11,756 + 9,716 + 4,217
Equity + 40,568 + 60,751 + 40,113 + 22,614 + 10,536 + 5,669 + 1,110 + 4,159 + 401
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 17,094 + 15,743 + 17,310 + 2,189 + 6,006 + 1,876 + 1,010 + 858 + 7
Debt instruments + 64,650 + 82,851 + 24,172 − 24,324 + 19,517 − 3,491 − 12,866 + 5,558 + 3,817
2. Portfolio investment − 89,846 − 73,978 + 28,479 − 38,738 + 49,231 + 58,442 − 9,120 + 38,727 + 28,835
Shares  2 − 705 − 30,651 − 6,392 − 2,801 − 6,120 − 9,010 − 5,887 − 1,912 − 1,210
Investment fund shares  3 − 2,519 − 6,298 − 4,963 + 1,400 − 797 + 205 + 227 − 411 + 389
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 72,291 − 41,376 + 32,911 − 20,338 + 29,298 + 34,167 − 8,674 + 29,574 + 13,268
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 14,330 + 4,348 + 6,923 − 16,999 + 26,850 + 33,081 + 5,215 + 11,477 + 16,389
3. Other investment  7 + 108,008 + 83,499 − 85,093 − 101,755 + 155,731 + 29,903 + 36,674 − 34,006 + 27,235
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 17,508 − 35,902 − 10,010 − 134,499 + 181,993 − 1,879 + 9,507 − 15,852 + 4,467
Long-term + 7,574 − 8,433 + 10,968 + 979 + 12,909 + 8,172 + 76 + 973 + 7,124Short-term + 9,935 − 27,469 − 20,978 − 135,479 + 169,084 − 10,051 + 9,431 − 16,825 − 2,657
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 22,063 + 14,829 + 21,959 − 2,994 + 26,093 + 29,287 + 29,972 − 17,287 + 16,602
Long-term + 6,881 + 7,805 + 12,412 + 1,609 + 5,945 − 526 + 351 + 2,231 − 3,108Short-term + 15,182 + 7,024 + 9,547 − 4,603 + 20,149 + 29,813 + 29,621 − 19,518 + 19,710
General government − 8,719 + 2,926 + 257 − 11,968 + 3,478 + 1,364 − 1,081 + 2,730 − 285
Long-term − 3,724 + 697 + 133 − 449 + 565 − 104 − 22 − 15 − 66Short-term − 4,996 + 2,230 + 124 − 11,519 + 2,914 + 1,468 − 1,058 + 2,745 − 218
Bundesbank + 77,156 + 101,646 − 97,299 + 47,706 − 55,834 + 1,131 − 1,724 − 3,597 + 6,452
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 283,208 + 236,936 + 205,543 + 92,848 + 33,927 + 41,918 + 13,506 + 2,104 + 26,309
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
August 2020
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
  
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts positiondrawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col. 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col. 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan.  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,6702003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,9212016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,7272017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,673 474,1722018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,688 439,293
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 673,626 487,345
2017         Nov. 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 576,562 515,270
         Dec. 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,673 474,172
2018         Jan. 1,114,774 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,665 882,043 53,165 617,080 497,694
         Feb. 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 636,808 511,171         Mar. 1,158,983 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 939,229 923,466 53,924 678,955 480,029
         Apr. 1,139,056 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 917,971 902,364 54,115 633,741 505,314
         May 1,198,995 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 973,323 956,150 54,203 656,505 542,490         June 1,213,511 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 991,577 976,266 54,857 701,011 512,500
         July 1,147,878 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 930,107 913,270 54,463 666,323 481,554
         Aug. 1,145,283 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 929,073 912,448 53,864 644,636 500,647         Sep. 1,189,175 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,380 956,487 54,717 686,368 502,807
         Oct. 1,167,004 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 943,644 927,555 55,089 664,608 502,396
         Nov. 1,184,703 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 960,478 941,130 56,026 674,449 510,254         Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,688 439,293
2019         Jan. 1,123,169 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,039 648,602 474,568
         Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 634,080 493,375         Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 655,655 534,761
         Apr. 1,167,188 177,378 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,482 935,563 919,696 54,247 627,265 539,923
         May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 618,780 567,614         June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 649,898 551,143
         July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 622,006 512,343
         Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 638,696 534,944         Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 626,128 559,014
         Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 597,432 505,662
         Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 591,913 542,217         Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 673,626 487,345
2020         Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 582,526 508,198
         Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 577,841 528,192         Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 617,919 600,896
         Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 626,625 588,226
         May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925         June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
         July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to respective country designation), since November 2000 also bal ances with non-euro
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad. 4See
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5Euro opening
valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
August 2020
81•
XII. External sector
9. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2016 877,815 246,093 631,722 421,163 210,558 196,385 14,173 1,055,685 132,817 922,868 725,655 197,213 124,628 72,585
2017 897,685 218,669 679,016 453,895 225,121 211,461 13,660 1,107,500 142,473 965,027 764,104 200,923 130,887 70,036
2018 929,542 234,581 694,961 463,631 231,330 217,163 14,167 1,210,748 143,373 1,067,374 860,496 206,878 135,879 70,999
2019 947,344 225,353 721,991 489,939 232,052 216,675 15,377 1,257,797 162,100 1,095,697 888,066 207,630 134,394 73,236
2020 Jan. 958,458 238,705 719,753 492,472 227,281 211,398 15,883 1,261,870 158,772 1,103,098 901,497 201,601 126,646 74,955
Feb. 981,097 244,455 736,641 506,315 230,326 214,260 16,066 1,289,263 171,618 1,117,645 914,309 203,335 126,607 76,729
Mar. 968,276 231,201 737,075 505,995 231,080 215,112 15,968 1,307,465 173,067 1,134,398 931,021 203,377 127,123 76,255
Apr. 962,991 253,658 709,333 499,540 209,793 193,762 16,031 1,328,673 206,582 1,122,091 934,526 187,566 110,041 77,525
May 969,823 263,459 706,364 506,239 200,125 184,090 16,036 1,314,249 191,307 1,122,942 938,814 184,128 105,846 78,282
June 973,161 254,300 718,861 507,839 211,022 195,121 15,901 1,329,833 203,284 1,126,549 934,147 192,403 116,028 76,375
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2016 520,274 188,982 331,292 248,172 83,121 74,410 8,711 672,896 89,243 583,653 509,751 73,902 52,626 21,275
2017 519,346 167,197 352,148 260,241 91,907 83,432 8,475 715,975 92,715 623,260 540,950 82,310 62,079 20,231
2018 542,346 176,454 365,892 273,495 92,397 84,139 8,258 787,342 86,085 701,257 618,154 83,103 62,625 20,477
2019 560,077 175,004 385,073 294,466 90,607 82,278 8,330 804,572 88,201 716,371 631,133 85,238 63,845 21,392
2020 Jan. 566,902 183,038 383,864 293,260 90,604 82,367 8,237 821,423 91,330 730,093 647,612 82,480 60,453 22,027
Feb. 572,842 185,723 387,120 293,608 93,512 84,998 8,515 833,323 95,419 737,903 652,996 84,908 62,657 22,251
Mar. 561,263 175,511 385,752 293,111 92,641 84,286 8,355 843,226 100,926 742,300 659,109 83,191 60,804 22,386
Apr. 570,622 191,945 378,677 296,090 82,587 73,793 8,794 859,840 125,575 734,265 661,442 72,823 50,025 22,798
May 579,264 198,931 380,333 300,396 79,937 71,247 8,690 853,710 117,706 736,004 662,877 73,127 50,046 23,081
June 583,919 195,331 388,588 302,774 85,814 77,309 8,505 859,727 118,288 741,439 662,314 79,125 56,142 22,983
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2016 357,541 57,112 300,429 172,992 127,438 121,976 5,462 382,789 43,574 339,215 215,904 123,311 72,002 51,310
2017 378,339 51,472 326,867 193,654 133,214 128,029 5,185 391,525 49,758 341,767 223,154 118,613 68,809 49,804
2018 387,196 58,127 329,068 190,135 138,933 133,024 5,909 423,406 57,288 366,117 242,342 123,776 73,254 50,522
2019 387,267 50,349 336,918 195,473 141,444 134,397 7,047 453,224 73,899 379,326 256,933 122,392 70,549 51,843
2020 Jan. 391,556 55,667 335,889 199,211 136,677 129,031 7,646 440,448 67,442 373,005 253,884 119,121 66,193 52,928
Feb. 408,254 58,733 349,522 212,708 136,814 129,262 7,552 455,940 76,199 379,741 261,313 118,428 63,950 54,478
Mar. 407,013 55,690 351,323 212,884 138,439 130,826 7,613 464,239 72,140 392,098 271,912 120,187 66,318 53,868
Apr. 392,369 61,713 330,656 203,450 127,206 119,969 7,237 468,833 81,007 387,827 273,084 114,743 60,016 54,726
May 390,559 64,528 326,031 205,843 120,189 112,843 7,346 460,539 73,601 386,938 275,937 111,001 55,800 55,201
June 389,241 58,969 330,273 205,065 125,208 117,812 7,396 470,107 84,997 385,110 271,833 113,278 59,886 53,392
Euro area (19)
2016 450,914 171,302 279,612 214,911 64,701 57,972 6,729 613,595 70,202 543,393 487,188 56,204 41,334 14,870
2017 451,219 150,346 300,873 228,761 72,112 64,643 7,469 650,641 75,398 575,243 509,470 65,773 50,395 15,378
2018 466,584 156,425 310,159 238,570 71,588 64,391 7,197 723,072 68,499 654,573 588,121 66,452 50,655 15,797
2019 484,879 156,743 328,135 257,791 70,344 62,945 7,399 733,299 68,393 664,906 597,241 67,664 50,955 16,710
2020 Jan. 490,256 163,855 326,401 256,186 70,215 62,972 7,243 750,165 73,124 677,042 613,112 63,930 46,891 17,039
Feb. 498,675 169,015 329,660 257,493 72,167 64,657 7,510 756,646 73,044 683,602 617,594 66,008 48,784 17,224
Mar. 488,875 160,641 328,234 257,236 70,998 63,654 7,344 768,986 80,996 687,990 623,047 64,942 47,657 17,285
Apr. 496,760 172,558 324,202 259,552 64,650 56,870 7,780 788,300 103,454 684,846 626,882 57,964 40,488 17,476
May 501,356 176,735 324,622 262,842 61,780 54,146 7,633 777,957 92,207 685,750 628,154 57,596 39,916 17,679
June 504,362 173,113 331,249 264,744 66,505 59,054 7,451 785,143 96,185 688,958 627,015 61,943 44,191 17,752
Extra-Euro area (19)
2016 426,901 74,791 352,110 206,252 145,857 138,413 7,444 442,090 62,615 379,475 238,467 141,009 83,294 57,715
2017 446,465 68,323 378,142 225,134 153,008 146,818 6,191 456,859 67,076 389,784 254,634 135,149 80,492 54,658
2018 462,958 78,156 384,802 225,060 159,742 152,772 6,970 487,676 74,875 412,801 272,375 140,426 85,224 55,202
2019 462,465 68,610 393,855 232,148 161,708 153,730 7,978 524,498 93,707 430,791 290,825 139,966 83,440 56,526
2020 Jan. 468,202 74,850 393,352 236,285 157,066 148,427 8,640 511,705 85,649 426,056 288,385 137,671 79,754 57,917
Feb. 482,422 75,440 406,982 248,823 158,159 149,603 8,556 532,617 98,574 434,043 296,715 137,328 77,823 59,505
Mar. 479,401 70,560 408,841 248,759 160,082 151,458 8,624 538,479 92,071 446,409 307,974 138,435 79,465 58,970
Apr. 466,231 81,100 385,131 239,988 145,143 136,892 8,251 540,373 103,128 437,245 307,643 129,602 69,553 60,049
May 468,466 86,724 381,742 243,397 138,346 129,943 8,402 536,292 99,100 437,192 310,660 126,532 65,929 60,603
June 468,798 81,186 387,612 243,095 144,517 136,067 8,450 544,690 107,099 437,591 307,132 130,459 71,836 58,623
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
August 2020
XII. External sector
 
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
  
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.10692017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.12972018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.18102019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2019         Mar. 1.5959 1.5104 7.5868 7.4625 125.67 9.7181 10.4999 1.1311 0.85822 1.1302
         Apr. 1.5802 1.5035 7.5489 7.4650 125.44 9.6233 10.4819 1.1319 0.86179 1.1238
         May 1.6116 1.5058 7.6736 7.4675 122.95 9.7794 10.7372 1.1304 0.87176 1.1185         June 1.6264 1.5011 7.7937 7.4669 122.08 9.7465 10.6263 1.1167 0.89107 1.1293
         July 1.6061 1.4693 7.7151 7.4656 121.41 9.6587 10.5604 1.1076 0.89942 1.1218
         Aug. 1.6431 1.4768 7.8581 7.4602 118.18 9.9742 10.7356 1.0892 0.91554 1.1126         Sep. 1.6162 1.4578 7.8323 7.4634 118.24 9.9203 10.6968 1.0903 0.89092 1.1004
         Oct. 1.6271 1.4581 7.8447 7.4693 119.51 10.1165 10.8023 1.0981 0.87539 1.1053
         Nov. 1.6181 1.4630 7.7571 7.4720 120.34 10.1087 10.6497 1.0978 0.85761 1.1051         Dec. 1.6154 1.4640 7.7974 7.4720 121.24 10.0429 10.4827 1.0925 0.84731 1.1113
2020         Jan. 1.6189 1.4523 7.6832 7.4729 121.36 9.9384 10.5544 1.0765 0.84927 1.1100
         Feb. 1.6356 1.4485 7.6302 7.4713 120.03 10.1327 10.5679 1.0648 0.84095 1.0905         Mar. 1.7788 1.5417 7.7675 7.4703 118.90 11.2943 10.8751 1.0591 0.89460 1.1063
         Apr. 1.7271 1.5287 7.6858 7.4617 116.97 11.3365 10.8845 1.0545 0.87547 1.0862
         May 1.6724 1.5219 7.7482 7.4577 116.87 10.9862 10.5970 1.0574 0.88685 1.0902         June 1.6322 1.5254 7.9734 7.4548 121.12 10.7298 10.4869 1.0712 0.89878 1.1255
         July 1.6304 1.5481 8.0352 7.4467 122.38 10.6544 10.3538 1.0711 0.90467 1.1463
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.    
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.12602011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.64662014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.7028042015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
August 2020
XII.  External sector
 
12.  Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
Q1 1999 = 100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  4 
In real terms In real terms
of which: based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selected
consumer domestic national consumer Euro  area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 60 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.0 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.5 95.9 97.7 98.2 98.1 97.8
2000 87.2 86.8 86.1 85.8 88.1 86.1 91.9 97.4 85.5 91.1 93.0 92.2 91.2
2001 87.6 87.1 86.8 86.8 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.4 86.1 90.5 92.9 91.6 91.02002 89.9 90.2 89.9 90.4 94.5 90.5 92.3 95.5 88.6 91.0 93.4 92.1 91.92003 100.5 101.3 101.1 101.8 106.4 101.5 95.9 94.6 97.8 95.3 97.0 96.6 96.82004 104.3 105.2 104.0 105.2 110.8 105.3 96.2 93.4 100.2 95.6 98.4 98.1 98.5
2005 102.9 103.9 102.1 103.5 109.0 102.9 94.8 91.9 99.1 93.3 98.4 97.1 96.8
2006 102.9 103.9 101.6 102.4 109.1 102.3 93.6 90.3 98.5 91.6 98.5 96.7 96.02007 106.4 106.9 103.8 104.8 112.7 104.5 94.6 89.5 102.3 92.0 100.9 98.2 97.42008 110.2 109.8 106.0 109.0 117.4 106.9 94.9 88.2 105.4 91.3 102.3 98.4 97.62009 111.7 110.6 107.1 114.7 120.5 108.0 95.2 89.0 104.9 92.0 101.9 98.5 98.0
2010 104.5 102.9 99.0 106.7 111.9 99.0 92.6 88.6 98.4 88.2 98.8 94.2 92.5
2011 104.3 102.0 97.0 105.1 112.7 98.6 92.1 88.4 97.8 87.4 98.2 93.4 92.02012 98.6 96.8 91.5 99.0 107.5 93.8 90.1 88.2 92.6 84.7 95.9 90.5 89.02013 102.2 99.9 94.4 102.0 112.2 96.8 92.4 88.7 97.7 86.7 98.2 92.3 90.92014 102.4 99.3 94.3 102.6 114.6 97.2 92.9 89.5 97.8 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.6
2015 92.6 89.6 85.8 92.3 106.1 88.7 89.7 90.1 88.9 83.5 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.3 91.6 88.0
p 93.4 110.1 90.7 90.5 90.4 90.3 84.8 95.1 88.8 88.2
2017 97.5 93.5 89.0 p 94.2 112.4 91.9 91.4 90.3 93.0 85.3 96.4 89.9 89.0
2018 100.0 95.7 90.4 p 95.5 117.3 95.1 92.4 90.2 95.7 86.0 97.7 91.1 90.9
2019 98.2 93.3 88.6 p 92.9 115.5 92.4 91.5 90.4 92.9 85.1 96.4 89.9 89.5
2018         Feb. 100.9 96.3 91.3 p 96.2 117.3 95.1 93.0 90.1 97.3 86.4 98.2 91.3 90.8
         Mar. 101.0 96.7 117.5 95.5 98.4 91.6 91.1
         Apr. 100.8 96.4 117.6 95.5 98.4 91.4 91.1
         May 99.4 95.2 90.2 p 95.4 116.2 94.4 92.5 90.2 95.9 85.8 97.8 90.8 90.5
         June 99.1 94.9 116.1 94.3 97.5 90.7 90.4
         July 100.2 95.9 117.4 95.2 97.4 91.1 90.9
         Aug. 99.9 95.5 90.3 p 95.8 117.8 95.4 92.2 90.1 95.2 85.9 97.3 91.0 91.0
         Sep. 100.4 96.0 119.1 96.3 97.7 91.4 91.7
         Oct. 99.7 95.5 117.8 95.3 97.3 91.1 91.1
         Nov. 99.2 95.0 89.7 p 94.8 116.8 94.5 92.0 90.3 94.5 85.8 97.3 91.0 90.8
         Dec. 99.3 94.8 117.0 94.3 97.2 90.8 90.6
2019         Jan. 98.8 94.3 116.3 93.7 96.8 90.4 90.1
         Feb. 98.4 93.8 88.8 p 93.2 115.6 93.0 91.7 90.3 93.8 85.3 96.7 90.1 89.7
         Mar. 97.9 93.2 115.2 92.6 96.4 89.7 89.4
         Apr. 97.7 93.1 115.0 92.4 96.5 89.8 89.4
         May 98.2 93.4 88.6 p 93.0 115.7 92.8 91.6 90.4 93.3 85.1 96.6 90.1 89.7
         June 98.8 93.9 116.2 93.2 96.8 90.3 89.9
         July 98.4 93.4 115.4 92.3 96.7 90.1 89.5
         Aug. 98.9 93.9 88.8 p 93.2 116.2 92.9 91.3 90.4 92.6 85.1 96.6 90.3 89.8
         Sep. 98.2 93.1 115.3 92.1 96.1 89.9 89.3
         Oct. 98.1 92.9 115.3 91.9 96.1 89.7 89.2
         Nov. 97.5 92.2 88.2 p 92.0 114.6 91.3 91.2 90.6 91.9 85.0 96.0 89.4 88.8
         Dec. 97.4 92.1 114.7 91.1 95.9 89.4 88.8
2020         Jan. 97.0 91.4 114.2 90.5 95.9 89.0 88.4
         Feb. 96.3 90.7 88.0 p 92.9 113.5 89.9 91.2 90.8 91.6 85.0 95.6 88.8 88.2
         Mar. 99.0 93.1 117.8 p 93.2 96.6 90.2 p 90.2
         Apr. 98.2 p 92.7 117.5 p 93.1 96.3 p 90.1 p 90.4
         May 98.4 p 92.8 ... ... 117.6 p 93.0 ... ... ... ... 96.2 p 90.1 p 90.2
         June 99.8 p 94.0 119.1 p 94.1 p 97.0 p 90.7 p 90.8
         July 100.5 p 94.7 120.3 p 95.1 p 96.4 p 90.2 p 90.5
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the group EER-19 and
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German additionally Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, Ind ia, Indonesia, Is-
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to rael, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines , the Russian Fe-
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an deration, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and the
increase in competitiveness. The weights are based on trade in manufactured goods United Arab Emirates. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from
and, as from the publication of 1 July 2020, additionally on trade in services. For 2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 incl uding Cyprus
more detailed information on methodology, see the website of the Deutsche and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162). 1ECB calculations are including Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan,
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United Sta tes.5Euro
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, area countries (current composition) and countries belong ing to the group EER-19.
China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, 6Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the group
Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the EER-42. United States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2010 and 2019, see the index attached 
to the January 2020 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
September 2019
– The impact of wages on prices in Germany:  
evidence from selected empirical analyses
– State government budgets: analysis of de -
tailed results for 2018
– Longer- term changes in the unsecured inter -
bank money market
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2018October 2019
– The sustainable finance market: a stocktake
– The European market for investment funds 
and the role of bond funds in the low inter -
est rate environment
– Long- term outlook for the statutory pension 
insurance scheme
– Structural reforms in the euro area
November 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2019
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2020 and 2021 and 
an outlook for 2022
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2018
– The relevance of surveys of expectations for 
the Deutsche Bundesbank
– The mixing of euro coins in Germany
January 2020
– The upswing in loans to enterprises in Ger -
many between 2014 and 2019
– Consequences of increasing protectionism
February 2020
– The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
85•

March 2020
– German balance of payments in 2019
– Households’ digital purchases in the balance  
of payments
– New benchmark rates, new challenges: 
introducing the €STR in the euro area
April 2020
– Sectoral portfolio adjustments in the euro 
area during the low interest rate period
– The EU budget and its financing: looking 
back and ahead
May 2020
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2020
– Outlook for the German economy for 2020 
to 2022
– Cash withdrawals and payments in urban 
and rural areas
July 2020
– The German current account surplus through 
the lens of macroeconomic models
– Cash hoarding by German households – how 
much cash do they store and why?
August 2020
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20202
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20202
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
29/2020  
Estimating the effects of the Eurosystem’s asset 
purchase programme at the country level30/2020  
The impact of aging and automation on the 
macroeconomy and inequality
31/2020  
The fiscal footprint of macroprudential policy
32/2020  
The (ir)relevance of the nominal lower bound 
for real yield curve analysis
33/2020  
Identifying indicators of systemic risk
34/2020  
Robust inference in time-varying structural VAR 
models: The DC-Cholesky multivariate stochas -
tic volatility model
35/2020  
Fiscal sustainability during the COVID-19 pan -
demic
36/2020  
Central bank funding and credit risk-taking
37/2020  
Negative monetary policy rates and systemic 
banks’ risk-taking: Evidence from the euro area 
securities register
38/2020  
Procyclical asset management and bond risk 
premia
39/2020  
Financial shocks and the relative dynamics of 
tangible and intangible investment: Evidence 
from the euro area
40/2020  
Does greater transparency discipline the loan 
loss provisioning of privately held banks?
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
87•

41/2020  
Household savings, capital investments and 
public policies: What drives the German current 
account?
42/2020  
Estimation of heterogeneous agent models: A 
likelihood approach
43/2020  
Interactions between bank levies and corporate 
taxes: How is bank leverage affected?
44/2020  
Predicting monetary policy using artificial neural 
networks
45/2020  
Backtesting macroprudential stress testsBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
August 2020  
88•

