Monthly Report
February 2020
Vol. 72  
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 14 February 2020.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  10
Driving forces of global industrial activity  ...........................................................................  11
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  21
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  22
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  34
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  43
House prices in Germany in 2019  .......................................................................................  51
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  56
The structural development of the German government budget  .........................................  57Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
5

Overview
Continued weakness 
in  German industry
Global economic activity appears to have re -
mained weak at the end of 2019. In the ad -
vanced economies, economic growth even de -
clined slightly. One- off effects played a role 
here, however. This is particularly true of Japan, 
where economic output is likely to have fallen 
substantially in the fourth quarter. In the United 
Kingdom, concerns about a disorderly exit from 
the European Union seem to have contributed 
to a sideways movement. In addition, growth 
in the euro area slowed. Only in the United 
States did economic expansion continue at the 
same moderate pace as before. The situation 
was slightly more favourable in the emerging 
market economies (EMEs). For instance, eco -
nomic growth in China stabilised at the end of 
the year after continuously losing steam in the 
preceding quarters. Economic activity in the 
other large EMEs appears to have regained 
some momentum, too.
Nevertheless, economic growth in 2019 as a 
whole looks set to have been at its lowest level 
since the global financial and economic crisis, 
both in the EMEs and worldwide. This was 
chiefly due to weakness in the industrial sector 
and in global trade. That said, there have been 
increasing signs of a certain degree of improve -
ment in the past few months. The global Pur -
chasing Managers’ Index for manufacturing, in 
particular, appears to have bottomed out and is 
now above the expansion threshold once 
more. The Bundesbank’s leading indicator for 
the world economy has risen even more steeply 
of late. This is clearly due, in part, to the fact 
that the threat of a further escalation of trade 
disputes is no longer considered to be as high. 
However, at the start of 2020, a new risk 
entered the scene in the form of a novel 
coronavirus in China. On account of the exten -
sive measures taken to contain the epidemic, 
amongst other factors, considerable losses for the Chinese economy – which may spill over to 
other economies – are to be expected, at least 
in the short term.
The international financial markets in the final 
quarter of 2019 and at the start of this year 
were initially characterised by an easing of pol -
itical uncertainty. Market participants took a 
positive view of the UK general election in De -
cember producing a clear majority in the House 
of Commons and of the United States and 
China reaching an initial trade agreement. Fur -
thermore, signs of recovery bolstered the 
global economy. Against this backdrop, invest -
ors switched from safe assets to riskier invest -
ments. In line with this, there was a rise in 
yields on high- quality government bonds, in 
particular, and share prices picked up signifi -
cantly. By contrast, the yield spreads of ten- year 
sovereign bonds issued by other euro area 
countries as well as European corporate bonds 
narrowed against those of ten- year Bunds. In 
January, however, the positive overall picture 
was increasingly overshadowed not only by the 
Iran conflict flaring up briefly but also by con -
cerns about the potential economic conse -
quences of the coronavirus outbreak. Investors 
worldwide displayed a preference for safe in -
vestments, resulting in the yields on high-  
quality government bonds falling to levels close 
to their all-  time lows in some countries (safe 
haven effect). However, the deterioration in 
stock market sentiment was only temporary, 
with positive business and economic data 
quickly triggering a countermovement. Shifts in 
exchange rates on the foreign exchange mar -
kets in the final quarter of 2019 and the first 
quarter of 2020 largely stayed within narrow 
bounds. On balance, measured as a weighted 
average against the currencies of 19 major 
trading partners, the euro has depreciated 
since the end of the third quarter of 2019.
The ECB Governing Council kept its policy rates 
unchanged over the reporting period. It ex -Global eco -
nomic activity 
remains weak
Improved 
outlook , but 
new risksFinancial 
 markets shaped 
by receding 
 political risks 
and concerns 
about potential 
implications of 
coronavirusDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
6

pects the key interest rates to remain at their 
present or lower levels until it has seen the in -
flation outlook robustly converge to a level suf -
ficiently close to, but below, 2% within its pro -
jection horizon, and such convergence has 
been consistently reflected in underlying infla -
tion dynamics. Furthermore, net purchases 
under the asset purchase programme (APP) 
were resumed at a monthly pace of €20 billion, 
as approved by the Governing Council in Sep -
tember 2019. It expects these purchases to run 
for as long as necessary to reinforce the ac -
commodative impact of the policy rates, and to 
end shortly before the key ECB interest rates 
start to be raised.
The ECB Governing Council also decided to 
launch a review of the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy strategy. This review will particularly 
focus on the quantitative formulation of price 
stability, the monetary policy toolkit, economic 
and monetary analyses and communication 
practices. In this context, the Governing Coun -
cil will also review the effectiveness and the 
potential  side effects of the monetary policy 
toolkit developed over the past decade. As 
things currently stand, the process is expected 
to be concluded by the end of this year.
Growth in the broad monetary aggregate M3 
remained robust in the fourth quarter of 2019. 
However, net inflows were less dynamic than in 
the preceding quarters, which was primarily at -
tributable to reduced inflows of funds from 
abroad. Once again, monetary growth was 
largely supported by lending to the domestic 
private sector. However, developments in this 
area were mixed. While the expansion of loans 
to households continued on its upward trajec -
tory, subdued euro area economic growth 
dampened non- financial corporations’ demand 
somewhat. Aside from this, financing condi -
tions on the capital markets improved in 2019, 
meaning that an attractive alternative to bank 
loans was available to enterprises. According to 
the latest bank lending survey, euro area banks’ 
lending policies remained largely unchanged on balance in both corporate and retail bank -
ing during the reporting quarter.
The cyclical slowdown in Germany continued 
through the final quarter of 2019. According to 
the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) remained at 
the level recorded in the previous quarter after 
adjustment for seasonal and calendar effects. 
For 2019 as a whole, real GDP increased by 
0.6%. Last year, therefore, economic growth 
lagged significantly behind the expansion of 
potential output. Capacity utilisation is likely to 
have shifted into normal range at the end of 
2019. The sustained weak underlying cyclical 
trend was chiefly the result of the downturn in 
industry, which could still be observed at the 
end of the year. By contrast, the more domes -
tically oriented services sectors continued to 
bolster economic activity. The still fairly positive 
income and labour market prospects for con -
sumers had a substantial part to play in this re -
gard.
The various sectoral trends also left their mark 
on lending growth. Overall, German banks sub -
stantially expanded their lending to the domes -
tic private sector in the final quarter of 2019. 
The largest contribution was again made by 
loans to households for house purchase, as 
growth in these loans gained further momen -
tum. While loans to non- financial corporations 
likewise grew markedly in the quarter under re -
view, the ongoing sluggishness in export-  
oriented industry dampened investment in ma -
chinery and equipment, and consequently also 
the demand for credit, among German enter -
prises. However, given the robustness of do -
mestic activity, the financing needs of enter -
prises in the loan- intensive construction and 
real estate sector, in particular, remained high. 
Demand for corporate loans and loans for 
house purchase was supported by exception -
ally low lending rates, especially for longer 
interest rate fixation periods. On balance, lend -
ing policies remained essentially unchanged 
across all segments. Nevertheless, loan margins 
were raised slightly on the whole.ECB Governing 
Council’s monet -
ary policy stance 
unchanged
ECB Governing 
Council decides 
to review 
 monetary policy 
strategy
Monetary 
growth remains 
robustEconomic out -
put in Germany 
stagnated at 
end- 2019
Renewed vigour 
in German 
banks’ lending 
to domestic 
 private sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
7

The persistent two- speed nature of economic 
activity was also reflected in the labour market. 
In this context, employment gains continued to 
outweigh losses in most sectors other than 
temporary work and manufacturing. Un -
employment remained broadly unchanged at a 
low level. The number of employees in eco -
nomically induced short- time work rose consid -
erably, but not dramatically. The leading labour 
market indicators suggest that, over the com -
ing months, growth in employment will con -
tinue and unemployment will remain largely 
stable.
In the final quarter of 2019, consumer prices 
(HICP) continued to rise at a moderate pace, 
increasing by 0.3% in seasonally adjusted terms 
compared with the preceding three- month 
period. There was a significant rise in prices for 
services, in particular, at the end of the period 
under review, with marked price increases 
being recorded most notably for travel services. 
Prices for industrial goods excluding energy 
likewise proceeded on their upward trajectory. 
By contrast, food prices were virtually stagnant. 
Energy prices, which fell further as a result of 
lower crude oil prices, had a dampening effect. 
Annual headline HICP inflation rose slightly 
from 1.0% in the third quarter to 1.2% in the 
final quarter. Excluding energy and food, the 
rate of inflation went up more steeply from 
0.9% to 1.6%. The one- off effect of package 
holidays, which had put an especially heavy 
dampener on the annual rate of inflation in the 
third quarter, no longer had any net impact on 
average over the quarter.
There are still no signs of any fundamental cyc -
lical change in Germany for the first quarter of 
2020. The domestic economy will probably 
continue to provide momentum, whereas in -
dustry will likely weigh on growth. In light of 
the ongoing robustness of the labour market 
and rising wages, domestic economic activity 
will be supported by private consumption. In 
addition, there is still no end in sight to the 
boom in the construction sector. With regard 
to industry, the downward trend in new orders persisted until the end of 2019 with diminish -
ing momentum. However, according to the ifo 
Institute, sentiment in this sector recently ex -
perienced a noticeable improvement. Enter -
prises were once again taking a less pessimistic 
view of the future and ongoing business was 
also being assessed more favourably. Alongside 
this, short- term production expectations bright -
ened considerably after the start of the new 
year and are now in positive territory. The sur -
vey results could indicate that the downward 
pressure on industrial production is gradually 
subsiding. This is consistent with the fact that 
industrial production capacity utilisation re -
cently rose again somewhat.
Nevertheless, economic risks have emerged 
with regard to the outbreak of the coronavirus 
in the People’s Republic of China. It is likely that 
a temporary decline in aggregate demand in 
China would subdue export activity in Ger -
many. In addition, some global supply chains 
could be negatively impacted by the safety pre -
cautions that have been implemented. This 
would result in supply bottlenecks in certain in -
dividual sectors in Germany.
Last year, economic growth was bolstered by 
Germany’s public finances. The general govern -
ment surplus fell markedly to 1½% of GDP , 
after totalling almost 2% of GDP in 2018. The 
main reason for this was central government’s 
looser spending stance. Alongside social spend -
ing as well as staff and other operating ex -
penditure, there was also a substantial rise in 
government investment. Furthermore, due to 
the slowdown in economic activity, tax revenue 
grew at a significantly slower pace than previ -
ously. The additional reduction in interest ex -
penditure helped to relieve the strain on the 
budget. By the end of the third quarter of 2019, 
the debt ratio had fallen to just over 61%.
The surplus is likely to continue to decline, and 
the government budget could then be more or 
less balanced in 2021. A persistently looser fis -
cal policy stance is the key factor here. It is 
probable that spending will continue to rise Two- speed 
nature of econ -
omy impacts 
labour market
Consumer prices 
see moderate 
rise in Q4 2019
No fundamental 
cyclical change 
expected for 
start of 2020Coronavirus 
 epidemic also 
poses downside 
risk to German 
economy
Marked decline 
in surplus in 
2019 due to 
looser spending 
stance
Fiscal policy 
stance to remain 
loose in current 
and coming 
year; surplus 
will continue 
to declineDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
8

significantly. In addition, there will be moderate 
tax relief measures, primarily in the form of the 
partial abolition of the solidarity surcharge 
planned for 2021. Despite considerable in -
creases in spending, social security contribution 
rates are still likely to remain fairly stable over -
all. It will be possible to bridge deficits, particu -
larly in the statutory pension and health insur -
ance schemes, by drawing on reserves. The 
climate package will probably have a largely 
neutral effect on the balance.
The Federal budget again posted a much bet -
ter result than planned at the end of 2019 and 
continued to adhere to the debt brake by a 
wide margin. The large surplus of €13½ billion 
was channelled almost entirely into the refu -
gee reserve, which grew to €48 billion. It 
again appears possible to achieve a balanced 
budget without the planned withdrawal from 
the reserve. Ultimately, however, the loose fis -
cal policy stance that has been adopted will 
lead to deficits. Moreover, demographic trends 
will place an increasing strain on the Federal 
budget from around the middle of this dec -
ade.Although central government’s spending 
stance has been loose for several years now, 
there is still considerable leeway within the 
scope of the budgetary rules at present. This is 
due to the fact that revenue has risen substan -
tially whilst interest expenditure has fallen. This 
leeway facilitates measures to improve the con -
ditions for growth and employment. At the 
Federal level, it would be logical to at least 
begin to abolish the solidarity surcharge in the 
current year. State and local governments are 
likewise posting high surpluses overall and, as 
things stand today, their financial outlooks are 
favourable. These levels of government are re -
sponsible not least for education and a large 
share of infrastructure, which means that they 
play a major role in economic development. Al -
though government investment has already 
been expanded to a considerable degree des -
pite the high levels of construction capacity 
utilisation, swift progress is often hindered by 
planning bottlenecks at authorities, drawn- out 
authorisation procedures, and reviews of legal 
objections. Efforts to press ahead with the ex -
pansion of required infrastructure would merit 
looking into these issues first.Federal budget 
result initially 
much better 
than plannedFiscal leeway 
facilitates meas -
ures to foster 
growth and 
employmentDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
9

Global and European setting
Global economic 
 developments
Global activity is likely to have remained weak 
at the end of 2019 as well, with economic ex -
pansion even slowing slightly in the advanced 
economies. However, one- off effects played a 
role here. This was particularly true for Japan, 
where economic output is expected to have 
fallen substantially in the fourth quarter owing 
to a tax hike and a typhoon. In the United 
Kingdom, concerns about a disorderly exit from 
the European Union seem to have contributed 
to a sideways movement. In addition, growth 
in the euro area slowed. Only in the United 
States did economic expansion continue at a 
moderate pace. The situation was slightly more 
favourable in the emerging market economies 
(EMEs). For instance, economic growth in 
China stabilised after having continuously lost momentum in the preceding quarters. Eco -
nomic activity in the other large EMEs appears 
to have regained some traction, too.
Nevertheless, economic growth for 2019 as a 
whole looks set to have been at its lowest level 
since the global financial and economic crisis, 
both in the EMEs and worldwide. This was 
chiefly due to the weakness in industry and in 
global trade. According to data provided by the 
Dutch economic research institute Centraal 
Planbureau (CPB), the underlying trend in 
global industrial production has seen only side -
ways movement since the final quarter of 2018. 
The volume of global trade has even declined 
slightly.
Nonetheless, there have been increasing signs 
of a certain degree of improvement in the past 
few months. The global Purchasing Managers’ 
Index (PMI) for manufacturing, in particular, 
now appears to have bottomed out. It con -
tinued to increase in January 2020, and now 
lies somewhat above the expansion threshold 
again. The primary reason for this was likely to 
have been the fading of negative demand 
shocks (see the box on pp. 11f.). The PMI for 
the services sector also rebounded again 
recently  after a certain time lag.1 The Bundes -
bank’s leading indicator for the world economy 
rose even more significantly. In January, it 
reached its highest level in one and a half years, 
boosted by improved sentiment in the financial 
markets. On the whole, there are a number of 
indications that the global economy is grad -
ually firming.
A similar assessment also forms the basis of the 
current projection published by the Inter -
national Monetary Fund (IMF). Although the 
IMF revised its projections for global economic Global eco -
nomic activity 
remains weakWeakness 
in industry 
significant 
Leading 
 indicators 
 suggest some 
consolidation
IMF expects 
growth to pick 
up gradually
1 This confirms the pattern that has been observed in the 
past, where turnarounds in the manufacturing sector typic -
ally anticipate similar changes in sentiment in the services 
sector. See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a).Indicators of global industrial activity
Sources: Centraal Planbureau and Bundesbank calculations ba-
sed  on  data  produced  by  IHS  Markit,  J.P.  Morgan,  sentix 
GmbH, and Standard and Poor’s, which are provided by IHS 
Markit.
Deutsche Bundesbank14 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20202468
–++++Seasonally adjusted, monthly data
9899100101102 Index points, long-term average = 100
Bundesbank leading indicatorGlobal industrial outputYear-on-year percentage change
Global trade volumeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
10

Driving forces of global industrial activity
Weakness in global industrial activity over 
the last two years has been a major factor 
behind the slowdown in global economic 
growth. The causes of this development 
can be analysed using a structural vector 
autoregressive (SVAR) model. This allows a 
distinction to be made between supply- side 
and demand- side explanatory factors. For 
this purpose, structural shocks are identifi  ed 
using sign restrictions. A negative demand 
shock initially reduces output and prices, 
whereas an adverse supply shock lowers 
output and increases prices.
The bivariate SVAR model is estimated using 
seasonally adjusted monthly data from the 
Global Manufacturing PMI (Purchasing 
Managers’ Index). The output component 
serves as an indicator of production, 
whereas the survey results on producer 
prices are used as a measure of price dy-
namics.1 A historical decomposition for the 
variables contained in the model is derived 
from the estimated model and the shock 
identifi  cation.2 It decomposes the devi-
ations of each variable from its uncondi-
tional mean into the contributions of 
present and past realisations of the identi-
fi  ed shocks.
The results of this analysis suggest that 
since the beginning of 2018, demand- side 
factors have contributed signifi  cantly to the 
decline in the output component of the global PMI. In 2017, these had provided a 
noticeable boost to industrial activity. This 
reversal can probably be attributed in part 
to the declining investment momentum fol-
lowing a previous boom. Another factor 
may have been an increase in (trade policy) 
uncertainty. In addition, supply- side disrup-
tions have continued to weigh on industrial 
activity right up to the present. These could 
potentially refl  ect higher trade costs for 
intermediate goods resulting from the trade 
disputes of the last year and a half and the 
production cuts by OPEC and its partners.
The coincident occurrence of pronounced 
adverse supply and demand shocks distin-
guishes the current episode from previous 
periods of weakness in the global economy 
since its recovery from the global fi  nancial 
and economic crisis. Although there were 
1 A comparable identifi  cation approach using informa-
tion on capacity utilisation in the euro area can be 
found in European Central Bank (2018). Ideally, the an-
alysis would relate to global industrial output and a 
corresponding producer price index. However, no such 
index is available. The PMI, which is used here as an 
alternative, generally reliably refl  ects the underlying 
momentum of global industrial activity.
2 The estimation with Bayesian methods for the period 
from October 2009 to January 2020 is carried out 
using the BEAR toolbox. See Dieppe et al. (2018).Historical shock decomposition of the 
Global Manufacturing PMI *
3.02.52.01.51.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
––––––+++++++Index points, seasonally adjusted
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20
Sources:  IHS  Markit  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Output 
component.  1 Contributions  of  contemporaneous  and  past 
realisations  of  economic  shocks,  as  derived  from  the  SVAR 
model. Differences between the actual deviations shown and 
the sum of the contributions are due to the model.
Deutsche BundesbankDemand shocks1
Supply shocks1
Deviation from
unconditional mean 
(Oct. 2010 to Jan. 2020)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
11

growth slightly downwards again for this year 
and next year in its regular January update to 
the World Economic Outlook, the main reason 
for this was its considerably more pessimistic 
assessment of India’s prospects. By contrast, 
the projections for other large economic re -
gions were mostly confirmed. All in all, the IMF 
thus continues to expect the global economic 
picture to slowly brighten up. Compared to the 
previous forecast in October 2019, the risk pro -
file has also been reclassified as less unfavour -
able. The conclusion of an initial agreement in 
the trade dispute between the United States 
and China is likely to have been a key factor in 
this. Although the immediate risk of re-  
escalation appears to have been averted for 
now, protectionist tendencies remain a signifi -
cant downward risk for the global economy.2
At the start of 2020, another risk emerged in 
the form of a novel coronavirus in China. On 
account of the extensive measures taken to 
contain the infectious disease as well as the disquiet among the general public, consider -
able losses for the Chinese economy – which 
may spill over to other economies – are to be 
expected, at least in the short term.
These concerns have already left their mark on 
international commodities markets during the 
reporting period. At the beginning of the year, 
however, oil prices still rose markedly against 
the backdrop of the confrontation between 
Iran and the United States. In the preceding 
months, crude oil prices had gone up distinctly 
owing to the expected extension of production 
cuts, which OPEC and its partners then adopted 
at the start of December 2019. Demand pro -
spects were considered to be more favourable, 
giving oil prices an additional boost after the 
partial agreement in the trade dispute between 
the United States and China. In the first half of 
January, a barrel of Brent crude oil at times cost 
just under US$70 on the spot market, thus Coronavirus a 
new downward 
risk for the 
world economyCrude oil prices 
up and downnegative demand shocks of a similar magni-
tude during the economic soft patch of 
2015 and 2016, these were mitigated by 
supply- side impulses, which were probably 
mainly related to falling commodity prices 
as a result of a strong increase in produc-
tion volumes.3 Due to this constellation of 
shocks, the economic slowdown at the 
time was not only milder, but was also dis-
tributed less evenly across regions.4 While 
industrial momentum in 2015 had weak-
ened above all in China and some 
commodity- exporting countries, in mid- 
2019 it weakened in almost all countries.
Since the second half of 2019, the output 
component of the Global Manufacturing 
PMI has recovered somewhat. The shock 
decomposition identifi  es subsiding negative 
demand shocks as a major driver of this. 
That said, the recent improvement should 
be interpreted with caution, not least due to the existing estimation uncertainty. Fur-
thermore, the PMI at the start of 2020 was 
only marginally above the expansion thresh-
old. It therefore remains to be seen how 
much momentum industry will have as it 
emerges from its trough.
3 This interpretation is supported by an extended 
model that includes crude oil prices and thus also 
allows for a simplifi  ed identifi  cation of oil price shocks.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2015).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
12

putting it around 16% higher than in October 
last year. Crude oil prices have registered a 
steep decline in recent weeks, however. The 
spread of the new coronavirus has probably 
been a factor in this, as has the stabilisation of 
the situation in the Middle East. The travel re -
strictions put in place to contain the infectious 
disease are likely to have markedly dampened 
China’s demand for oil during the main holiday 
season there. As this report went to press, the 
price of a barrel of Brent crude oil stood at just 
US$56. Recently, similar prices have had to be 
paid for future deliveries. The prices for indus -
trial commodities essentially followed the pat -
tern traced by oil prices during the reporting 
period. By contrast, prices for key food and 
beverages rose slightly. Overall, compared with 
its level in October, the HWWI index for non-  
energy commodities was down somewhat until 
the start of February.
The increase in oil prices was accompanied by 
a rise in the costs of living in industrial countries 
up to the end of 2019. Annual consumer price 
inflation went up from 1.3% in September to 
1.8% in December 2019. The core rate exclud -
ing energy and food rose slightly over the same 
period to 1.8%. The underlying inflationary 
pressures thus remained subdued.
Selected emerging market 
economies
In China, real gross domestic product (GDP) ex -
ceeded the previous year’s fourth quarter level 
by 6% according to the official figures for the 
fourth quarter of 2019. This meant that GDP 
growth maintained the pace seen in the third 
quarter following five quarters of gradual con -
traction. Industry is likely to have contributed 
the most to stabilising the economy as a whole. 
Supportive stimuli were provided by motor ve -
hicle manufacturing, which was able to expand 
production again for the first time after a 
longer period of downward movement. By 
contrast, the export sector has remained lack -
lustre recently. In 2019 as a whole, revenue from goods exports as measured in US dollars 
hovered close to the previous year’s level. In 
fact, exports to the United States declined by 
13% due to the trade dispute.3 A further escal -
ation of the conflict was averted for the time 
being with the signing of an initial trade agree -
ment in January 2020. Notably, China has com -
mitted to importing a considerably greater vol -
ume of US goods and services in future. The 
United States is hoping for greater demand 
from China, not least for food products. China 
currently also has high demand for meat prod -
ucts in particular, given the losses caused by 
swine fever. This is reflected in the steep rise in 
food prices. Overall, annual headline consumer 
price inflation (CPI) rose further to 4.3% in the 
fourth quarter, which was its highest rate since 
the end of 2011.Rising inflation 
in industrial 
countries
Economic 
growth in China 
stabilised in 
Q4 …World market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and food
and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 7 February 2020, or 1 to 13 February 2020 for 
crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2030406080Monthly averages, log scale
8090100110120130140
8090100110120US dollar basis, 2015 = 100, enlarged scaleCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beveragesIndustrial commodities
3 At the end of 2019, additional tariffs had been imposed 
on around two- thirds of the total volume of goods traded 
between the United States and China. For more informa -
tion on the US-  China trade dispute and its impact, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
13

Since mid-  January 2020, public life in China has 
largely been brought to a standstill due to the 
rapid spread of the new coronavirus strain. The 
government cordoned off several particularly 
severely affected cities and provinces, and 
companies across China extended their holiday 
shutdowns. Against this backdrop, there are in -
dications of considerable disruption to eco -
nomic activity for the current quarter. The 
growth losses could be distinctly higher than 
during the SARS epidemic of 2002-03, when 
the number of people infected was significantly 
lower and the authorities reacted less decisively. 
Nevertheless, as has been the case in previous 
epidemics, economic activity should swiftly re -
turn to normal levels once this epidemic has 
been contained.
In India, business activity is likely to have resta -
bilised by the end of 2019, after having previ -
ously decelerated sharply. In the third quarter 
of 2019, year- on- year economic expansion had 
fallen to 4.5%. The main reason for this was 
probably the crisis in the shadow banking in -
dustry, which plays a vital role in the supply of 
credit to households and small enterprises. Al -
though the problems are clearly not quite over 
yet, various indicators, including motor vehicle 
sales, have tended upwards again recently. 
Against this backdrop, the central bank has not 
lowered its policy rate any further since Octo -
ber. Intensifying consumer price inflation is also 
likely to have played a role here. Inflation in -
creased in the previous quarter to 5.8% on the 
year. This was primarily attributable to a strong 
rise in food prices due to monsoon- related 
crop failures.
There has also still not been any data published 
from Brazil’s national accounts for the final 
quarter of 2019. However, the trend in the cen -
tral bank’s monthly activity indicator suggests 
that GDP has grown moderately once again. 
The economic recovery following the deep 
recession   of 2015-16 thus appears to have 
strengthened somewhat over the past year. 
Nevertheless, GDP has not yet returned to its 
pre- crisis level. There has also been hardly any reduction in the high level of unemployment so 
far. In February 2020, the central bank lowered 
its policy rate again by 25 basis points, putting 
it at a new all- time low. Although consumer 
price inflation accelerated to 4.3% on the year 
by December 2019, this rise was probably 
largely attributable to temporary effects. Both 
the core rate and inflation expectations hovered 
at a low level.
In Russia, the slight upturn in economic activity 
that had already become apparent in the third 
quarter of 2019 continued until the end of the 
year. Although a GDP estimate for the past 
quarter is not yet available, the distinct pick- up 
in retail turnover – well above the rate of infla -
tion – points to an increase in private consump -
tion. This was caused by a marked increase in 
real disposable income brought about by the 
weaker rise in consumer prices. At 3.4% on the 
year, inflation in the fourth quarter was quite 
low by Russian standards. Against this back -
ground, the central bank maintained its accom -
modative monetary policy stance. At the same 
time, the Russian government signalled at the 
start of 2020 that its fiscal policy will be less 
restrictive in future.
United States
In the United States, the overall economic up -
turn continued, maintaining its moderate pace 
in the final quarter of 2019. According to an 
initial estimate, real GDP increased by 0.5% on 
the third quarter. Economic output had risen at 
similar rates in the second and third quarters. 
The expansion of domestic demand most re -
cently lost considerable momentum, however. 
Business investment was cut again, for ex -
ample, and inventory stockpiling came to a 
halt. Furthermore, the strong rise in private 
consumption of the previous two quarters 
weakened markedly. There was even a decline 
in the demand for foreign consumer goods. 
This is one of the reasons why imports were far 
below their level in the third quarter. In keeping 
with the persistent sluggishness in international … but short- 
term outlook 
significantly 
deteriorated due 
to coronavirus
Signs of cyclical 
stabilisation in 
India
Recovery in 
 Brazil gaining 
strengthCertain upturn 
in activity in 
Russia in second 
half of 2019
Unchanged 
moderate GDP 
growthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
14

trade, US exports saw little growth. The consid -
erable additional purchases to which China 
committed itself in the latest US- China trade 
agreement suggest, however, that US export 
business could pick up some steam again in the 
coming quarters. According to surveys of pur -
chasing managers, US companies have recently 
taken a more positive view of the future again 
in light of the easing tensions in trade politics. 
The continued favourable labour market situ -
ation is also boosting private consumption. In 
January 2020, the unemployment rate re -
mained close to its 50- year low. Annual con -
sumer price inflation went up to 2.5% in the 
same month. Given this context, the US Federal 
Reserve System refrained from further loosen -
ing its monetary policy stance.
United Kingdom
The United Kingdom’s overall upward eco -
nomic movement faltered in the fourth quarter 
of 2019. According to an initial estimate, and 
after elimination of the usual seasonal influ -
ences, real GDP stagnated at the third- quarter 
level, in which it had still seen distinct growth. 
Temporary concerns about a disorderly with -
drawal from the European Union are likely to 
have played a role in this regard, impacting on 
the manufacturing sector in particular. Momen -
tum waned in the services sector as well, how -
ever. On the other hand, the labour market 
situation remained very favourable. On an aver -
age for September to November, the seasonally 
adjusted unemployment rate remained at its 
provisional cyclical low of 3.8%. Moreover, 
many enterprises considered business condi -
tions to be more favourable again at the start 
of 2020. The Purchasing Managers’ Index for 
the whole economy climbed well above the ex -
pansion threshold in January. The fact that the 
new government’s clear majority in the UK par -
liament paved the way for an orderly with -
drawal from the EU on 31 January 2020 is likely 
to have been a key factor in this context. How 
long this improvement in sentiment will last 
also depends on how well the negotiations on the future relationship with the EU progress.4 
The annual rate of the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP) went down further in 
past months and most recently stood at 1.3%. 
At the end of January, the Bank of England 
maintained its monetary policy stance.
Japan
In Japan, economic output at the end of 2019 
appears to have fallen substantially, following 
fairly brisk growth in real GDP in the first three 
quarters of the year. One of the main reasons 
for this is likely to have been the increase in 
value added tax on 1  October 2019. Similar 
measures in the past have been associated with 
significant contractions in private consumption. 
Indeed, the Bank of Japan’s price- adjusted 
Consumption Activity Index has recently fallen 
well below the level seen in the third quarter of 
2019. Output losses that occurred after a ty -
phoon hit the Japanese mainland in the middle 
of October were another contributing factor.5 
As a result, industrial output in the fourth quar -
ter was significantly lower than in the preced -
ing quarter and was accompanied by a marked 
decline in the import of goods. The export of 
goods was also unable to maintain its level of 
the preceding quarter. However, there is much 
to indicate that the Japanese economy will veer 
back onto a sound expansionary path in the 
coming quarters. The labour market continued 
to provide robust support for private consump -
tion, and, at the end of the year, the unemploy -
ment rate held firm at an exceedingly low level. 
In order to accelerate cyclical normalisation 
and avert downside risks, the Japanese parlia -
ment (National Diet) adopted an extensive Stagnation in 
real GDPAdverse one- off 
effects contrib -
ute to decline in 
GDP at year- end
4 If a corresponding trade agreement is not reached, sig -
nificant tariff barriers would come into force on the basis of 
World Trade Organization rules once the transition period 
expires on 31 December 2020.
5 Analyses for the United States show that hurricanes lead 
to a marked dampening of both industrial output and pri -
vate consumption in the short term. Initially, this negative 
impact on the overall economy is only partly offset by an 
increase in activity in the construction sector that is prob -
ably connected to reconstruction work. See Deutsche 
Bundes bank (2017).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
15

stimulus package at the end of January 2020.6 
The core inflation rate – as measured by the 
annual rate of the CPI excluding energy and 
food – remained weak in December at 0.5%. 
Against this backdrop, the Japanese central 
bank maintained its accommodative stance.
Poland
In Poland, there was a significant slowdown in 
economic growth in the final quarter of 2019. 
Real GDP grew by just 0.2% on the quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms, following growth of 
1.2% in the preceding quarter. According to an 
initial estimate, economic output for the year 
as a whole increased by 4.0%, which was 
markedly lower than the rate of 5.1% seen in 
the previous year. While investment in the 
fourth quarter lost some of its momentum, the 
economy continued to be buoyed by private 
consumption, which benefited from a favour -
able labour market situation and increased so -
cial security benefits. While the number of un -
employed persons rose again slightly of late, 
the unemployment rate remained decidedly 
low at 3.2%. Monthly gross wages grew sub -
stantially again in the fourth quarter, up 6.9% 
in year- on- year terms. Consumer price inflation 
(CPI) rose to 2.8% on the year in the fourth 
quarter. In December, the inflation rate jumped to 3.4% and the core rate increased to 3.1%, 
primarily due to the steep rises in prices for ser -
vices. The Polish central bank left its policy rate 
unchanged, as consumer price inflation was 
still within its medium- term target corridor for 
the inflation rate.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
In the euro area, aggregate output increased 
only marginally in the final quarter of 2019. Ac -
cording to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real GDP 
rose by a mere 0.1% on the preceding quarter 
in seasonally adjusted terms.7 The increase fell 
to 0.9% on the year and thus remained consid -
erably lower than the potential rate of 1.3% 
estimated by the European Commission. One 
of the key reasons for this only weak economic 
growth was the further decline in manufactur -
ing output, despite growth in export business. 
It is likely that enterprises were reducing their 
inventories, which were reported as being too 
high in European Commission surveys. Further -
more, sluggish industrial activity adversely af -
fected industry- oriented services sectors. By 
contrast, consumer- related services proved 
once again to be fairly robust.
Following the steep rise in the third quarter, pri -
vate consumption is likely to have grown some -
what less strongly in the fourth quarter. In price 
and seasonally adjusted terms, retail sales saw 
only moderate growth. While new passenger 
car registrations increased considerably over 
the course of the quarter and offset the tem -
porary decline in September linked to the fur -
ther tightening of emission standards, registra -
tions increased only slightly on a quarterly aver -
age. The additional scope for expenditure due 
to the marked increase in disposable income Slowdown in 
economic 
growth, steep 
rise in consumer 
pricesOnly weak eco -
nomic growth at 
year- end
Private 
 consumption 
presumably 
slightly higherConsumption activity in Japan
Source: Bank of Japan.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20191011021031041051061071082011 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted, 
quarterly data, log scale
Increase in 
value added tax rate
6 Simulations using the NiGEM global econometric model 
indicate that Japanese economic growth in 2020 could end 
up 0.5  percentage point higher as a result of the fiscal 
measures taken. However, GDP growth in the subsequent 
year is expected to be markedly weaker due to the with -
drawal of fiscal stimuli.
7 In the third quarter, it rose by a seasonally adjusted 0.3%.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
16

was therefore presumably not fully exhausted 
in the fourth quarter. A role may have been 
played here by the slight dimming of consumer 
expectations regarding future economic devel -
opment, as indicated by the European Com -
mission’s consumer survey.
Investment activity probably remained sluggish 
in the final quarter of 2019.8 Investment in ma -
chinery and equipment continued to fall, and 
construction investment presumably nudged 
downwards following a previous rise. At any 
rate, domestic sales among capital goods pro -
ducers weakened in October and November, 
and construction work fell distinctly at the end 
of the year. Although capacity utilisation in 
manufacturing remained close to its long- term 
average between October and January, the 
weak demand is likely to have dampened the 
propensity to invest. This is what the European 
Commission surveys suggest, in any case. For 
construction investment, by contrast, the sur -
veys indicate that growth was stymied more by 
supply- side impediments.
According to the foreign trade statistics, the 
value of goods exports to countries outside the 
euro area increased markedly in the final quar -
ter of 2019. Exports to China, in particular, 
which had fallen slightly in the two preceding 
quarters, rose considerably once again. Exports 
to Turkey and Russia also recorded fairly robust 
growth. Deliveries to the United Kingdom, on 
the other hand, were down somewhat, whilst 
exports to the United States fell distinctly at the 
end of the year. Import demand, which re -
cently has only been weak, is likely to have had 
an impact here. By contrast, the additional tar -
iffs on aircraft and agricultural products intro -
duced by the United States in the fourth quar -
ter were probably only responsible for a small 
part of the decline. Given the only muted rise in 
export prices, the volume of exports to third 
countries is also likely to have risen markedly. 
By contrast, according to the foreign trade stat -
istics, the volume of imports from this group of 
countries fell distinctly in the fourth quarter. On 
an average of October and November, there was an increase in imports of capital goods and 
consumer goods, while imports of intermedi -
ate goods continued to decline. In price-  
adjusted terms, foreign trade within the euro 
area has increased significantly again of late.
Industrial output continued to fall in the fourth 
quarter, with an especially sharp decline in the 
production of capital goods. There was once 
again a significant drop in the manufacture of 
cars, bringing production roughly 15% lower 
than its last peak in the fourth quarter of 2017. 
The manufacture of intermediate goods also 
fell. By contrast, the production of consumer 
goods increased slightly in line with the robust Investment lack -
ing momentum
Increased 
exports to third 
countries
Continuing 
decline in indus -
trial production; 
growth in ser -
vices sectors 
again somewhat 
weakerAggregate output in the euro area*
949698100102104106108
2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 2019
Source: Eurostat. * Affected by a level shift in Irish GDP from 
Q1 2015 onwards.
Deutsche Bundesbank–0.50+0.5+1.0Lin scale
Quarter-on-quarter change%2015 = 100, log scale
Gross domestic productPrice and seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
8 This section concerns developments in the euro area ex -
cluding Ireland. In Ireland, the national accounts data, in -
cluding the data on gross fixed capital formation in particu -
lar, have been heavily influenced by the activities of multi -
national enterprises for a number of years. The large fluctu -
ations that result are also perceptible in the euro area 
aggregates. Excluding Ireland therefore allows for a better 
analysis of the cyclical trend in the euro area. See Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2018).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
17

consumer demand. In the services sectors, 
growth lost some of its momentum in October 
and November. A marked weakening in the 
pace of growth was seen, in particular, in the 
transport industry, the information and com -
munications sector and other business and 
support services.
In terms of individual countries, the downturn 
in economic activity in the euro area was attrib -
utable primarily to declines in France and Italy. 
Most other Member States largely maintained 
their paces of growth. In France, real GDP fell 
by 0.1% in the final quarter of 2019 compared 
to the preceding period, owing in part to pro -
duction losses caused by strikes and mainten -
ance activities at a large refinery. These events 
also left their marks on the expenditure com -
ponents of GDP , such as the substantial fall in 
expenditure on transport services. Much the 
same applies to exports of energy and pharma -
ceutical products. Even the extensive deliveries 
of transport equipment failed to fully offset this, as accompanying reductions in inventory 
made a negative contribution to growth. In 
Italy, aggregate output contracted by 0.3% ac -
cording to the flash estimate of the Italian stat -
istical office despite the foreign trade statistics 
showing a marked rise in goods exports. The 
domestic economy, however, proved weak. 
Given the only moderate increase in house -
holds’ real disposable income, private con -
sumption expenditure is likely to have increased 
only slightly at best. The same is probably true 
for investment activity, despite the incentives to 
invest introduced in the first half of last year. 
The movements in inventories are likely to have 
resulted in a large negative contribution to 
growth. In Spain, by contrast, economic growth 
increased slightly on the quarter to 0.5%, with 
exports providing the key stimuli. Conversely, 
investment activities were pared back consider -
ably and private consumption stagnated, albeit 
following strong growth in both areas in the 
preceding quarter. In line with the current weak 
domestic demand, imports fell markedly. In 
other Member States, such as the Netherlands, 
Austria and Belgium, growth continued at a 
moderate pace, while in some eastern Member 
States, economic activity remained vigorous. 
However, real GDP in Finland contracted.
The situation on the labour market in the euro 
area further improved, albeit only incremen -
tally. In seasonally adjusted terms, the number 
of unemployed people in the fourth quarter fell 
by 86,000 compared to the preceding quarter, 
and by around 700,000 on the year. The stand -
ardised unemployment rate fell to 7.4% by De -
cember. It was therefore only marginally higher 
than its last cyclical low prior to the financial 
and economic crisis, when it stood at 7.3%. Ac -
cording to Eurostat’s flash estimate, growth in 
the number of persons in employment was, at 
0.3%, actually higher again in the final quarter 
compared with the preceding quarter. As em -
ployment growth has only exhibited a muted 
response to the economic slowdown, product -
ivity has stagnated since the beginning of 2018. 
Given the scarcity on the labour markets, which 
continues to be fairly pronounced as indicated Mostly weak 
underlying cyc -
lical trend in the 
large Member 
StatesFurther improve -
ment in labour 
market situationConsumer prices in the euro area by 
component
Sources: Eurostat and the ECB.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 20191.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.0
––++++++Year-on-year change
Energy
Food
Industrial goods excl. energy
ServicesHICP
Percentage changeComponents (contributions):
Percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
18

by European Commission surveys, enterprises 
appear to be building up a labour buffer. Wage 
growth is likely to have also remained brisk in 
the fourth quarter.
Compared with the previous quarter, consumer 
prices in the euro area saw slightly stronger 
growth in the fourth quarter of 2019, rising by 
a seasonally adjusted 0.3% on the quarter. This 
was due chiefly to the energy component. By 
contrast, prices for services increased to a simi -
lar extent as in the previous quarter, roughly 
matching their average rate of growth since 
the start of the currency union. The same is 
true of prices for industrial goods excluding en -
ergy. Food prices rose less sharply than in the 
third quarter, above all because prices for un -
processed products normalised again following 
weather- induced volatility. Overall, annual 
headline HICP remained unchanged at 1.0% in 
the fourth quarter of 2019. By contrast, the in -
flation rate excluding energy and food rose 
from 0.9% to 1.2%, partly due to a one- off ef -
fect in the sub- index for package holidays.9
In 2019 as a whole, consumer price inflation 
amounted to 1.2% and was thus slightly lower 
than the 1.8% seen in 2018. Excluding energy 
and food, however, the rate of inflation per -
sisted at 1.0%, as in the preceding two years. 
While for industrial goods, both in aggregate 
terms and for the sub- components, the price 
movements observed were similar to those in 
the previous year, shifts took place in the area 
of services. Here, the rise in prices for travel ser -
vices weakened considerably, while inflation for 
household services increased and housing rents 
also went up.
According to the Eurostat flash estimate, an -
nual headline HICP inflation increased to 1.4% 
in January 2020 from a level of 1.3% in Decem -
ber 2019. Prices for energy and processed food 
in particular increased fairly substantially on the 
month in seasonally adjusted terms, but the 
slightly positive price trend for industrial goods 
excluding energy also continued. By contrast, the prices of services fell somewhat on account 
of package holidays.
Despite the slowdown in growth at the end of 
the year, there are mounting signs of a bright -
ening economic outlook. A key factor here is 
the prospect of the decline in manufacturing 
output potentially coming to an end. Senti -
ment in industry has, at any rate, improved 
somewhat of late. Furthermore, adjustments to 
inventories are likely to have made significant 
progress. This lowers the probability of further 
contagion effects in the hitherto fairly stable 
tertiary sector and to the labour markets, which 
have scarcely been affected thus far. Business 
climate in the services sectors and the con -
struction sector continued to exceed their re -
spective long- term averages. Overall, therefore, 
there are signs that growth in the euro area is 
accelerating at the start of 2020. That said, sig -
nificant risks still stand in the way of a compre -Moderate rise in 
consumer prices 
continues
Inflation eased 
on average in 
2019 due to 
lower price 
increases for 
energy
Higher inflation -
ary pressures 
in January due 
to volatile 
 componentsSlight brighten -
ing of economic 
outlook
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b).Sentiment indicators for the euro area
Source: European Commission.
Deutsche Bundesbank2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 202520151050
–––––Balance of positive and negative responses as a percentage of 
all responses, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
1510505101520
–––++++
Consumer confidenceManufacturing
industryServices sectorBusiness confidence
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5+10
ConstructionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
19

hensive improvement in the economic outlook. 
The trade disputes have yet to be resolved, the 
future relationship between the United King -
dom and the European Union has yet to be 
clarified, geopolitical tensions in parts of the 
world mean that uncertainty remains high, and the dangers stemming from the new corona -
virus strain are currently difficult to gauge. In 
addition, structural problems are continuing to 
place a burden on individual euro area coun -
tries.
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Consequences of increasing protectionism, Monthly Report, January 
2020, pp. 45-66.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), The two- speed global economy, Monthly Report, November 2019, 
pp. 11-12.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), The dampening special effect in the HICP in July 2019, Monthly 
Report, August 2019, pp. 57-59.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The impact of hurricanes on economic activity in the United States, 
Monthly Report, November 2017, pp. 14-15.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2015), The slowdown in global economic growth and the decline in com -
modity prices, Monthly Report, November 2015, pp. 16-17.
Dieppe, A., R. Legrand and B. van Roye (2018), The Bayesian Estimation, Analysis and Regression 
(BEAR) Toolbox, version 4.2.
European Central Bank (2018), Understanding the slowdown in growth in 2018, Economic Bul -
letin, Issue 8, pp. 51-54.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
20

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
Based on its assessment of the economic and 
inflation outlook, the ECB Governing Council 
kept the key interest rates unchanged at its 
monetary policy meetings in December 2019 
and January 2020. Therefore, the main refinan -
cing rate remains at 0.0%, while the rate of the 
marginal lending facility stands at 0.25% and 
the deposit facility rate at -0.5%. The ECB Gov -
erning Council now expects the key interest 
rates to remain at their present or lower levels 
until it has seen the inflation outlook robustly 
converge to a level sufficiently close to, but 
below, 2% within its projection horizon. This 
convergence should also be consistently re -
flected in underlying inflation dynamics. In No -
vember 2019, the Eurosystem resumed net pur -
chases under its asset purchase programme 
(APP) at a monthly volume of €20 billion. The 
Governing Council expects these net purchases 
to run for as long as necessary to reinforce the 
accommodative impact of the policy rates, and 
to end shortly before the key ECB interest rates 
start to be raised.
In the Governing Council’s view, the incoming 
data in January were in line with the baseline 
scenario of ongoing, but moderate, growth of 
the euro area economy. According to this as -
sessment, the weakness in the manufacturing 
sector still remains a drag on euro area growth 
momentum; however, ongoing, albeit deceler -
ating, employment growth and increasing 
wages are supporting the resilience of the 
economy. Risks to the growth outlook are still 
tilted to the downside as a result of external 
factors, but have moderated somewhat. This 
assessment is largely due to the partial easing 
of uncertainty surrounding global trade. While 
inflation developments remain subdued, the 
Governing Council sees some signs of a slight 
increase in underlying inflation in line with ex -
pectations.At the monetary policy meeting in January, the 
Governing Council also decided to launch a 
review  of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy 
strategy. The review will particularly focus on 
the quantitative formulation of price stability, 
the monetary policy toolkit, economic and 
monetary analyses and communication prac -
tices. As part of the review, the Governing 
Council will also review the effectiveness and 
the potential side effects of the monetary pol -
icy toolkit developed over the past decade. The 
review will also take into account how other 
considerations, such as financial stability, em -
ployment and environmental sustainability, 
could be relevant in pursuing the ECB’s man -
date. The Eurosystem wants to involve all 
stakeholders to ensure the review is based on 
thorough analysis and open minds. As things 
currently stand, the process is expected to be 
concluded by the end of the year.ECB Governing 
Council leaves 
monetary policy 
stance 
unchanged
Risks to euro 
area growth 
outlook lowerECB Governing 
Council decides 
to review its 
monetary policy 
strategy
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 Three-
month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. • Average 
1 to 12 February 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 20200.60.40.200.20.4
–––++
2468Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1, 2Basis
points% p.a. Marginal lending rate
Three-month EURIBOR 1
EONIA 1Main refinancing rate
Deposit facility rateDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
21

Money market management and liquidity needs
The two reserve periods between 30 Octo-
ber 2019 and 28  January 2020 saw euro 
area liquidity needs stemming from autono-
mous factors decrease by €54.4 billion to 
€1,379.8 billion (see the table below),1 
whereas they had increased in the same 
periods of the two preceding years. Around 
the end of the year, the autonomous fac-
tors fl  uctuated less than usual and were at 
a lower level overall. A signifi  cant factor be-
hind the declining liquidity needs was the 
decrease in government deposits with the 
Eurosystem by a total of €86.8 billion. 
Banknotes in circulation moved in the op-
posite direction, recording a seasonal in-
crease of €29.5 billion to €1,269.2 billion 
(see the chart on p.  24). Liquidity needs 
from the combined total of net foreign 
assets and other factors, which are con-
sidered together owing to liquidity- neutral valuation effects, rose by a moderate €2.9 
billion compared with the September- 
October 2019 reserve period. The minimum 
reserve requirement stood at €134.5 billion 
in the December 2019- January 2020 reserve 
period, representing an overall increase of 
€1.2 billion.
As of the beginning of the reporting period 
on 30 October 2019, the Eurosystem intro-
duced a two- tier system for remunerating 
excess reserve holdings which exempts part 
of the excess liquidity holdings from nega-
tive remuneration at the rate applicable on 
the deposit facility. Euro area banks subject 
1 Average of the eighth 2019 reserve maintenance 
period (December 2019- January 2020) as compared to 
the average of the sixth reserve maintenance period 
(September- October 2019), which was reported on in 
the November 2019 issue of the Monthly Report.
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2019/2020
30 October
to
17 December18 December
to
28 January
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  10.2 – 19.3
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) +  72.0 + 14.8
3. Net foreign assets 1 +  14.8 –  4.7
4. Other factors 1 –   6.8 –  6.2
Total +  69.8 – 15.4
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations –   0.2 +  1.1
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations –   4.8 – 47.6
c) Other operations +  10.1 + 20.3
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +  0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) + 198.7 +  3.3
Total + 203.8 – 22.9
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 273.6 – 38.4
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   0.9 –  0.3
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
22

to minimum reserve requirements are each 
given an allowance of six times their min-
imum reserve requirements (totalling 
€804.8 billion in the seventh maintenance 
period of 2019); banks used a volume- 
weighted average of 95.4% of this allow-
ance (see the adjacent chart). German insti-
tutions used an average of 93.6% of their 
allowances, totalling €223.1 billion. In the 
subsequent year- end period, the allow-
ances in the Eurosystem rose slightly by €2 
billion to €806.9 billion (96.3% utilisation) 
and in Germany declined slightly by €0.3 
billion to €222.8 billion (94.6% utilisation). 
Since the allowances are applied only to ex-
cess reserves, credit institutions shifted ex-
cess liquidity from the deposit facility to 
their current accounts when the system 
was introduced. Another effect of the intro-
duction of the two- tier system for remuner-
ating excess reserve holdings was that ex-
cess liquidity was distributed more widely 
across the banking systems of the euro area 
Member States. The banking systems in 
Italy, Spain, Ireland and Greece, for ex-
ample, now account for a higher share of 
the excess liquidity held in the euro area as 
a whole.
There was a signifi  cant change in the out-
standing tender volume during the report-
ing period. In the December 2019- January 
2020 reserve period, it averaged around 
€619 billion, putting it roughly €52 billion 
below the corresponding fi  gure for the 
September- October 2019 period (see the 
chart on p.  25). The decrease stemmed 
mainly from voluntary early repayments of 
the second series of targeted longer- term 
refi  nancing operations (TLTRO- II) relative to 
demand for the second TLTRO- III operation, 
which resulted in a net TLTRO repayment of 
€49.1 billion (total volume still outstanding: 
€612 billion). Demand for standard refi  nan-
cing operations remained at a very low 
level. For example, the average volumes of 
the main refi  nancing operation and the 
three- month tenders were €2.9 billion and 
€4.3 billion, respectively, in the period from Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as 
at 7 February
2020
Active programmes 1
PSPP + 28.8 2,118.7
CBPP3 +  7.4 268.4
CSPP + 11.1 190.6
ABSPP +  1.5 28.4
Completed programmes 
SMP –  1.3 44.8
CBPP1 –  0.8 1.6
CBPP2 –  0.1 2.9
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankCentral bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources:  ECB,  Eurex  Repo  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
1 From 1 October 2019, EONIA is calculated as €STR + 8.5 
basis points. 2 Current account holdings minus the minimum 
reserve requirement plus the deposit facility. 3 The last period 
displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankSep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb.
2019 20200.60.50.40.30.20.10
––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
02004006008001,0001,2001,4001,6001,8002,000Excess liquidity2Main refinancing rate
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period 3EONIA1
Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basket€STR
STOXX GC Pooling Overnight
GermanyEuro areaTheoretical allowancesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
23

December 2019 to January 2020 (same 
period of the previous year: €7.9 billion and 
€5.0 billion).
The bulk of the central bank liquidity con-
tinued to be provided by the Eurosystem 
through the monetary policy asset purchase 
programmes, which accounted for around 
80% of the total liquidity made available 
through open market operations in the re-
porting period. The average balance sheet 
holdings of all purchase programmes in the 
December 2019- January 2020 period stood 
at €2,639 billion, representing an increase 
of around €30 billion compared to the 
corre sponding average holdings in the 
September- October 2019 reserve period; 
compared with the same period of the pre-
vious year, however, this constituted a de-
crease of €14 billion (see the table on p. 23). 
One reason why the increase was not larger 
even though monthly net purchases recom-
menced in November 2019 was because se-
curities purchased under the terminated 
programmes matured.
On balance, excess liquidity came to an 
average of €1,744 billion in the December 
2019- January 2020 period (+€32 billion 
compared with the September- October 
2019 period). However, compared with the 
corresponding period of the previous year, excess liquidity dropped by €101 billion, 
mainly due to early repayments of out-
standing TLTRO- II amounts.
In view of the oversupply of liquidity, over-
night rates continued to be geared to the 
rate on the deposit facility of -0.50% (see 
the chart on p.  23), with the new, un-
secured euro short- term rate (€STR) staying 
below the secured overnight rates of the 
GC Pooling platform at all times. Another 
determinant of money market rates was the 
introduction of the two- tier system for re-
munerating excess reserve holdings. This 
led to increases in the overnight rates, be-
cause banks with unused allowances were 
willing to pay higher rates for the liquidity 
they obtained. The rise in the €STR was 
small and only discernible in the subsequent 
days (from mostly -0.55% to -0.54%). A 
clearer effect was observed for secured 
overnight money with an expanded set of 
eligible securities traded on the GC Pooling 
platform (ECB EXTended basket). These 
rates temporarily rose by 5 basis points to 
-0.44% when the new system entered into 
effect on 30  October 2019. For secured 
overnight money with a smaller set of eli-
gible securities (ECB basket), there was an 
increase of 2 basis points to -0.48%. While 
both rates went back down, they remained 
at a slightly higher level than in the periods 
prior to the introduction of the two- tier sys-
tem.
The money market recorded only minor 
year- end effects overall in 2019. This was 
evidenced by much smaller fl  uctuations in 
the secured market than in previous years, 
such as for overnight money in the GC 
Pooling ECB basket. The rate was deter-
mined to be -0.52% on the last day of the 
year (2 basis points lower than the previous 
day; in the previous year, however, it had 
been 6 basis points lower). In the unsecured 
market, the €STR rose by 1 basis point to 
-0.53%, with lower turnover volumes of 
€18 billion (roughly €30 billion were nor-
mal).Autonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive  (negative) 
sign. 1 Including end-of-quarter liquidity-neutral valuation ad-
justments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 20201,2501,0007505002500250500750
–––––+++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
24

In the reporting period, the APP holdings re -
corded on the balance sheet rose as a result of 
the resumption of net purchases. On 7 Febru -
ary 2020, the stock of APP assets held by the 
Eurosystem reached a total of €2,606 billion (a 
breakdown of these holdings by individual 
asset purchase programme can be found on 
pp.  22 ff.). The holdings continue to also be 
influenced  by the smoothing over time of re -
investments in line with the technical param -
eters agreed upon in December 2018 and by 
the use of amortised cost accounting.1
On 18 December 2019, the second operation 
of the third series of targeted longer- term refi -
nancing operations (TLTRO- III) was settled. De -
mand was significantly greater than in the first 
operation, totalling €97.7 billion, but was 
nonetheless below the expectations reported 
in prior surveys. As the monetary policy coun -
terparties voluntarily repaid funds from the 
second series of targeted longer- term refinan -
cing operations (TLTRO- II) at the same time to the tune of €146.8 billion, this resulted in a 
negative net liquidity effect. Together, the 
TLTRO- II and TLTRO- III series currently have an 
outstanding volume of around €612 billion.
Following the seasonal fluctuations of autono -
mous factors in the year- end period, the vol -
ume of excess liquidity stood at €1,790 billion 
as this report went to press and was therefore 
slightly lower than in November 2019. In par -
ticular, the slightly lower liquidity provision 
from monetary policy operations (TLTROs and 
APP) had an impact here.
Short- term money market rates remained virtu -
ally unchanged overall. The unsecured over -
night rate EONIA rose by approximately just 1 
basis point by the end of the year and remained 
within a narrow range of between -0.46% and Increase in 
securities hold -
ings recorded 
on balance 
sheet
Considerably 
higher demand 
in second 
TLTRO- IIIExcess liquidity 
slightly lower 
than in Novem -
ber 2019 after 
fluctuations 
during  year- end 
period
Only minor 
year- end effects 
on short- term 
money market 
ratesOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202003006009001,2001,5001,8002,1002,4002,7003,0003,300€ billion
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
First series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)
Purchase programmesMean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Second series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Third series of targeted longer-term 
refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition value 
and the redemption value is spread over the residual ma -
turity of a security, treated as part of interest income and 
measured at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
25

-0.44% over the entire period under review. Al -
though secured rates in the euro area, includ -
ing STOXX GC Pooling, showed marginally 
stronger year- end effects than the unsecured 
rate EONIA, these effects were significantly 
weaker than in previous years.
On 30 October 2019, the two- tier system for 
reserve remuneration came into effect. Thus 
far, it has had only a minor effect on the euro 
short- term rate (€STR),2 which rose by approxi -
mately just 1 basis point. The underlying turn -
over for the calculation of the €STR has also 
shown virtually no response to the introduction 
of the two- tier system. German money market 
statistics indicate a more nuanced picture for 
the interbank loans recorded in Germany.3 The 
introduction of the two-  tier system saw a 
strong increase in the average unsecured over -
night lending by reporting institutions in Ger -
many to credit institutions domiciled in the 
euro area (including Germany). This suggests 
that it was attractive for German institutions 
that hold more excess liquidity than their ex -
empt tier to lend liquidity to other credit insti -
tutions. In this context, borrowing liquidity at 
interest rates above the Eurosystem’s deposit 
facility rate can be profitable for the receiving 
institutions if they would not otherwise exhaust 
their exempt tier.
In December 2019 and also initially in January 
2020, money market forward rates continued 
to rise, particularly at the short end. While the 
communication following the monetary policy 
meeting resulted in only minor immediate re -
sponses in the forward curve, a further im -
provement in market participants’ assessment 
of economic developments led to continued 
increases in forward rates. In particular, the 
signing of the “phase one” trade deal between 
the United States and China and further clarity 
in the Brexit process have probably reduced the 
downside risks to activity from the perspective 
of market participants. After previously being 
inverted, the forward curve became temporar -
ily completely un- inverted. This suggests that 
the majority of market participants no longer expected any further policy rate cuts, which 
was also confirmed in the monetary policy sur -
veys before the ECB Government Council meet -
ings in December 2019 and January 2020. 
However, at the current end, the forward rates 
have fallen again, partly owing to uncertainty 
surrounding the potential impact of the corona -
virus.
Monetary developments in 
the euro area
At an annual rate of 5%, growth in the broad 
monetary aggregate M3 remained robust in 
the fourth quarter of 2019. However, the net 
inflows were less dynamic than in the preced -
ing quarters, primarily owing to reduced in -
flows of funds from abroad. Once again, mon -
etary growth was largely supported by lending 
to the domestic private sector. However, devel -
opments in this area were mixed. While the ex -
pansion of loans to households continued on 
its upward trajectory, subdued euro area eco -
nomic growth dampened non- financial corpor -
ations’ demand somewhat. Aside from this, 
financing   conditions on the capital markets 
improved  in 2019, meaning that an attractive 
alternative to bank loans was available to en -
terprises.
Net inflows to overnight deposits were once 
again the main drivers of M3. Although the 
momentum slowed somewhat compared with 
the first three quarters of 2019, inflows re -
mained high. The investment behaviour of 
households remained the main reason for the 
ongoing build- up of overnight deposits. House -
holds also preferred short- term bank deposits 
in the period under review, which may have 
been due to the persistently narrow interest 
rate spreads of the different types of deposit Two- tier system 
with minor 
impact overall 
on money 
market  rates
Expectations of 
interest rate cuts 
temporarily 
priced outAt 5%, 
monetary  
growth robust 
in Q4 2019
Households’ 
overnight 
deposits remain 
main drivers of 
M3, albeit with 
somewhat less 
momentum
2 Since 2  October 2019, the €STR has also formed the 
basis  for calculating EONIA. See also Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019a).
3 By contrast, the €STR reflects not only interbank transac -
tions but also banks’ unsecured overnight borrowing from 
other non- bank financial enterprises.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
26

and also households’ continuing high risk aver -
sion. Thus, short- term savings deposits – heav -
ily influenced by households – recorded notice -
able inflows. By contrast, households and en -
terprises substantially scaled back their short-  
term time deposits in the reporting quarter. 
Owing to another distinct drop in the interest 
rate in recent months, the attractiveness of this 
form of investment has continued to fall.
Looking at the M3 counterparts, the most sig -
nificant net inflows in the fourth quarter of 
2019 were again of loans to the domestic pri -
vate sector adjusted for loan sales and securi -
tisation. At the end of December 2019, the 
total contribution of these loans amounted to 
just over two- thirds of the annual growth rate 
of M3. In particular, net inflows to loans to 
households accelerated again markedly after 
having already increased distinctly in the previ -
ous quarter. Thus, their annual growth rate 
rose to 3.7% at the end of the year. Loans for 
house purchase were the main driver here, but 
consumer loans also remained in high demand 
given rather robust consumption activity in the 
euro area. The increase in the dynamism of 
lending to households was broadly distributed 
among all Member States. In particular, the 
fourth quarter of 2019 saw an acceleration in 
net inflows at banks in Germany and also in 
some smaller countries. In France, growth dy -
namics in this credit segment already started to 
increase in mid- 2019.
From the perspective of the banks surveyed in 
the Bank Lending Survey (BLS), demand for 
loans to households for house purchase con -
tinued to accelerate in the euro area. Bank 
managers attributed the further rise in demand 
to the low general level of interest rates, in par -
ticular, as well as the positive outlook for the 
housing market and house price developments. 
In addition, the contribution of consumer con -
fidence to the rise in demand was greater than 
in recent quarters. Banks’ lending policies did 
not stand in the way of the expansion of lend -
ing in this segment. For the banks participating 
in the survey, the standards for loans for house Substantial net 
inflows for loans 
to households 
continue to rise
Lending policies 
for housing 
loans virtually 
unchangedMonetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019202468
–++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10
2024
–++M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsYear-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities 1
Net external assets
Credit to the 
private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households 5Contribution of components in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage
change 
in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
27

purchase remained almost unchanged in the 
fourth quarter of 2019 for the third time in suc -
cession. Although the reduced risk tolerance of 
the surveyed banks had a restrictive effect 
when viewed in isolation, its influence on the 
standards was neutralised by the countervailing 
effect of the intense competition between 
lenders and the improved assessment of the 
credit risk, not least owing to the good outlook 
for the housing market. Alongside credit stand -
ards, the bank managers surveyed also per -
ceived credit terms and conditions –  which 
were tightened marginally in the preceding 
quarter – to be virtually unchanged overall.
Unlike lending to households, loans to non-  
financial corporations grew only moderately in 
the fourth quarter. The gradual decline in the 
annual growth rate thus continued; at the end 
of December, it stood at 3.2%, after 4.0% one 
year earlier. At country level, lending develop -
ment remained heterogeneous. Overall, how -
ever, the slowdown appears to be broad- based: 
for instance, as in the third quarter, net inflows 
recorded by banks in Germany and France 
– which are significant for the aggregate – fell 
clearly short of the high inflows recorded in the 
previous quarters. Banks in Italy saw the net 
outflows which have been observed since au -
tumn 2018 continue. The loss of momentum in 
credit growth in the euro area is likely to be mainly demand- driven. In Italy, in particular, the 
weak underlying cyclical trend dampened 
enter prises’ demand for additional funding.4 
However, other euro area countries, too, have 
experienced a perceptible weakening of eco -
nomic growth since the beginning of 2018. In 
addition, non-  financial corporations began to 
increase their uptake of funds in the capital 
market again in 2019. A contributing factor 
was that the overall cost of financing based on 
fixed-  income securities became more favour -
able compared with loans- based financing.
The slowdown in credit growth is also reflected 
in the BLS. According to the surveyed bank 
managers, the demand from non- financial cor -
porations for loans was, on the whole, declin -
ing for the first time since the end of 2013. The 
slump in demand was spread broadly across 
the euro area Member States. In most of these 
countries, the surveyed banks connected the 
decline to enterprises’ cyclically- induced lower 
financing needs for fixed investment. More-
over, the banks explained the slowdown in de -
mand in this loan segment by citing the inten -
sified recourse to alternative sources of funds. 
By contrast, taken in isolation, the low general 
level of interest rates, in particular, as well as 
funding needs for mergers, acquisitions and Loss of momen -
tum in lending 
to non- financial 
corporationsDecline in 
non-financial  
corporations’ 
demand for 
credit; lending  
policies almost 
unchangedConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q3 2019 Q4 2019
Holdings against central government 2 14.6 – 37.5
Monetary aggregate M3 210.2 107.0
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 195.8 138.6
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 10.2 – 27.8
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 4.2 –  3.8
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 13.0 0.3
of which:
Capital and reserves 24.0 24.5
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 11.1 – 24.1Assets Q3 2019 Q4 2019
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 129.1 90.1
Loans 102.3 76.6
Loans, adjusted 1 105.2 104.2
Securities 26.8 13.4
Credit to general government 
in the euro area – 2.1 –  5.1
Loans – 0.9 – 15.4
Securities – 1.1 10.2
Net external assets 84.0 30.1
Other counterparts of M3 26.8 – 45.1
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche Bundesbank
4 See Banca d’Italia (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
28

corporate restructuring had a boosting effect 
on demand. Interest rates for loans to enter -
prises remained close to their historic lows in 
the fourth quarter. Once again, lending policies 
changed only slightly in the fourth quarter ac -
cording to the bank managers surveyed in the 
BLS.
Likewise, securitised lending by the MFI sector 
to private non- banks and general government 
in the reporting quarter again contributed 
slightly to monetary growth on balance. The 
monthly net purchases of securities by the 
Euro system, which resumed in November 2019, 
played a key role in this context. Under the APP , 
the Eurosystem built up its holdings of bonds 
issued by both the public and the private sec -
tor. Commercial banks, on the other hand, 
showed a preference for purchasing shares and 
mutual fund shares. Altogether, there was a 
slight increase in securitised lending, not only 
to the private sector but also – for the first time 
since the net purchases were temporarily dis -
continued in December 2018 – to general gov -
ernment.
Although the inflows to the MFI sector’s net 
external asset position fell significantly short of 
the three strong preceding quarters, they 
nevertheless continued to support monetary 
growth on balance. The item benefited, first 
and foremost, from the euro area’s sustained 
current account surplus. In terms of securities 
transactions with non- residents, the net flow of 
which had likewise been discernibly positive in 
the preceding quarters, non- resident investors’ 
purchases and the investments of domestic in -
vestors virtually balanced each other out of 
late. According to the balance of payments 
data available for October and November, non- 
resident investors, on balance, had a particular 
appetite for shares and mutual fund shares is -
sued in the euro area. By contrast, resident in -
vestors exhibited a greater interest in foreign 
private- sector bonds. Furthermore, in terms of 
direct investment, outflows of funds abroad 
also outweighed inflows of funds over the past 
few months on balance.German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
The expansion in German banks’ deposit busi -
ness with domestic customers in the final quar -
ter of 2019 focused exclusively on overnight 
deposits. Despite, in some cases, negative 
interest rates, domestic customers sharply in -
creased their holdings of this type of deposit 
while scaling back all other forms of deposit, 
sometimes perceptibly. The main reason for the 
ongoing build-  up of overnight deposits is pre -Securitised 
lending  
supported  M3 
slightly in Q4
Weaker inflow 
of funds from 
abroad
Deposit growth 
still dominated 
by build- up 
of overnight 
depositsLoans to the private non-financial sector 
in the euro area*
403020100102030405060
––––++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, seasonally adjusted
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankExtended by the euro area MFI sector 2
... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–100+10+20+30+40+50+60+70
To households 3To non-financial corporations1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
29

sumably the narrow yield spread offered by al -
ternative bank deposits (see the adjacent chart).
Sectoral developments in the reporting quarter 
showed little change against the preceding 
quarters. Households and, to a lesser extent, 
non- financial corporations continued to be the 
main contributors to the increase in overnight 
bank deposits. By contrast, the more yield-  
conscious financial institutions built up hardly 
any overnight deposits, further pursuing the re -
duction in long-  term deposits observed for 
some time now.5
Banks’ credit business with the domestic non-  
bank sector again saw a marked expansion in 
the reporting quarter. This was mainly thanks 
to the sharp increase in lending to the domes -
tic private sector. In addition, banks once again 
slightly expanded their holdings of securities is -
sued by the private sector, acquiring bonds as 
well as shares and other variable- yield securities 
from financial corporations. By contrast, there 
was a further marked decline in lending to gen -
eral government. This was particularly true of 
securitised loans.
Once more, the largest contribution to the 
growth in lending to the private sector was 
made by loans to households. The decisive fac -
tor here was households’ persistent lively de -
mand for loans for house purchase, of which 
the pace of growth accelerated further in the 
reporting quarter. On balance, the growth rate 
of loans taken out for house purchase further 
increased to just under 5½% on the year, mak -
ing it the highest value in 20 years.
Consumer credit again posted marked positive 
developments in the reporting quarter. Along -
side the persistently favourable labour market 
and income prospects, the ongoing high de -
mand for bank loans among households in the 
reporting quarter was also stimulated by ex -
ceptionally favourable financing terms. Accord -Investment 
behaviour of 
the individual 
sectors 
unchanged
Credit business 
with non- banks 
regained 
momentum 
owing to loans 
to the private  
sector
Demand for 
loans for house 
purchase still 
high, …
… while 
consumer  credit 
also recorded 
net inflowsMFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2019
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 38.4 40.1
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 0.1 – 8.5
over 2 years – 8.3 – 4.6
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 1.2 – 3.0
over 3 months – 1.2 – 2.5
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 2.4 – 0.7
Securities – 0.2 – 4.3
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 26.1 33.4
of which: to households 3 17.4 21.0
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 5.0 10.2
Securities 5.1 1.2
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. End-of-quarter data, 
adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, 
households and general government excluding central govern-
ment. 2  Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including 
non-profi  t institutions serving households. 4 Non- fi  nancial cor-
porations and quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits of households and non-financial corporations accor-
ding  to  the  harmonised  MFI  interest  rate  statistics  (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 201901234% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
5 For background information, see Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
30

ing to the MFI interest rate statistics, interest 
rates on long- term loans for house purchase 
remained close to their all- time lows at the end 
of the reporting quarter, while interest rates for 
long- term consumer credit continued to fall 
slightly in the reporting quarter.
The latest BLS results provide evidence of fur -
ther influencing factors. The BLS respondents 
again stated the good outlook on the housing 
market and the expected development of 
house prices as the main reasons for the 
dynamic  growth in the demand for loans to 
households for house purchase. The sole ex -
planatory factor provided by the surveyed 
banks regarding the increase in demand for 
consumer credit was the low general level of 
interest rates.
At the same time, no noteworthy restrictive 
stimuli emanated from the BLS banks’ lending 
policies. As in the previous quarter, the banks 
participating in the BLS left their credit stand -
ards for housing loans unchanged in the re -
porting quarter, whereas they marginally 
widened their margins on riskier loans, in par -
ticular. Likewise, the surveyed banks saw no 
need to adjust their standards for consumer 
loans, but slightly narrowed their margins irre -
spective of credit rating.
The lending business of banks in Germany was 
supported not only by loans to households but 
also by loans to non- financial corporations, 
which went back up perceptibly in the report -
ing quarter. The main reason why net inflows 
to banks in Germany in this business segment 
at the euro area level failed to reach their levels 
from previous quarters was the strikingly weak 
growth in lending business with non-  financial 
corporations from the rest of the euro area. 
The latest expansion in lending to enterprises 
covered all maturities. However, long- term 
loans recorded the most prominent gains. Al -
though the sustained sluggishness of export-  
oriented industry dampened investment in ma -
chinery and equipment by enterprises in Ger -
many last year, the financing needs of enter -prises in the services sector and, in particular, 
the loan- intensive construction and real estate 
sector remained high thanks to the robust do -
mestic economy.6 In addition, the extremely 
low level of interest rates on long- term loans 
supported demand in this maturity segment 
(see the chart on p. 32). Despite the fact that 
the growth in loans to enterprises has slowed 
down slightly since mid- 2018, it remained rela -
tively high up to the current end at an annual 
growth rate of just over 5%.Lending policy 
for loans for 
house purchase 
largely 
unchanged
Robust domestic 
economy 
boosted 
demand for 
loans to 
enterprises 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year changes, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
3210123456
–––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2Up to 1 year
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 years
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchaseTotal,
percentage changeLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeMaturity contributions in percentage points
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
31

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q1 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20201.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p.a. % p.a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
32

This is largely consistent with the results of 
the BLS. According to the bank managers, the 
demand for longer- term loans in the reporting 
quarter was more dynamic than for short-  
term loans. Alongside financing needs for 
fixed investment as well as for refinancing, 
debt restructuring and renegotiation, the low 
general level of interest rates, in particular, 
had a boosting effect on demand when 
viewed in isolation. The MFI interest rate stat -
istics show that, at the end of December 
2019, domestic enterprises paid interest 
amounting to 1.4% for small- volume and 
1.2% for large- volume loans in the long- term 
segment, while interest on short-  term loans 
stood at 2.1% and 1.2%, respectively, of late 
(see the chart on p. 32). On the other hand, 
the BLS revealed that demand was being 
dampened by enterprises’ ability to fall back 
on alternative sources of funding; however, 
the impact of these sources has waned dis -
cernibly since autumn 2018.
At the same time, the latest BLS results indicate 
that the banks made their lending policies for 
loans to enterprises slightly more restrictive for 
the fourth consecutive time. The surveyed 
banks reported having further widened their 
margins on balance, irrespective of borrowers’ 
creditworthiness, citing the restrictive impact of 
the cost of funds along with balance sheet 
constraints as the main reasons. However, the 
credit standards for loans to enterprises re -mained unchanged across all survey categories 
in the reporting period.
Against the backdrop of the situation in the 
finan cial markets, the German banks, in re -
sponse to the ad hoc questions in the January 
BLS, reported virtually no change in their fund -
ing situation compared with the previous 
quarter  . In the wake of the new regulatory 
and  super  visory activities, they continued to 
strengthen their capital position in the second 
half of 2019. In addition, these activities had a 
tightening effect on credit standards when 
taken in isolation. During the same period, the 
ratio of NPLs to the gross book value of loans 
did not prompt the surveyed banks to change 
their lending policies.
Four banks from the German sample of the BLS 
took part in the second TLTRO- III, conducted in 
December 2019. The reason they gave for tak -
ing part was mainly to capitalise on the attract -
ive terms and conditions of the operation. 
These banks reported using the funds to substi -
tute TLTRO- II funds. In keeping with the mon -
etary policy purpose of the measure, they wish 
to use the liquidity for lending to the non-  
financial private sector. TLTRO- III had a positive 
direct or indirect effect on the banks’ financial 
situation through improved funding conditions 
and a more comfortable liquidity position. It 
had no impact on credit standards or credit 
terms and conditions, however.Demand sup -
ported mainly 
by low level of 
interest rates
Standards for 
loans to 
enterprises  
unchanged; 
credit terms and 
conditions 
slightly 
restrictive Regulatory and 
supervisory 
activities, when 
viewed in isol -
ation, leading to 
tightened credit 
standards; 
impact of NPL 
ratio neutral by 
comparison
TLTRO- III funds 
used chiefly for 
lending to the 
non- financial 
private sector 
and to substi -
tute TLTRO- II 
funds
List of references
Banca d’Italia (2020), The Italian Economy, Economic Bulletin, No 1, January 2020, pp. 33 f.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), The upswing in loans to enterprises in Germany between 2014 and 
2019, January 2020, pp. 13 ff.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), New methodology for calculating the EONIA since 2 October 
2019, Monthly Report, November 2019, p. 27.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), Acquisition of financial assets and the search for yield in Germany, 
Monthly Report, May 2019, pp. 31ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
33

Financial markets
Financial market setting
The key factor affecting the financial markets in 
the final quarter of 2019 and at the start of this 
year was, at first, an easing of political uncer -
tainty. Market participants took a positive view 
of the fact that the UK general election in De -
cember produced a clear majority in the House 
of Commons and of the United States and 
China reaching an initial trade agreement. Fur -
thermore, from the standpoint of investors, a 
number of indicators pointed to the possibility 
of a pick- up in global economic activity. In this 
environment, investors switched from risk-  free 
assets to riskier investments. In line with this, 
there was a rise in yields on high- quality gov -
ernment bonds, in particular, and share prices 
picked up significantly. By contrast, the yield 
spreads of ten- year sovereign bonds issued by 
other euro area countries as well as European 
corporate bonds narrowed against ten- year 
Bunds. In January, the positive overall picture 
was increasingly overshadowed not only briefly 
by the Iran conflict flaring up but also by con -
cerns about the possible economic conse -
quences of the coronavirus outbreak. Investors 
worldwide displayed a preference for safe in -
vestments, resulting in the yields on high-  
quality government bonds falling to levels close 
to their all-  time lows in some countries (safe 
haven effect). The deterioration in stock market 
sentiment was only temporary, however, with 
positive corporate and economic data quickly 
triggering a countermovement, leading in 
some instances to new all- time highs. For the 
most part, shifts in exchange rates on the for -
eign exchange markets in the final quarter of 
2019 and the first quarter of 2020 largely 
stayed within relatively narrow bounds on bal -
ance. The implied volatilities against the US 
dollar and the Japanese yen remained de -
cidedly low. Measured as a weighted average 
against the currencies of 19 major trading part -
ners, the euro depreciated slightly on balance (-1.9%) compared with the end of the third 
quarter of 2019.
Exchange rates
Since the end of the third quarter of 2019, 
there has, on balance, been no more than mar -
ginal change in the euro against the US dollar. 
As long ago as the second half of November, 
the euro- US dollar exchange rate was charac -
terised by only temporary fluctuations. In early 
December, a period of euro appreciation 
began, however. At the beginning of the 
month, investors were positively surprised by 
the publication of European purchasing man -
agers’ indices from the manufacturing sector, 
while the corresponding data in the United 
States turned out to be comparatively disap -
pointing. In mid- December, monetary policy 
decisions were then pending. Although the 
Federal Reserve left interest rates unchanged, 
the Chairman of the Federal Open Market 
Committee, Jerome Powell, said that there 
would be a prospect of a future rate increase 
only given a persistent and significant rise in in -
flation. As the market had evidently been ex -
pecting a less cautious signal, this weakened 
the US dollar. The meeting of the ECB’s Gov -
erning Council, which took place on the fol -
lowing day and was chaired by the new ECB 
President Christine Lagarde, made no more 
than a slight impression on the foreign ex -
change markets, however. Shortly after that, 
the euro gained ground against the US dollar 
after the UK general election produced a clear- 
cut majority in the House of Commons. From 
an investor perspective, this led to reduced un -
certainty about the United Kingdom’s with -
drawal from the EU, thus bringing greater clar -
ity concerning Europe’s political future; not 
only the pound sterling benefited from this, but 
also – to a lesser extent – the euro. In line with 
this, the euro appreciated against major third 
currencies such as the US dollar. The euro con -Financial mar -
kets shaped 
by receding pol -
itical risks …
… but uncer -
tainty increasing 
again at the end 
of the period 
under reviewEuro practically 
unchanged 
against 
US dollar  …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
34

tinued to appreciate in the period of thin trad -
ing between Christmas and New Year. At the 
end of the year, the euro was thus trading at 
US$1.12, its highest level since mid-  July 2019.
Given impetus by the escalation of the conflict 
between the United States and Iran, a counter -
movement began in January. The resulting rise 
in global risk aversion favoured the US dollar. 
From the end of January onwards, this ten -
dency was reinforced by growing concerns 
about a perceptible deterioration of the Chi -
nese economy owing to the spreading corona -
virus outbreak there. At the end of the period 
under review, the US dollar was also bolstered 
by surprisingly positive labour market data and 
by the publication of manufacturing sector pur -
chasing managers’ indices from the other side 
of the Atlantic. At the end of the period under 
review, the euro stood at US$1.09, its lowest 
level since May 2017 and 0.2% down on its 
level at the end of September 2019.
Marked exchange rate movements of the Jap -
anese yen against the euro were latterly being 
triggered chiefly by events outside Japan. Fun -
damentally, global factors are of major import -
ance for the yen’s exchange rate, since height -
ened risk aversion on the part of investors 
tends to strengthen the yen through net capital 
inflows. Following a calmer phase, the out -
come of the general election in the UK in mid- 
December led to an appreciation of the euro 
owing to the resulting reduction in political un -
certainty. Although the US- Iran conflict flared 
up in early January, leading to a countermove -
ment, the de- escalation of the conflict in the 
following days then led to the euro rising to its 
highest level against the yen in half a year. 
Nonetheless, a marked increase in risk aversion 
on the part of market participants in connec -
tion with the outbreak of coronavirus in China 
then saw a resumption of net capital inflows to 
Japan at the end of January. Although this 
meant that the euro depreciated again, at the 
end of the reporting period it was nevertheless 
trading at ¥119, up 1.4% on its level at the end 
of the third quarter.As in the quarters before, the exchange rate 
movements of the euro against the pound ster -
ling were shaped by news about the United 
Kingdom finally leaving the EU at the end of 
January 2020. This meant that reports on the 
early parliamentary general election therefore 
also played a significant role up to mid-  
December. The pound sterling was strength -
ened by the fact that a majority for Prime Min -
ister Boris Johnson was looking increasingly 
likely, because this lessened uncertainty about 
the economic and political outlook for the 
United Kingdom. Following a further percep -
tible appreciation of the pound sterling after 
the election, the euro was trading at £0.83 in … with gains 
against the yen
… but with 
exchange rate 
losses against 
the pound 
 sterlingExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries. An increase indicates an appreciation 
of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankOND J FMAM J J A SOND J FM
2018 2019 20201.101.151.201.25
115120125130135140
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
95100105Daily data, log scale
¥US$
£against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange rate:
€1 = US$1.1789 1
... yen
Launch exchange rate: €1 = ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange rate: €1 = £0.71111
Nominal effective exchange rate2
Q1 1999 = 100
Launch exchange rate: 103.12 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
35

mid- December, its lowest level since the refer -
endum on EU membership in 2016. Immedi -
ately afterwards, there was a pronounced 
countermovement, however, when the re-  
elected Prime Minister announced that ruling 
out an extension of the period for negotiating 
a comprehensive trade agreement with the EU 
beyond 2020 would be enshrined in law, thus 
placing a tight time limit on the transition 
period. This heightened the risk of the transi -
tion period ending without a trade agreement 
with the EU, thus clouding the economic out -
look once more – chiefly for the UK. In the fol -
lowing weeks, expectations of interest rate 
cuts were on the increase, not least owing to 
statements made by the Bank of England. From 
mid- January onwards, however, surprisingly 
positive data from the British labour market 
and on sentiment in industry strengthened the 
pound sterling against the euro. Ultimately, this 
trend was supported by the decision at the 
meeting of the Bank of England’s Monetary 
Policy Committee at the end of January to put interest rates on hold and by the UK Cabinet 
reshuffle. The euro was thus trading most re -
cently at £0.83, which was 5.9% below its 
value at the end of September.
Measured as a weighted average against the 
currencies of 19 major trading partners, the 
euro declined slightly on balance (-1.9%) com -
pared with the end of the third quarter of 2019. 
Although it made gains against the Japanese 
yen as well as a number of currencies with a 
lower trade weighting, it depreciated not only 
against the pound sterling but also against the 
Czech koruna (-3.8%), the Swiss franc (-2.0%), 
the Polish zloty (-2.9%), and the Chinese ren -
minbi (-2.4%) as well as other currencies. The 
renminbi benefited from the easing of the trade 
conflict between China and the United States, 
especially as the United States retracted the 
charge of currency manipulation against the 
Chinese government. The coronavirus epidemic 
in China has not led so far to a significant de -
preciation of the renminbi. In a setting of in -
creasing risk aversion, the euro – following its 
above- mentioned depreciation against the 
Swiss franc – was latterly trading at its lowest 
level since August 2015. Outside the group of 
19 partner currencies, the euro made gains 
against the Turkish lira (+7.1%). Factors weigh -
ing negatively on the Turkish lira included inter -
est rate cuts by the Turkish central bank, accel -
erating inflation rates in Turkey again, and for -
eign policy tensions.
Securities markets and 
 portfolio investment
Bond market
Yields on government bonds in the major cur -
rency areas all showed marked fluctuations in 
the reporting period, but presented a mixed 
picture overall. In the United States, yields on 
ten- year US Treasuries fell by 5 basis points to 
1.6%, which was close to their all- time low. 
After the end of September, however, they ini -
tially showed a marked rise to more than 1.9%. Euro depreci -
ation in effective 
terms
Mixed yields on 
both sides of the 
AtlanticBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20200.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–––+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
GermanyJapanEuro areaUnited States
United
KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
36

Investors were evidently assuming that the eco -
nomic outlook would become somewhat 
brighter. This was also helped by the initial 
trade agreement signed by the United States 
and China in mid-  January. Furthermore, the US 
Fed stressed in mid- December that its monet -
ary policy stance was appropriate. Accordingly, 
the Fed Funds futures market saw little likeli -
hood of a further cut in interest rates at the 
beginning of the new year. Many investors re -
sponded optimistically to this, preferring riskier 
assets over safe bonds. The upshot was an in -
crease in the term premium of US paper.1 The 
political tensions between the United States 
and Iran in early January had no more than a 
temporary impact on US yields. Since mid-  
January, US yields have fallen again signifi -
cantly, however, by 21 basis points. Out of con -
cern about the possible consequences of the 
coronavirus epidemic, investors became in -
creasingly interested in safe government bonds 
again. It was mainly term premiums that de -
clined again as a result of this. The expected 
short- term interest rates were also down 
slightly, however, after the Fed had stressed 
that it would be keeping a close watch on the 
consequences of the coronavirus epidemic.
The yield on ten- year Bunds rose on balance by 
18 basis points to -0.4% after the end of the 
third quarter. This meant that it was again 
somewhat up on its all-  time low in the third 
quarter. Following a decision by the ECB Gov -
erning Council in September, net purchases 
under the asset purchase programme (APP) 
were restarted at a monthly pace of €20 billion 
as from 1 November 2019. The resumption of 
purchases itself had no immediate impact on 
prices, as it had largely already been factored in 
by investors beforehand. Yields on German 
Federal securities in the reporting period were 
linked rather loosely to interest rate movements 
in the United States. Under the impact of the 
cited factors, yields on ten- year Federal bonds 
(Bunds) up to the end of 2019 initially rose 
somewhat more strongly than Treasuries with 
the same maturity. The safe haven effect due 
to increasing concern about the coronavirus epidemic was then, however, somewhat less 
pronounced for Bunds, meaning that yields in 
Germany fell less sharply. The yield spread be -
tween ten- year US Treasuries and German ten- 
year government bonds narrowed overall by 21 
basis points to 201 basis points.
Towards the end of the period under review, 
the term structure derived from yields on Fed -
eral securities was slightly steeper than at the 
end of the third quarter of 2019. Measured by 
the differential between ten- year and two- year 
yields, the increase stood at 24 basis points. 
The yield curve remains very flat by historical 
standards. Across all maturities, yields on Fed -
eral securities were somewhat above their all-  
time lows. At the end of the reporting period, 
bonds with a residual maturity of 25 years or 
more were again showing a positive yield. The 
rise in yields can be broken down into “implied 
short- term interest rate expectations” and 
“term premiums”. Both components rose in 
the period under review.
The yield spread between ten- year Bunds and 
ten- year government bonds of other euro area 
countries (GDP-  weighted average) narrowed Ten- year Bund 
yield higher on 
balance
Lower yield 
spreads over 
BundsYield curve in the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method),  based  on  listed  Federal  securities.  1 In  place  since 
18 September 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.90.80.70.60.50.40.3
–––––––
Residual maturity in years13 February 2020
30 September 2019% p.a.
1 This rise reflects the fact that investors were demanding 
lower compensation for future unexpectedly low short-  
term interest rates.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
37

compared with the end of the third quarter of 
2019 (down 8 basis points to 57 basis points). 
The narrowing of the spread of Greek and Irish 
bonds against ten- year Bunds was especially 
pronounced. One US rating agency upgraded 
Greece’s credit rating by one notch, which had 
a positive impact on prices. Ireland’s rating out -
look has shown an improvement, too. There 
was intermittently a very marked widening of 
the spread of Italian sovereign bonds, which re -
flected market players’ concern that the Italian 
government might fall after a regional election. 
Overall, however, the interest rate spread has 
fallen in line with general developments in 
spreads in the euro area.
Compared with the end of the third quarter of 
2019, yields on ten- year UK bonds (gilts) were 
up by 16 basis points at 0.7%. In its first meet -
ing of the new year at the end of January, the 
Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC) voted to maintain the bank rate at 
0.75%. In doing so, the Bank of England was assuming that the UK inflation rate would stay 
below 2% for a while before rising again to its 
target figure. Some leading indicators were 
pointing to the pace of economic growth pick -
ing up again after the UK’s withdrawal from 
the EU. At just under 0%, yields on Japanese 
ten- year government bonds were 19 basis 
points higher than at the end of September. 
Yields thus remained within the range in which 
market participants assume that the Bank of 
Japan wishes to keep interest rates as part of its 
policy to control the yield curve. In its January 
meeting, the Bank of Japan left its monetary 
policy stance unchanged. At the end of the 
period under review, yields were declining 
somewhat overall owing to the aforemen -
tioned uncertainties about the consequences 
of the coronavirus epidemic.
Euro area forward inflation rates derived from 
inflation swaps for a period of five years start -
ing in five years’ time latterly stood at 1.2%. 
This means that they were somewhat higher 
on balance in the reporting period. Besides 
long- term inflation expectations, this indicator 
also contains liquidity premiums and inflation 
risk premiums, which are currently negative. 
These premiums are the reason for the differ -
ential between market- based indicators and 
the higher inflation expectations computed 
from surveys and are likely to have played a 
major part in the reporting period as well. 
Long- term euro area inflation expectations sur -
veyed and collated by Consensus Economics 
likewise rose slightly throughout the reporting 
period.
Yields on BBB- rated European corporate bonds 
continued to fall during the reporting period. 
Bonds issued by financial corporations with a 
residual maturity of between seven and ten 
years were yielding 1.1% as this report went to 
press, which was 22 basis points lower than at 
the end of September. Yields on non- financial 
corporate bonds of equivalent maturity fell by 
4 basis points to 0.7%. The key factors behind 
this are likely to have been the somewhat more 
favourable economic outlook and stock market Rise in yields in 
UK and JapanSlight rise in 
euro area for -
ward inflation 
rate, survey- 
based inflation 
expectations 
also slightly 
higher
Corporate bond 
yields downSpreads of ten-year government bonds 
over German Bunds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland
FranceGreece
PortugalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
38

gains, which lowered the default risk. The fact 
that declining spreads were accompanied by 
lower CDS premiums certainly suggests that 
this was the case. Given that risk- free interest 
rates were higher overall, corporate bond 
spreads over Bunds narrowed more strongly in 
line with this. Yield spreads are thus well below 
their respective five- year averages.
Gross issuance in the German bond market in 
the fourth quarter of 2019 was well down on 
the preceding three- month period. Overall, 
German borrowers sold paper worth €293½ 
billion, compared with €356 billion in the third 
quarter. Net of redemptions and changes in is -
suers’ own holdings, domestic issuers cut back 
their capital market borrowing by €24 billion. 
The outstanding volume of foreign debt secur -
ities in the German market rose by €2½ billion 
in the fourth quarter. On balance, the total out -
standing volume of bonds in Germany thus 
shrank by €22 billion in the quarter under re -
view.
The public sector capitalised on its favourable 
fiscal situation to redeem debt instruments to -
talling €22 billion net in the final quarter of 
2019. In particular, central government (includ -
ing the resolution agency which is classified as 
belonging to it) made a marked reduction in its 
capital market debt, redeeming mainly five-  
year Federal notes (€11 billion), but also Treas -
ury discount paper notes (Bubills; €4½ billion) 
and two- year Federal Treasury notes (€1½ bil -
lion). This contrasted with net issuance of 10 
and 30- year Bunds (€6½ billion and €2½ bil -
lion respectively). State and local governments 
redeemed debt securities worth €6½ billion on 
balance.
German enterprises took advantage of the fa -
vourable financing conditions and issued bonds 
for €6 billion net in the period under review. 
On balance, this was exclusively long- term 
paper. There were slightly more issues by non- 
financial corporations (€3½ billion) than by 
other financial institutions (€3 billion).In the period from October to December 2019, 
domestic credit institutions reduced their cap -
ital market debt by €8 billion. Net redemptions 
were focused on debt securities issued by spe -
cialised credit institutions and other bank debt 
securities which can be structured flexibly (€6½ 
billion and €2½ billion respectively). The vol -
ume of outstanding public Pfandbriefe con -
tinues to be on the decline (€2 billion). These 
redemptions were partly offset by net issuance 
of mortgage Pfandbriefe amounting to €3 bil -
lion.
On the demand side of the German bond mar -
ket, a marked divergence became apparent in 
the fourth quarter of 2019. On balance, equi -
ties were acquired predominantly by domestic 
non- banks (€21 billion). Furthermore, the Bun -
desbank added €10 billion net worth of bonds 
to its portfolio. One key factor in this context 
was, not least, that the Eurosystem’s monetary 
policy asset purchase programme was restarted 
in November. By contrast, foreign investors and Net redemptions 
of German debt 
securities
Lower public 
sector capital 
market 
 borrowing
Net issuance of 
corporate bondsFall in credit 
institutions’ cap -
ital market debt
Acquisition of 
debt securitiesInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2018 2019
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents 8.9 29.6 15.5
Credit institutions – 11.9 10.6 – 15.4
of which:
Foreign debt securities –  2.8 11.2 –  8.0
Deutsche Bundesbank 10.9 – 3.1 10.0
Other sectors 9.9 22.1 20.8
of which:
Domestic debt securities 16.6 20.7 11.1
Non-residents – 27.2 – 0.5 – 37.3
Shares
Residents –  7.3 6.5 22.7
Credit institutions –  3.4 – 3.4 3.1
of which:
Domestic shares –  2.7 – 0.4 3.0
Non-banks –  3.9 9.8 19.7
of which:
Domestic shares 2.7 – 0.6 4.2
Non-residents 2.0 1.2 –  1.9
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 34.1 20.7 52.1
Investment in retail funds 0.6 4.3 4.9
of which:
Equity funds –  3.0 – 0.8 0.7
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
39

domestic credit institutions disposed of fixed-  
income securities with a net worth of €37½ 
billion and €15½ billion respectively.
Equity market
There was a significant increase in equity prices 
worldwide in the period under review. On bal -
ance, the US S&P 500 saw a 13.3% rise on its 
end- September level, thus hitting an all- time 
high. The Japanese Nikkei 225 index recorded 
gains of 9.5% and the continental European 
stock markets also registered an increase. The 
European EURO STOXX index, was up by 9.0%; 
Germany’s CDAX recorded an even stronger 
rise (10.8%). Measured by the broad FTSE All-  
Share Index, share prices of British enterprises 
were up by an average of 2.2%.
Prices on the international equity markets were 
driven up by the fact that, at the end of the 
year, market participants perceived a marked 
reduction in the above- mentioned longstand -
ing latent downside political risks. The resulting 
lower level of political uncertainty led to an in -
creasing risk appetite on the part of investors. 
This can be verified empirically, for example, by 
using a dividend discount model, which identi -
fied a further fall in the equity risk premium for 
the S&P 500 and the EURO STOXX as the main 
driver of the observed price gains in the report -
ing period. There was hardly any change in 
earnings growth expectations for enterprises, 
resulting in a comparatively high stock market 
valuation on both sides of the Atlantic.
In the second half of January, however, worries 
about the possible economic consequences of 
the coronavirus epidemic led to heightened un -
certainty among investors. From mid-  January 
onwards, share prices on all markets dipped 
temporarily. Nevertheless, a strong counter -
movement set in towards the end of the period 
under review, which was sustained by positive 
industrial and economic data from the US and 
China’s announcement that it would be halving 
tariffs on some US goods. Price uncertainty on Marked rise in 
equity prices 
worldwide
Stock markets 
benefited from 
reduction in pol -
itical uncertainty
Coronavirus 
outbreak  led 
to increased 
uncertaintyEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesDaily data, beginning of 2018 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
8090100110120130
60708090100110120
2018 2019 2020Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)
Implicit volatilities
in the financial markets
Sources: Bloomberg and Thomson Reuters. 1 Calculated from 
prices of index options with a maturity of 30 days. 2 Implied 
volatility  of  forex  options  with  a  maturity  of  three  months. 
3 Implied volatility of options on Bund future (Germany) and 
T-Note future (US) for a three-month horizon.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 202024681015202530354045
05101520
Bond market 3 
(Enlarged scale)Stock market 1
Foreign exchange market 2%, daily data
United StatesEuro area
VStoxx
(Euro Stoxx 50)
GermanyUnited States
VIX 
(S&P500)
Euro / US dollar Euro / yenGermany
VDAXDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
40

the equity markets measured by the implied 
volatility likewise showed a marked increase for 
a time, but it latterly went back in the United 
States and Europe to values below the respect -
ive five- year averages.
Bank stocks made marked gains in the euro 
area at 15.8% and in the United States at 
11.0%. Prices are likely to have been supported 
by the reporting season for the fourth quarter 
of 2019, which turned out to be better than 
expected on both sides of the Atlantic. In the 
European banking sector, German and Italian 
banks stood out in particular. In these cases, 
institution- specific reports led to strong gains 
of the overall sector indices. British banks, 
meanwhile, increased only slightly in value 
(+0.5%). One likely key reason for this is the still 
highly unpredictable negative fallout for the 
British financial sector arising from the United 
Kingdom’s potential failure to conclude a trade 
agreement with the EU by the end of 2020.
Funding on the German stock market totalled 
€5½ billion on balance in the reporting quarter 
and was thus well up on the previous quarter’s 
figure (€½). The volume of foreign shares in 
the German market rose by €15½ billion over 
the same period. On balance, equities were 
purchased mainly by resident non- banks (€19½ 
billion). These also include investment funds, 
for example, which were attracting large in -
flows at the end of the period under review. 
Domestic credit institutions added €3 billion 
net to their share portfolios, while foreign in -
vestors reduced their equity exposure in Ger -
many by €2 billion on balance.
In the final quarter of 2019, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded a significant net in -
flow of €57 billion, compared with €25 billion 
in the previous quarter. On balance, most of 
these funds were channelled to specialised 
funds reserved for institutional investors (€52 
billion). Among the asset classes, mixed secur -
ities funds, in particular, saw significant inflows 
of capital (€20½ billion), with bond funds (€14 
billion), funds of funds (€11½ billion) and open- Sharp rise in 
euro area and 
US bank stocks
Equity market 
funding
Sales and 
 purchases of 
mutual fund 
sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2018 2019
Q4 Q3 Q4p
I. Current account +  66.2 + 63.1 + 76.4 
1. Goods 1 +  52.5 + 62.2 + 57.0 
2. Services 2 –   2.5 – 13.7 –  2.0 
3. Primary income +  32.6 + 27.1 + 33.6 
4. Secondary income –  16.3 – 12.4 – 12.2 
II. Capital account +   1.5 +  0.5 –  0.6 
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) +  64.9 + 15.9 + 86.9 
1. Direct investment –  23.6 –  5.9 + 25.4 
Domestic investment 
abroad +   2.2 + 24.2 +  4.6 
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country +  25.9 + 30.2 – 20.8 
2. Portfolio investment +  18.9 + 21.2 + 71.4 
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities –   8.9 + 20.6 + 32.7 
Shares 3 –   0.5 –  0.7 +  9.5 
Investment fund shares 4–   0.4 + 10.7 + 20.9 
of which:
Money market fund 
shares +   4.9 –  0.4 +  4.7 
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 –   2.4 + 13.7 +  4.3 
of which:
Denominated in euro 6+   2.7 +  7.8 +  3.8 
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –   5.6 –  3.0 –  2.0 
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities –  27.9 –  0.6 – 38.7 
Shares 3 0.0 +  1.2 –  2.8 
Investment fund shares –   0.7 –  1.2 +  1.4 
Long-term debt 
 securities 5 –  22.5 –  8.1 – 20.3 
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 8 –  18.8 –  7.5 – 18.0 
Short-term debt 
 securities 7 –   4.7 +  7.5 – 17.0 
3. Financial derivatives 9 +   0.5 +  3.2 +  1.8 
4. Other investment 10 +  68.5 –  2.3 – 11.2 
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 + 110.4 +  9.3 + 61.9 
Enterprises and 
 households 12 +  24.9 +  8.4 +  0.7 
General government +   5.2 +  1.3 +  0.1 
Bundesbank –  72.1 – 21.3 – 73.9 
5. Reserve assets +   0.6 –  0.3 –  0.6 
IV. Errors and omissions 13 –   2.8 – 47.7 + 11.1 
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Long- 
term: original maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 
6 Including outstanding foreign D- Mark bonds. 7 Short- term: 
original maturity up to one year. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the Bun-
desbank. 12  Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corpor-
ations (excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as 
non- fi  nancial corporations, households and non- profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 13   Statistical errors and omissions, 
resulting from the difference between the balance on the fi  nan-
cial account and the balances on the current account and the 
capital account.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
41

end real estate funds (€8½ billion) also record -
ing fairly large inflows. The outstanding volume 
of foreign mutual fund shares in Germany rose 
by €21 billion in the period under review. In -
vestment fund shares were bought on balance 
almost exclusively by domestic non- banks, 
which added fund shares worth €74½ billion 
net to their portfolios. Most of this paper was 
issued by domestic mutual funds. German 
credit institutions boosted their fund portfolio 
by €2 billion net, while non- resident investors 
sold domestic mutual fund shares worth €1½ 
billion net.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital exports of €71½ in 
the fourth quarter of 2019. Direct investment 
likewise generated net outflows of funds 
amounting to €25½ billion.
Firms domiciled in Germany increased their dir -
ect investment abroad by €4½ billion between 
October and December 2019 (compared with 
€24 billion in the previous quarter). They 
boosted their equity capital abroad (€10½ bil -
lion), the vast majority of which was through investment in equity capital in the narrower 
sense, with reinvested earnings playing only a 
minor role. By contrast, they reduced the 
amount of funding – mainly financial credit – 
provided through intra- group lending (€5½ bil -
lion). German enterprises invest in a large num -
ber of countries and regions throughout the 
world. In the fourth quarter of 2019, a very 
high level of net investment was made in the 
United States (€8½ billion) and in Luxembourg 
(€5 billion). This contrasted with comparatively 
large return flows of funds from the United 
Kingdom (€11 billion) and the Netherlands (€3 
billion).
Foreign enterprises withdrew a net €21 billion 
of foreign direct investment from Germany in 
the fourth quarter of 2019 after having pro -
vided affiliated enterprises in Germany with 
€30 billion in the previous quarter. The bulk of 
this, at €20 billion, was for the repayment of 
intra- group loans, most of which consisted of 
financial credit. The fourth quarter saw a slight 
fall of €1 billion in foreign enterprises’ equity 
investment in Germany. There were compara -
tively large return flows of funds to Luxem -
bourg (€10½ billion), Belgium and the United 
Kingdom (€5 billion each) as well as the Neth -
erlands (€4 billion).Direct invest -
ment records 
net capital 
exports
Capital outflows 
due to transac -
tions by domes -
tic enterprisesForeign direct 
investment in 
Germany: 
 predominantly 
capital outflowsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
42

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
German economic momentum remained weak 
through the final quarter of 2019. According to 
the Federal Statistical Office’s flash estimate, 
real gross domestic product (GDP) stagnated at 
the level recorded in the previous quarter after 
adjustment for seasonal and calendar vari -
ations. For 2019 as a whole, real GDP increased 
by 0.6%, thus confirming the first preliminary 
annual outturn. Economic growth thus lagged 
significantly behind the expansion of potential 
output last year. Capacity utilisation is likely to 
have shifted into normal range at the end of 
2019.
The sustained weak underlying cyclical trend 
was chiefly the result of the downturn in indus -
try, which could still be observed at the end of 
the year. By contrast, the more domestically 
oriented services sectors continued to buoy 
economic activity. The still fairly positive income 
and labour market outlook for consumers had 
a substantial part to play in this regard. There 
are still no signs of any change in the two-  
speed economic activity at the start of 2020. 
On the one hand, leading economic indicators 
for manufacturing collectively do not suggest 
that this sector is already bottoming out. On 
the other hand, consumer sentiment is still 
buoyant and, following the lull at the end of 
the year, the construction boom is likely to con -
tinue, not least due to the favourable financing 
conditions.
Industry was the main factor weighing on ag -
gregate output towards the end of 2019. Value 
added in the manufacturing sector continued 
its steep decline, for example. Moreover, the 
construction sector is likely to have curbed ac -
tivity somewhat. This, however, was not attrib -
utable to cyclical factors; rather, enterprises in 
the finishing trades, in particular, are likely to 
have used the timing of the Christmas public 
holidays for extended plant shutdowns, which means a considerable countermovement can 
be expected after the turn of the year given the 
high demand. By contrast, the services sector 
reported a marked rise in activity. In the final 
months of last year, retail sales remained at the 
Q3 level in price- adjusted terms, but wholesale 
sales rose considerably and hotel and restaur -
ant services were also flourishing. In addition, 
output in the business- related services sectors 
excluding trade is likely to have increased 
somewhat. On the demand side, construction 
investment provided some impetus, yet private 
consumption is unlikely to have expanded fur -
ther after the steep growth in the previous 
quarter. Government consumption also lost a 
great deal of momentum. Exports as defined in 
the national accounts declined slightly, al -
though exports of goods, buoyed up by deliv -
eries of other transport equipment, exceeded 
third- quarter figures. Furthermore, enterprises Economic out -
put in Germany 
stagnated in 
final quarter 
of 2019
Two- speed 
German  eco -
nomic activity 
continues
Stronger drag 
on economic 
activity caused 
by industryOverall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019949698100102104106108
–10+1+2+3+4Price and seasonally adjusted
2015 = 100, log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
43

are likely to have invested less in machinery and 
equipment.
After price adjustment, German enterprises’ ex -
ports were distinctly higher –  measured in 
terms of goods exports – in the final quarter of 
2019. While exports of goods to euro area 
countries declined, deliveries to non- euro area 
countries were up substantially overall. This 
particularly holds true for Asia. With a sharp in -
crease, not only business with China was a 
clear source of impetus. German exporters also 
reported significant sales growth in the newly 
industrialised economies in Asia and in the 
south and east Asian emerging market econ -omies. Exports to central and east European EU 
countries were also noticeably higher than the 
level of the previous quarter. By contrast, ex -
ports of goods to the United States showed a 
steep decline. Moreover, the value of exports 
to the United Kingdom was well below its 
average  of the third quarter. One factor in this 
development was a one- off effect relating to 
deliveries of precious metals; these had 
previously  spiked before normalising in the re -
porting quarter. Broken down by category of 
goods, exports of capital and consumer goods 
saw a steep rise in real terms according to the 
data available up to November. In the case of 
capital goods, a significant increase in the other 
transport equipment sector was striking. By 
contrast, as in the previous two quarters, ex -
ports of motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts 
were down, as were exports of machinery. The 
volume of intermediate goods exports re -
mained largely unchanged.
Investment in commercial machinery and 
equipment is likely to have dropped in the final 
quarter of 2019. Industrial firms’ propensity to 
invest is likely to have remained subdued 
against the backdrop of the below- average 
utilisation of production capacity in industry. 
Considerably more capital goods were im -
ported from abroad, but capital goods produ -
cers’ sales in Germany plunged. German pro -
ducers of machinery and manufacturers of 
computer, electronic and optical products 
posted falling sales figures. At the same time, 
car registrations by commercial customers were 
up considerably compared with the average of 
the third quarter, which indicates that enter -
prises have stepped up investment in their ve -
hicle fleets. However, the strong growth rate is 
probably attributable primarily to anticipatory 
effects regarding the stricter carbon emission 
targets set by the EU, which came into effect 
for the majority of new vehicles on 1 January 
2020. Accordingly, a dampening countermove -
ment is to be expected for the first quarter of 
2020. In addition, registrations of commercial 
vehicles in the reporting period were quite con -
siderably lower than in the previous quarter.Increase in 
exports of 
goodsCommercial 
machinery and 
equipment 
down90100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201990100110
8590100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 190100 100110
€ bnto non-euro area 
countriesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
44

Construction investment is likely to have grown 
only at a moderate rate in the final quarter of 
2019. A major factor in this was probably the 
fact that mainly enterprises in the finishing 
trades are likely to have used the timing of the 
Christmas public holidays for extended plant 
shutdowns. Figures for turnover in the main 
construction sector, which are available up to 
November, indicate there could be a slight drop 
in housing investment, whilst investment in 
commercial and public construction is expected 
to be higher.
Private consumption is likely to have taken a 
breather at the end of 2019 after posting sig -
nificant growth in the third quarter. Consumers 
held back in particular with their retail shop -
ping, with purchases of electrical household 
appliances and furniture and furnishings af -
fected in particular. However, households also 
made fewer purchases of textiles, clothing and 
footwear. The warmer- than- average weather 
in December was probably a factor here. Fur -
thermore, households purchased fewer new 
passenger cars than in the third quarter. Private 
consumption received a positive boost from 
hotel and restaurant services, however, where 
turnover showed strong growth in the report -
ing period.
German imports of goods rose moderately in 
real terms in the final quarter of 2019. Accord -
ing to the data, which are available up to No -
vember, price- adjusted imports of chemical and 
pharmaceutical products experienced particu -
larly strong growth. In addition, there was also 
a significant increase in imports of computers, 
electronic and optical products and electrical 
equipment. By contrast, imports of motor ve -
hicles and machinery were down. Furthermore, 
on the back of a strong rise in crude oil prices 
and the rather mild weather conditions, real 
imports of energy fell off sharply. Broken down 
by geographical origin, the volume of imported 
products from the euro area went down, while 
the inflow of goods from non- euro area coun -
tries rose substantially.Sectoral trends
The downturn in industry persisted in the final 
quarter of 2019. Industrial production de -
creased steeply from its Q3 level in seasonally 
adjusted terms (-2¼%). The mechanical engin -
eering and automotive sectors saw a particu -
larly strong decline in output. By contrast, pro -
duction in the area of other transport equip -
ment was up substantially and thus had a 
stabilis ing effect. However, output of capital 
goods was significantly lower than the overall 
third- quarter average. On the other hand, the 
intermediate goods industry experienced a sig -
nificantly smaller contraction in production. 
The production of consumer goods remained 
at the same level as in the previous quarter, but 
the fact that there was no decrease was due to 
the pharmaceutical industry, in which output 
grew very strongly in the reporting period.
Although production fell strongly up to the end 
of 2019, industrial enterprises reported a slight 
rise in their utilisation of production capacity at 
the beginning of 2020. According to the Ifo In -
stitute, capacity utilisation of tangible fixed 
assets in manufacturing edged slightly upwards 
again, although it remained clearly below aver -
age and not all sectors saw a rise. While manu -
facturers of consumer and intermediate goods 
saw an increase in the utilisation of tangible 
fixed assets, the degree of capacity utilisation 
in the capital goods industry continued to de -
crease unabated.
Construction output experienced a strong 
quarter- on- quarter decline in the final quarter 
of 2019 (-2%), which was mainly attributable 
to a significant decrease in construction activity 
in the finishing trades. This contraction is not a 
sign that the construction boom is coming to 
an end, however. The above- mentioned timing 
of “bridge days” could have played a part. Fur -
thermore, initial data for finishing trades are 
prone to revision. Compared with the previous 
quarter, however, output in the main construc -
tion sector was up slightly on the back of a 
marked increase in activity in building construc -Construction 
investment likely 
to be somewhat 
higher
Private 
 consumption 
unchanged
Import demand 
still pointing 
upwardsIndustry still in 
a downturn
Rise in capacity 
utilisation
Strong decline 
in construction 
output but no 
signs of boom 
coming to an 
endDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
45

tion. On the other hand, civil engineering work 
remained at a high level.
Overall, output in the services sectors probably 
continued on its upward trajectory in the final 
quarter of 2019. Real retail sales moved side -
ways but wholesale trade continued on its 
growth path even though weakness persisted 
in the industrial sector. Taking the average of 
October and November –  the period up to 
which statistical data are currently available – 
price- adjusted wholesale sales were clearly 
higher than the level of the third quarter. Steep 
growth was also recorded in business activity in 
hotel and restaurant services. By contrast, car 
dealers suffered a distinct drop in sales com -
pared with the very strong previous quarter. 
Economic activity in the other services sectors is 
likely to have improved slightly. This is sug -
gested by the assessment of the business situ -
ation in this sector which, according to the Ifo 
Institute, recovered somewhat in the reporting period following the strong decline in the first 
half of 2019.
Labour market
The two-  speed nature of economic activity 
which persisted in the fourth quarter was also 
reflected in the labour market. In this context, 
net employment gains continued to be ob -
served in most sectors other than temporary 
work and manufacturing. Unemployment re -
mained broadly unchanged at a low level. The 
number of employees in economically induced 
short- time work rose considerably, but not dra -
matically. The leading labour market indicators 
suggest that, over the coming months, em -
ployment will continue to grow and unemploy -
ment will remain largely stable.
In the final quarter of 2019, seasonally adjusted 
domestic employment went up by 81,000 per -
sons, or 0.2%. This rise was about twice as 
high as in the previous quarter. Employment 
growth was mainly attributable to the increase 
in jobs subject to social security contributions. 
According to the Federal Employment Agency’s 
initial estimate, in the first two months of the 
reporting quarter alone such employment in -
creased by 113,000, or 0.3%, compared with 
the average of the third quarter. By contrast, 
the number of self- employed persons was 
lower. The Federal Employment Agency’s re -
porting of low- paid part- time employment was 
interrupted at the current end due to recording 
problems.
Employment subject to social security contribu -
tions rose in most economic sectors up until 
the end of the period under review. On the one 
hand, there were major recruitment drives in 
construction and large parts of the services sec -
tor, with the strongest growth recorded in IT. 
Moreover, notable employment growth was re -
corded in personal service activities such as 
healthcare and social work, education, restaur -
ants and hotels, but also in public administra -
tion and business- related services apart from Services sectors 
still on growth 
pathTwo- speed 
nature of econ -
omy impacts 
labour market
Marked rise in 
employment 
owing to 
increase in 
employment 
subject to 
social security 
contributions
Decline in 
employment 
mainly for tem -
porary workers; 
growth in many 
services sub-
sectorsOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019Industry
95100105110
859095100105110115120125
Construction1
Main construction2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
Industry excluding
automotive sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
46

temporary agency employment. Temporary 
agency employment, whose employees are 
often deployed in industry, and manufacturing 
are located chiefly on the other side of the 
two- speed economy. That said, the decline in 
temporary employment slowed towards the 
end of the period under review.
The number of jobs subject to social security 
contributions was only marginally lower in the 
manufacturing sector, which is suffering in par -
ticular from the current slowdown in economic 
activity. One contributory factor in this was that 
not all economic sectors in industry were 
equally affected by a downturn in demand. To 
wit, whereas the automotive industry, manu -
facturers of electrical equipment and manufac -
turers of metal products reduced their work -
forces moderately, employment adjustment in 
the mechanical engineering sector has thus far 
been minimal. Manufacturers of computers, 
electronic and optical products, food products 
and other transport equipment and in the field 
of repair and installation of machinery and 
equipment actually even added jobs. Further -
more, many enterprises in the affected sectors 
responded to the production losses by taking 
other adjustment measures. The rationale be -
hind this strategy is probably that if, as ex -
pected, economic activity picks up in the fu -
ture, the hiring of new staff might become la -
borious due to the persistently high demand 
for skilled workers. Alongside lower labour 
productivity, which led to a rise in unit labour 
costs, overtime was reduced, positive balances 
on working time accounts scaled back and 
more short- time work introduced. According to 
provisional data from the Federal Employment 
Agency, in October, the most recent month for 
which data are available, 87% of the just under 
100,000 short- time workers were employed in 
manufacturing. More than half of these alone 
were located in three subsectors: metal work -
ing and processing, the manufacture of fabri -
cated metal products and mechanical engin -
eering.Only minor 
employment 
adjustments in 
manufacturing, 
but reduced 
working hours 
and short- time 
workLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20Jan.42.042.543.043.544.044.545.045.5
29.530.030.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.005001,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200Jan.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Jan.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployed
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2Occupied positionsJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Oct.-
Nov.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
47

Registered unemployment remained virtually 
unchanged in the fourth quarter of 2019 after 
seasonal adjustment. The number of persons 
registered as unemployed averaged 2.28 mil -
lion over the reporting quarter, as in the previ -
ous quarter. Accordingly, the unemployment 
rate held steady at 5.0% throughout this 
period, where it remained in January. Even so, 
the economic downturn was reflected in the 
unemployment insurance scheme, with the 
number of people registered as unemployed 
again higher than the average of the previous 
quarter. The figure stabilised, however, during 
the year- end period and has not risen any fur -
ther of late. There was a reverse development 
for job seekers receiving the basic welfare al -
lowance. The decline prevailing so far, which 
was apparent again in quarter- on- quarter 
terms, ended in December and gave way to a 
minor improvement. A factor in this develop -
ment may be that, after just over a year with 
increasing cyclical unemployment, it is likely 
this effect is filtering through to the basic wel -
fare allowance scheme.
There was no further deterioration in leading 
labour market indicators during the past few 
months. However, there are only signs of the 
beginning of an upturn at most, with the la -
bour market likely to continue to run at two 
speeds for the time being. The Ifo employment 
barometer, a survey of the recruitment plans of 
trade and industry over the next three months, 
was up again slightly towards the end of the 
period under review. Services, and not manu -
facturing, appear to be driving this slight recov -
ery, however. The number of reported vacan -
cies continued to fall, albeit at a slower pace 
than in the third quarter. The decline is once 
again mainly attributable to other business-  
related services, which are shaped by develop -
ments in temporary employment. Furthermore, 
the number of vacancies in manufacturing and 
the trade sector decreased. The Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s BA-  X job index, which re -
cords stock figures as well as the inflow of re -
ported vacancies, stabilised, as the intake of 
jobs was up again slightly in the last three months.1 The labour market barometer of the 
Institute for Employment Research (IAB) is still 
clearly in positive territory, suggesting further 
job growth. The leading indicator for un -
employment in the IAB labour market barom -
eter has recovered somewhat and returned to 
neutral territory. Unemployment could thus re -
main stable over the next three months.
Wages and prices
Like in the third quarter, basic negotiated rates 
of pay were up only moderately in the fourth 
quarter in year- on- year terms (+2.3%), repre -
senting a continuation of the trend, seen in the 
previous two quarters, of lower growth in the 
production sector than in the services sectors. 
Including additional benefits, wage growth in 
the final quarter was at a level similar to that 
for basic rates of pay, after a clearly higher rise 
was recorded in the third quarter, mainly owing 
to special payments due for the first time in the 
metal- working and electrical engineering in -
dustries. Due to the continuing tightness of the 
labour market in many services sectors, actual 
earnings growth may also have strongly out -
paced negotiated wages in the fourth quarter.
In the fourth quarter, new collective pay agree -
ments were completed in the chemical indus -
try, insurance and temporary employment, 
amongst others. In the chemical industry, em -
ployers and trade unions concluded a collective 
agreement with an increase of only just under 
2% in annualised terms against the backdrop 
of the downturn in the industry. The new col -
lective agreement in insurance likewise envis -
ages only moderate wage growth, which also 
reflects the challenging situation in this sector. 
By contrast, relatively steep rises in negotiated Unemployment 
moving 
 sideways
Leading labour 
market indica -
tors stabilisedMuted growth 
in negotiated 
rates of pay in 
fourth quarter
New collective 
pay agreements 
with mixed 
 picture
1 The current release of the Federal Employment Agency’s 
BA- X job index was rebased from 2004 to 2015, which led 
to a lowering and compression of the index. In addition, 
values and seasonal factors for earlier periods were formal -
ised. Cf. Statistics provided by the Federal Employment 
Agency (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
48

wages were agreed for salaried employees in 
temporary employment.
As in the previous year, negotiated wages were 
up quite strongly, at just below 3%, in 2019 
overall. Initial figures calculated by the Federal 
Statistical Office indicate that, on an annual 
average, the actual earnings growth was some -
what higher still owing to the tight labour mar -
ket, with services sectors, in particular, showing 
a positive wage drift once again.
This year’s fairly small wage round will affect 
around 7½ million employees. In the metal-  
working and electrical engineering industries, 
dialogue between trade unions and employers, 
initially conducted at regional level, will in -
clude, in particular, topics relating to measures 
promoting job security and creation of new 
employment prospects through on-  the- job 
training, alongside wage increases. Further 
large sectors where wage negotiations are 
pending include the main construction sector 
in the second quarter and central and local 
government in Q3.
The general statutory minimum wage, which 
was raised from €9.19 to €9.35 per hour on 
1 January 2020, also factors into the wage ne -
gotiations in some sectors. In system catering, 
for example, the Nahrung- Genuss- Gaststätten 
(NGG – food, beverages and catering industry) 
union is demanding a clear difference between 
collectively bargained starting pay and the gen -
eral statutory minimum wage.
In the final quarter of 2019, consumer prices 
(HICP) continued to rise at a moderate pace, 
increasing by 0.3% in seasonally adjusted terms 
compared with the preceding three- month 
period. There was a significant rise in prices for 
services, in particular, at the end of the period 
under review, with marked price increases 
being recorded most notably for travel services. 
Prices for industrial goods excluding energy 
likewise maintained their upward trajectory, 
with clothing and shoes, in particular, becom -
ing markedly more expensive on the back of higher import prices. By contrast, food prices 
were virtually stagnant. Energy prices, which 
fell further as a result of lower crude oil prices, 
had a dampening effect. Annual headline HICP 
inflation rose slightly from 1.0% in the third 
quarter to 1.2% in the final quarter. Excluding 
energy and food, the rate of inflation even 
spiked from 0.9% to 1.6%. The one-  off effect 
of package holidays, which had put an espe -
cially severe damper on annual inflation in the 
third quarter, no longer had any net impact on 
average over the quarter.2
Averaged across 2019, the inflation rate, at 
1.4%, was significantly lower than in the previ -
ous year (1.9%). This was mainly attributable to 
energy price inflation slowing down consider -
ably. However, excluding the volatile energy 
and food components, inflation rose slightly to 
1.4%. By contrast, in the past year the increase 
in rents recorded in the official consumer price Clear rise in 
negotiated pay 
rates and actual 
earnings last 
year
Wage round 
2020; job secur -
ity also relevant 
alongside wage 
hike
General min -
imum wage 
now at €9.35 
per hour
Consumer prices 
up moderately 
in Q4 2019 …
… but averaged 
across 2019 at 
a slower pace 
than 2018 
owing to energy2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201900.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Percentage
points
–0.50+0.5%
Wage drift 1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 The wage 
drift is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual 
earnings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche Bundesbank
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
49

statistics decelerated (see the box on pp. 51ff.
for house price developments).
In January 2020, consumer prices were up by 
1.6% on the year and thus somewhat higher 
than at the end of 2019. Core inflation fell dis -
tinctly from 1.7% to 1.3%, however. This was a 
reflection not only of the reduced VAT rate for 
long- distance rail travel as part of the climate 
package,3 but also of an unusually strong de -
cline in prices for package holidays. It is pos -
sible that the latter effect will only dampen the 
rate temporarily, should package holiday prices 
return to normal. With regard to the impact of 
the climate package on consumer prices, the increase in aviation tax in April will probably 
elevate  prices to much the same extent as they 
were pushed down by the above- mentioned 
reduction in the VAT rate.
Order books and outlook
There are still no signs of a fundamental cyclical 
change in Germany for the first quarter of 
2020. The domestic economy will probably 
continue to provide momentum, and industry 
to have a dampening impact. In light of the 
ongoing robustness of the labour market and 
rising wages, domestic economic activity will 
be supported by private consumption. In add -
ition, there is still no end in sight to the boom 
in the construction sector. With regard to in -
dustry, the downward trend in new orders per -
sisted until the end of 2019, though the mo -
mentum continued to wane. However, accord -
ing to the Ifo Institute, sentiment in this sector 
recently improved noticeably. Enterprises were 
once again taking a less pessimistic view of the 
future and current business was also being 
assessed   more favourably. In addition, short-  
term production expectations brightened con -
siderably after the start of the new year and are 
now in positive territory. The survey results 
could indicate that the downward pressure on 
industrial production is gradually subsiding. 
This is consistent with the fact that utilisation 
of production capacity in industry recently rose 
again somewhat.
Nevertheless, economic risks have emerged 
with regard to the outbreak of the coronavirus 
in the People’s Republic of China. It is likely that 
a temporary decline in aggregate demand in 
China would dampen German exports. In add -
ition, some global supply chains could be nega -
tively impacted by the safety precautions that 
have been implemented. This would result in 
supply bottlenecks in certain individual sectors 
in Germany.Decline in core 
inflation at cur -
rent end only 
temporaryNo fundamental 
cyclical change 
expected for 
start of 2020
Coronavirus 
 epidemic poses 
downside risk to 
economyExport pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2096100104108
96100104108
96100104108
0123
+++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2Producer prices1
%2015 = 100, log scale
96100104
Jan.Import prices
Jan.
3 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
50

House prices in Germany in 2019
The broadly based, strong upward pressure 
on house prices in Germany continued last 
year in a somewhat weaker form. There 
was a distinct slowdown in the rates of 
price increase in German towns and cities, 
with the growth rate for Germany as a 
whole also being lower. A part in this was 
played by the fact that demand for housing 
became somewhat calmer, while there was 
probably no loss of pace in the expansion 
of the housing supply in the reporting year. 
From a macroeconomic perspective, house 
prices continued to be largely consistent 
with the supply and demand- side determin-
ants.1 House prices in the towns and cities, 
meanwhile, were still signifi  cantly above the 
level that would appear justifi  ed by the 
longer- term economic and sociodemo-
graphic determinants.
According to data from the Association of 
German Pfandbrief Banks (Verband deut-
scher Pfandbriefbanken – vdp), prices for 
owner- occupied housing climbed by 6¾% 
in the reporting year, compared with a 
7¾% rise in the previous year. With an in-
crease of 5¼%, the house price index of 
the Federal Statistical Offi   ce likewise shows 
a lower rate of infl  ation for the fi  rst three 
quarters of 2019 than in the previous year. 
Meanwhile, Hypoport AG’s Europace house 
price index (EPX) indicates that house prices 
in Germany grew by 9½% in 2019, which 
was considerably stronger than in the previ-
ous year.2
In the towns and cities, there was a percep-
tible slowdown in house price growth 
across all segments. According to fi  gures 
based on bulwiengesa AG data for 127 Ger-
man towns and cities, prices were up by 
6% last year, which was 2¾  percentage 
points less than on an average of the past three years. The upward pressure on house 
prices weakened most signifi  cantly in the 
seven major cities, which showed a 6½% 
increase in prices in 2019.3 According to 
vdp data, too, prices for residential property 
in the seven major cities rose at a consider-
ably slower pace in the reporting year than 
in the year before. While mainly house price 
growth, in particular, was weaker in Ger-
many as a whole, there was also an easing 
of upward pressure on prices for freehold 
apartments in towns and cities, which had 
previously been in higher demand.
The more moderate growth in house prices 
in the towns and cities also refl  ects the fact 
that adjustment pressure decreased in the 
case of rents. Figures based on bulwiengesa 
AG data indicate that the increase in rents 
for new lettings in towns and cities in 2019, 
at 2¾%, was down on the previous year’s 
already comparatively low rate of growth. 
In the seven major cities, the rise in rents for 
new tenancies, at 2½%, was also much 
more moderate than before. Rents in the 
towns and cities thus went up at their low-
est rate since 2010. According to vdp, rent 
adjustments for new lettings in Germany as 
a whole were, however, at much the same 
level as in the previous year.
The extremely strong pace of growth in 
housing demand thus far is likely to have 
1 These comments relate to how price developments 
in the housing market are to be seen in the context of 
the real economy. For an assessment from a fi  nancial 
stability perspective, it is also necessary to take a look 
at housing funding aspects.
2 Hypoport AG recently announced a revision of the 
index calculation (https://report.europace.de/epx/
europace-hauspreisindex-dezember-2019). This fi  gure 
should therefore be regarded as provisional.
3 The seven biggest cities are Berlin, Cologne, Düssel-
dorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
gart.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
51

slackened last year. This is due to in part to 
the somewhat less rosy outlook for incomes 
compared with earlier years as well as de-
clining immigration. By contrast, additional 
demand impulses came from the continu-
ing favourable fi  nancing conditions. The 
average rate for mortgage loans, which 
was already at a historical low, fell to 1.6% 
in the reporting year. All things considered, 
there was, however, no additional relief for 
households when purchasing residential 
property, partly because house prices were 
still rising more sharply than disposable 
household income.4
The additional supply of housing in 2019 is 
likely to have been at least as high as it was 
in 2018, when almost 290,000 new dwell-
ings were completed. This means that the 
number of completed dwellings persisted at 
its highest level since the beginning of the 
current real estate boom.5 Moreover, the 
number of building permits, at approxi-
mately 350,000, settled at a higher- than- 
average level last year. This was also re-
fl  ected in the extremely high degree of cap-
acity utilisation in the construction sector. 
Construction prices went up by 4.3%, as in 
the previous year, and thus signifi  cantly 
more sharply than construction costs, which 
rose by an estimated 2.1%. In line with this, 
construction fi  rms, given the extremely 
positive orders situation in this sector, con-
siderably expanded their margins in the re-
porting year. By contrast, the shortage of 
building land does not appear to have in-Price indices for housing
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on 
price  data  provided  by  bulwiengesa  AG.  2 Berlin,  Cologne, 
Düsseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich, Stuttgart.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 192010 = 100, annual data, log scale
95100110120130140150160170180190200210
95100110120130140150160
95100110120130140150160170180
95100110120130140150160
Destatis house price indexHypoport AG composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank 1
Quarterly dataof which:
7 major cities 2Total
127 towns and cities
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank, System of indicators for 
the German residential property market, available at 
https://www.bundesbank.de/en/statistics/sets-of- 
indicators/ system-of-indicators-for- the- german- 
residential- property- market/ system- of- indicators- for- 
the- german- residential- property- market- 795268.
5 Nevertheless, on an average of the period from 1990 
to 2018, just under 330,000 dwellings were com-
pleted per year. This, of course, includes the over-
shooting construction activity in the preceding housing 
boom of the mid- 1990s, which increases the reference 
fi  gure in arithmetical terms.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
52

According to the Ifo Institute, sentiment in the 
German economy worsened slightly at the be -
ginning of 2020 after it had shown a steady 
improvement throughout the final quarter of 
2019. The deterioration in the business climate 
index in January 2020 was attributable to the 
less optimistic business expectations overall, 
while the assessment of the business situation 
remained on its upward trajectory. Broken 
down by sector, the sentiment indicators pro -
duced a rather mixed picture. In manufactur -
ing, business expectations as well as – for the 
first time in one- and- a- half years – the assess -
ment of the business situation were distinctly 
higher. In wholesale trade, which is heavily de -
pendent on industrial activity, enterprises also 
showed more optimism for the future and 
greater satisfaction with the current situation. 
By contrast, both sentiment components fell 
significantly in the main construction sector, al -
beit from a very high level. The business climate 
in retail trade also became somewhat gloomier, 
owing to a marked deterioration in the assess -ment of the business situation. In the other ser -
vices sector, excluding trade, a perceptible de -
terioration in business expectations contrasted 
with a slight improvement in the assessment of 
the current situation.
Industrial new orders in Germany were down 
again in the fourth quarter of 2019. In regional 
terms, demand from Germany and from non-  
euro area countries contracted but new orders 
from the euro area showed a very strong in -
crease. However, this was mainly attributable 
to the irregular influx of large orders in other 
transport equipment. Excluding this sector, 
there were also fewer orders from euro area 
partner countries. Broken down by sector, Ger -
man manufacturers of machinery reported a 
particularly strong deterioration in order book 
levels. Manufacturers of computers, electronic 
and optical products also received fewer orders. 
By contrast, new orders in the automotive sec -
tor were markedly higher. In line with the re -
gional breakdown, the other transport equip -Economic senti -
ment improved 
in Q4, but 
deteriorated 
slightly in 
 January again
Orders situation 
still weaktensifi  ed to the same extent as previously. 
According to Federal Statistical Offi   ce data, 
prices of building land were going up at a 
rate of 3¾% in the fi  rst half of 2019, which 
was considerably more subdued than in 
previous years. Overall, these fi  gures indi-
cate that the housing supply has now be-
come signifi  cantly more convergent with 
the heightened demand.
Even though there was a weakening of 
house price dynamics in the towns and cit-
ies, prices last year, too, exceeded the level 
indicated by the sociodemographic and 
economic fundamentals. According to cur-
rent estimates, upward price deviations in 
the towns and cities were between 15% 
and 30%.6 Further standard indicators for 
assessing house prices likewise point to on-
going marked price exaggerations in the 
urban housing markets. For example, the 
price- rent ratio for apartments in towns and cities in the reporting year was roughly 25% 
above its multi- year mean since reunifi  ca-
tion; in the seven major cities it was some-
what more than 30% higher.
6 These fi  gures are based on updated results of a re-
gionally differentiated estimation model. They relate to 
an estimated fundamental residential property price, 
which is based conceptually on the sustainable com-
ponents of economic and sociodemographic variables. 
See Kajuth, Knetsch and Pinkwart (2016). Regionally 
differentiated price data for 2019 were available at the 
time of publication only for urban districts. The esti-
mates on which the current fi  gures for overvaluations 
are based refer to the reference period until 2018; 
district- specifi  c price information for Germany as a 
whole is currently available up to that date.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
53

ment sector recorded by far the largest increase 
in orders overall. New orders for capital goods 
were nevertheless down significantly on the 
average of the third quarter when looking at 
the whole picture. On the other hand, produ -
cers of intermediate and consumer goods en -
joyed higher demand for their products. Ac -
cording to the Ifo Institute, manufacturing 
firms still assessed their stocks of orders as too 
small and their inventories of finished goods as 
too large.
The boom in the German construction sector is 
likely to continue. On an average of October 
and November (data are available up to then), 
orders received by the main construction indus -
try showed a very strong seasonally adjusted 
rise compared with the third quarter thanks to 
a number of large orders. At the same time, 
rebound effects are expected in the finishing 
trades following the strong dampening effect 
from the “bridge” days in December. The fa -
vourable weather conditions experienced so far 
could also provide a boost. Nonetheless, at the 
beginning of 2020, construction output is not 
expected to be significantly higher than its last 
peak. This is because the sector is still operating 
at close to full capacity although equipment 
utilisation declined slightly of late according to 
the Ifo Institute.
Private consumption is set to go up in the first 
quarter of 2020. Irrespective of the modest ag -
gregate growth, the income and labour market 
outlook for consumers remains fairly positive. 
Their purchasing appetite is likely to have sup -
ported the domestic economy at the beginning 
of the year, too. In line with this, the GfK con -
sumer confidence index recently rose again 
slightly from a high level.Construction 
boom likely to 
continue
Private con -
sumption point -
ing upwards 
again at begin -
ning of yearDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 201995100105110115
–10–50+5+10
9095100105110115
95100 100105110
Oct.-
Nov.Oct.-
Nov.
9095100105110115120125130135
505101520
–++++Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scaleLin scale
Year-on-year change1Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1%
Main construction orders
%TotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
54

List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), Dampening special effect in the HICP in July 2019, Monthly Report, 
August 2019, pp. 57-59.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), The impact of the Climate Package on economic growth and infla -
tion, Monthly Report, December 2019, pp. 29-33.
Kajuth, F., T. Knetsch and N. Pinkwart (2016), Assessing House Prices in Germany: Evidence from a 
Regional Dataset, Journal of European Real Estate Research 9 (3), pp. 286-307.
Statistics provided by the Federal Employment Agency (2020): Grundlagen: Methodenbericht – 
 Revision des BA-  Stellenindex (BA-  X), Nuremberg, January.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
55

Public finances*
General government budget
The general government surplus, which has 
been rising for several years now, saw a turn -
around in 2019. According to provisional fig -
ures, it fell markedly to 1.5% of gross domestic 
product (GDP), after totalling almost 2% of 
GDP in 2018. The main reason for this was the 
government’s looser spending stance. Along -
side increases in social spending as well as in 
personnel and other operating expenditure, 
there was also a substantial rise in government investment. Furthermore, due to the cyclical 
slowdown in economic activity, tax revenue 
grew at a significantly slower rate than previ -
ously. Budgetary relief came from the add -
itional reduction in interest expenditure (see 
also pp. 57 ff.). By the end of the third quarter 
of 2019, the debt ratio had fallen to 61.2% 
(end- 2018: 61.9%).
The surplus is likely to continue declining, with 
the result that the government budget could 
then be more or less balanced in 2021. The cyc -
lical slowdown will probably again play a role 
here this year. However, interest expenditure is 
also expected to decrease further. As things 
currently stand, it is the further loosening of 
the fiscal policy stance which is driving the fall -
ing surplus. It is probable that spending will 
continue to rise significantly. In addition, in -
come tax will be cut, and only part of this is 
offset by progressive taxation. More specific -
ally, the income tax scale was adjusted at the 
start of the year and the solidarity surcharge is 
to be partially abolished as of 2021. Further tax 
cuts are on the cards. For instance, the coali -
tion agreement intends to continue compen -
sating for bracket creep induced by inflation in 
2021 and beyond. Additional new measures, 
such as bringing forward the partial abolish -
ment of the solidarity surcharge, are also under 
discussion. Despite considerable increases in 
spending by the social security funds, their con -
tribution rates are likely to remain fairly stable 
overall. It will initially be possible to bridge def -
icits, particularly in the statutory health and 
pension insurance schemes, by drawing on re -
serves. By contrast, the climate package will 
probably continue to have a largely neutral ef -Marked decline 
in surplus in 
2019 due to 
looser spending 
stance
Fiscal policy 
stance to remain 
loose in current 
and coming 
year; surplus to 
continue to 
declineGeneral government fiscal ratios *
* As defined in the national accounts. 1 Taxes and social con-
tributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Re-
solution Fund.
Deutsche Bundesbank434445464748
54321012
–––––++As a percentage of GDP
ExpenditureRevenue
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 2019Fiscal balance3839404142 Taxes and social contributions 1
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No annual data for 2019 are yet available for local 
government or the statutory health and public long- term 
care insurance schemes. These will be analysed in the short 
commentaries in upcoming issues of the Monthly Report.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
56

The structural development of the German government 
budget*
Results for 2019
Germany’s general government budget was 
in surplus again in 2019. According to pre-
liminary data, the surplus amounted to 
1.5% of gross domestic product (GDP), 
putting it well below the previous year’s fi  g-
ure (1.9% of GDP). The role played by cyc-
lical infl  uences and specifi  c temporary ef-
fects is established using the disaggregated 
framework for analysing public fi  nances. 
The remaining change is classifi  ed as struc-
tural. The major structural determinants are 
broken down separately (see the table on 
p. 59).
In 2019, the positive cyclical infl  uence on 
the general government budget waned 
somewhat. Tax revenue, in particular, ex-
panded at a slower pace, especially com-
pared with the dynamic growth recorded in 
the years before. By contrast, lower spend-
ing on Landesbanken eased the strain on 
the general government budget. In 2018, 
the privatisation of HSH Nordbank resulted 
in one- off burdens totalling €6 billion; in 
2019, Nord LB received a capital injection of 
just over €1½ billion. Moreover, interest 
expend iture declined again considerably, 
thanks to more favourable refi  nancing. 
These factors largely offset the less favour-
able cyclical infl  uences. Overall, the struc-
tural primary balance ratio deteriorated by 
roughly the same amount as the unadjusted 
fi  scal balance ratio. The primary balance 
does not include interest expenditure, 
whereas the fi  scal balance does.
The deterioration in the structural primary 
balance ratio is mainly attributable to the 
looser spending stance coupled with a min-
imal rise in the structural revenue ratio. The main driver on the expenditure side was 
soaring growth in spending on pensions 
and healthcare, not least due to measures 
implemented in these areas (in  particular, 
higher “mothers’ pensions”). The structural 
primary expenditure ratio was also pushed 
up by considerable growth in intermediate 
consumption, compensation of employees 
and other investments in fi  xed assets.
On the revenue side, receipts from assessed 
income tax and wage tax showed dynamic 
growth, as did revenue from social contri-
butions. However, revenue from corpor-
ation tax and local business tax fell. Yet, 
taxes and social contributions still rose 
again by a little more than can be explained 
by legislative changes, effects of tax pro-
gression and macroeconomic developments 
(positive residual; see the table on p. 59). 
Although various income tax cuts (espe-
cially the Family Relief Act (Familienentlas-
tungsgesetz )) lowered receipts, these had 
only a slightly greater impact than the 
revenue- boosting effects of tax progression 
(fi  scal drag).
Review of the period since the 2008-09 
crisis
The disaggregated framework can also be 
used to analyse developments since the 
2008-09 fi  nancial and economic crisis. At 
that time, automatic stabilisers took effect 
and the fi  scal policy stance was also loos-
ened considerably. The former are esti-
mated following the standard method, 
* The analysis is based on national accounts data. 
Aside from data revisions, adjustments to the macro-
economic outlook may also result in changes. For 
methodological notes on the framework, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2006).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
57

using the change in the cyclical component; 
the latter is measured here using the change 
in the structural primary balance ratio.
Our analysis reveals that falling interest ex-
penditure greatly eased the strain on the 
general government budget. It alone was 
responsible in net terms for the substantial 
improvement in the structural fi  scal balance 
ratio over the period from 2009 to 2019. 
This was primarily due to the declining aver-
age interest rate.
Before being loosened distinctly in 2019, 
the fi  scal stance had been virtually neutral 
on balance since 2015. Structural primary 
expenditure had been rising very clearly 
since 2016. However, this was initially 
masked by strong growth in taxes and 
social  contributions, not all of which was 
expected. Discretionary cuts in taxes and 
social contributions and the revenue- 
boosting effects of tax progression more or less balanced each other out. The favour-
able development of wages and employ-
ment had a considerable positive impact. 
Furthermore, profi  t- related taxes grew by 
a  much greater amount than can be ac-
counted for by the explanatory factors 
identifi  ed here (positive residual). This 
shows just how diffi   cult it is to correctly es-
timate the impact of economic develop-
ments and legislative changes. It could also 
be an indication that measures to combat 
tax evasion and tax fraud have become 
more effective. However, it is important to 
be cautious about projecting the surpris-
ingly favourable developments of the past 
into the future. As in the past, unexplained 
strong growth could be followed by times 
of noticeably weaker development.General government structural ratios*
424344454647As a percentage of nominal trend GDP
* Based on the figures in the national accounts. The  structural 
figures are derived by adjusting for cyclical influences and spe-
cific temporary effects. For explanations on the methodology, 
see  Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2006).  1 Expenditure  less  interest 
expenditure. 2  Fiscal balance less interest expenditure.
Deutsche BundesbankInterest expenditure
Fiscal balancePrimary balance 2Primary expenditure 1Revenue
–3–2–10+1+2+3
2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 2019Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
58

Structural development of the government budget*
Year-on-year change in the ratio to trend GDP in percentage points
 Item 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019Total 
2009 to 
2019
Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 – 3.0 – 1.2 3.5 0.9 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.1 0.6 – 0.4 1.6
Cyclical component 1 – 1.8 0.3 0.9 0.0 – 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.3 0.2 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.6
Temporary effects 1 0.2 – 1.2 1.3 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.3 0.2 0.1 0.3
Fiscal balance – 1.3 – 0.4 1.3 1.0 0.5 0.7 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.3 – 0.3 1.9
Interest payable – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.9
Primary balance – 1.5 – 0.5 1.4 0.8 0.0 0.5 0.0 – 0.2 0.0 0.2 – 0.5 0.0
Revenue – 0.8 – 0.2 1.0 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.4 0.4 0.6 0.1 1.8
Taxes and social 
contributions – 1.0 – 0.4 0.6 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.3 0.5 0.6 0.4 0.2 1.4
Fiscal drag 2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 1.0
Decoupling of macro-
economic reference vari-
ables from GDP – 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.7
Legislative changes – 0.3 – 0.6 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 1.3
Residual – 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.2 – 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.2 1.0
of which:
Profi  t- related  taxes 3 – 0.5 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.1 1.3
Other revenue 4 0.2 0.2 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.4
Primary expenditure 0.7 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.7 0.0 – 0.3 0.1 0.7 0.5 0.4 0.6 1.9
Social payments 0.1 0.0 – 0.4 – 0.4 – 0.3 0.0 0.3 0.4 0.4 0.0 0.3 0.4
Subsidies 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1
Compensation of 
employees 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2
Intermediate consumption 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.8
Gross fi  xed capital 
formation 0.1 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3
Other expenditure 5 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.2
Memo item:
Expenditure on
Pensions 6 – 0.1 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.2 – 0.2
Healthcare 7 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.9
Labour market 8 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 1.0
Long-term care 9 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.5
* The structural fi  gures are derived by adjusting for cyclical infl  uences and specifi  c temporary effects. 1  Year- on- year change in the ratio 
to GDP . 2 The term “fi  scal drag” encompasses the revenue effect of bracket creep in income taxation and the countervailing impact of 
the fact that specifi  c excise duties are largely independent of prices. 3 Assessed income tax, corporation tax, local business tax, investment 
income tax. 4 Other current transfers receivable, sales and total capital revenue. 5 Other current transfers payable, other net acquisitions 
of non- fi  nancial assets and capital transfers payable. 6 Spending by the statutory pension insurance scheme, spending on civil servant 
pensions as well as payments by the Post Offi   ce Pension Fund and the Federal Railways Fund. 7 Spending by the statutory health insurance 
scheme and assistance towards civil servants’ healthcare costs. 8 Spending by the Federal Employment Agency (excluding the reintegra-
tion payment paid to central government (from 2010 to 2013)) and central government expenditure on unemployment benefi  t II and on 
labour market reintegration measures. 9 Spending by the public long-term care insurance scheme.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
59

fect on the balance, also after including those 
amendments made in December 2019.
It is noteworthy that, assessed in structural 
terms, growth in government primary expend -
iture (expenditure excluding interest) has been 
much stronger than growth in nominal GDP 
since as early as 2016. Yet, despite this marked 
spending growth, the general government 
budget respected its ceiling by a wide margin. 
This is due to the fact that revenue has risen 
substantially and interest expenditure has fallen 
(see the chart on p. 58). Overall, fiscal policy on 
the expenditure side can hardly be described as 
restrained. Nevertheless, after years of very fa -
vourable economic conditions, there is still con -
siderable fiscal leeway.
This leeway facilitates measures to improve the 
conditions for growth and employment. At the 
Federal level, it would be logical to at least 
begin to abolish the solidarity surcharge in the 
current year (see also p. 64). State and local 
governments could make greater use of their 
financial leeway to improve educational oppor -
tunities or infrastructure, for instance. Funding 
for investment has been expanded to a consid -
erable degree over the last few years. However, 
the disbursement of said funds is proving ra -
ther slow. The high levels of construction cap -
acity utilisation are likely to have reined in in -vestment. Swift progress is likewise often hin -
dered by planning bottlenecks at authorities, 
drawn- out authorisation procedures, and re -
views of legal objections. Efforts to press ahead 
with the expansion of required infrastructure 
would merit looking into these issues.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue1 grew by 3% in 2019, a much 
slower rate than that recorded in previous years 
(see the adjacent chart and the table on p. 61). 
Growth was curbed by the economic slow -
down and tax cuts. Revenue was slightly higher 
than projected in the official tax estimate of 
October 2019 (+€2 billion). Assessed income 
tax, in particular, was up by more than fore -
cast.
Developments varied very widely among the in -
dividual types of tax last year. This reflects, for 
one thing, the fact that the economic slow -
down primarily hit the export- dependent sec -
tors. By contrast, the domestically oriented sec -
tors proved robust. Employment, wages and 
private consumption also continued to record 
stable development. Against this backdrop, 
wage tax increased considerably again (+5½%) 
– driven, inter alia, by additional revenue stem -
ming from tax progression. However, the latter 
was partly offset by the Family Relief Act ( Fami-
lienentlastungsgesetz ) which adjusted the in -
come tax scale in order to compensate for 
bracket creep from 2018. Child tax allowances 
and child benefits were also raised (the latter 
are deducted from tax revenue). Overall, the 
rise in profit- related taxes was negligible (+½%), 
but developments in this item were mixed; as -
sessed income tax, for instance, recorded par -Despite consid -
erable growth 
in expenditure 
since 2016, 
 fiscal leeway 
still exists
Fiscal leeway 
facilitates meas -
ures to foster 
growth and 
employmentSlower tax 
 revenue growth 
in 2019
Mixed impact 
of economic 
slowdownTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 20192024681012
–++++++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
1 Here, tax revenue includes EU shares in German tax rev -
enue, but excludes receipts from local government taxes, 
which are not yet known for the period under review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
60

ticularly dynamic growth. Yet, corporate in -
come tax, which is influenced to a greater de -
gree by profits from exports, fell after three 
years of strong growth. Withholding tax on 
interest income and capital gains declined 
sharply. By contrast, non- assessed taxes on 
earnings were up moderately on the already 
high level recorded in the previous year. This 
item mainly comprises investment income tax 
on dividends. Turnover tax rose considerably 
(+3½%).
The official tax estimate of October 2019 fore -
cast revenue growth of 2½% (including local 
government taxes) for the current year and 
stronger revenue growth again in the years 
thereafter. The slightly higher outturn for 2019 
and the January 2020 revisions to central gov -
ernment’s macroeconomic projection do not 
greatly alter the outlook. Growth will, however, 
be reined in by further tax cuts. The previous 
official tax estimate notably did not yet factor 
in the partial abolition of the solidarity sur -charge as of 2021, which has now been re -
solved. This will reduce tax revenue by just over 
1%. In addition, the coalition agreement envis -
ages another considerable rise in child benefits 
and child tax allowances in 2021 and continued 
compensation for bracket creep. Other meas -
ures under discussion at present include lower -
ing the solidarity surcharge as early as mid-  
2020 or cutting other taxes. Legal proceedings 
are currently underway to examine the consti -
tutionality of the solidarity surcharge.
Central government budget
According to provisional figures, central gov -
ernment posted a surplus of €13½ billion in 
2019. Fuelled by a surprisingly strong final 
quarter, the result was €2½ billion up on the 
high figure recorded in the previous year. Over 
the year as a whole, revenue rose moderately 
(+2%). As a result of the economic slowdown 
and state governments receiving a higher share Underlying trend 
still robust, but 
restricted a little 
more by tax cuts
Surplus up in 
2019 despite 
economic 
 slowdownTax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a whole
Estimate 
for 2019 1, 2Q4
2018 2019 2018 2019
Year-on-year changeYear- on- 
year 
change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 3 713.6 735.9 + 22.3 +  3.1 +  2.8 190.2 196.3 + 6.1 +  3.2
of which:
Wage tax 208.2 219.7 + 11.4 +  5.5 +  5.6 58.4 60.6 + 2.2 +  3.8
Profi  t-related taxes 123.9 124.4 +  0.4 +  0.4 –  0.9 27.6 29.0 + 1.4 +  5.1
Assessed income tax 4 60.4 63.7 +  3.3 +  5.5 +  3.5 15.2 16.6 + 1.4 +  9.0
Corporation tax 33.4 32.0 –  1.4 –  4.2 –  3.8 7.5 7.1 – 0.4 –  5.1
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 23.2 23.5 +  0.3 +  1.3 +  0.2 3.7 4.0 + 0.3 +  6.9
Withholding tax on 
interest income  and 
capital  gains 6.9 5.1 –  1.7 – 25.3 – 29.2 1.1 1.3 + 0.1 + 13.1
Turnover taxes 5 234.8 243.3 +  8.5 +  3.6 +  3.6 60.6 62.7 + 2.1 +  3.5
Other 
consumption-related 
taxes 6 92.7 93.0 +  0.3 +  0.3 +  0.2 27.8 27.9 + 0.2 +  0.5
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1 According to offi   cial tax estimate of October 2019. 2 Tax revenue 
including (still estimated) local government taxes was €6 billion below the estimate of October 2018, which was used as the basis for the 
2019 central government budget plan. According to Federal Government fi  gures, without the legislation adopted in the meantime, the 
revision would have amounted to –€1½ billion. 3 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes. 4 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 5 Turnover tax and import turnover tax. 6 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, 
motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re 
protection.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
61

of turnover tax, taxes grew by only 1½% (+€6 
billion). Non- tax receipts picked up by €2½ bil -
lion, primarily on account of the greatly in -
creased heavy goods vehicle toll. At 1½%, ex -
penditure growth was still somewhat weaker 
than growth in revenue. A further fall in inter -
est expenditure (-€4½ billion) had an alleviating 
effect. The fact that bonds were sold even fur -
ther above their nominal value (premiums) pro -
vided the most relief. These mark- ups are de -
ducted from interest expenditure. Favourable 
refinancing also eased the burden on the cen -
tral government budget. In addition, transfers 
to the digitalisation fund and the energy and 
climate fund (off- budget entities) fell by €3½ 
billion. However, almost all other spending cat -
egories recorded distinct growth.
The fiscal balance was up by €19 billion on the 
budget plan approved in autumn 2018. As in 
the previous years, the refugee reserve was not 
reduced by the budgeted amount (2019: €5½ 
billion). On the contrary, €13 billion was added to the reserve at budget outturn, taking its 
total to €48 billion.2 The reserve was set up at 
the end of 2015 to ease the strain on the 
budget caused by the influx of refugees, which 
– at that time – was very strong. Evidently, the 
funds are not needed for this purpose. In the 
budget plans, they instead serve as transitional 
financing for additional budgetary burdens. At 
the end of the multi- year fiscal plans, the re -
serve is usually depleted and sharp reductions 
in expenditure are envisaged. As the latter does 
not appear realistic, counting on depleting high 
reserves poses problems. Instead, it would be 
worth considering setting aside the reserve to 
bridge unexpected budgetary burdens accord -
ing to clear criteria.3 Some state governments 
have also set up risk reserves to make it easier 
to comply with the debt brake in the event of 
unpleasant surprises.
Overall, revenue was €6 billion higher than 
forecast (excluding the planned reserve with -
drawals). Taxes contributed €3½ billion to this. 
The rise in GDP was much slower, but the EU 
contributions deducted from tax revenue were 
€5½ billion lower, thus providing some relief 
overall. Additional higher- than- planned rev -
enue came, inter alia, from EU payments and a 
dividend from Deutsche Bahn. Expenditure was 
€13 billion lower than the amount envisaged in 
the budget. Interest expenditure accounted for 
€5½ billion of this as premiums were higher 
than expected. In addition, current transfers (to 
enterprises but also to state governments, for 
instance for student loans, in particular) were 
€5 billion and other operating expenditure (for 
military procurements, for example) €2½ billion 
below budget estimates. By contrast, fixed 
asset formation was as planned.
Structural net borrowing, which is the key fig -
ure for the debt brake, amounts to +0.1% of 
GDP (see the table on p. 63).4 The high surplus 
Result again 
much better 
than planned; 
refugee reserve 
topped up 
 significantlyRevenue much 
higher and 
expenditure 
much lower 
than forecastCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
1 Including interest expenditure recorded ahead of time in Q2 
(€7 billion).
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q45051015
–+++
–50+5+10+15+20
2018
20172017Quarterly figures
2019Cumulated from start of year2019
2018€ billion
11
1
2 For the first time, the surplus was also used to fund the 
reserve for multi- year military procurements – at the max -
imum amount of €½ billion.
3 For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2018a).
4 See Federal Ministry of Finance (2020), pp. 28-29.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
62

was channelled into the reserves. Net borrow -
ing was thus recorded at €0.5 On balance, the 
financial transactions to be deducted from this 
figure were negligible (budget estimate: +€½ 
billion). However, a cyclical burden of €3 billion 
was factored out. In the budget, a positive cyc -
lical effect of €4½ billion had been expected. 
This was revised due to lower nominal GDP 
growth. In addition, the off- budget entities in -
cluded under the debt brake recorded a surplus 
of €½ billion (estimate: -€3½ billion). These in -
clude the digitalisation fund, the energy and 
climate fund, the flood assistance fund and the 
fund to promote municipal investment. Struc -
tural net borrowing thus amounted to +€3½ 
billion (estimate: -€8½ billion) and was much 
more favourable than the threshold of -€11½ 
billion (-0.35% of GDP). Despite the transfer to 
reserves, the credit entry on central govern -
ment’s control account is set to remain high 
(€15 billion).6The 2020 central government budget likewise 
envisages no new net borrowing.7 According 
to the current Federal Government Annual Eco -
nomic Report, the macroeconomic outlook is 
not expected to deviate materially from the 
budget assumptions. However, the strain on 
the current budget is to be eased considerably 
by the better- than- anticipated budget outturn 
in 2019. It therefore again appears possible to 
achieve a balanced budget without the planned 
high withdrawal from the reserves (€10½ bil -
lion).According to 
debt brake, sur -
plus and high 
credit entry on 
control account 
despite reserve 
top- upContinuing relief 
to enable better- 
than- anticipated 
budget outturn 
in 2020, tooKey central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
€ billion
Item2018 2019 2020
Actual BudgetProvisional 
actual Budget
 1. Fiscal balance 10.9 –  5.8 13.3 – 11.0
 2. Coin seigniorage 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.3
 3. Transfer to (–)/withdrawal from (+) reserves – 11.2 5.5 – 13.5 10.6
 4. Net borrowing (1.+2.+3.) – – – –
 5. Balance of fi  nancial transactions 0.7 0.7 0.0 –  0.3
 6. Cyclical component in the budget procedure 1 –  3.6 4.4 –  2.8 –  0.5
 7. Balance of incorporated off-budget entities 4.0 –  3.6 0.7 –  5.9
Digitalisation fund (from 2018) 2.4 –  0.2 0.3 –  1.0
Energy and climate fund 2.9 –  0.7 1.8 –  3.8
Flood assistance fund –  0.6 –  0.7 –  0.6 –  0.5
All-day schools (as of 2020) . . . 1.0
Fund to promote municipal investment –  0.7 –  1.9 –  0.9 –  1.6
 8. Structural net borrowing (4.–5.–6.+7.)
(repayment: +; borrowing: –) 6.9 –  8.7 3.5 –  5.1
 9. Structural balance (8.–2.–3.) 17.8 – 14.5 16.8 – 16.1
10. Structural balance adjusted for updated estimate of potential 
output 2 6.5 – 12.1 12.0 – 16.5
11. Debt brake ceiling (–0.35% of GDP 3) – 11.4 – 11.5 – 11.5 – 11.7
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. * For more information, see Deutsche Bundesbank, Public fi  nances, 
Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68 f. 1 Provisional actual for 2019 according to the simplifi  ed procedure, based on the national ac-
counts fi  gures published in January 2020. 2 Potential output and GDP based on Federal Government’s 2020 Annual Economic Report. 
3 Here, this refers to GDP in the year before the budget is prepared.
Deutsche Bundesbank
5 Counting the reserves towards the structural outcome 
masks the underlying budgetary situation and deviates 
from the EU rules on budgetary surveillance. Furthermore, 
excluding the reserve top- up, the amount credited to the 
control account would have been correspondingly higher. 
The use of control account funds is considerably more 
limited.
6 The entry will be booked at the beginning of March 2020 
and is to be calculated using the figures for the GDP results 
that have been revised by then. The control account’s bal -
ance already stands at €37 billion prior to this calculation.
7 For information on the budget, see Deutsche Bundes -
bank (2019a), pp. 62-63.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
63

In mid- March, the Federal Government will 
adopt the benchmark figures for the 2021 cen -
tral government budget and for the fiscal plan 
up to 2024. The tax figures will be based on the 
2019 outturn and the tax estimate of October 
2019, which will be revised to reflect the macro -
economic assumptions contained in the Annual 
Economic Report. Associated changes to the 
tax revenue estimates in the last fiscal plan are 
likely to afford only limited scope. However, the 
refugee reserve has grown by €17 billion,8 and 
some of the relief achieved during budget im -
plementation in 2019 is likely to continue. The 
inflated reserve is again likely to be interpreted 
as extended budgetary scope. This appears to 
suggest that it would be logical to begin phas -
ing out the solidarity surcharge this year.9 There 
are concerns that this surcharge may be in con -
flict with constitutional law, and this poses con -
siderable budget risks. As a surtax on income 
taxes, the solidarity surcharge can only be im -
posed if central government has particular 
finan cing needs. From an economic point of 
view, topping up and keeping a high reserve for 
several years suggests that such needs no 
longer exist. Burdens are likely to be higher than 
planned so far for basic pensions and the exit 
from coal mining and coal power. Moreover, 
there are plans to continue compensating for 
bracket creep in 2021 and beyond. This has not 
been included in the fiscal plan as yet. Further -
more, spending envisaged for defence and de -
velopment aid falls short of the internationally 
agreed benchmarks. Demographic trends will 
place an increasing strain on the budget in the 
longer term. The baby boomer generation will 
enter retirement in the coming years. The con -
tribution rate to the statutory pension insurance 
scheme is expected to rise as of 2015 and is 
thus anticipated to push up the central govern -
ment grants connected to this rate by a consid -
erable amount.
According to figures from the Federal Ministry 
of Finance, central government’s off- budget 
entities (excluding SoFFin, bad banks and other 
entities that use commercial double- entry 
bookkeeping)10 recorded a surplus of €4½ bil -lion in 2019, compared with €6 billion in 2018. 
The major factor behind this decline was that 
the surplus recorded by the digitalisation fund 
fell to €½ billion following the initial injection 
of funds in 2018 (€2½ billion). The auction of 
5G frequencies in spring 2019 generated pro -
ceeds of €6½ billion; however, these payments 
will be staggered. The energy and climate 
fund’s surplus fell by €1 billion to €2 billion due 
to a lower central government transfer and 
higher spending. This outweighed additional 
income resulting from higher prices for Euro -
pean CO 2 certificates. €1 billion of relief came 
from the fact that, in contrast to last year, there 
was no redemption of an inflation- linked cen -
tral government security this year.
An off- budget entity for extending all- day 
childcare for children of primary school age is 
planned for the current year. It is to receive a 
transfer of €1 billion from the central govern -
ment budget; expenditure is not expected until 
a later date. By contrast, the energy and cli -
mate fund is likely to record a deficit. The cli -
mate package adopted at the end of 2019 in -
cluded a €1½ billion cut in the central govern -
ment transfer. At the same time, spending on 
climate protection measures is set to soar. An 
inflation- indexed Bund is also due for redemp -
tion. This will place an additional burden of 
around €2 billion on the off- budget entity set 
up to pay for inflation- linked final payments for 
particular Federal securities.11 Outflows from Further scope 
for benchmark 
figures for sub -
sequent years, 
but still some 
burdens to be 
taken on board 
as well
Central 
 government’s 
off- budget 
 entities record 
considerable 
surplus again 
in 2019 …… but larger 
burdens planned 
for 2020
8 Compared with the fiscal plan from last summer for 2021 
onwards. At the end of 2019, the reserve was up by €18½ 
billion. However, the withdrawal from reserves included in 
the 2020 budget is €1½ billion higher than the amount 
stated in the fiscal plan.
9 It would still appear to be even more logical to com -
pletely abolish this surcharge and, if necessary, to combine 
this step with a fundamental tax reform. For more informa -
tion, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), p. 67.
10 The Federal Ministry of Finance does not publish quar -
terly data for off- budget entities that keep commercial ac -
counts. SoFFin’s deficit was also excluded. SoFFin has been 
taking out loans since 2019 and lending these funds to the 
government- owned bad bank “FMS Wertmanagement”, 
which uses them to refinance legacy debt. Overall, there -
fore, SoFFin’s deficit does not increase central govern -
ment’s consolidated debt level.
11 In the national accounts, this burden has already been 
distributed as interest expenditure to previous years on an 
accruals basis.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
64

the fund to promote municipal investment and 
the digitalisation fund are expected to carry on 
picking up speed. All in all, central govern -
ment’s off- budget entities could close 2020 in 
deficit.
State government budgets12
Continuing the pattern seen since 2014, state 
government core budgets remained in surplus 
overall for 2019. Preliminary figures put the 
amount at just over €13 billion, which was 
below the high figure recorded for 2018 (€15½ 
billion). Apart from Brandenburg, which topped 
up a substantial special fund,13 all federal states 
posted a surplus. Revenue increased by 3% 
overall. Tax receipts saw dynamic growth of 
4%. This was partly because state governments 
were left with more turnover tax funds again 
after the debts of the German Unity Fund were 
repaid in imputed terms in 2018.14 Receipts 
from fines associated with diesel vehicle emis -
sions (€1½ billion) were almost as high as they 
had been a year earlier. However, at just under 
4%, expenditure rose at a stronger pace than 
revenue. Core budgets had faced a one- off ex -
ceptional burden of €5 billion in 2019 as a re -
sult of the privatisation of HSH Nordbank.15 
After adjustment for this effect, expenditure 
growth was as high as 5%. Personnel expenses 
saw a significant increase of 5%, which was 
largely due to pay rises for salaried employees 
and civil servants. A rise in staff numbers and 
recipients of civil servant pensions was prob -
ably also a significant factor. Current transfers 
to local government grew at a similar rate. 
Other operating expenditure, which is a much 
smaller spending item, recorded far stronger 
growth. Interest expenditure declined steeply 
(-10%), not least because state governments 
were also able to obtain much more favourable 
refinancing terms for their maturing securities.
The outlook for state government finances re -
mains positive both for this year and for the 
medium term. The official estimate of October 
2019 forecasts robust tax revenue growth. As things stand, no substantial adjustment will be 
needed in this regard. However, expenditure is 
likely to rise more sharply than revenue, caus -
ing the surplus to decline perceptibly in the me -
dium term. In particular, spending on educa -
tion and childcare will probably increase signifi -
cantly. This will not only affect the large ex -
penditure item personnel costs for teachers, as 
well as transfers to local government; it will 
also generate substantial growth in other oper -
ating expenditure and investment. By contrast, 
interest payments are likely to continue falling.Surplus high 
again in 2019
Surpluses 
expected to 
continue this 
year and in the 
medium termState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states’ core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q463036912
––++++
3691215182124
2018
20172017Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192019
2018€ billion
12 The following data are based, unless other sources are 
stated, on the monthly cash statistics for the core budgets.
13 In a supplementary budget, borrowing of €1 billion 
–  possible in this way for the last time before the debt 
brake came into force – was planned for this purpose.
14 In actual fact, as was largely the case with the Redemp -
tion Fund for Inherited Liabilities, these debts were not de -
finitively repaid but instead converted into central govern -
ment debt.
15 The support measures for Nord LB in 2019 cost the 
state governments of Lower Saxony and Saxony-  Anhalt just 
under €2 billion, though this was mostly funded outside of 
their core budgets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
65

The debt brake embedded in the German con -
stitution came into force for state government 
budgets at the beginning of 2020. It requires 
state governments, as a general rule, to bal -
ance their budgets with no net new borrowing. 
Exceptions to this rule are permitted, notably, 
in order to offset cyclical burdens. The good 
overall state of their finances should permit 
state governments to comply with the debt 
brake.16 This also applies to Bremen and Saar -
land, which face the highest net interest bur -
den owing to their large debts. As a result, 
these two federal states are likely to benefit far 
more than the others from the extremely low 
interest rates. In addition, starting this year, they are receiving budgetary recovery assis -
tance from central government. At €400 mil -
lion each per year, this significantly exceeds the 
consolidation assistance they were granted 
previously – and, unlike the previous support, 
most of it may be disbursed.
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
As a result of large expansions of benefits, the 
statutory pension insurance scheme saw its 
surplus narrow by €3 billion to €1½ billion in 
2019. However, this balance was still signifi -
cantly higher than originally planned (deficit of 
€1½ billion). The sustainability reserve rose to 
€40½ billion by the end of 2019, thus almost 
reaching 1.8 times the scheme’s monthly ex -
penditure.
Revenue expanded considerably, by a total of 
4½%, thus mirroring the rise in per capita earn -
ings and in employment. Expenditure growth 
was somewhat stronger still, at 5½%. This was 
due to adjustments of individual pensions aver -
aging almost 3½% across the year, and also to 
a moderate increase in the number of pensions 
paid. In addition, legislators at central govern -
ment level made further expansions to mothers’ 
pensions. This alone contributed 1½ percent -
age points to expenditure growth. Further -
more, supplementary contribution rates to the 
statutory health insurance scheme have been 
financed equally by employer and employee 
since the beginning of 2019. Since then, the 
statutory pension insurance scheme has been 
covering the employer half of this amount for 
pensions.
Although the reserve will probably remain sig -
nificantly above the statutory upper limit of 1.5 
times the scheme’s monthly expenditure in Federal states 
well prepared 
for debt brakeSignificantly 
reduced surplus 
in 2019
Stronger 
expenditure 
growth due to 
higher mothers’ 
pensions
2020: surplus 
probably more 
or less depletedFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary  quarterly  figures  as  the  latter  are  not  revised  sub-
sequently.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201920182017
2018
201720192017 2018 201902468
2017 2018 201902468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
16 Furthermore, the reserves formed over the past few 
years will make it easier for them to cushion the impact 
of  negative shocks. For a more detailed stocktake from 
 autumn 2018, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2018b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
66

2020, it is prohibited by law to cut the contri -
bution rate in such an event until 2025. This 
means that revenue will increase in parallel 
with employment and per capita earnings this 
year. However, growth is likely to weaken com -
pared with 2019. The rise in expenditure will 
probably be perceptibly stronger than that in 
revenue. Pensions are likely to increase at a 
similar annual average rate as in 2019, with a 
somewhat stronger hike in the number of pen -
sions. This means that the scheme’s annual re -
sult will probably decline again in 2020, al -
though it will still be broadly in balance.
The financial pressure on the pension scheme is 
likely to increase significantly in the coming 
years.17 Deficits will rise until the reserve is back 
down to its statutory lower limit. After that, the 
contribution rate will increase. The Federal 
Government’s pension insurance report of au -
tumn 2019 predicts a leap of 1.2 percentage 
points to 19.8% in 2025. The report does not 
expect the statutory upper limit of 20% in 
place until that date to be exceeded. Contrary 
to original expectations, there would then be 
no need for central government to intervene. 
Up to 2025, the replacement rate will remain at 
the minimum of 48% guaranteed until then.
Under the current arrangements, it will not be 
possible to alleviate the demographic financial 
pressure after 2025 by raising contribution 
rates alone. Higher tax- financed government 
funds, a lower replacement rate and a rising 
statutory retirement age will also need to play 
a role. The gradual increase in the statutory re -
tirement age will come to a halt in 2029. Yet 
life expectancy is likely to continue rising. The 
Federal Government is expecting to receive a 
report from the Pensions Commission in March 
2020 on the reform of the statutory pension 
insurance scheme for the period after 2025. It 
would be advisable to continue to spread the 
growing funding burden broadly. If life expect -
ancy keeps on rising, one approach could be to 
continue raising the statutory retirement age 
from 2030 onwards.18Federal Employment Agency
In 2019, the Federal Employment Agency 
posted a surplus of €2 billion for its core 
budget,19 which amounted to a fall of €4 bil -
lion on the year. The 2018 surplus had been 
reduced by a special transfer of €2 billion to 
the civil servants’ pension fund. However, the Rising deficits on 
the cards, with 
contribution 
rates set to 
increase in 
medium term
Reform commis -
sion to present 
proposals in 
March
Significantly 
smaller surplus 
in 2019Finances of the
Federal Employment Agency *
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants’ 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410123
–+++
–10+1+2+3+4+5+6Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year201920182017
2017
201920182017 2018 2019–12–9–6–30+3+6+9+12
2017 2018 201912963036912
––––++++ Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
17 The planned basic pension is currently under discussion 
in the Federal Cabinet. To broadly cover the additional ex -
penditure, government funds are to be increased.
18 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c).
19 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are thus recorded as expenditure, reducing the 
core budget balance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
67

actual result again significantly exceeded the 
estimate in the budget plan (+€½ billion). The 
free reserve for the core budget rose to €25½ 
billion (0.8% of GDP) at the end of 2019.20
Revenue declined by €4 billion, or almost 
10½%, on the back of the considerable contri -
bution rate cut at the start of the year (by 
0.5 percentage point to 2.5%). Developments 
in per capita earnings and employment re -
mained positive. Had the contribution rate re -
mained unchanged, the Federal Employment 
Agency’s revenue would thus have risen by 
5%. Spending on unemployment benefit saw a 
large increase of 9%, with per capita benefit 
rates rising by 4% and case numbers by 5%. 
Growth in the latter remained low in historical 
terms despite their cyclically induced rise. Out -
lays on advanced vocational training increased 
by 5½% because of an expansion of benefits at 
the beginning of 2019.
The Federal Employment Agency expects to re -
cord a deficit of €1½ billion in its core budget 
for 2020. The estimates for per capita earnings 
and employment in the Federal Government 
Annual Economic Report are somewhat more 
favourable than in the budget plan. This report 
foresees a continuation of the clearly positive developments in the contribution revenue 
base. At the start of the year, the contribution 
rate was lowered slightly by 0.1  percentage 
point to 2.4%. This resulted in revenue losses 
of around €1½ billion. On the expenditure side, 
growth totalling 10½% is anticipated com -
pared with the annual result for 2019, which 
was not yet available when the budget was 
drawn up. Looking at unemployment benefit, it 
is expected that the number of benefit recipi -
ents will rise by 5½%, and that the per capita 
benefit rates will increase broadly in line with 
earnings. Outlays on active labour market 
policy  and administration are also set to rise 
sharply. The expenditure appropriations appear 
generous again, albeit less so than in previous 
years. This remains the case even after the 
recent  Federal Cabinet decision on short- time 
working benefits, as that is likely to generate 
only minimal additional expenditure. As things 
stand, then, the Federal Employment Agency’s 
budget balance could once again be some -
what more favourable than planned, all in all, 
in 2020.Lower revenue 
due to contribu -
tion rate cut; 
strong growth 
in outlays on 
unemployment 
benefit
Moderate deficit 
planned for 
2020, with small 
contribution rate 
cut
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), Public finances, Monthly Report, November 2019, pp. 57-68.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), Public finances, Monthly Report, August 2019, pp. 62-71.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019c), Long- term outlook for the statutory pension insurance scheme, 
Monthly Report, October 2019, pp. 53-81.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018a), Excursus: the use of reserves and off- budget entities by central and 
state government, Monthly Report, August 2018, pp. 69-73.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018b), Implementation of the debt brake pursuant to Article 109 III of the 
German Basic Law: current status, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 44-47.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2006), A disaggregated framework for analysing public finances: Germa -
ny’s fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, pp. 61-76.20 In addition, there were the insolvency benefit and win -
ter compensation reserve (totalling €2 billion) and the re -
serve of €9 billion in the civil servants’ pension fund.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
68

Federal Ministry of Finance (2020), Vorläufiger Abschluss des Bundeshaushalts 2019, Monthly 
 Report, January 2020, pp. 23-39.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
69

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
70

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank)  
in Germany  .................................................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates  ........................................................................................................  43 •
2. Base rates  ....................................................................................................................  43 •
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
4. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
3•

6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ......................  61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover, sales of motor vehicles  ...............................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  78 •
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ....................................................  78 •
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
8. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks) vis-à-vis  
non-residents  ..............................................................................................................  81 •
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
5  Monthly Report
February 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area 
 
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
  
 
 
 Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
 M3  3 
MFI lending to Yield on Euro-
 3-month enterprises Monetary pean govern-
MFI lending, and capital 3-month ment bonds moving  average
M1 M2 (centred) total households formation  4 EONIA  5,7 EURIBOR  6,7 outstanding  8 
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2018         Apr. 7.1 4.2 3.8 3.8 2.9 2.7 − 0.5 − 0.37 − 0.33 1.0
         May 7.5 4.6 4.0 4.0 3.3 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.36 − 0.33 1.1         June 7.4 4.7 4.3 4.1 3.1 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1
         July 7.0 4.5 4.0 3.9 3.4 3.3 − 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.0
         Aug. 6.5 4.0 3.5 3.7 3.4 3.4 − 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.1         Sep. 6.8 4.3 3.6 3.6 3.2 3.2 0.1 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2
         Oct. 6.8 4.4 3.9 3.7 2.9 2.9 0.7 − 0.37 − 0.32 1.3
         Nov. 6.7 4.3 3.8 3.9 2.6 2.8 0.6 − 0.36 − 0.32 1.2         Dec. 6.6 4.3 4.2 3.9 2.8 3.0 0.7 − 0.36 − 0.31 1.1
2019         Jan. 6.2 4.1 3.7 4.0 2.7 2.9 0.8 − 0.37 − 0.31 1.0
         Feb. 6.7 4.6 4.2 4.2 3.0 3.2 1.4 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.9         Mar. 7.5 5.2 4.6 4.5 2.7 3.0 1.3 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
         Apr. 7.4 5.3 4.7 4.7 2.7 3.2 1.1 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.8
         May 7.2 5.2 4.8 4.7 2.2 2.8 1.3 − 0.37 − 0.31 0.7         June 7.2 5.0 4.5 4.8 2.3 3.1 2.1 − 0.36 − 0.33 0.4
         July 7.8 5.5 5.1 5.1 2.2 3.1 1.9 − 0.37 − 0.36 0.2
         Aug. 8.4 6.2 5.7 5.5 2.3 3.3 1.7 − 0.36 − 0.41 − 0.1         Sep. 7.9 5.9 5.6 5.6 2.2 3.3 1.8 − 0.40 − 0.42 − 0.1
         Oct. 8.4 6.1 5.6 5.6 2.4 3.7 1.5 − 0.46 − 0.41 0.0
         Nov. 8.3 5.9 5.6 5.4 2.1 3.4 1.7 − 0.45 − 0.40 0.1         Dec. 8.0 5.7 5.0 ... 2.0 3.3 1.5 − 0.46 − 0.40 0.2
2020         Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 0.45 − 0.39 0.2
1 Source: ECB. 2 Seasonally adjusted. 3 Excluding money market fund shares
/units, overnight index average. 6 Euro interbank offered rate. 7 See also footnotes to Table
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by VI.4, p. 43  .8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
non-euro area residents. 4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs. 5 Euro include: DE,FR,NL,BE,AT,FI,IE,PT,ES,IT,GR,SK. 
 
 
2. External transactions and positions  * 
  
 
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1 
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3 
of which: Direct Portfolio Financial Other Reserve
Balance Goods Balance investment investment investment assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4 derivatives  2 
Period € million Q1 1999 = 100 EUR 1 = USD ...
2018         Apr. + 34,133 + 24,594 + 9,509 + 21,087 + 27,220 + 13,876 − 48,944 − 3,730 1.2276 99.5 94.0
         May + 11,555 + 24,156 + 26,927 − 2,858 + 52,587 + 15,131 − 40,323 + 2,389 1.1812 98.1 92.7         June + 32,486 + 29,217 + 43,964 + 44,339 − 48,248 + 8,513 + 31,448 + 7,912 1.1678 97.9 92.6
         July + 32,777 + 26,305 + 9,932 + 3,924 + 9,370 + 14,043 − 13,188 − 4,218 1.1686 99.2 93.8
         Aug. + 29,890 + 19,229 + 44,440 − 3,043 + 70,560 + 14,260 − 40,567 + 3,229 1.1549 99.0 93.4         Sep. + 27,633 + 19,901 + 40,047 + 1,849 − 45,295 + 6,676 + 74,469 + 2,347 1.1659 99.5 93.9
         Oct. + 36,535 + 25,865 − 21,630 + 11,454 − 9,217 + 11,752 − 34,938 − 681 1.1484 98.9 93.4
         Nov. + 31,832 + 29,017 + 42,652 − 34,091 + 13,259 + 16,133 + 43,941 + 3,409 1.1367 98.3 92.9         Dec. + 42,763 + 26,542 + 42,127 − 86,212 + 126,273 + 1,715 − 2,755 + 3,106 1.1384 98.4 92.7
2019         Jan. + 8,662 + 10,434 + 15,924 + 20,876 − 21,394 − 59 + 18,962 − 2,461 1.1416 97.8 92.1
         Feb. + 19,123 + 27,586 − 350 + 13,516 − 18,630 − 3,065 + 7,507 + 321 1.1351 97.4 91.7         Mar. + 40,632 + 33,320 + 45,348 + 26,160 − 43,145 + 6,137 + 51,189 + 5,007 1.1302 96.9 91.1
         Apr. + 22,209 + 25,277 − 21,216 − 44,005 + 7,488 + 11,154 + 954 + 3,193 1.1238 96.7 90.9
         May + 2,166 + 28,683 + 3,975 − 17,603 − 59,592 + 13,921 + 65,459 + 1,789 1.1185 97.4 91.4         June + 16,933 + 27,241 + 33,453 − 41,458 + 24,613 + 9,050 + 43,512 − 2,265 1.1293 97.9 91.9
         July + 38,510 + 35,445 + 31,428 − 3,336 − 16,838 + 11,084 + 33,402 + 7,116 1.1218 97.5 91.3
         Aug. + 38,639 + 22,686 + 39,115 + 15,129 + 19,942 − 2,285 + 5,585 + 744 1.1126 98.1 91.8         Sep. + 40,226 + 29,520 + 34,293 + 52 − 9,403 − 5,564 + 55,371 − 6,163 1.1004 97.4 91.1
         Oct. + 44,389 + 36,212 + 61,544 + 67,491 + 37,146 + 3,602 − 47,733 + 1,038 1.1053 97.4 p 90.9
         Nov. + 36,590 + 28,509 + 41,105 − 26,758 + 12,361 − 1,960 + 59,714 − 2,253 1.1051 96.7 p 90.2         Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1113 96.7 p 90.1
2020         Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1100 96.2 p 89.6
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary Tables XII.10 and 12, pp.
82-83   .2Including employee stock options. 3Against the
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 1Monthly averages, see also currencies of the EER-19 group. 4 Based on consumer price indices. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2017 2.5 2.0 2.5 5.7 3.1 2.3 1.5 8.1 1.7 3.8
2018 1.9 1.5 1.5 4.8 1.7 1.7 1.9 8.2 0.8 4.6
2019 ... ... 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2018         Q3 1.6 1.4 1.1 4.7 1.6 1.7 2.4 7.4 0.5 4.6
         Q4 1.2 1.6 0.9 5.1 0.4 1.2 1.6 3.6 0.5 5.1
2019         Q1 1.4 1.3 0.9 5.0 0.5 1.0 0.8 7.9 − 0.2 3.0
         Q2 1.2 1.3 − 0.1 3.8 1.4 1.5 2.9 4.9 0.0 1.8
         Q3 1.2 1.6 1.0 4.2 2.2 1.8 2.7 5.0 0.6 2.9
         Q4 1.0 ... ... ... ... 0.9 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 2
 Annual percentage change
2017 2.9 2.9 3.4 4.3 3.4 2.4 4.1 − 2.2 3.6 8.7
2018 0.9 1.2 1.0 4.1 3.4 0.2 1.8 − 0.1 0.6 2.0
2019 e − 1.7 ... p − 4.7 − 1.9 2.0 0.3 − 0.7 p 0.7 − 1.4 0.8
2018         Q3 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 3.7 3.2 0.0 2.5 5.9 − 0.3 2.9
         Q4 − 1.9 1.1 − 2.3 5.1 1.8 − 1.8 2.6 − 6.4 − 2.4 0.8
2019         Q1 − 0.5 3.1 − 2.7 4.1 0.6 0.5 1.5 2.6 − 0.6 − 0.8
         Q2 − 1.4 5.9 − 5.2 − 0.3 2.9 1.5 0.7 4.0 − 1.1 1.3
         Q3 − 2.1 4.3 − 5.3 − 4.1 3.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 2.6
         Q4 e − 2.8 ... p − 5.6 − 7.1 1.2 − 0.7 − 4.9 p − 2.4 − 2.4 0.0
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 As a percentage of full capacity
2017 82.9 81.8 86.6 74.9 82.3 84.7 70.0 79.5 76.8 74.5
2018 83.8 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.4
2019 82.3 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2018         Q4 83.4 80.8 87.1 73.0 84.1 85.7 70.9 77.0 77.9 75.9
2019         Q1 83.5 81.5 86.3 75.2 83.2 85.2 70.2 80.3 78.4 77.0
         Q2 82.7 81.3 85.3 73.5 80.8 85.1 71.7 76.9 77.5 76.9
         Q3 81.8 81.2 83.9 72.5 81.6 84.3 71.8 74.1 77.0 75.9
         Q4 81.0 80.7 82.6 69.9 78.6 83.4 72.1 78.0 76.8 75.5
2020         Q1 80.9 79.7 82.9 70.7 78.4 83.1 72.3 75.5 76.5 74.7
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 4
 As a percentage of civilian labour force
2017 9.1 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.4 21.5 6.8 11.2 8.7
2018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 9.1 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.5
2019 7.6 5.3 3.2 ... 6.7 8.5 ... 5.0 ... ...
2019         Aug. 7.5 5.2 3.2 3.9 6.8 8.6 16.9 5.0 9.6 6.2
         Sep. 7.5 5.2 3.1 4.3 6.7 8.5 16.8 4.8 9.9 6.1
         Oct. 7.5 5.2 3.1 4.2 6.7 8.5 16.6 4.7 9.7 6.2
         Nov. 7.5 5.2 3.2 4.3 6.6 8.4 16.5 4.7 9.8 6.3
         Dec. 7.4 5.3 3.3 ... 6.6 8.4 ... 4.7 9.8 6.7
2020         Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 4.8 ... ...Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2020
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2019         Aug. 1.0 0.9 1.0 2.1 1.2 1.3 0.1 0.6 0.5 3.1
         Sep. 0.8 0.6 0.9 2.2 1.0 1.1 0.2 0.6 0.2 2.3
         Oct. 0.7 0.2 0.9 1.4 0.9 0.9 − 0.3 0.6 0.2 2.2
         Nov. 1.0 0.4 1.2 1.8 0.8 1.2 0.5 0.8 0.2 2.0
         Dec. 1.3 0.9 1.5 1.8 1.1 1.6 1.1 1.1 0.5 2.1
2020         Jan. e 1.4 e 1.5 1.6 ... e 1.2 e 1.6 e 1.0 e 1.1 e 0.5 e 2.3
 
 General government financial balance 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2017 − 0.9 − 0.7 1.2 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 2.8 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.5
2018 − 0.5 − 0.7 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.8 − 2.5 1.0 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.7
2019 ... ... 1.5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
 General government debt 5
 As a percentage of GDP
2016 90.0 104.9 69.2 10.2 62.6 98.0 178.5 73.9 134.8 40.2
2017 87.8 101.8 65.3 9.3 60.9 98.4 176.2 67.8 134.1 38.6
2018 85.9 100.0 61.9 8.4 59.0 98.4 181.2 63.6 134.8 36.4
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical are provisional. 1  Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted. 2  Manufacturing,
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports and mining and energy: adjusted for working-day variations. 3  Manufacturing: quarterly

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1
 Annual percentage change
4.2 1.8 6.7 2.9 2.5 3.5 3.0 4.8 2.9 4.4 20173.6 3.1 7.0 2.6 2.4 2.4 4.0 4.1 2.3 4.1 2018
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2.0 ... 2019
3.2 2.5 7.7 2.5 1.6 2.4 4.6 4.6 2.0 4.2 2018          Q3
3.9 1.2 7.8 2.2 2.5 1.9 3.4 3.8 2.4 3.4          Q4
4.2 0.3 6.1 1.7 1.9 2.2 3.8 3.3 2.5 3.2 2019          Q1
3.8 3.1 4.9 1.8 1.8 1.7 2.2 2.4 1.7 3.0          Q23.8 3.1 3.4 1.9 1.6 1.9 1.3 2.3 1.9 3.4          Q3
... ... ... ... 1.1 ... ... ... 1.8 ...          Q4
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
6.8 3.7 8.7 1.3 5.4 3.5 3.3 8.4 3.3 8.1 20175.2 − 1.3 1.3 0.6 4.2 0.1 4.3 5.0 0.4 6.9 20183.5
p − 3.0 p 1.5 p − 1.1 ... − 2.4 0.4 p 3.0 p 0.5 ... 2019
2.9 − 2.6 − 1.9 0.1 2.4 − 1.3 5.8 3.7 0.4 5.8 2018          Q3
5.6 − 2.0 4.6 − 1.6 3.1 − 1.4 4.5 0.9 − 2.9 6.0          Q4
4.7 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.2 4.5 − 4.1 6.8 4.4 − 0.2 6.4 2019          Q1
5.5 − 1.5 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.9 − 2.2 2.9 3.2 1.3 2.4          Q24.1 − 2.3 4.7 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 3.7 − 3.0 2.5 0.7 4.2          Q3
− 0.1
p − 6.7 p 2.6 p − 1.1 ... 0.6 − 5.0 p 1.8 p 0.0 ...          Q4
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.2 81.5 80.3 82.5 86.7 80.4 85.3 85.1 78.7 59.1 201777.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 201877.3 79.8 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
77.4 79.0 79.1 84.0 88.5 81.2 87.6 85.6 78.6 62.5 2018          Q4
77.5 80.1 77.1 84.4 87.0 77.8 88.2 85.2 80.8 61.5 2019          Q1
76.9 79.7 78.2 84.3 87.2 79.4 89.1 84.8 80.4 66.0          Q277.5 80.3 75.9 84.1 86.7 80.1 89.4 83.6 80.8 64.2          Q377.2 79.0 78.0 84.0 85.3 77.4 84.1 83.8 79.3 63.6          Q4
76.4 83.4 78.8 83.2 84.8 80.6 82.2 83.0 80.0 63.3 2020          Q1
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
7.1 5.6 4.0 4.9 5.6 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.3 11.1 20176.2 5.5 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 20186.3 5.5 3.5 3.4 ... 6.5 5.8 4.6 14.1 ... 2019
6.7 5.7 3.4 3.5 4.5 6.4 5.8 4.9 14.3 7.2 2019          Aug.
6.6 5.4 3.4 3.5 4.5 6.6 5.8 4.9 14.1 7.2          Sep.
6.4 5.5 3.4 3.5 4.4 6.5 5.7 4.7 14.0 7.3          Oct.
6.4 5.5 3.5 3.5 4.2 6.7 5.7 4.6 13.8 7.7          Nov.6.1 5.6 3.4 3.2 4.2 6.9 5.7 4.6 13.7 7.6          Dec.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2020          Jan.Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2020
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
 Annual percentage change
3.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 20172.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 20182.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
2.5 1.4 1.9 3.1 1.5 − 0.1 3.0 2.4 0.4 0.6 2019          Aug.
2.0 1.1 1.6 2.7 1.2 − 0.3 3.0 1.7 0.2 − 0.5          Sep.
1.5 0.8 1.4 2.8 1.0 − 0.1 2.9 1.5 0.2 − 0.5          Oct.
1.7 1.0 1.3 2.6 1.2 0.2 3.2 1.4 0.5 0.5          Nov.2.7 1.8 1.3 2.8 1.8 0.4 3.2 2.0 0.8 0.7          Dec.
...
e 2.7 e 1.3 e 1.6 ... e 0.8 ... 2.3 e 1.1 e 0.6 2020          Jan.
General government financial balance 5
As a percentage of GDP
0.5 1.4 3.4 1.3 − 0.7 − 3.0 − 1.0 0.0 − 3.0 1.7 20170.6 2.7 1.9 1.5 0.2 − 0.4 − 1.1 0.8 − 2.5 − 4.4 2018
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2019
General government debt 5
As a percentage of GDP
39.9 20.1 55.5 61.9 82.9 131.5 52.0 78.7 99.2 103.4 201639.3 22.3 50.3 56.9 78.3 126.0 51.3 74.1 98.6 93.9 201734.1 21.0 45.8 52.4 74.0 122.2 49.4 70.4 97.6 100.6 2018
data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter. 4Monthly data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5  According to Maastricht Treaty definition. 
data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on unadjusted

Deutsche Bundesbank
8  Monthly Report
February 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area 
 
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 
  
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2018         May 122.1 88.1 11.0 34.0 39.7 − 34.2 121.0 155.2 − 4.4 − 7.4 − 0.4 1.2 2.1
         June − 5.3 − 22.6 − 22.3 17.4 20.5 75.2 − 67.8 − 143.0 − 8.3 − 4.8 − 0.4 − 7.7 4.6
         July 67.5 66.6 19.9 0.9 3.5 − 24.4 41.6 66.0 10.4 6.1 − 0.6 − 8.3 13.2
         Aug. − 2.3 − 13.6 − 4.8 11.3 22.6 − 26.6 − 1.3 25.3 4.0 − 8.3 − 0.4 1.4 11.3
         Sep. 25.3 22.5 − 11.1 2.8 7.0 64.2 − 26.2 − 90.3 24.5 − 12.5 − 0.5 22.3 15.2
         Oct. 11.7 17.3 3.0 − 5.6 − 7.4 − 12.9 72.5 85.4 8.0 − 6.5 − 0.2 3.9 10.9
         Nov. 92.0 91.6 12.1 0.4 2.0 73.8 35.0 − 38.8 3.3 − 4.2 − 1.0 3.9 4.6
         Dec. − 90.5 − 69.9 − 21.3 − 20.6 − 22.6 − 0.9 − 162.8 − 161.9 5.8 16.4 0.1 − 8.3 − 2.3
2019         Jan. 126.4 70.0 14.8 56.4 44.9 0.0 196.2 196.2 19.7 − 8.7 0.1 26.2 2.2
         Feb. 54.0 42.8 17.7 11.2 24.8 21.8 − 31.6 − 53.4 21.1 0.6 − 0.1 26.2 − 5.6
         Mar. 15.1 41.1 1.6 − 26.0 − 26.1 71.2 − 0.6 − 71.8 8.3 − 1.8 0.0 − 5.2 15.1
         Apr. 69.2 90.2 27.2 − 21.0 − 20.5 − 6.6 114.4 121.0 − 16.4 − 5.2 0.2 − 9.8 − 1.5
         May 39.1 36.7 12.8 2.4 3.2 61.1 67.5 6.4 9.9 − 2.9 0.6 7.2 5.0
         June − 0.4 23.1 − 13.5 − 23.4 − 22.6 78.7 − 12.6 − 91.3 42.4 20.0 1.1 6.7 14.7
         July 50.3 61.2 − 1.5 − 11.0 − 13.7 34.5 162.0 127.4 0.4 − 22.3 0.4 5.4 17.0
         Aug. 25.0 19.2 − 7.9 5.8 5.6 − 15.1 15.7 30.7 − 15.5 − 15.5 − 0.4 − 7.2 7.6
         Sep. 6.2 26.1 25.5 − 19.9 − 13.7 41.7 − 45.5 − 87.2 35.9 24.9 − 1.1 − 1.4 13.5
         Oct. 43.2 62.8 − 9.3 − 19.6 − 25.7 15.7 16.6 0.8 − 15.2 − 2.0 − 1.9 − 23.2 11.9
         Nov. 54.7 55.0 30.9 − 0.3 3.4 24.4 − 21.4 − 45.7 21.0 0.8 − 1.6 8.0 13.8
         Dec. − 118.5 − 79.6 − 23.1 − 38.9 − 20.8 − 17.5 − 297.8 − 280.3 − 9.6 4.0 − 1.4 − 6.5 − 5.7
  
  
b) German contribution
 
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) II. Net claims on III. Monetary capital formation at monetary
in the euro area non-euro area residents financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises General
and households government Debt
Deposits securities
Liabil- with an Deposits with
Claims ities to agreed at agreed maturities
on non- non-euro maturity notice of of over Capital
of which: of which: euro area area of over over 2 years and
Period Total Total Total Total residents residents Total 2 years 3 months (net)  2 Securities Securities reserves  3 
2018         May 19.2 21.2 5.0 − 2.1 2.4 − 10.7 29.8 40.6 − 0.1 0.6 − 0.2 4.1 − 4.6
         June 16.7 17.9 2.1 − 1.1 1.3 − 18.2 − 20.4 − 2.1 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.5 − 3.1 8.1
         July 12.7 9.7 0.0 2.9 0.9 26.0 − 0.3 − 26.3 2.4 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 2.7 5.9
         Aug. 4.1 5.7 − 8.7 − 1.6 2.8 − 8.5 − 11.6 − 3.1 − 3.5 − 3.2 − 0.4 − 1.7 1.8
         Sep. 19.3 18.3 1.8 1.0 4.1 − 4.1 7.9 12.0 12.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 7.6 7.8
         Oct. 7.0 8.7 1.4 − 1.7 − 5.0 34.2 2.8 − 31.4 1.6 0.1 − 0.5 4.1 − 2.0
         Nov. 20.0 18.5 0.9 1.5 2.5 15.1 − 3.7 − 18.8 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 3.0 − 1.4
         Dec. − 5.6 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 0.7 − 33.5 3.6 37.1 − 1.1 0.7 − 0.3 − 9.1 7.5
2019         Jan. 16.3 15.0 0.3 1.3 − 1.3 67.9 21.1 − 46.8 2.1 − 5.7 − 0.5 14.0 − 5.7
         Feb. 12.5 16.4 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 1.4 24.3 − 15.4 − 39.6 6.6 − 0.8 0.1 12.6 − 5.2
         Mar. 9.7 17.2 0.1 − 7.5 − 4.8 − 32.1 13.9 46.1 − 4.0 − 3.2 0.2 − 4.4 3.4
         Apr. 7.6 12.7 − 0.5 − 5.1 − 6.1 19.2 14.8 − 4.5 − 6.6 − 2.7 0.2 − 4.0 0.0
         May 19.3 19.8 0.5 − 0.5 1.4 11.8 2.4 − 9.3 9.1 − 1.7 0.6 7.5 2.6
         June 25.7 26.4 4.3 − 0.7 1.2 − 8.0 10.3 18.3 11.5 1.5 0.6 2.4 7.1
         July 9.5 7.8 0.0 1.6 − 0.8 42.6 6.3 − 36.4 0.8 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 4.4
         Aug. 25.2 19.9 1.0 5.2 5.5 − 13.6 2.4 16.0 − 6.2 − 4.4 − 0.3 − 3.7 2.3
         Sep. 5.7 11.8 − 0.8 − 6.1 − 1.3 − 2.8 − 24.3 − 21.5 4.3 − 0.7 − 0.6 0.0 5.6
         Oct. 10.2 11.0 1.2 − 0.8 − 4.2 56.3 2.4 − 53.9 − 2.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 3.6 2.5
         Nov. 25.3 20.4 5.2 4.9 3.9 − 23.5 − 17.6 5.9 3.0 − 1.9 − 0.9 1.6 4.2
         Dec. − 4.4 1.5 0.8 − 5.9 − 1.1 − 39.4 − 47.4 − 8.0 − 4.7 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 6.0 2.6
*The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary MFIs’ portfolios. 3After deduction of inter-MFI participations. 4Including the counter-
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from parts of monetary liabilities of central governments. 5Including the monetary
the flow figures (see also the “Notes on the figures“ in the “Explanatory notes“ in the liabilities of central governments (Post Office, Treasury). 6In Germany, only savings
Statistical Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report, p. 30  ).1Source: ECB. 2Excluding deposits. 7Paper held by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.

Deutsche Bundesbank
9  Monthly Report
February 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
 
 
 a) Euro area 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )
Money stock M2 Debt secur-
of which: ities with
Intra- Money stock M1 maturities
Eurosystem Deposits of up toliability/ with an Deposits Money 2 years
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market (incl. money
posits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund market    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares paper)    central  gov-
ernments Total  4 issue Total Total Total lation deposits  5 2 years  5 tions (net)  2,7  Period (net) 2,7,8 months  5,6 
7.1 15.7 − 69.6 93.1 95.8 4.9 90.9 − 10.0 7.2 24.9 − 12.3 − 5.8 2018          May
21.4 − 43.4 − 100.3 108.7 91.1 11.4 79.6 14.2 3.4 − 5.6 − 8.9 2.9          June
7.6 33.8 − − 8.8 − 9.5 − 6.0 6.7 − 12.8 − 8.1 4.6 6.7 10.3 − 6.3          July
2.9 − 41.1 − 5.3 − 1.4 − 0.0 2.9 − 2.9 − 6.6 5.2 3.8 − 1.6 1.9          Aug.
40.6 5.7 − 18.7 45.4 69.3 2.1 67.2 − 20.8 − 3.2 − 10.7 − 19.5 − 0.7          Sep.
− 38.8 − 5.4 − 35.0 13.3 8.0 1.8 6.3 8.3 − 3.0 − 10.2 23.8 − 2.2          Oct.
7.3 65.1 − 90.2 88.3 97.7 5.3 92.4 − 11.6 2.2 31.5 0.3 − 0.9          Nov.
− 59.9 − 89.7 − 52.3 50.2 49.2 18.0 31.2 − 4.4 5.4 − 14.2 0.6 6.7          Dec.
66.8 69.4 − − 29.4 − 22.2 − 39.7 − 13.1 − 26.6 3.3 14.2 15.6 − 3.9 − 7.1 2019          Jan.
18.6 − 2.6 − 38.7 46.4 40.2 3.2 37.0 − 0.4 6.6 0.2 − 8.4 − 0.4          Feb.
− 21.7 − 21.5 − 121.3 140.0 133.4 6.2 127.2 − 6.2 12.8 − 7.2 − 0.5 − 19.5          Mar.
− 33.1 36.4 − 75.7 55.4 46.2 7.4 38.9 2.4 6.8 22.2 15.5 0.5          Apr.
17.8 − 8.5 − 81.0 88.5 87.6 5.1 82.4 − 12.4 13.4 − 7.7 − 9.7 5.9          May33.5 − 69.0 − 71.4 87.3 98.3 7.5 90.8 − 14.4 3.4 − 20.7 − 11.5 − 4.4          June
− 13.0 45.1 − 52.3 31.1 25.6 9.0 16.6 1.4 4.0 17.9 20.4 − 2.2          July
6.3 − 93.7 − 112.8 110.1 86.1 1.3 84.7 19.1 4.9 4.7 17.6 − 13.4          Aug.5.8 43.5 − − 37.3 − 19.0 − 1.6 3.1 − 4.8 − 15.6 − 1.7 − 17.9 − 14.0 − 0.6          Sep.
− 37.6 53.3 − 58.4 44.8 60.7 3.0 57.7 − 10.1 − 5.7 42.1 2.3 6.5          Oct.
− 1.1 − 53.0 − 112.2 104.3 122.7 6.5 116.2 − 17.8 − 0.7 − 14.7 14.9 − 2.0          Nov.− 66.6 − 27.1 − − 32.7 3.4 6.2 16.4 − 10.2 − 7.5 4.7 − 33.6 − 20.3 − 15.0          Dec.
 
 
  b) German contribution 
 
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V )  10 
of which: Components of the money stockIntra- Debt securities
Eurosystem Deposits withliability/ with an Deposits Money maturities
IV. De- claim agreed at agreed market of up to 2 yearsposits of related to Currency maturity notice of Repo fund (incl. money    
banknote in circu- Overnight of up to up to 3 transac-
shares market    central  gov-
ernments Total issue  9,11 lation Total deposits 2 years months  6 tions (net)  7,8 paper)(net)  7  Period
11.7 − 42.5 5.4 − 0.1 39.3 38.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 2.1 2018          May
17.7 − 26.3 3.6 2.5 4.8 − 6.4 14.6 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.1 − 2.6          June
− 21.0 57.8 3.1 2.2 − 0.5 6.6 − 6.1 − 0.6 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.9          July
13.7 − 14.2 5.3 0.5 − 0.4 2.4 − 3.5 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 1.7          Aug.12.2 − 32.9 3.9 − 0.3 23.8 27.3 − 2.1 0.0 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.5          Sep.
− 17.8 43.5 3.8 0.1 13.8 11.1 − 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.0 2.3          Oct.
9.7 − 8.2 2.5 1.0 32.8 38.6 − 4.1 0.5 − 1.0 0.4 − 1.5          Nov.
− 5.4 − 27.6 4.0 2.8 − 5.0 − 1.3 − 3.3 2.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 1.8          Dec.
− 18.5 103.9 − 9.6 7.5 − 3.4 − 14.3 9.6 0.3 0.9 0.0 0.0 2019          Jan.
− 2.7 20.3 2.9 0.4 12.5 8.3 3.6 1.0 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.7          Feb.
17.7 − 58.0 2.5 1.2 21.8 20.9 − 1.5 2.2 0.0 − 0.2 0.3          Mar.
− 15.2 33.9 3.9 2.1 14.7 17.9 − 3.7 0.0 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.6          Apr.
19.0 − 20.1 4.0 0.8 23.0 23.8 0.4 − 0.3 − 1.3 0.1 0.4          May
3.7 − 7.7 3.0 2.1 10.3 10.3 − 1.4 − 0.4 1.7 − 0.0 0.2          June
− 27.1 74.0 3.6 3.2 4.4 7.2 − 3.3 − 0.6 1.0 0.1 0.1          July
10.7 − 26.8 5.8 − 0.7 33.9 26.1 5.7 − 1.2 3.1 0.0 0.3          Aug.
9.9 − 6.6 4.9 0.8 − 4.7 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.7 − 1.1 0.1 1.7          Sep.
− 19.8 74.2 4.3 0.2 14.7 18.7 − 0.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.3          Oct.
8.2 − 29.5 4.5 0.7 20.0 24.1 − 3.4 − 0.7 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2          Nov.
− 2.0 − 32.6 4.9 3.4 − 4.6 − 0.4 − 6.6 0.6 1.8 − 0.1 0.0          Dec.
8Less German MFIs’ holdings of paper issued by euro area MFIs. 9Including money stocks M1, M2 or M3. 11The difference between the volume of euro
national banknotes still in circulation. 10The German contributions to the Euro- banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in
system’s monetary aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see als o footnote
monetary aggregates and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
10  Monthly Report
February 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
 
 
 
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
Claims
Total Shares and on non-
End of assets or Debt other Debt euro area Other
year/month liabilities Total Total Loans securities  2 equities Total Loans securities  3 residents assets
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2017         Nov. 26,790.1 17,846.2 13,271.9 11,037.5 1,430.7 803.7 4,574.3 1,038.3 3,536.0 5,247.3 3,696.6
         Dec. 26,320.8 17,707.9 13,166.9 10,942.4 1,425.5 798.9 4,541.0 1,028.7 3,512.3 5,065.9 3,547.0
2018         Jan. 26,414.7 17,897.5 13,319.7 11,069.2 1,448.8 801.7 4,577.8 1,041.6 3,536.2 5,253.9 3,263.3
         Feb. 26,379.4 17,897.8 13,316.5 11,070.0 1,456.4 790.0 4,581.2 1,025.2 3,556.0 5,342.9 3,138.7
         Mar. 26,373.0 17,959.1 13,358.0 11,111.1 1,466.5 780.4 4,601.1 1,023.3 3,577.8 5,257.7 3,156.2
         Apr. 26,515.4 18,032.8 13,432.8 11,127.7 1,490.0 815.1 4,599.9 1,025.1 3,574.8 5,335.0 3,147.6
         May 26,916.5 18,104.2 13,514.1 11,201.8 1,504.5 807.8 4,590.1 1,019.9 3,570.2 5,543.9 3,268.5
         June 26,772.3 18,099.2 13,482.5 11,193.8 1,501.6 787.1 4,616.7 1,016.8 3,599.9 5,455.9 3,217.3
         July 26,782.1 18,156.4 13,547.1 11,235.8 1,523.9 787.4 4,609.3 1,012.7 3,596.6 5,466.2 3,159.5
         Aug. 26,815.9 18,127.5 13,530.7 11,227.3 1,523.9 779.5 4,596.8 1,001.7 3,595.1 5,485.0 3,203.3
         Sep. 26,769.8 18,147.8 13,539.6 11,248.0 1,509.3 782.3 4,608.3 1,000.7 3,607.5 5,462.1 3,160.0
         Oct. 27,088.9 18,151.7 13,555.3 11,266.4 1,510.7 778.1 4,596.4 1,002.6 3,593.9 5,679.3 3,257.9
         Nov. 27,226.0 18,243.4 13,638.0 11,338.0 1,515.9 784.1 4,605.5 1,001.0 3,604.5 5,704.1 3,278.5
         Dec. 26,994.6 18,171.5 13,568.2 11,295.6 1,501.4 771.1 4,603.3 1,002.8 3,600.5 5,563.5 3,259.6
2019         Jan. 27,403.8 18,309.1 13,637.6 11,345.3 1,517.0 775.3 4,671.6 1,015.9 3,655.7 5,783.6 3,311.1
         Feb. 27,442.3 18,354.8 13,684.1 11,368.4 1,528.3 787.3 4,670.8 1,001.2 3,669.6 5,771.2 3,316.2
         Mar. 27,740.5 18,397.0 13,735.5 11,413.7 1,526.1 795.7 4,661.6 1,001.4 3,660.2 5,848.6 3,494.8
         Apr. 27,900.1 18,468.2 13,828.7 11,472.8 1,529.8 826.1 4,639.5 1,001.1 3,638.4 5,955.9 3,476.0
         May 28,196.5 18,496.8 13,853.9 11,494.5 1,549.0 810.4 4,643.0 1,000.3 3,642.6 6,039.0 3,660.7
         June 28,319.7 18,521.8 13,874.8 11,521.2 1,552.4 801.2 4,647.0 1,000.0 3,647.0 6,005.4 3,792.4
         July 28,782.5 18,601.6 13,939.2 11,583.8 1,550.6 804.8 4,662.4 1,002.8 3,659.6 6,219.6 3,961.4
         Aug. 29,373.3 18,658.5 13,961.1 11,612.7 1,549.1 799.3 4,697.4 1,003.1 3,694.3 6,311.4 4,403.5
         Sep. 29,193.3 18,650.8 13,970.5 11,595.9 1,565.9 808.7 4,680.3 996.7 3,683.7 6,300.2 4,242.3
         Oct. 28,964.7 18,688.3 14,041.5 11,660.2 1,549.7 831.6 4,646.8 1,002.5 3,644.3 6,259.6 4,016.8
         Nov. 29,016.2 18,728.7 14,098.6 11,684.5 1,568.4 845.7 4,630.2 998.6 3,631.5 6,270.8 4,016.7
         Dec. 28,338.0 18,590.5 14,006.7 11,614.7 1,544.3 847.8 4,583.9 981.2 3,602.7 5,932.0 3,815.4
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2017         Nov. 6,088.7 4,211.0 3,227.4 2,777.0 178.7 271.6 983.6 321.5 662.1 1,177.2 700.5
         Dec. 6,051.1 4,202.2 3,222.8 2,768.6 180.4 273.8 979.4 318.5 660.9 1,163.4 685.4
2018         Jan. 6,074.8 4,214.9 3,242.3 2,786.5 181.6 274.2 972.5 317.0 655.6 1,176.4 683.5
         Feb. 6,051.9 4,220.1 3,253.3 2,799.4 183.1 270.8 966.8 311.4 655.4 1,195.1 636.8
         Mar. 6,053.7 4,228.1 3,260.9 2,809.5 183.0 268.4 967.2 309.7 657.5 1,184.4 641.2
         Apr. 6,046.4 4,233.3 3,267.7 2,816.0 184.4 267.4 965.6 310.5 655.0 1,178.5 634.6
         May 6,148.1 4,248.4 3,280.8 2,824.1 186.8 269.8 967.6 306.5 661.1 1,226.7 673.0
         June 6,120.9 4,264.2 3,297.3 2,838.8 187.5 271.0 966.9 304.3 662.7 1,201.8 654.9
         July 6,089.3 4,274.2 3,307.9 2,849.4 187.0 271.5 966.3 304.9 661.4 1,194.2 620.9
         Aug. 6,121.9 4,279.7 3,313.6 2,863.9 183.8 265.9 966.0 300.5 665.5 1,189.8 652.4
         Sep. 6,119.7 4,295.4 3,331.0 2,880.3 184.8 265.9 964.4 297.5 666.9 1,194.5 629.8
         Oct. 6,154.2 4,303.6 3,339.1 2,888.2 185.3 265.6 964.5 300.8 663.7 1,208.1 642.4
         Nov. 6,177.4 4,323.4 3,356.8 2,905.6 188.1 263.0 966.7 299.8 666.9 1,202.7 651.3
         Dec. 6,194.1 4,317.4 3,353.6 2,903.7 187.8 262.2 963.7 296.4 667.3 1,208.5 668.2
2019         Jan. 6,252.9 4,333.5 3,366.6 2,917.4 188.8 260.4 966.9 299.2 667.7 1,232.6 686.9
         Feb. 6,243.9 4,343.3 3,382.0 2,932.6 189.2 260.2 961.3 296.6 664.7 1,221.0 679.6
         Mar. 6,392.0 4,373.9 3,414.7 2,963.7 189.7 261.3 959.2 293.9 665.3 1,265.4 752.8
         Apr. 6,408.7 4,379.3 3,427.3 2,976.4 189.1 261.9 951.9 294.8 657.1 1,278.2 751.2
         May 6,524.8 4,402.6 3,446.8 2,995.6 190.0 261.1 955.8 293.1 662.8 1,284.5 837.7
         June 6,619.8 4,431.8 3,473.1 3,017.0 194.4 261.7 958.6 291.2 667.5 1,294.2 893.7
         July 6,698.2 4,445.3 3,481.1 3,024.8 194.0 262.3 964.2 293.7 670.5 1,312.3 940.7
         Aug. 6,973.5 4,478.6 3,501.8 3,044.3 196.5 261.0 976.8 293.5 683.3 1,330.9 1,163.9
         Sep. 6,872.6 4,462.9 3,497.0 3,040.4 196.0 260.5 965.9 288.3 677.6 1,311.9 1,097.8
         Oct. 6,769.9 4,466.0 3,506.4 3,049.0 195.9 261.4 959.5 291.6 667.9 1,303.7 1,000.3
         Nov. 6,785.4 4,490.1 3,527.4 3,064.8 199.7 262.9 962.6 292.6 670.0 1,289.6 1,005.8
         Dec. 6,716.1 4,480.4 3,527.3 3,064.0 197.9 265.4 953.1 288.5 664.6 1,236.4 999.2
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan enterprises. 3Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national general government. 4Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12   ).
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2Including money market paper of Excluding MFIs‘ cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the

Deutsche Bundesbank
11  Monthly Report
February 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  6 
over
Currency 1 year and
in of which: up to up to over up to over  End of
Total in euro  5 Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months year/month circulation  4 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
1,107.1 12,249.2 11,471.4 11,544.6 6,291.1 832.2 245.9 1,912.7 2,207.2 55.5 2017          Nov.
1,123.2 12,285.7 11,542.3 11,615.7 6,348.4 834.7 242.2 1,925.2 2,210.3 54.9          Dec.
1,108.0 12,318.0 11,527.5 11,608.4 6,347.5 840.6 236.7 1,915.1 2,212.7 55.8 2018          Jan.
1,108.3 12,329.7 11,524.1 11,601.3 6,351.7 831.3 232.1 1,915.9 2,215.2 55.1          Feb.1,117.0 12,393.6 11,580.0 11,659.1 6,416.1 831.5 226.4 1,909.0 2,221.4 54.8          Mar.
1,121.2 12,401.4 11,610.6 11,679.1 6,454.1 817.7 222.3 1,907.2 2,223.4 54.4          Apr.
1,126.1 12,502.5 11,690.4 11,761.7 6,547.6 810.6 217.7 1,900.9 2,230.9 54.0          May1,137.6 12,613.6 11,776.7 11,843.6 6,623.3 821.4 214.9 1,895.2 2,235.1 53.7          June
1,145.3 12,606.0 11,760.4 11,825.6 6,603.5 817.3 212.1 1,899.9 2,239.8 53.1          July
1,148.3 12,595.4 11,753.0 11,802.8 6,593.6 812.2 208.9 1,890.4 2,244.9 52.7          Aug.1,150.4 12,662.1 11,779.9 11,831.4 6,656.8 796.4 205.9 1,877.8 2,242.2 52.3          Sep.
1,152.2 12,639.5 11,788.4 11,848.4 6,668.9 812.9 203.6 1,872.0 2,239.0 52.1          Oct.
1,157.5 12,719.4 11,861.9 11,912.4 6,750.7 801.7 200.7 1,866.8 2,241.3 51.3          Nov.1,175.4 12,713.4 11,926.4 11,989.4 6,799.2 800.8 200.8 1,888.5 2,248.7 51.5          Dec.
1,162.4 12,765.3 11,908.3 11,974.0 6,777.8 798.3 199.4 1,885.1 2,262.2 51.3 2019          Jan.
1,165.6 12,830.6 11,957.3 12,003.3 6,806.3 795.5 196.8 1,885.4 2,268.0 51.2          Feb.1,171.7 12,947.7 12,078.4 12,135.2 6,931.6 786.3 199.6 1,885.8 2,280.5 51.3          Mar.
1,179.1 12,957.7 12,120.5 12,180.4 6,970.6 788.7 201.8 1,880.0 2,287.8 51.5          Apr.
1,184.2 13,059.0 12,198.2 12,256.9 7,049.8 775.9 201.4 1,876.3 2,301.5 52.1          May1,191.7 13,181.5 12,287.9 12,335.5 7,122.8 762.5 198.3 1,893.9 2,304.7 53.2          June
1,200.7 13,178.2 12,299.5 12,350.0 7,148.0 767.6 198.9 1,872.9 2,309.0 53.7          July
1,202.0 13,282.7 12,388.2 12,438.0 7,227.7 782.3 201.0 1,859.8 2,313.8 53.4          Aug.1,205.2 13,297.2 12,382.1 12,445.1 7,222.4 769.0 200.8 1,886.1 2,313.8 53.0          Sep.
1,208.2 13,291.7 12,421.6 12,486.3 7,284.6 758.5 201.2 1,882.2 2,308.8 50.9          Oct.
1,214.7 13,388.4 12,519.8 12,571.9 7,388.4 740.7 200.5 1,884.2 2,309.6 48.6          Nov.1,231.1 13,310.6 12,507.7 12,582.7 7,392.5 740.5 199.9 1,887.0 2,315.4 47.4          Dec.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
250.9 3,646.8 3,521.5 3,383.7 1,990.6 157.1 37.4 618.2 538.3 42.1 2017          Nov.
252.9 3,647.9 3,515.8 3,378.5 1,976.2 162.0 37.7 620.4 540.7 41.5          Dec.
250.1 3,632.5 3,522.3 3,390.7 1,994.6 161.5 36.4 616.5 539.5 42.2 2018          Jan.
249.8 3,642.4 3,523.0 3,388.4 1,995.9 160.2 35.3 615.5 540.0 41.5          Feb.248.3 3,652.2 3,524.1 3,389.6 1,998.1 164.6 34.2 612.1 539.4 41.0          Mar.
250.3 3,641.8 3,529.8 3,395.0 2,013.5 157.6 33.6 610.6 539.1 40.6          Apr.
250.2 3,693.8 3,568.4 3,425.0 2,048.0 154.6 33.0 610.2 539.0 40.3          May252.7 3,716.5 3,574.0 3,423.0 2,039.4 165.5 32.6 607.2 538.5 39.8          June
256.0 3,694.1 3,571.0 3,429.7 2,053.1 161.2 32.2 605.8 538.0 39.4          July
256.4 3,703.1 3,568.1 3,417.3 2,051.8 153.7 34.0 601.1 537.7 38.9          Aug.256.1 3,737.2 3,588.3 3,437.1 2,076.9 153.2 33.2 597.4 537.8 38.6          Sep.
256.3 3,730.6 3,595.8 3,453.9 2,092.2 155.1 33.6 596.9 538.0 38.1          Oct.
257.2 3,774.2 3,632.0 3,482.3 2,127.4 149.8 33.2 595.9 538.5 37.4          Nov.260.0 3,766.4 3,629.3 3,481.1 2,120.4 152.5 33.7 596.7 540.6 37.2          Dec.
267.6 3,737.2 3,622.2 3,471.2 2,113.7 154.3 33.5 592.1 540.9 36.7 2019          Jan.
268.0 3,747.2 3,634.2 3,474.2 2,117.5 153.9 33.2 591.0 541.8 36.7          Feb.269.1 3,785.8 3,652.3 3,490.2 2,136.2 152.2 33.0 587.7 544.0 37.1          Mar.
271.3 3,782.3 3,667.4 3,506.4 2,156.4 151.2 32.8 584.8 544.1 37.2          Apr.
272.1 3,824.2 3,689.1 3,523.2 2,176.6 149.4 32.7 582.9 543.7 37.9          May274.2 3,837.7 3,697.8 3,528.6 2,183.2 147.8 32.3 583.5 543.3 38.4          June
277.3 3,812.4 3,701.4 3,532.6 2,191.7 147.0 31.6 581.4 542.7 38.1          July
276.6 3,849.7 3,730.3 3,550.9 2,213.2 149.7 31.7 576.9 541.5 37.8          Aug.277.4 3,853.5 3,722.1 3,546.0 2,213.9 146.4 31.5 576.1 540.8 37.2          Sep.
277.6 3,848.5 3,734.8 3,571.5 2,240.3 148.6 31.2 575.2 539.9 36.4          Oct.
278.4 3,874.7 3,753.7 3,580.0 2,257.7 143.0 30.8 573.7 539.2 35.6          Nov.281.8 3,863.9 3,744.4 3,574.3 2,250.5 144.8 31.0 573.5 540.0 34.5          Dec.
volume of euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with Bundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item “Intra -Eurosystem
the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote liability/claim related to banknote issue“ (see “Other liability ite ms“). 5Excluding
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by the central governments’ deposits. 6 In Germany, only savings deposits. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
12  Monthly Report
February 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
 
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont’d)
 
 
 
Liabilities (cont’d)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont’d)  
 
General government Repo transactions Debt securities
with non-banks
Other general government in the euro area
With agreed At agreed
maturities of notice of  2 
Money
over of which: market of which:
Central 1 year and Enterprises fund Denom-
End of govern- up to up to over up to over and shares inated
year/month ments Total Overnight 1 year 2 years 2 years 3 months 3 months Total households (net)  3 Total in euro
 Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
2017         Nov. 310.2 394.4 197.6 89.5 29.8 49.0 23.8 4.6 243.4 242.8 527.6 2,096.3 1,442.2
         Dec. 289.4 380.5 191.5 81.5 31.5 46.8 24.6 4.6 211.2 210.7 501.2 2,077.2 1,433.0
2018         Jan. 330.3 379.3 186.4 84.3 31.1 47.5 25.1 5.0 230.3 229.8 521.3 2,072.4 1,439.4
         Feb. 344.1 384.3 192.0 83.4 30.4 47.8 25.8 4.8 229.1 228.6 510.0 2,075.7 1,430.8
         Mar. 358.1 376.4 181.7 85.8 29.5 48.6 25.9 4.8 231.7 231.2 508.5 2,078.7 1,435.5
         Apr. 338.2 384.1 190.5 84.7 28.4 49.7 26.0 4.7 227.6 227.1 519.8 2,087.3 1,436.6
         May 345.3 395.4 196.6 87.2 29.8 51.0 26.1 4.7 253.0 252.5 507.4 2,100.4 1,439.3
         June 366.7 403.3 199.6 91.7 29.9 51.9 25.7 4.7 247.4 246.8 498.2 2,095.9 1,439.0
         July 374.6 405.8 203.3 88.4 30.9 52.8 25.7 4.7 254.0 253.5 508.7 2,077.3 1,432.6
         Aug. 377.4 415.2 208.7 90.6 31.0 54.4 25.9 4.6 257.8 257.3 507.1 2,084.1 1,439.3
         Sep. 414.4 416.3 211.2 87.8 32.4 54.8 25.5 4.6 247.2 246.7 487.6 2,109.6 1,457.2
         Oct. 375.6 415.5 213.2 84.0 32.3 55.7 25.8 4.5 237.4 236.9 511.4 2,164.5 1,474.0
         Nov. 383.0 423.9 218.9 85.1 33.6 56.3 25.7 4.3 268.8 268.4 511.7 2,164.1 1,469.6
         Dec. 322.5 401.4 203.7 78.6 34.2 56.9 23.8 4.3 254.5 254.2 512.5 2,158.1 1,471.8
2019         Jan. 389.2 402.0 196.7 85.8 34.9 55.8 24.2 4.5 270.1 269.6 513.3 2,176.2 1,484.6
         Feb. 407.9 419.4 207.3 92.1 34.2 56.3 25.1 4.5 270.5 269.7 505.0 2,205.1 1,506.2
         Mar. 386.0 426.5 212.0 92.5 35.4 56.7 25.5 4.4 272.8 272.4 506.5 2,184.4 1,490.0
         Apr. 352.9 424.4 212.1 91.2 34.5 56.9 25.3 4.4 295.0 294.6 521.8 2,174.3 1,487.9
         May 370.7 431.3 216.8 94.7 33.4 57.0 25.1 4.3 287.4 287.0 512.1 2,190.0 1,497.2
         June 404.2 441.8 224.3 94.6 35.1 58.1 25.2 4.4 266.0 265.7 500.4 2,179.2 1,492.1
         July 391.2 437.0 221.4 93.8 34.1 58.2 25.1 4.4 284.1 283.8 522.2 2,189.7 1,492.7
         Aug. 397.5 447.2 228.1 97.2 34.1 58.3 25.2 4.3 289.0 288.5 539.7 2,174.3 1,484.1
         Sep. 402.9 449.2 231.4 98.0 31.7 58.9 25.0 4.2 257.0 256.5 525.9 2,181.6 1,484.9
         Oct. 365.1 440.3 224.5 95.5 32.3 59.1 24.8 4.2 298.8 298.3 528.2 2,171.7 1,487.8
         Nov. 363.9 452.6 235.6 95.5 33.8 59.1 24.8 3.8 284.3 283.7 543.0 2,186.7 1,492.4
         Dec. 297.4 430.5 224.7 85.9 33.7 59.1 23.6 3.6 250.4 249.8 522.7 2,155.5 1,487.0
 German contribution ( € billion) 
2017         Nov. 51.7 211.4 65.5 73.0 26.2 43.1 2.9 0.7 2.6 2.6 2.0 518.3 251.1
         Dec. 61.7 207.7 69.3 66.3 27.8 40.6 2.9 0.7 3.3 3.3 1.7 512.7 256.4
2018         Jan. 37.4 204.4 61.6 70.3 27.5 41.4 2.8 0.8 4.3 4.3 1.7 518.8 262.8
         Feb. 46.7 207.4 66.3 69.2 26.8 41.5 3.0 0.6 3.8 3.8 2.0 522.7 263.8
         Mar. 55.0 207.6 63.2 72.7 25.8 42.3 3.0 0.6 2.9 2.9 2.2 523.5 265.6
         Apr. 39.7 207.0 63.1 72.5 24.4 43.3 3.0 0.6 2.4 2.4 2.1 524.1 270.0
         May 51.4 217.4 68.6 74.9 25.7 44.5 3.1 0.6 1.6 1.6 1.9 536.8 274.3
         June 69.1 224.5 70.7 79.2 25.6 45.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 2.0 531.3 274.8
         July 48.1 216.4 63.4 76.6 26.5 46.2 3.1 0.6 1.8 1.8 1.9 526.6 277.0
         Aug. 61.7 224.1 67.3 78.9 26.4 47.7 3.1 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.9 527.7 282.0
         Sep. 73.9 226.2 69.6 76.9 27.8 48.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.9 536.3 287.6
         Oct. 56.1 220.6 66.1 73.9 28.0 48.9 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 1.9 544.5 286.9
         Nov. 65.7 226.3 69.4 74.8 28.7 49.7 3.1 0.7 1.3 1.3 2.2 544.9 290.3
         Dec. 60.3 225.0 74.6 67.5 29.3 49.9 3.0 0.6 0.8 0.8 2.2 532.5 283.4
2019         Jan. 41.8 224.2 67.1 74.8 30.0 48.7 3.0 0.6 1.7 1.7 2.2 546.6 294.1
         Feb. 38.8 234.3 71.8 80.3 29.3 49.1 3.1 0.6 2.0 2.0 2.2 560.4 302.9
         Mar. 56.4 239.2 75.9 80.0 30.3 49.4 3.1 0.6 11.4 11.4 2.0 557.3 298.2
         Apr. 41.2 234.7 73.6 78.4 29.4 49.6 3.1 0.6 12.5 12.5 1.9 552.8 293.5
         May 60.3 240.7 77.4 81.7 28.3 49.6 3.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 2.0 560.1 300.1
         June 64.0 245.1 80.4 81.5 29.0 50.6 3.1 0.5 12.9 12.9 2.0 558.0 301.8
         July 36.9 242.9 79.6 80.7 28.2 50.8 3.1 0.5 13.9 13.9 2.0 559.4 296.9
         Aug. 47.6 251.2 84.7 83.8 28.1 50.9 3.2 0.5 16.9 16.7 2.0 557.3 295.0
         Sep. 57.3 250.3 84.6 85.0 25.8 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.5 1.3 2.2 563.5 297.7
         Oct. 37.4 239.6 76.3 82.4 26.1 51.3 3.1 0.5 1.2 1.0 2.1 555.2 299.2
         Nov. 45.4 249.3 83.4 83.9 27.4 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.7 1.5 1.9 560.4 302.2
         Dec. 43.4 246.2 89.5 75.4 27.0 51.0 2.9 0.4 3.5 3.4 1.8 551.3 301.4
*Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan paper. 5Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued. 6After deduction of
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national inter-MFI participations. 7The German contributions to the Eurosystem’s monetary
central banks (the Eurosystem). 1Source: ECB. 2In Germany, only savings aggregates should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates
deposits. 3Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding and are therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2
German MFIs’ portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area. 4In Germany, or M3. 8Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on
bank debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market p. 10    ).9For the German contribution, the difference between the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
13  Monthly Report
February 2020
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
    
 
 Memo item:
 Other liability items Monetary aggregates  7 
 (from 2002 German contribution
issued (net)  3 excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
of which: MonetaryIntra- liabilitiesEurosystem- of centralliability/ govern-
over Liabilities Excess claim Monetary ments1 year and to non- Capital of related to capital (Post
up to up to over euro area and inter-MFI banknote forma- Office, End of1 year  
4 2 years 2 years residents  5 reserves  6 liabilities Total  8 issue 9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12 tion 13 year/month Treasury)  14 
Euro area ( € billion) 1
 
39.2 36.9 2,020.3 4,288.9 2,657.3 45.9 3,574.3 − 7,724.0 11,175.5 11,854.9 6,699.4 151.3 2017          Nov.
33.5 34.8 2,008.9 4,098.4 2,730.9 26.5 3,266.5 − 7,786.3 11,233.9 11,870.9 6,771.4 146.0          Dec.
26.6 28.8 2,017.1 4,415.1 2,714.8 0.3 3,034.4 − 7,767.2 11,220.5 11,867.6 6,755.3 148.1 2018          Jan.
34.8 27.3 2,013.6 4,505.1 2,708.1 13.5 2,899.8 − 7,777.1 11,217.7 11,863.9 6,745.3 147.5          Feb.40.8 27.1 2,010.8 4,349.0 2,720.9 50.4 2,923.2 − 7,840.1 11,282.8 11,929.7 6,748.9 147.5          Mar.
43.0 26.9 2,017.4 4,494.1 2,722.0 10.0 2,932.1 − 7,892.1 11,316.8 11,986.8 6,755.4 148.4          Apr.
38.2 26.8 2,035.4 4,707.9 2,701.2 13.9 3,004.2 − 7,994.8 11,419.6 12,067.5 6,747.1 147.0          May42.1 26.0 2,027.8 4,563.5 2,672.3 31.8 2,911.9 − 8,086.7 11,529.2 12,168.6 6,705.5 150.2          June
34.6 27.1 2,015.6 4,612.8 2,667.6 18.5 2,891.9 − 8,080.7 11,518.8 12,158.7 6,693.5 152.4          July
36.7 27.2 2,020.2 4,649.4 2,663.2 25.8 2,884.9 − 8,082.1 11,519.5 12,166.6 6,685.6 155.5          Aug.37.6 25.1 2,046.9 4,573.4 2,663.0 27.3 2,849.1 − 8,152.5 11,566.6 12,186.7 6,699.4 157.9          Sep.
35.9 26.5 2,102.1 4,705.7 2,708.7 − 2.6 2,972.2 − 8,164.0 11,585.4 12,229.4 6,795.1 153.6          Oct.
39.6 21.9 2,102.6 4,658.8 2,711.1 15.7 3,019.0 − 8,260.7 11,672.4 12,318.3 6,792.4 157.4          Nov.47.5 20.7 2,090.0 4,504.5 2,727.7 14.8 2,933.7 − 8,307.1 11,719.2 12,367.3 6,818.8 154.1          Dec.
36.3 23.9 2,116.1 4,707.8 2,752.7 24.0 3,032.0 − 8,264.1 11,693.4 12,338.0 6,865.5 151.7 2019          Jan.
32.8 26.1 2,146.2 4,672.4 2,740.5 22.8 3,029.9 − 8,305.1 11,741.3 12,377.6 6,884.0 150.4          Feb.15.2 22.5 2,146.7 4,662.3 2,766.3 29.3 3,199.3 − 8,442.9 11,887.1 12,505.1 6,911.3 151.9          Mar.
17.0 21.4 2,135.8 4,780.6 2,760.7 27.7 3,203.3 − 8,488.9 11,942.5 12,580.9 6,889.4 151.5          Apr.
23.4 22.2 2,144.4 4,786.9 2,774.4 37.6 3,365.1 − 8,576.2 12,032.4 12,664.6 6,908.5 149.7          May18.7 20.5 2,140.0 4,653.1 2,830.3 47.8 3,469.6 − 8,670.2 12,114.6 12,728.7 6,979.9 155.2          June
16.7 21.3 2,151.6 4,806.9 2,878.8 36.7 3,685.3 − 8,698.9 12,150.2 12,788.1 7,019.5 151.7          July
3.4 20.8 2,150.1 4,865.1 2,940.4 − 2.9 4,082.9 − 8,787.8 12,264.3 12,904.5 7,066.3 152.7          Aug.3.6 19.1 2,158.9 4,814.2 2,942.8 25.6 3,943.9 − 8,789.3 12,250.7 12,872.0 7,103.9 153.4          Sep.
8.0 19.9 2,143.9 4,780.3 2,935.2 34.9 3,715.9 − 8,847.1 12,291.3 12,924.7 7,075.4 152.9          Oct.
5.7 19.5 2,161.5 4,768.6 2,923.0 32.3 3,675.2 − 8,973.1 12,401.5 13,042.3 7,080.1 157.9          Nov.
− 9.3 19.5 2,145.3 4,447.0 2,915.0 26.8 3,479.0 − 8,974.8 12,398.4 13,002.7 7,057.3 151.1          Dec.
 German contribution ( € billion) 
18.5 15.8 484.0 883.4 593.7 − 940.3 1,382.0 355.5 2,056.1 2,890.9 2,929.9 1,781.9 − 2017          Nov.
17.7 14.8 480.2 921.3 668.6 − 999.6 1,295.2 359.3 2,045.5 2,882.9 2,920.4 1,852.1 −          Dec.
16.0 14.2 488.5 931.6 656.8 − 974.7 1,303.7 359.3 2,056.2 2,894.2 2,930.5 1,846.2 − 2018          Jan.
16.7 14.3 491.6 968.4 653.3 − 1,003.8 1,263.2 361.3 2,062.1 2,896.6 2,933.5 1,844.1 −          Feb.16.0 13.9 493.6 953.5 657.7 − 1,016.5 1,278.1 368.2 2,061.3 2,901.1 2,936.2 1,847.4 −          Mar.
17.5 12.3 494.3 949.7 658.7 − 1,002.9 1,270.5 369.5 2,076.6 2,907.0 2,941.3 1,848.1 −          Apr.
19.0 13.1 504.7 997.9 662.3 − 1,044.2 1,297.9 374.9 2,116.6 2,946.8 2,982.4 1,862.6 −          May17.0 12.5 501.8 996.0 666.2 − 1,070.1 1,277.7 378.5 2,110.1 2,954.5 2,987.3 1,860.9 −          June
16.7 11.9 498.0 967.9 665.4 − 1,019.3 1,250.8 381.6 2,116.5 2,954.1 2,986.4 1,855.4 −          July
18.3 12.0 497.4 966.5 672.6 − 1,024.8 1,273.6 386.9 2,119.1 2,953.0 2,986.4 1,858.4 −          Aug.17.8 11.0 507.4 979.8 670.9 − 1,059.4 1,251.7 390.8 2,146.5 2,978.4 3,010.4 1,863.3 −          Sep.
20.2 11.0 513.2 952.8 676.1 − 1,031.2 1,277.1 394.6 2,158.3 2,990.0 3,025.5 1,873.8 −          Oct.
19.4 10.3 515.2 932.7 675.8 − 1,041.8 1,288.0 397.1 2,196.8 3,024.9 3,058.2 1,874.7 −          Nov.17.7 10.1 504.6 967.9 689.9 − 1,063.4 1,297.9 401.1 2,195.0 3,021.7 3,052.5 1,879.0 −          Dec.
18.2 9.6 518.7 920.7 690.0 − 971.6 1,326.1 391.5 2,180.7 3,017.3 3,049.1 1,886.9 − 2019          Jan.
19.1 8.2 533.2 882.8 684.4 − 966.0 1,330.9 394.4 2,189.4 3,030.9 3,062.3 1,895.1 −          Feb.19.2 8.3 529.8 958.7 695.9 − 1,031.3 1,412.2 396.9 2,212.1 3,054.7 3,095.5 1,900.4 −          Mar.
18.6 8.2 525.9 953.9 692.7 − 985.8 1,398.5 400.8 2,230.0 3,069.0 3,110.2 1,890.7 −          Apr.
18.9 8.4 532.9 944.9 702.5 − 1,016.3 1,496.1 404.8 2,254.0 3,093.0 3,133.5 1,906.3 −          May19.7 7.6 530.7 957.2 722.3 − 1,013.1 1,542.9 407.8 2,263.6 3,100.7 3,142.8 1,926.0 −          June
19.7 7.9 531.9 925.0 735.6 − 950.3 1,600.3 411.4 2,271.3 3,104.7 3,148.2 1,938.3 −          July
20.3 7.6 529.4 944.3 757.0 − 980.7 1,826.9 417.2 2,297.9 3,135.9 3,182.8 1,952.6 −          Aug.22.3 7.4 533.8 927.2 755.6 − 992.1 1,761.2 422.1 2,298.5 3,131.2 3,164.7 1,954.3 −          Sep.
20.7 6.7 527.8 867.4 750.0 − 918.5 1,664.0 426.3 2,316.5 3,147.7 3,178.4 1,941.3 −          Oct.
21.4 5.8 533.1 877.7 749.1 − 951.9 1,671.9 430.8 2,341.2 3,168.5 3,199.3 1,943.1 −          Nov.21.0 6.1 524.2 863.7 750.0 − 999.7 1,681.6 435.8 2,340.1 3,161.1 3,193.6 1,933.6 −          Dec.
euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in years and at agreed notice of up to three months (excluding central govern ments’
accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote deposits) and (for the euro area) central governments’ monetary li abilities with such
2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2). 10Overnight deposits (excluding central maturities. 12M2 plus repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market
governments’ deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central paper and debt securities up to two years. 13Deposits with agreed maturities of
governments’ overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the over two years and at agreed notice of over three months, debt securities w ith
consolidated balance sheet. 11M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two maturities of over two years, capital and reserves. 14 Non-existent in Germany. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
February 2020
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2017         Oct. 635.0 6.7 765.3 0.2 2,239.2 648.1 0.0 1,142.8 218.3 383.9 1,253.3 3,044.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 634.5 3.0 763.7 0.2 2,333.5 682.5 0.0 1,146.6 188.5 407.6 1,309.7 3,138.8
2018         Jan. 635.7 2.9 760.6 0.2 2,398.2 689.2 0.0 1,158.2 188.1 487.0 1,275.2 3,122.5
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 630.9 1.5 760.5 0.0 2,435.5 686.3 0.0 1,148.2 203.6 474.9 1,315.6 3,150.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 627.1 1.9 759.5 0.1 2,476.8 668.0 0.0 1,159.0 247.5 495.6 1,295.3 3,122.3
         June 625.2 1.8 757.3 0.1 2,519.9 659.5 0.0 1,170.4 218.0 502.5 1,353.9 3,183.8
         July 635.1 2.1 744.2 0.1 2,558.4 652.2 0.0 1,183.6 263.4 533.8 1,306.9 3,142.6
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 637.5 3.0 739.9 0.1 2,589.7 671.2 0.0 1,192.2 239.1 519.1 1,348.7 3,212.0
         Oct. 625.2 6.9 727.8 0.1 2,622.8 631.8 0.0 1,194.3 283.1 504.4 1,369.0 3,195.1
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 625.1 6.8 726.4 0.1 2,642.3 635.9 0.0 1,202.4 240.2 542.9 1,379.4 3,217.7
2019         Jan. 655.8 7.9 723.8 0.1 2,652.8 640.0 0.0 1,218.8 231.3 618.2 1,332.1 3,190.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 665.5 6.0 723.1 0.1 2,645.8 637.6 0.0 1,209.2 257.3 571.4 1,364.8 3,211.7
         Apr. 678.6 5.7 720.3 0.1 2,635.9 619.6 0.0 1,215.8 270.5 555.6 1,379.0 3,214.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 689.7 5.5 718.6 0.4 2,630.6 601.9 0.0 1,228.2 248.2 561.9 1,404.6 3,234.7
         July 710.3 4.6 700.1 0.0 2,620.4 570.8 0.0 1,240.8 295.9 592.2 1,335.7 3,147.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 720.2 3.0 692.5 0.0 2,612.4 555.7 0.0 1,251.1 268.5 621.2 1,331.5 3,138.3
         Oct. 758.5 2.0 668.5 0.0 2,608.7 456.6 0.0 1,252.7 298.6 641.3 1,388.5 3,097.8
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 773.3 1.8 663.7 0.0 2,618.8 257.9 0.0 1,262.9 226.6 648.1 1,662.1 3,182.9
2020         Jan. 768.6 2.9 616.1 0.0 2,639.1 254.6 0.0 1,282.2 211.8 654.3 1,623.7 3,160.6
Deutsche Bundesbank
2017         Oct. 154.8 0.3 94.9 0.0 481.5 171.0 0.0 269.4 65.9 − 197.6 422.7 863.2
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 154.2 0.5 94.8 0.0 501.4 187.5 0.0 270.3 56.0 − 218.6 455.8 913.6
2018         Jan. 155.5 0.9 93.3 0.0 514.7 204.4 0.0 272.8 54.9 − 192.2 424.5 901.7
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 151.5 0.6 93.4 0.0 522.9 207.9 0.0 271.0 56.8 − 221.3 453.9 932.8
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 150.7 1.1 93.3 0.0 530.6 190.8 0.0 273.8 61.1 − 191.3 440.9 905.5
         June 150.1 1.1 93.1 0.0 540.6 200.3 0.0 277.4 59.2 − 217.9 466.0 943.6
         July 151.9 0.4 91.8 0.0 547.6 196.8 0.0 280.0 69.4 − 194.1 439.6 916.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 152.1 0.4 91.5 0.0 556.2 192.9 0.0 282.0 65.2 − 178.9 439.0 913.9
         Oct. 148.1 0.5 88.5 0.0 563.5 160.0 0.0 282.6 81.3 − 183.4 460.0 902.6
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 146.9 0.6 88.1 0.0 570.0 148.0 0.0 283.6 69.6 − 185.2 489.5 921.2
2019         Jan. 155.8 1.7 87.6 0.1 570.4 153.1 0.0 293.4 60.5 − 144.9 453.7 900.1
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 158.3 0.6 87.6 0.0 569.5 163.3 0.0 294.3 49.3 − 157.0 466.0 923.7
         Apr. 160.8 0.6 86.7 0.0 563.7 172.5 0.0 296.1 61.2 − 199.4 481.6 950.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 163.6 0.6 86.1 0.0 565.2 166.3 0.0 299.6 58.0 − 213.6 505.3 971.1
         July 169.4 0.7 85.3 0.0 563.1 150.1 0.0 303.0 65.7 − 175.0 474.5 927.7
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 172.5 0.5 84.9 0.0 562.7 150.1 0.0 305.6 57.6 − 157.6 464.9 920.6
         Oct. 182.8 0.4 82.8 0.0 560.0 151.5 0.0 306.5 70.8 − 159.4 456.6 914.7
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 186.9 0.4 82.4 0.0 566.1 82.2 0.0 307.6 55.9 − 135.3 525.4 915.3
2020         Jan. 186.0 0.9 74.0 0.0 567.9 73.6 0.0 311.7 52.7 − 95.7 486.5 871.8
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
February 2020
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
− 4.0 + 1.2 − 3.3 − 0.1 + 89.0 + 36.7 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 36.5 − 1.2 + 10.6 + 47.5 2017          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.5 − 3.7 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 94.3 + 34.4 + 0.0 + 3.8 − 29.8 + 23.7 + 56.4 + 94.6          Dec.
+ 1.2 − 0.1 − 3.1 + 0.0 + 64.7 + 6.7 + 0.0 + 11.6 − 0.4 + 79.4 − 34.5 − 16.3 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.8 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 37.3 − 2.9 + 0.0 − 10.0 + 15.5 − 12.1 + 40.4 + 27.6          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 3.8 + 0.4 − 1.0 + 0.1 + 41.3 − 18.3 + 0.0 + 10.8 + 43.9 + 20.7 − 20.3 − 27.8          May
− 1.9 − 0.1 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 43.1 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 11.4 − 29.5 + 6.9 + 58.6 + 61.5          June
+ 9.9 + 0.3 − 13.1 + 0.0 + 38.5 − 7.3 + 0.0 + 13.2 + 45.4 + 31.3 − 47.0 − 41.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 2.4 + 0.9 − 4.3 + 0.0 + 31.3 + 19.0 + 0.0 + 8.6 − 24.3 − 14.7 + 41.8 + 69.4          Sep.
− 12.3 + 3.9 − 12.1 + 0.0 + 33.1 − 39.4 + 0.0 + 2.1 + 44.0 − 14.7 + 20.3 − 16.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.1 − 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 + 19.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 8.1 − 42.9 + 38.5 + 10.4 + 22.6          Dec.
+ 30.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 16.4 − 8.9 + 75.3 − 47.3 − 26.8 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 9.7 − 1.9 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 9.6 + 26.0 − 46.8 + 32.7 + 20.8          Mar.
+ 13.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 18.0 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 13.2 − 15.8 + 14.2 + 2.7          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 11.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 17.7 + 0.0 + 12.4 − 22.3 + 6.3 + 25.6 + 20.3          June
+ 20.6 − 0.9 − 18.5 − 0.4 − 10.2 − 31.1 + 0.0 + 12.6 + 47.7 + 30.3 − 68.9 − 87.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 9.9 − 1.6 − 7.6 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 15.1 + 0.0 + 10.3 − 27.4 + 29.0 − 4.2 − 9.1          Sep.
+ 38.3 − 1.0 − 24.0 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 99.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 30.1 + 20.1 + 57.0 − 40.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 14.8 − 0.2 − 4.8 + 0.0 + 10.1 −198.7 + 0.0 + 10.2 − 72.0 + 6.8 + 273.6 + 85.1          Dec.
− 4.7 + 1.1 − 47.6 + 0.0 + 20.3 − 3.3 + 0.0 + 19.3 − 14.8 + 6.2 − 38.4 − 22.3 2020          Jan.
Deutsche Bundesbank
− 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 18.3 + 5.5 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 13.5 − 5.0 + 4.2 + 9.2 2017          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 19.9 + 16.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 − 9.9 − 21.0 + 33.1 + 50.4          Dec.
+ 1.3 + 0.4 − 1.6 − 0.0 + 13.3 + 16.9 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 1.1 + 26.4 − 31.3 − 11.9 2018          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 4.0 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 8.2 + 3.5 + 0.0 − 1.7 + 1.9 − 29.1 + 29.4 + 31.1          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
− 0.8 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.7 − 17.0 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 4.2 + 30.0 − 13.0 − 27.3          May
− 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 10.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 3.6 − 1.8 − 26.6 + 25.1 + 38.1          June
+ 1.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 7.0 − 3.5 + 0.0 + 2.6 + 10.2 + 23.9 − 26.4 − 27.2          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 8.6 − 3.9 + 0.0 + 2.0 − 4.2 + 15.2 − 0.6 − 2.5          Sep.
− 4.0 + 0.0 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 7.3 − 32.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 16.1 − 4.5 + 21.1 − 11.2          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
− 1.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 6.6 − 12.0 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 11.7 − 1.8 + 29.5 + 18.5          Dec.
+ 8.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 + 9.7 − 9.2 + 40.2 − 35.9 − 21.1 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 11.2 − 12.0 + 12.3 + 23.6          Mar.
+ 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 12.0 − 42.5 + 15.6 + 26.5          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 6.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.2 − 14.2 + 23.7 + 21.0          June
+ 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 7.6 + 38.6 − 30.7 − 43.5          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 8.1 + 17.4 − 9.6 − 7.1          Sep.
+ 10.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 13.2 − 1.8 − 8.3 − 5.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 − 69.3 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 14.9 + 24.1 + 68.8 + 0.6          Dec.
− 0.9 + 0.4 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 1.8 − 8.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 3.2 + 39.6 − 38.9 − 43.5 2020          Jan.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
16  Monthly Report
February 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
1. Assets *
 
 
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currency residents denominated in euro
Balances with
Claims on banks, security
investments, euro area Balances Claims
external loans residents with banks, arising from
As at Gold and other denominated security the credit
reporting Total and gold Receivables external in foreign investments facility under
date assets receivables Total from the IMF assets currency Total and loans ERM II
 Eurosystem 1
 
2019 July                 5 4,677.5 431.8 339.0 79.6 259.5 21.0 20.6 20.6 −
                              12 4,684.4 431.9 341.1 79.6 261.6 20.3 20.9 20.9 −
                              19 4,688.2 431.9 345.2 80.5 264.7 20.2 21.6 21.6 −
                              26 4,685.7 431.9 347.0 80.6 266.4 20.5 19.7 19.7 −
         Aug.                 2 4,679.2 431.9 347.7 80.6 267.1 18.8 20.0 20.0 −
                                9 4,677.8 431.9 347.3 80.6 266.8 19.3 19.0 19.0 −
                              16 4,676.1 431.9 347.1 80.6 266.5 18.5 21.6 21.6 −
                              23 4,681.0 431.9 347.6 80.6 267.0 18.6 21.7 21.7 −
                              30 4,683.7 431.9 347.9 80.6 267.3 19.5 22.5 22.5 −
         Sep.                 6 4,681.6 431.9 346.5 80.6 265.9 19.0 25.3 25.3 −
                              13 4,674.6 431.9 345.9 80.6 265.4 20.3 21.8 21.8 −
                              20 4,663.0 431.9 342.2 80.5 261.7 20.5 20.2 20.2 −
                              27 4,638.1 431.9 341.9 80.5 261.4 21.5 18.6 18.6 −
         Oct.                 4 4,695.1 474.1 357.5 82.4 275.1 19.0 18.9 18.9 −
                              11 4,692.3 474.1 358.9 82.4 276.6 18.4 17.2 17.2 −
                              18 4,687.1 474.1 357.2 82.4 274.9 18.5 17.5 17.5 −
                              25 4,680.9 474.1 355.7 82.4 273.4 20.2 17.0 17.0 −
2019 Nov.                 1 4,676.3 474.1 356.3 82.4 273.9 19.3 16.4 16.4 −
                                8 4,684.1 474.1 355.6 82.3 273.3 19.5 17.0 17.0 −
                              15 4,691.9 474.1 354.3 82.3 272.0 20.0 17.0 17.0 −
                              22 4,696.5 474.1 355.5 82.3 273.1 19.5 18.0 18.0 −
                              29 4,698.3 474.1 353.4 81.6 271.8 20.3 18.5 18.5 −
         Dec.                 6 4,709.3 474.1 352.8 81.6 271.2 21.1 20.7 20.7 −
                              13 4,713.6 474.1 355.5 81.6 273.9 19.5 18.8 18.8 −
                              20 4,682.6 474.1 357.4 81.6 275.7 22.9 19.1 19.1 −
                              27 4,692.0 474.1 358.6 81.6 277.0 22.0 17.0 17.0 −
2020 Jan.                 3 4,664.0 470.7 347.3 80.5 266.8 21.5 17.1 17.1 −
                              10 4,655.8 470.7 344.2 80.5 263.7 19.5 16.7 16.7 −
                              17 4,660.3 470.7 345.3 80.5 264.8 19.9 15.5 15.5 −
                              24 4,674.4 470.7 345.5 80.5 265.0 20.3 15.3 15.3 −
                              31 4,671.4 470.7 346.0 80.5 265.5 19.9 15.3 15.3 −
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 July                 5 1,751.7 134.5 52.9 20.6 32.3 0.0 2.3 2.3 −
                              12 1,754.5 134.5 53.1 20.6 32.5 0.0 2.5 2.5 −
                              19 1,765.7 134.5 54.1 20.8 33.3 0.0 3.8 3.8 −
                              26 1,736.3 134.5 54.4 20.8 33.6 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
         Aug.                 2 1,756.5 134.5 53.6 20.8 32.8 0.0 2.9 2.9 −
                                9 1,756.1 134.5 53.3 20.7 32.5 0.0 1.2 1.2 −
                              16 1,768.1 134.5 53.3 20.7 32.6 0.0 3.4 3.4 −
                              23 1,764.5 134.5 53.6 20.8 32.8 0.0 2.8 2.8 −
                              30 1,779.5 134.5 54.0 20.8 33.3 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
         Sep.                 6 1,761.8 134.5 53.4 20.7 32.7 0.0 6.1 6.1 −
                              13 1,754.7 134.5 53.2 20.7 32.5 0.0 3.2 3.2 −
                              20 1,767.6 134.5 52.7 20.7 31.9 0.0 3.1 3.1 −
                              27 1,768.2 134.5 52.6 20.7 31.8 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
         Oct.                 4 1,768.6 147.6 55.3 21.2 34.1 0.0 1.9 1.9 −
                              11 1,758.7 147.6 55.0 21.2 33.8 0.0 0.3 0.3 −
                              18 1,763.7 147.6 54.6 21.2 33.4 0.0 0.8 0.8 −
                              25 1,737.7 147.6 54.5 21.2 33.3 0.0 1.1 1.1 −
2019 Nov.                 1 1,710.2 147.6 54.6 21.2 33.4 0.0 0.5 0.5 −
                                8 1,730.6 147.6 54.6 21.2 33.4 0.0 1.3 1.3 −
                              15 1,724.7 147.6 54.7 21.2 33.5 0.0 0.7 0.7 −
                              22 1,724.6 147.6 54.7 21.2 33.5 0.0 0.9 0.9 −
                              29 1,765.3 147.6 54.2 21.0 33.2 0.0 1.0 1.0 −
         Dec.                 6 1,757.4 147.6 54.4 21.0 33.4 0.0 3.8 3.8 −
                              13 1,770.7 147.6 54.2 21.0 33.3 0.0 2.0 2.0 −
                              20 1,736.8 147.6 54.4 21.0 33.5 1.4 2.6 2.6 −
                              27 1,743.1 147.6 54.4 21.0 33.5 1.4 0.6 0.6 −
2020 Jan.                 3 1,737.3 146.6 52.8 20.7 32.1 1.4 0.6 0.6 −
                              10 1,701.8 146.6 53.2 20.7 32.5 0.0 1.8 1.8 −
                              17 1,688.3 146.6 53.2 20.7 32.5 0.0 1.4 1.4 −
                              24 1,660.0 146.6 53.3 20.7 32.6 0.0 1.2 1.2 −
                              31 1,700.8 146.6 53.6 20.7 32.9 0.0 1.7 1.7 −
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instrum ents are valued at the
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the end of the quarter. 1 Source: ECB. 
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet

Deutsche Bundesbank
17  Monthly Report
February 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations Securities of euro area residents
denominated in euro in euro
 Other
 claims on euro area
Longer- Fine-  credit Securities General
Main re- term re- tuning Structural Credits institutions held for governmentfinancing financing reverse reverse Marginal related denomi- monetary debt deno-    As atopera- opera- opera- opera- lending to margin nated in policy Other minated in Other    reporting
Total tions tions tions tions facility calls euro Total purposes securities euro assets    date
Eurosystem 1
 
697.7 5.1 692.6 − − − − 42.0 2,843.6 2,615.6 228.0 23.4 258.3 2019 July                  5
695.6 2.9 692.6 − − − − 40.4 2,846.8 2,619.9 226.9 23.4 264.1                               12
695.5 2.9 692.6 − − − − 39.7 2,841.9 2,616.1 225.8 23.4 268.9                               19
695.6 2.9 692.6 − − 0.0 − 38.7 2,843.4 2,617.9 225.5 23.4 265.6                               26
696.2 3.6 692.6 − − 0.0 − 42.3 2,832.5 2,610.5 221.9 23.4 266.5          Aug.                  2
696.0 3.4 692.6 − − − − 41.5 2,833.2 2,612.2 221.0 23.4 266.2                                 9
695.6 3.0 692.6 − − 0.0 − 39.6 2,834.1 2,613.0 221.2 23.4 264.3                               16
695.6 3.0 692.6 − − 0.0 − 36.0 2,835.5 2,613.7 221.7 23.4 270.8                               23
695.7 3.3 692.3 − − − − 35.1 2,835.5 2,614.2 221.3 23.4 272.3                               30
694.7 2.3 692.3 − − 0.0 − 35.7 2,833.0 2,612.6 220.3 23.4 272.2          Sep.                  6
694.7 2.3 692.3 − − 0.1 − 36.4 2,831.9 2,611.1 220.9 23.4 268.3                               13
694.3 2.0 692.3 − − − − 35.5 2,831.2 2,609.9 221.3 23.4 263.9                               20
666.6 2.8 663.8 − − 0.0 − 34.1 2,833.3 2,612.4 220.9 23.4 266.7                               27
665.6 1.8 663.8 − − − − 31.0 2,829.8 2,609.1 220.7 23.4 275.7          Oct.                  4
666.1 2.3 663.8 − − 0.0 − 30.0 2,830.7 2,609.9 220.7 23.4 273.6                               11
665.7 1.9 663.8 − − 0.1 − 30.8 2,827.3 2,606.5 220.8 23.4 272.6                               18
664.9 1.1 663.8 − − 0.0 − 31.9 2,820.4 2,604.7 215.7 23.4 273.3                               25
665.8 2.2 663.6 − − 0.0 − 33.9 2,817.1 2,602.0 215.1 23.4 270.0 2019 Nov.                  1
665.2 1.6 663.6 − − 0.0 − 31.1 2,826.4 2,610.9 215.4 23.4 271.9                                 8
665.1 1.5 663.6 − − 0.0 − 33.4 2,831.3 2,615.3 215.9 23.4 273.4                               15
665.5 1.9 663.6 − − 0.0 − 29.4 2,837.6 2,621.9 215.6 23.4 273.7                               22
666.4 2.5 663.8 − − 0.0 − 28.1 2,839.3 2,624.0 215.3 23.4 274.9                               29
665.3 1.4 663.8 − − 0.0 − 26.9 2,841.7 2,627.0 214.7 23.4 283.4          Dec.                  6
665.3 1.4 663.8 − − 0.0 − 34.1 2,846.7 2,632.0 214.7 23.4 276.4                               13
619.0 2.5 616.2 − − 0.3 − 28.4 2,854.2 2,639.4 214.8 23.4 284.1                               20
624.1 7.9 616.2 − − 0.1 − 26.3 2,854.3 2,639.2 215.1 23.4 292.1                               27
617.7 1.5 616.2 − − 0.0 − 22.5 2,846.7 2,631.9 214.8 23.4 297.2 2020 Jan.                  3
617.3 1.1 616.2 − − 0.0 − 25.1 2,850.7 2,637.0 213.7 23.4 288.2                               10
617.0 0.8 616.2 − − 0.0 − 34.4 2,853.5 2,641.4 212.1 23.4 280.7                               17
617.1 1.0 616.2 − − 0.0 − 33.7 2,860.2 2,649.3 210.9 23.4 288.1                               24
617.7 1.6 616.1 − − 0.0 − 40.1 2,860.6 2,652.2 208.4 23.4 277.6                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
85.5 0.6 84.9 − − − − 6.8 559.5 559.5 − 4.4 905.7 2019 July                  5
85.6 0.7 84.9 − − − − 8.4 561.1 561.1 − 4.4 904.9                               12
85.6 0.6 84.9 − − 0.0 − 9.4 561.7 561.7 − 4.4 912.3                               19
85.8 0.8 84.9 − − 0.0 − 4.9 562.4 562.4 − 4.4 888.3                               26
85.5 0.6 84.9 − − 0.0 − 6.7 562.2 562.2 − 4.4 906.7          Aug.                  2
85.6 0.7 84.9 − − − − 5.3 562.8 562.8 − 4.4 909.2                                 9
85.4 0.5 84.9 − − 0.0 − 7.4 562.6 562.6 − 4.4 917.1                               16
85.4 0.5 84.9 − − 0.0 − 7.5 563.1 563.1 − 4.4 913.2                               23
85.2 0.4 84.8 − − − − 6.7 563.4 563.4 − 4.4 928.2                               30
85.1 0.2 84.8 − − 0.0 − 7.2 563.7 563.7 − 4.4 907.2          Sep.                  6
85.3 0.5 84.8 − − − − 8.2 560.6 560.6 − 4.4 905.3                               13
85.2 0.4 84.8 − − − − 7.0 561.0 561.0 − 4.4 919.7                               20
82.9 0.5 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.2 561.6 561.6 − 4.4 925.3                               27
82.9 0.5 82.4 − − − − 4.6 561.5 561.5 − 4.4 910.4          Oct.                  4
83.1 0.7 82.4 − − 0.0 − 4.5 557.7 557.7 − 4.4 906.0                               11
82.8 0.4 82.4 − − 0.1 − 5.5 558.0 558.0 − 4.4 910.0                               18
82.5 0.1 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.5 559.1 559.1 − 4.4 882.9                               25
82.8 0.3 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.4 560.9 560.9 − 4.4 854.0 2019 Nov.                  1
82.8 0.3 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.8 563.4 563.4 − 4.4 870.7                                 8
82.7 0.3 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.8 565.1 565.1 − 4.4 863.7                               15
83.0 0.6 82.4 − − 0.0 − 4.6 566.5 566.5 − 4.4 862.8                               22
83.1 0.6 82.4 − − 0.0 − 6.0 567.7 567.7 − 4.4 901.3                               29
82.9 0.5 82.4 − − 0.0 − 6.7 569.9 569.9 − 4.4 887.6          Dec.                  6
82.8 0.4 82.4 − − 0.0 − 5.5 568.3 568.3 − 4.4 905.8                               13
74.6 0.4 74.0 − − 0.3 − 4.7 569.6 569.6 − 4.4 877.4                               20
75.9 1.9 74.0 − − 0.0 − 4.1 569.6 569.6 − 4.4 885.0                               27
74.7 0.7 74.0 − − 0.0 − 2.1 568.3 568.3 − 4.4 886.5 2020 Jan.                  3
74.6 0.6 74.0 − − 0.0 − 4.4 565.7 565.7 − 4.4 851.2                               10
74.5 0.5 74.0 − − 0.0 − 6.5 567.3 567.3 − 4.4 834.4                               17
74.6 0.6 74.0 − − 0.0 − 7.1 568.7 568.7 − 4.4 804.0                               24
74.4 0.4 74.0 − − 0.0 − 6.3 571.1 571.1 − 4.4 842.7                               31

Deutsche Bundesbank
18  Monthly Report
February 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
 
2. Liabilities *
 
 
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to Liabilities to
monetary policy operations denominated in euro other euro area residents
denominated in euro
 
Other
Current liabilities
accounts to euro
(covering Fine- area credit
the tuning Deposits institutions Debt
As at Banknotes minimum Fixed- reverse deno- certifi- General related to
reporting Total in circu- reserve Deposit term opera- margin minated cates govern- Other
date liabilities lation  1 Total system) facility deposits tions calls in euro issued Total ment liabilities
 Eurosystem 3
 
2019 July                 5 4,677.5 1,243.1 1,935.4 1,350.4 585.0 − − 0.0 4.5 − 388.1 257.3 130.8
                              12 4,684.4 1,245.1 1,909.2 1,327.2 582.0 − − 0.0 5.9 − 413.6 283.7 129.9
                              19 4,688.2 1,245.2 1,845.2 1,293.5 551.7 − − 0.0 6.9 − 469.1 333.4 135.7
                              26 4,685.7 1,247.1 1,848.7 1,307.3 541.3 − − 0.0 3.8 − 463.7 329.6 134.0
         Aug.                 2 4,679.2 1,252.4 1,916.3 1,349.5 566.8 − − 0.0 4.5 − 380.2 245.4 134.8
                                9 4,677.8 1,252.6 1,907.1 1,350.0 557.1 − − 0.0 4.0 − 382.2 251.6 130.6
                              16 4,676.1 1,253.9 1,865.8 1,323.6 542.2 − − 0.0 5.6 − 413.1 279.6 133.5
                              23 4,681.0 1,249.2 1,836.9 1,299.2 537.7 − − 0.0 5.6 − 450.9 316.0 134.9
                              30 4,683.7 1,250.8 1,873.2 1,318.4 554.7 − − 0.0 5.9 − 415.3 278.1 137.2
         Sep.                 6 4,681.6 1,251.6 1,916.9 1,335.6 581.2 − − 0.0 6.0 − 376.1 238.3 137.8
                              13 4,674.6 1,250.7 1,894.7 1,337.7 557.0 − − 0.0 5.2 − 406.2 264.4 141.8
                              20 4,663.0 1,249.4 1,859.4 1,394.9 464.4 − − 0.0 6.5 − 446.4 308.8 137.7
                              27 4,638.1 1,252.2 1,828.5 1,369.1 459.5 − − − 3.8 − 447.2 312.0 135.2
         Oct.                 4 4,695.1 1,254.9 1,863.6 1,407.1 456.5 − − − 5.4 − 406.3 268.6 137.7
                              11 4,692.3 1,254.7 1,851.9 1,393.1 458.8 − − − 4.2 − 420.4 280.6 139.8
                              18 4,687.1 1,254.2 1,832.5 1,393.8 438.7 − − − 4.5 − 447.5 308.0 139.5
                              25 4,680.9 1,253.3 1,846.2 1,393.6 452.5 − − − 5.1 − 433.0 294.8 138.2
2019 Nov.                 1 4,676.3 1,258.6 1,900.4 1,662.5 237.9 − − − 5.4 − 372.2 224.4 147.8
                                8 4,684.1 1,257.3 1,949.2 1,693.5 255.8 − − − 6.1 − 342.9 203.7 139.2
                              15 4,691.9 1,256.7 1,915.5 1,684.1 231.4 − − − 5.4 − 386.3 247.7 138.6
                              22 4,696.5 1,256.3 1,888.3 1,657.8 230.5 − − − 4.7 − 415.5 275.4 140.1
                              29 4,698.3 1,265.1 1,925.9 1,649.8 276.1 − − − 5.6 − 361.5 221.6 139.9
         Dec.                 6 4,709.3 1,272.6 1,941.6 1,662.0 279.6 − − − 8.1 − 336.9 200.5 136.5
                              13 4,713.6 1,276.9 1,927.3 1,629.4 298.0 − − − 5.9 − 335.2 201.7 133.5
                              20 4,682.6 1,287.4 1,877.0 1,629.8 247.2 − − − 6.2 − 330.1 201.3 128.9
                              27 4,692.0 1,293.9 1,850.6 1,623.1 227.5 − − − 10.4 − 324.8 195.2 129.5
2020 Jan.                 3 4,664.0 1,289.1 1,867.2 1,638.3 228.9 − − − 5.5 − 312.5 180.9 131.7
                              10 4,655.8 1,280.0 1,907.6 1,665.0 242.6 − − − 5.0 − 318.9 188.0 130.9
                              17 4,660.3 1,274.3 1,906.5 1,648.1 258.3 − − − 6.2 − 355.3 225.9 129.4
                              24 4,674.4 1,270.2 1,889.1 1,608.3 280.9 − − − 6.8 − 398.5 271.6 127.0
                              31 4,671.4 1,273.9 1,900.4 1,640.4 260.0 − − − 7.0 − 372.8 244.6 128.2
 Deutsche Bundesbank
2019 July                 5 1,751.7 302.6 638.4 475.1 163.4 − − 0.0 2.2 − 79.5 38.2 41.3
                              12 1,754.5 304.3 621.5 469.4 152.1 − − 0.0 3.4 − 94.7 52.4 42.3
                              19 1,765.7 305.2 613.2 467.5 145.7 − − 0.0 4.3 − 108.8 67.8 41.0
                              26 1,736.3 306.0 594.1 462.6 131.5 − − 0.0 0.9 − 103.8 62.9 40.9
         Aug.                 2 1,756.5 304.8 631.0 474.2 156.8 − − 0.0 1.9 − 85.3 42.7 42.7
                                9 1,756.1 306.1 625.1 476.0 149.1 − − 0.0 1.1 − 86.9 46.8 40.1
                              16 1,768.1 307.1 606.9 463.4 143.4 − − 0.0 2.2 − 103.0 63.4 39.6
                              23 1,764.5 307.3 598.5 456.0 142.5 − − 0.0 2.7 − 109.9 67.7 42.2
                              30 1,779.5 303.6 627.8 462.3 165.4 − − 0.0 2.9 − 95.5 52.0 43.5
         Sep.                 6 1,761.8 304.6 618.7 457.4 161.3 − − 0.0 2.4 − 92.1 51.3 40.8
                              13 1,754.7 305.5 607.4 460.0 147.4 − − 0.0 2.5 − 106.6 65.9 40.7
                              20 1,767.6 306.2 611.6 455.5 156.1 − − 0.0 2.9 − 124.8 85.3 39.5
                              27 1,768.2 308.6 614.2 455.2 159.0 − − − 1.5 − 126.8 82.2 44.5
         Oct.                 4 1,768.6 305.9 616.5 467.4 149.1 − − − 2.0 − 105.4 60.0 45.4
                              11 1,758.7 306.3 617.3 463.1 154.1 − − − 1.7 − 99.0 54.8 44.2
                              18 1,763.7 307.2 602.4 457.6 144.8 − − − 1.3 − 121.9 76.1 45.9
                              25 1,737.7 307.4 592.8 447.2 145.6 − − − 1.9 − 114.1 70.0 44.1
2019 Nov.                 1 1,710.2 305.6 597.2 533.4 63.8 − − − 1.7 − 83.2 35.4 47.8
                                8 1,730.6 305.5 617.9 546.4 71.5 − − − 2.5 − 82.8 43.0 39.9
                              15 1,724.7 306.3 581.3 520.6 60.7 − − − 2.0 − 116.2 73.4 42.8
                              22 1,724.6 307.6 579.8 522.1 57.8 − − − 1.6 − 112.5 71.5 41.0
                              29 1,765.3 307.1 638.2 533.3 104.9 − − − 2.1 − 83.4 48.0 35.4
         Dec.                 6 1,757.4 309.6 631.0 523.9 107.1 − − − 3.7 − 76.2 44.2 32.0
                              13 1,770.7 311.6 615.5 500.2 115.3 − − − 2.0 − 99.6 67.6 32.1
                              20 1,736.8 317.0 578.2 488.0 90.2 − − − 1.9 − 95.7 61.5 34.2
                              27 1,743.1 318.9 552.3 483.2 69.1 − − − 4.0 − 101.3 65.4 35.9
2020 Jan.                 3 1,737.3 311.7 569.1 510.4 58.7 − − − 1.7 − 88.1 46.9 41.3
                              10 1,701.8 308.8 570.3 507.3 63.1 − − − 1.3 − 76.9 39.1 37.9
                              17 1,688.3 308.1 558.2 486.5 71.7 − − − 2.0 − 94.7 52.3 42.5
                              24 1,660.0 307.6 544.4 470.7 73.8 − − − 2.6 − 88.1 56.9 31.3
                              31 1,700.8 309.2 586.0 520.5 65.5 − − − 2.8 − 74.7 39.6 35.1
 
*The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8%
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an
items for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at “Intra-Eurosystem liability related to euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the
market rates at the end of the quarter. 1In accordance with the accounting value of the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly

Deutsche Bundesbank
19  Monthly Report
February 2020
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
    
 
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated inforeign currency
Intra-  
Eurosystem  
Liabilities Liabilities Liabilities Counterpart liability  to non-euro to euro area Deposits, arising of special related to  area residents residents balances from the drawing euro  Capital    As atdenominated in foreign and other rights allocated Other banknote Revaluation and    reporting credit facility
in euro currency Total liabilities under ERM II by the IMF issue  
1 accounts reserves    date liabilities  2 
Eurosystem 3
 
241.3 5.8 10.2 10.2 − 56.8 259.4 − 425.7 107.2 2019 July                  5
242.8 6.7 10.7 10.7 − 56.8 260.7 − 425.7 107.2                               12
248.3 8.1 11.7 11.7 − 56.8 264.0 − 425.7 107.2                               19
245.8 10.3 11.4 11.4 − 56.8 265.3 − 425.7 107.2                               26
247.0 10.4 10.5 10.5 − 56.8 268.1 − 425.7 107.2          Aug.                  2
254.0 10.8 10.5 10.5 − 56.8 266.8 − 425.7 107.2                                 9
263.1 10.2 10.3 10.3 − 56.8 264.4 − 425.7 107.2                               16
261.6 9.7 11.6 11.6 − 56.8 265.9 − 425.7 107.2                               23
260.9 10.2 11.4 11.4 − 56.8 266.4 − 425.7 107.2                               30
250.5 10.2 10.9 10.9 − 56.8 269.7 − 425.7 107.2          Sep.                  6
238.6 10.4 11.1 11.1 − 56.8 267.9 − 425.7 107.2                               13
225.8 7.4 10.6 10.6 − 56.8 267.8 − 425.7 107.2                               20
226.9 7.2 10.4 10.4 − 56.8 272.2 − 425.7 107.2                               27
230.1 7.4 11.1 11.1 − 58.1 272.8 − 478.3 107.2          Oct.                  4
227.7 8.5 11.2 11.2 − 58.1 270.1 − 478.3 107.2                               11
217.4 7.6 10.7 10.7 − 58.1 269.1 − 478.3 107.2                               18
208.9 8.4 9.6 9.6 − 58.1 272.7 − 478.3 107.2                               25
206.9 8.7 8.9 8.9 − 58.1 271.5 − 478.3 107.2 2019 Nov.                  1
197.1 8.0 9.3 9.3 − 58.1 270.5 − 478.3 107.2                                 8
196.2 8.0 8.9 8.9 − 58.1 271.2 − 478.3 107.2                               15
200.4 8.0 9.0 9.0 − 58.1 270.7 − 478.3 107.2                               22
208.2 8.4 8.8 8.8 − 58.1 271.2 − 478.3 107.2                               29
215.7 8.6 9.0 9.0 − 58.1 273.1 − 478.3 107.2          Dec.                  6
230.2 8.3 8.9 8.9 − 58.1 277.3 − 478.3 107.2                               13
244.4 9.1 8.3 8.3 − 58.1 276.5 − 478.3 107.2                               20
274.4 9.0 7.9 7.9 − 58.1 277.4 − 478.3 107.2                               27
265.8 8.0 7.4 7.4 − 57.4 277.2 − 466.6 107.2 2020 Jan.                  3
222.8 8.3 7.4 7.4 − 57.4 274.5 − 466.6 107.3                               10
196.8 8.9 7.0 7.0 − 57.4 274.1 − 466.6 107.3                               17
181.7 8.7 7.0 7.0 − 57.4 281.2 − 466.6 107.1                               24
189.4 7.9 7.0 7.0 − 57.4 282.0 − 466.6 107.0                               31
 Deutsche Bundesbank
136.6 0.0 − − − 14.7 32.1 407.8 132.0 5.7 2019 July                  5
137.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.7 32.1 407.8 132.0 5.7                               12
140.9 0.0 1.0 1.0 − 14.7 32.1 407.8 132.0 5.7                               19
137.7 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.7 32.2 407.8 132.0 5.7                               26
136.6 0.0 0.5 0.5 − 14.7 32.5 411.4 132.0 5.7          Aug.                  2
140.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.7 32.5 411.4 132.0 5.7                                 9
151.8 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.7 32.6 411.4 132.0 5.7                               16
148.6 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 14.7 32.7 411.4 132.0 5.7                               23
145.9 0.0 1.4 1.4 − 14.7 32.7 417.2 132.0 5.7                               30
140.8 0.0 0.8 0.8 − 14.7 32.7 417.2 132.0 5.7          Sep.                  6
129.8 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 14.7 32.7 417.2 132.0 5.7                               13
119.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.7 33.0 417.2 132.0 5.7                               20
114.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.7 33.1 417.2 132.0 5.7                               27
115.9 0.0 0.9 0.9 − 15.1 32.6 422.1 146.6 5.7          Oct.                  4
111.8 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 15.1 32.8 422.1 146.6 5.7                               11
108.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 32.9 422.1 146.6 5.7                               18
99.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 33.1 422.1 146.6 5.7                               25
95.5 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 33.2 426.3 146.6 5.7 2019 Nov.                  1
94.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 15.1 33.2 426.3 146.6 5.7                                 8
91.8 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.3 426.3 146.6 5.7                               15
95.7 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.3 426.3 146.6 5.7                               22
102.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 − 15.1 33.5 430.8 146.6 5.7                               29
105.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.5 430.8 146.6 5.7          Dec.                  6
109.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.6 430.8 146.6 5.7                               13
112.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.6 430.8 146.6 5.7                               20
134.5 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 15.1 33.7 430.8 146.6 5.7                               27
132.4 0.0 0.1 0.1 − 14.9 33.6 435.8 144.2 5.7 2020 Jan.                  3
109.6 0.0 0.3 0.3 − 14.9 34.0 435.8 144.2 5.7                               10
90.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 33.9 435.8 144.2 5.7                               17
81.9 0.0 0.2 0.2 − 14.9 34.6 435.8 144.2 5.7                               24
90.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 − 14.9 34.9 437.9 144.2 5.7                               31
 
basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro into circulation is also disclosed as an “Intra-Eurosystem claim/li ability related to bank-
banknotes issued corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The note issue“. 2For the Deutsche Bundesbank: including DEM banknotes still in circu-
difference between the value of the euro banknotes allocated to the NCB according lation. 3 Source: ECB. 
to the aforementioned accounting procedure and the value of euro banknotes put

Deutsche Bundesbank
20  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
 
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country
Enterprises and house-
holds
Secur- Secur-
Balance ities ities
sheet Cash issued issued
Period total  1 in hand Total Total Loans by banks Total Loans by banks Total Total Total Loans
 End of year or month
 
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,310.8 43.4 2,230.3 1,759.9 1,493.5 266.4 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,019.9 3,584.7 3,168.7 2,864.9
2018         Mar. 7,746.6 35.1 2,254.6 1,852.5 1,585.3 267.1 402.1 274.9 127.2 3,814.9 3,410.8 2,946.8 2,644.4
         Apr. 7,781.1 33.8 2,300.8 1,892.1 1,625.1 267.0 408.7 280.6 128.0 3,818.5 3,417.4 2,956.1 2,650.7
         May 7,882.8 35.0 2,314.0 1,900.7 1,630.1 270.6 413.3 284.6 128.6 3,823.8 3,418.9 2,963.0 2,656.6
         June 7,804.7 35.0 2,266.6 1,853.0 1,584.7 268.2 413.6 285.5 128.1 3,832.7 3,430.8 2,979.9 2,672.2
         July 7,784.2 34.7 2,276.2 1,852.8 1,585.7 267.1 423.4 295.9 127.5 3,840.0 3,437.3 2,987.0 2,679.3
         Aug. 7,828.0 35.1 2,294.8 1,865.2 1,597.6 267.6 429.6 301.1 128.5 3,840.6 3,431.8 2,987.4 2,690.7
         Sep. 7,799.9 35.8 2,267.8 1,846.4 1,577.7 268.7 421.4 291.0 130.4 3,854.6 3,447.2 3,006.3 2,708.5
         Oct. 7,845.2 36.9 2,286.9 1,855.6 1,588.6 267.0 431.4 298.1 133.2 3,858.3 3,447.8 3,009.7 2,711.9
         Nov. 7,881.2 36.8 2,303.5 1,872.8 1,605.2 267.6 430.8 295.9 134.8 3,874.4 3,460.7 3,023.7 2,727.7
         Dec. 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 36.7 2,267.3 1,827.4 1,559.5 267.8 439.9 304.8 135.1 3,878.8 3,468.7 3,032.2 2,737.6
         Feb. 7,935.7 36.9 2,304.8 1,862.5 1,591.5 271.1 442.3 304.8 137.5 3,893.1 3,477.0 3,044.8 2,751.0
         Mar. 8,121.3 37.0 2,343.5 1,885.9 1,614.7 271.2 457.6 319.3 138.4 3,921.0 3,488.4 3,059.8 2,765.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 38.2 2,354.4 1,893.6 1,625.2 268.5 460.8 321.6 139.1 3,928.3 3,492.4 3,068.0 2,774.1
         May 8,280.9 37.9 2,376.8 1,919.0 1,648.5 270.5 457.8 317.9 139.9 3,944.5 3,509.1 3,085.5 2,790.5
         June 8,321.9 37.9 2,332.5 1,869.9 1,600.4 269.6 462.6 321.6 141.0 3,972.1 3,530.5 3,108.0 2,809.6
         July 8,372.1 37.4 2,311.4 1,845.2 1,575.0 270.2 466.2 324.2 142.0 3,984.9 3,539.6 3,114.5 2,815.1
         Aug. 8,645.5 38.3 2,327.7 1,857.2 1,589.6 267.6 470.5 327.6 142.9 4,009.7 3,554.6 3,127.0 2,827.3
         Sep. 8,550.4 38.0 2,323.6 1,835.8 1,569.4 266.4 487.8 344.3 143.5 4,001.0 3,562.6 3,139.5 2,839.7
         Oct. 8,445.6 39.3 2,312.0 1,810.4 1,543.9 266.5 501.6 358.5 143.1 4,008.1 3,569.7 3,149.2 2,847.6
         Nov. 8,509.0 40.1 2,361.5 1,860.2 1,590.2 270.0 501.3 358.1 143.2 4,027.1 3,586.3 3,166.8 2,863.7
         Dec. 8,310.8 43.4 2,230.3 1,759.9 1,493.5 266.4 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,019.9 3,584.7 3,168.7 2,864.9
 Changes 3
2012 − 129.2 2.9 − 81.9 − 28.4 3.0 − 31.4 − 53.5 − 39.7 − 13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 − 703.6 − 0.5 − 257.1 − 249.2 − 216.5 − 32.7 − 7.9 1.6 − 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 − 126.2 − 128.6 − 95.3 − 33.4 2.4 7.2 − 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 − 191.4 0.3 − 18.2 − 12.1 66.1 − 78.2 − 6.1 6.6 − 12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 − 16.8 − 58.1 − 49.2 − 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 − 17.6 − 29.1 − 19.6 − 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 − 29.2 − 49.7 − 53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.5 2.8 20.8 − 3.6 − 2.3 − 1.4 24.4 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.6 148.2 140.9
2018         Apr. 28.9 − 1.3 45.6 39.7 39.9 − 0.2 5.9 5.1 0.9 4.0 7.1 9.8 6.3
         May 85.0 1.3 12.4 9.1 5.7 3.4 3.4 2.8 0.5 12.9 9.4 15.3 14.3
         June − 77.2 − 0.1 − 47.4 − 47.7 − 45.4 − 2.3 0.3 0.9 − 0.5 9.9 12.8 17.9 16.4
         July − 14.4 − 0.3 10.5 0.3 1.3 − 1.0 10.1 10.7 − 0.6 7.8 6.8 5.9 6.1
         Aug. 41.9 0.4 19.8 13.8 13.0 0.8 5.9 4.9 1.0 0.6 − 5.6 0.4 11.3
         Sep. − 30.4 0.8 − 27.3 − 18.9 − 19.9 1.0 − 8.4 − 10.4 1.9 14.2 15.9 19.2 18.2
         Oct. 36.4 1.1 15.0 8.5 10.3 − 1.8 6.5 6.1 0.4 3.8 0.5 3.4 3.2
         Nov. 38.5 − 0.1 17.2 17.6 16.7 1.0 − 0.5 − 2.0 1.6 16.7 13.4 14.4 16.1
         Dec. − 100.0 3.8 − 114.6 − 104.0 − 104.3 0.2 − 10.6 − 10.9 0.3 − 8.8 − 1.5 1.6 − 0.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 − 3.9 79.5 59.2 58.8 0.5 20.3 20.0 0.3 17.0 12.6 10.0 11.4
         Feb. 31.1 0.1 36.8 34.8 31.7 3.0 2.1 − 0.4 2.5 15.5 9.5 13.7 14.5
         Mar. 124.6 0.2 32.4 25.5 26.3 − 0.8 6.9 6.5 0.4 12.4 10.7 14.4 14.6
         Apr. 33.9 1.2 10.8 7.7 10.5 − 2.8 3.1 2.4 0.7 7.6 4.4 8.4 8.9
         May 124.6 − 0.3 22.1 25.4 23.2 2.1 − 3.2 − 3.9 0.7 16.3 16.3 17.4 16.2
         June 50.5 0.0 − 42.3 − 48.3 − 47.7 − 0.6 6.0 4.8 1.2 27.8 21.7 22.9 19.4
         July 49.8 − 0.5 − 23.0 − 25.4 − 26.0 0.6 2.4 1.5 0.9 12.1 9.1 6.8 5.6
         Aug. 265.9 0.8 14.8 11.4 14.2 − 2.8 3.4 2.7 0.7 23.9 14.6 12.3 11.9
         Sep. − 100.4 − 0.3 − 19.8 − 19.0 − 18.0 − 1.0 − 0.7 − 1.3 0.6 7.9 8.2 12.1 12.1
         Oct. − 93.5 1.2 − 9.8 − 24.8 − 25.0 0.2 15.0 15.3 − 0.3 8.8 8.1 10.5 8.8
         Nov. 55.4 0.8 48.2 49.3 45.9 3.3 − 1.1 − 1.2 0.1 18.6 16.6 17.3 15.8
         Dec. − 187.2 3.3 − 129.2 − 99.4 − 96.2 − 3.2 − 29.8 − 29.5 − 0.3 − 6.0 − 1.1 2.3 1.6
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Including debt securities arising from the

Deutsche Bundesbank
21  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
euro area Claims on
non-euro area
to non-banks in other Member States residents
 General Enterprises and General
 government households government
Secur- Secur- of which: Secur- of which: Other
ities Total Loans ities  2 Total Total Loans Total Loans ities Total Loans assets  1   Period
End of year or month
 
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018303.8 416.0 254.7 161.3 435.2 312.6 198.9 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
302.4 463.9 275.5 188.4 404.1 278.3 164.9 125.9 29.8 96.1 1,016.8 763.8 625.3 2018          Mar.
305.4 461.2 276.2 185.0 401.2 275.1 165.1 126.0 29.9 96.2 1,009.2 757.3 618.9          Apr.
306.4 455.9 272.3 183.6 404.9 280.2 167.4 124.8 29.8 95.0 1,052.9 799.1 657.1          May307.7 450.8 270.0 180.8 402.0 278.4 166.4 123.6 29.9 93.7 1,032.5 777.4 637.9          June
307.7 450.3 270.8 179.5 402.7 281.2 169.9 121.5 29.7 91.8 1,028.8 770.8 604.5          July
296.8 444.3 266.4 178.0 408.9 286.1 173.1 122.8 29.7 93.1 1,021.0 762.2 636.6          Aug.297.8 440.9 263.4 177.5 407.4 283.7 171.7 123.6 29.6 94.0 1,028.7 770.3 613.1          Sep.
297.8 438.1 265.4 172.7 410.5 287.6 176.1 122.9 31.0 91.9 1,037.4 780.7 625.6          Oct.
296.0 437.0 264.5 172.5 413.7 290.8 177.8 122.9 30.9 92.1 1,032.1 777.3 634.5          Nov.297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2          Dec.
294.6 436.5 265.9 170.6 410.1 291.8 179.6 118.3 28.9 89.5 1,049.5 794.1 670.0 2019          Jan.
293.8 432.2 263.3 168.9 416.1 294.1 181.5 122.0 28.8 93.1 1,037.8 781.6 663.2          Feb.294.1 428.5 260.6 168.0 432.6 311.4 197.8 121.2 28.9 92.4 1,084.1 826.7 735.7          Mar.
293.8 424.5 260.8 163.7 435.9 315.7 202.0 120.2 29.6 90.5 1,099.5 840.3 734.2          Apr.
295.0 423.6 259.2 164.4 435.5 317.7 205.0 117.8 29.4 88.4 1,101.0 839.1 820.6          May298.5 422.5 257.7 164.7 441.6 320.9 207.2 120.7 29.0 91.7 1,103.8 841.8 875.6          June
299.4 425.0 260.2 164.8 445.3 322.2 209.5 123.1 29.0 94.1 1,114.6 851.7 923.8          July
299.7 427.6 260.2 167.4 455.1 330.1 216.8 125.0 28.9 96.1 1,122.3 857.7 1,147.5          Aug.299.8 423.2 255.1 168.1 438.3 313.4 200.6 124.9 28.8 96.1 1,106.8 841.9 1,081.1          Sep.
301.6 420.5 257.1 163.4 438.4 313.1 201.3 125.3 30.1 95.2 1,102.8 842.5 983.5          Oct.
303.1 419.5 257.7 161.8 440.8 315.2 201.0 125.6 30.5 95.1 1,091.3 828.7 989.0          Nov.303.8 416.0 254.7 161.3 435.2 312.6 198.9 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5          Dec.
Changes 3
− 11.8 10.7 − 10.5 21.2 − 0.2 − 0.7 − 1.5 0.5 − 2.2 2.7 − 15.5 − 17.7 − 62.2 2012
2.0 − 7.0 − 10.9 3.9 − 3.0 − 3.4 − 9.3 0.5 − 2.6 3.1 − 38.8 − 47.2 − 420.8 2013
15.5 − 12.3 − 15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 − 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 − 3.9 − 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 − 3.7 − 1.0 − 2.8 − 88.3 − 101.0 − 150.1 2015
7.8 − 35.4 − 12.1 − 23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 3.3 51.4 55.0 − 51.4 2016
13.7 − 51.3 − 22.8 − 28.5 − 12.2 − 3.4 4.0 − 8.7 0.1 − 8.9 − 12.3 − 6.7 − 173.1 2017
− 9.8 − 46.2 − 19.1 − 27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 − 11.4 − 1.5 − 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 − 17.7 − 8.6 − 9.1 31.2 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.1 1.7 − 32.1 − 33.3 330.3 2019
3.5 − 2.6 0.7 − 3.3 − 3.1 − 3.3 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.0 − 13.2 − 11.9 − 6.2 2018          Apr.
0.9 − 5.8 − 4.3 − 1.5 3.5 4.6 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.1 30.9 29.9 27.5          May1.5 − 5.0 − 2.3 − 2.8 − 2.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 1.4 − 20.4 − 21.8 − 19.2          June
− 0.2 0.9 2.2 − 1.3 0.9 3.1 3.7 − 2.2 − 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 3.8 − 31.6          July
− 10.9 − 6.0 − 4.5 − 1.5 6.2 4.9 3.1 1.3 0.0 1.2 − 11.0 − 11.5 32.1          Aug.
1.1 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.4 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 1.6 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 5.4 5.9 − 23.5          Sep.
0.2 − 2.9 1.9 − 4.8 3.3 4.5 4.1 − 1.2 1.4 − 2.6 4.0 3.5 12.6          Oct.
− 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.2 3.3 3.3 1.5 0.0 − 0.1 0.2 − 4.0 − 2.2 8.8          Nov.
1.7 − 3.1 − 1.1 − 2.0 − 7.3 − 3.5 − 1.1 − 3.8 − 2.3 − 1.5 3.5 3.5 16.1          Dec.
− 1.4 2.6 2.4 0.2 4.4 5.1 3.2 − 0.8 0.3 − 1.0 16.5 15.8 19.8 2019          Jan.
− 0.8 − 4.2 − 2.6 − 1.7 6.0 2.4 2.2 3.7 − 0.0 3.7 − 14.5 − 15.1 − 6.9          Feb.− 0.2 − 3.7 − 2.8 − 1.0 1.7 3.0 2.5 − 1.2 0.0 − 1.2 16.1 17.2 63.6          Mar.
− 0.4 − 4.0 0.2 − 4.2 3.1 4.2 4.3 − 1.1 0.7 − 1.8 15.8 14.1 − 1.5          Apr.
1.2 − 1.0 − 1.7 0.7 − 0.1 2.3 3.1 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 2.2 0.0 − 2.8 86.5          May3.5 − 1.2 − 1.5 0.3 6.1 3.4 2.7 2.6 − 0.4 3.1 10.5 9.9 54.5          June
1.2 2.2 2.5 − 0.2 3.0 1.3 2.1 1.7 − 0.0 1.8 4.4 4.1 56.8          July
0.4 2.3 − 0.2 2.5 9.3 7.5 7.0 1.8 − 0.1 1.9 2.6 1.2 223.7          Aug.0.0 − 4.0 − 4.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 21.9 − 21.7 − 66.4          Sep.
1.7 − 2.4 2.1 − 4.6 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.5 1.3 − 0.8 3.9 7.7 − 97.7          Oct.
1.5 − 0.8 0.6 − 1.4 2.1 1.7 − 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 − 17.6 − 19.3 5.3          Nov.0.7 − 3.4 − 3.0 − 0.4 − 4.9 − 1.5 − 1.0 − 3.4 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 47.9 − 44.3 − 7.5          Dec.
exchange of equalisation claims. 3Statistical breaks have been eliminated from
the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
22  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
 
€ billion
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks
With agreed At agreed
of banks maturities notice
Balance in the in other of which: of which:
sheet home Member Over- up to up to Over-
Period total  1 Total country States Total Total night Total 2 years Total 3 months Total night
 End of year or month
 
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,310.8 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2018         Mar. 7,746.6 1,238.1 1,057.5 180.6 3,537.7 3,413.3 1,944.1 888.1 274.7 581.2 539.9 115.3 48.7
         Apr. 7,781.1 1,233.9 1,053.5 180.4 3,551.3 3,430.7 1,967.4 882.9 270.2 580.4 539.6 108.8 46.7
         May 7,882.8 1,232.4 1,037.1 195.3 3,582.2 3,462.4 1,998.3 884.0 271.4 580.1 539.5 109.4 47.7
         June 7,804.7 1,224.7 1,035.7 189.0 3,582.9 3,463.7 1,991.4 893.1 281.1 579.2 539.1 109.0 44.0
         July 7,784.2 1,228.5 1,042.2 186.3 3,584.2 3,462.9 1,997.6 887.1 277.5 578.2 538.6 108.8 44.5
         Aug. 7,828.0 1,229.6 1,043.7 185.9 3,595.2 3,474.5 2,014.0 882.9 276.6 577.6 538.3 106.9 45.1
         Sep. 7,799.9 1,220.4 1,034.2 186.2 3,594.0 3,473.8 2,017.5 879.0 273.7 577.3 538.4 108.8 48.2
         Oct. 7,845.2 1,227.0 1,034.3 192.7 3,614.3 3,494.1 2,039.3 877.8 273.4 577.0 538.6 108.8 47.3
         Nov. 7,881.2 1,244.5 1,046.8 197.7 3,646.1 3,527.4 2,074.8 875.8 271.5 576.8 539.1 106.2 47.1
         Dec. 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019         Jan. 7,902.3 1,238.4 1,040.5 197.9 3,646.4 3,530.1 2,074.3 877.3 277.3 578.4 541.4 104.9 45.9
         Feb. 7,935.7 1,258.4 1,046.6 211.8 3,658.9 3,544.0 2,083.6 880.9 281.8 579.5 542.4 103.3 44.6
         Mar. 8,121.3 1,281.9 1,050.1 231.8 3,676.8 3,554.7 2,095.7 877.1 280.6 582.0 544.7 109.9 51.7
         Apr. 8,154.6 1,298.3 1,061.2 237.0 3,689.3 3,569.8 2,117.1 870.5 276.7 582.2 544.7 105.8 47.5
         May 8,280.9 1,291.2 1,057.1 234.1 3,721.9 3,599.3 2,147.3 869.5 277.3 582.5 544.4 108.1 50.1
         June 8,321.9 1,292.1 1,048.3 243.8 3,728.4 3,595.5 2,144.7 868.1 274.5 582.6 544.0 116.0 56.6
         July 8,372.1 1,291.9 1,055.1 236.8 3,728.8 3,605.7 2,160.6 863.3 271.9 581.8 543.4 110.3 51.1
         Aug. 8,645.5 1,306.3 1,062.2 244.1 3,754.1 3,626.8 2,182.9 863.7 276.0 580.2 542.2 114.6 54.3
         Sep. 8,550.4 1,299.7 1,038.3 261.4 3,745.4 3,618.0 2,179.8 859.2 273.5 579.0 541.5 115.2 55.7
         Oct. 8,445.6 1,313.5 1,050.3 263.2 3,761.4 3,633.5 2,201.7 854.6 270.4 577.2 540.6 114.1 51.4
         Nov. 8,509.0 1,326.4 1,057.3 269.1 3,791.3 3,663.8 2,238.9 849.3 266.7 575.6 539.9 115.8 52.6
         Dec. 8,310.8 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
 Changes 4
2012 − 129.2 − 68.7 − 70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 − 90.4 − 50.2 1.5 14.1 − 1.4 5.4
2013 − 703.6 − 106.2 − 73.9 − 32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 − 56.3 − 26.6 − 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 − 28.4 − 32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 − 32.1 3.1 − 2.4 − 2.4 − 2.5 − 0.0
2015 − 191.4 − 62.1 − 50.3 − 11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 − 37.0 − 10.1 − 11.3 4.2 − 0.4 − 0.3
2016 184.3 − 31.6 − 2.2 − 29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 − 11.1 1.4 − 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 − 32.5 − 15.3 − 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 − 20.1 − 25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 − 18.8 − 6.5 − 4.3 1.2 − 4.3 2.3
2019 483.5 12.6 − 10.0 22.5 132.1 120.0 154.1 − 30.6 − 6.6 − 3.4 − 0.6 10.6 8.7
2018         Apr. 28.9 − 4.5 − 3.8 − 0.6 13.5 17.5 22.8 − 4.6 − 4.0 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 6.6 − 2.0
         May 85.0 − 3.5 − 17.3 13.9 29.2 30.2 29.9 0.7 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 0.4 0.9
         June − 77.2 − 7.8 − 1.5 − 6.3 0.7 1.2 − 6.9 9.0 9.7 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 3.8
         July − 14.4 4.7 7.2 − 2.5 1.8 − 0.4 6.5 − 5.9 − 3.5 − 1.0 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.5
         Aug. 41.9 2.0 2.6 − 0.6 10.7 11.3 16.1 − 4.2 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 2.0 0.6
         Sep. − 30.4 − 9.6 − 9.7 0.1 − 1.2 − 0.7 3.6 − 4.0 − 3.1 − 0.3 0.0 1.9 3.1
         Oct. 36.4 5.4 − 0.4 5.9 19.1 19.3 21.1 − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.3 0.2 − 0.2 − 1.0
         Nov. 38.5 17.7 12.6 5.1 32.1 33.5 35.5 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 0.1 0.5 − 2.5 − 0.2
         Dec. − 100.0 − 30.3 − 24.8 − 5.5 − 2.9 − 0.1 1.3 − 3.1 − 4.2 1.7 2.0 − 1.7 − 2.1
2019         Jan. 128.9 24.8 18.9 6.0 3.6 3.0 − 1.2 4.4 10.1 − 0.2 0.3 0.4 1.0
         Feb. 31.1 19.6 5.6 13.9 12.0 13.3 9.0 3.2 4.1 1.1 1.0 − 1.7 − 1.4
         Mar. 124.6 19.3 2.7 16.6 15.7 9.5 11.1 − 4.1 − 1.4 2.5 2.2 5.7 6.3
         Apr. 33.9 16.4 11.2 5.2 12.6 15.1 21.4 − 6.6 − 3.9 0.2 0.1 − 4.1 − 4.3
         May 124.6 − 7.3 − 4.2 − 3.1 32.4 29.5 30.1 − 0.9 0.6 0.3 − 0.3 2.3 2.7
         June 50.5 2.1 − 8.2 10.3 7.3 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.3 − 2.8 0.2 − 0.4 7.9 6.6
         July 49.8 − 1.3 6.3 − 7.6 − 0.7 9.3 15.4 − 5.2 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 0.6 − 5.8 − 5.6
         Aug. 265.9 13.7 6.8 6.9 24.7 20.5 21.9 0.2 4.0 − 1.5 − 1.2 4.2 3.1
         Sep. − 100.4 − 19.2 − 21.7 2.5 − 9.5 − 9.5 − 3.5 − 4.7 − 2.7 − 1.2 − 0.7 0.5 1.3
         Oct. − 93.5 15.0 12.5 2.5 17.1 16.2 22.5 − 4.5 − 3.1 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 0.9 − 4.2
         Nov. 55.4 11.9 6.6 5.3 29.1 29.5 36.7 − 5.7 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.7 1.5 1.1
         Dec. − 187.2 − 82.4 − 46.4 − 36.0 − 12.2 − 13.2 − 7.3 − 5.4 − 4.9 − 0.5 0.6 0.7 2.2
*This table serves to supplement the “Overall monetary survey“ in Section II. Unlike by banks (including building and loan associations) − data from mo ney market
the other tables in Section IV, this table includes − in addition to the figures reported funds. 1See footnote 1 in Table IV.2. 2Excluding deposits of central

Deutsche Bundesbank
23  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Debt securities
issued  3 
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
With agreed At agreed Liabilitiesmaturities notice arising
of which: from Money of which: Liabilitiesdomestic market with to non- repos with
of which: of which: central non-banks fund euro Capital maturities
up to up to govern- in the shares of up to area and Other
Total 2 years Total 3 months Total ments euro area issued  
3 Total reserves   Period 2 years  3 residents Liabilities  1 
End of year or month
 
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 201142.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 201244.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 201342.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 201663.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 201756.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 201859.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.6 728.4 935.7 2019
63.8 22.6 2.9 2.6 9.1 8.3 2.9 2.3 1,014.0 35.2 641.0 675.0 635.6 2018          Mar.
59.2 18.0 2.9 2.5 11.7 8.4 2.4 2.2 1,016.6 34.7 672.9 677.3 624.6          Apr.
58.8 16.8 2.9 2.5 10.4 8.8 1.6 2.0 1,031.1 36.4 707.2 679.7 646.6          May62.2 21.7 2.9 2.5 10.2 9.3 1.3 2.1 1,022.2 33.7 670.8 680.2 620.5          June
61.5 19.0 2.9 2.5 12.4 10.0 1.8 2.0 1,016.9 33.1 681.9 682.2 586.7          July
58.9 16.4 2.8 2.5 13.9 10.6 1.2 2.0 1,021.2 35.0 690.5 684.5 603.8          Aug.57.8 17.4 2.8 2.5 11.5 9.2 1.3 2.0 1,034.7 33.9 681.7 687.2 578.7          Sep.
58.6 17.2 2.8 2.5 11.4 9.7 2.4 2.0 1,044.7 36.2 666.9 687.8 600.0          Oct.
56.3 15.0 2.8 2.5 12.5 10.0 1.3 2.4 1,048.3 34.6 643.3 688.1 607.3          Nov.56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7          Dec.
56.2 15.3 2.8 2.5 11.5 10.1 1.7 2.4 1,048.1 32.1 636.9 688.3 640.1 2019          Jan.
55.9 14.9 2.8 2.5 11.7 10.0 2.0 2.3 1,067.9 32.2 621.9 684.9 639.5          Feb.55.4 14.9 2.8 2.5 12.1 10.5 11.4 2.1 1,065.3 32.7 666.8 699.3 717.8          Mar.
55.5 15.0 2.8 2.5 13.7 11.2 12.5 2.0 1,060.0 32.1 698.4 696.3 697.8          Apr.
55.2 14.8 2.8 2.5 14.4 12.0 11.2 2.0 1,071.8 32.4 688.6 703.5 790.6          May56.6 16.1 2.8 2.5 17.0 14.0 12.9 2.0 1,071.1 33.1 676.3 706.6 832.5          June
56.4 15.6 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 13.9 2.1 1,075.3 33.4 667.9 709.9 882.4          July
57.5 17.4 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 16.9 2.2 1,072.7 33.9 676.2 713.0 1,103.9          Aug.56.8 15.2 2.7 2.4 12.2 10.9 1.5 2.3 1,077.8 35.7 671.4 719.2 1,033.2          Sep.
60.1 17.8 2.7 2.4 13.8 10.6 1.2 2.2 1,067.5 33.4 657.4 711.0 931.3          Oct.
60.6 18.3 2.7 2.4 11.7 10.6 1.7 2.0 1,076.7 33.7 653.6 723.6 933.9          Nov.59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.6 728.4 935.7          Dec.
Changes 4
− 7.2 − 3.6 0.5 0.3 − 7.9 − 9.2 − 19.6 1.2 − 107.0 − 18.6 54.2 21.0 − 68.5 2012− 0.5 2.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 11.3 − 10.0 4.1 − 3.2 − 104.9 − 17.6 − 134.1 18.9 − 417.1 2013− 2.3 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 6.4 − 4.8 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 63.7 − 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
− 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.9 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 86.8 7.7 − 30.3 28.0 − 143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 1.1 8.6 − 1.3 116.1 26.4 − 39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.1 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 16.1 34.1 − 162.3 2017
− 6.4 − 4.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 2.1 2.1 − 2.6 0.3 30.0 − 5.9 − 36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 − 0.5 22.3 0.1 − 47.3 29.8 328.9 2019
− 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.7 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.3 28.0 1.7 − 8.4 2018          Apr.
− 0.5 − 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.4 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 7.3 1.4 29.3 0.1 23.6          May
3.3 4.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 0.5 − 0.4 0.1 − 9.2 − 2.7 − 36.6 0.4 − 24.3          June
− 0.6 − 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.2 0.7 0.6 − 0.1 − 3.6 − 0.6 12.3 2.6 − 32.6          July
− 2.6 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.4 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 2.8 1.9 7.5 2.3 17.3          Aug.− 1.2 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.3 0.1 − 0.0 11.8 − 1.1 − 10.0 2.2 − 23.7          Sep.
0.8 − 0.3 0.0 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.1 5.5 2.2 − 18.1 − 0.7 24.1          Oct.
− 2.3 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.2 0.5 − 1.0 0.3 4.4 − 1.6 − 23.1 0.5 7.6          Nov.
0.5 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.2 0.5 − 0.6 0.0 − 12.7 − 2.6 − 66.2 8.0 4.7          Dec.
− 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.2 − 0.4 0.9 0.0 13.9 0.2 61.2 − 7.3 31.7 2019          Jan.
− 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.3 − 0.1 17.8 − 0.0 − 16.4 − 4.0 1.9          Feb.− 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.5 0.6 0.0 − 0.3 − 6.0 0.4 15.8 11.6 68.4          Mar.
0.1 0.1 0.0 − 0.0 1.7 0.8 1.1 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 0.5 31.6 − 3.0 − 19.4          Apr.
− 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.6 0.6 − 1.3 0.0 11.8 0.2 − 10.4 7.2 92.3          May
1.4 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 2.5 2.0 1.7 0.0 3.4 0.9 − 8.2 4.8 39.5          June
− 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 0.0 − 4.2 − 2.8 1.0 0.1 1.0 0.2 − 11.7 2.2 59.2          July
1.1 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 3.1 0.1 − 5.4 0.4 5.8 2.3 221.7          Aug.
− 0.8 − 2.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 1.1 0.1 1.3 1.7 − 8.3 5.3 − 69.0          Sep.
3.4 2.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 1.8 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 6.5 − 2.1 − 9.7 − 6.9 − 102.1          Oct.
0.4 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.0 0.2 0.4 − 0.2 5.6 0.2 − 7.2 11.5 4.2          Nov.
− 1.5 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 0.3 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 9.2 − 1.3 − 89.9 6.2 0.5          Dec.
governments. 3In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are published together with money market fund shares. 4Statistical breaks have been
classed as money market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were eliminated from the flow figures (see also footnote * in Table  II.1). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which: of which:
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2019         July 1,567 8,421.6 520.0 2,454.5 1,958.2 492.1 4,305.4 411.5 3,211.6 0.4 671.1 113.2 1,028.5
         Aug. 1,562 8,695.0 522.3 2,465.3 1,971.4 489.5 4,342.4 420.9 3,230.9 0.5 677.8 112.6 1,252.5
         Sep. 1,551 8,599.6 500.3 2,474.9 1,982.7 487.5 4,326.5 396.2 3,237.7 0.4 679.8 112.4 1,185.5
         Oct. 1,543 8,494.3 577.0 2,384.8 1,893.8 486.4 4,333.2 398.5 3,250.2 0.4 671.6 112.2 1,087.1
         Nov. 1,535 8,558.1 576.9 2,424.4 1,930.1 489.9 4,351.6 395.8 3,266.3 0.4 676.0 112.1 1,093.2
         Dec. 1,534 8,359.6 526.7 2,319.0 1,830.1 486.3 4,316.9 367.7 3,264.5 0.5 673.3 112.0 1,085.1
Commercial banks 6
2019         Nov. 260 3,567.0 330.9 1,006.1 921.7 84.0 1,371.2 234.3 924.0 0.3 206.2 50.6 808.2
         Dec. 259 3,445.8 282.3 949.7 866.6 82.8 1,341.8 212.2 922.2 0.4 202.8 50.2 821.7
   Big banks 7
2019         Nov. 4 2,127.2 106.2 579.8 546.1 33.7 652.6 129.7 409.7 0.1 108.4 44.8 743.9
         Dec. 4 2,068.6 92.6 546.7 513.9 32.8 626.4 107.9 409.2 0.1 106.4 44.6 758.3
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2019         Nov. 148 1,037.8 116.9 253.8 205.0 48.6 605.6 69.5 443.9 0.1 90.8 5.1 56.3
         Dec. 147 1,010.4 114.2 234.5 186.1 48.3 601.3 68.0 442.6 0.1 89.3 4.8 55.7
   Branches of foreign banks
2019         Nov. 108 402.0 107.8 172.5 170.6 1.7 113.0 35.1 70.4 0.1 7.1 0.7 8.1
         Dec. 108 366.7 75.6 168.5 166.6 1.7 114.1 36.2 70.3 0.2 7.1 0.8 7.8
Landesbanken
2019         Nov. 6 843.5 33.1 276.8 212.7 63.1 417.6 50.9 313.0 0.0 49.5 9.1 107.1
         Dec. 6 807.2 37.4 252.3 190.3 61.4 408.6 45.0 311.3 0.0 48.9 9.0 99.9
Savings banks
2019         Nov. 380 1,354.5 87.2 180.0 62.9 116.8 1,052.8 51.0 836.1 0.0 165.3 14.3 20.2
         Dec. 380 1,341.7 78.7 175.1 58.6 116.2 1,054.2 50.8 837.3 0.0 165.7 14.7 19.0
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2019         Nov. 842 985.5 39.7 172.2 65.1 106.8 735.2 34.6 587.5 0.0 113.0 17.4 20.9
         Dec. 842 982.9 35.0 171.3 64.0 107.2 738.2 35.9 588.7 0.0 113.5 17.6 20.9
Mortgage banks
2019         Nov. 10 231.5 2.3 23.3 14.1 9.2 197.2 2.8 175.0 − 19.4 0.2 8.6
         Dec. 10 231.0 1.8 24.1 14.8 9.2 196.3 3.0 174.1 − 19.2 0.2 8.7
Building and loan associations
2019         Nov. 19 237.3 1.4 49.0 32.7 16.2 181.8 1.1 154.8 . 25.9 0.3 4.8
         Dec. 19 237.9 1.5 48.7 32.5 16.2 182.9 1.0 156.0 . 25.9 0.3 4.4
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2019         Nov. 18 1,338.7 82.4 717.1 620.8 93.8 395.8 21.0 276.0 − 96.6 20.2 123.3
         Dec. 18 1,313.1 90.0 697.9 603.2 93.3 394.8 19.8 274.8 − 97.2 20.0 110.4
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2019         Nov. 142 1,247.6 192.6 390.3 350.5 39.5 542.5 89.7 355.7 0.3 95.1 3.4 118.8
         Dec. 142 1,181.8 164.2 364.9 325.5 39.1 537.5 88.3 353.5 0.4 93.7 3.3 112.0
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2019         Nov. 34 845.5 84.8 217.8 179.9 37.8 429.5 54.6 285.3 0.2 88.1 2.7 110.7
         Dec. 34 815.1 88.6 196.4 158.9 37.3 423.4 52.1 283.1 0.2 86.7 2.5 104.2
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,822.4 584.0 1,238.4 3,879.8 2,292.6 284.1 675.8 59.8 588.6 549.5 38.7 1,179.0 545.3 995.2 2019          July
1,840.9 563.7 1,277.2 3,912.6 2,316.1 298.9 671.9 67.2 587.0 548.3 38.6 1,178.3 545.8 1,217.5          Aug.1,844.1 561.9 1,282.2 3,873.7 2,308.5 271.8 669.3 36.9 585.7 547.6 38.4 1,185.4 546.5 1,149.9          Sep.
1,837.1 560.1 1,276.9 3,896.3 2,327.0 279.0 668.4 43.1 583.9 546.5 38.0 1,164.7 547.5 1,048.8          Oct.
1,846.4 579.0 1,267.3 3,926.4 2,365.0 273.9 667.5 43.9 582.3 545.8 37.7 1,182.8 548.9 1,053.7          Nov.1,690.8 446.6 1,244.2 3,890.7 2,348.7 257.2 667.2 29.2 581.8 546.4 35.9 1,172.2 552.5 1,053.3          Dec.
Commercial banks 6
913.3 406.0 507.3 1,569.1 1,024.1 167.7 260.9 41.6 100.5 93.0 16.0 165.6 199.7 719.3 2019          Nov.
800.5 322.6 477.8 1,545.0 1,007.3 163.2 260.0 28.4 100.0 93.3 14.5 164.7 200.3 735.4          Dec.
Big banks 7
456.4 177.5 278.8 783.7 493.7 96.0 106.1 41.2 84.4 77.8 3.6 118.4 110.2 658.6 2019          Nov.
407.1 148.4 258.7 756.4 476.7 89.4 104.1 28.2 83.9 78.1 2.3 117.7 110.2 677.2          Dec.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
231.2 93.3 137.9 630.7 423.9 46.3 132.3 0.4 15.9 14.9 12.3 46.5 79.8 49.7 2019          Nov.
203.7 79.6 124.1 632.0 423.7 46.9 133.3 0.2 15.9 14.9 12.1 46.3 80.2 48.2          Dec.
Branches of foreign banks
225.8 135.2 90.6 154.7 106.6 25.4 22.4 − 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.7 9.7 11.1 2019          Nov.
189.6 94.6 95.1 156.6 106.9 26.8 22.6 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.6 9.9 10.0          Dec.
Landesbanken
249.2 64.6 184.5 248.4 112.9 42.7 85.9 1.9 6.7 6.6 0.3 196.5 40.7 108.7 2019          Nov.
225.3 29.9 195.3 241.2 114.9 34.1 85.4 0.8 6.5 6.4 0.3 195.2 43.4 102.1          Dec.
Savings banks
147.2 13.2 134.0 1,022.4 688.1 16.2 14.9 − 287.9 266.7 15.3 18.3 122.4 44.3 2019          Nov.
137.6 7.5 130.1 1,019.2 688.0 13.9 14.8 − 287.4 266.4 15.0 18.2 122.4 44.3          Dec.
 
Credit cooperatives
 
124.5 3.7 120.7 735.4 497.6 33.0 13.5 − 186.7 179.0 4.5 10.9 83.6 31.0 2019          Nov.
122.2 2.0 120.2 734.9 497.4 32.0 13.6 − 187.4 179.9 4.5 10.7 83.8 31.4          Dec.
Mortgage banks
47.0 3.3 43.7 69.7 2.4 3.3 64.0 − − − . 97.4 10.2 7.2 2019          Nov.
48.3 3.0 45.3 68.8 2.4 2.9 63.4 − − − . 96.2 10.3 7.5          Dec.
Building and loan associations
24.0 2.9 21.1 187.4 3.2 2.3 181.3 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.8 12.0 12.2 2019          Nov.
23.9 2.2 21.6 189.5 3.1 2.4 183.5 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.8 12.0 10.6          Dec.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
341.3 85.3 256.0 94.0 36.7 8.7 47.0 0.4 − − . 692.2 80.3 130.9 2019          Nov.
333.1 79.3 253.7 92.3 35.6 8.8 46.4 0.0 − − . 685.4 80.3 122.0          Dec.
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
473.7 242.0 231.7 562.6 408.5 50.1 79.3 1.6 19.5 19.1 5.1 33.4 61.3 116.6 2019          Nov.
406.4 184.7 221.7 569.7 411.7 53.6 79.8 2.9 19.6 19.2 5.0 32.5 61.7 111.6          Dec.
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
248.0 106.8 141.1 407.9 301.9 24.7 56.9 1.6 19.2 18.9 5.0 32.7 51.5 105.5 2019          Nov.
216.8 90.1 126.6 413.0 304.8 26.8 57.2 2.9 19.3 18.9 4.9 31.9 51.8 101.6          Dec.
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to Ap ril 2018)
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Br anches (with
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking cat egories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2018         July 34.4 456.8 1,369.6 1,128.2 0.0 1.1 240.3 4.8 3,368.0 2,949.9 0.2 2.2 415.6
         Aug. 34.8 455.2 1,383.7 1,141.5 0.0 1.2 241.0 5.3 3,368.5 2,956.8 0.2 1.6 409.9
         Sep. 35.6 471.0 1,349.1 1,105.9 0.0 1.3 241.9 5.9 3,384.0 2,971.7 0.2 1.8 410.2
         Oct. 36.6 505.8 1,323.8 1,082.0 0.0 1.4 240.3 6.1 3,384.4 2,977.1 0.2 0.6 406.6
         Nov. 36.5 496.8 1,350.3 1,107.7 0.0 1.3 241.3 6.0 3,397.3 2,992.0 0.2 0.8 404.3
         Dec. 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019         Jan. 36.5 451.8 1,346.4 1,106.7 0.0 0.8 238.9 6.1 3,405.3 3,003.3 0.2 1.0 400.8
         Feb. 36.6 471.9 1,361.8 1,118.8 0.0 0.8 242.1 6.1 3,413.6 3,014.0 0.2 0.3 399.0
         Mar. 36.8 476.4 1,380.3 1,137.3 0.0 1.0 242.0 6.0 3,425.0 3,026.0 0.3 1.0 397.7
         Apr. 38.0 501.2 1,363.8 1,123.2 0.0 0.8 239.8 6.0 3,428.9 3,034.7 0.2 1.1 393.0
         May 37.7 517.6 1,371.8 1,129.7 0.0 0.8 241.3 5.5 3,445.6 3,049.5 0.2 1.5 394.4
         June 37.7 477.9 1,362.5 1,121.2 0.0 1.0 240.3 5.2 3,467.1 3,067.0 0.2 1.3 398.5
         July 37.2 460.1 1,355.5 1,113.6 0.0 0.9 241.0 5.1 3,476.1 3,075.1 0.2 2.3 398.6
         Aug. 38.0 462.1 1,365.8 1,126.4 0.0 0.9 238.4 4.8 3,491.7 3,087.2 0.2 2.9 401.4
         Sep. 37.8 452.7 1,354.1 1,115.7 0.0 0.8 237.6 4.7 3,499.8 3,094.5 0.2 3.8 401.3
         Oct. 39.0 529.1 1,252.1 1,013.6 0.0 0.9 237.6 4.6 3,506.7 3,104.5 0.2 3.4 398.6
         Nov. 39.9 529.6 1,301.7 1,059.6 0.0 1.1 241.0 4.6 3,523.5 3,121.1 0.2 3.3 398.9
         Dec. 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
Changes *
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.2
2019 + 2.8 + 59.7 − 63.0 − 61.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 5.5
2018         July − 0.3 + 19.3 − 19.3 − 18.1 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 6.2 + 8.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 2.1
         Aug. + 0.4 − 1.6 + 15.6 + 14.8 − + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.7 + 7.1 − 0.0 − 0.6 − 5.8
         Sep. + 0.8 + 16.0 − 34.6 − 35.7 − + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 15.5 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.4
         Oct. + 1.1 + 34.7 − 25.4 − 23.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 5.4 − 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.6
         Nov. − 0.1 − 9.0 + 26.6 + 25.7 − − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 12.9 + 14.9 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 2.2
         Dec. + 3.9 − 80.6 − 26.9 − 24.0 − − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.5
2019         Jan. − 3.9 + 35.6 + 23.0 + 23.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 10.8 + 13.1 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 3.1
         Feb. + 0.1 + 20.1 + 15.3 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 8.3 + 10.7 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 1.7
         Mar. + 0.2 + 3.8 + 22.0 + 22.7 − + 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.0 + 10.9 + 12.0 + 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.8
         Apr. + 1.2 + 24.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.7
         May − 0.3 + 16.4 + 8.0 + 6.5 − − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 16.7 + 14.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.5
         June − 0.0 − 39.7 − 9.2 − 8.4 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 21.5 + 17.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 4.1
         July − 0.5 − 17.7 − 7.2 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0
         Aug. + 0.8 + 1.9 + 10.3 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.2 + 15.6 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 2.8
         Sep. − 0.2 − 9.4 − 9.2 − 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.1 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.1
         Oct. + 1.2 + 76.4 − 102.1 − 102.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.8
         Nov. + 0.9 + 0.4 + 49.6 + 46.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 16.8 + 16.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3
         Dec. + 3.3 − 53.0 − 46.9 − 43.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
− 18.5 94.4 1,041.4 118.8 922.6 0.0 4.9 3,473.2 2,002.6 852.3 578.2 40.0 32.8 2018          July
− 18.4 88.0 1,042.8 117.3 925.5 0.0 4.8 3,485.0 2,020.0 847.9 577.6 39.5 33.1          Aug.− 18.3 87.9 1,033.4 117.1 916.2 0.0 4.8 3,482.9 2,022.5 844.0 577.3 39.1 33.9          Sep.
− 17.9 87.9 1,032.9 111.3 921.6 0.0 4.8 3,504.0 2,044.7 843.7 577.0 38.6 33.7          Oct.
− 17.9 87.7 1,045.8 115.5 930.3 0.0 4.7 3,537.4 2,079.6 843.0 576.9 37.9 33.7          Nov.− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9          Dec.
− 17.8 90.8 1,039.4 114.9 924.6 0.0 4.7 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 578.5 36.7 33.8 2019          Jan.
− 17.8 90.8 1,045.6 118.2 927.4 0.0 4.7 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 579.5 36.1 34.0          Feb.− 17.6 90.9 1,049.4 122.3 927.1 0.0 4.7 3,565.3 2,101.1 846.4 582.0 35.8 33.9          Mar.
− 17.5 90.7 1,060.8 131.5 929.3 0.0 4.6 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 582.3 35.4 33.9          Apr.
− 17.5 91.2 1,056.4 121.5 934.9 0.0 4.6 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 582.5 35.2 33.7          May− 17.5 90.9 1,047.1 122.5 924.6 0.0 4.6 3,609.5 2,150.7 841.2 582.7 34.9 33.4          June
− 17.1 91.0 1,053.9 123.2 930.6 0.0 4.5 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 581.8 34.8 32.9          July
− 17.1 90.3 1,061.4 127.7 933.7 0.0 4.5 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 580.3 34.7 32.7          Aug.− 17.0 90.0 1,037.5 121.4 916.1 0.0 4.5 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 579.0 34.4 32.6          Sep.
− 17.1 90.1 1,049.3 129.3 920.0 0.0 4.5 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 577.2 34.1 32.5          Oct.
− 17.1 90.2 1,055.9 126.6 929.4 0.0 4.5 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 575.7 33.8 32.5          Nov.− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5          Dec.
Changes *
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018− − 0.7 + 0.1 − 8.6 + 1.6 − 10.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 2019
− − 0.2 + 0.4 + 7.7 − 2.7 + 10.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 6.1 − 4.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.2 2018          July
− + 0.0 − 6.0 + 2.8 − 1.5 + 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 11.9 + 17.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 − 0.5 + 0.5          Aug.− − 0.1 − 0.0 − 9.5 − 0.2 − 9.3 − − 0.0 − 1.9 + 2.7 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.6          Sep.
− − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 5.8 + 5.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 21.2 + 22.2 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.2          Oct.
− − 0.0 − 0.2 + 13.0 + 4.2 + 8.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 33.4 + 34.8 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 3.2 − 24.9 − 8.9 − 16.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 1.8 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2          Dec.
− − 0.2 − 0.0 + 18.6 + 9.4 + 9.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 2019          Jan.
− − − 0.0 + 5.9 + 3.3 + 2.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1          Feb.− − 0.2 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 3.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 10.4 + 12.0 − 3.8 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0          Mar.
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 9.2 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.3 − 10.0 + 5.7 − + 0.0 + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          May− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.2 + 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.7 + 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5          July
− + 0.0 − 0.6 + 7.6 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 0.0 − + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2          Aug.− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 21.4 − 6.3 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          Sep.
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 11.8 + 7.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 6.7 − 2.7 + 9.4 − + 0.0 + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 0.2 − 45.8 − 19.3 − 26.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec.
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2018         July 0.2 1,031.9 795.4 502.7 292.7 2.3 234.2 2.6 740.4 464.1 103.9 360.2 6.1 270.2
         Aug. 0.2 1,027.9 789.8 496.9 292.9 2.3 235.8 2.6 748.7 469.5 107.6 362.0 6.5 272.7
         Sep. 0.3 1,028.7 787.7 496.7 291.1 2.3 238.6 2.7 742.5 464.0 102.4 361.6 5.3 273.2
         Oct. 0.3 1,013.0 772.7 492.7 280.0 2.1 238.1 2.8 772.5 495.4 115.8 379.6 6.0 271.1
         Nov. 0.3 1,007.9 765.4 491.4 274.0 1.5 241.0 2.9 776.4 500.3 117.6 382.7 5.9 270.2
         Dec. 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019         Jan. 0.2 1,031.6 787.8 518.2 269.6 1.3 242.5 3.1 784.3 511.1 119.4 391.8 6.0 267.2
         Feb. 0.2 1,031.8 785.3 511.5 273.7 1.7 244.8 3.2 782.0 504.5 110.6 393.9 5.9 271.5
         Mar. 0.2 1,092.9 845.1 565.9 279.2 2.0 245.8 3.2 799.2 519.8 122.8 397.0 7.8 271.6
         Apr. 0.2 1,106.2 858.3 579.0 279.3 2.8 245.2 3.3 807.9 529.0 130.3 398.7 6.6 272.2
         May 0.2 1,090.6 840.9 564.1 276.8 2.8 246.8 3.6 820.1 542.9 140.2 402.7 6.4 270.8
         June 0.2 1,109.3 857.3 578.3 279.0 3.1 248.9 3.8 816.2 535.9 135.8 400.1 6.6 273.6
         July 0.2 1,099.0 844.6 563.6 281.0 3.3 251.1 3.8 829.3 548.2 143.9 404.3 8.6 272.5
         Aug. 0.2 1,099.5 844.9 562.8 282.1 3.4 251.1 3.9 850.7 564.8 158.0 406.8 9.4 276.4
         Sep. 0.2 1,120.8 867.0 583.4 283.5 3.9 249.9 3.9 826.7 539.6 131.1 408.5 8.6 278.5
         Oct. 0.2 1,132.8 880.2 590.3 289.9 3.8 248.8 3.9 826.5 544.3 140.7 403.7 9.2 273.0
         Nov. 0.2 1,122.8 870.5 585.6 284.9 3.4 248.9 3.8 828.1 541.1 136.8 404.3 9.9 277.1
         Dec. 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
Changes *
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.7
2019 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 11.3 − 21.9 + 10.7 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 26.8 + 19.9 + 12.7 + 7.3 + 3.0 + 3.8
2018         July − 0.0 + 7.0 + 5.1 + 2.7 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 9.2 + 10.4 + 6.4 + 4.0 + 0.1 − 1.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 6.4 − 7.9 − 7.2 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 0.1 + 7.3 + 4.7 + 3.5 + 1.1 + 0.4 + 2.3
         Sep. + 0.0 − 1.2 − 3.9 − 1.2 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 2.8 + 0.1 − 7.6 − 6.8 − 5.5 − 1.3 − 1.1 + 0.3
         Oct. − 0.0 − 7.7 − 6.9 − 4.5 − 2.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 12.8 + 14.8 + 10.5 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 2.6
         Nov. + 0.0 − 4.9 − 6.5 − 0.9 − 5.6 − 0.6 + 2.1 + 0.1 + 5.3 + 5.4 + 2.0 + 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Dec. − 0.0 + 8.0 + 8.2 + 13.2 − 4.9 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 13.4 − 9.5 − 17.4 + 7.9 − 2.0 − 2.0
2019         Jan. − 0.0 + 17.6 + 16.1 + 14.5 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 22.2 + 21.4 + 19.4 + 2.0 + 1.7 − 0.9
         Feb. + 0.0 − 1.8 − 4.4 − 7.7 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 8.3 − 9.2 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 4.2
         Mar. + 0.0 + 28.2 + 27.8 + 24.7 + 3.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 3.0 − 2.5 − 3.4 + 0.8 + 1.5 − 2.0
         Apr. + 0.0 + 13.7 + 13.5 + 13.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.6 + 7.7 + 1.9 − 1.1 + 0.7
         May − 0.0 − 17.6 − 19.4 − 16.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 12.1 + 13.9 + 10.0 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 1.6
         June + 0.0 + 23.8 + 21.3 + 15.8 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.4
         July − 0.0 − 15.1 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 7.7 + 2.2 + 2.0 − 1.6
         Aug. + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 19.0 + 14.5 + 13.9 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.7
         Sep. − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.5 − 11.3 − 10.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 1.6
         Oct. + 0.0 + 18.1 + 18.9 + 9.8 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 7.5 + 10.1 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.2
         Nov. − 0.0 − 14.2 − 13.8 − 6.7 − 7.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 6.1 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 0.7 + 3.7
         Dec. + 0.0 − 53.1 − 51.2 − 50.3 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 29.1 − 24.9 − 24.9 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.9
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 201032.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 201812.6 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 1.1 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.9 23.0 708.4 420.2 288.2 197.2 91.0 0.0 273.1 129.4 143.7 84.1 59.6 0.3 2018          July
11.9 23.1 709.8 404.3 305.5 217.7 87.8 0.0 278.8 129.5 149.2 90.1 59.1 0.3          Aug.11.8 22.4 711.7 426.7 285.0 197.3 87.7 0.0 269.3 133.2 136.1 79.2 56.9 0.1          Sep.
11.8 22.5 702.4 413.6 288.9 200.1 88.8 0.0 271.0 129.8 141.2 82.8 58.4 0.1          Oct.
11.8 22.3 693.6 410.5 283.1 194.4 88.7 0.0 258.1 132.6 125.5 67.7 57.8 0.2          Nov.11.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1          Dec.
11.7 21.5 674.5 405.5 269.1 182.9 86.1 0.0 268.4 132.7 135.8 77.9 57.9 0.1 2019          Jan.
11.8 21.7 699.2 430.9 268.3 181.1 87.3 0.0 241.7 110.2 131.5 73.6 57.8 0.1          Feb.13.0 21.5 762.8 464.1 298.7 209.1 89.6 1.3 259.1 113.8 145.3 87.7 57.6 0.1          Mar.
13.0 22.3 787.1 441.7 345.4 255.0 90.4 1.3 268.4 124.2 144.2 86.9 57.3 0.1          Apr.
13.0 22.3 783.6 482.4 301.2 210.0 91.2 1.3 261.3 120.7 140.6 83.6 57.0 0.1          May12.8 22.3 787.2 471.3 315.9 225.1 90.7 1.3 265.6 126.9 138.8 81.8 56.9 0.1          June
12.8 22.0 768.5 460.7 307.8 214.3 93.5 1.3 262.9 126.2 136.7 79.5 57.2 0.1          July
12.8 22.0 779.4 436.0 343.4 247.8 95.6 1.3 274.2 127.1 147.1 90.2 56.9 0.1          Aug.12.8 22.2 806.6 440.4 366.2 269.8 96.4 1.3 244.6 123.1 121.5 63.1 58.4 0.1          Sep.
12.6 21.8 787.8 430.9 356.9 259.3 97.6 1.1 251.8 119.9 131.9 73.3 58.6 0.1          Oct.
12.6 21.6 790.4 452.4 338.0 239.5 98.5 1.1 251.6 120.5 131.1 72.4 58.7 0.1          Nov.12.6 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 1.1 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1          Dec.
Changes *
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018+ 0.7 − 0.9 − 9.5 − 49.4 + 39.8 + 28.0 + 11.8 + 1.1 − 0.8 + 2.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 2019
− 0.1 − 0.6 − 3.0 − 12.2 + 9.2 + 9.1 + 0.1 − + 13.9 + 6.3 + 7.6 + 5.4 + 2.2 − 2018          July
− 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 16.4 + 16.3 + 20.0 − 3.7 − + 5.7 − 0.1 + 5.8 + 5.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Aug.− 0.0 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 22.1 − 21.2 − 20.9 − 0.3 − − 9.8 + 3.6 − 13.3 − 11.2 − 2.2 − 0.2          Sep.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 − 12.5 − 14.5 + 2.0 + 1.4 + 0.6 − + 0.7 − 3.8 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 0.0          Oct.
− 0.0 − 0.2 − 8.2 − 2.8 − 5.4 − 5.4 − 0.0 − − 12.7 + 2.9 − 15.6 − 15.0 − 0.6 + 0.0          Nov.+ 0.0 − 0.1 − 49.1 − 40.2 − 8.9 − 7.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 22.3 − 4.1 − 4.0 − 0.1 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 − 0.6 + 31.6 + 34.9 − 3.3 − 2.6 − 0.7 − + 36.9 + 22.5 + 14.5 + 14.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 2019          Jan.
+ 0.0 + 0.1 + 23.6 + 24.8 − 1.2 − 2.2 + 1.0 − − 27.2 − 22.6 − 4.6 − 4.6 − 0.1 + 0.0          Feb.+ 1.3 − 0.2 + 32.9 + 22.7 + 10.2 + 9.0 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 5.1 + 1.6 + 3.5 + 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.8 + 24.4 − 22.2 + 46.6 + 45.9 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 10.4 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 −          Apr.
− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2 + 40.4 − 44.6 − 45.3 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 7.2 − 7.9 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.0 + 7.2 − 9.6 + 16.8 + 14.6 + 2.2 − + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          June
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 22.0 − 12.0 − 10.0 − 12.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 2.4 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 25.9 + 34.3 + 32.8 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.6 + 10.0 + 10.3 − 0.4 −          Aug.− 0.0 + 0.1 + 9.8 − 3.1 + 12.9 + 12.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 2.3 − 18.6 − 20.0 + 1.4 + 0.0          Sep.
− 0.2 − 0.3 − 14.6 − 8.1 − 6.5 − 8.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.7 + 10.9 + 10.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 20.3 − 20.9 − 21.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.− 0.0 − 0.2 − 106.0 −111.5 + 5.5 + 5.5 + 0.1 − − 20.7 − 7.7 − 12.9 − 11.4 − 1.6 − 0.0          Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2018         July 3,368.0 2,950.1 256.7 225.4 224.7 0.7 31.3 29.8 1.5 3,111.3 2,692.5
         Aug. 3,368.5 2,957.0 250.5 223.9 223.1 0.8 26.6 25.7 0.9 3,118.0 2,700.6
         Sep. 3,384.0 2,971.9 255.9 232.3 231.6 0.7 23.6 22.5 1.1 3,128.1 2,711.1
         Oct. 3,384.4 2,977.3 252.6 228.0 227.4 0.6 24.6 24.7 − 0.1 3,131.8 2,718.7
         Nov. 3,397.3 2,992.2 251.7 227.9 227.4 0.5 23.9 23.6 0.3 3,145.6 2,732.7
         Dec. 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019         Jan. 3,405.3 3,003.5 255.8 230.8 230.3 0.5 25.0 24.5 0.5 3,149.4 2,738.4
         Feb. 3,413.6 3,014.2 257.6 235.4 234.9 0.5 22.2 22.4 − 0.2 3,156.0 2,746.4
         Mar. 3,425.0 3,026.3 261.6 241.0 240.4 0.6 20.6 20.2 0.4 3,163.4 2,755.8
         Apr. 3,428.9 3,034.9 256.3 235.0 234.3 0.7 21.4 21.0 0.4 3,172.6 2,769.9
         May 3,445.6 3,049.7 257.3 236.6 235.7 0.9 20.7 20.1 0.6 3,188.3 2,785.8
         June 3,467.1 3,067.2 271.3 249.8 249.2 0.6 21.5 20.8 0.7 3,195.8 2,795.2
         July 3,476.1 3,075.3 270.3 243.8 243.2 0.6 26.5 24.9 1.6 3,205.9 2,807.7
         Aug. 3,491.7 3,087.4 266.2 238.8 238.3 0.5 27.4 25.0 2.4 3,225.5 2,825.7
         Sep. 3,499.8 3,094.7 269.2 246.1 245.6 0.6 23.1 19.9 3.2 3,230.6 2,831.0
         Oct. 3,506.7 3,104.7 261.6 237.1 236.5 0.6 24.5 21.6 2.8 3,245.1 2,849.5
         Nov. 3,523.5 3,121.3 262.6 239.8 239.2 0.6 22.8 20.1 2.7 3,260.9 2,864.3
         Dec. 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
Changes *
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2018         July + 6.2 + 7.9 − 0.3 − 4.5 − 4.3 − 0.2 + 4.2 + 3.6 + 0.6 + 6.5 + 9.9
         Aug. + 0.7 + 7.1 − 6.2 − 1.5 − 1.5 + 0.0 − 4.7 − 4.1 − 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.2
         Sep. + 15.5 + 14.9 + 5.6 + 8.6 + 8.7 − 0.0 − 3.1 − 3.3 + 0.2 + 9.9 + 10.3
         Oct. + 0.5 + 5.3 − 4.8 − 5.8 − 5.7 − 0.1 + 1.1 + 2.2 − 1.1 + 5.2 + 9.1
         Nov. + 12.9 + 14.9 − 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.1 + 0.3 + 13.8 + 14.0
         Dec. − 2.9 − 1.8 − 2.2 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 2.4 − 1.9 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1
2019         Jan. + 10.8 + 13.1 + 6.3 + 2.8 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 3.5 + 2.8 + 0.7 + 4.5 + 5.6
         Feb. + 8.3 + 10.7 + 1.8 + 4.6 + 4.5 + 0.0 − 2.8 − 2.1 − 0.7 + 6.5 + 8.0
         Mar. + 10.9 + 12.0 + 4.1 + 5.7 + 5.7 + 0.1 − 1.7 − 2.3 + 0.6 + 6.9 + 8.8
         Apr. + 3.8 + 8.5 − 4.7 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 13.4
         May + 16.7 + 14.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.7 + 16.0
         June + 21.5 + 17.6 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 13.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.4
         July + 9.2 + 8.2 − 1.0 − 6.1 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 10.2 + 12.9
         Aug. + 15.6 + 12.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 19.8 + 18.2
         Sep. + 8.1 + 7.3 + 3.1 + 7.4 + 7.3 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 5.1 + 0.8 + 5.1 + 4.8
         Oct. + 6.9 + 10.0 − 7.4 − 8.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 14.4 + 18.4
         Nov. + 16.8 + 16.7 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 15.9 + 14.9
         Dec. − 1.9 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 20102,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 20182,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5 2019
2,454.6 277.7 2,176.9 237.9 17.0 418.7 241.0 20.3 220.8 177.7 − 1.5 2018          July
2,467.5 279.3 2,188.2 233.1 17.0 417.4 240.6 21.1 219.5 176.8 − 1.3          Aug.2,476.9 280.1 2,196.8 234.1 16.9 417.1 241.0 20.5 220.5 176.1 − 1.3          Sep.
2,484.5 279.7 2,204.9 234.1 16.6 413.1 240.7 20.2 220.5 172.5 − 1.3          Oct.
2,500.3 284.2 2,216.1 232.4 16.6 412.9 240.9 20.0 220.9 171.9 − 1.3          Nov.2,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4          Dec.
2,507.3 283.1 2,224.2 231.1 16.5 411.1 241.4 19.3 222.0 169.7 − 1.3 2019          Jan.
2,516.1 284.2 2,231.9 230.3 16.5 409.6 240.8 18.9 221.9 168.7 − 1.3          Feb.2,525.3 286.6 2,238.7 230.5 16.3 407.6 240.4 18.7 221.7 167.2 − 1.3          Mar.
2,539.8 291.3 2,248.5 230.0 16.2 402.7 239.8 18.4 221.4 162.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,554.8 293.7 2,261.1 231.0 16.3 402.5 239.1 18.2 220.9 163.4 − 1.3          May2,560.3 294.3 2,266.1 234.9 16.2 400.6 237.0 17.9 219.0 163.7 − 1.3          June
2,571.9 295.2 2,276.8 235.8 15.8 398.2 235.4 17.4 218.0 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,588.9 298.3 2,290.5 236.8 15.9 399.7 235.2 17.4 217.8 164.5 − 1.2          Aug.2,594.1 297.2 2,296.8 236.9 15.8 399.6 235.2 17.0 218.2 164.4 − 1.2          Sep.
2,611.0 299.7 2,311.3 238.5 15.9 395.6 235.5 16.9 218.6 160.1 − 1.2          Oct.
2,624.4 301.6 2,322.8 240.0 15.9 396.5 237.6 17.6 220.0 158.9 − 1.2          Nov.2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5          Dec.
Changes *
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018+ 126.0 + 18.9 + 107.2 + 6.8 − 0.8 − 17.8 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 12.3 − + 0.1 2019
+ 10.1 + 2.5 + 7.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 1.9 − − 0.0 2018          July
+ 13.1 + 1.6 + 11.5 − 4.9 − 0.0 − 1.3 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.9 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 9.2 + 0.5 + 8.7 + 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.6 + 0.9 − 0.7 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 9.2 + 1.0 + 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 3.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 15.8 + 4.6 + 11.2 − 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Nov.− 0.9 − 1.6 + 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.7 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 1.5 − + 0.2          Dec.
+ 8.0 + 0.5 + 7.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 − − 0.2 2019          Jan.
+ 8.7 + 1.1 + 7.6 − 0.7 − − 1.5 − 0.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 1.0 − −          Feb.+ 9.1 + 2.1 + 6.9 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 1.5 − + 0.0          Mar.
+ 13.9 + 4.5 + 9.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Apr.
+ 15.0 + 2.4 + 12.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − − 0.0          May+ 5.6 + 0.6 + 5.0 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.2 − − 0.0          June
+ 11.7 + 1.0 + 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 17.1 + 3.3 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 4.7 − 0.7 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 16.8 + 2.4 + 14.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 13.4 + 1.9 + 11.6 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − + 0.3          Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2017 2,610.1 1,304.3 1,326.6 1,053.0 273.6 1,403.1 368.5 131.3 112.6 67.3 133.3 50.2 51.5 147.9
2018         Dec. 2,727.0 1,382.2 1,391.2 1,116.4 274.8 1,483.6 392.7 139.3 116.5 71.9 138.7 53.2 50.6 157.3
2019         Mar. 2,765.7 1,437.3 1,404.9 1,152.3 252.6 1,513.5 398.4 144.4 117.8 74.0 141.0 53.6 50.1 160.5
         June 2,809.5 1,469.6 1,427.8 1,182.8 244.9 1,539.7 405.2 150.3 120.5 76.2 140.5 54.4 50.5 161.5
         Sep. 2,839.6 1,487.2 1,450.4 1,197.0 253.4 1,551.7 411.6 150.1 118.6 77.4 139.9 54.8 50.1 166.2
         Dec. 2,864.8 1,514.0 1,472.2 1,214.9 257.4 1,560.5 418.0 146.6 119.1 77.1 141.6 54.2 50.3 168.2
 Short-term lending
2017 210.6 − 6.5 − 6.5 180.8 3.6 32.3 4.0 13.6 45.2 3.4 4.0 27.4
2018         Dec. 227.6 − 7.2 − 7.2 195.9 4.1 35.5 4.9 14.7 48.3 3.7 4.9 28.0
2019         Mar. 240.4 − 7.7 − 7.7 210.1 4.5 39.5 6.2 15.8 49.6 4.0 5.0 29.7
         June 249.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 217.3 4.6 42.9 7.2 16.5 48.6 4.7 5.2 29.3
         Sep. 245.6 − 8.4 − 8.4 213.6 5.0 41.1 5.3 16.7 48.0 4.4 4.5 30.1
         Dec. 238.4 − 8.1 − 8.1 206.2 4.7 35.8 5.6 15.7 48.5 3.8 4.6 27.0
 Medium-term lending
2017 273.5 − 34.0 − 34.0 193.1 14.0 23.6 5.1 11.3 18.2 4.3 10.3 46.7
2018         Dec. 282.6 − 35.4 − 35.4 202.5 15.4 24.9 4.5 12.5 19.0 4.5 10.6 49.0
2019         Mar. 286.6 − 35.1 − 35.1 206.0 15.4 25.4 4.5 12.9 19.3 4.5 10.4 49.1
         June 294.3 − 36.0 − 36.0 212.6 16.1 26.1 5.2 13.5 19.5 4.5 10.4 49.0
         Sep. 297.1 − 36.4 − 36.4 215.4 16.5 27.3 4.9 13.7 19.6 4.7 10.0 50.1
         Dec. 301.3 − 36.6 − 36.6 219.5 16.6 28.5 4.9 13.9 19.7 4.6 10.2 52.0
 Long-term lending
2017 2,125.9 1,304.3 1,286.1 1,053.0 233.1 1,029.2 351.0 75.4 103.5 42.4 70.0 42.4 37.2 73.8
2018         Dec. 2,216.8 1,382.2 1,348.6 1,116.4 232.2 1,085.2 373.2 78.9 107.2 44.7 71.4 45.0 35.1 80.3
2019         Mar. 2,238.7 1,437.3 1,362.1 1,152.3 209.8 1,097.4 378.5 79.5 107.2 45.3 72.1 45.0 34.6 81.7
         June 2,266.1 1,469.6 1,383.8 1,182.8 200.9 1,109.8 384.5 81.3 108.1 46.2 72.4 45.3 34.9 83.2
         Sep. 2,296.8 1,487.2 1,405.6 1,197.0 208.6 1,122.7 390.2 81.8 108.5 46.9 72.3 45.7 35.6 85.9
         Dec. 2,325.1 1,514.0 1,427.6 1,214.9 212.7 1,134.9 396.6 82.2 108.6 47.6 73.3 45.8 35.5 89.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2018         Q4 + 18.5 + 10.8 + 15.2 + 8.9 + 6.2 + 6.8 + 4.8 − 1.1 + 0.7 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
2019         Q1 + 38.7 + 15.1 + 13.5 + 11.4 + 2.1 + 29.8 + 5.5 + 5.1 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.3 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 4.9
         Q2 + 43.8 + 16.3 + 20.1 + 13.5 + 6.7 + 26.8 + 6.9 + 5.8 + 1.7 + 2.2 − 0.7 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 1.0
         Q3 + 29.8 + 18.0 + 22.4 + 15.4 + 7.0 + 12.0 + 6.1 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 4.8
         Q4 + 25.3 + 21.9 + 21.9 + 15.8 + 6.1 + 9.2 + 6.5 − 3.6 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.1
 Short-term lending
2018         Q4 − 5.5 − − 0.1 − − 0.1 − 6.2 − 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 1.4
2019         Q1 + 12.9 − + 0.5 − + 0.5 + 14.3 + 0.4 + 4.0 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 3.5
         Q2 + 9.3 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 7.7 + 0.2 + 3.3 + 1.0 + 0.8 − 1.2 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Q3 − 3.6 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.3 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8
         Q4 − 7.0 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 7.5 − 0.2 − 5.3 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.7 + 0.1 − 3.1
 Medium-term lending
2018         Q4 + 3.9 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9
2019         Q1 + 3.7 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Q2 + 7.4 − + 0.9 − + 0.9 + 6.4 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Q3 + 3.5 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.3
         Q4 + 4.2 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 1.9
 Long-term lending
2018         Q4 + 20.1 + 10.8 + 14.7 + 8.9 + 5.8 + 9.6 + 4.3 + 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5
2019         Q1 + 22.0 + 15.1 + 13.3 + 11.4 + 1.9 + 12.3 + 5.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 1.5
         Q2 + 27.0 + 16.3 + 18.9 + 13.5 + 5.5 + 12.7 + 6.1 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 1.5
         Q3 + 30.0 + 18.0 + 21.3 + 15.4 + 5.9 + 12.7 + 5.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.7
         Q4 + 28.1 + 21.9 + 21.9 + 15.8 + 6.2 + 12.6 + 6.5 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.3
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
709.0 214.9 42.3 186.4 411.2 47.7 1,192.3 954.3 237.9 171.6 8.6 14.8 3.7 2017
756.0 237.0 47.3 196.9 432.6 48.0 1,228.4 994.8 233.7 172.9 8.3 15.0 3.7 2018          Dec.
772.0 242.9 48.7 197.6 436.3 48.6 1,237.2 1,002.7 234.4 173.7 8.0 15.1 3.8 2019          Mar.
785.8 247.4 51.6 199.3 441.1 48.6 1,254.6 1,018.8 235.9 175.6 8.0 15.2 3.8          June794.7 252.9 50.9 200.6 444.7 48.3 1,272.5 1,035.0 237.5 176.4 8.5 15.4 3.8          Sep.803.6 264.5 51.2 193.9 447.5 47.6 1,288.4 1,050.4 238.0 176.5 7.9 15.9 3.8          Dec.
Short-term lending
50.9 10.1 6.8 10.3 23.3 5.0 29.3 2.9 26.4 1.6 8.6 0.5 0.0 201755.9 12.0 8.1 10.4 24.0 5.2 31.2 3.1 28.2 1.5 8.3 0.5 − 2018          Dec.
60.1 12.1 9.3 10.4 24.4 5.8 29.8 3.2 26.5 1.5 8.0 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
63.0 12.5 10.2 10.6 24.6 5.6 31.3 3.4 28.0 1.9 8.0 0.5 0.0          June63.5 13.5 9.5 10.7 24.3 5.4 31.5 3.4 28.1 1.6 8.5 0.5 0.0          Sep.65.0 14.4 9.7 10.2 23.9 4.9 31.6 3.3 28.2 1.3 7.9 0.7 0.0          Dec.
Medium-term lending
73.5 12.1 9.3 18.3 32.7 3.6 79.9 20.0 59.9 55.2 − 0.6 0.0 201777.5 14.8 9.9 21.3 31.5 3.5 79.6 19.9 59.7 56.4 − 0.5 0.1 2018          Dec.
80.0 15.4 9.6 21.8 31.7 3.5 80.1 19.6 60.5 57.2 − 0.5 0.0 2019          Mar.
84.4 16.6 11.0 22.4 32.2 3.6 81.2 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          June85.1 17.5 11.2 22.6 32.0 3.7 81.3 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          Sep.85.7 18.1 11.0 22.9 31.9 3.5 81.4 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec.
Long-term lending
584.6 192.6 26.2 157.8 355.3 39.2 1,083.1 931.4 151.6 114.8 − 13.7 3.7 2017622.6 210.2 29.2 165.3 377.2 39.3 1,117.6 971.8 145.8 115.0 − 14.0 3.7 2018          Dec.
631.9 215.4 29.8 165.4 380.3 39.3 1,127.2 979.9 147.4 115.1 − 14.1 3.7 2019          Mar.
638.5 218.3 30.3 166.3 384.3 39.4 1,142.0 995.5 146.5 115.8 − 14.2 3.8          June646.1 222.0 30.3 167.3 388.4 39.2 1,159.7 1,011.7 147.9 116.7 − 14.4 3.7          Sep.652.8 231.9 30.4 160.9 391.7 39.1 1,175.5 1,027.1 148.3 117.1 − 14.7 3.8          Dec.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 8.4 + 6.1 − 1.1 + 2.3 + 2.1 − 0.5 + 11.7 + 10.3 + 1.4 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2018          Q4
+ 14.1 + 4.6 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 3.7 + 0.6 + 8.8 + 8.0 + 0.8 + 2.6 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 15.5 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 1.7 + 4.3 − 0.1 + 16.9 + 13.2 + 3.7 + 2.9 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 9.0 + 5.6 − 0.7 + 1.2 + 3.6 − 0.3 + 17.9 + 16.3 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 9.1 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 15.9 + 15.4 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
Short-term lending
− 1.8 + 0.3 − 2.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 2018          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.1 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 − 1.4 + 0.2 − 1.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 3.5 + 0.5 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 1.6 + 0.2 + 1.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0          Q2+ 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 1.6 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 1.3 + 0.8 + 0.1 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.5 − + 0.0 − 2018          Q4
+ 2.4 + 0.6 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 0.9 + 0.9 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 4.3 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.8 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0          Q3+ 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 8.9 + 5.0 + 0.9 + 0.8 + 2.4 − 0.2 + 10.4 + 10.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2018          Q4
+ 9.3 + 3.9 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 9.7 + 8.2 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q1
+ 7.7 + 2.9 + 0.5 + 0.8 + 3.7 + 0.0 + 14.2 + 12.8 + 1.5 + 1.7 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 7.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 3.9 − 0.2 + 17.4 + 16.0 + 1.4 + 1.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0          Q3+ 7.0 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 15.4 + 15.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2019         Jan. 3,540.8 2,079.4 846.3 212.7 633.6 57.1 576.4 578.5 36.7 33.8 14.9 0.8
         Feb. 3,554.5 2,088.8 850.1 217.9 632.2 56.2 576.0 579.5 36.1 34.0 15.1 0.6
         Mar. 3,565.3 2,101.1 846.4 215.8 630.5 57.0 573.5 582.0 35.8 33.9 15.2 0.2
         Apr. 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 214.7 626.9 56.0 570.9 582.3 35.4 33.9 15.2 2.6
         May 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 216.3 624.7 54.9 569.8 582.5 35.2 33.7 15.2 1.6
         June 3,609.5 2,150.7 841.2 214.5 626.7 55.4 571.4 582.7 34.9 33.4 15.1 2.2
         July 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 210.7 623.2 54.0 569.2 581.8 34.8 32.9 14.9 0.2
         Aug. 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 214.7 619.7 54.1 565.5 580.3 34.7 32.7 14.9 0.6
         Sep. 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 214.8 615.5 51.8 563.7 579.0 34.4 32.6 15.2 0.3
         Oct. 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 211.7 614.3 51.8 562.6 577.2 34.1 32.5 15.1 0.5
         Nov. 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 207.5 613.4 52.4 561.0 575.7 33.8 32.5 14.9 0.5
         Dec. 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
Changes*
2018 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 3.5 − 7.3 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 1.4 − 1.2
2019 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 0.8 − 24.9 − 4.1 − 20.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.3
2019         Jan. + 3.2 − 0.7 + 4.7 + 9.3 − 4.6 + 0.3 − 4.9 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 13.6 + 9.3 + 3.9 + 5.2 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2
         Mar. + 10.4 + 12.0 − 3.8 − 2.1 − 1.7 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr. + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 − 1.1 − 3.6 − 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.4
         May + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 1.6 − 2.2 − 1.1 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 1.0
         June − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 + 2.0 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.6
         July + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 3.8 − 3.7 − 1.4 − 2.3 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.9 − 2.0
         Aug. + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 + 4.0 − 3.6 + 0.1 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.5
         Sep. − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 + 0.0 − 4.2 − 2.4 − 1.8 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.3
         Oct. + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 4.2 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Dec. − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
Domestic government End of year or month*
2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2019         Jan. 221.7 59.2 154.7 74.8 79.8 29.2 50.6 3.7 4.2 25.2 2.2 −
         Feb. 230.4 63.0 159.5 80.1 79.4 28.4 51.0 3.8 4.1 25.2 2.2 −
         Mar. 232.2 64.0 160.3 79.8 80.5 29.3 51.2 3.8 4.1 25.1 2.2 −
         Apr. 229.6 62.3 159.5 79.7 79.8 28.4 51.4 3.7 4.1 25.0 2.2 1.4
         May 238.8 68.9 162.0 83.0 79.0 27.3 51.7 3.7 4.1 25.0 2.2 1.4
         June 240.8 68.3 164.6 84.1 80.5 28.1 52.4 3.7 4.2 24.8 2.2 2.0
         July 234.6 66.2 160.6 80.7 79.9 27.3 52.6 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.2 −
         Aug. 245.2 73.5 163.7 83.7 80.0 27.3 52.7 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.3 0.2
         Sep. 242.8 72.0 162.9 85.1 77.9 25.0 52.9 3.7 4.2 24.7 2.2 0.2
         Oct. 234.5 66.0 160.7 82.5 78.2 25.2 53.0 3.6 4.2 24.7 2.3 0.2
         Nov. 245.6 74.7 163.2 83.9 79.3 26.4 52.8 3.6 4.2 24.7 2.2 0.2
         Dec. 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
Changes*
2018 + 16.9 + 3.6 + 13.5 + 2.0 + 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2019 + 17.1 + 11.8 + 5.8 + 7.8 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2
2019         Jan. + 2.7 − 3.5 + 6.3 + 6.9 − 0.6 + 0.6 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Feb. + 8.7 + 3.8 + 4.9 + 5.3 − 0.4 − 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 −
         Mar. + 1.8 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 −
         Apr. − 2.6 − 1.7 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 1.4
         May + 9.1 + 6.6 + 2.5 + 3.3 − 0.9 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0
         June + 1.6 − 0.8 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 1.3 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − + 0.6
         July − 6.1 − 2.1 − 4.0 − 3.4 − 0.6 − 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 2.0
         Aug. + 10.5 + 7.3 + 3.2 + 3.0 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2
         Sep. − 2.8 − 1.5 − 1.3 + 1.1 − 2.3 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Oct. − 8.3 − 6.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov. + 11.1 + 8.7 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Dec. − 8.5 + 0.0 − 8.3 − 7.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.62018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.52019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2019         Jan. 3,319.1 2,020.2 691.6 137.9 553.7 27.9 525.8 574.8 32.5 8.7 12.7 0.8
         Feb. 3,324.1 2,025.8 690.6 137.8 552.8 27.8 525.0 575.8 31.9 8.8 12.9 0.6         Mar. 3,333.1 2,037.1 686.0 136.0 550.0 27.7 522.3 578.3 31.7 8.8 13.0 0.2
         Apr. 3,352.4 2,060.4 682.1 135.1 547.1 27.5 519.5 578.5 31.3 8.9 13.0 1.1
         May 3,372.6 2,083.8 679.0 133.3 545.7 27.6 518.1 578.8 31.0 8.7 13.0 0.2         June 3,368.8 2,082.4 676.6 130.4 546.2 27.3 518.9 579.0 30.7 8.6 12.9 0.2
         July 3,382.3 2,100.3 673.3 130.0 543.3 26.7 516.6 578.1 30.6 8.2 12.7 0.2
         Aug. 3,393.3 2,115.6 670.6 131.0 539.7 26.8 512.8 576.5 30.5 8.0 12.7 0.4         Sep. 3,386.3 2,113.4 667.3 129.7 537.6 26.8 510.9 575.3 30.2 7.9 12.9 0.2
         Oct. 3,409.9 2,141.1 665.4 129.2 536.1 26.6 509.5 573.6 29.9 7.9 12.9 0.3
         Nov. 3,429.2 2,169.8 657.7 123.6 534.1 25.9 508.2 572.1 29.6 7.8 12.8 0.4         Dec. 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
Changes*
2018 + 100.8 + 135.7 − 24.3 − 5.5 − 18.8 − 1.3 − 17.5 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 4.1 − 1.3 − 1.22019 + 105.4 + 144.0 − 31.5 − 8.6 − 22.9 − 1.5 − 21.4 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.4
2019         Jan. + 0.5 + 2.8 − 1.6 + 2.4 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 4.9 + 5.6 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 8.6 + 10.9 − 4.5 − 1.7 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr. + 19.3 + 23.3 − 3.9 − 0.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 20.2 + 23.3 − 3.1 − 1.7 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.9         June − 3.6 − 1.2 − 2.3 − 3.1 + 0.8 − 0.2 + 1.0 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         July + 13.3 + 17.9 − 3.6 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1
         Aug. + 10.9 + 15.3 − 2.7 + 1.0 − 3.7 + 0.1 − 3.8 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3         Sep. − 6.5 − 2.2 − 2.8 − 1.0 − 1.8 − 0.0 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3
         Oct. + 23.7 + 27.7 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. + 19.3 + 28.7 − 7.7 − 5.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec. − 5.3 − 8.2 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.62018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.52019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2019         Jan. 1,036.9 587.8 430.7 88.3 342.4 16.9 325.5 7.0 11.4 2.6 10.2 0.8
         Feb. 1,026.7 579.2 429.1 88.2 340.9 16.7 324.2 7.0 11.4 2.7 10.4 0.6         Mar. 1,028.2 585.5 424.2 86.2 338.0 16.6 321.4 7.1 11.4 2.6 10.5 0.2
         Apr. 1,035.7 596.5 420.7 85.6 335.1 16.5 318.6 7.1 11.4 2.6 10.5 1.1
         May 1,043.1 606.9 417.7 84.7 333.0 16.6 316.4 7.1 11.3 2.6 10.5 0.2         June 1,029.8 595.8 415.6 81.9 333.7 16.5 317.2 7.1 11.3 2.6 10.4 0.2
         July 1,035.2 604.4 412.5 81.7 330.8 15.9 314.9 7.1 11.2 2.2 10.2 0.2
         Aug. 1,036.6 608.6 409.7 83.1 326.7 15.8 310.8 7.1 11.2 2.2 10.2 0.4         Sep. 1,033.6 608.9 406.4 82.3 324.1 15.8 308.3 7.2 11.1 2.2 10.4 0.2
         Oct. 1,045.5 622.3 405.2 82.8 322.4 15.5 306.9 7.0 11.0 2.4 10.4 0.3
         Nov. 1,036.2 620.2 398.2 77.9 320.3 14.9 305.4 6.9 10.9 2.4 10.3 0.4         Dec. 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
Changes*
2018 − 3.2 + 25.1 − 27.2 − 5.9 − 21.3 + 0.3 − 21.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.22019 − 3.4 + 30.4 − 32.8 − 4.8 − 28.0 − 1.6 − 26.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.4
2019         Jan. + 1.6 + 3.9 − 2.2 + 2.2 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 4.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. − 10.3 − 8.7 − 1.6 − 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 1.1 + 5.9 − 4.9 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 0.1 − 2.9 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.4
         Apr. + 7.4 + 11.0 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 2.9 − 0.1 − 2.7 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9
         May + 7.5 + 10.4 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 1.9 + 0.2 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.9         June − 13.1 − 10.9 − 2.1 − 3.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0
         July + 5.3 + 8.7 − 3.3 − 0.2 − 3.1 − 0.6 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.8 − 0.1
         Aug. + 1.4 + 4.2 − 2.8 + 1.4 − 4.2 − 0.1 − 4.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.3         Sep. − 2.5 + 0.4 − 2.9 − 0.5 − 2.4 − 0.0 − 2.3 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.3
         Oct. + 12.1 + 13.5 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. − 9.4 − 2.2 − 7.0 − 4.9 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec. − 4.7 − 5.8 + 1.5 + 3.2 − 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
2019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2019         July 2,347.1 1,495.9 1,457.3 260.2 1,039.4 157.8 38.7 260.8 247.2 21.6 188.9 36.8
         Aug. 2,356.7 1,507.0 1,467.5 263.5 1,046.1 157.9 39.6 260.9 247.4 21.5 189.0 36.9
         Sep. 2,352.7 1,504.5 1,464.9 258.4 1,048.8 157.7 39.6 260.9 247.4 21.4 189.0 37.1
         Oct. 2,364.4 1,518.8 1,479.3 264.9 1,056.4 158.0 39.4 260.2 246.8 21.1 188.7 37.0
         Nov. 2,393.0 1,549.7 1,510.7 267.1 1,083.4 160.2 38.9 259.4 246.4 20.9 188.5 37.0
         Dec. 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
Changes*
2018 + 104.0 + 110.5 + 109.7 + 20.3 + 83.1 + 6.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 5.8 − 0.3
2019 + 108.8 + 113.6 + 111.8 + 18.5 + 88.7 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.7
2019         July + 8.0 + 9.2 + 9.6 + 7.5 + 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.1
         Aug. + 9.5 + 11.1 + 10.2 + 3.3 + 6.7 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1
         Sep. − 4.0 − 2.6 − 2.6 − 5.1 + 2.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Oct. + 11.6 + 14.2 + 14.4 + 6.5 + 7.6 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.1
         Nov. + 28.6 + 30.9 + 31.4 + 2.2 + 27.0 + 2.2 − 0.5 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Dec. − 0.6 − 2.4 − 2.8 − 0.9 − 2.0 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 2.2 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 1.7 + 0.4
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
 
 
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
2019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2019         July 234.6 11.2 6.0 0.9 4.2 0.0 11.8 58.0 15.8 27.8 13.3 1.1 12.8
         Aug. 245.2 11.2 5.9 0.9 4.3 0.1 11.8 60.9 18.0 28.3 13.4 1.1 12.9
         Sep. 242.8 10.9 5.5 1.0 4.3 0.1 11.8 64.0 18.6 30.1 14.2 1.1 12.8
         Oct. 234.5 10.6 5.3 1.0 4.3 0.1 11.8 58.9 16.0 27.1 14.7 1.1 12.8
         Nov. 245.6 10.6 5.4 1.0 4.1 0.1 11.8 58.5 17.5 25.1 14.8 1.1 12.9
         Dec. 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
Changes*
2018 + 16.9 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.5
2019 + 17.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.0
2019         July − 6.1 − 2.8 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 10.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.9 + 2.2 + 0.5 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Sep. − 2.8 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 2.6 + 0.5 + 1.5 + 0.5 − − 0.0
         Oct. − 8.3 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 5.3 − 2.6 − 3.1 + 0.5 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov. + 11.1 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 1.5 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Dec. − 8.5 + 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.7 + 3.6 − 7.8 − 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
14.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 201713.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 201813.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 − 2019
13.5 48.3 212.5 10.8 201.7 571.1 563.7 7.4 19.4 6.0 2.5 − 2019          July
13.5 47.9 213.0 11.0 202.0 569.4 562.1 7.3 19.3 5.8 2.5 −          Aug.13.5 47.4 213.5 11.0 202.5 568.2 560.9 7.3 19.1 5.6 2.5 −          Sep.
13.3 46.4 213.8 11.1 202.7 566.6 559.3 7.2 18.9 5.5 2.5 −          Oct.
13.0 45.6 213.8 11.1 202.8 565.2 558.1 7.1 18.7 5.4 2.4 −          Nov.13.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 −          Dec.
Changes*
− 0.2 + 0.4 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.2 − 4.5 − 3.9 − 0.6 − 5.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 2018− 0.4 − 3.8 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 2019
+ 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2019          July
− 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 −          Aug.− 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 − 1.3 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Sep.
− 0.2 − 1.0 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Oct.
− 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          Nov.+ 0.3 − 0.0 + 2.3 + 0.1 + 2.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −          Dec.
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
61.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 201765.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 201865.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 − 2019
57.5 28.4 9.3 14.2 5.6 0.0 108.0 16.0 42.7 48.2 1.1 − 2019          July
64.6 35.4 9.7 13.8 5.6 0.0 108.6 14.2 44.8 48.4 1.1 −          Aug.61.3 32.1 9.8 13.9 5.6 0.0 106.6 15.7 44.2 45.5 1.2 −          Sep.
59.3 30.9 9.1 13.9 5.5 0.0 105.7 13.8 45.3 45.4 1.2 −          Oct.
62.8 34.6 9.0 13.8 5.4 0.0 113.8 17.2 48.9 46.6 1.1 −          Nov.65.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 −          Dec.
Changes*
+ 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 +10.8 − 0.1 − 2018− 0.8 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2019
− 4.2 − 3.4 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − + 0.7 + 0.7 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 2019          July
+ 7.1 + 7.0 + 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 − + 0.6 − 1.7 + 2.1 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Aug.− 3.3 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.9 + 1.5 − 0.6 − 2.9 + 0.0 −          Sep.
− 2.0 − 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.1 − − 0.9 − 1.9 + 1.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          Oct.
+ 3.3 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 8.1 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 1.2 − 0.0 −          Nov.+ 2.6 + 2.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.4 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 −          Dec.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturities
Special Special At 3 on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
2019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2019         Aug. 587.0 580.3 542.2 323.1 38.0 28.1 6.8 6.0 0.1 38.6 34.7 26.1 3.9
         Sep. 585.7 579.0 541.6 319.0 37.5 27.5 6.7 6.0 0.1 38.4 34.4 25.9 3.9
         Oct. 583.9 577.2 540.6 315.8 36.6 26.7 6.6 5.9 0.1 38.0 34.1 25.7 3.9
         Nov. 582.3 575.7 539.9 313.2 35.7 25.9 6.6 5.9 0.1 37.7 33.8 25.4 3.9
         Dec. 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 0.9 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
Changes*
2018 − 4.7 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 9.1 − 6.5 − 3.6 − 2.6
2019 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 21.3 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 . − 5.3 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.2
2019         Aug. − 1.6 − 1.5 − 1.2 − 4.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0
         Sep. − 1.3 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 4.0 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Oct. − 1.9 − 1.8 − 1.0 − 3.2 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1
         Nov. − 1.6 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0
         Dec. − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 1.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
 
 
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
2019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2019         Aug. 1,147.2 127.9 30.1 377.6 95.0 116.0 2.7 23.4 4.9 1,007.8 1.4 0.7 31.1 0.4
         Sep. 1,154.4 125.6 30.2 383.0 96.6 118.6 2.7 24.7 4.7 1,011.1 1.1 0.7 31.1 0.4
         Oct. 1,133.7 123.9 28.4 362.8 86.4 106.8 2.7 23.7 4.7 1,003.2 1.1 0.7 30.9 0.4
         Nov. 1,150.8 123.9 28.4 373.2 95.2 116.2 2.6 23.5 4.6 1,011.1 0.9 0.7 31.9 0.4
         Dec. 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
Changes*
2018 + 33.6 − 7.8 + 1.5 − 14.3 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 10.5 − 0.3 + 45.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
2019 + 40.6 − 15.9 + 1.1 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 11.5 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 1.9 + 27.4 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.3
2019         Aug. − 0.6 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 2.3 + 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 −
         Sep. + 7.2 − 2.3 + 0.1 + 5.4 + 1.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 1.3 − 0.2 + 3.3 − 0.3 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Oct. − 20.6 − 1.7 − 1.8 − 20.3 − 10.3 − 11.8 + 0.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 7.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Nov. + 17.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 10.5 + 8.8 + 9.3 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 7.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 −
         Dec. − 10.1 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 5.5 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 11.7 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2018 20 233.4 39.4 0.0 15.7 11.9 110.2 25.7 25.8 2.8 20.4 174.3 10.0 3.3 11.7 86.6
2019 19 237.9 34.0 0.0 16.2 11.4 117.6 28.0 25.9 2.9 21.0 179.7 9.8 1.8 12.0 88.7
2019         Oct. 19 236.0 34.3 0.0 16.1 11.6 115.9 27.2 25.8 3.0 19.4 177.6 10.0 1.8 12.0 7.5
         Nov. 19 237.3 34.2 0.0 16.2 11.5 116.5 27.9 25.9 2.9 21.0 177.5 9.9 1.8 12.0 7.3         Dec. 19 237.9 34.0 0.0 16.2 11.4 117.6 28.0 25.9 2.9 21.0 179.7 9.8 1.8 12.0 8.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Oct. 11 162.5 18.8 − 6.5 8.6 90.1 23.2 11.6 1.7 17.2 115.1 9.8 1.8 8.3 4.7
         Nov. 11 163.5 18.6 − 6.7 8.6 90.5 23.8 11.7 1.7 18.5 115.2 9.5 1.8 8.3 4.6         Dec. 11 164.1 18.3 − 6.7 8.5 91.5 23.9 11.7 1.7 18.5 116.6 9.5 1.8 8.3 5.1
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Oct. 8 73.5 15.5 0.0 9.6 2.9 25.8 4.0 14.2 1.2 2.2 62.4 0.3 − 3.7 2.7
         Nov. 8 73.8 15.5 0.0 9.6 2.9 26.0 4.1 14.3 1.2 2.5 62.3 0.4 − 3.7 2.7         Dec. 8 73.7 15.7 0.0 9.5 2.9 26.1 4.2 14.3 1.2 2.5 63.1 0.3 − 3.8 2.9
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2018 27.0 2.1 7.4 45.2 25.1 40.2 15.9 4.3 4.8 3.7 19.5 16.6 6.8 6.6 5.5 0.2
2019 27.3 2.1 7.5 49.2 25.8 42.9 16.4 4.2 4.6 3.6 21.9 18.1 6.5 7.2 ... 0.2
2019         Oct. 2.2 0.0 0.6 4.6 2.5 3.8 1.4 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.0 17.9 7.1 0.6 0.0
         Nov. 2.2 0.1 0.8 4.3 2.0 3.8 1.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.9 18.0 6.7 0.5 0.0         Dec. 2.4 1.8 0.6 4.2 2.1 3.6 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.9 18.1 6.5 0.6 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Oct. 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.7 1.8 3.0 1.0 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.6 12.9 3.8 0.5 0.0
         Nov. 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.3 1.3 2.8 1.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.5 13.2 3.6 0.4 0.0         Dec. 1.5 1.1 0.3 3.1 1.3 2.7 1.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.6 13.4 3.5 0.5 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2019         Oct. 0.8 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.6 0.8 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.9 3.3 0.1 0.0
         Nov. 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.1 0.7 0.9 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.8 3.2 0.1 0.0         Dec. 0.8 0.6 0.3 1.0 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.6 3.0 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
40  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV.  Banks
  
13.  Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
  
  
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other  assets  7 
Loans Credit  balances and loans
German   
banks
(MFIs)   
with of which:
foreign foreign Derivative
branches Money Money financial branches  1 
and/or and/or market to to market instruments
foreign foreign Balance paper, German foreign paper, in the
subsi- subsi- sheet German Foreign secur- non- non- secur- trading
Period diaries diaries total  7 Total Total banks banks Total Total banks banks ities  2 Total portfolio ities 2,3 
Foreign  branches End of year or month *
  
2016 51 192 1,873.3 584.2 570.5 205.0 365.5 13.8 580.5 489.8 14.5 475.3 90.8 708.5 485.3
2017 52 188 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019         Feb. 50 186 1,457.9 426.1 413.9 203.7 210.2 12.2 562.1 472.2 19.2 453.1 89.9 469.6 290.3
         Mar. 53 196 1,498.2 446.3 434.3 214.6 219.7 11.9 572.3 480.1 19.3 460.8 92.1 479.7 305.2
         Apr. 53 199 1,517.6 449.4 433.3 212.3 221.1 16.0 565.8 477.7 18.9 458.8 88.1 502.4 313.7
         May 52 198 1,573.6 442.1 425.4 213.1 212.3 16.7 575.5 483.3 19.5 463.9 92.1 556.0 383.3
         June 53 199 1,556.2 429.4 412.4 216.7 195.7 17.0 576.2 478.8 19.5 459.3 97.4 550.6 378.2
         July 53 199 1,564.2 426.9 410.4 222.3 188.0 16.5 572.8 476.9 19.8 457.1 95.9 564.5 390.5
         Aug. 53 199 1,694.2 454.9 437.3 235.0 202.3 17.5 565.3 471.6 19.9 451.7 93.7 674.1 506.9
         Sep. 53 199 1,672.7 457.5 440.2 243.6 196.6 17.3 581.9 482.9 19.9 463.1 98.9 633.3 465.9
         Oct. 53 200 1,634.9 451.2 433.5 230.9 202.6 17.7 573.8 471.4 19.7 451.7 102.4 609.9 432.4
         Nov. 52 199 1,582.4 418.6 403.2 219.9 183.2 15.5 581.6 481.8 20.0 461.8 99.8 582.2 417.1
Changes *
2017 + 1 − 4 − 216.7 − 52.5 − 49.4 − 7.9 − 41.5 − 3.1 − 10.9 − 10.0 − 1.4 − 8.6 − 0.9 − 74.6 − 60.4
2018 − 3 − 5 − 250.2 −101.0 −102.0 − 5.0 − 97.0 + 1.0 − 24.8 − 27.1 + 7.0 − 34.1 + 2.4 − 148.2 − 102.6
2019         Mar. + 3 + 10 + 40.4 + 18.1 + 18.4 + 11.0 + 7.5 − 0.4 + 5.4 + 3.7 + 0.1 + 3.6 + 1.6 + 10.0 + 13.3
         Apr. − + 3 + 19.3 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 2.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.4 − 0.4 − 2.0 − 0.2 + 22.7 + 8.4
         May − 1 − 1 + 55.6 − 8.0 − 8.7 + 0.8 − 9.5 + 0.7 + 8.9 + 4.7 + 0.6 + 4.2 + 4.1 + 53.2 + 69.2
         June + 1 + 1 − 16.0 − 10.1 − 10.5 + 3.6 − 14.1 + 0.4 + 6.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 6.2 − 4.0 − 2.7
         July − − + 6.9 − 4.5 − 3.9 + 5.6 − 9.6 − 0.6 − 8.1 − 6.0 + 0.3 − 6.3 − 2.1 + 12.8 + 10.3
         Aug. − − + 129.1 + 26.3 + 25.3 + 12.7 + 12.7 + 1.0 − 11.5 − 8.7 + 0.1 − 8.8 − 2.8 + 108.6 + 114.9
         Sep. − − − 22.5 + 0.7 + 1.1 + 8.6 − 7.4 − 0.4 + 11.9 + 7.4 − 0.0 + 7.4 + 4.5 − 41.7 − 43.5
         Oct. − + 1 − 36.2 − 4.0 − 4.5 − 12.7 + 8.2 + 0.5 − 2.1 − 6.3 − 0.1 − 6.2 + 4.2 − 21.9 − 30.4
         Nov. − 1 − 1 − 53.6 − 34.4 − 32.1 − 10.9 − 21.2 − 2.3 + 3.0 + 6.4 + 0.3 + 6.0 − 3.3 − 28.8 − 17.6
  
  
Foreign  subsidiaries End of year or month *
  
2016 20 53 320.5 82.1 72.2 21.4 50.8 9.9 161.4 130.3 22.6 107.7 31.2 76.9 −
2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 −
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 −
2019         Feb. 16 42 236.0 50.6 44.6 19.0 25.6 5.9 134.3 108.5 13.9 94.6 25.8 51.2 −
         Mar. 16 42 246.1 53.9 48.3 19.2 29.1 5.6 141.2 114.2 13.8 100.5 27.0 51.1 −
         Apr. 17 43 245.6 53.9 48.5 19.9 28.6 5.4 142.6 116.0 14.0 102.0 26.6 49.1 −
         May 17 43 245.4 54.3 48.9 19.1 29.8 5.4 145.4 119.0 14.4 104.7 26.3 45.7 −
         June 17 43 249.3 57.4 51.9 19.1 32.7 5.6 146.8 120.5 14.3 106.2 26.3 45.1 −
         July 16 42 248.9 54.8 49.4 18.8 30.6 5.4 147.5 121.7 14.5 107.2 25.7 46.6 −
         Aug. 16 42 248.3 56.6 50.8 19.0 31.8 5.8 141.1 116.5 14.5 102.0 24.6 50.7 −
         Sep. 16 42 250.4 57.3 51.6 19.7 32.0 5.7 142.0 117.7 14.2 103.5 24.3 51.0 −
         Oct. 15 41 238.9 53.9 48.4 18.0 30.4 5.5 138.5 114.7 14.3 100.4 23.8 46.5 −
         Nov. 15 41 237.2 54.2 48.3 18.6 29.6 5.9 136.2 113.1 14.1 99.1 23.1 46.8 −
Changes *
2017 − − 3 − 33.3 − 4.9 − 2.4 + 3.5 − 6.0 − 2.5 − 8.2 − 4.4 − 0.4 − 4.0 − 3.8 − 20.2 −
2018 − 3 − 7 − 42.2 − 20.9 − 19.9 − 4.9 − 15.1 − 1.0 − 14.2 − 11.6 − 8.4 − 3.2 − 2.6 − 7.0 −
2019         Mar. − − + 6.0 + 2.8 + 3.3 + 0.2 + 3.0 − 0.5 + 6.5 + 5.3 − 0.1 + 5.4 + 1.2 − 3.3 −
         Apr. + 1 + 1 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 1.5 + 1.9 + 0.2 + 1.6 − 0.4 − 2.0 −
         May − − − 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.1 + 2.6 + 2.9 + 0.4 + 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.4 −
         June − − + 5.0 + 3.5 + 3.2 + 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 2.1 − 0.1 + 2.1 − 0.0 − 0.5 −
         July − 1 − 1 − 1.5 − 3.1 − 2.8 − 0.3 − 2.5 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.6 + 1.5 −
         Aug. − − − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 − 6.8 − 5.7 + 0.0 − 5.7 − 1.1 + 4.1 −
         Sep. − − + 1.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.3 + 0.4 −
         Oct. − 1 − 1 − 10.2 − 2.7 − 2.6 − 1.7 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 3.0 − 2.4 + 0.1 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 4.5 −
         Nov. − − − 2.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.6 − 1.1 + 0.3 − 2.7 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 1.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 −
*In this table “foreign“ also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches the flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for t he latest date are
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical revisions have been eliminated from the changes. always to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions , which appear in the
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated from following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Several branches in a given

Deutsche Bundesbank
41  Monthly Report
February 2020
IV.  Banks
        
  
Deposits Other  liabilities  6,7 
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4 
Moneymarket of which:paper Derivativeand debt financial
Medium Working instruments
securities
and out- capital in the
German Foreign Short- long- Foreign stand- and own trading
Total Total banks Total Total term term ing  5 funds Total portfolio   Period banks non-banks
End of year or month * Foreign  branches
  
1,136.5 800.9 424.9 376.0 335.6 15.4 11.8 3.6 320.2 100.6 51.2 585.1 481.0 20161,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
952.3 635.2 419.8 215.4 317.1 11.8 9.9 1.8 305.4 97.2 54.2 354.1 287.1 2019          Feb.
981.9 664.9 448.7 216.2 317.1 11.4 9.7 1.8 305.6 98.2 53.7 364.4 302.3          Mar.
994.1 675.5 467.6 207.9 318.6 10.8 8.4 2.4 307.9 100.2 54.0 369.3 303.1          Apr.
989.9 667.6 450.7 216.9 322.2 10.7 8.4 2.2 311.6 103.2 54.3 426.2 380.3          May979.6 670.4 468.5 201.8 309.2 12.0 9.4 2.6 297.2 94.4 54.4 427.8 376.0          June
960.5 660.0 451.8 208.2 300.5 13.5 10.8 2.7 287.0 105.8 53.7 444.2 390.6          July
964.6 659.6 455.0 204.6 305.0 16.3 13.6 2.7 288.7 101.9 53.9 573.9 508.6          Aug.971.2 657.5 459.5 198.0 313.7 15.8 13.0 2.7 297.9 108.1 53.7 539.7 468.3          Sep.
979.2 676.7 475.9 200.8 302.5 13.7 11.0 2.7 288.8 106.8 53.4 495.5 434.0          Oct.
945.8 644.9 465.2 179.7 300.9 14.9 12.2 2.7 286.0 107.3 53.6 475.8 416.2          Nov.
Changes *
− 97.3 − 80.7 − 52.1 − 28.6 − 16.7 + 0.6 + 2.3 − 1.7 − 17.3 + 5.2 + 0.8 − 86.5 − 58.1 2017− 113.1 − 84.7 + 56.0 −140.8 − 28.3 − 4.6 − 4.4 − 0.2 − 23.8 − 9.4 + 2.0 − 139.7 − 105.7 2018
+ 27.3 + 27.4 + 28.8 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 1.0 − 0.5 + 10.3 + 15.3 2019          Mar.
+ 12.2 + 10.6 + 18.9 − 8.4 + 1.6 − 0.7 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 2.3 + 2.0 + 0.3 + 4.9 + 0.8          Apr.
− 5.1 − 8.6 − 16.9 + 8.3 + 3.6 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 2.6 + 0.3 + 56.9 + 77.2          May− 7.8 + 5.1 + 17.8 − 12.7 − 12.9 + 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 14.2 − 7.4 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 4.3          June
− 21.0 − 12.2 − 16.7 + 4.6 − 8.9 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 0.1 − 10.4 + 10.3 − 0.7 + 16.3 + 14.6          July
+ 2.4 − 2.0 + 3.2 − 5.3 + 4.5 + 2.8 + 2.8 + 0.0 + 1.7 − 4.9 + 0.2 + 129.7 + 118.0          Aug.+ 4.8 − 3.8 + 4.5 − 8.2 + 8.5 − 0.5 − 0.6 + 0.0 + 9.1 + 5.2 − 0.1 − 34.2 − 40.3          Sep.
+ 10.4 + 21.5 + 16.4 + 5.0 − 11.0 − 2.1 − 2.0 − 0.0 − 9.0 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 44.2 − 34.3          Oct.
− 35.3 − 33.5 − 10.7 − 22.8 − 1.7 + 1.2 + 1.2 + 0.1 − 2.9 − 0.6 + 0.2 − 19.7 − 17.8          Nov.
  
  
End of year or month * Foreign  subsidiaries
  
247.0 134.3 71.8 62.5 112.7 12.2 6.7 5.5 100.5 13.6 23.8 36.0 − 2016207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 − 2017171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 − 2018
168.3 69.6 35.4 34.2 98.7 7.9 5.2 2.7 90.8 16.1 21.8 29.8 − 2019          Feb.
174.4 75.1 37.8 37.3 99.3 7.5 4.8 2.7 91.7 16.5 21.8 33.4 −          Mar.
173.1 75.7 36.4 39.3 97.5 7.6 4.9 2.7 89.9 16.6 22.2 33.6 −          Apr.
172.7 74.8 36.0 38.8 97.9 7.4 4.6 2.8 90.5 16.5 22.3 33.9 −          May177.0 74.7 37.9 36.8 102.4 7.7 4.9 2.8 94.6 16.5 22.4 33.3 −          June
176.4 72.8 37.6 35.3 103.6 7.7 4.9 2.8 95.9 16.5 22.3 33.7 −          July
175.8 74.7 37.9 36.7 101.1 8.3 5.6 2.7 92.8 16.5 22.3 33.8 −          Aug.178.0 76.0 39.0 37.1 101.9 7.0 4.3 2.8 94.9 16.5 22.4 33.5 −          Sep.
168.3 70.9 36.7 34.2 97.4 7.0 4.3 2.8 90.4 16.3 22.1 32.2 −          Oct.
167.3 70.7 36.7 34.0 96.6 6.9 4.2 2.7 89.7 16.1 22.1 31.6 −          Nov.
Changes *
− 32.8 − 33.7 − 22.0 − 11.8 + 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 1.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 2017− 37.4 − 25.8 − 13.7 − 12.0 − 11.7 − 2.8 + 0.2 − 3.0 − 8.8 + 1.3 − 1.8 − 4.3 − 2018
+ 5.6 + 5.3 + 2.4 + 2.8 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.7 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 2019          Mar.
− 1.3 + 0.5 − 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 0.1 − − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.5 −          Apr.
− 0.7 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 −          May+ 5.2 + 0.4 + 1.9 − 1.5 + 4.8 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 4.5 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.3 −          June
− 1.4 − 2.3 − 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 −          July
− 1.1 + 1.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 − 2.7 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.0 − 3.3 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.2 −          Aug.+ 1.6 + 1.0 + 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 −          Sep.
− 8.7 − 4.6 − 2.3 − 2.3 − 4.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.8 −          Oct.
− 1.6 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.9 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.8 −          Nov.
country of domicile are regarded as a single branch. 2Treasury bills, Treasury securities. 5Issues of negotiable and non-negotiable debt securities and money
discount paper and other money market paper, debt securities. 3Including own debt market paper. 6 Including subordinated liabilities. 7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1. 
securities. 4Excluding subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
February 2020
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2019         Nov. . . . . . .
         Dec. 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020         Jan.  p 13,603.4 136.0 135.7 ... ... ...
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2019         Nov. . . . . . . .
         Dec. 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020         Jan.  p 3,769,816 27.7 37,698 37,549 . ... ...
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2019         Nov. . . . . . . .
         Dec. 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020         Jan.  p 7,709 5,623 2,807 12,361 7,112 112 1,825
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2019         Nov. . . . . .
         Dec. 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020         Jan.  p 2,660,353 1,768 412,635 576,220 118,830
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
43  Monthly Report
February 2020
VI. Interest rates
 
1. ECB interest rates 2. Base rates
  
% per annum % per annum
Main refinancing Main refinancing
operations operations Base Base
Mar- Mar- rate rateginal ginal as per as per
Minimum Minimum
Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Deposit Fixed bid lending Applicable Civil Applicable Civilfrom facility rate rate facility from facility rate rate facility from Code  
1 from Code  1 
2005 Dec.                 6 1.25 − 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr.                13 0.50 1.25 − 2.00 2002 Jan.                1 2.57 2009 Jan.                1 1.62
         July               13 0.75 1.50 − 2.25          July                1 2.47          July                1 0.12
2006 Mar.                 8 1.50 − 2.50 3.50          Nov.                  9 0.50 1.25 − 2.00
         June               15 1.75 − 2.75 3.75          Dec.                14 0.25 1.00 − 1.75 2003 Jan.                1 1.97 2011 July                1 0.37
         Aug.                 9 2.00 − 3.00 4.00          July                1 1.22
         Oct.               11 2.25 − 3.25 4.25 2012 July                11 0.00 0.75 − 1.50 2012 Jan.                1 0.12
         Dec.               13 2.50 − 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan.                1 1.14
2013 May                 8 0.00 0.50 − 1.00          July                1 1.13 2013 Jan.                1 −0.13
2007 Mar.               14 2.75 − 3.75 4.75          Nov.                13 0.00 0.25 − 0.75          July                1 −0.38
         June               13 3.00 − 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan.                1 1.21
2014 June               11 −0.10 0.15 − 0.40          July                1 1.17 2014 Jan.                1 −0.63
2008 July                 9 3.25 − 4.25 5.25          Sep.                10 −0.20 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 −0.73
         Oct.                 8 2.75 − 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan.                1 1.37
         Oct.                 9 3.25 3.75 − 4.25 2015 Dec.                  9 −0.30 0.05 − 0.30          July                1 1.95 2015 Jan.                1 −0.83
         Nov.               12 2.75 3.25 − 3.75
         Dec.               10 2.00 2.50 − 3.00 2016 Mar.                16 −0.40 0.00 − 0.25 2007 Jan.                1 2.70 2016 July                1 −0.88
         July               1 3.19
2009 Jan.               21 1.00 2.00 − 3.00 2019 Sep.                18 −0.50 0.00 − 0.25
         Mar.               11 0.50 1.50 − 2.50 2008 Jan.                1 3.32
         Apr.                 8 0.25 1.25 − 2.25          July                1 3.19
         May               13 0.25 1.00 − 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.  
 
 
 
3. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
 
 
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid Allotment Minimum Weighted
amount amount Fixed rate bid rate Marginal rate  1 average rate
Date of Running for
settlement € million % per annum ... days
Main refinancing operations
2020 Jan.                 8 1,104 1,104 0.0 0−−−7
         Jan.               1 5 8 2 1 8 2 1 0 . 0 0−−−7
         Jan.               2 2 9 6 5 9 6 5 0 . 0 0−−−7
         Jan.               29 1,602 1,602 0.0 0−−−7
         Feb.                 5 8 4 2 8 4 2 0 . 0 0−−−7
         Feb.               1 2 9 0 0 9 0 0 0 . 0 0−−−7
Long-term refinancing operations
2019 Nov.               28 1,424 1,424 2 ... − − − 91
         Dec.               18 97,718 97,718 2 ... − − − 1099
         Dec.               19 2,282 2,282 2 ... − − − 98
2020 Jan.               30 547 547 2 ... − − − 91
*Source: ECB. 1Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of this
collected. 2Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at the operation. 
 
 
 
4. Money market rates, by month *
 
 
% per annum
EURIBOR  2 
Monthlyaverage EONIA  
1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2019         July − 0.37 − 0.40 − 0.40 − 0.36 − 0.35 − 0.28
         Aug. − 0.36 − 0.41 − 0.41 − 0.41 − 0.40 − 0.36         Sep. − 0.40 − 0.45 − 0.45 − 0.42 − 0.39 − 0.34
         Oct. − 0.46 − 0.50 − 0.46 − 0.41 − 0.36 − 0.30
         Nov. − 0.45 − 0.48 − 0.45 − 0.40 − 0.34 − 0.27         Dec. − 0.46 − 0.49 − 0.45 − 0.40 − 0.34 − 0.26
2020         Jan. − 0.45 − 0.50 − 0.46 − 0.39 − 0.33 − 0.25
*Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor the basis of real turnover according to the act/360 method and published v ia
anyone else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the Reuters. 2Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by
EURIBOR. 1Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for inter- Reuters since 30 December 1998 according to the act/360 method. 
bank operations calculated by the European Central Bank since 4 January 1999 on

Deutsche Bundesbank
44  Monthly Report
February 2020
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
 
 
Households’ deposits Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  2 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Dec. 0.23 63,057 1.23 217,570 0.01 68,323 0.87 28,597
2019         Jan. 0.23 62,837 1.21 217,168 0.01 68,701 0.86 28,839
         Feb. 0.23 62,576 1.20 217,250 0.01 69,389 0.85 28,815
         Mar. 0.23 62,652 1.20 217,159 0.02 67,395 0.85 29,229
         Apr. 0.22 62,253 1.19 216,952 0.02 67,114 0.84 28,899
         May 0.21 60,966 1.18 217,558 0.03 66,325 0.83 28,799
         June 0.22 60,652 1.17 217,383 0.03 63,711 0.83 28,547
         July 0.22 60,326 1.16 217,260 0.03 63,826 0.85 27,984
         Aug. 0.22 60,071 1.15 217,527 0.02 66,066 0.84 27,809
         Sep. 0.21 59,625 1.15 217,918 0.01 65,179 0.85 27,581
         Oct. 0.21 58,785 1.14 217,872 − 0.01 64,731 0.85 27,684
         Nov. 0.22 57,815 1.12 217,794 − 0.02 63,482 0.85 27,757
         Dec. 0.23 57,910 1.12 219,819 − 0.05 66,312 0.84 27,528
 
 
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5 
with a maturity of
over 1 year and over 1 year and
up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
month % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2018         Dec. 2.27 4,242 1.86 26,203 2.44 1,199,525 7.10 51,196 3.53 85,387 3.81 312,896
2019         Jan. 2.27 4,379 1.85 25,867 2.42 1,200,982 7.19 49,709 3.52 85,499 3.79 314,143
         Feb. 2.28 4,300 1.85 25,861 2.41 1,204,756 7.17 49,608 3.51 85,678 3.78 314,960
         Mar. 2.27 4,424 1.85 25,905 2.39 1,210,350 7.16 49,935 3.50 86,453 3.78 314,929
         Apr. 2.26 4,418 1.79 25,875 2.37 1,218,785 7.04 50,058 3.49 86,872 3.77 313,007
         May 2.26 4,534 1.79 26,212 2.35 1,224,628 7.13 49,275 3.49 87,410 3.76 314,341
         June 2.23 4,575 1.78 26,445 2.33 1,230,368 7.11 51,281 3.49 87,504 3.76 314,057
         July 2.22 4,643 1.77 26,544 2.31 1,236,461 7.06 50,115 3.48 86,724 3.74 315,493
         Aug. 2.16 4,658 1.76 26,765 2.29 1,243,945 7.08 49,280 3.46 87,412 3.74 316,798
         Sep. 2.16 4,636 1.75 26,538 2.27 1,250,520 7.23 51,134 3.46 87,317 3.71 315,907
         Oct. 2.11 4,749 1.73 26,605 2.24 1,257,680 7.16 49,728 3.45 87,489 3.69 317,081
         Nov. 2.07 4,787 1.71 26,726 2.22 1,265,217 7.13 48,412 3.44 87,638 3.67 318,019
         Dec. 2.07 4,609 1.71 26,604 2.20 1,268,608 7.12 50,917 3.44 87,332 3.65 316,611
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 Effective interest rate  1 
month % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Dec. 2.24 146,721 1.72 150,727 2.06 703,722
2019         Jan. 2.22 151,176 1.70 152,824 2.04 707,410
         Feb. 2.22 154,912 1.70 154,061 2.03 712,194
         Mar. 2.21 159,432 1.69 155,413 2.02 713,389
         Apr. 2.20 157,460 1.66 159,372 2.00 716,684
         May 2.14 159,767 1.67 162,699 1.99 722,437
         June 2.14 167,044 1.66 164,225 1.98 722,521
         July 2.13 163,263 1.64 165,839 1.96 724,902
         Aug. 2.14 163,138 1.64 167,486 1.95 729,505
         Sep. 2.18 164,445 1.64 167,202 1.92 730,591
         Oct. 2.19 160,244 1.63 169,633 1.91 735,730
         Nov. 2.21 163,260 1.63 171,713 1.90 739,461
         Dec. 2.24 162,067 1.64 171,398 1.88 737,454
*The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from either as annualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined eff ective rates. Both
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate calculation methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans bu t not any
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of other related charges which may occur for enquiries, administrat ion, preparation of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations the documents, guarantees and credit insurance. 2Data based on monthly balance
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole sheet statistics. 3Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial and home improvements; including loans granted by building and loan a ssociations
corporations include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and and interim credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the re porting agents in
other financial institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as their own name and for their own account. 4Loans for consumption are defined as
provisional. Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not loans granted for the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and
specially marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found services. 5For the purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other
on the Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and purposes such as business, debt consolidation, education, e tc.6Including overdrafts
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans). oThe statistics on outstanding amounts (see also footnotes 12 to 14 on p. 47   ). 
are collected at the end of the month. 1The effective interest rates are calculated

Deutsche Bundesbank
45  Monthly Report
February 2020
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Households’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8  of
Overnight up to 1 year over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months over 1 year and up to 2 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  7 rate 1 Volume  2 rate 1 Volume  2 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
2018         Dec. 0.02 1,432,861 0.28 5,439 0.26 642 0.65 702 0.14 540,271 0.25 37,155
2019         Jan. 0.02 1,432,335 0.28 6,375 0.44 603 0.69 1,074 0.14 540,608 0.24 36,693
         Feb. 0.02 1,446,689 0.29 5,693 0.45 619 0.68 1,032 0.13 541,529 0.24 36,726         Mar. 0.01 1,451,707 0.29 5,595 0.34 837 0.73 978 0.13 543,711 0.25 37,036
         Apr. 0.01 1,464,110 0.29 5,357 0.33 485 0.72 868 0.14 543,806 0.25 37,197
         May 0.01 1,477,188 0.13 4,250 0.52 665 0.67 737 0.13 543,432 0.26 37,857         June 0.01 1,487,229 0.10 3,429 0.44 330 0.68 713 0.13 543,047 0.27 38,409
         July 0.01 1,496,476 0.12 3,834 0.49 378 0.79 965 0.13 542,420 0.27 38,137
         Aug. 0.01 1,507,758 0.15 3,511 0.39 522 0.73 907 0.12 541,175 0.26 37,798         Sep. 0.01 1,504,996 0.14 3,322 0.50 342 0.63 820 0.12 540,525 0.25 37,218
         Oct. 0.01 1,519,599 0.17 2,945 0.44 404 0.99 956 0.12 539,574 0.23 36,402
         Nov. 0.01 1,550,441 0.18 2,617 0.66 674 0.58 999 0.12 538,889 0.23 35,551         Dec. 0.01 1,548,036 0.08 3,590 0.49 729 0.60 818 0.12 539,678 0.21 34,476
 
 
Non-financial corporations’ deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 yearsEffective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting interest rate  
1 Volume  2 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Dec. − 0.03 445,954 − 0.07 15,012 0.14 308 0.55 1,109
2019         Jan. − 0.03 443,971 0.01 16,527 0.08 549 0.40 545
         Feb. − 0.03 439,934 0.02 15,774 0.11 277 0.31 238         Mar. − 0.03 443,524 0.01 15,807 0.07 389 0.65 299
         Apr. − 0.03 451,668 0.01 14,136 0.09 374 0.34 278
         May − 0.03 460,120 − 0.03 12,080 0.23 641 0.40 311         June − 0.03 448,314 − 0.09 10,189 0.19 421 0.25 190
         July − 0.03 460,551 − 0.08 11,503 0.00 86 0.66 442
         Aug. − 0.03 465,696 − 0.17 11,745 − 0.06 135 0.45 212         Sep. − 0.04 468,092 − 0.22 11,961 − 0.33 1,000
x . x .
         Oct. − 0.04 477,961 − 0.20 10,900 − 0.06 155 . .
         Nov. − 0.04 476,945 − 0.21 11,165 − 0.03 389 0.32 654         Dec. − 0.05 476,406 − 0.22 17,148 0.04 554 0.28 911
 
 
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years (including charges)
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million
2018         Dec. 5.80 5.81 6,514 7.04 1,133 7.58 518 4.45 2,820 6.72 3,176
2019         Jan. 5.98 5.98 9,985 7.13 2,196 8.08 544 4.53 3,696 6.72 5,745
         Feb. 5.80 5.83 9,354 6.98 1,934 7.98 486 4.44 3,556 6.55 5,312         Mar. 5.73 5.72 9,868 6.88 1,765 8.48 528 4.25 3,929 6.52 5,411
         Apr. 5.83 5.76 9,830 6.86 1,767 8.44 504 4.36 3,762 6.47 5,564
         May 5.86 5.80 9,893 6.79 1,839 8.80 428 4.46 3,770 6.45 5,695         June 6.06 5.98 8,345 7.01 1,554 9.23 425 4.52 3,222 6.68 4,698
         July 6.17 6.11 10,570 7.13 2,173 9.19 493 4.63 3,859 6.79 6,219
         Aug. 6.06 6.00 9,351 6.98 1,957 9.68 420 4.51 3,376 6.63 5,555         Sep. 5.92 5.87 8,928 6.72 1,837 9.41 461 4.44 3,178 6.42 5,289
         Oct. 5.91 5.85 9,336 6.70 1,894 9.23 528 4.39 3,350 6.42 5,459
         Nov. 5.75 5.73 8,369 6.60 1,654 8.54 493 4.36 3,056 6.32 4,821         Dec. 5.74 5.75 7,033 6.47 1,288 8.59 590 4.38 2,640 6.26 3,804
For footnotes *, x and 1 to 6, see p.
44  .+For deposits with an agreed maturity and the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new business interest. 7Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
covers all new agreements between households or non-financial corporations and underlying total using a grossing-up procedure. 8Including non-financial corpor-
the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted average rates of all ations’ deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums. 9Excluding over-
new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For overnight deposits, drafts. 10Annual percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges
deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card debt: new which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for the sake of guarantees and credit insurance. simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business at the end of

Deutsche Bundesbank
46  Monthly Report
February 2020
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Loans to households for other purposes  5  with an initial rate fixation of
of which: floating rate or over 1 year and
Total Renegotiated loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
Loans to households
2018         Dec. 1.89 5,777 1.79 1,716 1.76 2,554 2.42 717 1.87 2,506
2019         Jan. 1.96 5,889 1.84 2,160 1.81 2,541 2.39 860 1.96 2,488
         Feb. 1.99 4,707 1.78 1,409 1.82 2,095 2.59 661 1.96 1,951
         Mar. 1.90 5,598 1.77 1,515 1.68 2,497 2.51 772 1.92 2,329
         Apr. 2.01 5,684 1.88 1,734 2.01 2,214 2.46 815 1.86 2,655
         May 1.90 5,259 1.75 1,397 1.79 2,312 2.44 813 1.82 2,134
         June 1.80 5,098 1.80 1,128 1.69 2,120 2.32 731 1.73 2,247
         July 1.84 5,915 1.78 1,869 1.80 2,429 2.43 876 1.69 2,610
         Aug. 1.79 4,740 1.71 1,047 1.76 1,855 2.53 657 1.60 2,228
         Sep. 1.78 4,757 1.73 1,279 1.82 2,154 2.34 630 1.55 1,973
         Oct. 1.83 4,987 1.68 1,481 1.96 2,229 2.40 635 1.52 2,123
         Nov. 1.63 5,178 1.58 1,046 1.61 2,022 2.28 722 1.45 2,434
         Dec. 1.63 6,393 1.74 1,399 1.66 2,662 2.07 1,016 1.44 2,715
of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2018         Dec. 1.96 4,139 . . 1.94 1,777 2.42 546 1.83 1,816
2019         Jan. 2.00 4,236 . . 1.94 1,774 2.46 640 1.89 1,822
         Feb. 2.02 3,331 . . 1.94 1,502 2.61 504 1.89 1,325
         Mar. 1.99 3,895 . . 1.95 1,539 2.53 580 1.86 1,776
         Apr. 2.04 3,962 . . 2.09 1,654 2.46 619 1.83 1,689
         May 1.95 3,864 . . 1.91 1,705 2.54 593 1.76 1,566
         June 1.90 3,540 . . 1.94 1,397 2.43 515 1.70 1,628
         July 1.92 4,264 . . 1.99 1,719 2.43 676 1.68 1,869
         Aug. 1.91 3,192 . . 1.97 1,203 2.64 483 1.63 1,506
         Sep. 1.79 3,219 . . 1.80 1,458 2.42 449 1.57 1,312
         Oct. 1.78 3,572 . . 1.82 1,568 2.46 476 1.52 1,528
         Nov. 1.74 3,478 . . 1.80 1,297 2.40 532 1.48 1,649
         Dec. 1.79 4,258 . . 1.93 1,691 2.40 637 1.47 1,930
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d)
Housing loans  3  with an initial rate fixation of
Total of which: floating rate or over 1 year and over 5 years and
Total up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years up to 10 years over 10 years (including charges) Renegotiated loans  9 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Annual percentage
Reporting Volume  7 Volume  7 rate of charge  10 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 interest rate  1 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2018         Dec. 1.90 1.85 17,630 1.89 3,168 2.02 2,113 1.71 1,519 1.70 6,088 1.94 7,910
2019         Jan. 1.92 1.86 20,907 1.93 4,619 2.09 2,475 1.69 1,962 1.70 7,080 1.95 9,390
         Feb. 1.84 1.78 19,352 1.84 3,469 2.04 2,163 1.65 1,749 1.63 6,344 1.85 9,095
         Mar. 1.80 1.74 21,335 1.83 3,606 2.04 2,413 1.64 1,755 1.59 6,884 1.79 10,283
         Apr. 1.72 1.67 23,105 1.76 4,326 2.04 2,570 1.48 2,074 1.53 7,760 1.72 10,701
         May 1.68 1.63 22,629 1.74 3,609 2.00 2,560 1.50 2,030 1.46 7,324 1.67 10,715
         June 1.63 1.57 20,164 1.65 3,245 1.98 2,280 1.44 1,695 1.41 6,429 1.61 9,760
         July 1.54 1.49 25,672 1.64 4,571 1.98 2,743 1.43 2,107 1.34 8,473 1.49 12,348
         Aug. 1.43 1.38 22,520 1.53 3,272 1.86 2,529 1.38 1,684 1.23 6,856 1.36 11,450
         Sep. 1.34 1.28 21,803 1.45 3,348 1.88 2,182 1.38 1,613 1.14 6,714 1.24 11,294
         Oct. 1.31 1.27 23,169 1.44 3,714 1.91 2,452 1.31 1,738 1.12 7,268 1.22 11,711
         Nov. 1.31 1.26 22,234 1.41 3,066 1.84 2,206 1.30 1,663 1.09 6,889 1.25 11,475
         Dec. 1.34 1.29 20,048 1.48 2,938 1.81 2,396 1.37 1,553 1.14 6,622 1.27 9,477
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2018         Dec. . 1.79 7,242 . . 2.02 694 1.49 670 1.64 2,592 1.93 3,286
2019         Jan. . 1.81 9,238 . . 2.04 922 1.50 948 1.65 3,196 1.96 4,172
         Feb. . 1.72 8,040 . . 2.07 682 1.45 859 1.56 2,709 1.84 3,790
         Mar. . 1.68 8,615 . . 2.06 732 1.43 768 1.51 2,924 1.77 4,191
         Apr. . 1.63 9,886 . . 2.02 933 1.40 986 1.47 3,469 1.71 4,498
         May . 1.56 9,434 . . 1.90 945 1.30 879 1.39 3,118 1.65 4,492
         June . 1.52 8,277 . . 1.98 820 1.28 744 1.35 2,732 1.59 3,981
         July . 1.44 10,426 . . 1.96 944 1.24 935 1.30 3,493 1.48 5,054
         Aug. . 1.32 9,008 . . 1.90 732 1.19 762 1.17 2,860 1.35 4,654
         Sep. . 1.22 8,966 . . 1.89 689 1.19 689 1.08 2,919 1.21 4,669
         Oct. . 1.20 9,660 . . 1.82 818 1.09 799 1.06 3,118 1.20 4,925
         Nov. . 1.19 9,173 . . 1.75 738 1.09 787 1.03 2,848 1.22 4,800
         Dec. . 1.20 8,738 . . 1.79 758 1.15 719 1.07 2,897 1.19 4,364
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . For   
footnote 11, see p. 47   .  

Deutsche Bundesbank
47  Monthly Report
February 2020
VI. Interest rates
 
5. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *  (cont’d)
b) New business +
 
 
Loans to households (cont’d) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12 Revolving loans  12 
and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 Extended and overdrafts  13 Revolving loans  12 
Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 credit card debt Credit card debt  14 and overdrafts  13 
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
Reporting Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 Volume  2 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 interest rate  1 
period % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million % p.a. € million
2018         Dec. 7.86 41,799 7.96 32,782 14.75 4,585 3.14 73,787 3.16 73,380
2019         Jan. 8.01 40,499 7.96 32,586 14.78 4,389 3.09 76,006 3.10 75,622
         Feb. 7.99 40,394 7.99 32,324 14.76 4,384 3.09 78,104 3.10 77,717         Mar. 7.98 40,531 7.97 32,533 14.75 4,355 3.06 80,843 3.07 80,447
         Apr. 7.78 40,783 7.93 31,833 14.75 4,416 3.04 78,782 3.06 78,390
         May 7.90 39,977 7.92 31,720 14.76 4,369 2.98 78,903 2.99 78,496         June 7.86 41,429 7.92 32,848 14.77 4,421 2.92 84,632 2.94 84,230
         July 7.72 40,774 7.81 32,054 14.77 4,372 2.92 80,865 2.94 80,466
         Aug. 7.79 40,128 7.84 31,484 14.78 4,450 2.91 81,292 2.92 80,923         Sep. 7.91 41,961 7.91 33,243 15.08 4,561 2.97 82,771 2.99 82,352
         Oct. 7.81 40,630 7.80 32,063 15.05 4,479 2.96 79,242 2.98 78,810
         Nov. 7.72 39,142 7.62 30,666 15.11 4,517 2.95 81,340 2.97 80,912         Dec. 7.62 41,902 7.69 32,556 15.10 4,576 3.05 79,862 3.07 79,476
 
 
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15  with an initial rate fixation of
Renegotiated floating rate or over 1 year and floating rate or over 1 year and
Total loans  9 up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  9 up to 5 years over 5 years
Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective Effective
interest interest interest interest interest interest interest interest
Reporting rate  1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 rate 1 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 Volume  7 
period % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. % p.a. € million € million € million € million € million € million € million € million
Total loans
2018         Dec. 1.29 96,525 1.46 25,307 2.06 10,205 2.40 1,480 1.85 1,434 1.02 62,907 1.72 5,156 1.60 15,343
2019         Jan. 1.24 74,566 1.42 20,900 2.01 10,992 2.43 1,491 1.94 1,376 0.96 50,703 1.46 2,676 1.58 7,328
         Feb. 1.25 65,642 1.46 16,418 2.04 9,918 2.51 1,338 1.86 1,136 0.97 43,885 1.37 3,016 1.56 6,349         Mar. 1.29 77,548 1.41 22,154 2.05 11,060 2.56 1,534 1.85 1,391 1.05 52,989 1.49 2,834 1.43 7,740
         Apr. 1.21 81,708 1.38 21,675 2.10 10,283 2.46 1,606 1.76 1,464 0.95 55,315 1.26 3,354 1.44 9,686
         May 1.19 75,507 1.38 19,256 2.12 9,981 2.52 1,587 1.76 1,374 0.91 51,534 1.45 3,207 1.40 7,824         June 1.18 84,377 1.28 25,393 2.08 10,633 2.51 1,407 1.65 1,312 0.94 58,540 1.21 3,408 1.40 9,077
         July 1.19 85,200 1.32 22,605 2.08 10,553 2.52 1,630 1.59 1,640 0.91 56,383 1.69 4,920 1.24 10,074
         Aug. 1.13 70,037 1.32 19,327 2.02 8,816 2.54 1,375 1.55 1,248 0.88 47,954 1.71 3,280 1.17 7,364         Sep. 1.18 81,376 1.27 23,112 1.98 10,331 2.46 1,320 1.42 1,224 1.00 55,486 1.53 2,877 1.03 10,138
         Oct. 1.22 80,549 1.31 23,322 1.93 10,875 2.41 1,503 1.43 1,313 1.06 55,298 1.32 3,647 1.08 7,913
         Nov. 1.27 72,910 1.33 19,516 2.04 10,266 2.48 1,416 1.42 1,251 1.10 48,917 1.43 3,070 1.09 7,990         Dec. 1.29 102,587 1.40 27,151 2.10 10,584 2.40 1,608 1.45 1,480 1.15 73,303 1.36 4,483 1.18 11,129
of which: Collateralised loans 11
2018         Dec. 1.50 16,695 . . 1.90 607 2.55 122 1.68 411 1.37 8,845 2.04 1,266 1.51 5,444
2019         Jan. 1.42 9,732 . . 1.83 630 2.46 149 1.84 429 1.20 5,503 1.90 464 1.57 2,557
         Feb. 1.42 7,982 . . 1.90 485 2.59 151 1.70 323 1.23 4,383 1.46 648 1.56 1,992         Mar. 1.49 11,158 . . 1.87 508 2.65 144 1.78 388 1.40 7,357 1.71 520 1.53 2,241
         Apr. 1.39 10,596 . . 1.81 620 2.43 162 1.60 417 1.25 5,977 1.95 533 1.41 2,887
         May
x . x . . . 1.94 565 x . x . 1.58 381 1.50 6,363 2.17 355 1.49 2,156
         June 1.47 10,380 . . 1.80 493 2.86 126 1.55 326 1.41 6,221 1.31 448 1.51 2,766
         July 1.34 11,662 . . 1.80 595 2.81 152 1.46 466 1.22 6,100 1.63 1,548 1.26 2,801
         Aug. 1.49 8,835 . . 1.96 474 2.53 152 1.28 357 1.45 4,757 2.16 957 1.15 2,138         Sep. 1.30 12,814 . . 1.86 487 2.80 113 1.26 378 1.27 7,572 1.95 1,094 1.03 3,170
         Oct. 1.28 10,710 . . 1.64 630 2.52 140 1.24 362 1.24 6,623 1.72 588 1.11 2,367
         Nov. 1.35 9,204 . . 1.87 465 2.47 129 1.19 329 1.47 4,566 1.66 800 0.95 2,915         Dec. 1.38 17,816 . . 1.71 553 2.43 174 1.28 402 1.41 11,704 1.46 1,422 1.17 3,561
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p.
44  . For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45  . debit balances on current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of
11For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured whether they are within or beyond the limits agreed between custome rs and the
if collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) bank. 14Including convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is
in at least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or defined as the credit granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period betweenassigned. 12Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the payment transactions effected with the card during one billing cycle and the date at
borrower may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without which the debt balances from this specific billing cycle become due. 15The amount
giving prior notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and category refers to the single loan transaction considered as new business.
decrease as funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; xDominated by the business of one or two banks. Therefore, the value cannot be
(d) there is no obligation of regular repayment of funds. 13Overdrafts are defined as published because of confidentiality. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
48  Monthly Report
February 2020
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
1. Assets *
 
 
 € billion
Currency Investment Insurance
End of and Debt Shares and fund Financial technical Non-financial Remaining
year/quarter Total deposits  1 securities Loans  2 other equity shares/units derivatives reserves assets assets
Insurance corporations
 
2017         Q1 2,189.7 355.5 377.5 367.7 297.7 635.8 2.8 50.4 32.5 69.7
         Q2 2,178.4 344.1 378.9 365.3 301.9 643.8 3.1 49.1 32.6 59.6
         Q3 2,188.1 331.3 386.1 371.1 305.5 650.5 3.1 49.5 32.7 58.4
         Q4 2,212.7 321.1 387.0 354.3 336.1 671.3 2.9 48.3 34.3 57.3
2018         Q1 2,218.0 344.1 394.6 326.9 342.8 664.0 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.6
         Q2 2,226.3 346.8 400.1 319.6 346.3 669.9 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6
         Q3 2,224.8 326.3 401.1 327.9 349.4 677.8 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6
         Q4 2,213.5 318.3 400.4 330.4 349.7 665.8 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019         Q1 2,343.9 332.3 431.9 329.6 381.6 707.8 2.6 59.3 37.1 61.7
         Q2 2,405.7 336.9 449.4 338.5 388.2 734.0 3.6 57.8 37.1 60.3
         Q3 2,490.1 333.2 469.1 356.1 397.6 767.2 4.6 58.7 38.0 65.7
Life insurance
2017         Q1 1,170.5 223.8 185.3 217.2 37.2 462.6 1.8 8.2 19.1 15.3
         Q2 1,172.8 215.7 189.5 217.6 38.6 467.1 2.0 8.0 19.1 15.3
         Q3 1,177.5 207.6 193.6 220.6 38.4 472.5 1.9 7.9 19.1 16.0
         Q4 1,193.2 199.2 192.4 226.1 41.4 487.8 1.8 8.6 20.0 16.0
2018         Q1 1,187.6 212.5 198.8 206.7 43.1 481.8 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
         Q2 1,195.2 215.3 201.6 200.5 46.3 487.9 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
         Q3 1,194.1 199.7 201.6 209.0 47.3 493.9 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
         Q4 1,185.2 194.5 200.1 208.5 50.4 484.7 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019         Q1 1,238.0 202.8 213.4 205.9 52.7 516.7 1.6 10.4 20.2 14.1
         Q2 1,289.7 205.9 227.1 213.9 55.3 537.6 2.3 10.0 20.2 17.3
         Q3 1,348.6 205.4 241.9 224.8 57.8 563.4 3.1 10.4 20.8 20.9
Non-life insurance
2017         Q1 606.7 120.3 102.5 92.1 56.9 157.3 0.3 34.1 9.1 34.2
         Q2 603.7 116.8 103.9 91.2 58.5 160.4 0.4 33.3 9.1 30.1
         Q3 603.1 111.9 106.2 93.0 58.6 162.9 0.4 32.5 9.2 28.4
         Q4 606.9 111.6 108.1 82.3 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.5 9.7 26.6
2018         Q1 623.2 120.2 112.7 75.1 72.1 167.0 0.3 34.6 9.8 31.5
         Q2 621.6 120.1 115.7 72.9 72.9 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
         Q3 617.9 116.3 116.1 72.8 73.7 168.9 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
         Q4 616.2 113.8 117.4 73.7 73.8 167.4 0.2 33.5 10.8 25.6
2019         Q1 655.4 119.2 128.0 74.2 75.8 177.0 0.3 38.1 11.1 31.7
         Q2 664.1 119.8 131.9 75.6 76.8 182.0 0.4 37.6 11.0 29.1
         Q3 679.8 116.9 136.5 79.2 78.5 188.5 0.4 38.6 11.4 29.8
Reinsurance  3 
2017         Q1 412.5 11.4 89.8 58.4 203.5 15.9 0.8 8.1 4.3 20.2
         Q2 401.9 11.6 85.5 56.5 204.8 16.3 0.8 7.9 4.4 14.2
         Q3 407.5 11.8 86.3 57.5 208.5 15.1 0.9 9.2 4.4 13.9
         Q4 412.6 10.3 86.5 45.9 224.0 17.6 0.7 8.3 4.7 14.7
2018         Q1 407.2 11.4 83.1 45.1 227.6 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
         Q2 409.5 11.5 82.9 46.1 227.1 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
         Q3 412.7 10.2 83.4 46.0 228.4 15.0 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
         Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019         Q1 450.5 10.2 90.5 49.5 253.1 14.0 0.7 10.8 5.8 15.9
         Q2 451.9 11.2 90.3 49.0 256.1 14.4 0.8 10.3 5.8 13.9
         Q3 461.6 10.9 90.7 52.1 261.3 15.2 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Pension funds  4 
2017         Q1 617.1 103.8 60.6 29.9 21.1 336.5 − 6.7 37.7 20.8
         Q2 626.0 103.1 61.4 29.8 22.2 343.0 − 6.8 38.6 21.0
         Q3 636.5 101.1 62.9 29.7 23.7 351.7 − 7.0 39.2 21.2
         Q4 646.8 96.7 65.1 29.7 25.0 360.4 − 7.1 41.2 21.5
2018         Q1 650.6 94.6 64.8 30.1 25.5 365.1 − 7.4 41.7 21.5
         Q2 657.6 95.0 64.6 30.6 26.6 369.5 − 7.6 42.2 21.6
         Q3 663.6 92.3 64.5 30.8 27.1 376.5 − 7.9 42.9 21.7
         Q4 670.7 91.7 65.2 31.2 27.3 381.3 − 8.1 43.9 22.0
2019         Q1 688.6 89.6 69.4 31.3 28.0 394.5 − 8.2 44.9 22.5
         Q2 701.0 87.7 72.8 31.9 28.5 403.3 − 8.3 45.2 23.4
         Q3 711.3 85.6 75.7 31.9 29.1 412.1 − 8.3 45.0 23.7
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- ed on assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrower s’ note loans and
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- registered Pfandbriefe. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by pri-
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. *Valuation of list- mary insurers, which is included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the insti-
ed securities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB’s securities data- tutional sector “pension funds“ of the European System of Accou nts. Pension funds
base. 1Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered thus comprise company pension schemes and occupational pension sch emes for the
bonds, borrowers’ note loans and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Including deposits retain- self-employed. Social security funds are not included. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
49  Monthly Report
February 2020
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
 
2. Liabilities
  
 € billion
Insurance technical reserves
Life/
Debt claims on
End of securities Shares and pension fund Financial Remainingyear/quarter Total issued Loans  
1 other equity Total reserves  2 Non-life derivatives liabilities Net worth  5 
Insurance corporations
 
2017         Q1 2,189.7 30.5 57.2 448.6 1,511.9 1,309.6 202.3 1.8 139.6 −
         Q2 2,178.4 28.6 57.0 450.8 1,505.5 1,308.5 197.0 2.1 134.3 −         Q3 2,188.1 28.5 58.4 455.6 1,513.1 1,317.2 195.9 2.3 130.2 −         Q4 2,212.7 28.3 62.6 466.0 1,523.0 1,335.0 187.9 2.2 130.6 −
2018         Q1 2,218.0 28.0 61.9 460.2 1,539.4 1,333.8 205.6 1.5 127.0 −
         Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 456.8 1,553.7 1,348.0 205.7 1.9 122.2 −         Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.3 1,545.4 1,344.1 201.4 2.0 122.4 −         Q4 2,213.5 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.3 1,332.4 197.9 1.6 124.6 −
2019         Q1 2,343.9 31.6 68.3 489.2 1,624.9 1,402.8 222.2 1.5 128.4 −
         Q2 2,405.7 31.9 69.3 489.7 1,685.2 1,463.9 221.3 1.8 127.8 −         Q3 2,490.1 31.7 69.1 487.9 1,765.7 1,539.4 226.3 2.2 133.5 −
Life insurance
2017         Q1 1,170.5 4.1 12.5 116.3 991.8 991.8 − 0.9 44.8 −
         Q2 1,172.8 4.0 12.1 119.8 989.6 989.6 − 1.0 46.2 −         Q3 1,177.5 4.1 12.3 121.5 994.0 994.0 − 1.1 44.5 −         Q4 1,193.2 4.1 12.8 121.9 1,007.5 1,007.5 − 1.1 45.8 −
2018         Q1 1,187.6 4.0 13.3 119.5 1,007.4 1,007.4 − 0.7 42.6 −
         Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.3 1,017.4 1,017.4 − 0.8 40.6 −         Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.0 1,013.7 1,013.7 − 0.9 41.9 −         Q4 1,185.2 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.7 1,000.7 − 0.5 42.1 −
2019         Q1 1,238.0 4.1 14.3 120.8 1,057.5 1,057.5 − 0.4 40.9 −
         Q2 1,289.7 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,106.5 1,106.5 − 0.4 42.4 −         Q3 1,348.6 3.7 15.4 116.1 1,168.6 1,168.6 − 0.6 44.3 −
Non-life insurance
2017         Q1 606.7 1.1 7.3 134.1 409.0 300.8 108.3 0.1 55.1 −
         Q2 603.7 1.1 6.8 135.7 406.8 302.5 104.3 0.1 53.1 −         Q3 603.1 1.1 6.9 137.5 406.8 305.8 101.1 0.1 50.7 −         Q4 606.9 1.1 6.7 141.3 405.9 309.8 96.1 0.1 51.8 −
2018         Q1 623.2 1.1 7.7 141.4 423.0 311.1 111.9 0.0 50.0 −
         Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 −         Q3 617.9 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 −         Q4 616.2 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.6 315.5 101.1 0.0 50.0 −
2019         Q1 655.4 1.1 9.3 144.6 449.5 329.5 120.0 0.0 50.9 −
         Q2 664.1 1.1 8.8 146.1 459.8 341.8 118.0 0.1 48.3 −         Q3 679.8 1.2 9.0 147.7 471.8 354.7 117.2 0.1 49.9 −
Reinsurance  3 
2017         Q1 412.5 25.3 37.4 198.2 111.1 17.0 94.1 0.8 39.7 −
         Q2 401.9 23.5 38.1 195.2 109.1 16.4 92.6 1.1 35.0 −         Q3 407.5 23.3 39.3 196.6 112.3 17.5 94.9 1.1 35.0 −         Q4 412.6 23.1 43.1 202.8 109.6 17.7 91.9 1.0 33.1 −
2018         Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 −
         Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 −         Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 −         Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 −
2019         Q1 450.5 26.5 44.6 223.8 117.9 15.7 102.2 1.1 36.7 −
         Q2 451.9 26.6 46.1 221.8 118.9 15.6 103.3 1.3 37.2 −         Q3 461.6 26.8 44.7 224.1 125.3 16.1 109.1 1.5 39.3 −
Pension funds  4 
2017         Q1 617.1 − 6.9 6.9 552.1 552.1 − − 2.4 48.8
         Q2 626.0 − 6.9 7.1 557.1 557.1 − − 2.5 52.4         Q3 636.5 − 6.9 7.3 563.0 563.0 − − 2.5 56.9         Q4 646.8 − 7.1 7.6 574.3 574.3 − − 2.7 55.2
2018         Q1 650.6 − 7.3 7.6 580.0 580.0 − − 2.7 52.9
         Q2 657.6 − 7.5 7.7 587.1 587.1 − − 2.7 52.6         Q3 663.6 − 7.7 7.8 592.9 592.9 − − 2.7 52.5         Q4 670.7 − 7.9 7.8 602.1 602.1 − − 2.8 50.1
2019         Q1 688.6 − 8.1 7.9 612.4 612.4 − − 2.8 57.4
         Q2 701.0 − 8.1 7.9 617.5 617.5 − − 2.8 64.6         Q3 711.3 − 8.2 7.9 620.8 620.8 − − 2.8 71.6
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data ac- tor. 3Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is
cording to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I supervi- included there. 4The term “pension funds“ refers to the institutional sector “pension
sory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations. 1Including depo- funds“ of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company
sits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers’ note loans pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-emp loyed. Social se-
and registered Pfandbriefe. 2Insurance technical reserves “life“ taking account of curity funds are not included. 5Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and
transitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the “non-life insurance“ sec- the liability item “Shares and other equity“. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
50  Monthly Report
February 2020
VIII. Capital market
 
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
 
 
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
Credit in-
Sales stitutions
= Public Foreign including
total Bank Corporate debt debt building
pur- debt bonds secur- secur- and loan Deutsche Other Non-
Period chases Total securities ities ities  3 Total 4 Bundesbank sectors  6 residents  7 (non-MFIs)  2 associations  5 
2008 76,490 66,139 − 45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . − 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 − 538 − 114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 − 19,945
2010 146,620 − 1,212 − 7,621 24,044 − 17,635 147,831 92,682 − 103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 − 46,796 850 59,521 20,075 − 23,876 − 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 − 21,419 − 98,820 − 8,701 86,103 73,231 − 3,767 − 42,017 − 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 − 15,969 − 101,616 − 117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 − 25,778 − 12,708 54,895 − 32,379
2014 64,775 − 31,962 − 47,404 − 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 − 12,124 − 11,951 74,484 14,366
2015 33,024 − 36,010 − 65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 − 66,330 121,164 61,657 − 83,471
2016 69,745 27,429 19,177 18,265 − 10,012 42,316 164,603 − 58,012 187,500 35,113 − 94,856
2017 53,710 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 42,147 141,177 − 71,454 161,012 51,620 − 87,470
2018 56,664 16,630 33,251 12,433 − 29,055 40,034 102,442 − 24,417 67,328 59,529 − 45,778
2019 123,466 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 54,930 86,585 8,059 2,408 76,118 36,884
2019         Feb. 25,646 13,718 16,833 2,035 − 5,150 11,928 12,638 7,239 − 1,984 7,383 13,008
         Mar. 17,631 18,264 4,492 2,581 11,191 − 633 − 5,323 − 1,709 − 4,425 811 22,954
         Apr. − 13,949 − 18,294 − 8,318 5,092 − 15,069 4,345 − 3,081 − 8,015 1,283 3,651 − 10,868
         May 44,585 42,665 20,104 1,599 20,962 1,920 16,191 4,099 4,010 8,082 28,395
         June 8,018 − 2,297 − 913 8,375 − 9,757 10,315 11,820 9,743 − 1,663 3,740 − 3,801
         July − 2,071 − 7,860 744 − 1,051 − 7,553 5,789 1,428 4,464 − 2,627 − 409 − 3,499
         Aug. 27,388 27,213 − 3,325 6,474 24,064 175 20,990 6,157 1,378 13,455 6,399
         Sep. 3,717 − 1,029 − 722 170 − 477 4,746 7,164 − 35 − 1,888 9,087 − 3,447
         Oct. − 37,410 − 38,176 − 17,186 3,290 − 24,280 766 − 11,320 − 8,976 505 − 2,849 − 26,090
         Nov. 45,338 38,355 13,461 6,468 18,426 6,983 28,912 5,649 7,457 15,806 16,426
         Dec. − 29,741 − 24,349 − 4,293 − 3,847 − 16,209 − 5,392 − 2,131 − 12,043 2,062 7,850 − 27,610
 
 
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Sales Residents
=
total Domestic Foreign Credit insti- Non-
Period purchases shares  8 shares  9 Total 10 tutions  5 Other sectors  11 residents  12 
2008 − 29,452 11,326 − 40,778 2,743 − 23,079 25,822 − 32,195
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 − 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 − 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 − 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 − 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 31,881 4,409 27,472 30,525 − 5,143 35,668 1,356
2017 50,410 15,570 34,840 48,773 7,031 41,742 1,637
2018 61,212 16,188 45,024 50,020 − 11,184 61,204 11,192
2019 42,884 9,076 33,807 49,141 − 1,120 50,261 − 6,257
2019         Feb. 634 122 512 1,500 − 436 1,936 − 866
         Mar. − 1,529 948 − 2,477 138 − 867 1,005 − 1,667
         Apr. 5,466 243 5,223 6,315 − 360 6,675 − 849
         May 4,650 1,061 3,589 5,996 1,182 4,814 − 1,346
         June 989 475 514 181 − 295 476 808
         July 2,858 68 2,790 1,255 − 1,609 2,864 1,603
         Aug. − 490 75 − 565 756 − 616 1,372 − 1,246
         Sep. 5,280 124 5,156 4,456 − 1,145 5,601 824
         Oct. 10,712 385 10,327 10,728 − 172 10,900 − 16
         Nov. 4,230 236 3,994 4,445 1,801 2,644 − 215
         Dec. 5,878 4,669 1,209 7,567 1,452 6,115 − 1,689
1Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers’ portfolios of their own 8Excluding shares of public limited investment companies; at issue prices. 9Net pur-
debt securities. 2Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. chases or net sales (−) of foreign shares (including direct investment)  by  re sidents;  
3Net purchases or net sales (−) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction transaction  values. 10Domestic and foreign shares. 11Residual; also including
values. 4Domestic and foreign debt securities. 5Book values; statistically adjusted. purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds. 12Net
6Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic purchases or net sales (−) of domestic shares (including direct in vestment) by
mutual funds. Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank. 7Net purchases or non-residents; transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are
net sales (−) of domestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values. provisional; revisions are not specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
51  Monthly Report
February 2020
VIII. Capital market
 
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *  
  
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1 
 
Debt securities
Corporate issued by special-
Mortgage Public purpose Other bank bonds Public
Period Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe debt securities (non-MFIs)  2 debt securities credit institutions
Gross sales
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,421
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,3752012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,5302013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,8922014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
2016 
3 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
2017 3 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,4962019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
2019         Apr. 100,795 64,464 2,078 92 53,880 8,414 6,941 29,390
         May 115,749 71,690 7,035 15 53,641 10,998 5,146 38,914         June 88,671 50,607 1,469 37 38,478 10,623 13,573 24,491
         July 116,547 73,836 3,014 738 58,148 11,936 6,410 36,302
         Aug. 113,666 61,206 1,851 − 46,927 12,428 8,352 44,107         Sep. 106,888 66,644 3,242 1,877 53,588 7,936 10,787 29,457
         Oct. 102,837 65,365 1,947 31 54,709 8,678 9,740 27,732
         Nov. 111,203 65,111 4,053 1,080 48,790 11,188 11,524 34,568         Dec. 61,994 39,959 570 10 33,766 5,613 4,268 17,767
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four  years 4
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,4072009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,4312012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,8882013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,7652014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
2016 
3 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
2017 3 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,7602019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
2019         Apr. 25,789 9,141 1,255 92 4,760 3,035 4,194 12,454
         May 34,546 17,220 3,914 15 8,131 5,160 2,831 14,495         June 30,682 11,412 1,015 35 7,578 2,784 11,093 8,177
         July 33,810 15,283 2,331 290 8,959 3,704 5,310 13,217
         Aug. 24,543 5,751 341 − 2,515 2,895 6,676 12,116         Sep. 35,985 18,536 2,075 1,877 11,581 3,003 7,100 10,349
         Oct. 27,395 10,263 1,381 31 6,522 2,329 7,450 9,682
         Nov. 40,373 16,756 2,896 1,030 6,675 6,155 9,535 14,082         Dec. 16,946 9,899 540 10 6,824 2,525 2,729 4,317
Net sales 5
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 − 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,3022009 76,441 − 75,554 858 − 80,646 25,579 − 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 − 87,646 − 3,754 − 63,368 28,296 − 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 − 54,582 1,657 − 44,290 32,904 − 44,852 − 3,189 80,2892012 − 85,298 − 100,198 − 4,177 − 41,660 − 3,259 − 51,099 − 6,401 21,2982013 − 140,017 − 125,932 − 17,364 − 37,778 − 4,027 − 66,760 1,394 − 15,4792014 − 34,020 − 56,899 − 6,313 − 23,856 − 862 − 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 − 65,147 − 77,273 9,271 − 9,754 − 2,758 − 74,028 25,300 − 13,174
2016 
3 21,951 10,792 2,176 − 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 − 7,020
2017 3 2,669 5,954 6,389 − 4,697 18,788 − 14,525 6,828 − 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 − 6,564 18,850 − 5,453 9,738 − 33,6302019 59,719 28,750 13,098 − 3,728 26,263 − 6,885 30,449 519
2019         Apr. − 14,225 − 6,856 987 − 1,177 − 5,347 − 1,319 4,151 − 11,521
         May 39,075 19,156 4,826 − 1,099 13,377 2,052 317 19,601         June − 933 − 116 − 608 − 1,193 1,497 188 8,975 − 9,792
         July − 6,666 1,488 − 1,791 45 1,851 1,382 − 1,306 − 6,847
         Aug. 23,134 − 3,541 680 − 918 − 2,828 − 474 6,041 20,634         Sep. − 531 − 804 484 1,560 2,787 − 5,636 720 − 446
         Oct. − 32,609 − 16,242 244 − 1,286 − 12,310 − 2,890 3,080 − 19,448
         Nov. 42,328 15,455 3,670 118 10,420 1,247 6,544 20,329         Dec. − 30,172 − 9,922 − 1,605 − 816 − 4,406 − 3,096 − 2,804 − 17,445
*For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Supplemen t 2 − Capital of debt securities. 4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue. 5 Gross
market statistics on pp. 23 ff. 1Excluding registered bank debt securities. 2 Including sales less redemptions. 
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011. 3 Sectoral reclassification

Deutsche Bundesbank
52  Monthly Report
February 2020
VIII. Capital market
 
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
 
 
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
 
End of year Debt securities
or month/ issued by Corporate
Maturity Mortgage Public special-purpose Other bank bonds Public
in years Total Total Pfandbriefe Pfandbriefe credit institutions debt securities (non-MFIs) debt securities
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
2016 1 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
2017 1 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 342,325 1,584,136
2019         Apr. 3,117,396 1,217,437 168,287 51,300 685,937 311,913 322,409 1,577,550
         May 2 3,154,821 1,236,593 173,113 50,201 699,314 313,965 2 321,076 1,597,151
         June 3,153,887 1,236,477 172,505 49,008 700,811 314,153 330,051 1,587,359
         July 3,147,222 1,237,965 170,714 49,054 702,662 315,535 328,744 1,580,512
         Aug. 3,170,356 1,234,424 171,394 48,135 699,834 315,061 334,785 1,601,147
         Sep. 3,169,825 1,233,620 171,879 49,695 702,621 309,425 335,505 1,600,700
         Oct. 3,137,216 1,217,378 172,123 48,410 690,311 306,535 338,585 1,581,253
         Nov. 3,179,544 1,232,833 175,793 48,528 700,730 307,782 345,130 1,601,582
         Dec. 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 342,325 1,584,136
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity  3 Position at end-December 2019 
1,005,276 446,922 43,917 13,406 284,380 105,218 59,959 498,394     less than  2
635,564 285,311 47,800 12,142 161,495 63,876 52,434 297,817 2 to less than  4
473,371 205,486 36,948 7,230 115,764 45,543 54,270 213,615 4 to less than  6
310,708 118,167 24,177 6,049 55,104 32,838 28,158 164,383 6 to less than  8
226,711 77,281 13,094 6,233 40,196 17,758 19,662 129,768 8 to less than 10
151,660 36,048 5,577 1,051 16,645 12,776 30,870 84,741 10 to less than 15
90,451 22,882 1,768 1,498 15,746 3,871 11,717 55,852 15 to less than 20
255,632 30,811 907 103 6,996 22,805 85,255 139,564 20 and more
*Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers’ portfolios. 1Sectoral falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of the residual amount outstanding for
reclassification of debt securities. 2Adjustments due to change of domicile of debt securities not falling due en bloc. 
issuers. 3Calculated from month under review until final maturity for debt securities
 
 
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  * 
 
 
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies’ capital due to
Memo item:
Share circulation
at market values
cash payments (market capita-
Share capital = Net increase or and ex- contribution merger reduction lisation)
circulation at net decrease (−) change of of claims and of capital level at end
end of period during period convertible issue of and other transfer change of and of period
Period under review under review bonds  1 bonus shares real assets of assets legal form liquidation under review  2 
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 − 428 − 608 − 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 − 3,741 − 1,269 − 974 927,256
2010 174,596 − 1,096 3,265 497 178 − 486 − 993 − 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 − 552 − 762 − 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 − 478 594 − 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 − 6,879 2,971 718 476 − 1,432 − 619 − 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 − 465 − 1,044 − 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 − 1,394 − 1,385 − 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 − 1,062 3,272 319 337 − 953 − 2,165 − 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 − 457 − 661 − 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 − 1,055 − 1,111 − 946 1,634,155
2019 3  4 183,461 1,700 2,411 2,419 542 − 858 − 65 − 2,747 1,950,224
2019         Apr. 180,744 38 127 21 19 − 29 − 9 − 90 1,833,023
         May 180,763 19 46 112 0 − 45 − 60 − 34 1,696,088
         June 180,375 − 389 420 84 8 22 − 59 − 864 1,784,783
         July 179,852 − 523 35 11 3 − 10 − 6 − 555 1,769,824
         Aug. 179,826 − 26 40 93 − − 36 − 7 − 116 1,745,136
         Sep. 182,330 2,504 71 1,918 488 − 65 145 − 54 1,799,024
         Oct.  3 183,777 − 94 79 − 5 − 40 − 8 − 129 1,867,235
         Nov. 183,514 − 265 41 − − − 156 − 10 − 141 1,927,816
         Dec.  4 183,461 − 83 284 1 20 − 11 − 8 − 368 1,950,224
*Excluding shares of public limited investment companies. 1Including shares issued Börse AG. 3Methodological changes since October 2019. 4Changes due to
out of company profits. 2All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based reclassifications. 
on data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mitteilungen and Deutsche

Deutsche Bundesbank
53  Monthly Report
February 2020
 VIII. Capital market
 
5. Yields and indices on German securities
  
               
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3 
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Corporate German German With a residual With a residual
maturity of bonds bond iBoxx CDAX share maturity of more
9 to (non- index share price index than 9 years and € Germany
Total Total Total 10 years  4 Total up to 10 years MFIs) (REX) price index index (DAX)
Average End-1998 End-1987 End-1987
Period % per annum daily rate = 100 = 100 = 1,000
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.352012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.392013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.162014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 3.0 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.062017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.642018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.962019 − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2019         Aug. − 0.4 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.1 2.2 147.13 116.35 518.10 11,939.28
         Sep. − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.1 2.3 145.93 114.98 535.82 12,428.08
         Oct. − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.1 2.4 144.91 113.34 554.98 12,866.79
         Nov. − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.4 0.0 0.2 2.2 144.67 112.86 571.40 13,236.38         Dec. − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 0.0 0.2 2.1 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020         Jan. − 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3 0.0 0.3 2.0 144.88 113.14 565.28 12,981.97
1Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of standing of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthl y figures are calcula-
over 4 years if their mean residual maturities exceed 3 years. Convertible debt ted on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annu al figures
securities and similar, debt securities with unscheduled redemption, zero coupon are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. 2End of year or month. 3Source:
bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in euro are not included. Deutsche Börse AG. 4Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for
Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the amounts out- futures contracts; calculated as unweighted averages. 
 
 
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
  
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1  (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the Credit institutions
general public including building
Other sectors  3 and loan associations  2 
of which:
Sales of which: of which:
= Secur- Foreign Foreigntotal Money ities- Real Special- mutual mutualpur- market based estate ised Foreign fund fund Non-resi-
Period chases Total Total funds funds funds funds funds  
4 Total Total shares Total shares dents  5 
2008 2,598 − 7,911 − 14,409 − 12,171 − 11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 − 16,625 − 9,252 27,940 19,761 − 8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 − 5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 − 14,995 − 8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 − 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,5982011 46,512 45,221 − 1,340 − 379 − 2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 − 7,576 − 694 47,050 1,984 7,0352012 111,236 89,942 2,084 − 1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 − 3,062 − 1,562 117,738 22,855 − 3,4372013 123,736 91,337 9,184 − 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 − 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 − 1,745 143,256 44,266 − 3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,8712016 157,068 119,369 21,301 − 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,698 163,998 2,877 − 3,172 161,121 40,870 − 6,9312017 145,017 94,921 29,560 − 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 50,096 147,006 4,938 1,048 142,068 49,048 − 1,9912018 122,353 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 18,660 128,170 2,979 − 2,306 125,191 20,966 − 5,821
2019 173,113 122,546 17,032 − 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 50,565 177,686 2,720 − 812 174,966 51,377 − 4,5752019         June 10,963 4,257 2,040 10 790 1,164 2,218 6,705 10,282 − 150 − 505 10,432 7,210 681
         July 9,671 5,905 681 63 122 549 5,225 3,766 10,131 1,377 − 55 8,754 3,821 − 460
         Aug. 13,558 9,862 1,022 139 346 570 8,839 3,696 13,732 − 310 − 1,346 14,042 5,042 − 174         Sep. 12,440 9,233 2,629 164 1,645 831 6,604 3,207 12,990 890 64 12,100 3,143 − 551
         Oct. 14,526 11,592 322 − 115 − 1,543 647 11,270 2,934 14,118 719 114 13,399 2,820 408
         Nov. 18,431 12,313 2,646 − 232 1,764 1,048 9,668 6,117 18,296 217 118 18,079 5,999 135         Dec. 44,876 33,056 1,942 − 98 947 949 31,114 11,820 44,061 845 79 43,216 11,741 815
1Including public limited investment companies. 2Book values. 3Residual. 4Net transaction values. — The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions
purchases or net sales (−) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values. are not specially marked. 5Net purchases or net sales (−) of domestic fund shares by non-residents;

Deutsche Bundesbank
54  Monthly Report
February 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
   Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 35.08 48.76 24.92 − 0.40 9.97 31.48 − 18.86 − 7.80 33.03
Debt securities − 3.40 − 5.65 5.10 0.55 1.46 2.44 0.65 − 0.45 − 0.71
Short-term debt securities − 0.58 − 2.26 1.00 − 0.02 0.38 0.77 0.41 − 1.11 − 0.39
Long-term debt securities − 2.81 − 3.39 4.10 0.57 1.09 1.68 0.25 0.66 − 0.32
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 2.68 − 2.80 1.45 0.47 − 0.02 0.89 0.62 − 0.07 − 0.55
Non-financial corporations 0.67 − 0.56 0.51 0.32 − 0.13 0.33 0.74 − 0.27 − 0.03
Financial corporations − 2.53 − 0.41 1.18 0.31 0.08 0.61 − 0.10 0.12 − 0.44
General government − 0.82 − 1.82 − 0.25 − 0.15 0.03 − 0.05 − 0.03 0.07 − 0.08
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 0.72 − 2.85 3.66 0.08 1.48 1.56 0.04 − 0.38 − 0.16
Loans 18.11 52.72 − 23.70 − 9.88 − 0.55 − 10.86 14.29 − 5.51 − 5.47
Short-term loans 18.80 28.74 4.52 − 4.96 − 0.62 4.38 15.77 − 6.22 − 2.80
Long-term loans − 0.69 23.97 − 28.22 − 4.92 0.07 − 15.24 − 1.48 0.71 − 2.67
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 0.67 21.85 − 3.39 − 3.71 4.68 − 3.64 2.95 − 3.62 − 4.93
Non-financial corporations − 4.78 15.23 − 10.03 − 4.52 2.50 − 5.60 0.94 − 6.71 − 8.09
Financial corporations 5.25 6.26 6.29 0.72 2.10 1.87 2.01 3.10 3.15
General government 0.20 0.36 0.35 0.09 0.09 0.09 0.00 0.00 0.00
Loans to the rest of the world 17.44 30.86 − 20.32 − 6.17 − 5.23 − 7.22 11.34 − 1.89 − 0.54
Equity and investment fund shares 96.49 62.53 121.61 39.31 44.63 7.18 5.64 13.71 32.20
Equity 90.66 53.98 119.93 38.33 44.53 10.11 2.88 12.02 29.20
Listed shares of domestic sectors 22.91 − 3.82 18.82 − 2.70 − 1.34 1.12 1.82 − 3.34 15.05
Non-financial corporations 22.59 − 3.76 18.27 − 2.90 − 1.38 0.91 1.84 − 3.31 15.12
Financial corporations 0.31 − 0.06 0.55 0.20 0.04 0.21 − 0.02 − 0.03 − 0.08
Listed shares of the rest of the world 10.88 7.62 0.70 16.15 − 15.14 0.02 0.34 0.74 2.93
Other equity  1 56.88 50.18 100.42 24.88 61.01 8.97 0.72 14.62 11.23
Investment fund shares 5.83 8.55 1.67 0.98 0.10 − 2.93 2.76 1.70 3.00
Money market fund shares 0.36 − 0.46 − 0.53 − 0.03 − 0.14 0.27 − 0.03 0.23 − 0.03
Non-MMF investment fund shares 5.47 9.01 2.21 1.01 0.24 − 3.19 2.79 1.47 3.03
Insurance technical reserves 1.15 3.92 1.97 0.87 0.82 − 0.20 0.43 0.41 0.68
Financial derivatives 22.74 12.68 − 5.84 − 2.90 − 4.54 − 0.76 0.26 − 6.72 3.10
Other accounts receivable 7.17 163.18 3.76 9.04 − 0.46 − 38.41 26.76 − 26.39 − 17.72
Total 177.34 338.13 127.81 36.59 51.33 − 9.12 29.19 − 32.73 45.12
External financing
Debt securities 23.71 8.56 7.08 2.36 0.90 1.03 5.77 5.87 5.00
Short-term securities − 0.15 0.60 4.08 1.48 0.38 − 0.32 1.23 1.75 0.46
Long-term securities 23.85 7.95 3.00 0.89 0.53 1.35 4.54 4.12 4.54
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 10.82 7.17 3.81 1.65 − 0.94 0.61 4.08 0.08 2.37
Non-financial corporations 0.67 − 0.56 0.51 0.32 − 0.13 0.33 0.74 − 0.27 − 0.03
Financial corporations 10.06 9.16 3.28 1.38 − 0.54 0.24 2.44 0.87 2.36
General government 0.01 0.01 0.01 − 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.69 − 0.61 − 0.04
Households 0.08 − 1.45 0.01 − 0.05 − 0.27 0.04 0.20 0.09 0.08
Debt securities of the rest of the world 12.89 1.39 3.27 0.71 1.84 0.42 1.69 5.78 2.63
Loans 40.46 94.74 132.51 45.49 37.27 8.19 25.49 40.26 10.12
Short-term loans 14.98 21.62 68.51 21.86 23.48 − 3.89 18.42 19.08 − 3.46
Long-term loans 25.49 73.12 64.00 23.63 13.79 12.08 7.08 21.18 13.58
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 19.51 53.26 75.14 18.44 27.44 − 0.10 21.08 18.57 − 5.99
Non-financial corporations − 4.78 15.23 − 10.03 − 4.52 2.50 − 5.60 0.94 − 6.71 − 8.09
Financial corporations 21.90 39.09 84.29 22.47 24.13 5.74 23.18 24.55 2.24
General government 2.39 − 1.06 0.87 0.50 0.82 − 0.25 − 3.03 0.73 − 0.15
Loans from the rest of the world 20.95 41.47 57.38 27.05 9.83 8.29 4.41 21.69 16.11
Equity 16.09 13.41 14.80 11.38 − 1.03 2.06 3.76 2.77 3.52
Listed shares of domestic sectors 27.35 8.53 73.29 4.49 5.21 43.60 4.48 − 34.56 15.00
Non-financial corporations 22.59 − 3.76 18.27 − 2.90 − 1.38 0.91 1.84 − 3.31 15.12
Financial corporations − 2.06 11.14 46.76 4.52 4.11 43.19 − 0.24 − 32.74 − 0.71
General government 0.07 0.51 0.53 0.15 0.09 0.13 − 0.04 0.04 0.04
Households 6.74 0.65 7.72 2.71 2.38 − 0.63 2.92 1.45 0.55
Listed shares of the rest of the world − 25.83 − 4.20 − 32.01 6.18 − 4.82 − 42.09 − 4.24 2.58 − 14.23
Other equity  1 14.57 9.07 − 26.47 0.71 − 1.42 0.56 3.52 34.74 2.75
Insurance technical reserves 3.22 6.89 6.04 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51 1.51
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options − 0.13 3.69 − 4.19 3.27 − 0.06 − 8.90 3.62 0.65 4.49
Other accounts payable 38.23 57.82 22.43 17.59 4.79 − 16.82 12.28 − 17.41 22.07
Total 121.57 185.11 178.67 81.61 43.38 − 12.93 52.43 33.64 46.70
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
    
    
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
55  Monthly Report
February 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 512.9 556.2 568.4 536.1 535.4 568.4 536.0 518.6 568.4
Debt securities 44.8 38.8 43.1 39.7 41.0 43.1 44.4 44.3 44.0
Short-term debt securities 5.5 3.3 4.2 3.1 3.5 4.2 4.7 3.6 3.2
Long-term debt securities 39.3 35.6 38.8 36.6 37.5 38.8 39.7 40.8 40.7
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 20.8 18.2 19.2 18.7 18.6 19.2 20.1 20.2 19.8
Non-financial corporations 4.4 3.9 4.3 4.1 4.0 4.3 5.1 4.8 4.8Financial corporations 12.0 11.7 12.7 12.2 12.3 12.7 12.8 13.1 12.8General government 4.4 2.5 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.3 2.3
Debt securities of the rest of the world 24.0 20.7 23.8 21.1 22.5 23.8 24.2 24.1 24.2
Loans 549.4 594.0 570.7 581.8 581.3 570.7 591.7 586.4 582.9
Short-term loans 450.7 475.0 480.0 476.0 475.5 480.0 502.0 496.2 494.5
Long-term loans 98.7 119.0 90.7 105.9 105.8 90.7 89.7 90.2 88.4
Memo item:
Loans to domestic sectors 354.4 376.3 372.9 371.8 376.5 372.9 375.8 372.2 367.3
Non-financial corporations 282.6 297.8 287.8 290.9 293.4 287.8 288.7 282.0 273.9Financial corporations 62.0 68.2 74.5 70.5 72.6 74.5 76.5 79.6 82.8General government 9.9 10.3 10.6 10.4 10.5 10.6 10.6 10.6 10.6
Loans to the rest of the world 195.0 217.7 197.8 210.0 204.7 197.8 215.9 214.2 215.6
Equity and investment fund shares 2,030.4 2,183.7 2,139.2 2,221.8 2,259.2 2,139.2 2,231.5 2,241.0 2,280.0
Equity 1,870.5 2,013.6 1,974.9 2,048.9 2,085.4 1,974.9 2,057.2 2,062.3 2,095.4
Listed shares of domestic sectors 292.3 332.2 302.6 338.5 338.3 302.6 318.3 319.7 328.8
Non-financial corporations 286.2 325.3 296.0 330.9 330.4 296.0 311.3 312.1 321.4Financial corporations 6.1 6.8 6.6 7.6 7.9 6.6 7.0 7.7 7.3
Listed shares of the rest of the world 44.5 49.0 45.3 64.2 49.1 45.3 49.1 49.9 52.1
Other equity  
1 1,533.7 1,632.5 1,627.0 1,646.3 1,697.9 1,627.0 1,689.8 1,692.7 1,714.5
Investment fund shares 159.9 170.1 164.3 172.8 173.9 164.3 174.3 178.7 184.6
Money market fund shares 1.9 1.5 1.0 0.9 0.7 1.0 0.9 1.2 1.2Non-MMF investment fund shares 158.0 168.6 163.3 172.0 173.1 163.3 173.4 177.5 183.5
Insurance technical reserves 50.2 54.2 56.3 55.6 56.3 56.3 57.0 57.7 58.4Financial derivatives 60.1 49.3 42.9 42.4 40.8 42.9 48.4 47.5 56.5Other accounts receivable 1,006.2 1,116.9 1,148.0 1,184.9 1,184.7 1,148.0 1,194.2 1,174.9 1,196.0
Total 4,254.0 4,593.1 4,568.6 4,662.4 4,698.7 4,568.6 4,703.1 4,670.5 4,786.2
Liabilities
Debt securities 183.8 210.6 187.8 189.0 185.8 187.8 196.4 205.6 217.0
Short-term securities 2.9 3.4 6.1 7.4 6.5 6.1 7.4 9.1 9.5
Long-term securities 180.9 207.2 181.6 181.6 179.2 181.6 189.1 196.5 207.4
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 72.1 82.9 79.0 80.2 79.0 79.0 85.4 85.8 88.2
Non-financial corporations 4.4 3.9 4.3 4.1 4.0 4.3 5.1 4.8 4.8Financial corporations 51.9 64.4 60.7 61.6 60.8 60.7 65.2 66.4 68.9General government 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.8 0.2 0.2Households 15.7 14.4 13.9 14.3 14.1 13.9 14.3 14.4 14.4
Debt securities of the rest of the world 111.7 127.7 108.8 108.8 106.8 108.8 111.1 119.7 128.7
Loans 1,511.7 1,605.8 1,727.0 1,688.1 1,719.7 1,727.0 1,759.6 1,798.0 1,811.3
Short-term loans 598.1 624.3 687.7 673.4 692.0 687.7 709.4 728.4 726.5
Long-term loans 913.6 981.5 1,039.3 1,014.7 1,027.7 1,039.3 1,050.2 1,069.5 1,084.8
Memo item:
Loans from domestic sectors 1,157.8 1,206.4 1,273.6 1,248.2 1,274.6 1,273.6 1,290.0 1,307.5 1,302.3
Non-financial corporations 282.6 297.8 287.8 290.9 293.4 287.8 288.7 282.0 273.9Financial corporations 815.4 850.8 928.2 899.9 923.2 928.2 946.6 970.0 973.1General government 59.8 57.8 57.6 57.5 58.0 57.6 54.7 55.5 55.3
Loans from the rest of the world 353.9 399.4 453.5 439.9 445.1 453.5 469.6 490.4 509.0
Equity 2,785.3 3,062.0 2,684.8 2,978.5 2,942.3 2,684.8 2,782.7 2,869.3 2,875.3
Listed shares of domestic sectors 654.2 748.2 683.9 726.8 733.2 683.9 733.3 711.9 722.2
Non-financial corporations 286.2 325.3 296.0 330.9 330.4 296.0 311.3 312.1 321.4Financial corporations 144.8 171.8 180.2 156.3 160.2 180.2 193.2 165.7 166.1General government 44.4 51.8 48.7 49.0 52.1 48.7 54.1 55.5 58.1Households 178.7 199.2 159.0 190.7 190.5 159.0 174.7 178.7 176.5
Listed shares of the rest of the world 813.6 933.6 740.2 915.2 882.3 740.2 760.2 830.4 827.8
Other equity  
1 1,317.6 1,380.1 1,260.7 1,336.5 1,326.8 1,260.7 1,289.2 1,326.9 1,325.2
Insurance technical reserves 256.8 263.7 269.7 266.7 268.2 269.7 271.2 272.7 274.2Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 38.2 26.9 23.3 28.2 30.1 23.3 29.7 34.0 42.6
Other accounts payable 1,072.6 1,107.5 1,159.1 1,155.2 1,164.0 1,159.1 1,187.8 1,187.4 1,242.8
Total 5,848.4 6,276.4 6,051.7 6,305.7 6,310.1 6,051.7 6,227.5 6,366.9 6,463.2
  1 Including unlisted shares.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
56  Monthly Report
February 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
  
  
  € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Acquisition of financial assets
Currency and deposits 114.91 105.99 140.10 40.57 27.33 58.20 20.10 43.23 22.47
Currency 21.18 19.48 32.06 7.54 7.03 13.84 − 0.89 9.40 9.19
Deposits 93.74 86.51 108.04 33.02 20.30 44.37 21.00 33.83 13.29
Transferable deposits 105.32 99.78 109.88 34.10 21.40 42.22 17.18 34.39 17.27
Time deposits 1.28 − 4.03 6.79 1.99 1.43 2.23 1.86 − 0.79 − 0.30
Savings deposits
(including savings certificates) − 12.87 − 9.24 − 8.63 − 3.06 − 2.53 − 0.08 1.95 0.23 − 3.68
Debt securities − 12.80 − 8.14 1.81 0.52 1.71 0.58 0.52 0.66 − 1.42
Short-term debt securities − 0.16 − 0.20 − 0.13 − 0.01 − 0.02 0.26 − 0.22 − 0.13 − 0.18
Long-term debt securities − 12.63 − 7.93 1.94 0.53 1.72 0.32 0.74 0.79 − 1.23
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors − 4.14 − 5.09 2.29 0.16 1.18 0.96 0.71 0.28 − 1.45
Non-financial corporations − 0.01 − 1.43 − 0.09 − 0.23 − 0.12 0.19 0.22 0.04 0.01
Financial corporations − 2.48 − 2.68 2.83 0.61 1.36 0.79 0.58 0.30 − 1.29
General government − 1.65 − 0.99 − 0.46 − 0.22 − 0.06 − 0.02 − 0.09 − 0.07 − 0.17
Debt securities of the rest of the world − 8.66 − 3.05 − 0.48 0.36 0.53 − 0.38 − 0.19 0.39 0.04
Equity and investment fund shares 45.78 55.13 39.42 8.06 11.79 1.84 11.41 11.48 10.64
Equity 21.65 14.69 18.92 2.79 7.01 1.76 6.76 4.21 3.67
Listed shares of domestic sectors 9.37 0.90 9.47 2.55 2.63 0.02 4.29 1.56 1.09
Non-financial corporations 6.09 0.54 6.33 1.63 2.27 − 0.69 2.52 1.43 0.86
Financial corporations 3.28 0.36 3.14 0.92 0.37 0.70 1.78 0.13 0.24
Listed shares of the rest of the world 6.93 9.65 4.41 − 0.83 2.82 0.95 0.93 1.52 1.59
Other equity  1 5.35 4.13 5.04 1.07 1.57 0.79 1.54 1.12 0.99
Investment fund shares 24.13 40.44 20.51 5.27 4.77 0.08 4.65 7.27 6.97
Money market fund shares − 0.53 − 0.28 − 0.33 − 0.03 − 0.06 0.16 − 0.12 − 0.02 0.16
Non-MMF investment fund shares 24.66 40.72 20.84 5.29 4.83 − 0.07 4.77 7.29 6.81
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardised
guarantees 15.58 20.23 15.80 3.20 3.15 6.25 3.36 3.41 3.41
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 24.79 37.68 28.06 6.73 6.18 6.97 6.80 5.04 7.12
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,
entitlements to non-pension benefits 32.00 35.52 29.61 8.05 7.42 4.33 6.74 5.79 2.77
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts receivable  2 − 15.96 − 24.55 − 5.83 − 8.41 − 1.97 − 19.74 34.55 − 4.72 13.09
Total 204.31 221.86 248.96 58.71 55.58 58.43 83.49 64.88 58.08
  External financing
Loans 47.46 55.38 68.30 20.06 22.43 15.07 15.83 23.78 24.76
Short-term loans − 4.31 − 2.19 2.44 0.11 1.83 0.53 0.47 0.87 − 0.62
Long-term loans 51.76 57.57 65.86 19.96 20.60 14.54 15.36 22.91 25.38
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 41.92 47.24 57.31 15.73 19.52 13.12 9.03 16.57 21.57
Consumer loans 9.78 11.25 11.14 4.34 2.36 2.67 6.15 6.56 3.67
Entrepreneurial loans − 4.24 − 3.11 − 0.14 − 0.01 0.55 − 0.73 0.65 0.66 − 0.49
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 42.87 49.99 61.72 17.65 19.41 13.67 12.51 21.22 21.09
Loans from other financial institutions 4.59 5.40 6.58 2.41 3.02 1.40 3.32 2.56 3.67
Loans from general government and rest
of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Other accounts payable − 0.23 0.64 − 0.09 0.01 − 0.05 − 0.27 0.45 0.10 0.20
Total 47.23 56.02 68.21 20.07 22.38 14.80 16.27 23.88 24.96
 1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.   
   

Deutsche Bundesbank
57  Monthly Report
February 2020
IX. Financial accounts
  
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
    
  End of year/quarter; € billion
2018 2019 
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
  Financial assets
Currency and deposits 2,209.4 2,314.2 2,456.0 2,368.7 2,397.8 2,456.0 2,476.1 2,519.3 2,541.8
Currency 174.4 193.8 225.9 205.0 212.0 225.9 225.0 234.4 243.5
Deposits 2,035.0 2,120.3 2,230.1 2,163.7 2,185.8 2,230.1 2,251.1 2,285.0 2,298.3
Transferable deposits 1,188.6 1,288.4 1,398.0 1,334.6 1,355.8 1,398.0 1,415.2 1,449.6 1,466.9Time deposits 248.7 245.4 252.4 248.6 250.2 252.4 254.3 253.5 253.2Savings deposits(including savings certificates) 597.7 586.5 579.7 580.5 579.8 579.7 581.6 581.9 578.2
Debt securities 127.4 120.5 115.7 118.1 119.3 115.7 119.4 121.3 120.8
Short-term debt securities 2.7 2.5 2.1 2.0 2.0 2.1 1.9 1.8 1.6
Long-term debt securities 124.7 118.0 113.6 116.0 117.3 113.6 117.5 119.5 119.2
Memo item:
Debt securities of domestic sectors 85.6 82.5 79.9 81.4 82.5 79.9 83.1 84.2 83.1
Non-financial corporations 13.9 12.5 12.1 12.1 12.1 12.1 12.4 12.5 12.4Financial corporations 66.7 66.1 64.4 65.7 67.0 64.4 67.3 68.4 67.5General government 5.0 3.9 3.4 3.5 3.4 3.4 3.4 3.3 3.2
Debt securities of the rest of the world 41.8 37.9 35.9 36.7 36.9 35.9 36.3 37.1 37.7
Equity and investment fund shares 1,107.8 1,216.7 1,140.0 1,215.5 1,239.4 1,140.0 1,231.7 1,269.1 1,299.4
Equity 590.0 640.6 584.3 629.2 643.8 584.3 634.8 655.3 666.7
Listed shares of domestic sectors 200.8 226.4 183.0 214.2 217.2 183.0 202.6 209.0 208.2
Non-financial corporations 169.8 190.3 151.0 180.8 180.8 151.0 166.0 170.1 168.4Financial corporations 31.0 36.1 32.0 33.4 36.5 32.0 36.6 38.9 39.7
Listed shares of the rest of the world 86.8 101.0 98.2 102.9 111.4 98.2 114.2 117.8 123.7
Other equity  
1 302.4 313.2 303.2 312.1 315.2 303.2 318.0 328.5 334.8
Investment fund shares 517.8 576.2 555.7 586.3 595.7 555.7 596.9 613.8 632.7
Money market fund shares 2.8 2.7 2.3 2.3 2.1 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.4Non-MMF investment fund shares 515.0 573.5 553.4 584.1 593.5 553.4 594.7 611.6 630.3
Non-life insurance technical reserves
and provision for calls under standardisedguarantees 339.9 360.1 375.9 366.5 369.6 375.9 379.3 382.7 386.1
Life insurance and annuity
entitlements 947.8 991.4 1,011.1 1,001.8 1,006.2 1,011.1 1,017.9 1,023.0 1,030.4
Pension entitlement, claims of
pension funds on pension managers,entitlements to non-pension benefits 810.9 846.5 876.0 861.4 866.8 876.0 882.8 888.6 891.3
Financial derivatives and employee
stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts receivable  
2 32.6 31.1 29.6 31.8 31.8 29.6 30.6 31.5 32.3
Total 5,575.8 5,880.4 6,004.3 5,963.8 6,030.9 6,004.3 6,137.7 6,235.4 6,302.0
  Liabilities
Loans 1,654.7 1,711.8 1,775.5 1,737.6 1,760.4 1,775.5 1,791.2 1,816.1 1,840.8
Short-term loans 56.6 54.4 58.1 54.5 56.3 58.1 58.5 59.4 58.8
Long-term loans 1,598.1 1,657.3 1,717.4 1,683.1 1,704.2 1,717.4 1,732.7 1,756.7 1,782.1
Memo item:
Mortgage loans 1,195.8 1,247.3 1,307.8 1,274.7 1,294.6 1,307.8 1,316.7 1,337.2 1,358.7Consumer loans 201.8 211.8 218.1 213.4 215.5 218.1 224.1 229.7 233.3Entrepreneurial loans 257.0 252.7 249.7 249.5 250.4 249.7 250.4 249.2 248.8
Memo item:
Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,558.3 1,610.0 1,667.2 1,633.7 1,653.5 1,667.2 1,679.6 1,701.8 1,722.9Loans from other financial institutions 96.4 101.8 108.4 103.9 107.0 108.4 111.7 114.2 117.9Loans from general government and restof the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Other accounts payable 15.9 17.1 17.2 18.1 18.4 17.2 19.0 19.1 19.7
Total 1,670.6 1,728.8 1,792.7 1,755.7 1,778.8 1,792.7 1,810.2 1,835.2 1,860.5
1Including unlisted shares. 2Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares   
with insurance corporations.      

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
February 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2013 + 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 2.5 + 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.2
2014 + 17.0 + 15.5 + 2.0 − 3.9 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 + 28.6 + 16.6 + 5.2 + 3.7 + 3.0 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 p + 37.1 + 13.6 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 8.6 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 40.3 + 8.1 + 11.3 + 9.9 + 11.0 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.3
2018 p + 62.4 + 20.1 + 12.8 + 13.7 + 15.9 + 1.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
2019 pe + 49.8 + 19.2 + 13.3 + 6.6 + 10.7 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017         H1  p + 23.6 + 2.8 + 6.8 + 6.7 + 7.3 + 1.5 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  p + 16.7 + 5.3 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 3.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2
2018         H1  p + 51.7 + 18.7 + 15.8 + 8.0 + 9.2 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.6
         H2  p + 10.7 + 1.4 − 3.0 + 5.7 + 6.6 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2019         H1  pe + 46.1 + 18.0 + 13.5 + 6.6 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2013 2,213.0 1,390.1 663.6 175.4 1.3 78.7 49.4 23.6 6.2 0.0
2014 2,215.2 1,396.1 657.8 177.8 1.4 75.7 47.7 22.5 6.1 0.0
2015 2,185.1 1,372.2 654.7 177.7 1.4 72.1 45.3 21.6 5.9 0.0
2016 p 2,169.0 1,366.4 637.7 179.2 1.1 69.2 43.6 20.3 5.7 0.0
2017 p 2,119.0 1,350.9 610.5 175.9 0.8 65.3 41.6 18.8 5.4 0.0
2018 p 2,069.0 1,323.5 596.1 167.6 0.7 61.9 39.6 17.8 5.0 0.0
2018         Q1  p 2,095.8 1,338.3 599.8 174.7 1.0 64.1 40.9 18.3 5.3 0.0
         Q2  p 2,081.2 1,330.0 596.2 173.2 0.9 63.0 40.3 18.1 5.2 0.0
         Q3  p 2,081.3 1,336.2 595.2 167.9 0.8 62.7 40.2 17.9 5.1 0.0
         Q4  p 2,069.0 1,323.5 596.1 167.6 0.7 61.9 39.6 17.8 5.0 0.0
2019         Q1  p 2,078.8 1,324.9 606.9 166.5 0.7 61.7 39.4 18.0 4.9 0.0
         Q2  p 2,069.4 1,320.8 605.2 165.3 0.7 61.1 39.0 17.9 4.9 0.0
         Q3  p 2,086.6 1,328.2 615.5 165.0 0.6 61.2 38.9 18.0 4.8 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus the first half of the year. Therefore, the 2019 half-year figures are not directly compat-
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection ible with the annual figures. 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output
with the publication of the 2019 annual figures, no revised figures were released for of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2013 1,264.7 650.9 465.4 148.4 1,263.5 666.6 220.5 141.8 61.0 51.5 122.2 + 1.1 1,120.6
2014 1,313.9 673.0 482.3 158.5 1,296.9 691.3 227.5 147.1 60.5 47.1 123.4 + 17.0 1,160.0
2015 1,363.1 704.2 501.2 157.7 1,334.5 722.0 233.0 149.7 64.6 42.7 122.5 + 28.6 1,212.4
2016 p 1,425.6 738.6 524.3 162.7 1,388.5 754.3 240.7 158.6 68.2 37.8 128.9 + 37.1 1,269.8
2017 p 1,481.7 772.7 549.5 159.6 1,441.4 784.8 250.0 162.9 71.9 34.3 137.5 + 40.3 1,328.9
2018 p 1,552.9 807.7 572.5 172.7 1,490.5 806.1 259.3 169.4 78.4 31.7 145.7 + 62.4 1,387.3
2019 pe 1,606.7 831.3 598.3 177.1 1,556.9 845.2 271.7 179.3 84.7 28.0 148.0 + 49.8 1,436.6
As a percentage of GDP
2013 45.0 23.2 16.6 5.3 44.9 23.7 7.8 5.0 2.2 1.8 4.3 + 0.0 39.9
2014 44.9 23.0 16.5 5.4 44.3 23.6 7.8 5.0 2.1 1.6 4.2 + 0.6 39.6
2015 45.0 23.2 16.5 5.2 44.0 23.8 7.7 4.9 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 0.9 40.0
2016 p 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.3 24.1 7.7 5.1 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.5
2017 p 45.7 23.8 16.9 4.9 44.4 24.2 7.7 5.0 2.2 1.1 4.2 + 1.2 41.0
2018 p 46.4 24.2 17.1 5.2 44.6 24.1 7.8 5.1 2.3 0.9 4.4 + 1.9 41.5
2019 pe 46.8 24.2 17.4 5.2 45.3 24.6 7.9 5.2 2.5 0.8 4.3 + 1.5 41.8
Percentage growth rates
2013 + 2.5 + 3.0 + 2.4 + 1.1 + 2.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 4.5 + 1.0 − 18.9 + 7.9 . + 2.7
2014 + 3.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.8 − 8.4 + 1.0 . + 3.5
2015 + 3.7 + 4.6 + 3.9 − 0.5 + 2.9 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 1.8 + 6.7 − 9.4 − 0.7 . + 4.5
2016 p + 4.6 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 3.1 + 4.0 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.0 + 5.5 − 11.6 + 5.3 . + 4.7
2017 p + 3.9 + 4.6 + 4.8 − 1.9 + 3.8 + 4.1 + 3.9 + 2.7 + 5.4 − 9.3 + 6.7 . + 4.7
2018 p + 4.8 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 8.2 + 3.4 + 2.7 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 9.0 − 7.4 + 5.9 . + 4.4
2019 pe + 3.5 + 2.9 + 4.5 + 2.5 + 4.5 + 4.9 + 4.8 + 5.8 + 8.0 − 11.7 + 1.6 . + 3.6
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  
Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
February 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.3 642.3 + 14.0 1,490.9 1,430.7 + 60.2
2017         Q1  p 216.0 180.4 0.9 199.6 62.9 80.3 13.8 10.2 1.9 + 16.4 150.3 155.1 − 4.8 338.0 326.4 + 11.6
         Q2  p 217.9 177.3 1.2 206.6 63.9 83.6 6.6 8.8 3.6 + 11.3 156.4 154.3 + 2.1 346.1 332.7 + 13.4
         Q3  p 219.6 180.4 3.5 215.9 64.4 78.6 14.5 13.4 4.2 + 3.8 154.8 155.7 − 0.9 346.1 343.2 + 2.8
         Q4  p 243.8 196.3 2.1 244.4 69.8 84.7 6.9 19.2 4.1 − 0.6 168.2 158.0 + 10.2 383.4 373.8 + 9.6
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
         Q4  p 255.2 203.9 2.2 262.1 73.1 89.7 6.2 20.3 9.6 − 6.9 174.6 163.4 + 11.2 400.7 396.4 + 4.3
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 230.4 71.0 88.5 11.5 10.1 3.3 + 10.5 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 366.8 + 7.5
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 233.4 67.5 87.0 12.2 13.1 2.6 + 22.8 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 371.9 + 24.3
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2017         Q1  p 88.2 82.9 + 5.3 95.6 90.0 + 5.6 52.7 57.7 − 4.9
         Q2  p 81.5 80.0 + 1.4 96.3 93.6 + 2.7 65.0 59.5 + 5.5
         Q3  p 88.6 93.6 − 5.0 98.9 91.4 + 7.5 63.4 61.5 + 1.9
         Q4  p 99.5 96.2 + 3.3 104.7 109.2 − 4.5 77.2 69.1 + 8.2
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 113.4 118.5 − 5.1 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 99.4 + 6.2 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 97.5 + 8.5 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
February 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 ... 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 ... ... 25,998
2018         Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
         Q2 194,715 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 29,064 − 540 6,592
         Q3 189,015 161,683 84,952 69,414 7,317 27,579 − 248 7,579
         Q4 203,128 177,157 92,363 76,459 8,335 35,492 − 9,521 6,206
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 202,383 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 29,784 + 37 6,179
         Q3 193,918 166,676 86,117 72,677 7,882 27,569 − 327 7,402
         Q4 ... 182,556 98,381 78,809 5,365 ... ... 6,146
2018         Dec. . 86,104 45,080 37,676 3,348 . . 2,069
2019         Dec. . 88,149 48,411 38,226 1,512 . . 2,049
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Turnover taxes  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment Turnover tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Turnover tax on trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total tax imports fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2018         Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
         Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912
         Q3 173,202 78,105 50,368 12,683 7,192 7,862 59,169 43,951 15,218 2,315 26,424 5,797 1,391 11,519
         Q4 190,161 86,001 58,409 15,204 7,513 4,876 60,581 44,994 15,587 4,257 31,936 6,109 1,276 13,004
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770
         Q3 179,020 81,267 53,668 13,614 7,607 6,379 61,057 45,976 15,081 2,221 26,654 6,485 1,336 12,344
         Q4 196,300 89,619 60,632 16,575 7,128 5,284 62,696 47,175 15,520 3,660 32,301 6,746 1,279 13,745
2018         Dec. 92,977 52,112 26,024 15,827 7,845 2,416 20,890 15,669 5,221 2,054 15,459 2,044 417 6,873
2019         Dec. 95,346 54,219 26,902 16,870 7,893 2,554 21,296 16,270 5,025 1,753 15,294 2,404 382 7,197
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2019: 48.9:47.7:3.4. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2019: 24.0:76.0. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
February 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,377
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 ... ... ...
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
         Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 18,827 14,548 3,853         Q3 10,423 4,353 3,886 2,752 2,128 1,677 531 674 3,592 1,463 464 278 18,128 13,764 3,919         Q4 15,436 4,860 4,543 2,197 1,956 1,650 545 749 3,645 1,752 481 231 17,224 13,713 3,140
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 17,959 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 19,163 14,869 3,881         Q3 10,519 4,624 3,667 2,770 2,251 1,639 515 668 3,923 1,824 474 264 17,118 12,659 4,019         Q4 15,379 5,086 4,507 2,281 2,035 1,745 538 730 4,223 1,798 488 237 ... ... ...
2018         Dec. 8,513 2,882 1,866 651 540 521 218 267 1,162 657 149 77 . . .
2019         Dec. 8,465 3,001 1,464 669 625 591 214 263 1,491 661 164 87 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,250
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 
p 326,455 232,001 93,728 324,999 277,645 20,955 + 1,455 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2017         Q1 71,301 49,388 21,715 73,731 63,263 4,460 − 2,430 31,660 29,133 2,270 205 52 4,140
         Q2 74,581 52,739 21,632 73,785 63,016 4,440 + 796 32,535 30,372 1,901 210 52 4,136         Q3 73,295 51,374 21,738 75,569 64,628 4,560 − 2,274 30,801 28,831 1,701 214 54 4,115         Q4 79,956 57,910 21,790 75,842 64,694 4,562 + 4,114 35,362 33,750 1,335 224 53 4,045
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
February 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −
2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2017         Q1 8,859 7,564 204 − 8,834 3,973 478 1,772 . 146 1,749 + 26 −
         Q2 9,355 8,112 227 − 7,964 3,529 173 1,802 . 155 1,577 + 1,391 −
         Q3 9,159 7,897 210 − 7,281 3,360 63 1,646 . 171 1,402 + 1,878 −
         Q4 10,446 8,929 241 − 7,789 3,193 55 1,823 . 215 1,717 + 2,657 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −
         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −
         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −
         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −
         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,654
2017         Q1 55,809 51,632 3,625 57,716 18,632 9,215 9,807 3,559 3,516 3,173 2,514 − 1,907
         Q2 57,801 53,621 3,625 57,502 17,973 9,239 9,822 3,614 3,748 3,043 2,589 + 298
         Q3 57,617 53,442 3,625 57,202 17,802 9,330 9,629 3,374 3,679 2,980 2,731 + 415
         Q4 62,391 57,526 3,625 58,527 17,878 9,627 9,712 3,566 3,792 3,080 3,095 + 3,865
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264
         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934
         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736
         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. 
sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
February 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 4,778 12,951 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,315
2017         Q1 8,558 8,538 9,092 1,046 3,194 2,261 289 405 − 534
         Q2 8,978 8,962 9,379 1,080 3,230 2,440 347 397 − 400         Q3 8,945 8,932 9,944 1,210 3,289 2,562 422 411 − 999         Q4 9,620 9,610 10,110 1,158 3,285 2,731 470 387 − 490
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,202 3,251 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,229 3,251 2,835 561 384 − 510
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 1,198 3,232 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 1,205 3,237 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 1,288 3,277 2,972 598 450 + 576
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,213,009 12,438 662,788 190,555 43,616 1,303,612
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,215,168 12,774 634,012 190,130 44,576 1,333,675
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,185,113 85,952 621,220 186,661 44,630 1,246,650
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,168,989 205,391 598,282 179,755 41,318 1,144,2432017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,118,963 319,159 551,834 175,617 38,502 1,033,8522018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018  
p 2,069,007 364,731 500,938 181,077 37,475 984,786
2019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914
2017         Q1 + 47,749 − 5,700 + 6,178 − 2,428 2017          Q1 2,144,575 239,495 585,209 178,219 40,475 1,101,176
         Q2 + 42,941 + 5,281 + 318 + 4,289          Q2 2,139,642 265,130 571,563 176,810 41,255 1,084,885         Q3 + 44,338 + 3,495 + 587 + 941          Q3 2,134,509 290,214 559,524 176,646 42,855 1,065,270         Q4 + 36,878 + 1,455 + 4,741 + 95          Q4 2,118,963 319,159 551,834 175,617 38,502 1,033,852
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1  
p 2,095,754 329,387 529,176 176,495 37,450 1,023,246
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2  p 2,081,161 344,279 513,563 179,856 36,980 1,006,483
         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3  p 2,081,326 356,899 501,892 180,464 37,428 1,004,642
         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4  p 2,069,007 364,731 500,938 181,077 37,475 984,786
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1  p 2,078,759 359,884 498,341 179,512 36,368 1,004,654
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2  p 2,069,442 361,032 491,994 179,168 35,814 1,001,433
         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3  p 2,086,584 358,813 490,061 179,228 42,003 1,016,479
         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
February 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
 
 
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other government
or quarter) Total and deposits  1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2013 2,213,009 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 100,535 545,347 . .
2014 2,215,168 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,833 533,074 . .
2015 2,185,113 14,303 65,676 1,499,098 85,121 520,914 . .
2016 2,168,989 15,845 69,715 1,484,378 91,300 507,752 . .
2017         Q1 2,144,575 12,891 60,798 1,479,171 89,093 502,622 . .
         Q2 2,139,642 15,196 54,362 1,486,822 83,528 499,734 . .
         Q3 2,134,509 16,161 48,197 1,489,440 82,720 497,992 . .
         Q4 2,118,963 14,651 48,789 1,484,573 82,662 488,288 . .
2018         Q1  p 2,095,754 12,472 48,431 1,479,589 70,141 485,122 . .
         Q2  p 2,081,161 12,636 54,932 1,465,767 67,050 480,776 . .
         Q3  p 2,081,326 15,607 59,989 1,465,858 64,601 475,271 . .
         Q4  p 2,069,007 14,833 52,572 1,456,512 72,044 473,046 . .
2019         Q1  p 2,078,759 15,635 64,225 1,460,757 66,795 471,348 . .
         Q2  p 2,069,442 12,811 56,259 1,462,920 70,202 467,250 . .
         Q3  p 2,086,584 17,500 62,620 1,465,799 74,766 465,899 . .
Central government
2013 1,390,061 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,970 122,474 2,696 10,303
2014 1,396,124 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,383 1,202 12,833
2015 1,372,206 14,303 49,512 1,139,039 45,256 124,095 2,932 13,577
2016 1,366,416 15,845 55,208 1,124,445 50,004 120,914 2,238 8,478
2017         Q1 1,350,579 12,891 45,510 1,124,430 48,082 119,666 2,465 7,469
         Q2 1,353,204 15,196 40,225 1,132,686 44,682 120,415 2,547 8,136
         Q3 1,352,593 16,161 34,216 1,136,873 45,235 120,108 2,674 10,160
         Q4 1,350,925 14,651 36,297 1,132,542 47,761 119,673 2,935 10,603
2018         Q1  p 1,338,267 12,472 35,923 1,133,372 37,211 119,290 2,867 9,887
         Q2  p 1,330,010 12,636 42,888 1,120,497 35,048 118,941 2,835 10,693
         Q3  p 1,336,199 15,607 46,614 1,119,053 36,633 118,293 2,614 10,260
         Q4  p 1,323,503 14,833 42,246 1,107,702 42,057 116,666 2,540 9,959
2019         Q1  p 1,324,917 15,635 50,032 1,103,095 39,126 117,028 2,437 11,528
         Q2  p 1,320,764 12,811 42,752 1,109,478 38,832 116,890 2,464 13,768
         Q3  p 1,328,158 17,500 48,934 1,105,789 38,766 117,169 2,347 13,716
State government
2013 663,615 − 6,847 360,706 11,862 284,200 12,141 2,655
2014 657,819 − 8,391 361,916 19,182 268,330 14,825 2,297
2015 654,712 − 16,169 362,376 18,707 257,460 15,867 4,218
2016 637,673 − 14,515 361,996 16,116 245,046 11,408 3,376
2017         Q1 629,540 − 15,308 356,769 15,938 241,526 10,407 3,446
         Q2 623,182 − 14,167 356,521 14,792 237,702 11,180 3,417
         Q3 622,430 − 14,021 355,153 16,358 236,899 13,313 3,338
         Q4 610,535 − 12,543 354,688 15,112 228,192 14,326 3,539
2018         Q1  p 599,835 − 12,548 349,682 13,137 224,468 13,301 3,409
         Q2  p 596,174 − 12,073 348,833 13,485 221,782 14,271 3,579
         Q3  p 595,241 − 13,392 350,399 10,953 220,498 14,008 3,531
         Q4  p 596,147 − 10,332 352,376 14,307 219,132 14,385 3,331
2019         Q1  p 606,851 − 14,198 361,513 14,003 217,137 15,530 3,458
         Q2  p 605,219 − 13,512 357,673 19,669 214,365 17,948 3,353
         Q3  p 615,488 − 13,691 364,250 24,507 213,040 18,010 3,416
Local government
2013 175,405 − − 646 25,325 149,435 2,523 530
2014 177,782 − − 1,297 26,009 150,476 1,959 734
2015 177,727 − − 2,047 26,887 148,793 2,143 463
2016 179,222 − − 2,404 26,414 150,403 1,819 566
2017         Q1 178,144 − − 2,645 25,452 150,047 1,966 697
         Q2 178,051 − − 2,672 25,263 150,116 1,963 819
         Q3 176,593 − − 2,687 24,477 149,429 1,871 927
         Q4 175,852 − − 3,082 23,952 148,818 1,881 1,064
2018         Q1  p 174,654 − − 2,427 22,778 149,450 1,811 1,072
         Q2  p 173,177 − − 2,561 22,443 148,172 1,977 1,090
         Q3  p 167,850 − − 2,703 20,503 144,644 2,132 1,123
         Q4  p 167,626 − 1 3,046 19,730 144,849 2,019 1,147
2019         Q1  p 166,536 − 1 2,960 19,092 144,483 2,285 1,153
         Q2  p 165,318 − 1 2,960 18,993 143,363 2,173 1,175
         Q3  p 164,950 − 1 3,015 19,025 142,909 2,233 1,211
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
February 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,872
2014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,1222015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,6852016 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,044
2017         Q1 1,150 − − − 504 646 − 3,226
         Q2 895 − − − 290 605 − 3,318         Q3 750 − − − 184 566 − 3,433         Q4 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2018         Q1  
p 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,610
         Q2  p 883 − − − 383 500 − 3,721
         Q3  p 790 − − − 400 390 − 3,841
         Q4  p 674 − − − 372 302 − 4,506
2019         Q1  p 707 − − − 437 270 − 4,114
         Q2  p 726 − − − 541 185 − 4,289
         Q3  p 578 − − − 375 203 − 4,247
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 983,807 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,548
2008 1,015,846 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 74,6262009 1,082,101 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,048
2010 1,333,467 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 238,558
2011 1,343,515 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 211,7562012 1,387,361 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,4512013 1,390,061 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,4442014 1,396,124 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 177,771
2015 1,372,206 14,303 1,070 1,188,551 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 169,351
2016 1,366,416 15,845 1,010 1,179,653 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 170,9192017 1,350,925 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,4352018 
p 1,323,503 14,833 921 1,149,948 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,723
2017         Q1 1,350,579 12,891 995 1,169,939 674,049 213,371 53,838 14,535 3,362 95,148 14,910 619 167,748
         Q2 1,353,204 15,196 986 1,172,911 687,278 205,203 55,842 14,465 4,507 93,795 14,431 487 165,097         Q3 1,352,593 16,161 977 1,171,089 684,134 215,029 56,905 14,490 4,092 91,893 11,851 398 165,344         Q4 1,350,925 14,651 966 1,168,840 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 167,435
2018         Q1  
p 1,338,267 12,472 951 1,169,295 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 156,501
         Q2  p 1,330,010 12,636 941 1,163,385 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,989
         Q3  p 1,336,199 15,607 932 1,165,667 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,925
         Q4  p 1,323,503 14,833 921 1,149,948 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,723
2019         Q1  p 1,324,917 15,635 902 1,153,128 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 156,155
         Q2  p 1,320,764 12,811 852 1,152,230 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,723
         Q3  p 1,328,158 17,500 822 1,154,723 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 155,935
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
February 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2018   2019
  2017   2018   2019   2017   2018   2019   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2015 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 107.6 109.0 105.0 3.2 1.3 − 3.6 2.2 3.7 0.2 − 0.8 − 2.2 − 4.7 − 3.1
Construction 101.4 104.8 109.0 − 0.6 3.4 4.0 1.3 3.5 3.3 4.9 6.5 2.5 5.3
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and restaurant
services 104.4 106.2 108.8 2.9 1.8 2.4 2.2 3.0 0.8 1.2 2.3 1.5 3.2
Information and communication 106.4 109.7 112.9 3.5 3.1 2.9 2.6 2.9 3.9 2.9 3.3 3.3 3.2
Financial and insurance
activities 100.2 100.1 103.0 3.8 − 0.1 2.9 0.5 − 0.0 − 1.0 0.3 2.0 2.4 3.0
Real estate activities 99.0 100.1 101.5 − 1.0 1.1 1.4 1.3 1.1 1.0 0.9 0.9 1.5 1.5
Business services  1 105.7 108.0 108.7 3.7 2.2 0.6 2.7 3.4 1.8 1.0 1.3 0.4 0.5
Public services, education and
health 107.7 109.0 110.7 3.4 1.2 1.6 1.5 1.2 1.0 1.1 1.3 1.4 1.5
Other services 98.9 99.0 99.9 0.8 0.1 0.9 − 0.4 0.4 − 0.1 0.6 1.1 0.9 0.9
Gross value added 104.8 106.4 106.9 2.5 1.5 0.5 1.8 2.5 0.9 0.8 0.8 − 0.1 0.8
Gross domestic product  2 104.8 106.4 107.0 2.5 1.5 0.6 1.6 2.5 1.1 0.9 0.9 − 0.1 1.0
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 103.6 105.0 106.6 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.8 1.4 0.6 1.3 1.0 1.5 2.1
Government consumption 106.6 108.1 110.9 2.4 1.4 2.5 1.5 1.9 1.2 1.1 1.8 1.8 2.3
Machinery and equipment 107.1 111.8 112.3 4.0 4.4 0.4 5.0 5.9 3.4 3.4 2.8 1.2 0.8
Premises 104.6 107.2 111.3 0.7 2.5 3.8 0.6 2.7 2.6 4.0 6.6 2.1 4.5
Other investment  4 109.6 114.3 117.4 4.2 4.3 2.7 3.9 4.6 4.8 3.8 3.0 2.7 2.6
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.5 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.1 1.0 0.6 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.6
Domestic demand 105.5 107.7 108.8 2.4 2.1 1.0 1.7 2.0 2.4 2.4 1.9 1.5 0.7
Net exports  6 . . . 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 0.1 0.6 − 1.1 − 1.3 − 0.8 − 1.4 0.3
Exports 107.4 109.7 110.7 4.9 2.1 0.9 3.0 4.4 1.3 − 0.1 1.7 − 1.2 2.5
Imports 109.8 113.7 115.9 5.2 3.6 1.9 3.4 3.7 4.3 3.1 4.1 2.0 2.0
Gross domestic product  2 104.8 106.4 107.0 2.5 1.5 0.6 1.6 2.5 1.1 0.9 0.9 − 0.1 1.0
At current prices ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,697.0 1,743.7 1,793.9 2.9 2.8 2.9 3.1 2.8 2.2 3.0 2.2 3.1 3.5
Government consumption 644.3 665.6 698.8 3.9 3.3 5.0 3.3 3.7 3.3 3.0 3.9 4.3 4.4
Machinery and equipment 224.2 235.3 239.0 4.7 4.9 1.6 5.2 6.4 4.1 4.2 3.6 2.5 2.0
Premises 320.7 344.3 373.4 4.2 7.3 8.4 4.8 7.2 7.8 9.3 12.0 7.0 8.8
Other investment  4 121.0 128.1 133.7 5.8 5.9 4.4 5.5 6.2 6.6 5.5 4.7 4.4 4.2
Changes in inventories  5 7.4 21.3 − 10.6 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,014.5 3,138.3 3,228.2 3.8 4.1 2.9 3.4 3.9 4.2 4.8 3.6 3.7 2.3
Net exports 230.4 206.1 207.8 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,538.0 1,585.8 1,612.2 6.6 3.1 1.7 3.2 4.8 2.9 1.6 3.1 − 0.3 2.8
Imports 1,307.6 1,379.7 1,404.5 7.9 5.5 1.8 3.6 4.9 7.6 5.9 5.3 2.8 0.9
Gross domestic product  2 3,245.0 3,344.4 3,436.0 3.5 3.1 2.7 3.2 4.0 2.3 2.8 2.7 2.1 3.1
IV. Prices (2015 = 100)
Private consumption 102.2 103.7 105.0 1.5 1.5 1.3 1.2 1.4 1.5 1.7 1.1 1.6 1.4
Gross domestic product 102.2 103.8 106.0 1.0 1.5 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.2 1.9 1.8 2.2 2.1
Terms of trade 100.8 99.9 100.8 − 0.9 − 0.9 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.6 − 1.0 0.2 0.2 1.4
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,694.7 1,771.3 1,851.3 4.3 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.4 4.9 4.3 4.5 4.6 4.4
Entrepreneurial and property
income 735.8 731.8 710.2 2.1 − 0.5 − 2.9 0.8 2.8 − 4.8 − 0.5 − 2.9 − 4.7 − 0.7
National income 2,430.5 2,503.1 2,561.6 3.6 3.0 2.3 3.3 4.0 1.8 3.0 2.1 2.0 2.9
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,328.0 3,437.9 3,536.4 3.6 3.3 2.9 3.4 4.2 2.6 3.0 2.7 2.4 3.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2019. Initial annual ing households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer software and enter-
results for 2019: figures computed in January 2020. 1Professional, scientific, techni- tainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Including net increase
cal, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added plus taxes on in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit institutions serv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
67  Monthly Report
February 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
2. Output in the production sector*
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Manu-
Manu- facture offacture of computers,basic metals Motor
electronic
and vehicles, and optical
Production Inter- Non- fabricated products Machinery trailerssector, Construc- mediate Capital Durable durable metal and and semi-
and electrical
total tion Energy Total goods goods goods goods products equipment equipment trailers
2015 = 100  
  
% of total  1 100.00 14.04 6.37 79.59 29.45 36.98 2.27 10.89 10.31 9.95 12.73 14.16
Period
2016 101.5 105.3 98.6 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.6 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.1
2017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.7 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.32018
2 105.8 2 108.9 97.4 105.9 105.5 106.0 106.1 106.9 107.3 108.9 106.5 103.5
2019 x 102.1 112.3 90.8 101.2 101.4 100.9 106.0 100.6 102.9 104.3 102.9 91.5
 
2018         Q4 107.7 122.0 99.8 105.8 101.8 109.3 106.3 105.0 104.8 110.3 115.7 97.6
2019         Q1 100.9 92.9 102.4 102.2 104.3 100.8 108.4 100.1 106.5 104.4 100.3 98.0
         Q2 102.5 113.7 83.7 102.0 102.9 102.0 103.0 99.4 105.0 103.1 102.6 95.2         Q3
r 102.0 119.6 81.2 100.6 101.5 99.7 103.8 101.0 102.6 105.6 101.8 88.7
         Q4 x 102.8 122.9 95.7 99.8 96.9 101.0 109.0 102.0 97.5 104.3 106.9 84.2
 
2018         Dec. 101.8 123.6 102.9 97.8 88.9 105.8 94.8 95.7 90.2 103.7 124.9 80.6
2019         Jan. 92.8 75.1 109.4 94.6 100.1 88.6 100.8 98.5 100.7 97.6 88.3 84.9
         Feb. 98.3 92.6 96.6 99.4 100.7 99.4 105.3 94.6 103.1 99.7 97.1 99.5         Mar. 111.7 111.1 101.1 112.7 112.2 114.3 119.1 107.1 115.8 115.8 115.4 109.6
         Apr. 101.5 112.9 88.3 100.5 103.1 98.9 101.6 98.8 105.3 101.3 99.5 92.5
         May 101.4 111.1 84.3 101.0 102.4 100.2 101.2 99.8 103.5 101.6 99.1 96.1         June 104.6 117.1 78.6 104.5 103.1 106.9 106.3 99.5 106.1 106.4 109.1 97.0
         July
3,r 103.0 122.0 81.4 101.4 102.7 100.5 100.0 101.1 104.1 103.2 102.7 90.6
         Aug. 3,r 96.7 114.5 80.5 94.9 98.3 91.0 95.4 98.8 97.3 101.8 93.8 76.6
         Sep. r 106.4 122.3 81.8 105.6 103.4 107.5 115.9 103.0 106.4 111.7 108.9 98.8
         Oct. x 104.9 122.9 91.9 102.8 104.5 99.6 114.3 106.5 104.6 108.5 100.1 89.2
         Nov. x 108.5 127.4 95.2 106.2 103.2 107.8 116.6 107.1 105.4 109.2 108.4 97.1
         Dec. x,p 94.9 118.4 99.9 90.4 82.9 95.5 96.0 92.5 82.5 95.3 112.2 66.4
 
Annual percentage change  
  
2016 + 1.8 + 5.7 − 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 − 0.1 + 2.5
2017 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 3.6 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.12018
2 + 0.9 2 + 0.2 − 1.5 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.8 + 2.3 − 1.7
2019 x − 3.5 + 3.1 − 6.8 − 4.4 − 3.9 − 4.8 − 0.1 − 5.9 − 4.1 − 4.2 − 3.4 − 11.6
 
2018         Q4 − 2.0 − 0.3 − 4.7 − 2.2 − 2.6 − 1.8 − 3.0 − 1.9 − 1.8 − 1.2 − 0.1 − 6.8
2019         Q1 − 1.6 + 6.2 − 2.9 − 2.6 − 1.4 − 3.2 − 0.3 − 4.1 − 0.3 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 10.2
         Q2 − 4.0 + 3.1 − 8.0 − 5.0 − 4.5 − 5.1 − 2.2 − 6.9 − 4.3 − 3.8 − 2.1 − 13.9         Q3
r − 4.0 + 3.1 − 12.9 − 4.7 − 4.9 − 3.3 − 0.3 − 9.4 − 4.9 − 4.3 − 3.2 − 8.1
         Q4 x − 4.6 + 0.8 − 4.1 − 5.7 − 4.8 − 7.6 + 2.5 − 2.8 − 7.0 − 5.4 − 7.6 − 13.7
 
2018         Dec. − 2.4 + 0.7 − 3.7 − 3.1 − 3.8 − 2.2 − 2.4 − 4.1 − 3.2 − 3.9 − 2.9 − 3.7
2019         Jan. − 2.8 − 0.7 + 2.8 − 3.7 − 2.1 − 5.3 − 1.2 − 3.8 − 0.4 − 3.9 + 0.6 − 14.3
         Feb. − 0.4 + 11.4 − 5.3 − 1.8 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 4.4 − 1.2 − 4.2 + 0.1 − 5.1         Mar. − 1.5 + 6.9 − 6.4 − 2.3 − 0.7 − 3.4 + 0.4 − 4.0 + 0.7 − 2.1 − 0.9 − 11.3
         Apr. − 2.8 + 6.2 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 2.5 − 6.2 − 1.6 − 3.5 − 2.6 − 2.2 − 0.7 − 17.5
         May − 4.3 + 0.2 − 7.1 − 5.1 − 5.1 − 4.2 − 1.5 − 8.4 − 5.0 − 3.7 − 2.5 − 11.0         June − 4.7 + 3.2 − 11.9 − 5.7 − 5.8 − 4.9 − 3.5 − 8.7 − 5.2 − 5.3 − 3.0 − 13.2
         July
3,r − 3.9 + 3.0 − 12.9 − 4.7 − 5.3 − 3.6 + 1.6 − 8.0 − 4.7 − 5.2 − 1.9 − 9.9
         Aug. 3,r − 3.7 + 3.4 − 15.0 − 4.1 − 4.4 − 2.2 + 0.4 − 10.2 − 5.4 − 3.5 − 4.4 − 4.8
         Sep. r − 4.3 + 2.8 − 10.8 − 5.2 − 5.0 − 4.1 − 2.4 − 9.9 − 4.7 − 4.1 − 3.3 − 8.9
         Oct. x − 4.6 + 2.2 − 5.7 − 5.9 − 4.3 − 8.2 + 1.9 − 4.0 − 6.8 − 3.5 − 7.9 − 14.5
         Nov. x − 2.5 + 4.4 − 3.8 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 5.0 + 4.1 − 1.2 − 5.9 − 4.8 − 4.4 − 9.9
         Dec. x,p − 6.8 − 4.2 − 2.9 − 7.6 − 6.7 − 9.7 + 1.3 − 3.3 − 8.5 − 8.1 − 10.2 − 17.6
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *For explanatory notes, Office. 3Influenced by a change in holiday dates. xProvisional; estimated and ad-
see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables II.10 to justed in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Pro-
II.12. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Share of gross value added at factor cost of duction Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry,
the production sector in the base year 2015. 2As of January 2018 weights in respectively. 
structural and civil engineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical

Deutsche Bundesbank
68  Monthly Report
February 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
3. Orders received by industry *
 
 
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-
age age age age age age
Period 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
Total
2015 99.8 + 2.0 99.8 − 0.8 99.8 + 3.7 99.8 + 3.1 99.7 + 4.1 99.8 + 2.8
2016 100.8 + 1.0 98.9 − 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.1 − 0.7
2017 108.6 + 7.7 109.4 + 10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 + 10.6 102.2 + 3.1
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 p 104.7 − 5.2 103.1 − 7.5 105.4 − 4.1 107.0 − 2.7 122.7 + 3.2 101.8 − 4.9
2018         Dec. 111.6 − 3.1 96.8 − 6.4 122.8 − 1.9 95.8 + 1.5 109.5 + 0.8 91.3 + 1.8
2019         Jan. 108.1 − 2.3 110.0 − 5.0 106.8 − 0.6 108.4 − 3.0 118.7 + 3.7 104.9 − 5.2
         Feb. 102.8 − 7.0 104.5 − 5.0 101.4 − 8.5 106.5 − 4.7 114.9 + 3.5 103.8 − 7.3
         Mar. 115.9 − 4.7 113.9 − 6.0 117.3 − 4.2 115.5 − 0.4 131.1 + 6.7 110.4 − 2.9
         Apr. 104.3 − 4.1 104.9 − 8.5 103.7 − 1.8 105.9 + 1.0 115.6 + 1.6 102.8 + 1.0
         May 101.2 − 7.7 102.1 − 9.7 100.4 − 6.9 104.2 − 2.3 113.8 − 5.9 101.0 − 0.9
         June 108.9 − 3.0 105.1 − 8.3 111.3 + 0.7 107.6 − 6.6 120.4 − 1.8 103.3 − 8.4
         July 103.1 − 4.4 102.2 − 10.0 102.7 + 0.0 109.8 − 9.0 121.0 + 0.9 106.2 − 12.2
         Aug. 92.7 − 6.3 94.6 − 8.3 90.3 − 4.7 103.5 − 5.8 119.8 + 2.6 98.2 − 8.7
         Sep. 104.9 − 4.4 99.8 − 8.6 107.7 − 1.7 107.7 − 4.8 137.4 + 9.7 98.0 − 10.2
         Oct. 106.1 − 4.9 103.9 − 8.8 106.8 − 3.5 109.8 + 0.8 124.0 − 2.7 105.2 + 2.3
         Nov. 106.0 − 5.8 103.5 − 7.0 106.8 − 6.3 110.7 + 4.7 134.0 + 10.1 103.1 + 2.6
         Dec. p 102.3 − 8.3 92.4 − 4.5 109.4 − 10.9 94.1 − 1.8 121.9 + 11.3 84.9 − 7.0
From the domestic market
2015 99.8 + 1.7 99.8 − 1.9 99.7 + 4.7 99.8 + 2.8 99.7 − 0.7 99.8 + 4.0
2016 99.8 + 0.0 97.6 − 2.2 101.9 + 2.2 98.1 − 1.7 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 − 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.8 101.6 + 3.6 108.6 + 5.3 99.3 + 3.1
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 − 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.6 98.9 − 0.4
2019 p 101.0 − 5.8 99.0 − 8.8 102.7 − 3.7 101.3 − 1.6 115.5 + 0.7 96.5 − 2.4
2018         Dec. 101.4 + 0.1 91.6 − 6.9 111.4 + 5.0 90.9 + 5.5 99.0 + 11.2 88.1 + 3.4
2019         Jan. 107.2 − 0.6 106.3 − 6.2 108.9 + 4.7 101.1 − 1.2 109.3 + 1.8 98.3 − 2.3
         Feb. 104.3 − 0.6 102.6 − 4.3 105.4 + 2.1 106.9 + 3.0 112.6 + 4.2 105.0 + 2.5
         Mar. 112.3 − 6.2 109.4 − 8.5 115.2 − 5.3 109.7 + 1.5 134.6 + 10.9 101.3 − 2.2
         Apr. 100.1 − 4.0 100.3 − 7.0 100.3 − 2.1 97.4 + 0.7 111.9 − 1.2 92.5 + 1.5
         May 99.2 − 6.4 99.6 − 8.6 99.3 − 4.0 96.8 − 8.6 105.9 − 16.8 93.7 − 5.1
         June 101.3 − 5.9 99.6 − 10.2 103.3 − 2.4 97.6 − 3.9 104.4 − 9.6 95.3 − 1.7
         July 102.4 − 6.6 100.4 − 11.1 103.9 − 3.1 103.5 − 2.6 112.6 + 3.4 100.4 − 4.7
         Aug. 91.2 − 6.6 91.4 − 10.0 90.2 − 3.4 97.3 − 5.6 105.7 − 7.9 94.5 − 4.7
         Sep. 100.3 − 7.0 95.3 − 11.3 104.2 − 4.7 102.5 + 1.8 126.0 + 5.8 94.5 + 0.0
         Oct. 98.9 − 7.4 98.4 − 10.9 98.3 − 5.2 105.6 − 1.7 127.1 + 5.5 98.3 − 4.5
         Nov. 102.2 − 8.9 101.2 − 8.8 102.2 − 10.2 108.1 − 0.1 128.9 + 6.3 101.1 − 2.6
         Dec. p 93.0 − 8.3 84.0 − 8.3 101.2 − 9.2 89.6 − 1.4 107.3 + 8.4 83.6 − 5.1
From abroad
2015 99.8 + 2.4 99.8 + 0.3 99.8 + 3.2 99.8 + 3.4 99.8 + 8.5 99.8 + 1.9
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.4 + 0.6 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.1 + 7.3 101.1 + 1.3
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 + 11.5 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 + 14.7 104.4 + 3.3
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 111.9 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 − 0.5 113.4 + 8.6
2019 p 107.4 − 5.0 107.4 − 6.3 107.0 − 4.4 111.4 − 3.5 128.5 + 5.2 105.8 − 6.7
2018         Dec. 119.4 − 5.0 102.5 − 5.8 129.7 − 5.1 99.6 − 1.2 117.9 − 5.1 93.7 + 0.5
2019         Jan. 108.7 − 3.6 113.9 − 3.9 105.6 − 3.5 114.0 − 4.2 126.2 + 5.0 110.0 − 7.2
         Feb. 101.7 − 11.4 106.5 − 5.8 99.0 − 14.1 106.2 − 9.9 116.7 + 2.9 102.9 − 13.8
         Mar. 118.6 − 3.6 118.7 − 3.6 118.5 − 3.7 120.0 − 1.8 128.3 + 3.4 117.3 − 3.5
         Apr. 107.4 − 4.3 109.8 − 10.1 105.7 − 1.8 112.5 + 1.4 118.6 + 3.9 110.6 + 0.5
         May 102.8 − 8.5 104.8 − 10.9 101.0 − 8.6 109.9 + 2.6 120.2 + 3.8 106.6 + 2.2
         June 114.6 − 1.0 111.1 − 6.3 116.2 + 2.6 115.3 − 8.3 133.3 + 3.8 109.5 − 12.4
         July 103.6 − 2.8 104.2 − 8.8 102.0 + 2.0 114.7 − 13.0 127.7 − 0.9 110.6 − 16.7
         Aug. 93.9 − 6.0 98.0 − 6.8 90.4 − 5.4 108.3 − 5.9 131.2 + 10.8 101.0 − 11.5
         Sep. 108.4 − 2.4 104.7 − 5.7 109.8 + 0.0 111.8 − 8.9 146.6 + 12.5 100.6 − 16.4
         Oct. 111.5 − 3.3 109.9 − 6.5 111.9 − 2.6 113.1 + 2.7 121.5 − 8.6 110.4 + 7.5
         Nov. 108.8 − 3.5 106.0 − 5.1 109.6 − 4.0 112.8 + 8.7 138.1 + 13.2 104.7 + 6.9
         Dec. p 109.3 − 8.5 101.4 − 1.1 114.4 − 11.8 97.6 − 2.0 133.6 + 13.3 85.9 − 8.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; for ex-   
planatory notes, see Statistical Supplemen t 4 − Seasonally adjusted business statistics,  
Tables II.14 to II.16. o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
69  Monthly Report
February 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
4. Orders received by construction *   
  
Adjusted for working-day variations  o 
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1 
 Building    
Housing Industrial Public sector Civil Public
Total Total construction construction construction engineering Industry sector  2 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2015 99.9 + 4.7 99.9 + 4.9 99.9 + 12.9 99.9 − 2.1 99.8 + 8.7 99.9 + 4.5 99.9 + 0.7 99.8 + 4.9
2016 114.4 + 14.5 115.0 + 15.1 116.9 + 17.0 114.9 + 15.0 108.8 + 9.0 113.7 + 13.8 111.6 + 11.7 116.0 + 16.22017 122.4 + 7.0 123.1 + 7.0 123.0 + 5.2 123.4 + 7.4 121.8 + 11.9 121.6 + 6.9 119.8 + 7.3 125.0 + 7.82018 134.7 + 10.0 131.2 + 6.6 136.6 + 11.1 127.9 + 3.6 125.2 + 2.8 138.8 + 14.1 135.6 + 13.2 132.5 + 6.0
 
2018         Nov. 128.6 + 13.9 125.7 + 6.7 139.5 + 23.0 117.2 − 6.8 111.8 + 9.2 131.9 + 23.0 136.8 + 10.1 112.5 + 13.2
         Dec. 150.5 + 12.4 145.7 − 2.1 166.6 + 12.1 135.1 − 14.2 116.5 − 1.1 156.1 + 34.0 164.1 + 15.3 125.2 + 8.5
2019         Jan. 117.3 + 18.2 120.8 + 19.8 123.8 + 21.3 123.7 + 19.6 99.7 + 15.0 113.3 + 16.3 126.5 + 19.6 102.8 + 14.3
         Feb. 132.9 + 7.1 129.4 + 9.7 119.0 + 5.5 134.4 + 7.9 145.1 + 31.7 137.0 + 4.4 132.4 − 2.8 141.9 + 21.3         Mar. 171.7 + 17.9 163.8 + 16.7 170.3 + 22.9 158.3 + 15.5 163.1 + 3.2 180.9 + 19.2 166.4 + 21.0 178.7 + 12.2
         Apr. 153.1 + 12.7 149.0 + 14.0 149.8 + 6.2 151.6 + 20.5 136.8 + 19.6 157.9 + 11.3 145.5 + 14.6 163.9 + 14.8
         May 147.8 + 3.5 144.6 + 5.6 146.8 + 12.3 148.9 + 4.1 121.6 − 9.9 151.4 + 1.2 148.1 + 3.8 148.0 − 1.5         June 162.1 + 10.2 161.6 + 14.0 158.3 + 11.1 163.9 + 20.4 164.0 + 2.7 162.7 + 6.1 166.1 + 21.4 159.9 − 1.1
         July 153.8 + 8.2 147.9 + 4.1 154.6 + 8.6 141.9 − 1.3 147.9 + 9.6 160.8 + 12.9 152.2 + 5.4 155.2 + 11.1
         Aug. 134.7 + 4.7 135.6 + 13.2 139.3 + 10.8 131.3 + 12.7 139.3 + 24.0 133.6 − 3.9 137.2 + 7.8 128.9 − 2.3         Sep. 147.9 + 5.9 146.6 + 2.2 156.9 + 0.6 130.5 + 0.2 173.1 + 13.7 149.4 + 10.4 143.5 + 6.5 147.5 + 8.8
         Oct. 136.8 + 3.6 137.4 + 6.8 154.8 + 9.6 124.2 + 1.6 129.6 + 17.0 136.1
+ 0.0 135.1 + 0.5 127.9 + 3.3
         Nov. 145.5 + 13.1 154.8 + 23.2 149.7 + 7.3 166.8 + 42.3 127.1 + 13.7 134.5 + 2.0 168.0 + 22.8 117.1 + 4.1
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *At current prices; exclu- adjusted business statistics, Table II.21. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Excluding
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement − Seasonally housing construction orders. 2 Including road construction. 
 
 
5. Retail trade turnover *   
  
Adjusted for calendar variations  o 
of which:In stores by enterprises main product range
Construction Retail sale of
and flooring pharmaceutical Retail sale via
Textiles, Information materials, and medical mail order housesclothing, and household goods, cosmetic or via internet
Food, beverages, foodwear and communications appliances, and toilet as well as
Total tobacco  
1 leather goods equipment furniture articles other retail sale  2 
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent-age age age age age age age age
Period change change change change change change change change
2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100 2015 = 100
2016 102.5 + 2.4 102.2 + 2.1 101.6 + 1.5 100.9 + 0.7 99.9 − 0.3 101.5 + 1.3 103.9 + 3.9 109.8 + 9.8
2017 107.6 + 5.0 105.8 + 3.5 105.9 + 4.2 108.1 + 7.1 106.2 + 6.3 103.0 + 1.5 107.7 + 3.7 120.4 + 9.72018
4 110.7 + 2.9 107.5 + 1.6 109.6 + 3.5 105.6 − 2.3 107.1 + 0.8 103.1 + 0.1 112.4 + 4.4 127.6 + 6.0
2019 5 114.4 + 3.3 110.4 + 2.7 111.9 + 2.1 105.9 + 0.3 108.2 + 1.0 106.9 + 3.7 117.4 + 4.4 137.6 + 7.8
 
2018         Dec. 128.9 − 0.4 125.3 − 1.0 126.5 + 0.5 122.3 − 4.4 157.5 − 2.6 109.7 − 2.2 124.5 + 0.8 153.9 − 0.4
2019         Jan. 103.8 + 3.7 101.3 + 3.2 102.1 + 2.9 87.6 − 2.4 112.2 + 1.8 92.0 + 1.9 113.4 + 5.4 130.4 + 9.8
         Feb. 101.5 + 5.5 98.6 + 4.7 101.3 + 3.1 82.6 + 5.4 94.4 + 1.8 94.5 + 4.8 110.1 + 6.0 120.1 + 11.2         Mar. 115.6 + 4.3 111.9 + 3.9 113.9 + 3.4 104.3 + 4.2 105.9 + 1.7 114.8 + 7.4 117.3 + 4.3 133.3 + 5.8
         Apr. 115.0 + 1.6 110.7 + 0.8 113.4 + 0.6 110.0 − 8.1 94.0 + 3.5 114.9 + 1.1 116.3 + 3.1 134.4 + 8.9
         May 113.3 + 2.3 108.8 + 1.6 111.8 − 0.5 103.1 − 5.7 94.3 + 5.6 110.2 + 4.2 115.3 + 7.0 127.5 + 5.8         June 115.0 + 4.6 110.9 + 3.9 115.4 + 3.1 116.6 + 9.2 97.5 − 2.3 106.6 + 4.8 114.4 + 4.4 131.8 + 13.9
         July 115.3 + 4.2 111.6 + 3.0 114.0 + 2.9 105.6
+ 0.0 95.7 − 0.4 108.4 + 5.6 119.5 + 3.2 136.6 + 10.2
         Aug. 110.9 + 4.0 107.5 + 3.5 110.9 + 3.4 100.0 + 1.6 102.1 + 5.1 100.9 + 4.7 113.8 + 3.5 124.2 + 6.6         Sep. 111.7 + 3.7 107.6 + 3.7 106.4 + 0.9 112.1 + 3.1 109.7 + 1.4 103.4 + 4.7 117.2 + 6.1 137.1 + 9.4
         Oct. 116.5 + 1.9 111.9 + 1.7 112.6 + 1.6 117.0 + 0.6 110.1 + 2.0 110.6 + 2.1 120.2 + 4.2 139.1 + 1.6
         Nov. 122.9 + 3.4 118.2 + 3.1 114.6 + 4.8 116.0 + 3.4 131.6 − 0.2 115.3 + 2.9 122.8 + 4.0 163.5 + 0.6         Dec.  
5 131.2 + 1.8 126.3 + 0.8 126.7 + 0.2 116.3 − 4.9 151.4 − 3.9 111.0 + 1.2 128.6 + 3.3 173.2 + 12.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. *Excluding value added online retail sales-based enterprise that founded a business establishment in Germany
tax;  for explanatory notes, see Statistical Supplement 4 − Seasonally adjusted busi- in May 2015. 4As of January 2018 figures are provisional, and particularly uncertain
ness statistics, Table II.24. oUsing JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13). 1Including stalls and mar- in recent months due to estimates for missing reports. 5Unadjusted figures partially
kets. 2Not in stores, stalls or markets. 3As of May 2015 integration of a larger estimated by the Federal Statistical Office. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
February 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legal
category
Solely of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary social Unem- Temporary Security
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies,  4, 6 
Thou- percentage Thou- percentage rate 4, 5 thou-
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2015 43,122 + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,655 + 1.2 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 44,248 + 1.4 32,234 + 2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,854 + 1.4 32,964 + 2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 8 45,251 8 + 0.9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 2,267 827 9 5.0 774
2016         Q4 44,091 + 1.3 32,014 + 2.2 9,137 21,770 866 4,781 93 36 2,547 766 5.8 677
2017         Q1 43,720 + 1.4 31,790 + 2.3 9,040 21,697 830 4,728 307 41 2,734 7 987 6.2 671
         Q2 44,153 + 1.3 32,064 + 2.3 9,110 21,857 852 4,762 36 25 2,513 822 5.6 717
         Q3 44,436 + 1.4 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763
         Q4 44,684 + 1.3 32,759 + 2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 82 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1 44,380 + 1.5 32,563 + 2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 325 24 2,525 909 5.7 760
         Q2 44,776 + 1.4 32,802 + 2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 5.1 794
         Q3 45,016 + 1.3 33,040 + 2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
         Q4 45,244 + 1.3 33,452 + 2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019         Q1 r 44,889 r + 1.1 33,214 + 2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
         Q2 r 45,208 r + 1.0 33,388 + 1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 9 2,227 778 9,10 4.9 795
         Q3 r 45,362 r + 0.8 11 33,547 11 + 1.5 11 9,492 11 23,050 11 753 11 4,599 ... 11 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
         Q4 8 45,545 8 + 0.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,204 811 4.8 729
2016         Sep. 44,024 + 1.2 32,007 + 2.2 9,157 21,729 869 4,768 46 35 2,608 787 5.9 687
         Oct. 44,102 + 1.2 32,045 + 2.2 9,154 21,773 871 4,767 50 39 2,540 756 5.8 691
         Nov. 44,154 + 1.2 32,069 + 2.2 9,147 21,807 876 4,794 52 40 2,532 756 5.7 681
         Dec. 44,016 + 1.3 31,848 + 2.2 9,063 21,731 835 4,794 178 30 2,568 785 5.8 658
2017         Jan. 43,640 + 1.4 31,707 + 2.3 9,017 21,648 825 4,719 370 43 2,777 7 1,010 6.3 647
         Feb. 43,692 + 1.4 31,774 + 2.3 9,032 21,690 828 4,706 335 42 2,762 1,014 6.3 675
         Mar. 43,829 + 1.4 31,930 + 2.3 9,078 21,777 838 4,722 216 40 2,662 935 6.0 692
         Apr. 43,999 + 1.4 32,013 + 2.2 9,101 21,831 838 4,748 39 27 2,569 861 5.8 706
         May 44,168 + 1.3 32,131 + 2.3 9,124 21,900 859 4,775 36 25 2,498 810 5.6 714
         June 44,291 + 1.3 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July 44,330 + 1.4 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
         Aug. 44,371 + 1.4 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765
         Sep. 44,606 + 1.3 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
         Oct. 44,678 + 1.3 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
         Nov. 44,749 + 1.3 32,830 + 2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772
         Dec. 44,625 + 1.4 32,609 + 2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 194 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan. 44,326 + 1.6 32,504 + 2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 287 23 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb. 44,358 + 1.5 32,551 + 2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 359 23 2,546 927 5.7 764
         Mar. 44,456 + 1.4 32,660 + 2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778
         Apr. 44,632 + 1.4 32,782 + 2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
         May 44,812 + 1.5 32,857 + 2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 5.1 793
         June 44,885 + 1.3 32,870 + 2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
         July 44,918 + 1.3 32,844 + 2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
         Aug. 44,968 + 1.3 33,131 + 2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
         Sep. 45,161 + 1.2 33,422 + 2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
         Oct. 45,249 + 1.3 33,488 + 2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
         Nov. 45,312 + 1.3 33,513 + 2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
         Dec. 45,170 + 1.2 33,286 + 2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019         Jan. r 44,837 r + 1.2 33,156 + 2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
         Feb. r 44,877 r + 1.2 33,199 + 2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
         Mar. r 44,953 r + 1.1 33,286 + 1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
         Apr. r 45,114 r + 1.1 33,383 + 1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
         May r 45,237 r + 0.9 33,433 + 1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 9 2,236 772 9,10 4.9 792
         June r 45,272 r + 0.9 33,407 + 1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
         July r 45,284 r + 0.8 33,360 + 1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
         Aug. r 45,298 r + 0.7 11 33,606 11 + 1.4 11 9,506 11 23,100 11 749 11 4,568 ... 11 52 2,319 848 5.1 795
         Sep. r 45,504 r + 0.8 11 33,945 11 + 1.6 11 9,584 11 23,350 11 753 11 4,523 ... 11 77 2,234 808 4.9 787
         Oct. r 45,585 r + 0.7 11 33,979 11 + 1.5 11 9,569 11 23,411 11 748 11 4,499 ... 11 99 2,204 795 4.8 764
         Nov. r 45,608 r + 0.7 11 33,994 11 + 1.4 11 9,564 11 23,445 11 742 ... ... 11 96 2,180 800 4.8 736
         Dec. 8 45,443 8 + 0.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020         Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,426 985 5.3 668
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and tical Office. 9Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Cod e (SGB II). 10From May
figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: end 2019, calculated on the basis of new labour force figures. 11Unadjusted figures esti-
of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the total mated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2017 and 2018, the estimated values
civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seaso- for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum of 0.2% for employees sub-
nal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From January 2017 persons receiving ject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.4% for persons solely in jobs exempt
additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at from social contributions, and by a maximum of 70.0% for cyclical ly induced
the same time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book the basis of short-time work. 
the Social Security Code (SGB III) 8Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statis-

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
February 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
7. Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which:  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  7 
prices ofindustrial
of which:
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Actual Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy rents struction the prices  of price index
Energy Services for (national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial
Total 2 Food 3 4, 5 2, 4 concept) index market  6 Exports Imports Energy  8 products  6 goods  4 housing materials  9 
Period 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.1 101.2 100.5 101.9 98.4 98.7 99.0 96.7 83.2 98.4
2017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.12018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.22019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8
10 111.6 102.4 101.7 110.0 108.1
 
2018         Mar. 103.0 106.4 103.1 97.9 102.9 104.1 102.9 102.4 105.8 101.1 100.8 109.5 104.9
         Apr. 103.2 106.8 103.3 99.5 102.8 104.3 103.1 102.8 105.6 101.3 101.4 116.7 106.1
         May 104.3 106.9 103.2 101.9 104.6 104.4 103.9 109.4 103.3 104.4 101.8 102.9 129.9 112.5         June 104.4 106.9 102.8 102.4 104.9 104.5 104.0 103.7 104.6 102.1 103.4 130.5 111.3
         July 105.2 106.6 101.7 102.3 107.4 104.7 104.4 103.9 107.1 102.2 103.3 129.9 105.8
         Aug. 105.2 106.4 102.3 103.1 107.0 104.8 104.5 111.0 104.2 110.5 102.4 103.3 130.5 105.7         Sep. 105.3 107.1 103.8 105.1 105.6 104.9 104.7 104.7 111.6 102.4 103.7 140.8 102.7
         Oct. 105.4 107.1 104.1 106.1 105.5 105.0 104.9 105.0 111.4 102.6 104.7 144.7 105.5
         Nov. 104.2 107.0 104.1 108.0 102.4 105.1 104.2 112.0 105.1 111.7 102.5 103.7 123.7 105.2         Dec. 104.4 107.0 103.8 103.5 104.0 105.2 104.2 104.7 111.6 102.1 102.4 111.4 103.2
2019         Jan. 103.4 107.4 102.9 101.5 102.9 105.4 103.4 105.1
10 111.5 102.2 102.2 112.3 104.4
         Feb. 103.9 107.9 103.4 101.7 103.6 105.6 103.8 114.0 105.0 112.1 102.3 102.5 114.3 109.4         Mar. 104.4 107.7 103.9 102.4 104.1 105.7 104.2 104.9 113.0 102.4 102.5 115.2 108.3
         Apr. 105.4 107.9 104.6 104.4 105.3 105.8 105.2 105.4 115.5 102.6 102.8 119.2 108.8
         May 105.7 108.3 104.6 106.1 105.3 105.9 105.4 115.0 105.3 115.7 102.5 102.7 116.6 106.6         June 106.0 108.4 104.1 104.9 106.6 106.1 105.7 104.9 115.1 102.3 101.3 102.8 108.6
         July 106.4 108.7 103.3 104.7 107.9 106.2 106.2 105.0 114.3 102.4 101.1 105.7 113.0
         Aug. 106.3 108.8 103.4 103.8 107.8 106.3 106.0 115.8 104.5 112.5 102.3 100.5 100.2 106.0         Sep. 106.2 108.8 104.7 103.8 106.9 106.4 106.0 104.6 110.0 102.4 101.1 105.9 107.5
         Oct. 106.3 108.6 105.0 103.8 106.9 106.6 106.1 104.4 110.4 102.4 101.0 105.7 107.1
         Nov. 105.4 109.0 105.2 103.7 104.9 106.7 105.3 116.4 104.4 112.1 102.4 101.5 110.5 106.9         Dec. 106.0 109.2 105.1 103.6 106.1 106.8 105.8 104.5 114.5 102.5 101.7 112.5 110.4
2020         Jan. 105.1 110.1 104.0 104.9 104.3 107.0 105.2 ... ... ... ... 107.4 112.2
Annual percentage change  
  
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 16.8 − 1.6
2017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 10.0 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 19.7 + 8.82018 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 25.1 − 0.82019 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 4.6 + 1.1
10 + 2.4 + 0.5 − 1.0 − 11.7 + 1.8
 
2018         Mar. + 1.7 + 2.9 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.8 − 2.4 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 9.8 − 9.9
         Apr. + 1.3 + 3.3 + 0.6 + 1.2 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 1.3 + 1.9 − 4.3 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 16.2 − 3.6
         May + 2.5 + 3.3 + 0.5 + 5.2 + 2.5 + 1.6 + 2.1 + 4.3 + 2.5 − 6.5 + 1.0 + 2.9 + 39.5 + 8.0         June + 2.1 + 3.2 + 0.8 + 6.6 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 6.7 + 1.5 + 4.4 + 52.3 + 10.9
         July + 2.2 + 2.7 + 0.4 + 6.7 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 1.9 + 2.9 − 4.2 + 1.7 + 4.8 + 50.2 + 2.8
         Aug. + 2.1 + 2.5 + 0.6 + 7.1 + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 5.0 + 3.1 − 1.7 + 2.1 + 4.8 + 44.8 + 2.3         Sep. + 2.2 + 2.9 + 1.0 + 7.8 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.9 + 3.2 + 1.3 + 1.9 + 4.4 + 46.2 − 0.1
         Oct. + 2.6 + 2.2 + 1.0 + 8.9 + 2.3 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 3.3 + 1.6 + 2.0 + 4.8 + 42.4 + 2.7
         Nov. + 2.2 + 2.1 + 1.0 + 9.4 + 1.1 + 1.5 + 2.1 + 5.2 + 3.3 + 2.1 + 1.7 + 3.1 + 12.1 + 1.3         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.4
2019         Jan. + 1.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 2.6
10 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.9
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 7.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 3.2         Mar. + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 6.8 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 3.2
         Apr. + 2.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.5
         May + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 5.1 + 1.9 + 10.8 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 10.2 − 5.2         June + 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 21.2 − 2.4
         July + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 18.6 + 6.8
         Aug. + 1.0 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 23.2 + 0.3         Sep. + 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.4
+ 0.0 − 2.5 − 24.8 + 4.7
         Oct. + 0.9 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 3.5 − 27.0 + 1.5
         Nov. + 1.2 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 4.0 + 2.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.9 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 10.7 + 1.6         Dec. + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 7.0
2020         Jan. + 1.6 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 1.5 + 1.7 ... ... ... ... − 4.4 + 7.5
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on basis of the five digit structure set out in the European Classifi cation of Individual
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Consumption according to Purpose (ECOICOP). 5Electricity, gas and other fuels as
Materials: HWWI. 1Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. 2With well as transport fuels and lubricants, from January 2017 excluding lubricants. 6Exclu-
effect from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of ding value added tax. 7For the euro area, in euro. 8Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natu-
package holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series. 3Including alcoholic be- ral gas. 9Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 10From
verages and tobacco. 4Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the January 2019 onwards provisional figures. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
February 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- As
age age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2011 1,103.5 4.9 746.4 4.0 371.1 − 1.3 1,117.5 2.2 1,628.1 3.3 163.1 0.5 10.0
2012 1,150.0 4.2 776.1 4.0 376.8 1.5 1,152.9 3.2 1,668.4 2.5 161.0 − 1.3 9.7
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 − 2.5 9.3
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.2 4.1 1,273.5 4.0 1,781.5 2.7 179.2 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.9 3.9 425.6 3.7 1,322.4 3.8 1,836.2 3.1 186.4 4.0 10.2
2017 1,394.0 4.2 932.0 3.9 441.5 3.7 1,373.4 3.9 1,894.4 3.2 197.4 5.9 10.4
2018 1,460.9 4.8 975.5 4.7 451.8 2.3 1,427.3 3.9 1,958.2 3.4 214.5 8.6 11.0
2018         Q2 355.8 4.8 232.3 4.6 111.6 2.3 343.9 3.9 482.3 3.4 50.2 9.0 10.4
         Q3 361.7 5.1 246.5 5.0 113.6 2.4 360.1 4.2 486.0 2.8 45.1 9.1 9.3
         Q4 403.3 4.6 269.0 4.4 112.8 2.5 381.8 3.9 497.5 3.5 48.4 8.7 9.7
2019         Q1 354.7 4.3 238.5 4.8 117.4 3.1 355.9 4.2 503.8 2.3 72.9 3.1 14.5
         Q2 371.6 4.5 243.9 5.0 116.3 4.2 360.1 4.7 496.6 3.0 51.1 1.9 10.3
         Q3 377.1 4.3 258.0 4.7 118.5 4.3 376.5 4.6 502.2 3.3 46.0 1.9 9.2
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2019. *Households salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2012 92.6 2.6 92.8 2.6 92.8 2.8 92.8 2.8 92.4 2.9
2013 94.9 2.5 95.1 2.5 95.1 2.5 95.1 2.5 94.4 2.2
2014 97.7 3.0 97.8 2.8 97.8 2.7 97.7 2.8 97.2 3.0
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.5
2017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.1 104.3 2.1 104.6 2.3 105.1 2.6
2018 107.2 2.8 107.2 2.9 107.1 2.7 107.4 2.7 108.4 3.1
2019 110.4 3.0 110.3 2.9 109.9 2.6 110.1 2.5 . .
2018         Q3 109.6 2.9 109.6 2.9 109.7 2.9 107.9 2.8 107.2 3.6
         Q4 119.2 2.9 119.2 2.9 119.2 2.7 108.3 2.8 118.5 3.1
2019         Q1 101.9 2.9 101.9 2.9 101.9 3.0 109.1 3.0 105.0 2.9
         Q2 103.0 2.1 103.0 2.1 102.9 2.2 109.9 2.2 109.2 3.2
         Q3 114.3 4.3 114.2 4.3 112.5 2.6 110.5 2.4 110.6 3.2
         Q4 122.2 2.5 122.1 2.4 122.1 2.5 110.8 2.3 . .
2019         June 103.2 2.6 103.2 2.6 102.6 2.0 110.0 2.0 . .
         July 136.3 7.0 136.2 7.0 131.1 2.8 110.4 2.4 . .
         Aug. 103.4 2.7 103.3 2.7 103.2 2.4 110.5 2.4 . .
         Sep. 103.2 2.5 103.2 2.5 103.3 2.5 110.6 2.5 . .
         Oct. 103.3 2.5 103.3 2.4 103.4 2.4 110.7 2.4 . .
         Nov. 158.0 2.6 157.9 2.5 157.8 2.7 110.8 2.3 . .
         Dec. 105.2 2.4 105.1 2.3 105.2 2.2 110.8 2.2 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such November 2019. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
73  Monthly Report
February 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
  
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
Non- Trade of which:
Total current Intangible Tangible Financial Current Inven- receiv- Financial Financial Trade
Period assets assets assets assets assets assets tories ables Cash  1 Equity Total Total debt Total debt payables
Total ( € billion)
2015 2,226.8 1,395.1 470.7 565.7 273.1 831.8 215.5 190.5 136.1 633.5 1,593.4 861.4 466.2 732.0 222.8 180.3
2016 2,367.7 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.82017 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.72018 
3 2,595.4 1,539.0 542.2 611.2 288.5 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.4 792.2 1,803.2 927.4 560.1 875.9 257.6 205.2
2017         H2 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
2018         H1  3 2,551.8 1,533.0 541.7 602.5 288.3 1,018.8 250.1 236.1 143.3 775.6 1,776.2 909.4 541.0 866.7 254.7 210.2
         H2 2,595.4 1,539.0 542.2 611.2 288.5 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.4 792.2 1,803.2 927.4 560.1 875.9 257.6 205.2
2019         H1  p 2,709.0 1,659.5 551.1 682.7 314.5 1,049.4 269.3 241.7 144.0 779.7 1,929.3 1,025.8 615.2 903.4 301.7 210.9
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 62.7 21.1 25.4 12.3 37.4 9.7 8.6 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.7 20.9 32.9 10.0 8.1
2016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.12017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.22018 
3 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.8 9.9 7.9
2017         H2 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
2018         H1  3 100.0 60.1 21.2 23.6 11.3 39.9 9.8 9.3 5.6 30.4 69.6 35.6 21.2 34.0 10.0 8.2
         H2 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.8 9.9 7.9
2019         H1  p 100.0 61.3 20.3 25.2 11.6 38.7 9.9 8.9 5.3 28.8 71.2 37.9 22.7 33.4 11.1 7.8
Groups with a focus on the production sector ( € billion)  2 
 
2015 1,782.4 1,077.8 304.0 447.3 259.0 704.6 198.8 147.1 104.4 485.2 1,297.2 690.4 354.0 606.8 198.4 127.52016 1,910.1 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.92017 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.42018 
3 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.8
2017         H2 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.4
2018         H1  3 2,072.0 1,177.0 360.2 460.4 277.5 895.0 232.7 185.6 115.2 604.9 1,467.0 727.9 411.2 739.2 229.5 167.5
         H2 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.8
2019         H1  p 2,164.7 1,247.6 358.0 501.5 302.7 917.2 252.0 187.0 114.4 604.2 1,560.5 805.6 452.6 754.9 260.2 162.6
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 60.5 17.1 25.1 14.5 39.5 11.2 8.3 5.9 27.2 72.8 38.7 19.9 34.1 11.1 7.2
2016 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.42017 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.72018 
3 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
2017         H2 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
2018         H1  3 100.0 56.8 17.4 22.2 13.4 43.2 11.2 9.0 5.6 29.2 70.8 35.1 19.9 35.7 11.1 8.1
         H2 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
2019         H1  p 100.0 57.6 16.5 23.2 14.0 42.4 11.6 8.6 5.3 27.9 72.1 37.2 20.9 34.9 12.0 7.5
Groups with a focus on the services sector ( € billion)
 
2015 444.5 317.3 166.7 118.3 14.1 127.2 16.7 43.5 31.6 148.3 296.2 171.0 112.2 125.2 24.4 52.72016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.92017 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.32018 
3 502.2 365.2 182.9 148.3 11.0 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.0 322.2 185.5 131.7 136.7 26.4 54.4
2017         H2 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
2018         H1  3 479.8 356.0 181.4 142.1 10.8 123.8 17.4 50.5 28.1 170.7 309.2 181.6 129.8 127.6 25.2 42.7
         H2 502.2 365.2 182.9 148.3 11.0 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.0 322.2 185.5 131.7 136.7 26.4 54.4
2019         H1  p 544.2 412.0 193.2 181.3 11.9 132.2 17.3 54.7 29.7 175.5 368.8 220.2 162.6 148.6 41.6 48.3
As a percentage of total assets
2015 100.0 71.4 37.5 26.6 3.2 28.6 3.8 9.8 7.1 33.4 66.6 38.5 25.3 28.2 5.5 11.9
2016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.32017 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.22018 
3 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.2 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.8 35.8 64.2 36.9 26.2 27.2 5.3 10.8
2017         H2 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
2018         H1  3 100.0 74.2 37.8 29.6 2.3 25.8 3.6 10.5 5.9 35.6 64.4 37.8 27.1 26.6 5.2 8.9
         H2 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.2 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.8 35.8 64.2 36.9 26.2 27.2 5.3 10.8
2019         H1  p 100.0 75.7 35.5 33.3 2.2 24.3 3.2 10.1 5.5 32.2 67.8 40.5 29.9 27.3 7.6 8.9
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Including cash equivalents. 2In-
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly cluding groups in agriculture and forestry. 3From this point onwards: significant
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with p revious periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
74  Monthly Report
February 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
 
 
 
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1  ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Operating income Distribution  2 Distribution  2 
before depreciation
and amortisation Weighted First Third Operating Weighted First Third
Revenues (EBITDA  1  ) average quartile Median quartile income (EBIT) average quartile Median quartile
Annual Annual
Annual Annual change in Annual change in
per- per- per- per- per-
centage centage centage centage centage
Period change  4 change  4 % points  4 % % % change  4 % points  4 %%% € billion  3 € billion  3 € billion  3 
Total
2011 1,414.3 8.5 175.9 0.5 12.4 − 1.0 5.7 11.1 17.4 93.9 − 4.1 6.6 − 0.9 2.7 6.6 12.0
2012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 − 0.4 5.4 10.2 17.5 95.7 − 7.7 6.2 − 0.9 2.0 6.1 11.0
2013 1,541.1 − 0.6 187.2 − 2.8 12.2 − 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.5 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 2.0 5.9 11.1
2014 1,565.7 1.0 198.9 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.5 109.4 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.2
2015 1,635.4 6.9 196.2 − 1.0 12.0 − 1.0 6.1 10.6 18.1 91.7 − 16.3 5.6 − 1.5 1.7 6.7 11.6
2016 1,626.1 − 0.4 214.9 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.5 18.1 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,721.7 5.1 243.9 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.4 33.2 8.3 1.7 2.5 6.9 12.2
2018 6 1,709.6 0.7 233.4 − 0.8 13.7 − 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.7 − 6.2 7.6 − 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2014         H2 808.8 2.9 101.7 5.3 12.6 0.3 5.6 11.0 19.2 51.5 7.6 6.4 0.3 1.8 7.1 12.1
2015         H1 815.3 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 − 0.4 5.0 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.3 − 0.5 1.2 5.9 10.9
         H2 831.4 5.1 93.6 − 7.6 11.3 − 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.5 32.7 − 36.6 3.9 − 2.5 2.3 7.2 11.7
2016         H1 782.7 − 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 6.1 10.5 18.0 65.7 2.9 8.4 0.4 1.7 6.4 11.4
         H2 843.4 1.1 103.1 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.2 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.6 12.5
2017         H1 845.0 6.8 125.9 14.5 14.9 1.0 5.8 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.4 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.7
         H2 879.8 3.5 117.7 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.4 63.2 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.5 12.4
2018         H1  6 849.5 − 0.0 120.7 − 2.4 14.2 − 0.4 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.9 − 5.2 8.6 − 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
         H2 870.9 1.4 115.2 0.9 13.2 − 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.3 − 7.5 6.7 − 0.6 2.1 6.7 12.5
2019         H1  p 862.9 2.7 112.4 − 3.8 13.0 − 0.9 6.3 11.7 18.6 53.7 − 23.2 6.2 − 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
Groups with a focus on the production sector  5 
 
2011 1,079.0 10.6 130.0 − 1.7 12.1 − 1.5 5.6 11.3 16.4 74.1 − 5.0 6.9 − 1.2 2.4 6.9 11.5
2012 1,173.8 7.8 140.8 5.3 12.0 − 0.3 5.8 10.3 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 − 0.4 1.9 6.1 9.8
2013 1,179.0 − 0.8 138.8 − 2.5 11.8 − 0.2 5.1 10.3 15.7 74.5 − 5.7 6.3 − 0.3 1.6 5.8 10.5
2014 1,197.4 1.0 148.1 5.9 12.4 0.6 5.6 10.0 15.5 82.0 9.7 6.9 0.6 1.5 5.9 10.3
2015 1,282.5 7.0 144.0 − 2.6 11.2 − 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.0 65.2 − 19.8 5.1 − 1.8 2.1 6.5 10.3
2016 1,267.1 − 1.1 156.5 6.1 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 80.6 3.9 6.4 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,362.9 5.6 181.6 16.8 13.3 1.3 6.8 10.9 15.6 108.0 40.8 7.9 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
2018 6 1,334.9 1.0 169.1 − 1.6 12.7 − 0.3 6.8 10.6 15.6 95.5 − 7.1 7.2 − 0.6 2.7 6.8 10.9
2014         H2 613.1 3.1 73.8 7.9 12.0 0.6 4.4 9.8 16.0 35.8 10.6 5.8 0.4 0.7 6.4 10.8
2015         H1 636.4 8.8 80.1 7.9 12.6 − 0.1 5.4 10.2 15.5 48.8 5.6 7.7 − 0.2 2.1 6.1 10.0
         H2 646.7 5.3 63.9 − 13.2 9.9 − 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.6 16.4 − 52.4 2.5 − 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.7
2016         H1 611.3 − 2.5 84.0 1.4 13.7 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.8 50.7 − 7.0 8.3 − 0.4 2.9 6.4 10.0
         H2 655.9 0.4 72.6 12.0 11.1 1.2 6.2 11.3 16.4 29.9 34.5 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.6
2017         H1 678.7 7.3 98.5 18.8 14.5 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 64.0 37.6 9.4 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
         H2 684.9 3.9 83.1 14.5 12.1 1.2 6.9 11.7 16.5 44.0 45.8 6.4 1.9 3.4 7.2 10.8
2018         H1  6 665.8 − 0.1 90.9 − 3.9 13.7 − 0.5 6.5 10.8 16.7 57.1 − 6.0 8.6 − 0.6 2.9 6.6 11.5
         H2 678.8 2.1 80.6 1.2 11.9 − 0.1 6.2 11.1 15.9 39.8 − 8.6 5.9 − 0.7 1.9 6.4 10.9
2019         H1  p 673.0 2.5 79.8 − 8.0 11.9 − 1.4 7.1 10.6 15.9 39.7 − 26.2 5.9 − 2.4 1.7 5.8 9.4
Groups with a focus on the services sector
 
2011 335.3 1.7 45.9 7.7 13.7 0.8 6.0 10.4 20.7 19.7 − 0.4 5.9 − 0.1 3.2 6.2 13.8
2012 359.1 2.8 48.0 − 3.2 13.4 − 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 − 46.6 3.9 − 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.2
2013 362.0 − 0.1 48.4 − 3.5 13.4 − 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 82.0 6.9 2.9 2.4 5.9 12.5
2014 368.3 0.9 50.8 1.9 13.8 0.1 6.2 12.7 22.6 27.3 4.3 7.4 0.2 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.2 52.2 4.4 14.8 − 0.3 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 − 3.1 7.5 − 0.7 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.6 58.4 14.0 16.3 1.6 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 26.5 8.8 1.6 2.5 8.3 15.5
2017 358.7 3.2 62.3 7.6 17.4 0.7 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 10.2 9.6 0.6 2.4 7.5 15.1
2018 6 374.7 − 0.6 64.4 1.7 17.2 0.4 5.7 10.5 24.7 34.2 − 2.9 9.1 − 0.2 1.6 5.9 16.6
2014         H2 195.6 2.2 27.8 − 2.4 14.2 − 0.6 6.4 13.5 23.8 15.7 − 0.3 8.1 − 0.2 3.6 8.1 18.0
2015         H1 178.9 8.2 22.8 − 2.5 12.7 − 1.4 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 − 19.7 5.8 − 1.8 − 0.5 4.5 14.2
         H2 184.7 4.5 29.7 10.3 16.1 0.8 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.7 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016         H1 171.5 1.0 27.8 26.8 16.2 3.3 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 68.2 8.7 3.4 1.0 6.4 14.9
         H2 187.4 4.1 30.6 4.2 16.3 0.0 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.8 8.8 − 0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2017         H1 166.3 4.4 27.4 − 0.4 16.5 − 0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 − 1.0 8.8 − 0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
         H2 195.0 2.0 34.7 14.9 17.8 2.1 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.2 20.8 9.9 1.5 3.0 8.2 17.9
2018         H1  6 183.7 0.5 29.8 3.4 16.2 0.5 4.0 9.7 22.9 15.8 − 1.0 8.6 − 0.1 − 0.9 5.1 15.5
         H2 192.1 − 1.6 34.6 0.3 18.0 0.3 6.8 12.1 25.6 18.4 − 4.3 9.6 − 0.3 2.7 7.2 17.8
2019         H1  p 189.9 3.8 32.7 11.3 17.2 1.2 5.6 12.7 24.8 14.0 − 9.5 7.4 − 1.0 0.3 5.4 15.2
*Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt figures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement stati stics, p. 3.
Stock Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly 4Adjusted for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and
or half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. in the reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical S upplement 4 −
Excluding groups engaged in real estate activities. 1Earnings before interest, taxes, Seasonally adjusted business statistics. 5Including groups in agriculture and forest-
depreciation and amortisation. 2Quantile data are based on the groups’ unweighted ry. 6From this point onwards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing com-
return on sales. 3Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year parability with previous periods. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
February 2020
XII. External sector
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2019
Item 2016 2017 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep. Oct. Nov.  p
Current account + 351,638 + 352,504 + 359,488 + 68,417 + 41,308 + 117,375 + 40,226 + 44,389 + 36,590A.
1. Goods
Exports 2,117,444 2,264,983 2,341,365 593,199 598,863 600,770 204,413 222,739 204,282Imports 1,755,461 1,918,079 2,045,213 521,859 517,661 513,119 174,893 186,527 175,773
Balance + 361,983 + 346,904 + 296,155 + 71,340 + 81,201 + 87,651 + 29,520 + 36,212 + 28,509
2. Services
Receipts 816,213 881,422 921,204 217,097 243,166 261,166 86,427 82,458 76,796Expenditure 773,162 808,893 806,197 194,155 241,480 218,113 65,998 72,690 70,187
Balance + 43,051 + 72,529 + 115,007 + 22,942 + 1,686 + 43,052 + 20,428 + 9,769 + 6,609
3. Primary income
Receipts 678,649 720,431 770,150 183,536 202,989 189,833 63,429 61,486 61,653Expenditure 593,046 651,832 671,536 155,768 216,503 165,419 60,537 50,634 50,637
Balance + 85,602 + 68,601 + 98,614 + 27,769 − 13,514 + 24,414 + 2,892 + 10,852 + 11,016
4. Secondary income
Receipts 102,506 108,370 115,127 27,437 29,474 25,280 9,179 8,304 7,776Expenditure 241,503 243,897 265,414 81,069 57,538 63,023 21,793 20,747 17,321
Balance − 139,000 − 135,529 − 150,286 − 53,632 − 28,064 − 37,743 − 12,614 − 12,443 − 9,544
Capital account + 1,517 − 19,705 − 33,595 − 4,199 − 15,057 + 1,930 + 50 + 899 + 487B.
Financial account (increase: +) + 359,977 + 336,437 + 329,116 + 60,922 + 16,212 + 104,836 + 34,293 + 61,544 + 41,105C.
1. Direct investment + 98,164 + 3,252 + 87,128 + 60,552 − 103,066 + 11,845 + 52 + 67,491 − 26,758
By resident units abroad + 440,418 + 260,276 − 256,843 + 92,005 − 90,279 + 162,485 + 75,053 − 8,988 + 4,886By non-resident units in the euro area + 342,251 + 257,022 − 343,972 + 31,453 + 12,785 + 150,640 + 75,001 − 76,480 + 31,644
2. Portfolio investment + 563,066 + 331,228 + 207,339 − 83,169 − 27,491 − 6,299 − 9,403 + 37,146 + 12,361
By resident units abroad + 380,010 + 660,992 + 202,231 + 58,204 + 51,180 + 146,666 + 56,961 + 43,984 + 28,705
Equity and
investment fund shares + 9,157 + 203,579 + 45,943 − 4,046 + 4,329 − 25,209 − 15,612 + 19,560 + 13,544
Long-term debt securities + 363,257 + 382,122 + 195,659 + 64,100 + 90,579 + 118,480 + 38,039 + 33,488 + 25,282Short-term debt securities + 7,596 + 75,287 − 39,375 − 1,849 − 43,728 + 53,395 + 34,534 − 9,064 − 10,122
By non-resident units in the euro area − 183,058 + 329,761 − 5,111 + 141,373 + 78,670 + 152,965 + 66,364 + 6,837 + 16,343
Equity and
investment fund shares + 109,924 + 454,379 + 153,620 − 2,619 + 37,283 + 126,988 + 41,791 + 46,634 + 4,150
Long-term debt securities − 319,442 − 135,583 − 76,400 + 119,414 + 56,320 + 6,225 + 315 − 31,260 + 12,317Short-term debt securities + 26,462 + 10,967 − 82,328 + 24,580 − 14,932 + 19,753 + 24,259 − 8,537 − 124
3. Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 20,809 + 25,389 + 96,566 + 3,013 + 34,125 + 3,235 − 5,564 + 3,602 − 1,960
4. Other investment − 337,384 − 22,360 − 86,878 + 77,658 + 109,925 + 94,358 + 55,371 − 47,733 + 59,714
Eurosystem − 152,902 − 176,851 − 132,123 + 141,226 + 4,408 + 34,516 + 2,968 + 53,073 + 9,768General government + 14,097 + 25,710 − 5,664 − 9,659 + 5,103 − 6,584 − 2,279 − 7,175 + 11,419MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) − 126,603 + 149,885 + 87,734 − 13,712 + 105,833 + 48,101 + 28,084 − 94,771 + 18,251Enterprises and households − 71,973 − 21,101 − 36,824 − 40,197 − 5,419 + 18,324 + 26,597 + 1,139 + 20,276
5. Reserve assets + 15,322 − 1,073 + 24,956 + 2,867 + 2,717 + 1,697 − 6,163 + 1,038 − 2,253
Net errors and omissions + 6,823 + 3,639 + 3,224 − 3,296 − 10,039 − 14,468 − 5,983 + 16,257 + 4,028D.
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary  
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
February 2020
XII. External sector
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.)  1 
of which:
Supple-
mentary Balance of of which: Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2005 + 106,942 + 156,563 − 6,515 − 37,580 + 19,300 − 31,341 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 8,172
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 − 4,687 − 31,777 + 40,499 − 32,014 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 20,796
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 − 1,183 − 32,465 + 35,620 − 33,390 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 − 3,947 − 29,122 + 24,063 − 34,147 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 − 6,605 − 17,642 + 54,524 − 34,764 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 − 6,209 − 25,255 + 51,306 − 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 − 9,357 − 29,930 + 69,087 − 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 − 11,388 − 30,774 + 65,658 − 38,703 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 43,882
2013 + 184,274 + 203,802 − 12,523 − 39,399 + 63,284 − 43,413 − 563 + 225,371 + 838 + 41,660
2014 + 210,735 + 219,629 − 14,296 − 25,873 + 57,858 − 40,880 + 2,936 + 240,117 − 2,564 + 26,446
2015 + 259,920 + 248,394 − 15,405 − 19,242 + 69,262 − 38,494 − 48 + 234,404 − 2,213 − 25,467
2016 + 265,489 + 252,581 − 19,010 − 21,814 + 75,590 − 40,868 + 2,138 + 259,720 + 1,686 − 7,908
2017 + 261,894 + 253,111 − 14,069 − 21,938 + 80,276 − 49,554 − 1,947 + 282,947 − 1,269 + 23,000
2018 + 246,031 + 222,670 − 24,490 − 20,686 + 91,666 − 47,619 + 1,858 + 228,848 + 392 − 19,041
2019 p + 266,173 + 237,523 − 14,199 − 21,743 + 97,808 − 47,416 + 716 + 193,041 − 544 − 73,848
2017         Q1 + 69,906 + 63,678 − 1,365 − 2,653 + 22,781 − 13,901 + 562 + 69,234 − 360 − 1,234
         Q2 + 52,671 + 64,258 − 3,660 − 5,301 + 5,673 − 11,959 − 2,624 + 67,523 + 385 + 17,476
         Q3 + 64,060 + 65,296 − 3,113 − 12,334 + 21,991 − 10,893 + 766 + 62,836 + 152 − 1,990
         Q4 + 75,257 + 59,879 − 5,931 − 1,651 + 29,831 − 12,802 − 652 + 83,353 − 1,446 + 8,749
2018         Q1 + 71,153 + 62,406 − 3,973 − 2,203 + 25,279 − 14,329 + 4,003 + 67,340 + 699 − 7,816
         Q2 + 60,648 + 60,154 − 8,201 − 2,804 + 8,504 − 5,205 − 2,563 + 56,803 − 374 − 1,281
         Q3 + 47,987 + 47,644 − 7,861 − 13,139 + 25,305 − 11,823 − 1,050 + 39,839 − 493 − 7,098
         Q4 + 66,244 + 52,467 − 4,455 − 2,540 + 32,578 − 16,262 + 1,467 + 64,866 + 560 − 2,845
2019         Q1 + 66,737 + 59,927 − 1,896 − 2,309 + 25,733 − 16,615 + 1,408 + 35,415 − 63 − 32,730
         Q2 + 59,916 + 58,362 − 2,487 − 3,679 + 11,389 − 6,156 − 522 + 54,886 + 444 − 4,509
         Q3 + 63,116 + 62,187 − 4,197 − 13,733 + 27,100 − 12,439 + 456 + 15,855 − 349 − 47,717
         Q4  p + 76,404 + 57,047 − 5,619 − 2,023 + 33,586 − 12,205 − 627 + 86,885 − 576 + 11,107
2017         July + 18,800 + 19,876 − 203 − 4,325 + 7,632 − 4,383 + 483 + 18,879 + 463 − 404
         Aug. + 17,949 + 20,316 − 2,098 − 5,515 + 6,576 − 3,427 + 130 + 9,684 − 912 − 8,395
         Sep. + 27,311 + 25,104 − 812 − 2,494 + 7,783 − 3,082 + 154 + 34,273 + 602 + 6,808
         Oct. + 19,647 + 20,060 − 767 − 4,091 + 7,853 − 4,175 − 270 + 16,992 + 1,176 − 2,385
         Nov. + 27,382 + 23,893 − 1,960 − 345 + 8,266 − 4,432 − 521 + 30,390 − 270 + 3,530
         Dec. + 28,228 + 15,926 − 3,204 + 2,785 + 13,712 − 4,195 + 139 + 35,971 − 2,353 + 7,604
2018         Jan. + 21,436 + 17,953 − 1,544 − 367 + 8,866 − 5,016 + 3,772 + 27,335 − 121 + 2,127
         Feb. + 19,854 + 19,507 − 883 − 772 + 6,465 − 5,346 + 324 + 13,905 + 583 − 6,273
         Mar. + 29,862 + 24,946 − 1,546 − 1,064 + 9,948 − 3,967 − 92 + 26,100 + 236 − 3,670
         Apr. + 22,846 + 20,355 − 2,447 + 89 + 4,958 − 2,556 + 301 + 30,453 − 670 + 7,305
         May + 13,028 + 19,093 − 2,380 − 1,360 − 4,851 + 146 − 27 + 20,458 + 83 + 7,457
         June + 24,773 + 20,706 − 3,373 − 1,533 + 8,396 − 2,795 − 2,838 + 5,892 + 213 − 16,044
         July + 13,858 + 15,271 − 1,892 − 4,865 + 8,090 − 4,638 − 231 + 6,482 + 266 − 7,145
         Aug. + 15,185 + 15,923 − 2,680 − 5,693 + 8,565 − 3,610 + 97 + 21,233 − 640 + 5,952
         Sep. + 18,944 + 16,450 − 3,289 − 2,581 + 8,651 − 3,576 − 915 + 12,124 − 119 − 5,904
         Oct. + 20,301 + 19,922 − 512 − 4,338 + 9,005 − 4,287 − 822 + 4,021 + 700 − 15,458
         Nov. + 23,610 + 19,439 − 2,015 + 521 + 9,185 − 5,534 − 489 + 26,596 − 124 + 3,475
         Dec. + 22,332 + 13,107 − 1,928 + 1,277 + 14,389 − 6,440 + 2,779 + 34,248 − 17 + 9,137
2019         Jan. + 18,777 + 15,790 − 1,006 − 1,088 + 9,112 − 5,036 + 2,133 + 9,673 + 158 − 11,238
         Feb. + 17,328 + 18,983 − 546 − 544 + 6,868 − 7,979 + 224 + 15,413 + 112 − 2,139
         Mar. + 30,632 + 25,155 − 344 − 677 + 9,754 − 3,600 − 949 + 10,329 − 333 − 19,354
         Apr. + 22,840 + 19,191 − 972 − 516 + 7,789 − 3,624 + 79 + 26,952 + 547 + 4,034
         May + 16,234 + 21,559 − 1,048 − 790 − 5,274 + 739 − 435 + 8,134 + 182 − 7,665
         June + 20,843 + 17,611 − 467 − 2,372 + 8,875 − 3,271 − 166 + 19,800 − 285 − 878
         July + 21,002 + 22,613 − 1,457 − 5,612 + 8,567 − 4,565 + 259 − 3,397 + 348 − 24,658
         Aug. + 17,298 + 17,222 − 1,080 − 4,928 + 9,238 − 4,235 + 858 + 2,911 + 755 − 15,244
         Sep. + 24,815 + 22,352 − 1,660 − 3,192 + 9,295 − 3,639 − 660 + 16,341 − 1,452 − 7,814
         Oct. + 22,908 + 23,008 − 1,136 − 4,578 + 8,951 − 4,474 − 783 + 31,264 − 107 + 9,139
         Nov. + 24,088 + 17,962 − 2,514 + 349 + 9,319 − 3,542 − 387 + 36,541 − 356 + 12,841
         Dec.  p + 29,409 + 16,076 − 1,968 + 2,206 + 15,316 − 4,189 + 544 + 19,081 − 113 − 10,872
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions resulting from the difference between the balance on the finan cial account
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account . 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
February 2020
 XII. External sector
 
 3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
  by country and group of countries*
 
 € million
 2019
Group of countries/country  2017  2018  2019 p July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,278,958 1,317,440 1,327,647 114,962 101,590 114,119 119,748 113,062 97,967
Imports 1,031,013 1,088,720 1,104,066 93,655 85,162 93,003 98,437 94,481 82,768Balance + 247,946 + 228,720 + 223,581 + 21,306 + 16,428 + 21,116 + 21,312 + 18,582 + 15,199
I. Exports 872,427 900,141 902,594 75,361 67,917 78,926 81,795 77,544 63,474European countries
Imports 699,677 744,575 747,880 62,553 55,976 62,678 65,344 63,885 55,804Balance + 172,749 + 155,566 + 154,714 + 12,808 + 11,941 + 16,248 + 16,452 + 13,659 + 7,671
Exports 749,850 778,644 777,129 64,204 57,821 68,387 70,219 66,600 54,387 1. EU Member States (28)
Imports 586,071 623,458 631,487 52,778 47,182 53,598 55,506 53,793 46,469Balance + 163,780 + 155,186 + 145,642 + 11,426 + 10,639 + 14,789 + 14,713 + 12,806 + 7,918
Euro area (19) Exports 471,213 492,469 492,208 41,176 35,439 43,089 43,950 41,956 34,660
countries Imports 378,700 405,810 409,284 34,639 29,983 34,094 35,615 34,093 29,931
Balance + 92,513 + 86,659 + 82,924 + 6,537 + 5,456 + 8,996 + 8,335 + 7,863 + 4,729
of which:
Austria Exports 62,656 65,027 65,908 5,536 5,020 5,550 5,866 5,458 4,572
Imports 40,686 42,994 43,984 3,910 3,166 3,747 3,743 3,614 3,095Balance + 21,970 + 22,033 + 21,925 + 1,626 + 1,854 + 1,803 + 2,122 + 1,844 + 1,477
Belgium and Exports 50,071 50,389 51,882 4,229 3,880 4,544 4,512 4,355 3,895
Luxembourg Imports 43,689 49,315 46,367 3,657 3,592 3,823 3,853 3,678 3,083
Balance + 6,381 + 1,074 + 5,515 + 572 + 288 + 721 + 659 + 677 + 812
France Exports 105,687 105,359 106,916 9,034 7,407 9,351 9,709 9,381 7,228
Imports 64,329 65,024 66,063 5,640 4,499 5,775 5,863 5,534 4,988Balance + 41,359 + 40,335 + 40,852 + 3,394 + 2,908 + 3,576 + 3,846 + 3,847 + 2,240
Italy Exports 65,422 69,813 68,104 5,886 4,230 6,008 6,136 5,809 4,897
Imports 55,342 60,223 57,094 5,123 4,032 4,808 4,956 4,854 4,204Balance + 10,080 + 9,591 + 11,010 + 763 + 199 + 1,201 + 1,181 + 955 + 693
Netherlands Exports 84,661 91,061 91,663 7,586 7,108 8,226 7,957 7,702 6,731
Imports 90,597 97,709 98,832 8,071 7,895 8,299 8,261 8,245 7,732Balance − 5,935 − 6,649 − 7,168 − 485 − 787 − 72 − 305 − 543 − 1,001
Spain Exports 43,067 44,184 44,297 3,697 2,884 3,858 3,991 3,712 3,013
Imports 31,396 32,399 33,220 2,878 2,097 2,668 2,815 2,757 2,302Balance + 11,671 + 11,785 + 11,077 + 819 + 788 + 1,189 + 1,176 + 955 + 712
Other EU Member Exports 278,638 286,175 284,921 23,028 22,382 25,298 26,270 24,644 19,728
States Imports 207,371 217,647 222,203 18,139 17,199 19,505 19,891 19,700 16,538
Balance + 71,267 + 68,527 + 62,718 + 4,889 + 5,183 + 5,793 + 6,378 + 4,943 + 3,190
of which:
United Exports 85,440 82,164 78,692 6,244 5,965 7,203 7,299 6,008 5,113Kingdom Imports 36,820 37,025 38,322 3,224 3,143 3,255 3,593 3,470 3,191
Balance + 48,620 + 45,139 + 40,370 + 3,020 + 2,822 + 3,948 + 3,707 + 2,538 + 1,922
Exports 122,576 121,497 125,465 11,157 10,095 10,538 11,576 10,944 9,087 2. Other European
Imports 113,607 121,117 116,393 9,774 8,793 9,079 9,838 10,092 9,335 countries
Balance + 8,969 + 380 + 9,072 + 1,382 + 1,302 + 1,459 + 1,738 + 852 − 248
of which:
Switzerland Exports 53,913 54,021 56,365 4,856 4,590 4,841 5,126 5,008 3,993
Imports 45,689 45,913 46,302 3,957 3,544 3,718 4,163 4,178 3,538Balance + 8,224 + 8,108 + 10,063 + 899 + 1,046 + 1,123 + 963 + 830 + 455
II. Exports 403,490 413,483 421,505 39,269 33,354 34,932 37,617 35,256 34,229Non-European
Imports 328,606 342,980 354,658 30,994 29,053 30,115 32,909 30,416 26,808 countries
Balance + 74,884 + 70,503 + 66,847 + 8,274 + 4,301 + 4,817 + 4,708 + 4,840 + 7,422
Exports 25,431 22,524 23,725 2,279 1,897 1,955 1,896 1,781 1,957 1. Africa
Imports 20,428 22,542 24,411 2,321 1,794 2,225 2,249 2,115 2,053Balance + 5,003 − 18 − 686 − 42 + 104 − 270 − 353 − 334 − 96
Exports 154,644 158,952 165,320 15,575 13,749 13,886 15,077 13,679 11,798 2. America
Imports 89,927 92,444 99,823 8,522 8,008 8,314 9,611 8,279 7,840Balance + 64,717 + 66,508 + 65,497 + 7,052 + 5,741 + 5,573 + 5,467 + 5,400 + 3,958
of which:
Exports 111,805 113,341 118,660 11,249 9,746 9,908 11,069 9,880 8,451 United States
Imports 61,902 64,493 71,425 6,102 5,719 6,039 7,179 5,974 5,522Balance + 49,903 + 48,847 + 47,235 + 5,147 + 4,027 + 3,869 + 3,890 + 3,906 + 2,929
Exports 212,070 219,716 221,237 20,206 16,838 18,192 19,780 18,859 19,640 3. Asia
Imports 214,393 224,355 226,564 19,768 18,886 19,337 20,707 19,748 16,578Balance − 2,323 − 4,639 − 5,327 + 438 − 2,048 − 1,145 − 927 − 890 + 3,063
of which:
Middle East Exports 33,104 29,144 28,618 2,687 2,244 2,254 2,806 2,565 3,050
Imports 6,963 8,156 7,323 710 587 607 622 571 473Balance + 26,141 + 20,989 + 21,295 + 1,977 + 1,657 + 1,647 + 2,184 + 1,995 + 2,576
Japan Exports 19,546 20,436 20,660 2,046 1,580 1,862 1,918 1,597 1,323
Imports 22,955 23,710 23,933 2,023 1,929 2,095 2,178 2,009 1,603Balance − 3,410 − 3,275 − 3,272 + 22 − 350 − 233 − 259 − 413 − 280
Exports 86,141 93,004 96,075 8,726 7,384 7,683 8,636 8,184 8,321 People‘s Republic
Imports 101,837 106,065 109,525 9,581 9,317 9,401 10,374 9,720 8,567 of China  
2 
Balance − 15,695 − 13,061 − 13,451 − 855 − 1,933 − 1,718 − 1,738 − 1,535 − 246
Exports 53,425 54,995 54,133 4,982 4,133 4,469 4,637 4,690 4,472 New industrial countries
Imports 50,873 52,945 51,923 4,579 4,041 4,393 4,683 4,573 3,564 and emerging markets
Balance + 2,552 + 2,050 + 2,210 + 403 + 92 + 76 − 46 + 117 + 908 of Asia  3 
Exports 11,344 12,291 11,222 1,209 870 899 864 937 834 4. Oceania and
Imports 3,857 3,639 3,859 383 366 239 343 273 337 polar regions
Balance + 7,487 + 8,652 + 7,363 + 826 + 505 + 659 + 521 + 664 + 497
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, imports other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong. 3Brunei Darussalam,
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of K orea, Singapore, Taiwan
the current position. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and aircraft and and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
February 2020
XII. External sector
 
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2015 − 19,242 − 5,203 − 36,595 + 8,621 + 5,354 + 2,601 − 1,216 + 3,161 + 1,114 + 68,506 − 358
2016 − 21,814 − 5,978 − 38,247 + 8,607 + 6,779 + 1,536 − 1,716 + 3,093 + 441 + 76,218 − 1,070
2017 − 21,938 − 3,669 − 43,558 + 10,726 + 5,930 + 1,349 + 39 + 2,138 − 702 + 82,270 − 1,292
2018 − 20,686 − 2,500 − 44,543 + 10,044 + 7,453 + 1,597 − 353 + 3,209 − 1,118 + 93,548 − 765
2019 p − 21,743 + 117 − 45,915 + 10,327 +13,099 − 4,337 − 2,602 + 3,070 − 1,203 + 99,841 − 830
2018         Q2 − 2,804 − 249 − 9,153 + 2,093 + 1,998 + 804 − 225 + 906 − 469 + 11,098 − 2,125
         Q3 − 13,139 − 654 − 18,219 + 1,777 + 1,604 + 287 + 326 + 822 − 918 + 27,163 − 939
         Q4 − 2,540 − 786 − 10,194 + 3,585 + 2,774 + 574 − 497 + 656 − 104 + 29,552 + 3,130
2019         Q1 − 2,309 − 686 − 6,978 + 2,272 + 2,154 − 157 − 454 + 760 + 329 + 26,232 − 828
         Q2 − 3,679 + 329 − 9,899 + 2,530 + 1,790 + 632 − 1,151 + 817 − 466 + 13,997 − 2,142
         Q3 − 13,733 + 263 − 19,214 + 2,664 + 3,400 − 2,248 − 426 + 826 − 957 + 29,338 − 1,280
         Q4  p − 2,023 + 210 − 9,824 + 2,860 + 5,756 − 2,564 − 571 + 666 − 109 + 30,274 + 3,420
2019         Feb. − 544 − 368 − 2,106 + 731 + 1,078 − 170 − 216 + 249 + 125 + 7,029 − 285
         Mar. − 677 + 18 − 3,133 + 779 + 858 + 132 + 124 + 267 + 85 + 9,996 − 328
         Apr. − 516 + 185 − 1,830 + 936 + 512 − 240 − 601 + 278 − 152 + 8,365 − 425
         May − 790 + 89 − 3,401 + 706 + 1,080 − 130 − 5 + 267 − 157 − 3,630 − 1,487
         June − 2,372 + 55 − 4,668 + 888 + 198 + 1,002 − 545 + 272 − 157 + 9,262 − 230
         July − 5,612 + 53 − 6,098 + 883 + 773 − 993 − 740 + 252 − 337 + 9,306 − 402
         Aug. − 4,928 + 42 − 6,814 + 938 + 1,331 − 844 − 221 + 284 − 328 + 10,028 − 461
         Sep. − 3,192 + 168 − 6,302 + 843 + 1,295 − 411 + 534 + 290 − 292 + 10,004 − 417
         Oct. − 4,578 + 49 − 5,877 + 942 + 1,400 − 1,621 − 136 + 276 − 58 + 9,459 − 451
         Nov. + 349 + 260 − 2,070 + 749 + 1,254 − 439 − 163 + 251 − 25 + 9,731 − 387
         Dec.  p + 2,206 − 99 − 1,877 + 1,168 + 3,101 − 504 − 273 + 139 − 26 + 11,083 + 4,258
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001 the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which: of which:
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which: resident and Non-produced
international non-resident Workers’ Capital income, wealth, non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2015 − 38,494 − 24,087 − 6,805 + 10,455 − 14,406 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 48 + 1,787 − 1,835
2016 − 40,868 − 25,232 − 11,516 + 10,627 − 15,636 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 2,138 + 3,208 − 1,070
2017 − 49,554 − 21,979 − 9,852 + 10,446 − 27,576 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 1,947 + 2,502 − 4,449
2018 − 47,619 − 27,748 − 9,880 + 10,351 − 19,871 − 5,152 − 5,142 + 1,858 + 5,375 − 3,517
2019 p − 47,416 − 28,179 − 10,402 + 11,499 − 19,237 − 5,444 − 5,431 + 716 + 2,617 − 1,901
2018         Q2 − 5,205 − 347 − 1,260 + 6,233 − 4,858 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 2,563 − 48 − 2,515
         Q3 − 11,823 − 7,249 − 1,926 + 1,225 − 4,574 − 1,287 − 1,286 − 1,050 − 297 − 753
         Q4 − 16,262 − 10,934 − 4,461 + 1,195 − 5,328 − 1,287 − 1,286 + 1,467 + 2,329 − 862
2019         Q1 − 16,615 − 12,096 − 2,756 + 2,015 − 4,519 − 1,360 − 1,358 + 1,408 + 845 + 563
         Q2 − 6,156 − 543 − 1,352 + 6,600 − 5,613 − 1,361 − 1,358 − 522 − 288 − 233
         Q3 − 12,439 − 7,674 − 1,905 + 1,563 − 4,765 − 1,361 − 1,358 + 456 + 1,209 − 752
         Q4  p − 12,205 − 7,865 − 4,389 + 1,321 − 4,340 − 1,363 − 1,358 − 627 + 852 − 1,478
2019         Feb. − 7,979 − 6,374 − 1,056 + 927 − 1,605 − 453 − 453 + 224 − 241 + 465
         Mar. − 3,600 − 2,099 − 413 + 811 − 1,501 − 453 − 453 − 949 − 745 − 203
         Apr. − 3,624 − 1,072 − 371 + 1,138 − 2,553 − 454 − 453 + 79 + 305 − 226
         May + 739 + 2,424 − 333 + 4,352 − 1,685 − 453 − 453 − 435 − 554 + 119
         June − 3,271 − 1,895 − 648 + 1,109 − 1,375 − 454 − 453 − 166 − 39 − 127
         July − 4,565 − 2,898 − 814 + 376 − 1,667 − 453 − 453 + 259 + 668 − 409
         Aug. − 4,235 − 2,674 − 629 + 368 − 1,561 − 454 − 453 + 858 + 891 − 33
         Sep. − 3,639 − 2,103 − 463 + 819 − 1,537 − 454 − 453 − 660 − 350 − 310
         Oct. − 4,474 − 3,172 − 970 + 220 − 1,302 − 454 − 453 − 783 − 426 − 357
         Nov. − 3,542 − 2,118 − 1,296 + 210 − 1,424 − 453 − 453 − 387 − 32 − 356
         Dec.  p − 4,189 − 2,575 − 2,123 + 891 − 1,614 − 455 − 453 + 544 + 1,309 − 766
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
February 2020
XII. External sector
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2019
Item 2017 2018 2019  p Q2 Q3 Q4  p Oct. Nov. Dec.  p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 376,599 + 352,485 + 187,112 + 106,077 + 27,750 − 70,254 − 36,755 + 53,063 − 86,562
1. Direct investment + 123,084 + 132,671 + 103,539 + 30,482 + 24,227 + 4,625 + 13,583 + 14,146 − 23,103
Equity + 76,326 + 140,071 + 86,518 + 29,812 + 22,188 + 10,343 + 11,921 + 6,420 − 7,997
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 24,572 + 31,689 + 40,491 + 12,576 + 14,509 + 643 + 4,401 + 4,709 − 8,466
Debt instruments + 46,758 − 7,400 + 17,021 + 670 + 2,039 − 5,718 + 1,662 + 7,726 − 15,106
2. Portfolio investment + 106,469 + 68,098 + 117,627 + 27,839 + 20,649 + 32,681 + 8,093 + 17,243 + 7,345
Shares  2 + 14,229 + 9,406 + 12,130 + 2,928 − 731 + 9,452 + 4,393 + 4,142 + 917
Investment fund shares  3 + 50,094 + 18,658 + 50,565 + 8,330 + 10,669 + 20,871 + 2,934 + 6,117 + 11,820
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 44,184 + 44,648 + 53,048 + 17,011 + 13,732 + 4,326 − 1,744 + 7,119 − 1,049
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 2,038 − 4,613 + 1,883 − 430 − 3,022 − 1,969 + 2,510 − 136 − 4,343
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 11,618 + 23,253 + 22,434 + 11,240 + 3,193 + 1,816 + 2,200 + 1,500 − 1,884
4. Other investment  7 + 136,697 + 128,070 − 55,945 + 36,072 − 19,970 − 108,801 − 60,523 + 20,530 − 68,808
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 20,986 + 49,856 + 9,293 + 34,381 − 3,609 − 72,576 + 24,840 − 21,116 − 76,299
Long-term + 19,641 + 4,456 + 18,194 + 7,842 + 1,276 − 3,247 + 6,479 − 8,798 − 928Short-term − 40,627 + 45,400 − 8,901 + 26,540 − 4,885 − 69,329 + 18,361 − 12,318 − 75,371
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 5,039 + 30,233 + 9,934 + 229 + 6,578 − 3,083 + 1,071 + 8,028 − 12,181
Long-term − 2,062 + 10,456 + 10,837 + 2,627 + 2,737 + 5,487 + 1,891 + 2,274 + 1,323Short-term + 7,102 + 19,777 − 903 − 2,398 + 3,841 − 8,570 − 820 + 5,754 − 13,504
General government − 3,993 − 8,814 − 4,257 − 453 + 6,328 − 11,896 − 8,295 + 848 − 4,449
Long-term − 4,408 − 1,097 − 3,082 − 1,514 − 338 − 872 − 711 + 259 − 420Short-term + 415 − 7,717 − 1,175 + 1,061 + 6,666 − 11,024 − 7,584 + 589 − 4,029
Bundesbank + 156,637 + 56,795 − 70,915 + 1,915 − 29,266 − 21,247 − 78,138 + 32,770 + 24,121
5. Reserve assets − 1,269 + 392 − 544 + 444 − 349 − 576 − 107 − 356 − 113
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(increase: +) + 93,652 + 123,637 − 5,929 + 51,191 + 11,895 − 157,139 − 68,018 + 16,522 − 105,643
1. Direct investment + 74,395 + 89,151 + 44,779 + 26,472 + 30,170 − 20,816 − 2,142 + 5,804 − 24,478
Equity + 21,255 + 13,396 + 15,373 + 2,857 + 5,281 − 903 − 1,613 + 2,293 − 1,583
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 8,115 + 4,531 + 8,926 + 1,216 + 3,795 − 147 − 369 + 1,335 − 1,113
Debt instruments + 53,140 + 75,755 + 29,406 + 23,615 + 24,889 − 19,913 − 529 + 3,511 − 22,894
2. Portfolio investment − 90,176 − 44,980 + 25,275 + 11,356 − 568 − 38,715 − 26,576 + 16,345 − 28,485
Shares  2 − 715 + 6,618 − 7,033 − 1,422 + 1,164 − 2,798 − 893 − 215 − 1,689
Investment fund shares  3 − 1,991 − 5,821 − 4,576 − 948 − 1,184 + 1,357 + 408 + 135 + 815
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 70,432 − 47,593 + 30,925 + 20,460 − 8,060 − 20,275 − 8,563 + 6,853 − 18,565
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 17,039 + 1,815 + 5,958 − 6,734 + 7,512 − 16,999 − 17,527 + 9,573 − 9,045
3. Other investment  7 + 109,433 + 79,466 − 75,983 + 13,362 − 17,707 − 97,608 − 39,300 − 5,627 − 52,681
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 17,476 − 35,965 − 10,010 + 34,768 − 12,898 − 134,499 − 6,542 − 2,080 − 125,878
Long-term + 7,541 − 8,496 + 10,968 + 3,349 + 5,416 + 979 + 2,035 + 459 − 1,515Short-term + 9,935 − 27,469 − 20,978 + 31,419 − 18,314 − 135,479 − 8,577 − 2,539 − 124,363
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 23,541 + 15,750 + 22,151 + 831 − 1,866 − 3,778 − 5,482 + 1,891 − 187
Long-term + 8,855 + 8,259 + 10,943 + 3,182 + 3,623 + 1,048 + 2,694 − 1,816 + 170Short-term + 14,687 + 7,491 + 11,207 − 2,351 − 5,489 − 4,826 − 8,176 + 3,708 − 357
General government − 8,719 + 2,890 − 720 − 620 + 5,057 − 11,963 − 1,077 − 2,113 − 8,772
Long-term − 3,723 + 660 − 844 − 101 − 298 − 443 − 476 + 48 − 14Short-term − 4,996 + 2,230 + 124 − 519 + 5,356 − 11,519 − 600 − 2,161 − 8,758
Bundesbank + 77,135 + 96,792 − 87,404 − 21,617 − 7,999 + 52,631 − 26,200 − 3,325 + 82,157
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 282,947 + 228,848 + 193,041 + 54,886 + 15,855 + 86,885 + 31,264 + 36,541 + 19,081
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
February 2020
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col. 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  1 col. 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan.  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,475
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,652 474,193
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 765,813 444,168
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 678,646 482,325
2017         May 1,098,879 175,958 122,486 14,459 5,907 33,107 871,724 857,272 51,197 601,093 497,785
         June 1,098,880 171,295 118,235 14,349 5,695 33,016 875,312 860,764 52,273 623,914 474,966
         July 1,092,769 169,735 117,330 14,124 5,531 32,750 871,752 856,510 51,282 612,871 479,898
         Aug. 1,089,883 171,044 119,770 14,071 5,530 31,673 867,696 852,511 51,143 620,273 469,611
         Sep. 1,115,200 169,937 118,208 14,089 5,471 32,169 894,441 878,888 50,821 618,496 496,703
         Oct. 1,085,916 172,047 118,569 14,208 5,446 33,824 862,772 848,443 51,097 600,416 485,499
         Nov. 1,091,832 169,539 117,208 14,069 5,168 33,094 869,988 855,548 52,305 576,550 515,282
         Dec. 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,652 474,193
2018         Jan. 1,114,774 164,944 117,008 13,776 4,166 29,994 896,665 882,043 53,165 617,024 497,750
         Feb. 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 636,717 511,262
         Mar. 1,158,983 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 939,229 923,466 53,924 678,829 480,155
         Apr. 1,139,056 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 917,971 902,364 54,115 633,679 505,377
         May 1,198,995 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 973,323 956,150 54,203 656,506 542,489
         June 1,213,511 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 991,577 976,266 54,857 701,075 512,436
         July 1,147,878 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 930,107 913,270 54,463 666,362 481,515
         Aug. 1,145,283 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 929,073 912,448 53,864 644,650 500,633
         Sep. 1,189,175 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,380 956,487 54,717 686,357 502,818
         Oct. 1,167,004 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 943,644 927,555 55,089 662,976 504,029
         Nov. 1,184,703 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 960,478 941,130 56,026 671,196 513,507
         Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 765,813 444,168
2019         Jan. 1,123,169 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,039 645,348 477,822
         Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 632,447 495,008
         Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 655,643 534,773
         Apr. 1,167,188 177,378 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,482 935,563 919,696 54,247 621,907 545,280
         May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 608,076 578,317
         June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 633,849 567,192
         July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 611,338 523,011
         Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 633,410 540,230
         Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 626,223 558,919
         Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 590,827 512,267
         Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 596,652 537,478
         Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 678,646 482,325
2020         Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 593,023 497,702
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to respective country designation), since November 2000 also bal ances with non-euro
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad. 4See
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5Euro opening
valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
81  Monthly Report
February 2020
XII. External sector
 
9. Assets and liabilities of enterprises in Germany (other than banks)
vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities  vis-à-vis foreign non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
Balances Loans
with from Credit Advance from from Credit Advance
End of year foreign financial terms payments foreign financial terms paymentsor month Total banks Total Total granted effected Total banks Total Total used received
operations operations
All countries
 
2016 877,815 246,093 631,722 421,163 210,558 196,385 14,173 1,055,685 132,817 922,868 725,655 197,213 124,628 72,5852017 897,685 218,669 679,016 453,895 225,121 211,461 13,660 1,107,500 142,473 965,027 764,104 200,923 130,887 70,0362018 914,056 233,402 680,654 450,943 229,712 215,637 14,075 1,174,527 138,328 1,036,199 832,342 203,857 133,440 70,4172019 947,346 225,353 721,993 489,941 232,052 216,675 15,377 1,256,781 161,089 1,095,693 888,066 207,626 134,390 73,236
2019         July 949,485 222,692 726,793 490,374 236,419 221,761 14,657 1,249,534 152,679 1,096,855 895,379 201,476 128,362 73,114
         Aug. 939,690 223,425 716,265 488,701 227,564 212,747 14,817 1,241,867 151,174 1,090,693 896,515 194,179 120,323 73,856         Sep. 964,013 228,385 735,628 498,327 237,301 222,072 15,229 1,274,081 162,102 1,111,979 904,019 207,960 133,602 74,358
         Oct. 961,595 232,002 729,594 492,069 237,525 222,206 15,318 1,269,507 158,291 1,111,216 903,816 207,401 131,953 75,447
         Nov. 980,275 233,313 746,963 507,090 239,873 224,297 15,576 1,285,456 158,268 1,127,189 920,171 207,018 132,329 74,689         Dec. 947,346 225,353 721,993 489,941 232,052 216,675 15,377 1,256,781 161,089 1,095,693 888,066 207,626 134,390 73,236
Industrial countries 1
 
2016 755,412 242,057 513,355 375,714 137,641 125,011 12,629 947,398 128,821 818,577 686,094 132,483 95,528 36,9552017 772,453 214,489 557,964 407,332 150,632 138,468 12,164 996,642 135,429 861,213 722,238 138,975 104,007 34,9692018 789,499 228,170 561,329 406,279 155,050 142,678 12,372 1,058,150 125,576 932,574 792,349 140,225 105,662 34,5632019 813,638 220,138 593,500 438,410 155,090 141,574 13,515 1,116,723 133,139 983,584 842,104 141,480 106,241 35,239
2019         July 819,880 218,048 601,832 442,666 159,166 146,057 13,109 1,130,203 135,769 994,433 854,699 139,734 103,805 35,929
         Aug. 812,639 218,319 594,319 441,499 152,820 139,628 13,192 1,131,268 143,046 988,222 854,933 133,289 97,127 36,162         Sep. 833,482 223,552 609,930 450,419 159,511 146,217 13,294 1,146,378 142,782 1,003,596 860,575 143,021 106,849 36,171
         Oct. 831,836 227,327 604,509 444,428 160,082 146,522 13,560 1,150,665 146,105 1,004,560 860,797 143,763 107,424 36,339
         Nov. 843,451 228,447 615,004 454,049 160,955 147,273 13,682 1,159,198 144,217 1,014,981 873,275 141,706 106,082 35,624         Dec. 813,638 220,138 593,500 438,410 155,090 141,574 13,515 1,116,723 133,139 983,584 842,104 141,480 106,241 35,239
EU Member States 1
 
2016 616,032 224,271 391,761 294,205 97,556 87,543 10,014 773,490 118,681 654,808 566,391 88,417 61,513 26,9042017 615,256 194,445 420,811 313,481 107,330 97,434 9,897 822,737 118,683 704,053 606,219 97,834 72,500 25,3352018 629,920 207,625 422,295 314,364 107,932 98,242 9,689 865,713 108,560 757,153 661,338 95,816 71,623 24,1922019 653,579 201,884 451,695 344,687 107,008 97,259 9,749 907,672 110,952 796,720 698,730 97,990 72,607 25,383
2019         July 651,073 197,839 453,234 344,308 108,926 99,124 9,802 927,964 117,661 810,304 713,498 96,805 71,670 25,135
         Aug. 644,989 198,380 446,609 342,550 104,059 94,227 9,832 923,467 121,405 802,062 711,365 90,697 65,532 25,166         Sep. 665,207 204,107 461,100 350,121 110,979 101,100 9,878 932,635 120,160 812,475 714,358 98,117 72,853 25,264
         Oct. 664,517 208,251 456,266 344,418 111,848 101,826 10,022 934,408 122,274 812,134 713,698 98,436 73,033 25,403
         Nov. 680,562 209,779 470,783 357,363 113,419 103,465 9,954 940,273 118,439 821,834 722,893 98,941 73,516 25,425         Dec. 653,579 201,884 451,695 344,687 107,008 97,259 9,749 907,672 110,952 796,720 698,730 97,990 72,607 25,383
of which: Euro area 2
 
2016 450,914 171,302 279,612 214,911 64,701 57,972 6,729 613,595 70,202 543,393 487,188 56,204 41,334 14,8702017 451,219 150,346 300,873 228,761 72,112 64,643 7,469 650,641 75,398 575,243 509,470 65,773 50,395 15,3782018 461,247 155,715 305,532 234,656 70,875 63,734 7,141 702,037 67,366 634,671 569,246 65,425 49,682 15,7432019 484,879 156,743 328,135 257,791 70,344 62,945 7,399 733,295 68,393 664,902 597,241 67,660 50,951 16,710
2019         July 471,794 148,940 322,854 251,226 71,628 64,280 7,348 757,800 73,172 684,628 618,830 65,798 49,581 16,217
         Aug. 464,767 146,759 318,008 249,512 68,496 61,098 7,398 753,671 75,022 678,649 617,365 61,284 44,981 16,303         Sep. 475,797 152,172 323,624 251,432 72,193 64,841 7,352 754,194 75,704 678,490 612,335 66,155 49,736 16,419
         Oct. 485,095 158,246 326,849 253,937 72,912 65,457 7,455 754,952 72,537 682,415 615,173 67,242 50,541 16,701
         Nov. 494,619 156,827 337,792 263,096 74,696 67,222 7,473 758,054 71,755 686,299 618,694 67,605 50,999 16,605         Dec. 484,879 156,743 328,135 257,791 70,344 62,945 7,399 733,295 68,393 664,902 597,241 67,660 50,951 16,710
Emerging economies and developing countries 3
 
2016 120,992 2,790 118,203 45,433 72,770 71,226 1,544 105,344 1,070 104,274 39,561 64,713 29,100 35,6132017 123,582 2,746 120,836 46,495 74,341 72,845 1,496 105,033 1,307 103,726 41,867 61,859 26,881 34,9792018 122,483 3,445 119,038 44,535 74,503 72,800 1,703 104,630 1,236 103,394 39,793 63,601 27,778 35,8232019 131,614 3,644 127,971 51,181 76,789 74,928 1,862 113,805 1,756 112,049 45,962 66,087 28,117 37,970
2019         July 127,636 3,192 124,444 47,362 77,082 75,534 1,548 103,413 1,249 102,163 40,480 61,683 24,520 37,163
         Aug. 125,106 3,683 121,423 46,854 74,569 72,943 1,626 103,563 1,366 102,198 41,382 60,816 23,156 37,659         Sep. 128,585 3,409 125,176 47,561 77,615 75,681 1,935 109,683 1,570 108,113 43,244 64,868 26,714 38,154
         Oct. 127,808 3,250 124,557 47,293 77,264 75,506 1,758 107,983 1,596 106,387 42,818 63,569 24,491 39,078
         Nov. 134,730 3,321 131,409 52,692 78,717 76,823 1,894 113,944 1,802 112,141 46,896 65,245 26,210 39,035         Dec. 131,614 3,644 127,971 51,181 76,789 74,928 1,862 113,805 1,756 112,049 45,962 66,087 28,117 37,970
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are gures shown in Table XI.7. 1From July 2013 including Croatia. 2From January 2014
shown in Table 4 of Section IV, “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not including Latvia; from January 2015 including Lithuania. 3All countries that are not
been eliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the fi- regarded as industrial countries. Up to June 2013 inclu ding Croatia. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
February 2020
XII. External sector
 
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2018         Sep. 1.6189 1.5211 7.9930 7.4583 130.54 9.6205 10.4426 1.1286 0.89281 1.1659
         Oct. 1.6158 1.4935 7.9481 7.4597 129.62 9.4793 10.3839 1.1413 0.88272 1.1484
         Nov. 1.5681 1.4998 7.8880 7.4611 128.79 9.6272 10.2918 1.1377 0.88118 1.1367
         Dec. 1.5849 1.5278 7.8398 7.4653 127.88 9.8055 10.2766 1.1293 0.89774 1.1384
2019         Jan. 1.5975 1.5196 7.7504 7.4657 124.34 9.7631 10.2685 1.1297 0.88603 1.1416
         Feb. 1.5895 1.4995 7.6485 7.4627 125.28 9.7444 10.4986 1.1368 0.87264 1.1351
         Mar. 1.5959 1.5104 7.5868 7.4625 125.67 9.7181 10.4999 1.1311 0.85822 1.1302
         Apr. 1.5802 1.5035 7.5489 7.4650 125.44 9.6233 10.4819 1.1319 0.86179 1.1238
         May 1.6116 1.5058 7.6736 7.4675 122.95 9.7794 10.7372 1.1304 0.87176 1.1185
         June 1.6264 1.5011 7.7937 7.4669 122.08 9.7465 10.6263 1.1167 0.89107 1.1293
         July 1.6061 1.4693 7.7151 7.4656 121.41 9.6587 10.5604 1.1076 0.89942 1.1218
         Aug. 1.6431 1.4768 7.8581 7.4602 118.18 9.9742 10.7356 1.0892 0.91554 1.1126
         Sep. 1.6162 1.4578 7.8323 7.4634 118.24 9.9203 10.6968 1.0903 0.89092 1.1004
         Oct. 1.6271 1.4581 7.8447 7.4693 119.51 10.1165 10.8023 1.0981 0.87539 1.1053
         Nov. 1.6181 1.4630 7.7571 7.4720 120.34 10.1087 10.6497 1.0978 0.85761 1.1051
         Dec. 1.6154 1.4640 7.7974 7.4720 121.24 10.0429 10.4827 1.0925 0.84731 1.1113
2020         Jan. 1.6189 1.4523 7.6832 7.4729 121.36 9.9384 10.5544 1.0765 0.84927 1.1100
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    
rates, see Statistical Supplement 5 − Exchange rate statistics.    
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
February 2020
XII.  External sector
 
12.  Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
Q1 1999 = 100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-38  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  4 
In real terms In real terms
of which: based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selected
consumer domestic national consumer Euro  area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 56 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.0 96.1 96.5 95.8 97.9 99.6 95.9 97.7 98.3 98.1 97.7
2000 87.2 86.7 86.0 85.6 88.0 85.8 92.0 97.5 85.4 91.0 93.0 92.1 91.0
2001 87.8 87.0 86.6 86.5 90.6 86.8 91.9 96.6 86.3 90.3 93.1 91.5 90.92002 90.1 90.0 89.6 89.8 95.2 90.4 92.5 95.7 88.8 90.8 93.6 92.0 91.72003 100.7 101.1 100.5 100.9 107.1 101.2 95.9 94.8 98.0 95.1 97.0 96.6 96.72004 104.6 104.8 103.3 104.2 111.7 104.9 96.2 93.6 100.4 95.4 98.4 98.0 98.3
2005 102.9 103.3 101.1 102.1 109.6 102.3 94.9 92.1 99.3 93.0 98.4 96.9 96.6
2006 102.8 103.2 100.4 100.9 109.6 101.5 93.7 90.5 98.8 91.4 98.6 96.5 95.82007 106.1 105.8 102.2 103.0 113.0 103.4 94.6 89.7 102.7 91.6 100.9 97.9 97.02008 109.3 107.9 103.5 106.4 117.1 105.4 94.8 88.4 105.9 90.7 102.2 97.8 97.12009 110.7 108.7 104.5 111.8 120.2 106.4 95.2 89.2 105.4 91.4 101.8 98.0 97.5
2010 103.6 101.0 96.2 103.7 111.6 97.5 92.6 88.8 98.9 87.5 98.7 93.6 92.0
2011 103.3 100.0 94.1 102.0 112.3 96.9 92.2 88.5 98.2 86.6 98.2 92.8 91.32012 97.7 94.7 88.6 95.8 107.2 92.1 90.2 88.4 93.0 83.9 95.9 89.8 88.32013 101.0 97.5 91.3 98.5 111.8 94.9 92.5 88.9 98.3 85.8 98.2 91.5 90.22014 101.4 97.1 91.4 99.3 114.1 95.3 93.2 89.7 98.6 86.5 98.3 91.7 90.8
2015 91.7 87.6 83.1 89.0 105.7 87.0 90.1 90.4 89.6 82.7 94.7 87.0 86.3
2016 94.4 89.5 85.3
p 89.9 109.7 p 88.9 90.9 90.7 91.1 84.0 95.3 88.0 p 87.5
2017 96.6 91.4 86.2 p 90.3 112.0 p 90.0 91.9 90.6 93.8 84.6 96.6 89.1 p 88.3
2018 98.9 93.4 87.5 p 91.3 117.9 p 93.8 92.9 90.5 96.5 85.3 97.9 90.3 p 90.4
2019 97.3 p 91.2 ... ... 116.7 p 91.5 ... ... ... ... p 96.7 p 89.1 p 89.2
2017         Aug. 99.0 93.6 88.0 p 91.9 115.0 p 92.3 92.9 90.8 96.1 85.6 97.9 90.4 p 89.8
         Sep. 99.0 93.6 115.0 p 92.3 97.9 90.4 p 89.8
         Oct. 98.6 93.2 114.8 p 91.9 97.5 89.9 p 89.4
         Nov. 98.5 93.1 87.7 p 91.4 115.0 p 92.0 93.0 90.7 96.6 85.5 97.9 90.2 p 89.7
         Dec. 98.8 93.3 115.3 p 92.2 98.1 90.3 p 89.8
2018         Jan. 99.4 93.9 116.1 p 92.7 98.3 90.4 p 89.9
         Feb. 99.6 93.9 88.2 p 91.9 117.3 p 93.6 93.4 90.4 98.0 85.6 98.4 90.5 p 90.1
         Mar. 99.7 94.2 117.7 p 94.0 98.4 90.6 p 90.3
         Apr. 99.5 94.0 117.9 p 94.0 98.6 90.6 p 90.5
         May 98.1 92.7 87.2 p 91.1 116.6 p 93.1 93.0 90.6 96.7 85.1 98.0 90.0 p 89.9
         June 97.9 92.6 116.7 p 93.0 97.8 89.9 p 89.9
         July 99.2 93.8 118.2 p 94.2 97.6 90.3 p 90.4
         Aug. 99.0 93.4 87.6 p 91.7 119.0 p 94.6 92.5 90.3 95.9 85.2 97.6 90.3 p 90.7
         Sep. 99.5 93.9 120.4 p 95.5 98.0 90.7 p 91.5
         Oct. 98.9 93.4 119.0 p 94.4 97.6 90.4 p 90.8
         Nov. 98.3 92.9 87.1 p 90.7 117.9 p 93.6 92.6 90.8 95.4 85.3 97.6 90.4 p 90.5
         Dec. 98.4 92.7 118.0 p 93.4 97.4 90.0 p 90.3
2019         Jan. 97.8 92.1 117.3 p 92.7 97.0 89.5 p 89.7
         Feb. 97.4 91.7 86.0 p 89.2 116.6 p 92.0 92.1 90.5 94.4 84.5 96.8 89.2 p 89.3
         Mar. 96.9 91.1 116.2 p 91.5 96.5 88.8 p 88.9
         Apr. 96.7 90.9 116.1 p 91.4 96.8 89.0 p 89.1
         May 97.4 91.4 85.9 p 88.9 117.0 p 91.9 92.2 90.8 94.1 84.6 97.0 89.4 p 89.6
         June 97.9 91.9 117.4 p 92.2 97.1 89.6 p 89.7
         July 97.5 91.3 116.5 p 91.3 96.9 89.3 p 89.2
         Aug. 98.1 91.8 86.2 p 89.1 117.6 p 92.0 91.7 90.7 93.3 84.5 96.8 89.5 p 89.5
         Sep. 97.4 91.1 116.7 p 91.2 96.5 89.2 p 89.2
         Oct. 97.4 p 90.9 116.6 p 91.0 96.4 p 88.9 p 88.9
         Nov. 96.7 p 90.2 ... ... 116.0 p 90.3 ... ... ... ... 96.3 p 88.6 p 88.6
         Dec. 96.7 p 90.1 116.0 p 90.2 p 96.3 p 88.7 p 88.6
2020         Jan. 96.2 p 89.6 115.5 p 89.7 p 96.2 p 88.4 p 88.3
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the group EER-19 (see footnote 1) and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Bra zil, Chile,
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German Iceland, India, Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zeala nd,
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to Philippines, Russian Federation, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailan d, Turkey and
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro (see Monthly Report, November Venezuela. Due to the redenomination of the Venezuelan bolívar on2001, pp.  50-53, May 2007, pp.  31-35 and August 2017, pp.  41-43). For more 20  August  2018, the spot rate from 17  August  2018 is used since t hen. 3Annual
detailed information on methodology, see the ECB’s Occasional Paper No  134 and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from 2001 including Greece, from
(www.ecb.eu). A decline in the figures implies an increase in competitiveness. 1ECB 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and Malta, from 2009 including
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including Latvia, fr om 2015
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Austra- including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norw ay, Sweden,
lia, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. 5Euro area countries
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-1 9.6Euro area
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai- countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the gro up EER-38 (see
lable, estimates were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the footnote 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The publications are available free of charge from the External Communication Division. 
Up-to-date figures for some statistical datasets are also available on the Bundesbank’s web -
site.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2010 and 2019 see the index attached to 
the January 2020 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
March 2019
– German balance of payments in 2018
– Cash demand in the shadow economy
April 2019
– Household wealth and finances in   Germany: 
results of the 2017 survey
– Interest rate pass- through in the low interest  
rate environment
– European Stability and Growth Pact: 
individual  reform options
– Germany’s debt brake: surveillance by the 
Stability Council
May 2019
– The current economic situation in GermanyJune 2019
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2019 and 2020 and 
an outlook for 2021
– The European banking package – revised 
rules in EU banking regulation
– Payment services in transition: instant pay -
ments, PSD2 and new competitors
– The costs of payment methods in the retail 
sector
July 2019
– Parallels in the exchange rate movements of 
major currencies
– Crypto tokens in payments and securities 
settlement
August 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2019
– The impact of wages on prices in Germany:  
evidence from selected empirical analyses
– State government budgets: analysis of de -
tailed results for 2018
– Longer- term changes in the unsecured inter -
bank money market
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2018Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
85•

October 2019
– The sustainable finance market: a stocktake
– The European market for investment funds 
and the role of bond funds in the low inter -
est rate environment
– Long- term outlook for the statutory pension 
insurance scheme
– Structural reforms in the euro area
November 2019
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2019
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2020 and 2021 and 
an outlook for 2022
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2018
– The relevance of surveys of expectations for 
the Deutsche Bundesbank
– The mixing of euro coins in Germany
January 2020
– The upswing in loans to enterprises in Ger -
many between 2014 and 2019
– Consequences of increasing protectionism
February 2020
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Supplements to the 
Monthly Report
 1 Banking statistics1, 2
 2 Capital market statistics1, 2
 3 Balance of payments statistics1, 2
 4 Seasonally adjusted business statistics1, 2
 5 Exchange rate statistics2
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 3
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19973
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19993
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20133
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20053
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20063
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
86•

Special Statistical Publications
 1 Banking statistics guidelines,  
January 20192, 4
 2 Banking statistics customer classification ,  
January 20192
 3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen,  
July 20132, 3
 4 Financial accounts for Germany 2013 to 
2018, July 20192
 5 Extrapolated results from financial state -
ments of German enterprises 1997 to 2017, 
June 20192
 6 Verhältniszahlen aus Jahresabschlüssen 
deutscher Unternehmen von 2014 bis 2015 , 
May 20182, 3
 7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, October 20132
 8 The balance of payments statistics of the 
Federal Republic of Germany, 2nd edition, 
February 1991o
 9 Securities deposits, August 2005
 10 Foreign direct investment stock statistics, 
June 20191, 2
 11 Balance of payments by region,  
July 2013
 12 Technologische Dienstleistungen in der 
Zahlungsbilanz, June 20113Discussion Papers*
41/2019  
Nowcasting GDP with a large factor model 
space
42/2019  
OTC discount
43/2019  
The fire-sale channels of universal banks in the 
European sovereign debt crisis
44/2019  
Labor productivity, effort and the euro area 
business cycle
45/ 2019  
Capital flows, real estate, and local cycles: evi -
dence from German cities, banks, and firms
46/ 2019  
The impact of US tariffs against China on US 
imports : Evidence for trade diversion?
47/ 2019  
Financial frictions, the Phillips curve and monet -
ary policy
48/2019  
Does the lack of financial stability impair the 
transmission of monetary policy?
49/2019  
The transmission of bank capital requirements 
and monetary policy to bank lending
01/2020  
Indeterminacy and imperfect information
02/2020  
Interest and credit risk management in German 
banks: Evidence from a quantitative survey
o Not available on the website.
* As of 2000 these publications have been made available 
on the Bundesbank’s website in German and English. Since 
the beginning of 2012, no longer subdivided into series 1 
and series 2.
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
87•

Banking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute 
of the European System of Central Banks 
and of the European Central Bank, June 
1998
 2 Banking Act, July 20142 2a Solvency Regulation, December 20062  
Liquidity Regulation, December 20062
1 Only the headings and explanatory notes to the data con -
tained in the German originals are available in English.
2 Available on the website only.
3 Available in German only.
4 Only some parts of the Special Statistical Publications are 
provided in English. The date refers to the German issue, 
which may be of a more recent date than the English one.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2020  
88•

