Monthly Report
November 2020
Vol. 72  
No 11

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 13 November 2020.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  7
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
Swift recovery of Chinese economy supporting commodity markets and world trade  .........  14
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  23
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  24
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  38
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  48
Impact of the temporary reduction in VAT on consumer prices  ...........................................  56
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  62
Annual pension adjustments in need of reform  ..................................................................  72Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
4

The current economic situation  
in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
5

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
6

Overview
Strong recovery may be 
followed  by a temporary 
setback 
In the third quarter of 2020, the global econ -
omy continued to recover from the slump in 
March and April caused by the coronavirus 
pandemic, albeit at a somewhat slower pace. 
Global gross domestic product (GDP) rose 
sharply on the quarter, not least owing to the 
strong countermovement already seen in May 
and June, yet fell short of its pre- crisis level. 
This was the case for all major advanced econ -
omies as well. In the United States and the 
euro area, economic output rebounded signifi -
cantly in the third quarter, returning to, re -
spectively, 97% and just under 96% of its pre- 
crisis level. In the United Kingdom, real GDP 
increased even more strongly after a particu -
larly sharp decline in the first half of the year, 
but remained nearly 10% below its level in the 
final quarter of 2019. The recovery in Japan and 
some emerging market economies is likely to 
have been somewhat more subdued. China’s 
economy, on the other hand, had already prac -
tically returned to its pre- crisis path, partly 
thanks to the country’s success in containing 
the pandemic so far.
As the number of infections has started to rise 
again, new restriction measures have been 
introduced in recent months, especially in 
Europe  . At first, these mainly applied only to 
individual, contact- intensive services, and were 
regionally targeted. Recently, however, high 
levels of infection have prompted many gov -
ernments to take wider- reaching measures 
again. It remains to be seen how quickly these 
steps will halt the current wave of infections. 
The economic recovery in the affected coun -
tries will probably suffer a setback in the final 
quarter as a result of greater cautiousness 
among the general public as well as of the new 
restrictions. Ensuring that measures effectively 
contain the pandemic whilst also minimising constraints on public life – and thus also the 
economy – will remain a challenge. Recent pro -
gress in the development of an effective vac -
cine is sparking hope that it may soon become 
easier to master this challenge.
The strong economic recovery also shaped the 
international financial markets in the third 
quarter of 2020. In the United States, above all, 
but also in Europe, (expected) monetary and 
fiscal policy support measures and favourable 
economic signals fuelled optimism among 
finan cial market participants. However, signifi -
cant growth in the number of infections and 
the concomitant imposition of restrictions led 
to a clear correction, especially in Europe. 
Equity markets in the euro area came under 
marked pressure in October  as market partici -
pants flocked towards safe havens. Towards 
the end of the reporting period, however, 
hopes that a vaccine might soon be available 
effected a resurgence in confidence. On bal -
ance, equity prices have risen since the end of 
June, while the average yield on long- term 
government bonds in the euro area has de -
clined.
By contrast, the US financial markets remained 
comparatively robust in the face of the pan -
demic. Buoyed by predominantly good quar -
terly results and improved corporate earnings 
expectations, US equity prices rose significantly 
overall, even reaching an all- time high at one 
point. The Fed’s new strategy of average infla -
tion targeting is likely to have boosted yields on 
US Treasuries by increasing term premiums. 
Market participants’ expectations that US fiscal 
policy could become even more expansionary 
as infection numbers increase also had a posi -
tive impact on yields, which had risen signifi -
cantly on balance. Changes in infection rates 
and the ensuing responses by policymakers 
were also partly reflected in the foreign ex -
change markets. The euro appreciated slightly 
on balance.Strong growth in 
global economic 
output in Q3
Sharp rise in 
number of infec -
tions and new 
containment 
measures may 
hamper global 
recoveryFinancial mar -
kets influenced 
by pandemic 
again, especially 
in EuropeDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
7

At its monetary policy meetings in September 
and October 2020, the Governing Council of 
the ECB left both key interest rates and asset 
purchases under its purchase programmes un -
changed. Given the renewed rise in the num -
ber of infections, the Governing Council identi -
fied significant downside risks at its October 
meeting. Based on new projections in Decem -
ber, the Governing Council will recalibrate its 
instruments to respond to the situation and to 
ensure that financing  conditions remain favour -
able.
Monetary developments were influenced by 
the coronavirus pandemic in the third quarter, 
too. The annual growth rate of the broad mon -
etary aggregate M3 accelerated further to 
10.4% at the end of September, thus doubling 
in comparison to the end of 2019. These strong 
dynamics were driven by three factors. First, 
households and non- financial corporations 
continued to increase their precautionary hold -
ings of highly liquid bank deposits. Second, 
monetary growth was fuelled by the Eurosys -
tem’s asset purchase programmes (especially 
the large- scale government bond purchases), 
which were expanded during the crisis. Third, 
commercial banks’ lending to the domestic pri -
vate sector once again played a substantial 
role. Non- financial corporations’ demand for 
loans declined in comparison to the preceding 
two very strong quarters as the substantial 
economic  recovery reduced enterprises’ acute 
liquidity  needs. However, households’ demand 
for housing and consumer loans picked up at 
the same time. In addition, commercial banks 
significantly increased their holdings of corpor -
ate bonds on balance.
In the third quarter, the German economy 
recovered  strongly from its slump in the quarter 
before. According to the Federal Statistical 
Office ’s flash estimate, in the third quarter of 
2020, real GDP expanded by more than 8% on 
the severely depressed figure for the preceding 
three- month period. The onset of the strong 
recovery already took place in May, which 
played a key role in the size of the counter -movement. Economic activity at the beginning 
of the third quarter was thus already far above 
the average of the second quarter. The recov -
ery continued as the quarter progressed, albeit 
at a considerably subdued pace. Irrespective of 
this strong growth, aggregate output in the 
third quarter was still down by more than 4% 
from the pre- crisis level of the final quarter of 
2019.
The German economy underwent a broad-  
based recovery in the third quarter. On the sup -
ply side, both manufacturing and services wit -
nessed considerable growth in real value 
added. Nevertheless, the services sector as a 
whole continued to present a rather mixed pic -
ture. While retail sales figures were clearly up 
on their pre- crisis level, seasonally adjusted 
turnover in the hotel and restaurant sector was 
still quite substantially below the average figure 
for the fourth quarter of 2019. This was due to 
the continuing restrictions in the wake of the 
coronavirus pandemic, which affected some 
branches of the services sector significantly 
more than others. Construction output is likely 
to have contracted slightly. However, this sec -
tor has been experiencing a boom of its own 
for some time now and has weathered the 
coronavirus crisis without significant problems 
so far. Demand for loans for house purchase 
remained very high, for instance.
On the demand side, all those components 
which had previously been depressed re -
bounded strongly. Households used the con -
sumption opportunities that became available 
again and probably made a number of pur -
chases that had previously been put on hold. 
As a case in point, they showed renewed inter -
est in consumer credit. Given the pick- up in 
global trade, exports also made a strong contri -
bution. Moreover, enterprises are likely to have 
expanded their investment in machinery again 
on a quite considerable scale. Besides the tem -
porary brightening of the business outlook at 
home and abroad, catch- up effects may have 
been a factor here, too. By contrast, loans to 
non- financial corporations declined slightly on Monetary 
policy : key 
interest  rates 
and purchase 
programmes 
unchanged
Further 
acceleration  
in monetary 
dynamics in the 
wake of the 
coronavirus 
pandemic
Very strong 
growth in 
German  econ -
omy in Q3Broad- based 
economic 
recovery Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
8

balance in the quarter under review. However, 
this is not at odds with brisk investment activity 
as, in the second quarter, enterprises had taken 
on large volumes of debt and built up ample 
liquidity reserves. They were then able to use 
these funds, together with the resurgent in -
come, to pay back short- term loans and fi -
nance investment.
The labour market in Germany shifted onto a 
path of slight recovery at the beginning of the 
third quarter. Employment levels rose some -
what over the course of the quarter following 
a considerable decline. Unemployment tem -
porarily peaked in June and has since fallen 
slightly. The uptake of short- time work even 
dropped massively from its high point in April 
but has remained widespread. As the number 
of hours worked per short- time worker has 
simultaneously increased, the volume of labour 
lost through short- time work has decreased 
by  more than two-  thirds over the past four 
months.
In the most recent pay negotiations, the social 
partners often focused on protecting employ -
ment – by ruling out redundancies and sector- 
specific regulations on short- time work, for ex -
ample – at the expense of significant wage in -
creases. The rise in negotiated wages was 
therefore markedly lower than last year. Several 
months without wage increases were often 
agreed upon at the start of employment con -
tracts. Even in sectors not hit as hard by the 
crisis, such as the main construction sector, pay 
rises were modest. The pay settlement in the 
central and local government areas of the pub -
lic sector also provides for restrained increases 
in earnings.
Consumer prices fell significantly in the third 
quarter against the backdrop of the temporary 
VAT cut. The Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) averaged over the July to Septem -
ber period was down by a seasonally adjusted 
0.7% from the second quarter, in which prices 
had remained virtually constant. Consumer 
prices declined by 0.2% year- on- year following an increase of 0.7% in the preceding quarter. 
Core inflation excluding energy and food 
dropped from 1.1% to 0.5% over the same 
period, but remained in positive territory. In 
October  , consumer prices remained stuck 
below their previous year’s level on account of 
the temporary VAT cut. The inflation rate fell to 
-0.5% from a level of -0.4% in the previous 
month.
The catch- up momentum is unlikely to con -
tinue into the final quarter of 2020. After the 
very strong growth seen in the third quarter, 
aggregate output could stagnate or even de -
cline. This will be due mainly to the recent re -
surgence of the pandemic in Germany and its 
European neighbours as well as the additional 
containment measures that have since been 
adopted for November. The imposed restric -
tions, which chiefly affect the hotel and res -
taurant sector as well as other leisure and cul -
tural services, are nowhere near as extensive as 
the measures applied in March and April. How -
ever, an additional compounding factor is that 
recovery in the predominantly export- oriented 
industry is also being hampered by the resur -
gence of the pandemic in Europe. On balance, 
short-  time work, which is likely to have con -
tinued to fall markedly in Septem ber and Octo -
ber, could, in November, temporarily  go back 
over the level reached in August. Overall, from 
the current perspective, a slump in economic 
output to a similarly subdued level as in the 
second quarter is not very likely.
German fiscal policy is still geared towards 
overcoming the consequences of the corona -
virus pandemic, entailing a high deficit and a 
sharp rise in debt this year. The economic 
slump is weighing on taxes and social contribu -
tions, whilst at the same time short- time work -
ing benefits and unemployment benefits are 
rising. The fiscal stabilisation measures taken 
since March are having an even greater impact 
than these automatic stabilisers. However, pub -
lic finances   will gradually recover as the crisis 
abates and fiscal stabilisation through public 
finances  gradually comes to an end. From the Slight labour 
market recovery 
in Q3
2020 wage 
round: lower 
wage increases 
than in the 
previous  year
Temporary 
VAT cut led to 
broad- based 
price drops 
in Q3German eco -
nomic recovery 
probably inter -
rupted for the 
time being
Fiscal policy 
stabilisation  
entailing high 
deficit and rising 
debt levelsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
9

current perspective, this means that the deficit 
will go back down to a degree over the course 
of next year and decline more significantly in 
2022. However, the outlook here remains 
highly uncertain. This applies both to economic 
developments and to any potential additional 
stabilisation measures.
Central government is responsible for the bulk 
of fiscal policy stabilisation. To this end, it has 
borrowed on an extensive scale. Here, the def -
icit for 2020 is likely to remain well below the 
budgeted figure of almost €220 billion. As 
things currently stand, a figure in the area of 
€150 billion seems plausible. Although the def -
icit is expected to decline next year, it is still 
projected to be very high; the Federal Govern -
ment’s draft budget envisages a figure of al -
most €100 billion. This means that central gov -
ernment will be expected to continue making a 
considerable contribution to macroeconomic 
stabilisation. According to the plans, the debt 
brake will be adhered to again from 2022. To 
achieve this, the Federal Government’s medium- 
term financial plan envisages, first, dissolving 
reserves. In addition, a need for action was 
identified which is set to require funds rising 
from €10 billion in 2022 to €16 billion in 2024. 
It is not clear how this has been calculated in 
the planning. Given the uncertain economic 
outlook, it is difficult to predict the actual need 
for action that will ultimately be identified. 
Nonetheless, the challenges currently expected 
should be disclosed transparently. That said, 
given the very high level of uncertainty, it is understandable that no concrete consolidation 
measures have been approved yet.
As the crisis will continue beyond the current 
year, a stabilising fiscal policy will also be im -
portant in the year to come. Invoking the debt 
brake escape clauses once again in 2021 in 
order to increase scope for borrowing is there -
fore the correct course of action. Germany had 
achieved sound public finances before the crisis 
and has headroom to significantly expand gov -
ernment stabilisation if necessary. However, 
new measures should be temporary in nature 
in order to avoid placing a permanent strain on 
public finances. In addition to the anticipated 
need for structural adjustment in the wake of 
the coronavirus crisis, further fiscal challenges 
are already in store for the medium term. These 
include demographic change and the associ -
ated foreseeable pressure on social security 
funds, for example. Once the crisis abates and 
the normal budgetary rules apply again, it is 
important that public finances be restored to a 
sound footing within a reasonable period of 
time. This will ultimately be the prerequisite for 
maintaining confidence in the public finances 
of both Germany and the other euro area 
Member States alike. Borrowing on a large 
scale will in future likewise occur at the Euro -
pean level for transfers to Member States, 
amongst other things. However, fiscal scope 
cannot be expanded permanently by shifting 
debts to the European level. Rather, EU debts, 
too, will have to be serviced by its Member 
States’ taxpayers.Central 
government  
contributes 
greatly to 
stabilisation 
Disclose 
potential  future 
budget gaps in 
a transparent 
manner, but 
postpone 
consolidation  
decisionsCurrent fiscal 
policy focus on 
stabilisation is 
correctDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
developments 
In the third quarter, the global economy con -
tinued to recover from the slump in March and 
April 2020 caused by the coronavirus pan -
demic, albeit at a somewhat slower pace. 
Global gross domestic product (GDP) rose 
sharply on the quarter, largely owing to the 
strong countermovement already seen in May 
and June, yet fell short of its pre- crisis level. 
This was the case for all major advanced econ -
omies as well. In the United States and the 
euro area, economic output rebounded signifi -
cantly in the third quarter, returning to, re -
spectively, nearly 97% and just under 96% of 
its pre- crisis level. In the United Kingdom, real 
GDP increased even more strongly after a par -
ticularly sharp decline in the first half of the 
year, but remained 10% below its level in the 
final quarter of 2019. The recovery in Japan and 
some emerging market economies is likely to 
have been somewhat more subdued. China’s 
economy, on the other hand, had already prac -
tically returned to its pre- crisis path, partly 
thanks to the country’s success in containing 
the pandemic so far.
With the easing of restrictions and extensive 
packages of support measures, economic activ -
ity in many places has so far returned to normal 
more swiftly than the staff of the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) had been expecting in 
June. Against this backdrop, the IMF revised its 
economic outlook significantly in October and 
now expects global GDP to decline by 4½% 
this year.1 In turn, its growth forecast for next 
year has been adjusted downwards somewhat. 
Global economic output in 2021 is therefore 
likely to only slightly exceed its 2019 level, and 
would thus remain clearly below its pre- crisis trend. In addition, the IMF expects the pan -
demic to reduce global potential output in the 
long term. It puts this down to increased in -
solvencies, discouraged workers leaving the la -
bour market, and resource reallocation across 
sectors triggered by the changed conditions.
The recovery process has certainly been uneven 
across sectors to date. The retail trade was very 
quick to return to its pre- crisis level, and des -
pite an initially hesitant recovery, industry has 
also rebounded significantly. In September, 
global industrial production was only a little 
less than 3% shy of its pre- crisis level. By con -
trast, contact- intensive services sectors, such as 
the hotel and restaurant sector, still had a lot of 
ground to make up, with ongoing restrictions 
and behavioural changes hindering further im -
provements.Strong growth in 
global economic 
output in Q3
IMF raises 
global GDP 
forecast  for the 
current yearProgress varies 
across sectors
Real GDP in selected major economies
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Bureau of Stat-
istics  of  China,  Eurostat,  Office  for  National  Statistics  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020859095100Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
90951009095100105
Euro areaChina
7580859095100
1 See International Monetary Fund (2020a). Compared 
with the previous forecast in June, this corresponds to an 
upward revision of just over ¾ percentage point.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
11

As the number of infections has started to rise 
again, new restriction measures have been 
introduced in recent months, especially in Eur -
ope. At first, these mainly applied only to indi -
vidual contact- intensive services, and were 
regionally  targeted. Recently, however, the 
worsening pandemic has prompted many gov -ernments to once again take more far- reaching 
measures. It remains to be seen how quickly 
these steps will halt the current wave of infec -
tions. The economic recovery in the affected 
countries will probably suffer a setback in the 
final quarter as a result of greater cautiousness 
among the general public and the new meas -
ures taken by governments. As this report went 
to press, mobility data for the euro area were 
showing a clear turning point, at any rate.
Expectations that demand for energy could be 
more subdued for longer have already been 
weighing on the international crude oil markets 
in recent weeks. After recovering into August, 
and making up a significant amount of the 
ground lost in the second quarter, prices have 
since declined again somewhat. For example, a 
barrel of Brent crude oil cost just US$41 in 
November  , but had been trading at US$44 in 
August. Doubts about whether the production 
cuts agreed by OPEC members and their part -
ners would continue to be rigorously imple -
mented and the resumption of oil production 
in Libya probably also played a role in this set -
back. According to the HWWI index, non-  
energy commodity prices also levelled off re -
cently. Before that, however, they had already 
more than made up for their declines in the 
second quarter and – partly as a result of re -
cord demand from China (see the box on p. 14) 
and pandemic- related production losses  – 
clearly exceeded their pre- crisis levels at the 
current end. This applies, in particular, to indus -
trial commodities such as iron ore, but also to 
various food products and agricultural raw ma -
terials.
Given the recent levelling- off of commodity 
prices, price inflation in industrial countries re -
mained subdued. The rate of annual consumer 
price changes rose to 0.8% in July and stayed 
at this level for the remainder of the third quar -
ter. The core rate excluding energy and food 
stood at 1.2% in September, which was only 
slightly higher than in June.New restrictions 
have potential 
to set back 
global recoveryRecovery in 
commodity 
prices levels off
Consumer price 
inflation in 
industrial coun -
tries remains 
subduedGlobal economic indicators*
Sources: CPB, OpenTable, national data and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. * Groups of countries vary due to differences in data 
availability. 1 Mean daily values, data available as of mid-Fe-
bruary 2020.
Deutsche BundesbankOND J FMAM J J A S O
2019 2020–15–10–50+5Year-on-year percentage change
1510505
–––+
100806040200
–––––Real retail salesIndustrial production
Restaurant
visits1Reduced scale
Time spent in retail outlets and 
recreational facilities in 2020
Sources:  Google  Covid-19  Community  Mobility  Report,  IMF, 
Haver Analytics and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Weighted ac-
cording to GDP shares at purchasing power parity exchange 
rates.
Deutsche BundesbankMar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.80604020020
––––+Percentage change compared to the same day of the week in 
January/February, 7-day moving averages
United StatesEuro area1
Other industrial countries1
Emerging economies excl. China1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
12

Selected emerging market 
economies
In the second quarter of 2020, China’s econ -
omy had already fully bounced back from its 
severe slump at the beginning of the year, and 
in recent months it has continued to grow. Ac -
cording to the official estimate, real GDP in the 
third quarter was up 4.9% on the year. Eco -
nomic output thus more or less returned to its 
pre- crisis path. Industry continued to be the 
main driver of the recovery. On the one hand, 
this was due to the persistent strong expansion 
of goods exports, which have grown on a 
broader footing of late after being boosted in 
the second quarter above all by the strong de -
mand for medical protective equipment.2 On 
the other hand, the expansion of government 
infrastructure investment has provided major 
impetus for industrial production (see the box 
on p. 14).
While the recovery has lagged somewhat be -
hind in China’s services sector, it is nevertheless 
also at a very advanced stage compared with 
other countries. For example, in September 
passenger numbers on domestic flights were 
nearly back to pre- crisis levels. China’s apparent 
success at keeping the pandemic permanently 
in check is likely to have been a key factor in 
this achievement. Despite the near complete 
normalisation of macroeconomic activity, con -
sumer price inflation declined to 2.3% on aver -
age in the third quarter. Excluding energy and 
food, it was even lower at just 0.5%.
In the second quarter of 2020, the Indian econ -
omy had to cope with a particularly severe 
slump, with economic output down almost 
one- quarter as a result of the strict lockdown. 
In recent months it appears to have recovered 
again somewhat. However, the persistently 
high number of new COVID-  19 infections, 
which have declined only slowly since their 
peak in mid-  September, is likely to have pre -
vented a further normalisation. On balance, 
economic output in the third quarter may once 
again have suffered a double- digit decline compared with the same period last year. Con -
sumer price inflation rose again slightly in the 
third quarter, to 6.9% on the year, while the 
rate excluding energy and food increased sig -
nificantly to 5.3%. The Indian central bank 
nevertheless left its policy rate at 4%.
Following the downturn in the second quarter 
of 2020, which was somewhat less severe than 
many observers had feared, the Brazilian econ -
omy is likely to have recovered markedly in the 
third quarter. One indication of this is the sharp 
expansion in private consumption expenditure, 
which was boosted by one- off payments to 
households. In price- adjusted terms, retail sales 
in July had already exceeded their pre- crisis 
level. By contrast, the unemployment rate rose 
to 14.4% by the end of the period under re -
view. However, according to the Ministry of La -
bour, the number of jobs has been rising again 
since July. While consumer price inflation in -China’s econ -
omy already 
back to pre- 
crisis trend
Recovery in the 
Chinese services 
sector also now 
at an advanced 
stage
Economic 
activity  in India 
still significantly 
impairedSigns of 
recovery  in Brazil World market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and
food and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and HWWI. • Latest figures: 
average of 1 to 6 November 2020, or 1 to 12 November 2020 
for crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202025304050607080Monthly averages, log scale
7080100120140160180200220
801001202015 = 100, US dollar basisCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beveragesIndustrial commodities
of which:
iron ore, scrap steel
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
13

Swift recovery of Chinese economy supporting commodity 
markets and world trade
The coronavirus pandemic has continued to 
weigh on the global economy. Even so, the 
prices of some industrial commodities, includ-
ing iron ore, rose to multi- year highs follow-
ing the slump in the second quarter of 2020. 
One of the main reasons for this was high de-
mand from China.1
In order to overcome the crisis into which the 
Chinese economy had been plunged by the 
pandemic and the containment measures, the 
government relied on a series of fi  scal policy 
measures, which the International Monetary 
Fund estimates as amounting to around 4.5% 
of gross domestic product.2 As was the case 
during the global fi  nancial and economic 
crisis , government investment formed an im-
portant part of these programmes. The out-
come was a considerable increase in spending 
on transport infrastructure. Real estate invest-
ment also rose steeply again, driven by the 
loose monetary policy stance.
This investment was accompanied by a strong 
increase in demand for steel. Despite a new 
all- time high in domestic production, it ap-
pears this was no longer suffi   cient to satisfy 
domestic demand for some types of steel, 
such as structural steel. Exports were there-
fore reduced, and the volume of imports increased  to more than two- and- a- half times 
the previous year’s level.3
This marked a notable change in China’s role 
in the international steel markets. Not so long 
ago, China had been criticised for its enor-
mous overcapacity. EU and US investigations 
into the matter culminated in the imposition 
of anti- dumping duties on Chinese steel ex-
ports. China’s current high level of steel con-
sumption also stimulated upstream demand 
for iron ore, the international prices of which 
have risen by around one- quarter since the 
beginning of the year.
Whether or not these tendencies are here to 
stay, however, is rather doubtful. Generally 
speaking, the rebalancing process in the Chi-
nese economy is seeing a shift away from 
steel- intensive consumption. In the short 
term, the surge in demand from China is, at 
any rate, a welcome boost to foreign trade for 
a number of countries, especially for com-
modity exporters. In the third quarter, for in-
stance, more than one- third of Brazilian goods 
exports were destined for China. But China 
became more important for the euro area, 
too, given weakening sales markets in the rest 
of the world. In the quarter ended, exports to 
China made up 8.6% of total exports to non- 
euro area countries in terms of value. This was 
around one percentage point more than be-
fore the crisis.
But even in the face of strong domestic 
demand , China’s trade surplus almost reached 
a new high in the third quarter, at around 
US$160 billion. This was mainly because 
Chinese  exporters, thanks to their range of 
products, benefi  ted considerably from the 
pandemic- related shifts in demand all over the 
world.4
1 In addition, temporary, pandemic- related production 
losses in a number of countries (such as South Africa 
and Brazil) are likely to have played a role.
2 See International Monetary Fund (2020b).
3 Part of this could be attributable to steelworks set up 
by Chinese fi  rms in other Asian countries.
4 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a).China's foreign trade in steel products
Sources:  General  Administration  of  Customs  of  the  People's 
Republic of China and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20051015202530Million tonnes, quarterly data
ImportsExportsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
14

creased slightly to 2.6% on the year in the third 
quarter, it still remained well below its long-  
term average, and the core rate actually fell to 
its lowest level since 1999. The policy rate re -
mained unchanged at 2%.
The Russian economy also set out on a recov -
ery path in the third quarter after containment 
measures were relaxed. According to the na -
tional statistical office’s initial estimate, annual 
growth in real GDP climbed from -8% in the 
second quarter to -3.6% in the third quarter. 
While manufacturing output has already more 
or less returned to its level of one year ago, oil 
production has been further restricted and has 
fallen to its lowest level since the global finan -
cial and economic crisis. The main reason for 
this fall in output was the additional production 
cuts agreed with the OPEC countries in June. 
Private consumption also increased markedly, 
but could be dampened again in the coming 
months owing to the sharp rise in the number 
of infections since mid-  September. Consumer 
price inflation remained relatively low in the 
third quarter, at 3.5% on the year. Neverthe -
less, the central bank recently left the policy 
rate unchanged at 4.25%, having cut it by 175 
basis points between March and July.
United States
The US economy has recovered rapidly in re -
cent months from the severe setback in the first 
half of the year. In the third quarter of 2020, 
seasonally adjusted real GDP rose by almost 
7½% on the previous quarter, in which it had 
fallen by 9%. This rapid turnaround was made 
possible by interim successes in curbing the 
pandemic and by opening up the economy. 
Households, in particular, took advantage of 
the regained opportunities, having actually 
seen their incomes rise since the start of the 
pandemic as a result of the extensive govern -
ment support measures. There was a corres -
ponding sharp rise in expenditure on private 
consumption and housing construction in the 
third quarter. Business investment also picked up, and the sharp decline in inventories seen in 
the previous two quarters came to an end as 
production was ramped up.3 The upturn in do -
mestic private demand was reflected in the 
strong increase in imports, while sales of US 
products in global markets saw somewhat 
more hesitant growth.
The recovery is likely to slow down significantly 
in the fourth quarter, not least on account of 
the progress that has already been made. Al -
though there is still significant catch- up poten -
tial in the contact- intensive services sectors,4 
the recovery in areas where measures to pre -
vent infection are difficult to implement is likely 
to be slow at best, given the resurgent infec -
tion rates.
Economic policy measures to support the US 
economy are likely to continue, with both par -
ties having pledged extensive economic stimu -
lus packages prior to the November election. 
Monetary policy is also likely to remain expan -
sionary for the foreseeable future. The Federal 
Reserve is now aiming for a consumer price in -
flation rate of 2% per year on average.5 After 
periods of weak inflation, moderately higher 
rates of inflation will therefore now also be tol -
erated. In September, the private consumption 
deflator amounted to 1.4% on the year, with 
the core rate excluding energy and food only 
slightly higher, at 1.5%.
Japan
In Japan, economic output is likely to have in -
creased markedly in the third quarter of 2020, 
following declines in the previous three quar -
ters in the wake of a VAT hike and the pan -
demic. The Japanese economy benefited con -
siderably from the recovery in the global econ -Russian econ -
omy also on 
upward path 
in Q3
Brisk recovery in 
the third quarterEmerging signs 
of a marked 
slowdown
Support from 
economic policy 
measures likely 
to continue
Marked recovery 
in economic 
output
3 The inventory component therefore significantly under -
pinned economic growth.
4 In October, employment in most sectors was only around 
5% lower than the respective pre- crisis level, but was down 
more than 20% in the leisure and hospitality sectors.
5 See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 
(2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
15

omy. For example, exports of goods rose 
sharply, partly thanks to the high demand for 
motor vehicles in the United States. At the 
same time, however, imports once again fell 
markedly, not least because of weak invest -
ment activity. Private consumption, by contrast, 
picked up considerably, buoyed by extensive 
fiscal transfers. A sharp rise in June accounted 
for most of this increase. The wave of infection 
in July and August and the intensified calls for 
social distancing that this caused dampened 
consumer activity and are also likely to have 
undermined the effectiveness of the new pro -
gramme to strengthen domestic tourism. Sub -
sidised hotel accommodation was also the 
main reason for the decline in the core inflation 
rate as measured by the CPI (excluding energy 
and food) to -0.3% in September.6 The Bank of 
Japan maintained its accommodative stance.
United Kingdom
Following the extensive relaxation of contain -
ment measures and massive fiscal support, the 
UK economy recovered strongly in the third 
quarter of 2020. Real GDP grew by 15½% on 
the quarter in seasonally adjusted terms. Never -
theless, even in September, economic output 
was still around 8½% down on its level at the 
end of 2019. The labour market situation eased somewhat. Although the third quarter saw the 
number of unemployed persons rise by around 
240,000 on the quarter in seasonally adjusted 
terms, the number of recipients of furlough 
benefits declined from 9 million in May to 
around 3 million at the end of August. In terms 
of their share of affected workers, the arts and 
entertainment sector and the hotel and res -
taurant sector made the greatest use of the 
furlough scheme. These two sectors are also 
particularly affected by the renewed tightening 
of containment measures in response to the 
once again very high rate of infection. In light 
of these developments, sentiment deteriorated 
markedly. The Purchasing Managers’ Index for 
the economy as a whole has already signalled a 
clear slowdown in the pace of growth for 
Octo ber. This is compounded by the continued 
uncertainty about the shape of future eco -
nomic relations with the European Union.7 
Year- on- year consumer price inflation, as meas -
ured by the CPI, remained very subdued in Sep -
tember at 0.5%.8 The Bank of England main -
tained its expansionary monetary policy stance 
and recently expanded its bond purchase pro -
gramme.
Poland
In the second quarter of 2020, Poland man -
aged to contain the pandemic better than 
many other countries through a comprehensive 
set of measures. The economy also quickly re -
covered from its decline in the second quarter 
once most of the restrictions were lifted. Real 
GDP rose by a seasonally adjusted 7.7% in the 
High infection 
rates putting 
continued 
economic  
recovery  at riskFollowing a 
strong recovery 
in Q3, measures 
to contain the 
pandemic 
tightened  as of 
mid- OctoberGross value added in the United 
Kingdom
Sources: Office for National Statistics and Bundesbank calcula-
tions.
Deutsche BundesbankJan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sep.
20207580859095100Q4 2019 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted, log scale
Quarter-on-quarter
percentage changeQuarterly average
– 19.8+ 15.5– 2.6
6 Prices for hotel accommodation in August and Septem -
ber were down a good 30% on the same months of last 
year.
7 The transitional period, which ensures reciprocal market 
access under EU Single Market rules, ends on 31 December 
2020. An agreement on a follow- up deal has not yet been 
reached.
8 Consumer prices were affected by some one- off effects. 
For example, many shops started their summer sales early 
and did not cut prices in July as sharply as in previous years. 
In August, there was a marked reduction in the price of 
hotel and restaurant services as a result of subsidised res -
taurant visits under the Eat Out to Help Out Scheme and 
the reduction in VAT on hotel stays.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
16

third quarter, following a decline of 9.0% in the 
previous three- month period. Industrial output 
grew by almost one- fifth in the third quarter 
and was more or less back at its pre- crisis levels 
in September. Retail sales also recovered to a 
very large extent. However, the sharp rise in the 
number of infections from September onwards 
prompted the authorities to re- introduce na -
tionwide restrictions in mid- October, which im -
pacted the wholesale and retail trade and a 
number of services sectors, in particular. Owing 
to various measures to support employment, 
the crisis has had scarcely any impact on the 
labour market to date. At 3.2%, the rate of un -
employment in the third quarter was on a par 
with its level one year earlier. Consumer price 
inflation (CPI) declined only slightly, and still 
amounted to 3.2% on the year in September. 
The core inflation rate excluding energy and 
food actually rose further, to 4.3%. Given the 
exceptionally high level of uncertainty about 
the future outlook, the Polish central bank kept 
its policy rate unchanged at its historic low of 
0.1%.
Macroeconomic trends 
in the euro area
The euro area’s economic recovery continued 
in the third quarter of 2020. There had already 
been a strong countermovement in May and 
June following the downturn caused by the 
pandemic. This is one of the reasons why, ac -
cording to Eurostat’s flash estimate, euro area 
real GDP rose by a seasonally adjusted 12.6% in 
the third quarter compared with the second 
quarter, in which it had fallen by 11.8%. Eco -
nomic output had already dropped by 3.7% in 
the first quarter. Although this did not com -
pletely reverse the downturn in the first half of 
the year, economic activity largely caught up to 
the pre- pandemic level in a number of sectors. 
In other areas, however, it remained far be -
hind. Overall, the level of activity in September 
is likely to have fallen short of the pre- crisis 
level by just under 4%,9 meaning that the eco -
nomic recovery was much stronger than many experts had expected.10 In addition to the 
exten sive economic policy support measures 
that stabilised households’ and enterprises’ 
finan cial situation, other key factors were prob -
ably the successful containment of the pan -
demic at times and the widespread easing of 
measures.
The pace of the economic recovery slowed 
over the course of the third quarter. Some sec -
tors had already recouped a considerable share 
of the pandemic- related production shortfalls 
by the beginning of the quarter. Restrictions 
remained  in place in other sectors, however, 
especially in contact-  intensive services such as 
leisure activities, tourism and large- scale events. 
The pandemic ultimately picked up speed again 
in mid-  July. Starting in August, several Member 
States gradually tightened their containment 
measures at the regional or local level and con -
sumers began to exercise greater caution 
again. In October, the number of infections in 
Member States increased quite considerably 
and led to extensive nationwide restrictions.
On the expenditure side, the recovery in the 
third quarter was broad- based. Private con -
sumption rose again at robust rates. It had suf -
fered significantly from the constraints in the 
second quarter, leading to a sharp rise in the 
saving ratio. However, not all segments of pri -
vate consumption shared equally in the recov -
ery. Retail sales actually exceeded pre-  crisis 
levels on average between July and September. 
Not only was demand for food very brisk, de -
mand for electronic devices and furniture was 
also particularly strong. The same was true for 
new cars, demand for which is likely to have 
been boosted by programmes to promote car 
purchases in several Member States. Mail order 
sales benefited in particular in terms of distribu -Strong recovery 
in economic 
activity in Q3Slowdown in 
upward move -
ment over 
course of Q3
Private 
consumption , 
especially of 
goods, up 
sharply
9 In order to gain an overview of the monthly pattern of 
macroeconomic activity, the Chow- Lin method was used to 
break down the quarterly GDP series into monthly data 
using key economic indicators. For details on the method -
ology, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).
10 In the September projection, ECB staff still expected real 
GDP to rise by no more than just over 8% in the third quar -
ter. See European Central Bank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
17

tion channels. The recovery in services used by 
households was less pronounced; the continu -
ing restrictions on recreation activities, large-  
scale events and tourism as well as increased 
caution slowed down demand for accommo -
dation and hospitality services as well as for 
certain transport services, such as air transport 
and bus tourism. Art and cultural activities also 
suffered under the change in circumstances.
Investment activity picked up again in the third 
quarter, and this was true of both construction 
investment and investment in machinery and 
equipment. In any event, construction output 
rose considerably in July and August, and was 
only around 2% down on the pre- pandemic 
level at the end of the period under review. In -
vestment in machinery and equipment did not 
recover quite as strongly, although investment 
in transport equipment in particular rose 
sharply, and new registrations of commercial 
vehicles in September exceeded the pre-  
pandemic level. Domestic industrial sales of 
capital goods also continued to increase on 
average in July and August. However, at the 
end of the period under review, they remained 
significantly below their pre- crisis levels.
Exports to non- euro area countries continued 
to rise in the third quarter. This recovery re -
mained incomplete, however, as restrictions on international passenger transport with third 
countries remained in place, which also ham -
pered goods trade. Moreover, the appreciation 
of the euro is likely to have depressed exports. 
On the whole, exports of consumer goods 
ended up being less affected than those of 
intermediate and capital goods. From a re -
gional perspective, exports to closer markets 
such as those of other EU Member States re -
covered faster than those to more distant mar -
kets in the United States, Japan or Brazil.11 One 
exception is exports to China, which had al -
ready picked up again in the second quarter. 
The losses in services trade brought about by 
the pandemic were even greater than the 
losses in goods trade. This was particularly true 
of the entire tourism sector and of business 
travel. Euro area exports of services to non-  
euro area countries saw hardly any growth in 
the third quarter, still falling short of the pre-  
pandemic level by one- quarter at the end of 
the period under review.
The situation in the manufacturing sector con -
tinued to brighten in the third quarter. This re -
covery was buoyed up by the fact that supply- 
side constraints such as interrupted supply 
chains were increasingly eliminated and stricter 
hygiene requirements had already been inte -
grated into operational procedures in the 
second quarter. In line with the rapid rise in 
households’ consumption of goods, consumer 
goods output experienced a very large re -
bound. For example, the manufacture of dur -
able and non- durable goods in September was 
only slightly below the level recorded in Febru -
ary. Developments in capital goods were not 
quite as favourable due to the particularly diffi -
cult situation in aircraft construction. In the 
automotive industry, challenges associated 
with the structural shift towards greater 
e- mobility also had a negative impact on top of 
the large drop in sales seen this year so far. By 
contrast, the construction sector benefited 
from a healthy reserve of orders. According to Investment 
expanded 
significantly Foreign trade 
with non- euro 
area countries 
on upward 
trajectory  again
Significant 
improvement in 
manufacturing 
and construction Estimated monthly path for aggregate 
output in the euro area
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from Eurostat.
Deutsche BundesbankJan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sep.
20207580859095100Q4 2019 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted, log scale
Quarterly 
average
Quarter-on-quarter 
percentage change+ 12.6
– 11.8– 3.7
Real GDP
11 This is consistent with the fact that goods trade within 
the euro area recovered much faster than external trade.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
18

European Commission surveys, orders in the 
construction sector remained at a fairly high 
level.
In the services sector, the recovery appears to 
have stalled over the course of the third quar -
ter. Although the index for euro area service 
output saw another marked rise in July 2020, it 
then flattened somewhat in August. The Pur -
chasing Managers’ Index for services also sug -
gests that activity in this area may have receded 
again towards the end of the quarter. That 
said, the situation was not uniform across the 
sector – mail order services as well as informa -
tion and communication services, for example, 
continued to benefit from the increased use of 
digital distribution channels and communica -
tions. By contrast, the situation in other areas, 
especially in hotels and restaurants, travel 
agencies, cultural events and passenger trans -
port, remained extremely precarious. Although 
activity in these sectors also increased for the 
most part, it still fell well short of the pre-  
pandemic level. Furthermore, it was primarily 
these sectors that were especially affected by 
the gradual tightening of containment meas -
ures towards the end of the quarter and the 
renewed rise in cautious consumer behaviour.
Economic output rebounded significantly in all 
Member States in the third quarter, with par -
ticularly high growth rates in those countries 
that had experienced stronger economic losses 
in the first half of the year. According to an ini -
tial estimate, economic output in France rose 
by 18.2% in the third quarter and was only 
4.1% down on the pre- crisis level. The strong, 
broad- based countermovement is likely to have 
been helped by the fact that many workers 
who had been unavailable during the spring 
lockdown due to a lack of childcare returned to 
work. Private consumption, in particular, re -
covered and was only slightly lower than the 
level prior to the pandemic. Investment and ex -
ports also picked up considerable momentum 
but were still distinctly down on their level in 
the final quarter of 2019. With regard to ex -
ports, one reason for this decline was the fact that key sectors for French exports, such as avi -
ation and international tourism, were hit hard 
by the crisis.
The Italian economy also recouped most of the 
losses caused by the pandemic up to Septem -
ber. Real GDP grew by 16.1% in the third quar -
ter after seasonal adjustment, meaning that 
aggregate output fell short of the pre- pandemic 
level by only 4.5%. The key factor behind this 
was the rapid recovery in the construction and 
industrial sectors, largely owing to the robust 
demand for consumer goods. Tourism- related 
services benefited from the low level of infec -
tion in Italy in the third quarter and the exten -
sive lifting of travel restrictions within the EU. 
However, according to data provided by the 
Italian central bank, spending by foreign tour -
ists was still 25% lower than last year, even in 
August.
Spain also recorded strong GDP growth in the 
third quarter, with an increase of 16.7% on the Large differ -
ences within 
services  sector
Strong growth 
spread broadly 
across France’s 
economyBrisk catch- up in 
Italy, especially 
in industryReal GDP in France, Italy and Spain
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
80859095100105
758085909510010580859095100105
Italy
SpainFranceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
19

quarter. However, activity levels still remained 
9.1% below the pre- crisis level in the third quar -
ter, and were thus further behind than the 
other large Member States. This was due, first 
of all, to the previous especially sharp down -
turn in economic output. On top of this, the 
renewed rise in the number of new cases of 
infection, which already began in August, and 
the subsequent tightening of travel restrictions 
put a massive strain on the international tour -
ism sector, which is central to the Spanish 
economy. The number of foreign visitors in the 
third quarter was 80% lower than last year. By 
contrast, industry and construction largely re -
covered, with catch- up effects likely to have 
been significant as well.
In most smaller Member States, aggregate eco -
nomic activity was also up very significantly. 
Real GDP in Belgium and Austria, for example, 
rose by 10.7% and 11.1% respectively on the 
quarter after seasonal adjustment, and in Por -
tugal by as much as 13.3%. Growth was lower 
in other countries such as Finland and the Bal -
tic states.
The labour market situation stabilised some -
what in the third quarter of 2020. The number 
of employed persons in the euro area rose by 
0.9% in seasonally adjusted terms, after having 
fallen by 2.9% in the second quarter. Short-  time work, which had bolstered employment 
considerably in the second quarter, was also 
scaled back, and the number of hours worked 
is likely to have increased again significantly. 
Nevertheless, the standardised unemployment 
rate went up from 7.9% in June to 8.3% in 
September. Recruitment prospects for job seek -
ers seemed to have improved again somewhat 
prior to the renewed tightening of contain -
ment measures. According to European Com -
mission surveys, labour shortages in manufac -
turing and services became slightly more pro -
nounced between July and October.
In the third quarter, consumer prices compared 
with the previous quarter remained unchanged 
on average after seasonal adjustment, with 
price drops for services and food and price rises 
for industrial goods (including energy) balan -
cing each other out. Unprocessed food, in par -
ticular, became significantly cheaper, whereas 
prices for non- energy industrial goods rose 
sharply. Overall, the inflation rate as measured 
by the annual increase in the Harmonised Index 
of Consumer Prices (HICP) continued to fall, 
dropping from 0.2% to 0.0% in the third quar -
ter. The rate excluding food and energy de -
creased markedly from 0.9% to 0.6%.
The decline in core inflation was driven by ex -
ceptional price movements in selected com -
ponents and individual countries. The first of 
these worth noting is the temporary reduction 
in VAT rates in Germany between July and De -
cember 2020.12 This was reflected, amongst 
other things, in a marked decrease in the prices 
of goods. By contrast, prices of goods rose sig -
nificantly in other countries. The prices of cloth -
ing and footwear showed atypical seasonal de -
velopments during the quarter owing to later 
summer sales in some countries, including Italy 
and France. Among services, price indices for 
recreation, personal and transport services 
showed declines in a number of countries. It 
should be noted, however, that prices for travel 
services were not yet available in some cases In Spain, level 
of activity well 
below pre- 
pandemic level 
despite strong 
GDP growth
Strong GDP 
growth in other 
Member States, 
too
Labour market 
situation stabil -
ised somewhatConsumer prices 
unchanged in 
Q3
One- off factors 
affecting the 
core rateDeterminants of the core HICP rate for 
the euro area
1 Excluding  travel  and  clothing.  The  temporary  reduction  in 
value added tax as of 1 July 2020 dampens the inflation rate. 
2 HICP excluding energy and food.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20200.400.40.81.21.6
–++++Year-on-year change
Contributions in percentage points:
Core rate for
the euro area2
%RemainderTravel and clothingGermany1
12 See the box on pp. 56 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
20

and were therefore imputed.13 As these de -
clines mainly concerned travel, the narrower 
core rate, which excludes this volatile compon -
ent as well as energy, food and clothing, fell by 
only 0.2  percentage point to 0.9%. This de -
crease is probably largely attributable to the 
temporary reduction in VAT in Germany.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, season -
ally adjusted consumer prices in October rose 
slightly on the month. Prices of goods (includ -
ing energy) went up somewhat, while prices 
for services remained unchanged. Neverthe -
less, the annual increase in the HICP held 
steady at -0.3% and the rate excluding energy 
and food remained at 0.2%. The resurgence of 
the pandemic and the ensuing new restrictions 
in many countries are likely to cause the share 
of imputed prices in the euro area’s HICP to rise 
once more, again making it more difficult to 
identify the inflation trend.
The considerable rise in new cases of infection 
and the return to nationwide containment 
measures in most Member States will weigh on 
the euro area economy in the final quarter. 
That said, the authorities are trying to limit re -
strictions on economic life and to keep child 
daycare centres and schools open as well. 
Nevertheless, certain contact- intensive services 
and, in some cases, non-  essential businesses 
have been closed again. The hope is that the 
new restrictions will remain largely confined to 
November and will not need to be extended. 
This would particularly affect those sectors of 
the economy in which progress has been limited in terms of recovery. This should contain 
new macroeconomic losses, although it will 
concentrate them within a small number of 
sectors. Extensive fiscal assistance should coun -
ter any longer- term damage. These recent de -
velopments have not yet been fully reflected in 
surveys of enterprises and households. Even so, 
they have already shown a significant deterior -
ation for services, whilst industry appeared to 
have been less affected. Household sentiment, 
however, worsened markedly. Ensuring that 
measures effectively contain the pandemic 
whilst also minimising constraints on public life 
– and thus also the economy – remains a chal -
lenge. Recent progress in the development of 
an effective vaccine gives hope that this will 
soon become easier.Slight price 
increase in 
October
Setback 
expected in the 
current quarter
List of references
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), Statement on Longer-Run Goals and 
Monetary Policy Strategy, August 2020, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/
FOMC_LongerRunGoals_guide.pdf , accessed on 29 October 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), China’s foreign trade withstanding the global economic crisis, 
Monthly Report, August 2020, pp. 15f.Sectoral Purchasing Managers' Indices 
for the euro area*
Source: IHS Markit. * Values over 50 indicate period-on-period 
growth in business activity. 1 Output component.
Deutsche Bundesbank2007 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 202030405060Index values, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
102030405060Manufacturing1
Services
13 See Eurostat (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
21

Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), The monthly development of aggregate output in the euro area, 
Monthly Report, May 2020, p. 21.
European Central Bank (2020), ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, September 
2020, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/projections/html/ecb.projections202009_ecbstaff~  
0940bca288.en.html
Eurostat (2020), Harmonised Indices of Consumer Prices – Methodology, https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/web/hicp/methodology
International Monetary Fund (2020a), World Economic Outlook, A Long and Difficult Ascent, 
Octo ber 2020.
International Monetary Fund (2020b), Policy Responses to COVID-19, https://www.imf.org/en/
Topics/imf-and-covid19/Policy-Responses-to-COVID-19Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
22

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At its monetary policy meetings in September 
and October 2020, the ECB Governing Council 
left key interest rates and purchase programmes 
unchanged. The main refinancing rate remains 
at 0%, while the rate on the marginal lending 
facility stands at 0.25% and the deposit facility 
rate at -0.5%. Asset purchases under the pan -
demic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) 
will continue. As was decided in June, the en -
velope for these purchases will total €1,350 bil -
lion. The Governing Council will conduct net 
asset purchases under the PEPP until at least 
the end of June 2021 and, in any case, until it 
judges the coronavirus crisis phase to be over. 
The Governing Council will reinvest the princi -
pal payments from maturing securities pur -
chased under the PEPP until at least the end of 
2022. Net purchases and reinvestment under 
the asset purchase programme (APP) will also 
continue as hitherto.
The ECB Governing Council’s initial assessment 
following its September meeting was that in -
coming data since July suggest a strong re -
bound in activity broadly in line with its previ -
ous expectations. However, the rise in new 
COVID-  19 cases in many Member States 
weighed increasingly on the near- term outlook 
in October. Against this background, the ECB 
Governing Council considered risks to be clearly 
titled to the downside following its October 
meeting. The Governing Council communi -
cated that it would carefully assess the incom -
ing information over the subsequent weeks, 
including information on the dynamics of the 
pandemic, prospects for a rollout of vaccines, 
and developments in the exchange rate. In 
addition, the new round of Eurosystem staff 
macroeconomic projections in December will 
allow a thorough reassessment of the eco -
nomic outlook and the balance of risks. Based 
on this updated assessment, the Governing Council will recalibrate its instruments, as ap -
propriate, to respond to the unfolding situation 
and to ensure that financing conditions remain 
favourable. In doing so, the Governing Council 
aims to support the economic recovery and 
counteract the negative impact of the pan -
demic on the projected inflation path.
APP holdings recorded on the balance sheet 
rose by €68.4 billion during the reporting 
period. On 6 November, the Eurosystem held 
assets totalling €2,872.7 billion as part of the 
APP (see the box on pp. 24 ff. for a breakdown 
of the holdings by individual programme). The 
holdings are furthermore being influenced by 
the smoothing over time of reinvestments in 
line with the technical parameters agreed upon 
in December 2018 and by the use of amortised ECB Governing 
Council leaves 
key interest rates 
and purchase 
programmes 
unchanged
ECB Governing 
Council con -
siders risks to be 
clearly tilted to 
the downside 
recentlyAPP and PEPP 
continue to 
increase secur -
ities holdings 
recorded on 
balance  sheet
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 From 
1 October 2019, EONIA calculated as €STR + 8.5 basis points. 
3 Three-month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. 
• Average 1 to 12 November 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 20200.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.3
––––––+++
–100+10+20 Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,3Basis
points% p. a.
EONIA1,2Three-month EURIBOR 1
Deposit facility rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate
€STR 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
23

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the two reserve maintenance periods 
under review running from 22 July 2020 to 
3  November 2020, liquidity needs stem-
ming from autonomous factors rose by 
€58.5 billion to €1,927.2 billion (see the 
table below).1 This increase was mainly at-
tributable to government deposits with the 
Eurosystem, which averaged €749.0 billion 
in the September- November 2020 reserve 
maintenance period and thus stood €77.8 
billion above the average for the June- July 
2020 period (see the chart on p. 25). A large 
part of this increase was due to higher de-
posits with the Bundesbank, which rose by 
€49.7 billion to €254.7 billion. The build- up 
of liquidity held by governments with cen-
tral banks, which has been observed to a 
greater extent since the beginning of the 
coronavirus pandemic, thus continued. The 
higher volume of banknotes in circulation in 
the Eurosystem in the period under review also led to a growing need for liquidity. 
With an increase of €23.4 billion to an aver-
age of €1,389.1 billion in the September- 
November 2020 period compared with the 
June- July 2020 period, net demand for 
banknotes remained at a high level. €14.9 
billion of this increase was attributable to 
cumulative net banknote issuance by the 
Bundesbank, which rose to €804.6 billion. 
By contrast, the rise in the combined total 
of net foreign assets and other factors, 
which are considered together owing to 
liquidity- neutral valuation effects, lowered 
liquidity needs by €42.7 billion. However, 
this change and also the above- mentioned 
1 Average of the sixth reserve maintenance period of 
2020 (September- November) compared with the aver-
age of the fourth reserve maintenance period of 2020 
(June- July), which was covered in the August 2020 
issue of the Monthly Report. This comparative ap-
proach is also used for the individual autonomous 
factors  mentioned above.
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2020
22 July
to
15 September16 September
to
3 November
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  15.5 –   7.9
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) –  41.7 –  36.1
3. Net foreign assets 1 –   5.4 –   1.5
4. Other factors 1 +  52.1 –   2.5
Total –  10.5 –  48.0
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations +   0.5 +   0.0
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations + 191.7 + 114.6
c) Other operations + 155.4 + 152.2
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility +   0.0 +   0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  57.2 –  47.5
Total + 290.4 + 219.3
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 279.8 + 171.3
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   1.2 –   1.2
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
24

increase in government deposits were due 
in part to technical factors, because individ-
ual accounts were statistically reclassifi  ed. 
Over the reporting period, the minimum re-
serve requirement rose by €2.4 billion to 
€143.6 billion in the September- November 
2020 reserve period and increased the need 
for central bank liquidity accordingly. In 
Germany, the reserve requirement went up 
by €0.7 billion to €39.5 billion.
In the period under review, around one- 
third of central bank liquidity was provided 
by refi  nancing operations and two- thirds by 
purchase programmes with a focus on the 
pandemic emergency purchase programme 
(PEPP) (see the chart on p. 27). As a result 
of the attractive terms of the third series of 
targeted longer- term refi  nancing operations 
(TLTRO- III), the fi  fth TLTRO- III operation 
continued to see a relatively high volume of 
demand among banks, which took up a 
total of €174 billion. On balance, the fi  fth 
TLTRO- III operation as well as the maturities 
and repayments from TLTRO- II resulted in a 
net liquidity injection of €158 billion on 
30 September 2020. Demand for pandemic 
emergency longer- term refi  nancing oper-
ations (PELTROs) remained only moderate 
for the third, fourth and fi  fth operations, to-
talling €7.5 billion. Interest in the regular 
main refi  nancing operations and three- 
month tenders remained low, partly owing 
to the more attractive terms of TLTRO- III. 
In  Germany, the outstanding volume of 
longer- term operations –  which include 
TLTROs, PELTROs and three- month ten-
ders – rose signifi  cantly to €320 billion in 
the period under review, which represented 
an increase of €85 billion compared with 
the June- July 2020 period.
At an average of €3,476 billion, holdings of 
the asset purchase programmes in the 
September- November 2020 period were 
around €308 billion above the average for the June- July 2020 period (see the table 
above).
In net terms, there was a considerable in-
crease in excess liquidity in the period under 
review. Whilst excess liquidity in the July- 
September 2020 period rose by €310 billion 
compared with the previous period, it in-
creased by a further €243 billion to an 
average  of €3,114 billion in the subsequent 
September- November 2020 period, although 
this was counteracted slightly by the in-
crease in government deposits with central 
banks.Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
6 November
2020
Active programmes 1
PSPP +  51.0 2,312.0
CBPP3 +   0.9 286.2
CSPP +  19.9 245.1
ABSPP –   0.9 29.4
PEPP + 223.2 641.6
Completed programmes 
SMP –   6.0 28.6
CBPP1 –   0.0 0.5
CBPP2 –   0.1 2.8
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankAutonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 20201,5001,2501,00075050025002505007501,000
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
25

At 98.8%, Eurosystem banks made some-
what greater use of the exemption allow-
ances under the two- tier system for remu-
nerating excess reserve holdings in the 
September- November 2020 period com-
pared with the June- July 2020 period. In 
Germany, utilisation was still below the 
Euro system average, but also climbed more 
signifi  cantly to 98.4%. The increase in min-
imum reserve requirements caused the ab-
solute exemption allowances to rise; how-
ever, given the much stronger growth in 
excess liquidity, excess reserves, remuner-
ated at -0.50%, grew once again (see the 
chart above). This meant that, on average, around 28% of excess liquidity in the Euro-
system was exempted from remuneration 
at negative interest rates in the September- 
October 2020 period, compared with 
around 33% in the June- July 2020 period.
In the money market, interest rates fell 
somewhat during the reporting period in 
the light of the considerable increase in ex-
cess liquidity (see the adjacent chart). The 
secured market saw overnight rates in Eurex 
Repo’s GC Pooling decline for the ECB bas-
ket, for the most part by 1 basis point to 
-0.51% to -0.52%, although there was a 
signifi  cant temporary decline to -0.74% 
with very low turnover at the end of the 
quarter in September 2020. While the rate 
for the ECB EXTended basket, which con-
tains an extended pool of collateral, did not 
respond at this time, it also fell by around 
1 basis point over the entire period under 
review to -0.49% to -0.50%. These devel-
opments should be seen in the context of 
declining turnover. For example, turnover 
on the GC Pooling platform for secured 
transactions with maturities of one day 
(ON, TN, SN; combined in the Deferred 
Funding Rate) fell by an average of around 
€5 billion in the September- November 2020 
reserve period compared with the period 
preceding the period under review, to €5.9 
billion per day. By comparison, there was lit-
tle change in the €STR, which mostly stood 
at -0.55%, although it was at -0.56% on 
certain days towards the end of the period 
under review. €STR turnover, too, remained 
broadly stable, averaging just under €43 bil-
lion in the period under review, compared 
with €41 billion in the two previous reserve 
maintenance periods. However, the €STR 
volume increased to an average of just over 
€45 billion following the settlement of the 
fi  fth TLTRO- III operation until the end of the 
September- November 2020 period.Deposit facility rate, money market rates 
and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Cent-
ral bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus 
the deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankJune July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
20200.45
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75–
–
–
–
–
–
–Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
3,500
3,000
2,500
2,000
1,500
1,000
500
0Excess liquidity1
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period 2Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling
Overnight€STR
GermanyEuro areaTheoretical allowancesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
26

cost accounting.1 Securities holdings reported 
under the PEPP amounted to €641.6 billion on 
6 November, up by €187.7 billion.
On 30 September 2020, the fifth operation of 
the third series of targeted longer- term refinan -
cing operations (TLTRO-  III) was settled, with 
388 banks taking up a total of €174.5 billion. 
Although demand was considerably lower than 
it had been for the fourth operation, it still ex -
ceeded the expectations of market participants. 
The amended conditions for TLTRO- III oper -
ations proved to still be highly attractive for 
many counterparties, even though the Septem -
ber operation only offered banks the favour -
able interest rate of up to -1% for a period of 
just around nine months (as opposed to 12 
months as in the June operation). By contrast, 
demand for pandemic emergency longer-  term 
refinancing operations (PELTROs) remained 
subdued, with a total of just €7.5 billion being 
allotted across three operations from August to 
October.Continued net asset purchases and the allot -
ment of TLTROs caused excess liquidity to grow 
further, albeit at a slower pace than in the pre -
vious reporting period. As this report went to 
press, the volume of excess liquidity stood at 
€3,308 billion, which corresponds to an in -
crease of around €400 billion (see the box on 
pp. 24 ff.).
Short- term money market rates had a mixed 
showing in recent weeks. The unsecured euro 
overnight index average rate (EONIA), which is 
computed by applying a fixed spread to the 
euro short- term rate (€STR), remained broadly 
unchanged overall at -0.47% for the most part. 
By contrast, the three- month EURIBOR posted 
yet another clear decline to end the period at 
-0.52%, which was significantly lower than 
EONIA, but still higher than €STR. The yield Fifth TLTRO- III 
sees relatively 
high demandContinued 
growth in excess 
liquidity
Short- term 
money market 
rates mixedOutstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202005001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,500€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesFirst series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operations
1 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
27

spread between the three- month EURIBOR and 
three- month EONIA swap rate, which is used 
as an indicator for money market risk, con -
tinued to narrow and is negative at present. 
This development is likely to be primarily attrib -
utable to the Eurosystem’s comprehensive pro -
vision of liquidity. Liquidity developments con -
tributed to changing supply and demand con -
ditions in neighbouring market segments, 
which generally led to declines in interest rates. 
Due to the method of calculation, these de -
clines in interest rates in other market segments 
can in turn have an impact on EURIBOR, too. 
By contrast, expectations of a reduction in the 
deposit facility rate within the next few months 
– which, in the past, had caused EURIBOR to 
temporarily drop below the level of EONIA at 
times – are not likely to have played any signifi -
cant role (see the following section).
Forward rates in the money market went into 
slight decline initially following the ECB Gov -
erning Council’s monetary policy meeting in 
September. For a time, the lowest point of the 
curve stood at -0.62% for the third quarter of 
2022. A reduction of 10 basis points in the 
Euro system deposit facility rate was factored 
into the forward rates for the third quarter of 
2021. Rather than expectations of falling inter -
est rates, it was probably an increase in nega -
tive term premia in light of heightened uncer -
tainty over how the coronavirus pandemic will 
play out that was primarily behind the decline 
in forward rates for medium- term to longer-  
term maturities. However, after news of the 
latest advances in vaccine development was 
made public, forward rates rose considerably, 
leaving only a low probability of a reduction in 
the deposit facility rate priced into forward 
rates. As in previous months, the surveys con -
ducted prior to the ECB Governing Council’s 
monetary policy meetings in September and 
October provided hardly any indication of ex -
pectations that the deposit facility rate would 
be reduced: in median terms, survey partici -
pants once again reported that they did not ex -
pect the deposit facility rate to be lowered over 
the entire survey horizon.Monetary developments 
in the euro area
Monetary developments were again shaped by 
the coronavirus pandemic in the third quarter 
of 2020. The annual growth rate of the broad 
monetary aggregate M3 accelerated to 10.4% 
at the end of September, twice the rate ob -
served at the end of December 2019. These 
current dynamics were driven by three factors. 
First, households and non- financial corpor -
ations continued to build up their holdings of 
highly liquid deposits in the reporting quarter. 
Precautionary considerations in light of the still 
intense uncertainty surrounding the future 
course of the pandemic were paramount in this 
regard. Second, the strong monetary growth 
continued to be fuelled by the Eurosystem’s 
asset purchase programmes –  especially the 
large- scale government bond purchases  – 
which were expanded during the crisis. Third, 
commercial banks’ lending to the domestic pri -
vate sector once again made a substantial con -
tribution to monetary growth. Although the 
economic recovery caused demand for loans 
among non-  financial corporations to weaken 
compared to the two very strong preceding 
quarters, lending to the private sector as a 
whole during the reporting quarter was never -
theless slightly up on its level from before the 
outbreak of the coronavirus crisis.
On the components side, monetary growth in 
the third quarter was driven by overnight de -
posits, which – as had already been the case in 
the two preceding quarters – recorded extra-
ordinarily strong increases as a result of precau -
tionary considerations.2 Households in particu -
lar once again added very substantially to their 
holdings of overnight deposits. The strong Money market 
forward rates 
markedly higher 
of lateMonetary 
dynamics still 
very fast- paced 
due to corona -
virus pandemic
Monetary 
inflows driven 
primarily by 
tendency  in the 
private non- 
financial sector 
to build up 
liquidity buffers
2 Deposits on central governments’ accounts with the 
Euro system also rose again sharply in the third quarter of 
2020. Central governments are likely to have used these 
accounts to store some of the inflows from the securitised 
lending taken up to tackle the coronavirus crisis. These de -
posits do not form part of M3, as central governments are 
not included in the money- holding sector when calculating 
the monetary aggregates. Taken in isolation, the inflows to 
deposits therefore dampened monetary growth.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
28

preference for liquidity was bolstered by the 
persistently low interest rate level and the asso -
ciated low opportunity cost of holding highly 
liquid instruments, especially in relation to 
other forms of deposit. Continued brisk growth 
was also observed in the overnight deposits of 
non- financial corporations; compared with the 
extraordinarily strong inflows in the two pre -
ceding quarters, though, the figures suggest 
that these corporations were building up li -
quidity buffers to a more limited extent overall. 
The temporary lull in the pandemic situation 
and the subsequent reduction in uncertainty 
were also reflected in a gradual decline in cur -
rency demand in the money- holding sector, 
which had increased sharply in the first half of 
the year.
As for the counterparts, monetary growth in 
the third quarter of 2020 was driven chiefly by 
loans to domestic non- banks. Loans and securi -
tised lending to the domestic private sector re -
mained major factors. However, their growth 
rates were down on the two strong preceding 
quarters, not least because banks’ loans to the 
private non- financial sector continued to return 
to more normal levels during the third quarter.
Loans to households continued the recovery 
that began in May. The reporting quarter saw 
growth return to its pre- crisis level, bouncing 
back from a significant decline in the first half 
of the year due to the lockdown and social dis -
tancing measures as well as the other eco -
nomic restrictions implemented to contain the 
pandemic. The current growth was chiefly 
attrib utable to the very strong inflows to hous -
ing loans, which were granted by banks in Ger -
many and France, in particular. As a result, the 
annual growth rate in housing loans continued 
to rise and came to 4.5% at the end of the 
quarter, the strongest rate since 2011. Con -
sumer credit, which had recorded considerable 
net outflows from March to May, likewise 
returned  to growth in the reporting quarter, 
albeit  at a more moderate pace than before the 
coronavirus crisis. By contrast, other loans, 
which mainly comprise loans to self- employed Slower expan -
sion in lending 
to the private 
non- financial 
sector overall
Significant 
recovery in 
loans to 
households Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202020246810
–+++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
20246
–+++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change
in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage pointsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
29

persons, saw hardly any growth in the third 
quarter.
This picture is consistent with the findings of 
the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) for the third 
quarter, where the bank managers surveyed re -
ported a considerable rise in demand for loans 
to households for house purchase in net terms 
after demand had slumped in the second quar -
ter. Banks in the euro area stated that catch- up 
effects related to the coronavirus pandemic 
played a key role in the upturn in demand. 
They also singled out the low general interest 
rate level as well as the positive outlook in the 
housing market and prospective developments 
in real estate prices as major factors driving the 
increase in demand. In addition, the banks sur -
veyed by the BLS also reported a marginal rise 
in demand for consumer credit and other loans, 
attributing this mainly to renewed but tentative 
customer interest in spending on consumer 
durables.
On the supply side, the banks that responded 
to the BLS tightened their standards for hous -
ing loans more strongly than they had done in 
more than seven years for the second time in a 
row. This tightening of standards was generally 
comparable in scale with the banks’ response 
during the sovereign debt crisis, but it was 
much less pronounced than the tightening that took place during the global financial crisis. The 
decisive factor for the adjustment of standards 
was the deteriorated assessment of credit risk, 
particularly of the general economic situation 
and outlook. Lower risk tolerance amongst in -
stitutions also led them to restrict their stand -
ards. Alongside these aspects, the banks expli -
citly stated that the coronavirus pandemic was 
a relevant factor for the tightening of stand -
ards. In addition, the surveyed institutions 
again tightened their standards for consumer 
credit and other loans, albeit to a lesser extent 
than in the previous quarter.
Loans to non- financial corporations likewise 
saw a certain degree of normalisation in the 
third quarter of 2020 as the situation surround -
ing the pandemic improved and the economy 
posted a robust recovery. Following strong in -
flows in the first two quarters of the year, 
which had been characterised by the corona -
virus crisis, third- quarter net inflows were only 
just slightly above their level from before the 
outbreak of the pandemic. These inflows  were 
driven yet again by longer- term lending, which 
was supported by the take- up of government 
support measures. Annual growth in loans to 
non- financial corporations persisted at an in -
creased rate of 7.1%.BLS banks report 
growth in credit 
demand among 
households …
… while credit 
standards were 
tightened at the 
same timeDecelerated 
growth in loans 
to non- financial 
corporationsConsolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q2 2020 Q3 2020
Holdings against central government 2 263.0 73.0
Monetary aggregate M3 405.7 380.0
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 365.6 322.8
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 42.5 33.5
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) –  2.4 23.7
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities –  4.9 10.1
of which:
Capital and reserves 16.9 8.2
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 21.8 1.9Assets Q2 2020 Q3 2020
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 194.9 160.4
Loans 102.5 102.0
Loans, adjusted 1 110.6 84.1
Securities 92.4 58.4
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 507.1 244.3
Loans –  1.7 – 4.0
Securities 508.8 248.3
Net external assets – 48.1 25.7
Other counterparts of M3 10.0 32.8
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Adjusted for loan sales and securitisation as well as for positions arising from notional 
cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI 
sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
30

In country terms, the net inflows to the euro 
area aggregate mainly originated from banks in 
France and Italy, on balance. While net inflows 
in France were at a high level but in decline, 
they were up on the quarter in Italy, probably 
because government assistance programmes 
there were implemented later in some cases. 
Conversely, banks in Germany and Spain re -
ported limited net outflows, which were chiefly 
due to repayments of short- term loans. Two 
factors caused credit demand to soften in the 
reporting quarter. First, the strong economic 
recovery and the associated rebound in income 
reduced the acute liquidity needs of many en -
terprises. Second, with the pandemic situation 
beginning to improve in May, enterprises on 
the whole were largely able to use the funds 
they had raised from taking out loans and issu -
ing bonds in the second quarter in net terms to 
build up liquidity buffers (see the upper chart 
on p. 32).
The bank managers interviewed as part of the 
BLS likewise reported that demand for loans 
among non- financial corporations had fallen 
slightly in the third quarter. Respondents mainly 
put the decreased need for funds down to en -
terprises’ reluctance to engage in fixed invest -
ment, mergers, takeovers and restructuring as 
a result of the pandemic. By contrast, they re -
ported that funding needs for inventories and 
working capital as well as for refinancing, debt 
restructuring and renegotiation had risen and 
indicated that government assistance pro -
grammes were bolstering demand. The banks 
surveyed for the BLS expect net demand to 
bounce back in the fourth quarter, especially 
from small and medium- sized enterprises and 
particularly for short- term loans.
While aggregate interest rates for corporate 
loans rose only marginally during the reporting 
quarter, the BLS offers evidence that banks sig -
nificantly tightened their lending policy. Indeed, 
the surveyed banks reported overall that they 
had tightened their corporate credit standards 
in the third quarter of 2020 on a scale last seen 
in 2011. Asked to provide their main reasons for doing so, the banks pointed, first, to the 
increased risks on the borrower side and, 
second, to a deterioration in the general eco -
nomic situation and outlook. Banks’ lower risk 
tolerance was another factor that contributed 
to the tightening of standards. The reporting 
period also saw the surveyed banks tighten 
their credit terms and conditions, where their 
heightened risk sensitivity was reflected primar -
ily in higher loan collateral requirements as well 
as in widened margins for riskier loans.
The MFI sector increased not only its loans but 
also its securities- based lending – especially in 
the form of bonds and debt securities – to the BLS banks report 
decline in 
credit demand 
amongst enter -
prises …
… and tighten 
their credit 
standardsMFI loans to the private non-financial 
sector in the euro area*
20020406080100120140
–+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60To households 3To non-financial corporations1
Total 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
31

domestic private sector significantly in the re -
porting quarter. Commercial banks, in particu -
lar, upped their holdings. The positive yield 
spread offered by these instruments over 
lower- risk alternative investments, such as in 
government bonds, is likely to have been an 
enticing feature. Yet the Eurosystem likewise 
showed meaningful demand for private debt 
securities as part of its asset purchase pro -
grammes (APP and PEPP) – which were ex -
panded in March and June in response to the 
crisis.
MFIs’ loans to general government rose far 
more rapidly than their lending to the private sector in the third quarter. It was especially 
securitised   lending to government which did 
particularly much to support monetary growth. 
Although net inflows into government bonds 
were one- half the record level set in the previ -
ous quarter, they still remained extraordinarily 
high. The expansion was, on balance, solely 
due to the Eurosystem. For commercial banks, 
which had built up their holdings strongly in 
the preceding two quarters, government bonds 
lost some of their appeal as an investment 
product because their yields continued to fall in 
most euro area countries.
In the reporting quarter, the net external asset 
position likewise supported monetary growth 
through moderate net inflows. According to 
the balance of payments data, which are not 
seasonally adjusted and currently available only 
for July and August, it was particularly the re -
newed increase in the current account surplus 
which impacted positively on the net external 
asset position. Moreover, the balance of cross- 
border securities transactions is likely to have 
lent some support, as non- residents were net 
purchasers of securities issued by residents, 
especially  equities and investment fund shares, 
in July and again in August. Net purchases of 
foreign instruments by resident investors lagged 
behind. It was particularly resident investors’ 
demand for long- term bonds issued by non-  
residents which fell over this period.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
domestic customers
German banks’ deposit business with domestic 
customers yet again posted strong growth in 
the third quarter of 2020, with domestic invest -
ors continuing to show an exceptionally strong 
preference for overnight bank deposits. It was 
particularly households, but also non- financial 
corporations, which once again amassed over -
night deposits despite, in some cases, negative 
interest rates, though net inflows fell short of 
the previous quarter’s record levels. On the Securitised lend -
ing to domestic 
private sector 
posting consid -
erable net 
inflowsSecuritised lend -
ing to govern -
ment once 
again exception -
ally high owing 
especially to 
monetary policy 
purchase pro -
grammes
Positive net 
impact on M3 
from cross- 
border flows 
of goods and 
capital
Renewed strong 
growth in 
deposit businessBorrowing and uses of funds by non-
financial corporations* in the euro area
* Non-financial corporations and quasi-corporations. 1 Adjust-
ed  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation  as  well  as  for  positions 
arising from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202050050100150200250300
–++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data
Loans1Net issues of bonds (nominal value)
Deposits in M3
Securities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202020002004006008001,000
–+++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof which:By the euro area MFI sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
32

other hand, short- term time deposits remuner -
ating at close- to- market rates and all longer-  
term deposits continued their slide in the re -
porting quarter. This tendency is likely to have 
been fostered by the narrow yield spreads (see 
the adjacent chart).
All in all, the high level of uncertainty about the 
future of the pandemic and thus also the eco -
nomic recovery path has encouraged house -
holds and non-  financial corporations in Ger -
many to increase their precautionary saving in 
recent months. This means that, since the be -
ginning of the pandemic, these sectors have, 
on balance, built up a sizeable pool of liquidity 
reserves which they can tap into if their finan -
cial situation deteriorates.
In the reporting quarter, banks’ lending busi -
ness with domestic customers grew at a per -
ceptibly weaker pace than in the previous quar -
ters. It should be taken into account, though, 
that growth of credit to domestic non- banks 
had been exceptionally strong in the two pre -
ceding quarters – under the spell of the crisis 
and government assistance measures. Seen in 
that light, the current development is a rever -
sion to more normal levels. Whereas lending 
business with the domestic private sector con -
tinued to grow moderately, German banks per -
ceptibly cut back their lending to domestic 
general government. They reduced, in particu -
lar, their holdings of securities issued by the do -
mestic public sector after having expanded 
them considerably in the two preceding quar -
ters. The very low yields on German govern -
ment bonds across the board, which fell again 
a little in the reporting quarter, were probably a 
key reason for the waning interest. On the 
other hand, banks markedly increased their 
holdings of securities issued by the private sec -
tor, acquiring mainly bonds issued by non-  
financial corporations. Here, too, yield consid -
erations will probably have been a primary mo -
tivating factor.
Banks saw the strongest net growth in lending 
to households, whose demand for loans for Lending business 
with non- banks 
weaker on 
balance Interest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 202001234% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight deposits
MFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2020
Q2 Q3
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 64.3 67.9
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years –  8.9 – 4.1
over 2 years – 15.4 – 9.2
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months 2.0 0.3
over 3 months –  2.5 – 1.3
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans 0.3 – 1.8
Securities 6.7 – 6.5
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 27.4 19.6
of which: to households 3 14.1 22.3
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 14.5 – 2.1
Securities –  2.7 3.6
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Data adjusted for statis-
tical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and 
general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 4   Non- fi  nancial corporations and 
quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
33

house purchase remained high, consistent with 
the comparatively robust state of construction 
activity. Remarkably, the pandemic and its eco -
nomic fallout do not appear so far to have had 
much, if any, impact on demand for residential 
property. Households were not only eyeing 
loans for house purchase but also displayed a 
certain renewed interest in consumer credit 
during the period under review, which, having 
been scaled back considerably in the previous 
quarter, was once again stepped up distinctly. 
All in all, the dynamics of loans to households 
in Germany have remained very stable, with 
the 12- month growth rate of loans to house -
holds coming in at 4.5% at the end of the re -porting quarter, up slightly on its end- 2019 
level of 4.4%.
Demand for loans for house purchase and con -
sumer credit in the third quarter was supported 
not only by signs of recovery in the labour mar -
ket but also by the persistently very sound asset 
situation of households in Germany. The latest 
BLS suggests that other factors were at play as 
well. Besides the low general level of interest 
rates, another key reason cited by the banks for 
the increase in demand for housing loans was 
the positive outlook regarding the housing 
market and the house price developments ex -
pected by households. According to the banks, 
pandemic- related income losses as a result of, 
for instance, short- time working arrangements 
had less of an impact than initially feared.
Funding conditions have remained favourable. 
According to the MFI interest rate statistics, the 
interest rate on long- term loans for house pur -
chase fell once again slightly in the reporting 
quarter, hitting a new all- time low of 1.2% at 
the end of the quarter. At the same time, the 
banks participating in the BLS reported tighten -
ing their credit standards and credit terms and 
conditions for housing loans once again in the 
third quarter. However, the net share of banks 
reporting tightening was down considerably 
from the previous quarter. The tightening of 
credit terms and conditions was reflected pri -
marily in a widening of margins on riskier loans 
and a reduction in loan- to- value ratios. Institu -
tions chiefly cited the deterioration in their as -
sessment of credit risk and a lower risk toler -
ance as the main reasons for tightening the 
standards and terms and conditions for loans 
to households for house purchase. The banks 
likewise tightened their credit standards for 
consumer credit and other loans. Conditions in 
this credit segment remained broadly un -
changed.
Loans to non- financial corporations, on the 
other hand, were down slightly on balance in 
the reporting quarter from the strong growth 
they had shown in the two preceding quarters. Growth 
dynamics  of 
loans to house -
holds stableSound house -
hold asset situ -
ation supporting 
credit demand
Lending policy 
once again 
tightened some -
what according 
to BLS
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020–50+5+10+15+20+25€ billion, three-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic
private non-financial sector
15105051015202530
–––++++++Non-financial corporations1
Households 2Total
Other lending
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankConsumer credit
Loans for house purchaseUp to 1 year
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 years
TotalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
34

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q4 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20201.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.59.0
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2012 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 200.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p. a. % p. a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
35

This decline was due to substantial net redemp -
tions of short- term loans, whereas long- term 
loans once again picked up markedly. Their 
growth, however, fell well short of the strik -
ingly strong previous quarter and was unable 
to make up for the sharp drop in short-  term 
lending. However, this is not at odds with the 
brisk investment activity as, in the second quar -
ter, enterprises had taken on large volumes of 
debt and built up generous liquidity reserves. 
They were then able to use these funds, to -
gether with the rebound in income, to finance 
investment and pay back short- term loans.
The banks surveyed in the BLS did, however, 
report a resurgence of demand for loans, espe -
cially among small and medium- sized enter -
prises. These enterprises are likely to be primar -
ily from sectors that were hit especially hard by 
the pandemic. Consistent with this picture, 
business surveys are showing growing hetero -
geneity in the financial situation of enterprises 
in Germany.
Current credit growth was supported ceteris 
paribus by the persistently low interest rates, 
with enterprises paying only slightly higher 
interest rates on small- scale loans (2.0%) and 
the same low rate of interest on large- scale 
loans (1.2%) in the short- term segment. Inter -
est rates on longer- term loans fell slightly and, 
at the end of September, stood at 1.6% (previ -
ous quarter: 1.8%) and 1.2% (previous quarter: 
1.3%), respectively.
On the other hand, the banks once again 
turned the screws on their lending policy some -
what in the quarter under review. According to 
the BLS results, the surveyed institutions con -
tinued to tighten their standards for loans to 
enterprises on balance, albeit considerably less 
severely of late than in the preceding quarter. 
As already in the previous quarter, the reasons 
cited by the institutions for tightening stand -
ards related primarily to a deteriorated assess -
ment of the industry or firm- specific situation 
and of borrowers’ creditworthiness. The banks 
tightened not only credit standards but also credit conditions. This was reflected, for one 
thing, in a widening of margins for riskier loans. 
For another, credit institutions tightened their 
collateral requirements for the third survey 
round in succession. Banks also imposed stricter 
limits on credit amounts than in the previous 
quarter.
Against the backdrop of the situation in the 
finan cial markets, in response to the ad hoc 
questions in the October BLS, the surveyed 
German banks reported an overall improve -
ment in their funding situation compared with 
the previous quarter. Funding through debt se -
curities, in particular, improved in all maturity 
segments.
Banks reported that the Eurosystem purchase 
programmes had, over the past six months, 
helped improve their liquidity position and 
funding conditions in the market. However, 
these programmes’ impact on net interest in -
come continued to weigh on banks’ profitabil -
ity. In the view of the surveyed banks, it was 
only in the area of loans to households for 
house purchase where the programmes made 
a sizeable contribution to credit growth.
The negative interest rate on the deposit facility 
once again weighed on the net interest income 
of the banks surveyed as part of the BLS. The 
interest rate- reducing impact on lending rates 
was more pronounced than the effect on de -
posit rates. Banks reported that the negative 
interest rate enhanced volumes significantly 
only in the case of loans to enterprises. The 
negative earnings effect was tempered by the 
two- tier system for remunerating excess liquid -
ity holdings, however.
Twenty- four banks from the German BLS sam -
ple participated in the TLTRO- III operation in 
June 2020, and 14 in the September 2020 
oper ation. The last two operations thus en -
countered greater interest on the part of banks 
than the previous operations. Participation in 
the June and September TLTRO- III operations Lending to 
enterprises 
down slightly on 
balance, espe -
cially owing to 
net redemptions 
of short- term 
loans
Interest rates on 
loans to enter -
prises still near 
all- time lows
Lending policy 
once again 
tightened some -
what according 
to BLSImprovement in 
German banks’ 
funding environ -
ment …
… through 
purchase  
programmes , 
amongst other 
things
Two- tier system 
for excess liquid -
ity counteracting 
burden on banks 
imposed by 
negative interest 
rate
Heightened 
interest in 
TLTRO- III thanks 
to attractive 
conditionsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
36

was motivated primarily by their attractive de -
sign.
The banks reported using the uptake in funds 
primarily for lending to the non- financial sector, 
the substitution of TLTRO- II funds and liquidity holding in the Eurosystem. The surveyed banks 
reported that they intended to participate in 
future  operations again mainly because of the 
TLTRO- III operations’ attractive design. The 
TLTRO- III operations had barely any impact on 
banks’ lending policies.Funds mainly 
used for lend -
ing, substitution 
of TLTRO- II funds 
and liquidity 
holding in the 
EurosystemDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
37

Financial markets
Financial market setting
The strong economic recovery also shaped the 
international financial markets in the third 
quarter of 2020. In the United States, above all, 
but also in Europe, (expected) monetary and 
fiscal assistance measures and favourable eco -
nomic signals fuelled optimism among financial 
market participants. However, renewed signifi -
cant growth in the number of infections since 
the autumn and the associated expected and, 
in some cases, already adopted restrictions 
resulted  in a marked correction, especially in 
Europe . Equity markets in the euro area came 
under pressure as market participants flocked 
towards safe havens, tending to avoid risky in -
vestments and preferring lower- risk securities, 
such as government bonds. Towards the end of 
the reporting period, however, hopes that a 
vaccine might soon be available effected a re -
surgence in confidence. On balance, equity 
prices have risen since the end of June, while 
the average yield on long- term government 
bonds in the euro area has declined.
By contrast, the US financial markets have re -
mained comparatively robust in the face of the 
current infection rates. Buoyed by predomin -
antly good quarterly corporate earnings and 
improved corporate earnings expectations, US 
equity prices rose significantly overall, even 
reaching an all- time high at one point. The Fed -
eral Reserve’s new strategy of average inflation 
targeting is likely to have boosted yields on US 
Treasuries through higher term premiums. In a 
speech, Jerome  Powell, Chair of the Federal 
Reserve , explained amongst other things that 
the Federal Reserve might consider inflation 
rates of just over 2% appropriate at times in 
future, following prolonged periods when in -
flation has remained below the 2% mark. Mar -
ket participants’ expectations that US fiscal pol -
icy could become even more expansionary with 
infection numbers rising also had a positive im -
pact on yields, which rose significantly on bal -ance. Changes in infection rates and the ensu -
ing responses  by policymakers were also partly 
reflected   in the foreign exchange markets. On 
balance, the euro appreciated slightly.
Exchange rates
Since the beginning of July 2020, the euro has 
recorded marked gains against the US dollar on 
balance. The spread of the coronavirus in the 
United States weighed heavily on the US cur -
rency at the start of the third quarter. The tem -
porary containment of the number of infec -
tions in the United States in August caused the 
euro/ US dollar exchange rate to stabilise some -
what initially. However, after the Federal Re -
serve announced the aforementioned adjust -
ment of its monetary policy strategy, the euro 
continued to appreciate and climbed to a two- 
year high against the US dollar at the begin -
ning of September (US$1.20).
The upward trend of the euro did not continue 
over the remainder of September. Against the 
backdrop of the renewed rise in the number of 
infections in the euro area and the resulting ex -
pectations of further containment measures, 
investor demand shifted in favour of the US 
dollar. In October, too, market activity was in -
fluenced by changes in investors’ risk appetite. 
For instance, the euro/ US dollar exchange rate 
fluctuated in response to the frequently chan -
ging prospects of a further fiscal package in the 
United States. As a result, the intensification of 
the pandemic and the prospect of further mon -
etary policy easing in the euro area weighed on 
the single currency before it regained ground 
following the US presidential election in early 
November. As this report went to press, the 
euro stood at US$1.18 on balance, which was 
5.3% higher than at the end of the second 
quarter.Financial mar -
kets influenced 
by pandemic 
again, especially 
in Europe
Euro up 
markedly  
against the 
US dollarDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
38

The euro also recorded gains against the yen. 
This continued until the end of August in view 
of a temporary decline in risk aversion. The sin -
gle currency was only burdened temporarily by 
weak economic figures from the euro area and 
by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s announcement 
of his resignation due to health reasons. Uncer -
tainty about whether his successor would pro -
vide political support for continued monetary 
policy easing strengthened the yen. Over the 
course of September, sentiment turned increas -
ingly in the Japanese currency’s favour, which is 
tending to benefit from net capital inflows in 
the wake of increased risk aversion. For ex -
ample, the course of the pandemic and the dis -
pute regarding further US fiscal stimulus meas -
ures dampened risk appetite in the foreign ex -
change market and, as a result, repeatedly 
caused co- movement of the yen and the US 
dollar against the euro. As this report went to 
press, however, the announcement of progress 
in the development of a vaccine weighed on 
the Japanese currency. The euro stood at 
around 124 yen at the end of the reporting 
period, meaning that the currency has gained 
3.0% since the end of June 2020.
The exchange rate developments of the euro 
against the pound sterling during the reporting 
period were driven by market participants’ 
shifting assessments of whether a trade agree -
ment would be reached between the United 
Kingdom and the European Union. For in -
stance, the euro appreciated markedly follow -
ing Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s announce -
ment that he would proceed with the contro -
versial Internal Market Bill despite protests from 
Brussels. The Bill stipulates that the United 
Kingdom may unilaterally renege on commit -
ments previously made in the EU Withdrawal 
Agreement, and this – in the eyes of market 
participants – called into question the success 
of the negotiations with the EU. Subsequently, 
however, the impression that a trade agree -
ment could be reached by the end of the year 
was increasingly strengthened. A growing 
interest rate differential between British and 
German long- term government bonds also favoured  the pound, and the euro relinquished 
its gains in the autumn months. At the end of 
the reporting period, the euro was trading at 
£0.90 – 1.6% lower than in mid- 2020.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro appreci -
ated by 0.7% on balance. Furthermore, outside 
this group, the euro appreciated against the 
currencies of some emerging market econ -
omies hard hit by the pandemic, such as the 
rouble (+14.6%), the Brazilian real (+4.1%) and 
the Indian rupee (+4.1%). The euro also re -
corded marked gains against the Turkish lira 
once again (+18.8%). The Turkish lira continued Euro also appre -
ciates against 
the yen, …
… but records 
exchange rate 
losses against 
the pound 
sterling 
Euro appreciates 
in effective 
termsExchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB. 1 Exchange rate at the start of monetary union 
on 4 January 1999. 2 As calculated by the ECB against the cur-
rencies of 19 countries. An increase indicates an appreciation 
of the euro.
Deutsche BundesbankJ J A S ON
20201.101.151.201.25
120125130135
0.700.750.800.850.900.95
100105110Daily data, log scale
¥
£US$ against the ...
... US dollar
Launch exchange rate: 
€1 = US$1.1789 1
... yen
Launch exchange rate: €1 = ¥133.73 1
... pound sterling
Launch exchange rate: €1 = £0.7111 1
Nominal effective exchange rate2
Q1 1999 = 100
Launch exchange rate: 103.23 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
39

its downward trend against the euro in an 
environ ment of high inflation rates, persistent 
current account deficits, dwindling foreign re -
serve assets and increasing political strains. 
Monetary policy tightening measures taken in 
September failed to halt the exchange rate 
losses, and new diplomatic tensions with 
France and the United States caused the Turk -
ish currency to reach an all- time low against 
the euro at the beginning of November. The 
lira was only recently able to recoup some of 
the losses it had previously sustained.
Securities markets and 
portfolio  investment
Bond market
Government bond yields in the major currency 
areas showed mixed developments during the 
period under review. In the United States, yields 
on ten- year US Treasuries rose by 22 basis points to 0.9% from the end of June 2020. A 
contributing factor was the prospect that a fur -
ther, comprehensive economic stimulus pack -
age could be adopted in the United States in 
response to the coronavirus crisis. Furthermore, 
according to some market observers, the in -
crease in yields was supported by the Federal 
Reserve’s new monetary policy strategy that 
was announced in August. Long- term inflation 
expectations, which form part of the nominal 
yields, rose markedly on balance. Given the 
largely unchanged expectation of a low policy 
rate over the longer term, yield movements of 
ten- year government bonds in the United 
States were dominated by higher term pre -
miums.
Yields have fluctuated significantly in the euro 
area since the end of June. On balance, yields 
on ten- year Federal bonds fell by 9 basis points 
to -0.5%. Following a calm summer, increasing 
infection rates constituted a driving force in 
October, making the economic outlook more 
uncertain overall. This brought the role of Fed -
eral securities as a safe haven into focus, which 
is usually associated with falling interest rates. 
Moreover, market participants expected that 
the Eurosystem might potentially recalibrate its 
monetary policy stance in the face of increasing 
risks, which also contributed to a decline in 
yields. However, a countermovement set in 
most recently following positive news about an 
effective vaccine.
The yield curve derived from yields on Federal 
securities shifted downwards slightly under the 
impact of the aforementioned influences. As 
this report went to press, the interest rate was 
below the deposit facility rate of -0.5% up to a 
maturity of 10 years. All outstanding Federal 
securities recorded negative yields. Despite 
steepening slightly, the slope of the yield curve 
between ten- year and two- year maturities re -
mained at a low level. The interest rate fluctu -
ations in the ten- year maturity segment were 
mainly driven by a lower term premium. The 
expected short- term interest rates on Federal 
securities fluctuated to a lesser extent. These Ten- year 
US Treasury 
yields upFalling yields in 
euro area bond 
markets
Downward shift 
in the yield 
curveBond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20200.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.03.3
–––+++++++++++% p. a., daily data
GermanyJapanEuro areaUnited States
United
KingdomDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
40

rates reflect not only monetary policy expect -
ations but also scarcity premiums – measured 
by the yield spread between Federal securities 
and EONIA swap rates with the same matur -
ity – as well as liquidity premiums.
Yield spreads between ten- year Federal bonds 
and government bonds with the same maturity 
issued by other euro area countries (GDP-  
weighted average excluding Germany) fell by 
21 basis points to 54 basis points in the report -
ing period and were therefore close to their 
historical low. The spread tightening was sup -
ported by the decision to launch an EU recov -
ery fund as well as the Eurosystem’s asset pur -
chases. The surge in infection rates at the end 
of the reporting period affected yield spreads 
only slightly. Furthermore, indicators of market 
functionality, such as order book illiquidity (see 
the upper chart on p. 42), did not indicate ten -
sion in the government bond markets.
Since the end of June, yields on ten- year gov -
ernment bonds in the United Kingdom have 
shown an upward trend on balance (0.4%, +18 
basis points), albeit with quite considerable 
fluctuations. Alongside uncertainty surrounding 
the pandemic, these fluctuations also reflected 
uncertainty about the form of the United King -
dom’s future trade relations with the EU once 
the transitional arrangement expires at the end 
of the year. In Japan, yields on ten- year govern -
ment bonds remained within a narrow corridor 
around the 0.0% mark and thus within what 
market participants believe to be the Bank of 
Japan’s target range for interest rates. Chan -
ging assessments of the political and economic 
environment made no discernible impression 
on Japanese yields.
Five- year forward inflation rates five years 
ahead derived from inflation swaps remained 
virtually unchanged at 1.2% (+5 basis points). 
They were thus well above the 0.72% mark re -
corded in March. As a consequence of the first 
wave of infections, liquidity had deteriorated 
significantly in some cases at that point in time 
– even in markets that are otherwise very broad and deep  – which partly contributed to the 
trough. The inflation expectations for the euro 
area six to ten years ahead, as calculated by 
Consensus Economics on the basis of surveys, 
dipped slightly to 1.8%. Inflation risk and li -
quidity premiums appeared to be largely re -
sponsible for the disparity between market and Narrowing of 
yield spreads in 
the euro area
Mixed yields 
in the UK and 
Japan
Forward infla -
tion rates 
unchanged in 
the euro area 
and significantly 
increased in 
the USYield curve in the German bond market*
* Interest rates for (hypothetical) zero coupon bonds  (Svensson 
method),  based  on  listed  Federal  securities.  1 In  place  since 
18 September 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 100.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8–
–
–
–
–
Residual maturity in years12 November 202030 June 2020% p. a.
Memo item:
Interest rate on the 
deposit facility1
Spreads of ten-year government bonds 
over Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy Spain
Ireland FranceGreece PortugalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
41

survey- based expectations. In the United States, 
five- year market- based forward inflation rates 
in five years rose by 32 basis points to 2.1%. 
Contributing factors included the anticipated 
fiscal package and the change in monetary pol -
icy strategy.
Yields on European corporate bonds continued 
to decline in the period under review, following 
the surge in March resulting from the pan -
demic. Bonds issued by BBB- rated financial cor -
porations with a residual maturity of between 
seven and ten years were yielding 1.1% as this 
report went to press, 67 basis points lower 
than at the end of June. Yields on non- financial 
corporate bonds of equivalent maturity fell by 
56 basis points to 0.6%. A look at country-  
specific corporate bond yields reveals that 
yields in the euro area mainly declined to an 
equal extent. Yields on high- yield bonds issued 
by enterprises with poorer credit ratings have 
fallen by 106 basis points to 3.6% since the 
end of June, and therefore to a greater extent 
than in the BBB segment. Monetary and fiscal 
policy support measures undoubtedly made a 
key contribution to declining corporate bond 
yields, as – alongside the fall in risk- free interest 
rates – the decline in yields reflected that in -
vestors required less compensation for default 
risks in the bond market, despite the recent re -
newed increase in infection rates. This was also 
demonstrated by lower CDS premiums. More -
over, there were indications of improved liquid -
ity in the market for corporate bonds.1
The substantial economic risks resulting from 
the pandemic and the heightened uncertainty 
in the stock market had no visible impact on 
spreads. However, with risk- free interest rates 
down, BBB- rated corporate bond spreads over 
Bunds narrowed by less than the drop in cor -
porate bond yields. At the end of the period 
under observation, spreads on BBB- rated cor -
porate bonds consequently remained below 
their respective five- year means, which points Yields on Euro -
pean corporate 
bonds in con -
tinued declineOrder book illiquidity*
10-day moving averages
010203040
Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov.
2020
Sources: MTS and Bundesbank calculations. * Quotient of the 
width (average bid-ask spread of the three closest buy and sell 
orders in the order book) and the depth of the order book li-
quidity (sum of the volumes offered at these three bid and ask 
prices in the order book) scaled by a factor of 109. The four lar-
gest euro area countries (DE, FR, ES, IT, GDP-weighted) were 
considered.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Forward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20201.41.82.22.6Weekly averages
00.40.81.2% p. a.
Five-year forward inflation rate 
in five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics inflation
expectations in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
Difference between the forward inflation 
rates in the United States and the euro areaPercentage 
points0.81.21.62.0
% p. a.
1 This is indicated by lower bid- ask spreads for BBB- rated 
corporate bonds in the reporting period.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
42

to a relatively high valuation. Comparing cor -
porate bonds’ performance with developments 
in a model- theoretical replicating portfolio com -
posed of shares in enterprises and risk- free 
bonds (Merton model) provides further evi -
dence of the relative valuation level of corpor -
ate bonds.2 Such a comparison also suggests 
that corporate bonds are relatively highly val -
ued.
Issuance in the German bond market remained 
very high in the third quarter of 2020. Gross 
issuance totalled €499 billion, only slightly 
lower than the figure for the previous quarter, 
in which the issue volume was also very strong 
(€518½ billion), but well above the figure for 
the same quarter a year earlier (€356 billion). 
After deducting redemptions and taking into 
account changes in issuers’ holdings of their 
own bonds, net bond issuance was €176 bil -
lion. By contrast, the volume of foreign paper 
in circulation in Germany fell by €2 billion. The 
total volume in the German bond market there -
fore rose by €174 billion in the period under 
review.
The public sector issued bonds amounting to 
€104½ billion net in the third quarter, com -
pared with €16 billion in the same quarter of 
the previous year. The significantly higher net 
issuance served not only to cover higher on -
going financing needs resulting from the 
COVID-  19 pandemic – public sector agencies 
also considerably upped their cash holdings. 
Germany’s central government, in particular, is -
sued bonds of its own to the value of €96½ 
billion net in the quarter under review. These 
mainly consisted of Treasury discount paper, or 
Bubills (€46 billion). Looking at Federal bonds, 
the 7-year and 15-  year maturity segments, 
which were newly introduced this year, were 
further expanded (€15 billion and €10 billion 
respectively). The government also issued five- 
year Federal notes (Bobls) to the tune of €8 bil -
lion and €7 billion worth of 30- year Bunds. 
State and local government issued bonds worth 
€8 billion net.In September, the Federal Government placed 
its first- ever green bond over €6½ billion 
(gross). Revenue from the issue will be used to 
finance “expenditure that is recognised as 
green” – irrespective of the basic principle of 
universality for public budgets.3 In November, a 
green five-  year Federal note with a gross issu -
ance volume of €5 billion followed. Further 
issues of green Federal securities in the 2- year 
and 30- year segments are planned. Each green 
Federal security has the same characteristics 
and maturity as an existing conventional bond, 
known as its twin, for which the green bonds 
can be exchanged at any time. This is intended 
to ensure high market liquidity and make it 
easy to compare green and conventional Net issuance in 
the bond market 
remains high
Rise in public 
sector capital 
market debtFirst green Bund 
issuedYield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 20200100200300400500600700800900
100200300400High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB financial corporations 2
BBB non-financial corporations 2By rating categoryBasis points, daily data
2 For more on the approach of comparing the perform -
ance of corporate bonds with a replicating portfolio com -
posed of equities and risk- free bonds, see Deutsche Bun -
desbank (2017).
3 “Expenditure recognised as green” means government 
expenditure that is defined as “green” under the Green 
Bond Framework. For more details, see Federal Ministry of 
Finance (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
43

bonds. In the first few weeks, the green bonds 
traded at a yield which was a few basis points 
shy of their conventional counterparts’ yield. 
Investors therefore accepted a yield discount 
for this financial market product.
Domestic credit institutions increased their cap -
ital market debt by €23 billion in the reporting 
quarter, up from €7½ billion in the second 
quarter. Specialised credit institutions, in par -
ticular, issued debt securities totalling €26½ bil -
lion on balance; a portion of the economic pol -
icy assistance measures for the German econ -
omy is distributed via these (promotional) insti -
tutions. Meanwhile, there were net redemptions 
of mortgage Pfandbriefe (€1½ billion) as well 
as other bank debt securities that can be struc -
tured flexibly and public Pfandbriefe (€1 billion 
each).
Domestic enterprises issued €48 billion net 
worth of debt securities in the third quarter fol -
lowing already strong net issuance of €38 bil -lion in the previous quarter. This was attribut -
able chiefly to other financial institutions, which 
mainly issued long- term securities. In the 
second and third quarters of the previous year, 
enterprises had raised a total of €20½ billion in 
the German capital market.
In the third quarter, foreign investors were the 
main buyers in the domestic bond market, 
adding paper worth a net €135½ billion to 
their portfolios, the majority of which was 
issued  by the private sector. The Bundesbank 
acquired debt securities worth €66 billion net, 
chiefly under the Eurosystem’s asset purchase 
programmes, with the vast majority of this 
paper constituting domestic bonds issued by 
the public sector. Domestic credit institutions 
and non- banks, meanwhile, sold bonds 
amounting to €21½ billion and €6 billion re -
spectively, in net terms. While credit institutions 
sold mainly foreign securities, non-  banks dis -
posed of domestic paper on balance.
Equity market
In the period under review, the international 
equity markets in particular were torn between 
hopes of an economic recovery, the economic 
consequences of the renewed escalation of the 
coronavirus pandemic and the prospect of a 
vaccine. Overall, prices rose. At the beginning 
of the third quarter of 2020, the rally continued 
worldwide after the pandemic had previously 
driven prices down sharply. An initial stabilisa -
tion in corporate earnings expectations and 
falling risk- free interest rates were contributing 
factors. At the same time, some long- simmering 
problems, such as the trade dispute between 
the United States and China, took more of a 
back seat in investors’ eyes. Over the remainder 
of the quarter, however, US and Japanese equi -
ties then significantly outperformed European 
shares. Buoyed by outperforming large tech 
shares, positive quarterly corporate results and 
market participants’ hopes for a new stimulus 
package from the US government, the S&P 500 
even reached a new all- time high at the begin -Net issuance 
by credit 
institutions 
Sharp rise in 
enterprises’ 
capital  market 
debtForeign investors 
chief buyers of 
debt securities
Share prices 
higher overallInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2019 2020
Q3 Q2 Q3
Debt securities
Residents 29.7 117.7 38.5
Credit institutions 10.6 24.5 – 21.4
of which:
Foreign debt securities 11.2 8.5 – 18.9
Deutsche Bundesbank – 3.1 78.6 65.8
Other sectors 22.3 14.6 –  5.9
of which:
Domestic debt securities 20.3 – 1.2 – 22.4
Non-residents – 0.1 66.2 135.6
Shares
Residents 7.0 26.5 61.0
Credit institutions – 3.4 1.6 1.9
of which:
Domestic shares – 0.4 1.7 0.2
Non-banks 10.3 24.9 59.1
of which:
Domestic shares – 0.5 9.6 40.4
Non-residents 1.1 – 9.1 – 14.8
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 20.7 1.2 18.9
Investment in retail funds 4.3 7.5 4.9
of which:
Equity funds – 0.8 4.8 3.4
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
44

ning of September. On the European equity 
markets, meanwhile, the focus increasingly lay 
on the renewed steep rise in new coronavirus 
infections, with new highs being reached in 
many European countries. In an environment 
characterised by growing economic doubts, in -
vestors increasingly shifted funds from equities 
into less risky assets (safe haven flows). Towards 
the end of the reporting period, however, 
reports  that a vaccination could soon be avail -
able lifted prices again; in addition, risk aver -
sion also came down somewhat following the 
US presidential election. On balance, European 
and German equities, as measured by the 
EURO STOXX and CDAX, have recorded gains 
since the beginning of the third quarter (EURO 
STOXX: 7.8%, CDAX: 4.6%). The UK’s FTSE All- 
Share index rose by 4.7% despite the uncer -
tainty surrounding Brexit. US and Japanese 
equities proved comparatively robust to rising 
infection rates and put in a very strong per -
formance all in all. Overall, the US S&P 500 
gained 14.1% as compared to its level at the 
end of June, while Japan’s Nikkei 225 climbed 
14.5%.
Bank shares on both sides of the Atlantic put in 
a more volatile performance than their respect -
ive overall markets, but also recorded net gains 
(United States: 13.1%, euro area: 7.1%). Several 
US and European banks reporting favourable 
quarterly results as well as fresh speculation 
about mergers in the European banking sector 
were positive factors. Prices received a further 
strong boost from recently growing hope of a 
coronavirus vaccination. Prior to this, bank 
shares had temporarily come under consider -
able pressure. A key factor driving prices down 
is likely to have been relatively pessimistic earn -
ings expectations, which were comparatively 
weak, especially in the medium term, and have 
declined further since the end of June. Import -
ant reasons for this were, first, concerns on the 
part of market participants about rising credit 
defaults, which would require banks to make 
greater provision for risk and would weigh on 
profits. Second, in the euro area, the interest 
rate curve, which market participants believe will remain flat, put pressure on the expected 
proceeds from maturity transformation.
On both sides of the Atlantic, market partici -
pants’ uncertainty about further price develop -
ments – as measured by the implied volatilities 
of equity indices calculated from options  – 
moved mostly sideways at a historically ele -
vated level in the third quarter. With concern 
about the further course of the pandemic then 
growing, it rose markedly in October. At last 
count, it was above its respective five- year 
averages, but still well below the record figures 
seen in the spring. Despite the heightened un -
certainty, the equity risk premia demanded by 
market participants, which can be calculated 
using a dividend discount model, changed only 
slightly in the reporting period for both the 
United States and Europe. In the euro area, the 
model found that weaker medium and long-  
term earnings expectations, in particular, 
weighed on prices. Although declining risk- free 
interest rates, which boost the present value of Bank shares 
with volatile 
performance
Uncertainty 
higher, but 
equity risk 
premia  little 
changedEquity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesDaily data, beginning of 2018 = 100, log scale
Total market indices
708090100110120130140
35405060708090100110120
2018 2019 2020Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
45

future dividends, had a supporting effect on 
prices, they were not ultimately visibly reflected 
in listings. By contrast, the S&P 500 was buoyed 
mainly by more favourable earnings expect -
ations, which more than compensated for the 
depressing effect on prices of recently in -
creased risk- free US interest rates. Both the im -
plied cost of equity and earnings yields were 
recently close to historical lows on both sides 
of the Atlantic, thus signalling a comparatively 
high stock market valuation.
Domestic enterprises issued new equity total -
ling €25½ billion in the third quarter of 2020. 
This was mainly attributable to a capital in -
crease by a public limited company in Septem -
ber. The volume of foreign equities circulating 
in the German market rose by €20½ billion. 
Domestic non- banks, which also include invest -
ment funds and insurance companies, for ex -
ample, were the main net buyers of equities 
(€59 billion). Domestic credit institutions pur -
chased equities for €2 billion in net terms, 
while foreign investors scaled back their equity 
holdings in Germany by €15 billion net.
Mutual funds
During the quarter under review, domestic in -
vestment companies recorded inflows of €24 
billion, after raising funds totalling €8½ billion 
in the previous three- month period. The fresh 
funds mainly accrued to specialised funds re -
served for institutional investors (€19 billion). 
Looking at the various asset classes, bond-  
based funds in particular attracted large inflows 
(€12½ billion). Open- end real estate funds and 
equity funds were also able to place new shares 
in the market (€4½ billion and €2½ billion, re -
spectively). Foreign funds distributed in the 
German market attracted new funds of €27½ 
billion net in the third quarter of 2020. Domes -
tic non- banks were the main buyers, adding 
mutual fund shares worth €50½ billion to their 
portfolios. Foreign investors purchased German 
mutual fund shares worth a net €1 billion, 
while domestic credit institutions scaled back Equity issuance 
and acquisition
Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
sharesMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2019 r 2020
Q3 Q2 Q3p
I. Current account + 58.9 + 36.1 +  64.0
1. Goods 1 + 59.8 + 28.4 +  57.7
2. Services 2 – 13.0 +  3.5 –   6.5
3. Primary income + 24.5 + 13.3 +  22.9
4. Secondary income – 12.3 –  9.1 –  10.1
II. Capital account +  0.2 +  0.5 –   1.2
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) + 29.6 + 45.4 +  60.4
1. Direct investment – 11.7 +  3.8 –  13.0
Domestic investment 
abroad + 12.2 +  5.3 +  15.1
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country + 23.8 +  1.5 +  28.1
2. Portfolio investment + 21.9 +  1.9 –  92.6
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities + 21.7 + 59.2 +  44.4
Shares 3 –  0.3 + 19.0 +  19.0
Investment fund shares 4+ 10.7 + 14.4 +  27.3
of which:
Money market fund 
shares –  0.4 +  0.9 +  11.7
Short-term debt 
 securities 5 –  2.8 +  2.8 –   1.2
Long-term debt 
 securities 6 + 14.1 + 23.0 –   0.6
of which:
Denominated in euro 7 +  8.0 + 18.0 –  18.2
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities –  0.2 + 57.3 + 137.0
Shares 3 +  1.2 –  9.1 +   0.6
Investment fund shares –  1.3 +  0.2 +   0.8
Short-term debt 
 securities 5 +  8.0 + 31.9 +  49.7
Long-term debt 
 securities 6 –  8.1 + 34.2 +  85.9
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 8 –  7.5 + 21.1 +  18.4
3. Financial derivatives 9 +  3.0 + 31.3 +  26.5
4. Other investment 10 + 16.7 +  8.2 + 140.7
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 +  9.3 – 45.2 –  13.9
Enterprises and 
 households 12 + 11.6 –  5.3 +  55.3
General government +  1.0 –  0.3 +  12.0
Bundesbank –  5.1 + 59.1 +  87.4
5. Reserve assets –  0.3 +  0.2 –   1.3
IV. Errors and omissions 13 – 29.5 +  8.8 –   2.4
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Short- 
term: original maturity of up to one year. 6 Long- term: original 
maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 7 Including out-
standing foreign D- Mark bonds. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the Bundes-
bank. 12 Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corporations 
(excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial 
corporations, households and non- profi  t institutions serving 
households. 13  Statistical errors and omissions resulting from 
the difference between the balance on the fi  nancial account 
and the balances on the current account and the capital ac-
count.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
46

their investment in funds marginally on bal -
ance.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital imports of €92½ 
billion in the third quarter of 2020. Direct in -
vestment, too, led to capital inflows, totalling 
€13 billion. New intra-  group loans were again 
issued in both directions, after the upsurge in 
the coronavirus pandemic had resulted in net 
repayments in this area in the previous quarter.
Foreign firms upped their direct investment in 
Germany by €28 billion between July and Sep -
tember; in the second quarter, the volume of 
such investment had amounted to just €1½ bil -
lion. The increase was driven by the reversal in 
intra- group credit transactions, which resulted 
in additional lending of €26 billion. This largely 
occurred through financial loans, with foreign 
subsidiaries’ lending to their domestic parent 
companies accounting for two- thirds (reverse 
investments). German groups appear to have covered their liquidity requirements –  which 
were probably heightened not least as a result 
of the pandemic – by tapping the international 
capital markets, amongst others, via their for -
eign branches. Foreign financing entities raised 
the funds by issuing debt securities and then 
passed the funds on to their German parent 
companies in the form of financial loans. In -
flows of direct investment came primarily from 
the United States (€14½ billion) and Luxem -
bourg (€11½ billion), while the Netherlands in 
particular withdrew capital (€9 billion).
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €15 billion in 
the third quarter (previous quarter: €5½ bil -
lion). They increased their equity capital, in par -
ticular (€13½ billion). In addition, they granted 
intra- group loans to their foreign branches 
(€1½ billion). On balance, they did this mainly 
through trade credits. Most additional direct in -
vestment went to branches in the United States 
(€6 billion) and Luxembourg (€4½ billion). By 
contrast, the capital of the Dutch branches was 
reduced (€6 billion).Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital imports
Foreign direct 
investment in 
Germany gener -
ates capital 
inflowsGerman direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exports
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), The market for corporate bonds in the low- interest- rate environ -
ment, Monthly Report, July 2017, pp. 17-32.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2020), Green Bond Framework, August 2020, https://www.
deutsche-finanzagentur.de/fileadmin/user_upload/institutionelle-investoren/pdf/
GreenBondFramework.pdfDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
47

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
The German economy picked up strongly in the 
summer months following its steep decline 
result ing from the coronavirus pandemic. Ac -
cording to the Federal Statistical Office’s flash 
estimate, real gross domestic product (GDP) in 
the third quarter of 2020 expanded very 
strongly (+8.2%) on the severely depressed fig -
ure for the preceding quarter. The fact that ac -
tivity was already starting to recover strongly in 
the second quarter played a key role in the 
scale of the countermovement. After infection 
rates had been brought back under control and 
the strict containment measures had been re -
laxed, the economy picked up again consider -
ably from May onwards. This meant that eco -
nomic activity at the beginning of the third 
quarter was already far above the average of 
the second quarter. The recovery continued during the summer months, albeit at a signifi -
cantly more moderate pace. Irrespective of this 
strong growth, aggregate output in the third 
quarter was still more than 4% down on the 
pre- crisis level of the final quarter of 2019. This 
catch- up movement is not likely to continue 
over the near term in the final quarter of 2020. 
The key reasons for this are the recent resur -
gence of the pandemic in Germany and its 
neighbouring countries in Europe as well as the 
additional containment measures adopted for 
November. The latter are impeding economic 
life as a whole much less than in March and 
April, however. From the current perspective, 
this means that it is not very likely that eco -
nomic output will slump to a similarly de -
pressed level as in the second quarter.
The recovery in the German economy in the 
third quarter was broadly based. On the supply 
side, real value added experienced considerable 
growth in both manufacturing and services. 
The services sector as a whole nevertheless pre -
sented rather a mixed picture. While retail sales 
figures were already clearly up on their pre-  
crisis level, turnover in the hotel and restaurant 
sector was still quite substantially down on the 
average of the fourth quarter of 2019. This was 
due to the continuing restrictions owing to the 
coronavirus pandemic, which affected some 
branches of the services sector significantly 
more than others. Construction output is likely 
to have contracted slightly. This sector has 
been experiencing a boom of its own for some 
time now, however, and has weathered the 
coronavirus crisis without significant problems 
so far. On the demand side, strong rebound ef -
fects in all the previously depressed compon -
ents provided a powerful impetus. Households 
used the consumption opportunities that be -
came available again and probably made a 
number of purchases that had previously been 
put on hold. Given that global trade was pick -
ing up again, exports also made a strong con -
tribution. Moreover, enterprises are likely to Very strong 
growth in 
German  
economy  in Q3
Broadly based 
economic 
recovery 
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020949698100102104106108
–12–9–6–30+3+6Price and seasonally adjusted
2015 = 100, log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
48

have expanded their investment in machinery 
again on a quite considerable scale. Besides the 
temporary brightening of the business outlook 
at home and abroad, catch- up effects may 
have been a factor in this context, too.
German exports of goods in the third quarter 
of 2020 saw an increase of around one- fifth in 
price- adjusted terms. This meant that they had 
already offset two- thirds of the pandemic-  
induced slump in the first half of the year. This 
was due chiefly to the broad- based pick- up in 
world trade following the easing of the con -
tainment measures in a large number of coun -
tries. The increase in German firms’ exports of 
goods to other euro area countries was some -
what stronger than the increase in goods ex -
ported to countries outside the euro area. 
Broken down by category – data for which are 
available up to August  – the volume of ex -
ported capital goods saw an especially sharp 
rise. The main part in this had been played by 
motor vehicle exports, which had been hit 
harder than most goods by the pandemic-  
related slump. German exports of intermediate 
and consumer goods also enjoyed considerable 
growth, however.
Private consumption is likely to have under -
gone a very strong increase in the third quarter 
of 2020. Households massively reduced their 
consumption and strongly expanded their sav -
ing in the second quarter. Key reasons for this 
were the unavailability or only partial availabil -
ity of a number of consumption options and 
the fact that some consumers did not make 
use of them owing to the risk of infection. The 
fear of future job loss and loss of income may 
also have contributed to the record high level 
in saving. With the easing of the containment 
measures, the pandemic abating and the stabil -
isation in the labour market, the savings ratio is 
likely to have gone back down considerably in 
the third quarter, boosting private consump -
tion.
Some of the areas of consumption that had 
suffered very heavily under the restrictions on social contact in March and April, showed the 
highest growth rates. Although real turnover in 
the hotel and restaurant industry during the 
summer months was one- quarter down on its 
pre- crisis level in the final quarter of 2019, the 
increase on the depressed second quarter was 
around nine- tenths. The catch- up movement in 
the automotive trade is likely to have been 
similarly strong. This can be seen from private 
owners’ new passenger car registrations, which 
likewise almost doubled compared with the 
average of the second quarter. This meant that 
they were, in fact, well up on their level before 
the crisis. There was also a considerable expan -
sion in retail sales, although developments Strong counter -
movement in 
exports
Very sharp rise 
in private 
consumption  
overall …
… but quite 
differing  
developments  
depending on 
sector708090100110120Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020758090100110
90100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 1758090100110
€ bnto non-euro area countriesmonthlyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
49

across the subsectors were very mixed. Some 
areas that particularly suffered under the re -
strictions in spring – such as the retail sale of 
textiles, clothing and footwear  – recovered 
very strongly, although they were still down on 
their pre- crisis levels. Sales of information and 
communication technology (ICT) equipment, 
household appliances as well as furniture like -
wise suffered under the crisis. Even so, their 
slump in the second quarter was less severe 
and, in the reporting quarter, sales were al -
ready back up again on their pre- crisis levels. In 
some areas, such as e-  commerce and mail 
order as well as trade in food products, the cri -
sis in fact brought an increase in sales. Sales 
figures returned to something like normal in 
this sector, but were still higher than before the 
crisis. In addition to catch- up effects and tem -
porarily lower rates of value added tax, the 
overall rapid pace of growth in retail sales could 
also be due to substitution effects. In view of 
the fact that the containment measures re -
mained in place, consumers cut back massively 
on their spending on travel, and the food retail 
sector is likely to have benefited from the re -
strictions applying to the hospitality industry. 
Given the continuing high rates of infection, 
use of leisure and cultural services likewise 
probably remained heavily subdued. As a re -
sult, there is likely to have been an expansion 
of the scope for expenditure in other areas of 
consumption.
Commercial investment in machinery and 
equipment can be expected to have risen 
sharply in the third quarter of 2020. The key 
reason for this was a rapid improvement in the 
business outlook for many industrial firms fol -
lowing the pandemic- related downturn. This 
may have induced firms to execute investment 
plans that had been put on hold in view of the 
dramatically increased uncertainty. This picture 
is confirmed by the economic indicators. There 
was a sharp increase in nominal sales of capital 
goods in Germany – even without taking the 
automotive sector into consideration, which 
had suffered disproportionately from the 
pandemic- related downturn. This is also true of the value of capital goods imports. New pur -
chases of passenger cars are likely to have 
made a particularly strong contribution to the 
overall increase in investment expenditure. 
While the registration figures for commercial 
vehicles increased by just under half in the third 
quarter, the corresponding figures for commer -
cial passenger vehicles were up by four- fifths.
Construction investment is likely to have under -
gone a marked decline in the third quarter of 
2020. The coronavirus crisis affected the con -
struction sector no more than marginally in the 
second quarter. In the third quarter, investment 
was therefore not subject to the same catch- up 
momentum. Nominal turnover in the main 
construction sector – data for which are avail -
able up to August – indicate that it was mainly 
the corporate sector that perceptibly cut back 
its investment in commercial buildings. Hous -
ing construction investment is likely to have 
seen only a slight fall, however.
In real terms, German exports expanded by just 
under one-  tenth in the third quarter of 2020. 
The increase in the volume of imports from 
other euro area countries was, however, clearly 
larger than that of imports from non- euro area 
countries. This discrepancy was due in part to 
imports from China, the value of which de -
clined quite considerably. To a quite significant 
extent, this was due to declining imports of 
medical personal protective equipment, which 
were still being stepped up on a massive scale 
at the height of the pandemic in spring. A 
breakdown of imports by category of goods 
shows that the largest increase was in the vol -
ume of capital goods. This was primarily con -
nected to the massive rise in motor vehicle im -
ports, where there was a particularly strong 
countermovement following the sharp down -
turn in spring. While there was a similarly sharp 
rise in imports of intermediate goods in real 
terms, demand for imported consumer goods 
eased somewhat, with demand admittedly 
having been very robust previously.Commercial 
investment in 
machinery and 
equipment likely 
to have shown 
a sharp increaseMarked decline 
in construction 
investment
Goods imports 
up by just under 
one- tenthDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
50

Sectoral trends
German industrial output increased very 
strongly in the third quarter of 2020. Com -
pared with the average of the second quarter, 
it rose by 14¾% in seasonally adjusted terms. 
Despite the marked recovery following the 
pandemic- related downturn, industrial output 
was still slightly less than one- tenth below its 
pre- crisis level in the final quarter of 2019. Pro -
ducers of capital goods showed the largest de -
cline. Production of intermediate and consumer 
goods was notably less down on pre-  crisis 
levels.
According to the ifo Institute, capacity utilisa -
tion of tangible fixed assets in manufacturing in 
October showed a further clear increase on the 
last survey in July. It was nevertheless still mark -
edly lower than its end- 2019 level, and down 
more than average in the case of capital and 
intermediate goods producers.
The construction sector did not follow the gen -
eral catch- up movement in the German econ -
omy in the third quarter of 2020. This industry- 
specific development is due to the fact that the 
sector – thanks also to exemptions from the 
general rules on social contact – was left rela -
tively unscathed by the coronavirus crisis and, 
looking at the whole picture, did not suffer any 
significant losses of output. On an average of 
the third quarter, construction output was 
markedly down on the quarter in seasonally 
adjusted terms (-2¼%). This was due mainly to 
the sharp decline in activity in the finishing 
trades. Activity in the main construction sector, 
by contrast, remained unchanged on the quar -
ter. The overall decline in output should not, 
however, be interpreted as a sign that the con -
struction boom has run its course. Activity in 
this sector remains at a very high level. This is 
indicated by ifo Institute data on equipment 
utilisation and the reach of orders in the con -
struction industry during the summer months.
The services sector is likely to have recovered 
quite strongly on the whole in the third quarter of 2020. The progress of the catch- up move -
ment was extremely mixed, however, when 
looking at the individual services subsectors. 
Real retail sales were well up on their pre- crisis 
level, for example. The volume of wholesale 
sales – where the relevant statistical data are 
available only for the months of July and 
August   – likewise underwent a strong expan -
sion and was no more than marginally down 
on the average of the final quarter of 2019. The 
automotive sector is also likely to have made 
good most of the second- quarter downturn. 
This is indicated by new passenger car registra -
tions, which were up very strongly on an aver -
age of the summer months. By contrast, real 
sales in the hotel and restaurant sector, which 
was hit very severely by the coronavirus crisis, 
were still far below their pre- crisis level despite 
a massive increase. This is also likely to be true 
of a number of other consumer and business- 
related areas of the services sector, whose busi -
ness activity has remained subdued owing to 
the pandemic- associated restrictions.Industrial output 
caught up 
strongly in Q3
Further increase 
in capacity 
utilisation 
Marked fall in 
construction 
output
Recovery in the 
services sector 
mixedOutput in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020707580859095100105110
951001051101151201251301352015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
monthlyIndustry
Main constructionIndustry excluding
automotive
Construction1Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
51

Labour market
The labour market in Germany shifted onto a 
mild path of recovery at the beginning of the 
third quarter. Employment levels rose some -
what during the quarter after declining consid -
erably. Unemployment peaked temporarily in 
June and has since fallen slightly. The deploy -
ment of short- time working has in fact declined 
heavily since its high point in April but it is still 
in wide use. The renewed restrictions on eco -
nomic life in November are likely to interrupt 
the recovery in the labour market, too.
Employment recovered slowly during the third 
quarter of 2020 from the low reached in June. 
This stabilisation is remarkable given the down -
turn in the second quarter. The increase was 
small, however. In September, employment 
was up on its level three months previously by 
just 54,000 persons, or 0.1%. This was still 
1.5% down on the level prior to the pandemic. 
Furthermore, the recovery does not yet cover 
all sectors and forms of employment. Even be -
fore the pandemic, self- employment was 
showing a clearly negative trend, which has 
now increased slightly. The development in em -
ployment subject to social security contribu -
tions, at +0.2% over the last three months, was 
somewhat better than total employment and 
was just 1.0% down on its level in February 
2020. The number of persons in low- paid part- 
time employment recovered somewhat more 
rapidly in fact, although the preceding decline 
was admittedly relatively sharp in this area.
In most areas of the services sector, employ -
ment subject to social security contributions sta -
bilised in line with the provisional sectoral esti -
mates, which are available up to August. The 
biggest increase in absolute terms in the last 
three months was recorded by the health and 
social care sector, whose level of employment 
had barely fallen previously. The education sec -
tor developed along generally similar lines. Re -
cruitment was also relatively strong in the hotel 
and restaurant sector. This industry was hit es -
pecially hard by the restrictions introduced in Labour market 
picks up slightly 
in Q3
Employment up 
somewhat, but 
still well below 
its pre- crisis level
Stabilisation or 
recovery in most 
services subsec -
tors, but not in 
manufacturingLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020Oct.42.543.043.544.044.545.045.5
30.030.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200+400+600Oct.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Oct.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered
unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
July-
Aug.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
52

spring, however. Nearly one in ten jobs subject 
to social security contributions was shed in this 
sector. The construction sector, which was rela -
tively unencumbered by restrictions in the 
second quarter, also continued to hire staff. The 
development in the export- dependent manu -
facturing sector is noticeably negative.
With the economy picking up strongly in the 
reporting quarter, it was mainly working hours 
that increased again following their sharp de -
cline. This was due mainly to a substantial re -
duction in short- time working, which was at an 
all- time high in the second quarter. Various spe -
cial arrangements had been made beforehand 
to make the use of short- time working easier 
and more attractive for firms. Six million persons 
were in economically induced short- time work 
in April, 18% of all employees subject to social 
security contributions. According to the initial 
estimate by the Federal Employment Agency, 
their number had fallen by nearly three- fifths to 
2.58 million in August. As there was also a de -
cline in the number of lost working hours per 
short- time worker, the volume of labour lost 
through short- time work fell by more than two- 
thirds over the last four months. Even so, the 
use of this instrument is still at an extremely high 
level compared with earlier crisis situations. The 
Federal Employment Agency’s provisional esti -
mates up to July show that there was a reduc -
tion in short- time work especially in the sectors 
affected by the enforced closures in the second 
quarter, such as in the hotel and restaurant sec -
tor as well as the wholesale and retail trade. In 
the manufacturing sector, working time ac -
counts and overtime were run down initially and 
short- time working did not peak until May and 
has been scaled back comparatively little so far. 
This is especially true of the metals and technol -
ogy sector, including the manufacture of fabri -
cated metal products, manufacture of machin -
ery and equipment and automotive manufac -
turing. Nearly one in four persons employed in 
these sectors was in short- time work in July.
There has been a slight decline in registered 
unemploy ment since June, with the number of unemployed people falling by 76,000 up to 
October  and the unemployment rate down by 
0.2 percentage point to 6.2%. However, the 
number of job seekers receiving unemployment 
benefits under the statutory unemployment 
scheme, which is more strongly affected by eco -
nomic developments, did not decrease until Oc -
tober. The number of unemployed receiving the 
basic welfare allowance was down somewhat 
more strongly. This area had seen a rise in un -
employment in the second quarter, partly be -
cause many labour market policy measures had 
to be interrupted owing to contact restrictions.1 
The recommencement is likely to have reduced 
unemployment, even if the resumption of active 
labour market policy is far from being complete.
The massive increase in the number of infections 
since mid- October and the restrictions on eco -
nomic life that were initially set for November 
are not yet adequately reflected in the current 
leading indicators, as many surveys or evalu -
ations were conducted beforehand. Short- time 
work is expected to have continued to decline 
markedly in September and October. In Novem -
ber, however, it could potentially rise again in the Short- time work -
ing substantially 
reduced since 
high point in 
April, but still 
being widely 
used
Unemployment 
down slightly 
since June
Leading indica -
tors still reflect 
the situation 
before latest 
containment 
measuresPersons in short-time work for economic 
reasons*
Source: Federal Employment Agency. * Number of short-time 
workers whose entitlement is based on Section 96 SGB III, un-
adjusted figures. From May 2020, provisional figures.
Deutsche Bundesbank2008 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 200123456Millions, monthly data
1 Participants in such measures are generally not counted 
as unemployed, as by making use of the measure they do 
not meet the criterion of availability for taking up a job. 
The suspension/interruption of many measures therefore 
led to the persons affected being made unemployed.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
53

short term beyond the level reached in August. 
There could be a renewed increase in the num -
ber of lay- offs through the final quarter of 2020 
and the first quarter of 2021, which would rep -
resent a setback to the recovery process in terms 
of employment and unemployment. By contrast, 
leading indicators were still suggesting that the 
recovery is continuing. The number of vacancies 
rose again distinctly in the course of the third 
quarter. This related to both positions reported 
to the Federal Employment Agency as well as the 
jobs on offer in the economy as a whole as de -
termined by the Institute for Employment Re -
search survey. The number of vacant jobs subject 
to social security contributions reported to the 
Federal Employment Agency grew in all sectors 
of the economy, including manufacturing.
Wages and prices
The pandemic is leaving its mark on employees’ 
earnings. The rise in negotiated wages re -mained moderate in the third quarter. The so -
cial partners settled on mainly low wage agree -
ments or delayed negotiations of collective 
agreements due to expire. The annual growth 
rate of actual earnings may also have declined 
in the third quarter, although probably not as 
strongly as in the second quarter. This is mainly 
due to short- time work, which pushed down 
hours worked and thus wages. The volume of 
short- time work, which had reached a record 
level in the spring, was also still high in the 
third quarter.
In the most recent pay negotiations, the social 
partners often focused on protecting employ -
ment – by ruling out redundancies and through 
sector- specific regulations on short- time work, 
for example  – at the expense of significant 
wage increases. The rise in negotiated wages 
was therefore markedly lower than last year. 
Several months without wage increases were 
often agreed upon at the start of contracts. 
Even in sectors not as hard- hit by the crisis, 
such as the main construction sector, annual -
ised wage increases were modest, at around 
2%. The pay settlement in the central and local 
government areas of the public sector provides 
for a moderate 1½% increase in wages based 
on a notional duration of 12 months.2 Not only 
in the construction and public sector, but also 
in a number of other sectors, the social part -
ners agreed on one- off special coronavirus pay -
ments, which are exempt from tax and social 
security contributions for employees.3Pandemic leads 
to moderate 
increase in 
negotiated pay 
and a decline in 
actual earnings
2020 pay round: 
lower wage 
increases than 
in the previous 
year, often spe -
cial coronavirus 
payments
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20201.00.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
––+++++++Year-on-year percentage change, on monthly basis
Per-
centage
points
–4–20+2%
H1
H1Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 The wage 
drift is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual 
earnings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche BundesbankQ3
2 This figure is calculated on the basis of a central govern -
ment employee receiving the agreed basic pay rate subject 
to the wage agreement for the public sector (TVöD), who 
benefits disproportionately from the increase in the low 
and middle remuneration bands through staggered corona -
virus special payments. Employees in the healthcare and 
long- term care sectors, in particular, received further 
marked financial improvements as a result of the wage 
agreement.
3 According to Section 3 No 11a of the Income Tax Act 
(Einkommensteuergesetz) , employers can pay their employ -
ees special payments up to an amount of €1,500 exempt 
from tax and social security payments up to 31 December 
2020. This is conditional on the special payment being 
made in order to cushion the additional strain caused by 
the coronavirus crisis and being provided in addition to the 
wage that is due in any case.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
54

On 28 October 2020, the German government 
decided to raise the general statutory minimum 
wage in four stages by a total of €1.10 or 
11.8% from the current €9.35 per hour to 
€10.45 per hour from 1 July 2022, in line with 
recommendations from the Minimum Wage 
Commission at the end of June 2020. While the 
first two phased rises in 2021 are very small in 
order to take account of the current crisis situ -
ation, the further improvements in the min -
imum wage in 2022 provide for significantly 
higher wage increases.
Consumer prices fell significantly in the third 
quarter against the backdrop of the temporary 
VAT cut (see the box on pp. 56 ff.). The Harmon -
ised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) averaged 
over the July to September period was down 
by a seasonally adjusted 0.7% from the second 
quarter, in which prices had remained virtually 
constant. The steep fall in prices in the wake of 
the VAT cut was felt in almost all categories of 
goods. The temporary tax measure, which 
entered into force on 1 July 2020, was also very 
evident in year- on- year terms. Consumer prices 
were down by a total of 0.2% on the year, fol -
lowing an increase of 0.7% in the previous 
quarter. Core inflation excluding energy and 
food dropped from 1.1% to 0.5% over the 
same period, but remained in positive territory.
In October, consumer prices remained below 
their previous year’s level on account of the 
temporary VAT cut. The inflation rate fell to 
-0.5% from a level of -0.4% in the previous 
month.4 The rate for energy remained clearly 
negative, partly because crude oil prices were 
low. The same goes for industrial goods ex -
cluding energy, which, against the backdrop of 
the VAT cut, were distinctly cheaper than in the 
previous year. The rate of inflation for services 
almost halved in October in spite of the fact 
that prices were still up on the year. A steep 
decline in prices for package holidays5 and 
one- off effects due to lower dental and insur -
ance fees played a role in this. By contrast, un -
processed food, in particular, has risen more 
sharply again recently. Excluding energy and food, the overall inflation rate fell further in 
Octo ber from 0.3% to 0.1%.Federal Cabinet 
to raise 
minimum  wage 
in stages from 
January 2021
Temporary 
VAT cut led to 
broadly based 
price drops 
in Q3 …
… and also still 
dampened the 
year- on- year 
rate significantly 
in OctoberExport pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20209396100104
96100104108
96100104108
10123
–+++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2Producer prices1
%2015 = 100, log scale
96100104
Oct.Import prices
Oct.
4 The annual rate of consumer inflation according to the 
national Consumer Price Index (CPI) was -0.2% in October, 
as it had been in the previous month. The comparatively 
large difference between CPI and HICP rates is due to the 
recent increase in fees for gambling, which are only cap -
tured in the CPI.
5 Owing to the travel warnings issued by the Federal For -
eign Office, the prices for international package holidays 
had to be largely estimated (imputed), especially in Sep -
tember and October, and are therefore less meaningful. 
Overall, however, compared with the second quarter, non- 
availability of price representatives owing to pandemic-  
related restrictions, as measured by their share of the HICP 
basket of goods, played almost no role in the third quarter. 
See Federal Statistical Office (2020b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
55

Impact of the temporary reduction in VAT on consumer 
prices
On 29 June 2020, the Bundestag and the 
Bundesrat adopted an economic stimulus 
package to support the economy, the key 
points of which had previously been agreed 
by the coalition committee on 3 June. A key 
component of this package is the tempor-
ary reduction in VAT: with effect from 1 July 
2020, the standard rate of VAT for goods 
and services was reduced from 19% to 16% 
and the reduced rate of VAT for goods was 
lowered from 7% to 5% on a temporary 
basis until 31 December 2020. This tempor-
ary VAT cut was the fi  rst of its kind in Ger-
many.1 Its aim was to boost private con-
sumption through lower prices in the face 
of weak demand. Whether and to what 
extent the VAT cut is actually passed on to 
consumers depends on enterprises’ pricing 
strategy. If enterprises do not pass the VAT 
reduction on to consumers, they could, for 
example, use it to strengthen their margins.
If enterprises had passed the VAT cut 
through immediately and in full to their 
prices, these would have fallen by 2.5% for 
goods and services subject to the standard 
rate of VAT and by 1.9% for goods and ser-
vices subject to the reduced rate. The stand-
ard rate of VAT only applies to slightly less 
than two- thirds of the basket of goods on 
which the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) is based. The standard rate of 
VAT applies to all energy products, most 
non- energy industrial goods, almost one- 
half of services and around one- third of 
food products.2 The lion’s share of food 
products, by contrast, are subject to the re-
duced rate of VAT. Together with certain 
indus trial goods (e.g. books or the water 
supply) and some services (e.g. local public 
transport), which are also taxed at the re-
duced rate of VAT, they account for around 
15% of the HICP basket of goods. Only ser-
vices, including rents, which constitute one- 
tenth of the total HICP basket of goods, are exempt from VAT. All in all, around one- half 
of services, i.e. around one- quarter of the 
HICP , are not subject to VAT. Taking into 
account  these shares in the basket of 
goods, the HICP rate would have been 
1.8 percentage points lower in each case in 
the months from July to December 2020 if 
the VAT cut had been passed through im-
mediately and in full.3 Core infl  ation exclud-
ing energy and food would have fallen al-
most equally as sharply. Looking at 2020 as 
a whole, the impact of the reduction in VAT 
would have been only half as great since it 
would have affected only six months.
However, initial analyses suggest that the 
pass- through of the reduction in VAT to 
consumer prices was actually signifi  cantly 
lower: the annual HICP rate was down 
markedly in July, but only fell from 0.8% to 
zero, which is less than half of what mech-
anical calculations predicted. Food price in-
fl  ation, in particular, recorded a sharp de-
cline, and the infl  ation rate for industrial 
goods excluding energy also fell distinctly 
by 1½ percentage points. By contrast, the 
infl  ation rate for services remained more or 
less unchanged, both overall and also for 
those services subject to VAT. However, 
movements in the annual growth rate pro-
vide only a rough indication of the pass- 
through of the VAT cut, as other factors 
also infl  uenced prices in July. For example, it 
is not surprising that the infl  ation rate for 
1 However, there was a temporary reduction in VAT in 
the United Kingdom, for example, in 2008-09.
2 The standard rate of VAT applies to beverages and 
tobacco.
3 The Federal Statistical Offi   ce (2020a) has reached a 
similar conclusion, reporting an effect of -1.6 percent-
age points for the national consumer price index (CPI). 
The slight deviation from the fi  gure for the HICP can 
be explained by the fact that the share of goods sub-
ject to VAT is lower in the CPI than in the HICP . This is 
because owner- occupied housing is excluded from the 
HICP , which means that the share of rents exempt 
from VAT is twice as high in the CPI as it is in the HICP .Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
56

energy barely fell in July despite the VAT cut, 
since oil prices, which usually have a signifi  -
cant and rapid impact on consumer prices, 
rose markedly at the same time.4 Besides 
this, many service providers are likely to 
have retained most of the VAT cut because 
the measures needed to contain the spread 
of the coronavirus have both severely damp-
ened turnover and caused additional costs, 
such as the installation of partition walls.
If other factors are then included in the an-
alysis of the HICP rate since July,5 the VAT 
cut appears to have been passed through in 
full for most food products and industrial 
goods excluding energy.6 In addition, in 
these two categories of goods, price de-
clines are evident in some cases which go 
well beyond the VAT effect. This was prob-
ably partly because some retailers had an-
nounced in advance that they would not be 
cutting prices across their entire product 
range as a result of the change to the tax 
rate, but would instead be offering very 
large discounts on selected products.7 
Looking at services, by contrast, just one- 
third of the lower tax rate appears to have 
been passed on. Only a few areas, such as 
telecommunications, which were not ad-
versely affected by the containment meas-
ures and the prices of which are relatively 
easy to adjust, saw price reductions in the 
full amount of the change in VAT. In terms 
of headline HICP infl  ation, the change in 
VAT may have been passed on by just over 
60%. For core infl  ation excluding energy 
and food, this fi  gure would be just under 
50%. Most of the prices were changed in 
July. In the months that followed, prices are 
only likely to have been changed in very 
isolated cases, probably owing to the fact 
that the VAT reduction was announced at 
short notice and not all prices could be ad-
justed on time.
In other countries which temporarily cut 
VAT rates, prices were frequently raised to 
their original level before tax rates were put 
back up again.8 So far, however, there have 4 In addition, suppliers of refi  ned petroleum products 
increased their margins in July, as separate data show.
5 For this purpose, a regression equation which ex-
plains the price change not only by the change in VAT 
but also by a cost factor of importance to the respect-
ive product or service, such as a sectoral producer 
price or negotiated wage, was estimated at the small-
est possible level of aggregation for each category of 
goods or services subject to VAT included in the HICP . 
This allows the impact of the change in VAT to be sep-
arated from the impact of other cost factors.
6 The ifo Institute (2020) has reached a very similar 
conclusion for food products.
7 For example, one larger clothing retailer announced 
that it would cut the prices of a different range of 
items every week by 30%.
8 See, for example, Offi   ce for National Statistics (2009) 
for the temporary reduction in VAT in the United King-
dom.HICP in Germany
1012
–++
–10+1+2
Source: Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche BundesbankOverall index
Industrial goods excluding energy
2019 20200123Year-on-year percentage change
ServicesTime of change in VAT
0.0+ 0.8
“Core inflation” components
+ 0.7
– 0.8
+ 1.4 + 1.4Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
57

Measurement uncertainty in the HICP is ex -
pected to intensify again in November against 
the backdrop of renewed restrictions in the ser -
vices sector and the associated non- availability 
of price representatives. However, negative in -
flation rates are still expected up to the end of 
the year owing to the temporary VAT cut. 
Thereafter, the return to the higher VAT rates 
planned for January 2021 is likely to lead to in -
flation rates entering clearly positive territory 
again.6
Order books and outlook
The recent significant acceleration in infection 
rates and the measures adopted restricting so -
cial and economic life, for November to begin 
with, are initially likely to interrupt the recovery 
of the German economy in the final quarter of 
2020. After the very strong growth seen in the 
third quarter, aggregate output could stagnate 
or even decline at the end of the year. In add -ition, there is a risk that further restrictions will 
be imposed at a later stage if it is not possible 
to reduce the infection rates significantly and 
sustainably. However, from the current per -
spective, it seems unlikely that there will be a 
repeat of the situation in the second quarter 
which saw a dramatic slump in economic out -
put. This is largely because the imposed restric -
tions, which chiefly affect the hotel and res -
taurant sector as well as other leisure and cul -
tural services, are much more targeted than the 
measures applied in March and April. Retail 
and motor vehicle trade are able to continue 
operations, for example. In addition, despite 
the very high number of new infections in al -
most all European countries and the resulting 
restrictions, there has so far been no further 
disruption to international production chains. 
This means that losses could be limited in sec -
tors of the economy not directly affected by 
restrictions.Higher inflation 
rates expected 
again when 
value added tax 
raised from 
beginning of 
2021
German eco -
nomic recovery 
probably inter -
rupted for time 
being, …been no indications of a similar early rever-
sal in Germany. It is likely, then, that prices 
will only be raised again once the tempor-
ary change in VAT has expired in January 
2021. Assuming a symmetrical price re-
bound such as this, the infl  ation rate should 
then once again take on signifi  cantly posi-tive values. In the second half of 2021, the 
infl  ation rate might even be quite high for a 
while because prices were dampened by 
the VAT cut one year earlier.Contributions of the VAT reduction to the inflation rate in 2020
1.41.21.00.80.60.40.20
–––––––Percentage points
Deutsche BundesbankHICP
excluding
energy
and foodHeadline
HICP
inflationServices Non-energy
industrial
goodsEnergy Food
15.5 10.9 26.6 47.0 100.0 73.6 Share of HICP in 2020 (%)
Pass-through in fullActual pass-through 
according to estimate
6 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
58

Against this backdrop, the manufacturing sec -
tor, in particular, could provide support in the 
fourth quarter, with value added in October 
likely to have been well above the average of 
the previous quarter. Industrial orders had im -
proved significantly towards the end of the 
period under review, and, according to the ifo 
Institute, the rise in capacity utilisation between 
July and October was roughly the same as that 
between April and July. However, the recovery 
in the predominantly export- oriented industry 
is also being hampered by the resurgence of 
the pandemic in Europe. Although it is also 
mainly contact- intensive services that are likely 
to suffer in other European countries, demand 
for goods from Germany’s export range, such 
as investment in machinery and equipment, 
will also probably be dampened, with exports 
to these countries losing considerable momen -
tum.
Sentiment in the German economy became 
much gloomier again of late. After five con -
secutive improvements, the ifo Business Cli -
mate Index declined slightly in October. This is 
likely to have been due to the rapid increase in 
the number of new COVID-  19 infections in 
Germany and in neighbouring European coun -
tries, which apparently fuelled enterprises’ 
fears of a setback on the back of tighter con -
tainment measures. It should be noted that 
these survey results were collected before the 
recent decisions to significantly tighten the epi -
demic containment measures became public in 
November.7 The deterioration in sentiment was 
primarily due to business expectations, which 
declined to a similar extent across all sectors of 
the economy. Short- term industrial output and 
export expectations also saw a marked deteri -
oration.
The orders situation in German industry largely 
recovered following the dramatic decline in 
March and April. For example, the inflow of … although 
manufacturing 
could provide 
support
Sentiment in 
the German 
economy deteri -
orated again 
somewhat
Orders situation 
in industry 
largely 
recoveredDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source  of  the  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office. 
1 Only calendar-adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202065708090100110
–30–20–100+10
65708090100110120
65708090100110
90100110120130140
–100+10+20Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
DomesticInternationalLog scaleLog scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1Lin scale
Year-on-year change1
Main construction orders
%%Total
Monthly
7 By contrast, the earlier than anticipated wide availability 
of a vaccination represents an upside risk for medium- term 
developments.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
59

orders in the third quarter of 2020 rose by just 
under one- third on the quarter and was thus 
only marginally down on the pre- crisis level in 
the last quarter of 2019. The pre- crisis volume 
of orders in the automotive sector was even 
exceeded in the third quarter, while the mech -
anical engineering sector was still clearly lag -
ging behind. Broken down by region, new 
orders from non- euro area countries were 
down on the pre- crisis level to a slightly smaller 
extent than incoming orders from Germany 
and the euro area. According to the ifo Insti -
tute’s survey results, the assessment of the 
stock of orders still being processed also im -
proved significantly recently, slightly exceeding 
the pre- crisis level.
The German construction industry is expected 
to flourish towards the end of 2020. The sector 
is not affected by the recent tightening of con -
tact restrictions due to the resurgence of the 
COVID-  19 pandemic. Furthermore, in July and 
August –  the most recent months for which 
statistics are available – incoming orders in the 
main construction sector saw a steep season -
ally adjusted rise compared with the previous 
quarter, with the inflow of orders in housing 
construction increasing particularly sharply. The 
number of building permits in this sector of the 
construction industry likewise remained at a 
very high level. The more timely survey indica -
tors show a similarly positive economic picture 
for the sector as a whole. According to surveys 
by the ifo Institute in October, equipment util -isation in the main construction industry re -
mained well above its long- term average. The 
reach of order books, which has so far also 
been stable during the coronavirus crisis, even 
expanded slightly of late from a very high level.
By contrast, private consumption is likely to de -
cline markedly in the final quarter of 2020. Fol -
lowing the steep catch- up movement in the 
third quarter, this setback is mainly due to the 
recent decisions by central and local govern -
ments to tighten contact restrictions signifi -
cantly for at least one month from 2 November 
in the light of rising coronavirus infection rates. 
This mainly affects hotels and restaurants, as 
well as leisure and cultural services sectors. 
Business activity in these branches is set to 
plummet dramatically, at least in November. 
Moreover, households’ travel expenditure 
abroad is expected to decline again. This is due 
mainly to the growing incidence of infection in 
EU Member States as well as in many non- EU 
countries. By contrast, the fact that retail trade 
is not affected by recent government decisions 
could have a stabilising effect. On the one 
hand, the pandemic is likely to have a slight 
dampening impact on customer numbers but, 
on the other, business activity in this area con -
tinues to benefit from the temporary reduction 
in the VAT rate. Moreover, the renewed tight -
ening of contact restrictions could lead to cer -
tain substitution effects, as the widespread 
closure of catering establishments increases re -
tail demand for food, for instance.Construction 
activity likely to 
continue to be 
brisk at year- endDistinct setback 
in private 
consumption  
towards end 
of year
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), The fiscal stimulus package announced by the coalition parties, 
Monthly Report, June 2020, pp. 28-29.
Federal Statistical Office (2020a), Impact of the value added tax cut on consumer prices , https://
www.destatis.de/EN/Press/2020/06/PE20_215_611.html
Federal Statistical Office (2020b), Impact of the corona crisis on the CPI/ HICP price collection, 
method report of 12  November 2020, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Themes/Economy/Prices/
Consumer-Price-Index/Methods/corona-cpi-hicp.pdf?__blob=publicationFileDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
60

Ifo Schnelldienst Digital (2020), Die Preiseffekte der Mehrwertsteuersenkung in deutschen Super -
märkten: Eine Analyse für mehr als 60 000 Produkte , 13/  2020, https://www.ifo.de/DocDL/
sd-2020-digital-13-fuest-neumeier-stoehlker-mehrwertsteuersenkung.pdf
Office for National Statistics (2009), Impact of VAT reduction on the consumer price indices, Eco -
nomic & Labour Market Review, Vol. 3 (No 8, August 2009).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
61

Public finances*
General government budget
German fiscal policy is still geared towards 
tackling the consequences of the coronavirus 
pandemic. Stabilisation measures are bringing 
with them high deficits and rising debt. Public 
finances will recover as the crisis abates and fis -
cal stabilisation gradually comes to an end. 
However, the outlook here remains highly un -
certain with respect to both macroeconomic 
developments and any potential additional sta -
bilisation measures.
Following a surplus of 1½% of gross domestic 
product (GDP) in 2019, a deficit ratio of over 
5% is expected for the current year. This devel -
opment is partly due to the economic slump 
(automatic stabilisers): this is causing taxes and 
social contributions from regular employment 
to fall whilst, at the same time, expenditure on 
short- time working and unemployment bene -
fits is rising. The impact of the active fiscal pol -
icy support measures adopted since March 
2020 is likely to be even greater.1 On top of 
this, the fiscal stance for 2020 was already ex -
pansionary before these measures were imple -
mented.2 The debt ratio could well rise above 
70% by the end of the year (2019: 60%). This 
reflects new loans to finance deficits and set up 
cash reserves. In addition, the debt level in -
cludes government- guaranteed loans and 
debt- financed capital injections for enterprises 
(these do not increase the deficit as defined in 
the national accounts). The ratio is also rising 
because nominal GDP is declining in the de -
nominator.
The outlook for the coming year hinges cru -
cially on macroeconomic developments and 
further fiscal stabilisation policy. As things cur -
rently stand, the deficit is expected to go back 
down, especially as stabilisation measures will 
come to an end over the course of the year. By 
contrast, a number of other decisions will push 
up the deficit, in particular the partial abolition of the solidarity surcharge and a significant in -
crease in child benefits and the child tax allow -
ance. Furthermore, the June economic stimulus 
package includes an additional government 
grant to prevent the electricity levy imposed 
by  the Renewable Energy Act ( Erneuerbare-  
Energien -Gesetz  – EEG) from rising. Additional 
expenditure on climate measures is also 
planned, and only part of this will be financed  
by the new national carbon pricing scheme. 
Net payments to the regular EU budget will 
also weigh more heavily on balance than in the 
current year, with Germany’s net financial con -
tribution rising primarily as a result of Brexit. By 
contrast, the revenue that Germany expects 
from the EU’s Next Generation EU (NGEU) off- 
budget entity will be much lower.
As the crisis will continue beyond the current 
year, a stabilising fiscal policy will also be im -
portant in the year to come. The escape clauses 
in the EU budget rules and in central govern -
ment’s debt brake are to remain active3 in 2021 
to make this possible. This will enable fiscal pol -
icy to support those enterprises and house -
holds that are particularly hard hit by the crisis. 
It might also be possible to give a more general 
boost to the economy. Essentially, it is a matter 
of effect ively tackling the fallout from the crisis. 
Jobs and enterprises that are otherwise viable 
should not need to be abandoned just because Fiscal policy 
continues to 
focus on 
coronavirus 
crisis 
High deficit in 
2020 and rising 
debt reflect 
fiscal  policy 
support 
Deficit expected 
to decline in 
2021Escape clauses 
in budget rules 
to remain active 
in 2021
* The section entitled “General government budget” re -
lates to data from the national accounts and the Maas -
tricht debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed report -
ing on budgetary developments (government finance stat -
istics). No data for the third quarter of 2020 are yet avail -
able for local government or the statutory health and 
public long- term care insurance schemes. These will be 
analysed in the short commentaries in upcoming issues of 
the Monthly Report.
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a). The excursus is based 
on estimates from June 2020. The strain that the crisis is 
placing on the budget is now expected to be much lower 
for 2020.
2 The Stability Council’s resolution in December 2019 was 
based on an estimate of a ¾ percentage point decline in 
the structural surplus in relation to GDP to ½% of GDP in 
2020.
3 Several state governments are also planning to keep their 
debt brake escape clauses active.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
62

of the coronavirus pandemic. Safeguarding 
these underpins economic fundamentals and 
employment in the medium term, too.
Against this background, Germany’s expan -
sionary fiscal stance in 2020 and 2021 appears 
appropriate. Owing to the high degree of un -
certainty, it is also essential to remain prepared 
to respond to any unforeseen developments 
that may arise. Germany had achieved sound 
public finances before the crisis and has head -
room to significantly expand government sta -
bilisation if necessary. However, new measures 
should be temporary in nature – as has pre -
dominantly been the case so far. Structural bur -
dens would be critical insofar as fiscal chal -
lenges – for instance, tax losses expected in the 
medium run (see pp. 65f.) and demographic 
change – will become tougher to overcome in 
the medium term. Once the crisis abates and 
the normal budgetary rules apply again, it is 
important that public finances be restored to a 
sound footing within a reasonable period of 
time. This will ultimately be the prerequisite for 
maintaining confidence in the public finances 
of both Germany and the other euro area 
Member States alike.
Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue4 in the third quarter of 2020 was 
considerably lower than in the same period last 
year (-6%; see the chart and table on p. 64). 
This was the result, not least, of measures from 
the June economic stimulus package. The weak 
economic situation also led to further short -
falls, though these were on a much smaller 
scale than the shortfalls following the massive 
slump in the second quarter. Wage tax fell by 
11½%. Revenue from wage tax was reduced 
significantly by short- time working5 and the 
first tranche of the bonus child benefit pay -
ment, which, like child benefits, is deducted from this type of revenue. Without this bonus 
payment, wage tax would have fallen by only 
4½%. Profit- related taxes were down by a total 
of 4½%. Corporation tax was again particularly 
affected; however, revenue from this item de -
clined by less than in the second quarter. The 
same was true for assessed income tax. By con -
trast, there was a significant rise in non-  
assessed taxes on earnings – chiefly investment 
income tax on dividends. This was probably at -
tributable in part to the fact that some share -
holders’ meetings took place later on, thus 
shifting dividend payouts into the second half 
of the year. VAT decreased by 2%. Both dwin -
dling private consumption and support meas -
ures had a part to play here. Specifically, the 
temporary cut in VAT, which came into force at 
the beginning of July, led to significant revenue 
shortfalls. However, VAT revenue was only partly 
affected in the third quarter as VAT is paid with 
a lag of up to two months. The cut in VAT was 
counteracted by deferrals from the previous 
quarter tailing off, with general government 
ultimately  receiving more in payments than it 
granted in new deferrals.
According to the current projection issued by 
the Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates, 
tax revenue for 2020 as a whole will be 9% 
lower than in the previous year. The major fac -
tor driving this development is a decrease in 
key macroeconomic reference variables. As 
average wages are also in decline, progressive 
taxation will push revenue down further. In 
addition, support measures related to the 
coronavirus pandemic are stifling revenue con -
siderably. Notable measures include the VAT 
cut applicable throughout the second half of 
2020 as well as the bonus child benefit pay -
ment for parents. Enterprises are receiving sup -Fiscal policy 
focus on stabil -
isation during 
coronavirus 
crisis  is appro -
priate
Tax revenue 
down in Q3: 
support meas -
ures play signifi -
cant roleTax revenue set 
to decline by 
9% for 2020 as 
a whole
4 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the quarter under review.
5 Short- time working reduces wages, and short- time work -
ing benefits are not taxed. For the purposes of income tax 
assessment, however, short- time working benefits are fac -
tored in when the tax rate is determined (Progressions-
vorbehalt) . This leads to higher tax rates, which in turn 
leads to a moderate increase in tax revenue in the follow -
ing year.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
63

port in the form of liquidity assistance: for ex -
ample, their excessively high tax prepayments 
can be quickly adjusted and they can have their 
tax payments temporarily deferred.Tax revenue is expected to grow significantly in 
2021 (+6½%), primarily on account of the as -
sumed macroeconomic catch- up process. Pro -
gressive taxation should then go back to boost -
ing revenue, as usual. As some COVID-  19 
measures will expire, the working group also 
expects incoming payments of taxes. However, 
tax revenue will come under strain from rising 
shortfalls resulting from other support meas -
ures (e.g. introducing the option of depreci -
ation using the declining- balance method) and 
the partial abolition of the solidarity surcharge. 
In the years thereafter, i.e. from 2022 to 2025, 
revenue is projected to rise between 5% and 
3½% annually, largely reflecting the assump -
tions made regarding macroeconomic develop -
ments and progressive taxation.
The working party only takes account of the 
tax legislation applicable when it draws up a 
tax estimate. As a consequence, one notable 
piece of legislation that its calculations do not 
factor in is the Second Family Relief Act (Zwei -Significant 
increase in 2021 
and somewhat 
slower tax 
growth 
thereafter 
Further cuts in 
income tax and 
increase in child 
benefits not yet 
includedTax revenue
 
Type of taxQ1-Q3Estimate 
for 2020 1Q3
2019 2020 2019 2020
Year-on-year changeYear- on- 
year 
change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 539.6 496.0 – 43.6 –  8.1 –  8.5 179.0 168.3 – 10.7 –  6.0
of which:
Wage tax 159.0 151.6 –  7.4 –  4.7 –  5.1 53.7 47.5 –  6.2 – 11.5
Profi  t-related taxes 95.4 80.1 – 15.3 – 16.0 – 15.1 27.6 26.3 –  1.3 –  4.7
Assessed income tax 3 47.1 42.8 –  4.3 –  9.1 –  8.9 13.6 13.5 –  0.1 –  0.9
Corporation tax 24.9 16.3 –  8.6 – 34.7 – 34.1 7.6 5.4 –  2.2 – 28.9
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 19.5 15.9 –  3.6 – 18.5 – 15.1 5.2 5.9 +  0.7 + 13.8
Withholding tax on 
interest income  and 
capital  gains 3.9 5.1 +  1.3 + 32.6 + 25.3 1.2 1.5 +  0.3 + 25.3
VAT4 180.6 164.1 – 16.4 –  9.1 – 10.1 61.1 59.8 –  1.2 –  2.0
Other consumption- 
related taxes 5 65.0 62.7 –  2.3 –  3.5 –  3.8 22.8 22.4 –  0.4 –  1.8
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1  According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of November 2020. 2 Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local 
government taxes. 3 Employee refunds deducted from revenue. 4 VAT and import VAT. 5 Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor 
vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protec-
tion.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Tax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Including EU shares in 
German tax revenue but excluding receipts from local govern-
ment taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 202020151050510
––––++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figuresDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
64

tes Familienentlastungsgesetz)  that has already 
been adopted by the Bundestag. This legisla -
tion provides for a rise in the basic tax allow -
ance for 2021 and 2022, and shifts the other 
income tax brackets to the right. Furthermore, 
child benefits and the child tax allowance are 
to be raised significantly again in 2021.
Owing to the very high degree of uncertainty in 
the coronavirus crisis, the working group also 
updated its estimate in September – outside 
the standard cycle for preparing estimates. Ac -
cording to the latest tax estimate, additional 
revenue of €10½ billion is expected this year 
compared with the September figure (see also 
the table above). The new macroeconomic as -
sumptions for key reference variables for tax 
revenue are somewhat less favourable for 
2020. However, the cash balances were a posi -
tive surprise, especially in the case of profit-  
related taxes. Additionally, fewer burdens aris -
ing from court rulings on real estate transfer 
tax are now expected.6 The estimates for 2021 
and 2022 are €3½ billion and €5½ billion 
higher. This is mainly due to more favourable 
macroeconomic assumptions. In addition, the 
working group now assumes a somewhat slower catch- up process for some profit- related 
taxes. This and the fact that the beneficial one- 
off effect of the revised court ruling will no 
longer be felt reduce the positive base effect 
from the previous year. From 2023 onwards, 
however, overall economic growth is less fa -
vourable in the new estimate. This is the main 
reason why tax revenue is expected to be mod -
erately lower than in the September estimate.
Compared with the last pre- COVID-  19 estimate 
(autumn 2019), this year’s expected tax receipts 
are down by €88 billion (2½% of GDP). Whilst 
annual revenue shortfalls are expected to wane Compared with 
September esti -
mate, additional 
revenue from 
2020 to 2022 
and revenue 
shortfalls in 
2024
Tax estimates: revisions made in the 
wake of the coronavirus pandemic*
Sources:  Working  Party  on  Tax  Revenue  Estimates,  Federal 
Ministry  of  Finance  and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * General 
government tax revenue according to the official tax estimates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025700750800850900950€ billion, log scale
October 2019
September 2020
November 2020
November 2020 
including the planned 
Second Family Relief ActOﬃ   cial tax estimate fi  gures and the Federal Government’s macroeconomic projection 
 
Item 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025
Tax revenue 1
€ billion 728.3 776.2 816.0 847.3 879.0 908.4
As % of GDP 22.0 22.1 22.3 22.5 22.8 23.0
Year-on-year change (%) – 8.9 6.6 5.1 3.8 3.7 3.3
Revision of previous estimate (€ billion) 10.6 3.4 5.4 0.6 – 4.2 .
Real GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2020) – 5.5 4.4 2.5 1.0 1.0 1.0
Interim projection (September 2020) – 5.8 4.4 1.5 1.5 1.5 .
Autumn projection (October 2019) 1.0 1.3 1.1 1.1 1.1 .
Nominal GDP growth (%)
Autumn projection (October 2020) – 3.8 6.0 4.3 2.6 2.6 2.6
Interim projection (September 2020) – 4.0 6.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 .
Autumn projection (October 2019) 2.9 3.1 2.8 2.8 2.8 .
Sources: Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates (November 2020) and Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 1 Including EU 
shares in German tax revenue, including customs duties, including receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 Implementation of the Federal Fiscal Court’s rulings on 
tax exemption pursuant to Section 6a of the Real Estate 
Transfer Tax Act (Grunderwerbsteuergesetz) ; see also Fed -
eral Ministry of Finance (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
65

in subsequent years, there is still set to be a 
shortfall of over €50 billion at what was the 
end of the projection period in 2024 compared 
with the autumn 2019 estimate. These drops in 
revenue are mainly due to the fact that eco -
nomic activity will be unable to match the 
macroeconomic expectations from prior to the 
coronavirus pandemic. Furthermore, legislative 
changes, such as the partial abolition of the 
solidarity surcharge, will play a significant role.
Central government budget
Central government recorded a high deficit of 
€21½ billion in the third quarter of 2020, com -
pared with a surplus of €2 billion in the same 
quarter of 2019. Revenue fell by 10% due to a 
€9½ billion drop in tax revenue. Expenditure 
rose steeply, by 15½% (€14 billion). Transfers to 
state governments increased by €5½ billion, 
driven to a large extent by compensation pay -
ments for losses suffered by public transport 
companies due to the COVID-  19 outbreak and 
for unoccupied hospital beds. Payments to the 
social security funds, in particular, increased by 
even more (+€6½ billion). For example, the 
health fund alone received €3½ billion on a 
one- off basis to compensate for exceptional 
burdens stemming from the pandemic. Crisis 
assistance for enterprises played only a minor 
role. Expenditure on the basic allowance for 
job seekers continued to increase only moder -
ately (by just under €½ billion). In terms of in -
vestment expenditure, loans to the social se -
curity funds rose by €4 billion. Payments to the 
Federal Employment Agency for the purpose of 
offsetting the deficit are recorded under this 
item. By contrast, interest expenditure con -
tinued to decline significantly (-€3 billion). This 
was mainly due to the once again higher pre -
miums received in the sale of central govern -
ment debt instruments.
After three quarters, the deficit in the central 
government budget came to €63½ billion. In 
the second supplementary budget, a record 
deficit of €218 billion is forecast for the year as a whole. There are indications that high bur -
dens are yet to come. Planned transfers to spe -
cial funds of around €30 billion are of particular 
importance. The one- off reimbursement of 
local governments’ local business tax losses, 
accounting for €6 billion, will likewise leave a 
mark. Additional loans to the Federal Employ -
ment Agency could be of a similar size. Further 
burdens include capital injections to Deutsche 
Bahn (€5 billion) and the permanent increase in 
central government’s share of the accommoda -
tion costs for recipients of unemployment 
benefit II (€3½ billion). On top of this, bridging 
aid for enterprises hit by the pandemic was ex -
tended and massively expanded to help them 
through the restrictions recently imposed. 
Nevertheless, the expenditure framework of 
around €25 billion available for this purpose 
still seems sufficient. All in all, so far it seems 
that net borrowing will remain well below the 
estimated amount. A deficit of around €150 
billion seems plausible. If net borrowing stays 
lower than planned, the future repayment 
amount required under the debt brake will also 
be lower. To date, the repayment figure has 
been estimated at €6 billion per year for 2023 
to 2042. This amount could be roughly halved.
So far, there has been limited take- up of bridg -
ing aid for enterprises, even though sales in 
some sectors have fallen sharply. Widening the 
options for tax loss carrybacks seems an apt 
way to expand targeted aid: more years could 
be factored in, the ceilings could be raised fur -
ther and local business tax could also be in -
cluded. This would enable enterprises that 
were profitable before the crisis to receive 
prompt assistance and effective support.
Central government adopted the draft budget 
for 2021 at the end of September. Given the 
high degree of uncertainty due to the corona -
virus pandemic, this was later than usual. Cen -
tral government envisages activating the debt 
brake escape clause again. Net borrowing is 
expected to amount to €96 billion. As in the 
second supplementary budget for 2020, there 
are no plans to use reserves. This alone increases Compared with 
pre- COVID-  19 
estimate, rev -
enue expected 
to be markedly 
lower in 
medium term, 
too
Deficit high 
again in Q3 due 
to pandemic
Record deficit 
this year, but 
probably consid -
erably lower 
than budgetedSupplement aid 
for enterprises 
by expanding 
tax loss carry -
backs
Draft budget for 
2021 includes 
renewed acti -
vation of escape 
clauseDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
66

the funds required by €19½ billion compared 
with the March benchmark figures, which did 
not factor in the fallout from the coronavirus 
(and net borrowing). Compared with the March 
figures, tax revenue is estimated to be €32 bil -
lion lower, also owing to measures taken in re -
sponse to the pandemic. In addition, global 
revenue shortfalls of €4 billion are factored in. 
These are presumably intended to cover pledged 
tax transfers to state governments in order to 
shield them from the consequences of the VAT 
cut. Moreover, expenditure appropriations were 
raised substantially. For instance, the social se -
curity funds are set to receive €11 billion in con -
nection with the pandemic. The main aim of this 
is to keep the overall contribution rate below 
40%. Taken together, the figures budgeted for 
long- term unemployment benefits and for 
claims from guarantees were raised by a similar 
amount. Additional funds have been earmarked 
to extend bridging aid. There are also higher 
grants for climate measures, amongst other 
things.
The Bundestag will deliberate on the 2021 cen -
tral government budget until December. Accord -
ing to the draft budget, the standard limit for 
net borrowing will be exceeded by €86 billion 
(see the table on p.  68). Structural net new 
borrowing of €12 billion is permitted under the 
debt brake. In addition, borrowing is permitted 
for cyclical burdens and the acquisition of 
finan cial assets, estimated at €14 billion and €2 
billion, respectively. However, the figures also 
have to take account of the large deficit for the 
off- budget entities incorporated under the 
debt brake, which is projected to be €18 billion 
(€14 billion for the Energy and Climate Fund). 
Repayment of the exceptional debt is sched -
uled to start in 2026 and end in 2042. This cor -
responds to €5 billion per year.
This does not take into account borrowing 
planned by the European Union (EU) for trans -
fers. Central government will also bear the 
costs for this in line with Germany’s share of 
funding for the EU budget. Repayment is 
scheduled to start in the second half of the decade, and funds to be provided by Germany 
are expected to be correspondingly higher. The 
basic idea behind the debt brake would sug -
gest that this EU debt should be taken into ac -
count in line with Germany’s share of funding. 
Just like any borrowing by central government 
itself, this is expected to place a strain on the 
central government budget in the future.
In the medium- term fiscal plan, there are still 
large tax shortfalls compared with the March 
benchmark figures. Although tax revenue will 
regain some lost ground over time, the gap still 
amounts to €20 billion in 2024, the final year 
covered by the plan. In addition, part of the 
additional expenditure from the June economic 
stimulus package is set to stretch into the 
longer term. Central government’s higher share 
(around €3½ billion) of accommodation costs 
for recipients of the basic allowance will have a 
sustained negative impact on the central gov -
ernment budget. As a result of these factors, 
the financial situation is likely to remain strained Repayment plan 
for escape 
clause debt 
implies annual 
burdens of €5 
billion as of 
2026
Count EU 
borrowing  
for transfers 
towards debt 
brakeFiscal plan up to 
2024: full deple -
tion of reserves 
and substantial 
unspecified need 
for actionCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Feder-
al Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget en-
tities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical effects. 
Since 2019, interest expenditure due at the beginning of July 
has been assigned to the second quarter.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q45025025
––+
–75–50–250+25
2018
20202018Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192020
2019€ billionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
67

Central government’s fi  scal planning up to 2024 and the result for the debt brake*
€ billion
Item Actual 2019Second sup-
plementary 
budget 
2020 Draft 2021Fiscal plan
2022 2023 2024
 1. Expenditure 1 343.2 508.5 413.4 387.0 387.1 393.3
of which:
1.a Investment 38.1 71.3 55.2 48.0 48.0 48.0
1.b Global spending increases/ cuts – –   2.3 –  3.3 –  9.8 – 14.6 – 15.6
 2. Revenue 1,2 356.5 290.4 317.0 347.7 366.8 380.9
of which:
2.a Tax revenue 1 329.0 264.4 292.0 308.4 325.2 338.5
2.b Global revenue increases/ shortfalls – – –  4.0 10.1 12.5 12.8
 3. Fiscal balance (2.–1.) 13.3 – 218.1 – 96.5 – 39.3 – 20.3 – 12.4
 4. Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3
 5. Transfer to (–)/ withdrawal from (+) 
reserves – 13.5 – – 28.5 13.3 6.9
 6. Net borrowing (–)/ repayment (+) 
(3.+4.+5.) – – 217.8 – 96.2 – 10.5 –  6.7 –  5.2
 7. Cyclical component in the budget 
procedure –  2.7 –  53.6 – 14.0 – 10.2 –  5.5 0.0
 8. Balance of fi  nancial transactions 0.0 –  14.6 –  2.1 –  2.0 –  1.1 –  0.5
 9. Balance of incorporated off- budget 
entities  (estimated as of 2022) 3 0.7 19.1 – 18.1 – 13.3 –  6.2 –  2.1
9.a Energy and Climate Fund 1.8 20.4 – 14.1 – 10.2 –  4.3 –  1.5
9.b Flood Assistance Fund –  0.6 –   0.7 –  0.3 . . .
9.c Fund to Promote Municipal 
Investment –  0.9 –   1.3 –  1.6 . . .
9.d Digitalisation Fund 0.3 –   1.0 –  1.8 . . .
9.e Fund for Primary School- Age Childcare 
Provision – 1.8 –  0.3 . . .
 10. Structural net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) 
(6.–7.–8.+9.) 3.3 – 130.4 – 98.2 – 11.6 –  6.3 –  6.7
 11. Amount exceeding ceiling 4 (16.+13.–10.) – 118.7 86.2 – – –
 12. Outstanding repayment amount, escape 
clause – 118.7 204.9 204.9 199.0 193.0
 13. Repayment amount due – – – – 5.9 5.9
Memo items:
 14. Need for action according to 2021 
fi  nancial  report – – – 9.9 16.4 16.2
15. Relief from global spending cuts and 
global revenue increases as well as 
withdrawal  from           reserves (2.b–1.b+5.) – – – 48.4 40.4 35.3
 16. Regular ceiling: structural net borrowing 
of 0.35% of GDP 5 – 11.5 –  11.7 – 12.1 – 11.6 – 12.3 – 12.6
 17. Structural fi  scal balance (3.–7.–8.+9.) 16.7 – 130.8 – 98.5 – 40.4 – 19.9 – 13.9
17.a Structural fi  scal balance with estimate 
of potential output according to 
fi  scal plan 1.8 – 149.0 – 98.5 – 40.4 – 19.9 – 13.9
 18. Amount credited to control account 14.8 – – – – –
 19. Credit balance on control account 52.0 52.0 52.0 52.0 52.0 52.0
* For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 1 After deduction of supplementary central government grants, shares of 
energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor vehicle tax and consolidation/ budgetary recovery assistance to fed-
eral states, excluding transfers to/ withdrawals from reserves. 2 Excluding coin seigniorage. 3 Estimated amount makes full use of the 
scope remaining under the debt brake. 4 Repayment plan for the amount from (a) 2020: 1 ⁄20 per year from 2023 to 2042; (b) 2021: 
1⁄17 per year from 2026 to 2042. 5 Here, this refers to gross domestic product in the year before the budget is prepared.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
68

beyond 2021. However, the debt brake escape 
clause is set to be deactivated after the ex -
pected easing of the coronavirus pandemic. 
The central government fiscal plan thus envis -
ages compliance with the standard limit for 
structural net borrowing from 2022 onwards. It 
appears that central government will make full 
use of the net borrowing permitted within this 
framework. To close funding gaps, the fiscal 
plan envisages depleting the reserves of €48 
billion, with €7 billion of this still being drawn 
in 2024, the final year of the plan. Furthermore, 
the plan identifies a required level of action 
that rises from €10 billion in 2022 to just over 
€16 billion in the two subsequent years. Along -
side global spending cuts of almost the same 
amount, the plan envisages global revenue in -
creases, for which measures are to be specified 
at a later date. Measured by these global items, 
the need for action on the expenditure and rev -
enue sides is higher than the aforementioned 
figure, rising from €20 billion in 2022 to €28 
billion in the final year of the plan.
At present, however, it is still difficult to predict 
what level of action will actually be required. 
This will hinge, not least, on the course of the 
COVID-  19 crisis and on the economic recovery. 
Nonetheless, the required level of action pro -
jected as things currently stand should be fully 
and transparently reported in order to provide a 
clear picture of the expected challenges. Given 
the very high level of uncertainty, though, it 
would seem appropriate to refrain from discuss -
ing specific consolidation measures for now. In -
stead, the focus should be on managing the 
coronavirus crisis, including measures to support 
the economic recovery. However, any additional 
measures should be time- limited in order to 
avoid putting public finances under even more 
pressure after the crisis has come to an end.
Central government’s off- budget entities re -
corded a deficit of €29 billion in the third quar -
ter of 2020, compared with a surplus of €2 bil -
lion in the same period last year.7 The key driver 
of this development was coronavirus assistance 
provided by the Economic Stabilisation Fund. Its deficit of €29 billion stemmed primarily from 
funding coronavirus aid loans issued by the 
Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW). Acquisi -
tions of equity, particularly in Lufthansa, ac -
counted for €1½ billion.
In the final quarter of the year, further business 
aid could have a negative impact on the Eco -
nomic Stabilisation Fund’s finances. However, 
borrowing will probably remain far below the 
authorisation of €200 billion. Furthermore, sur -
pluses are arising in areas where central gov -
ernment is prefunding future expenditure, e.g. 
the new fund for financing additional after-  
school care places for primary school children 
(just under €2 billion). Due to planned central 
government payments, the surplus of the En -
ergy and Climate Fund is expected to be as 
high as €20½ billion.
Next year, central government’s off- budget en -
tities are likely to record a large deficit. The ex -
tent to which assistance is paid out by the Eco -
nomic Stabilisation Fund will depend, not least, 
on how the pandemic progresses, and thus 
cannot be reliably estimated. The Energy and 
Climate Fund appears certain to record high 
outflows, due primarily to the stabilisation of 
the EEG levy, which is estimated at €11 billion. 
By contrast, spending on climate measures is to 
be funded mainly through the new pricing 
scheme for carbon emissions from transport 
and building heating.
State government budgets8
The COVID-  19 crisis continued to place a strain 
on state government core budgets in the third Report required 
level of action 
transparently in 
future; not yet 
necessary to 
pass consolida -
tion measures
Very high 
COVID-  19 costs 
for central gov -
ernment’s off- 
budget entities 
in Q3, …… strong coun -
tereffect until 
end of year 
from prefunding 
of Energy and 
Climate Fund
Large deficit 
next year, not 
least for Energy 
and Climate 
Fund
7 According to data from the Federal Ministry of Finance, 
i.e. excluding bad banks and other entities that use com -
mercial double- entry bookkeeping. The Special Fund for 
the Stabilisation of the Financial Market (SoFFin) is also 
omitted. SoFFin channels refinancing funds to the bad 
bank FMSW. In return, the direct debt of FMSW, which is 
attributable to central government, is partly repaid.
8 The data on the state government core budgets are 
based on the monthly cash statistics. Results for the off-  
budget entities are not yet available for the quarter under 
review.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
69

quarter of 2020. They posted a slight deficit of 
€½ billion, compared with a surplus of €5½ 
billion a year earlier. However, this figure pro -
vides only limited insight into the overall situ -
ation; many state governments set up off-  
budget entities, which paint a picture of the 
pandemic’s financial impact. At the current 
end, it is almost impossible to keep track of 
the financial relationships between these off-  
budget entities and the corresponding core 
budgets.9 In general, such links inflate the rev -
enue and expenditure of the core budgets. No 
specific data on this are yet available.
Revenue grew steeply in the third quarter, by 
9½% (+€9½ billion). Tax revenue proved to be 
comparatively stable (+½%), after falling sub -
stantially in the previous quarter. There was a 
very large increase (of 29%, or €6 billion) in 
revenue received from public administrations, 
not least from central government. At a total of 
16½% (+€15½ billion), the rise in expenditure 
was much faster than that in revenue. Growth in payments to public administrations was par -
ticularly strong, at 19% (+€5½ billion). By con -
trast, transfers to local government played only 
a minor role.
In the final figures for last year, core budgets 
recorded a surplus of €10 billion and off- budget 
entities a surplus of €6½ billion; some off-  
budget entities were topped up before the 
state government debt brakes fully entered into 
force in 2020.10 According to the current pro -
jection issued by the Federal Ministry of Finance 
for the Stability Council, the state government 
core budgets could close this year with a deficit 
of €40 billion. After three quarters, the deficit 
in the core budgets now stands at just under 
€22 billion. In particular, compensation of local 
governments for shortfalls in local business tax 
this year will be paid out in the final quarter. 
State governments will contribute €5 billion to 
this compensation. The coronavirus crisis is 
likely to place a large burden on state govern -
ment finances for the year as a whole.
The COVID-  19 crisis will continue to place a 
large strain on state government budgets in 
2021. It therefore seems likely that the debt 
brake escape clauses will be activated again. 
According to the latest estimate, tax receipts 
will be €20 billion lower than was expected be -
fore the outbreak of the pandemic. The Second 
Family Relief Act will probably reduce tax rev -
enue by a further €3 billion. In addition, local 
government budgets remain reliant on aid, and 
central government’s contribution to compen -
sation for shortfalls in local business tax will not 
continue next year. It would be advisable to 
combine further crisis support for local govern -Core budgets 
record slight 
deficit in Q3
Coronavirus aid 
payments 
significantly  
boosted revenue 
and expenditureVery large deficit 
foreseeable for 
year as a whole
Pandemic will 
continue to put 
pressure on 
state govern -
ments in 2021State government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states' core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
–30–20–100+10+20+30
2018
20202018Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192020
2019€ billion
9 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), pp. 88 ff. Figures in -
cluding off- budget entities are now available for the 
second quarter. While the core budgets posted a deficit of 
€26 billion, the off-  budget entities recorded a surplus of 
€6½ billion (€2 billion in the same quarter of the previous 
year). The deficit in the core budgets thus significantly over -
states the overall burden. In the quarter under review, the 
opposite could be true because of possible deficits in off- 
budget entities with their own borrowing authorisations.
10 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
70

ments with a reform of local government finan -
cing.11
Given the high measure of uncertainty, it seems 
reasonable, for the time being, not to adopt 
any consolidation measures for the medium 
term. Decisions of this kind should not be made 
until state governments are drawing up draft 
budgets without an escape clause. The chal -
lenges that this will pose for individual state 
governments are likely to vary quite widely. 
Their structural budget positions prior to the 
coronavirus crisis, their level of reserves and 
their cyclical borrowing options will all play a 
role.12
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
In the third quarter of 2020, the statutory pen -
sion insurance scheme recorded a deficit of €4 
billion, which was €1½ billion higher than it 
had been a year earlier. Contribution receipts 
rose by 2½%, bolstered by contributions paid 
for recipients of unemployment and short- time 
working benefits. In addition, the scheme 
retroactively received social contributions that 
had been deferred in the initial phase of the 
pandemic. Expenditure rose sharply by 4½%, 
with pensions increasing by an average of just 
over 3½%.
Over the first three quarters of the year, the 
pension insurance scheme thus recorded a 
cumulated  deficit of €6½ billion. Although the 
coronavirus pandemic is continuing to have a 
negative impact on the scheme’s finances, it is 
likely to record a surplus in the final quarter. As 
is usual for the time of year, contribution re -
ceipts will then be comparatively high. How -
ever, a perceptible deficit is likely to be recorded 
for the year as a whole. This constitutes a sub -
stantial deterioration in the scheme’s finances 
compared with the surplus of €2 billion re -
corded for 2019. The deficit will be funded 
from the sustainability reserve. By the end of 2020, this reserve could fall to just over 1.5 
times the scheme’s average monthly expend -
iture. That would still leave it around €32 billion 
above the lower limit of 0.2 times the scheme’s 
average monthly expenditure.
Next year, it is likely that the pension insurance 
scheme’s finances will deteriorate and its deficit 
will rise. On the revenue side, the COVID-  19 
pandemic will probably continue to weigh on 
contribution receipts. By contrast, government 
funds will still largely reflect the favourable Future chal -
lenges likely 
to vary quite 
widely
Significant 
deficit  in Q3
Perceptible 
deficit  for year 
as a whole, too
Rising deficit 
likely next yearFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently re-
vised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–8–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202020192018
2018
2020 20192018 2019 202002468
2018 2019 202002468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
€ billion
11 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020d).
12 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020e) for more details.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
71

Annual pension adjustments in need of reform
Annual pension adjustments are determined 
by three factors: the change in insured per-
sons’ average earnings subject to compulsory 
contributions, the cost or saving derived from 
the change in the pension insurance scheme 
contribution rate and the change in the pen-
sioner ratio via the sustainability factor. In sim-
plifi  ed terms, the pensioner ratio is the ratio of 
pension recipients to contribution payers.
However, the relevant data on earnings sub-
ject to compulsory contributions are not yet 
available when the level of the annual pension 
adjustment is determined. For this reason, the 
mid- year adjustment is based initially on the 
fi  gures that are already available for prior- year 
average gross wages and salaries (hereinafter 
referred to simply as wages). In the next year, 
this is corrected as necessary: if developments 
in earnings subject to compulsory contribu-
tions end up differing from wage develop-
ments, this will be corrected retroactively in 
the then upcoming pension adjustment. This 
thus ensures that pensions are ultimately 
based on earnings subject to compulsory con-
tributions.
In 2021, then, the adjustment will be based 
initially on the – in all likelihood lower – wages 
in the crisis year of 2020. This will be followed 
by a correction factoring in the change in 
average earnings subject to compulsory con-
tributions in 2019. What makes 2021 different 
from other years is that a revision of the pen-
sion statistics will cause earnings subject to 
compulsory contributions to be lower in 2019, 
curbing their increase compared with the un-
revised fi  gures for 2018. Growth in earnings 
subject to compulsory contributions is there-
fore likely to have been markedly weaker than 
the rise in wages. Taken by itself, this would 
make the pension cuts already on the horizon 
due to falling wages in 2020 even deeper.1 
However, as the pension adjustment formula 
contains a safeguard clause ruling out the 
option  of pension cuts, a zero adjustment is 
made.
By contrast, the adjustment in mid- 2022 is 
then likely to be exceptionally high. First, the wage fi  gures on which the pension adjust-
ment is initially based could rise quite steeply 
again in 2021 compared with the previous cri-
sis year. Second, the subsequent correction, 
which will capture the differences between 
earnings subject to compulsory contributions 
and wages in 2020, is likely to have a positive 
impact on the 2022 pension adjustment: 
growth in earnings subject to compulsory 
contributions in 2020 is expected to have 
been far more stable than wage growth.2 It 
should be noted that the major adjustment in 
2022 will be based on pensions that were not 
cut in 2021 owing to the safeguard clause. In 
the years after the safeguard clause has been 
activated, waived pension cuts are supposed 
to be compensated for, which would reduce 
pension increases. However, this mechanism, 
known as the catch- up factor, has been sus-
pended up to and through 2025.
When the next adjustment is made in mid- 
2023, the subsequent correction factor will 
offset the fact that, in 2021, wages will (prob-
ably) be back to rising more steeply than earn-
ings subject to compulsory contributions.3 
This will reduce the annual pension adjust-
ment again.
Another source of pension adjustment fl  uctu-
ations is the sustainability factor. This de-
creases (increases) the pension adjustment if 
the number of standard pensions4 grows 
faster (more slowly) than the number of aver-
age contribution payers. The impact on pen-
1 See Deutsche Rentenversicherung Bund (2020).
2 This is due, in particular, to the fact that short- time 
working benefi  ts and unemployment benefi  ts are re-
corded differently here. Neither are wage compon-
ents. Wages are falling sharply this year due to un-
employment and short- time working. However, pay-
ments for recipients of unemployment and short- time 
working benefi  ts are included as part of earnings sub-
ject to compulsory contributions, with pension insur-
ance scheme contributions being paid on 80% of 
earnings replaced by the transfers.
3 The impact of the short- time working and un-
employment factors will then reverse compared with 
the previous year.
4 The standard pension is a pension with 45 earnings 
points, which are accrued with consistently average 
earnings after around 45 years of contributions.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
72

wage and labour market developments of 
2019.
A general annual pension increase is unlikely 
in  mid- 2021, which will curb expenditure 
growth.13 The annual pension adjustments are 
based, not least, on the change in average 
gross wages and salaries in the previous year. 
This figure is likely to fall. However, a pension 
cut is prohibited by law.14 One factor driving up 
expenditure (in addition to annual average 
pension growth) is the increase in the number 
of pensions. Moreover, the supplementary con -
tribution rates to the statutory health insurance 
scheme, which are partially funded by the pen -
sion insurance scheme, are likely to rise some -
what as well.
The current economic downturn will continue 
to affect annual pension adjustments in subse -
quent years. Corrections due to lags in data 
availability will make them erratic. The correc -
tion factors will probably deliver a strong boost to the increase in 2022 but have a dampening 
effect in the years that follow. All in all, it would 
seem advisable to reform the annual pension 
adjustment formula in order to make pension 
increases more steady, less erratic and, overall, 
less complex (see the box on pp. 72 f.). The sus -
pension of the catch- up factor as part of the 
pension guarantee up to 2025 has intensified 
funding pressure on the expenditure side. The 
contribution rate is therefore likely to rise earl -
ier than was assumed before the pandemic. If 
this were to happen, central government 
would also have to provide more funds.General annual 
pension adjust -
ment unlikely 
in 2021
Economic 
downturn will 
have erratic 
impact on 
annual pension 
adjustments in 
coming yearssion funding is thus reduced if growth in the 
contribution base is weaker than the increase 
in expenditure that it is supposed to cover. 
Even in this crisis period, the number of stand-
ard pensions is growing relatively steadily. 
However, the number of average contribution 
payers is fl  uctuating, and the fl  uctuations in 
this number are even more pronounced in the 
sustainability factor because, owing to the 
delayed availability of data, provisional values 
have to be used initially. Errors resulting from 
this are then corrected in the following year 
on the basis of actual developments. On bal-
ance, the 2020 annual pension adjustment 
was too high owing to the sustainability fac-
tor. While this should then be corrected in 
2021, such a correction is prevented by the 
safeguard clause. As the catch- up factor has 
been suspended, it is not possible to offset 
this effect by reducing the next pension in-
crease, either.
All in all, rather erratic pension adjustments 
are to be expected over the next few years. 
The reasons for this are complicated and diffi   -cult to comprehend. The combination of vari-
ous statistical factors with the suspension of 
the catch- up factor for waived pension cuts 
means that, owing to the major economic 
volatility caused by the crisis, the replacement 
rate is ultimately going to be signifi  cantly 
higher than envisaged based on the pension 
adjustment formula. This will require a corres-
ponding increase in contributions and tax re-
sources.
Against this background, it would be worth 
fundamentally reforming the pension adjust-
ment formula. Care should be taken to avoid 
pronounced fl  uctuations stemming not least 
from foreseeable distortions in proxies. Pen-
sion adjustments and changes in the replace-
ment rate should not be the result of more or 
less random forces.
13 The fact that the eastern German level is to be gradually 
raised to the western German level will drive up expend -
iture somewhat. Consequently, pensions will increase by 
0.2% on average across Germany in mid- 2021.
14 Unlike after the financial and economic crisis just over a 
decade ago, a waived pension cut will not be compensated 
for with deductions on pension increases in the following 
years; the corresponding catch- up factor was suspended 
under the pension benefits package from 2018 up to and 
including 2025.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
73

Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency continued to 
be substantially affected by the COVID-  19 crisis 
in the third quarter of 2020, recording a deficit 
of almost €10½ billion in its core budget15 
(compared with a surplus of €1 billion last 
year). Revenue fell by 3½%. This was due, 
above all, to the contribution rate cut from 
2.5% to 2.4% at the beginning of the year. 
Without the rate cut, revenue would have stag -
nated. On the revenue side, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency is thus the branch of social 
security hardest hit by the crisis. Unlike the other social security fund institutions, the agen -
cy’s revenue- side burdens due to the crisis are 
not being alleviated by contributions paid for 
recipients of short- time working and unemploy -
ment benefits. The economic downturn is hav -
ing a far stronger impact on its expenditure, 
which was €11 billion higher (+140%) than in 
the same quarter last year. Spending on un -
employment benefits rose by more than 50%. 
The vast majority (€8½ billion) of this increase 
was attributable to short- time working bene -
fits. Social contributions paid by the Federal 
Employment Agency on behalf of enterprises 
as an exceptional crisis measure accounted for 
around half of this. Although short- time work -
ing had already peaked in April, expenditure 
was somewhat higher in the third quarter than 
in the second, as the Federal Employment 
Agency is reimbursing enterprises’ payments 
retroactively.
For the year as a whole, the Federal Employ -
ment Agency’s deficit could reach around €30 
billion. In running this deficit, the Federal Em -
ployment Agency is making a crucial contribu -
tion to the stabilisation of the economy. It holds 
a reserve for the purpose of funding deficits. 
This reserve totalled €25½ billion at the end of 
2019, although press reports indicate that only 
around €19 billion can be liquidated this year. 
Central government has granted the agency a 
multi- year loan to close the remaining funding 
gap.
Next year, the Federal Employment Agency’s 
finances  are likely to improve again once the 
crisis gradually eases, as is generally expected. 
Nonetheless, without a contribution rate in -
crease and central government assistance, it is 
still likely to record a large deficit. The draft Very large deficit 
in Q3, tooCentral govern -
ment supporting 
Federal Employ -
ment Agency 
with substantial 
loan
Central 
government  
funds to stabilise 
contribution rate 
next yearFinances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants' 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q41296303
––––+
–21–18–15–12–9–6–30+3+6Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202020192018
2020201920182018 2019 2020–200+20+40+60+80+100+120+140
2018 2019 202020020406080100120140
–+++++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
15 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are thus an item of expenditure that lowers the 
core budget balance. These transfers have been suspended 
from the second quarter of 2020 until the end of 2021 be -
cause of the COVID-  19 crisis. The Federal Employment 
Agency’s budget plan had envisaged transfers of just over 
€½ billion for 2020 as a whole. The absence of these trans -
fers is diminishing the balance of the civil servants’ pension 
fund, which is assigned to the government sector in the 
national accounts.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
74

central government budget for 2021 does not 
envisage any repayments of the multi- year loan 
by the Federal Employment Agency. Instead, it 
includes a further grant of €3 billion to the Fed -
eral Employment Agency and liquidity loans of up to €18 billion. At the end of 2021, it appears 
that all loans to the Federal Employment 
Agency that are still outstanding at that point 
will be forgiven.
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), Excursus: How the coronavirus pandemic is affecting Germany’s 
public finances: automatic stabilisers and measures, Monthly Report, August 2020, pp. 92-97.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), Public finances, Monthly Report, August 2020, pp. 77-98.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), State government budgets: results for 2019, Monthly Report, 
October  2020, pp. 87-108.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020d), Reform of local government finances: making financing crisis-  
proof and stable, Monthly Report, July 2020, pp. 10-11.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020e), The future requirements of state- specific debt brakes on state 
governments’  budgets, Monthly Report, October 2020, pp. 102-105.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68-69.
Deutsche Rentenversicherung Bund (2020), Stellungnahme zum Antrag „Corona- Krise genera -
tionengerecht überwinden – Nachholfaktor in der Rentenformel wiedereinführen“, Bundestags-  
Drucksache 19/ 20195.
Federal Ministry of Finance (2020), Press Release No 19/ 2020, 10 September 2020.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
75

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
76

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates/base rates  ........................................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  78 •
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ....................................................  78 •
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
8. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
9. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 EONIA  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2019 Feb. 6.7 4.5 4.3 4.3 3.0 3.2 1.4 – 0.37 – 0.31 0.9
Mar. 7.5 5.2 4.7 4.6 2.7 3.0 1.4 – 0.37 – 0.31 0.8
Apr. 7.4 5.3 4.8 4.8 2.7 3.2 1.2 – 0.37 – 0.31 0.7
May 7.1 5.2 4.8 4.8 2.2 2.8 1.4 – 0.37 – 0.31 0.7
June 7.2 5.0 4.6 4.9 2.2 3.1 2.2 – 0.36 – 0.33 0.4
July 7.8 5.5 5.2 5.2 2.1 3.0 2.0 – 0.37 – 0.36 0.2
Aug. 8.4 6.2 5.8 5.6 2.3 3.3 1.7 – 0.36 – 0.41 – 0.1
Sep. 7.9 5.9 5.7 5.7 2.2 3.3 1.8 – 0.40 – 0.42 – 0.1
Oct. 8.4 6.1 5.7 5.7 2.4 3.7 1.6 – 0.46 – 0.41 – 0.0
Nov. 8.3 5.9 5.6 5.4 2.1 3.4 1.8 – 0.45 – 0.40 0.1
Dec. 8.0 5.7 4.9 5.2 2.0 3.3 1.6 – 0.46 – 0.40 0.2
2020 Jan. 7.9 5.5 5.2 5.2 1.9 3.2 1.2 – 0.45 – 0.39 0.2
Feb. 8.1 5.6 5.5 6.0 1.9 3.2 0.8 – 0.45 – 0.41 – 0.0
Mar. 10.4 7.4 7.5 7.1 3.5 4.2 0.2 – 0.45 – 0.42 0.2
Apr. 11.9 8.3 8.2 8.2 4.7 4.2 0.0 – 0.45 – 0.25 0.3
May 12.5 9.1 9.0 8.8 6.1 4.8 0.1 – 0.46 – 0.27 0.2
June 12.6 9.2 9.2 9.5 6.8 4.5 – 0.5 – 0.46 – 0.38 0.2
July 13.5 10.1 10.1 9.6 7.4 4.7 – 0.6 – 0.46 – 0.44 0.0
Aug. 13.2 9.6 9.5 10.0 7.7 4.7 – 0.1 – 0.47 – 0.48 – 0.0
Sep. 13.8 10.3 10.4 ... 8.1 4.5 – 0.5 – 0.47 – 0.49 – 0.1
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... – 0.47 – 0.51 – 0.2
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 Euroovernight index average.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.  7 See also footnotes to Table
VI.4, p. 43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2019 Feb. +18,391 +25,407 + 38 +46,506 –36,458 –10,197 – 98 + 285 1.1351 98.4 93.8
Mar. +37,329 +31,733 +60,669 +23,068 –29,129 – 1,359 +63,016 + 5,073 1.1302 97.9 93.2
Apr. +10,362 +24,320 –20,679 + 6,100 –44,956 + 8,031 + 6,908 + 3,237 1.1238 97.7 93.0
May – 2,377 +26,746 – 2,612 –27,565 –48,475 + 3,715 +67,868 + 1,845 1.1185 98.2 93.4
June +10,969 +26,595 +10,298 –66,020 +26,400 + 4,979 +47,208 – 2,269 1.1293 98.8 93.9
July +32,110 +34,419 +28,091 –17,130 –23,962 + 8,841 +54,894 + 5,449 1.1218 98.4 93.4
Aug. +32,133 +22,750 +20,711 +36,187 – 8,524 – 5,340 – 2,242 + 629 1.1126 98.9 93.9
Sep. +38,197 +28,258 +41,622 +10,051 –12,393 – 5,574 +55,477 – 5,939 1.1004 98.2 93.1
Oct. +29,033 +36,805 +39,138 +20,540 +34,604 + 6,354 –23,255 + 894 1.1053 98.1 92.9
Nov. +23,336 +29,961 +39,821 –37,157 +43,063 + 328 +37,457 – 3,870 1.1051 97.5 92.2
Dec. +33,940 +31,597 + 3,140 –65,501 +65,880 –11,943 +14,246 + 458 1.1113 97.4 92.1
2020 Jan. – 8,588 + 9,479 – 8,534 + 7,975 –44,784 + 7,381 +19,911 + 983 1.1100 97.0 91.4
Feb. +16,209 +29,178 +18,764 +24,919 –26,943 + 6,850 +15,046 – 1,108 1.0905 96.3 90.7
Mar. +25,012 +38,328 + 1,382 – 5,836 –114,770 – 1,999 +120,437 + 3,550 1.1063 99.0 93.1
Apr. +11,437 +11,180 –26,734 –31,570 +163,322 +10,552 –170,741 + 1,703 1.0862 98.2 92.6
May – 404 +16,571 – 8,701 –57,858 +45,464 + 9,339 – 7,318 + 1,672 1.0902 98.4 92.8
June +19,909 +27,979 +41,429 –43,515 –14,381 +17,563 +81,852 – 90 1.1255 99.8 94.0
July +25,791 +36,111 –14,204 +19,163 –33,344 + 6,350 – 5,858 – 516 1.1463 100.5 p 94.6
Aug. +21,771 +24,806 +35,665 +25,485 – 2,631 – 66 +11,540 + 1,338 1.1828 101.6 p 95.1
Sep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1792 101.6 p 95.1
Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.1775 101.4 p 94.9
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also TablesXII.10 and 12, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Against the
currencies of the EER-19 group.  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area
 
3. General economic indicators
 
 
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2017 2.6 1.6 2.6 5.5 3.3 2.3 1.3 9.1 1.7 3.3
2018 1.9 1.8 1.3 4.4 1.5 1.8 1.6 8.5 1.0 4.0
2019 1.3 1.7 0.6 5.0 1.2 1.5 1.9 5.6 0.3 2.1
2019         Q2 1.3 1.7 − 0.3 3.3 1.3 1.9 3.0 5.6 0.2 1.7
         Q3 1.4 1.8 1.2 6.3 2.0 1.9 3.0 6.3 0.8 2.6
         Q4 1.0 1.6 0.2 5.3 0.8 0.7 0.6 5.9 0.1 0.8
2020         Q1 − 3.3 − 2.0 − 1.7 − 0.7 − 2.0 − 5.3 − 1.0 5.7 − 5.7 − 1.0
         Q2 − 14.8 − 13.9 − 11.3 − 6.9 − 6.6 − 18.9 − 15.3 − 3.0 − 18.3 − 8.9
         Q3 − 4.3 ... − 4.1 ... ... − 4.8 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 2
 Annual percentage change
2017 3.0 2.9 3.4 4.3 3.4 2.4 4.1 − 2.2 3.6 8.6
2018 0.7 1.2 1.0 4.8 3.4 0.4 1.8 − 5.0 0.7 2.0
2019 − 1.3 4.8 − 4.3 0.1 1.9 0.5 − 0.7 2.8 − 1.1 0.8
2019         Q2 − 1.3 5.9 − 5.0 2.0 2.8 1.6 0.6 0.4 − 0.8 1.4
         Q3 − 1.6 4.3 − 4.9 − 1.5 3.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 4.7 − 1.3 2.5
         Q4 − 2.0 5.9 − 5.1 − 5.1 1.2 − 0.7 − 5.0 4.7 − 2.1 0.0
2020         Q1 − 6.1 − 0.3 − 6.7 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 7.7 − 1.3 6.8 − 11.4 − 2.3
         Q2 − 20.1 − 11.7 − 21.7 − 13.3 − 5.3 − 23.6 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 25.4 − 5.1
         Q3 e − 6.8 − 3.6 p − 10.0 − 2.9 − 5.0 − 7.2 ... p − 2.2 − 5.2 − 1.9
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 As a percentage of full capacity
2018 83.8 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.4
2019 82.3 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2020 74.4 75.5 77.0 67.4 76.8 73.5 70.8 68.5 53.1 71.8
2019         Q3 81.8 81.2 83.9 72.5 81.6 84.3 71.8 74.1 77.0 75.9
         Q4 81.0 80.7 82.6 69.9 78.6 83.4 72.1 78.0 76.8 75.5
2020         Q1 80.8 79.7 82.9 70.7 78.4 82.6 72.3 75.5 76.5 74.7
         Q2 68.3 72.8 71.4 63.3 77.2 62.4 67.3 56.7 − 69.1
         Q3 72.1 73.4 74.4 66.0 76.0 72.9 70.3 69.6 64.5 70.8
         Q4 76.3 75.9 79.1 69.6 75.4 76.0 73.2 72.0 71.4 72.7
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 4
 As a percentage of civilian labour force
2017 9.0 7.1 3.8 5.8 8.6 9.1 21.5 6.8 11.3 8.7
2018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 8.7 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.5
2019 7.5 5.4 3.2 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020         May 7.6 5.0 e 4.5 7.0 8.0 6.9 17.7 4.7 8.7 8.7
         June 7.9 5.0 e 4.5 8.0 7.9 6.6 17.5 5.2 9.4 8.9
         July 8.1 5.0 e 4.5 7.8 8.6 7.1 17.0 6.2 9.8 9.0
         Aug. 8.3 5.1 e 4.5 8.0 8.5 7.5 16.8 6.7 9.7 8.8
         Sep. 8.3 5.2 e 4.6 ... 8.4 7.9 ... 7.3 9.6 8.4
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 7.3 ... ...Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
November 2020
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2017 1.5 2.2 1.7 3.7 0.8 1.2 1.1 0.3 1.3 2.9
2018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.6
2019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020         May 0.1 − 0.2 0.5 − 1.8 − 0.1 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.9
         June 0.3 0.2 0.8 − 1.6 0.1 0.2 − 1.9 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 1.1
         July 0.4 1.7 5 0.0 − 1.3 0.7 0.9 − 1.9 − 0.6 0.8 0.1
         Aug. − 0.2 − 0.9 5 − 0.1 − 1.3 0.3 0.2 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5
         Sep. − 0.3 0.5 5 − 0.4 − 1.3 0.3 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4
         Oct. e − 0.3 e 0.4 5 − 0.5 e − 1.7 e 0.2 e 0.0 − 2.0 e − 1.8 e − 0.6 e − 0.7
 
 General government financial balance 6
 As a percentage of GDP
2017 − 0.9 − 0.7 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 3.0 0.7 − 0.3 − 2.4 − 0.8
2018 − 0.5 − 0.8 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.3 1.0 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.8
2019 − 0.6 − 1.9 1.5 0.1 − 1.0 − 3.0 1.5 0.5 − 1.6 − 0.6
 
 General government debt 6
 As a percentage of GDP
2017 87.7 102.0 65.1 9.1 61.3 98.3 179.2 67.0 134.1 39.0
2018 85.8 99.8 61.8 8.2 59.6 98.1 186.2 63.0 134.4 37.1
2019 84.0 98.1 59.6 8.4 59.3 98.1 180.5 57.4 134.7 36.9
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical and are provisional. 1  Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted. 2  Manu-
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day vari ations. 3  Manufacturing: 

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2020
I. Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1
 Annual percentage change
4.3 1.8 8.0 2.9 2.4 3.5 3.0 4.8 3.0 5.1 20173.9 3.1 5.2 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.8 4.4 2.4 5.2 20184.3 2.3 4.9 1.7 1.4 2.2 2.3 3.2 2.0 3.1 2019
4.2 3.1 4.6 1.7 1.4 1.9 2.4 3.3 1.9 2.8 2019          Q2
4.4 3.1 3.6 1.8 1.7 2.2 1.4 3.1 1.8 2.8          Q34.2 2.8 5.0 1.6 0.4 2.4 2.0 2.0 1.6 3.6          Q4
2.4 1.5 1.4 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 2.2 − 3.6 − 2.4 − 3.8 1.1 2020          Q1
− 4.6 − 7.7 − 16.3 − 9.4 − 14.3 − 16.6 − 12.1 − 13.1 − 21.5 − 12.2          Q2− 0.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... − 8.7 ...          Q3
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
6.8 3.8 8.8 1.3 5.8 3.5 3.3 8.0 3.3 8.0 20175.2 − 1.1 1.3 0.6 4.9 0.1 4.3 5.3 0.4 6.9 20183.5 − 3.2 1.1 − 0.9 0.2 − 2.2 0.5 2.8 0.5 4.0 2019
5.5 − 0.8 0.5 − 1.4 0.0 − 1.7 3.0 3.3 1.4 2.4 2019          Q2
4.1 − 1.8 3.7 0.1 − 0.3 − 3.5 − 2.8 2.5 0.7 4.6          Q3
− 0.1 − 8.8 2.1 − 0.9 − 4.2 0.5 − 4.7 1.7 0.3 2.9          Q4
− 2.2 − 10.3 10.5 − 1.2 − 6.0 − 1.3 − 7.4 − 2.7 − 6.6 − 1.3 2020          Q1
− 7.0 − 22.6 − 7.5 − 8.6 − 16.8 − 23.8 − 28.1 − 17.3 − 24.6 − 19.7          Q2− 0.3 ...
p − 2.6 p − 5.0 ... − 1.3 − 1.5 p − 3.5 p − 5.2 ...          Q3
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 201877.3 79.8 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
72.9 72.2 70.4 78.2 79.2 75.5 79.3 78.2 74.3 51.7 2020
77.5 80.3 75.9 84.1 86.7 80.1 89.4 83.6 80.8 64.2 2019          Q3
77.2 79.0 78.0 84.0 85.3 77.4 84.1 83.8 79.3 63.6          Q4
76.4 83.4 78.8 83.2 84.8 80.6 82.2 83.0 80.0 63.3 2020          Q1
70.0 53.8 61.1 75.2 73.9 71.7 77.1 71.9 70.9 47.4          Q271.9 76.3 68.0 76.3 77.2 71.9 78.3 76.1 71.5 49.2          Q373.4 75.3 73.5 78.0 80.8 77.8 79.7 81.6 74.8 46.7          Q4
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
7.1 5.5 4.0 4.9 5.6 9.0 8.1 6.6 17.3 11.1 20176.2 5.6 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 20186.3 5.6 3.6 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
8.5 7.6 4.5 3.6 5.7 5.9 6.8 5.5 15.3 8.1 2020          May
8.8 7.6 4.3 4.3 5.9 7.3 6.7 5.3 16.0 7.4          June
9.0 7.2 4.1 4.5 5.6 7.9 6.8 4.8 16.5 6.9          July
9.6 6.8 4.1 4.6 5.4 8.1 6.9 4.7 16.7 7.4          Aug.9.8 6.7 4.0 4.4 5.5 7.7 6.8 4.7 16.5 8.0          Sep.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...          Oct.Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
November 2020
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
 Annual percentage change
3.7 2.1 1.3 1.3 2.2 1.6 1.4 1.6 2.0 0.7 20172.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 20182.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
0.2 − 1.6 0.9 1.1 0.6 − 0.6 2.1 − 1.4 − 0.9 − 1.4 2020          May
0.9 − 0.4 1.0 1.7 1.1 0.2 1.8 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 2.2          June
0.9 0.1 0.7 1.6 1.8 − 0.1 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 2.0          July
1.2 − 0.2 0.7 0.3 1.4 − 0.2 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 2.9          Aug.0.6 − 0.3 0.5 1.0 1.3 − 0.8 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 1.9          Sep.
e 0.5 e − 0.4 e 0.6 1.2 ... e − 0.6 e 1.7 − 0.5 e − 1.0 e − 1.3          Oct.
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.5 1.3 3.2 1.3 − 0.8 − 3.0 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 3.0 1.9 20170.6 3.1 2.0 1.4 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.5 20180.3 2.4 0.5 1.7 0.7 0.1 − 1.4 0.5 − 2.9 1.5 2019
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
39.1 22.3 48.8 56.9 78.5 126.1 51.7 74.1 98.6 93.5 201733.7 21.0 45.2 52.4 74.0 121.5 49.9 70.3 97.4 99.2 201835.9 22.0 42.6 48.7 70.5 117.2 48.5 65.6 95.5 94.0 2019
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter. 4 unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5  Influenced by a temporary
Monthly data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on reduction of value added tax. 6  According to Maastricht Treaty definition. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2019 Feb. 53.9 42.8 17.6 11.2 24.8 27.4 –26.0 –53.4 20.4 0.3 –0.1 25.8 –5.5
Mar. 15.0 41.0 1.4 –26.0 –26.1 74.7 0.4 –74.3 9.0 –2.4 0.0 –4.2 15.5
Apr. 69.1 90.1 27.1 –21.0 –20.5 –15.7 107.8 123.5 –16.1 –5.0 0.2 –10.2 –1.2
May 39.0 36.7 12.7 2.4 3.2 63.5 69.9 6.3 11.0 –2.9 0.6 7.6 5.7
June – 0.4 23.0 –13.5 –23.4 –22.6 78.1 –15.3 –93.4 41.8 19.9 1.1 6.2 14.7
July 49.7 61.3 –1.4 –11.6 –14.3 35.0 165.1 130.1 0.7 –21.9 0.4 5.0 17.1
Aug. 25.2 19.2 –7.9 5.9 5.7 – 3.9 26.6 30.5 –16.2 –15.5 –0.4 –7.3 7.0
Sep. 6.6 26.5 25.9 –19.9 –13.7 41.8 –45.7 –87.5 36.1 25.1 –1.1 –1.4 13.5
Oct. 43.7 63.3 –9.2 –19.6 –25.7 17.3 16.2 –1.1 –11.5 –1.9 –1.8 –19.8 12.1
Nov. 54.4 54.9 30.9 –0.5 3.3 10.4 –21.5 –31.9 19.0 0.8 –0.8 4.7 14.3
Dec. –118.4 –79.5 –24.9 –38.9 –20.6 –21.8 –299.1 –277.3 –7.3 7.2 –1.4 –5.9 –7.2
2020 Jan. 101.6 51.4 1.4 50.2 28.1 24.6 295.6 271.0 –5.5 –6.2 –1.0 13.0 –11.3
Feb. 60.7 50.0 20.1 10.7 22.1 41.5 92.7 51.2 –2.8 –3.0 –0.7 –3.3 4.2
Mar. 318.2 176.2 –21.5 142.0 127.7 – 3.6 101.7 105.3 –33.0 0.8 –1.0 –42.9 10.2
Apr. 293.5 101.7 54.9 191.8 180.8 –100.8 14.4 115.3 –33.5 –8.9 –1.1 –3.9 –19.7
May 291.4 119.4 30.1 172.1 176.8 8.7 –42.6 –51.2 19.4 3.9 –0.8 –1.1 17.4
June 136.2 –16.1 16.2 152.3 160.5 68.8 –146.3 –215.1 –0.9 –7.1 –1.1 –7.9 15.2
July 154.9 80.3 33.2 74.6 74.0 –46.8 78.1 124.9 –2.3 2.5 –0.1 –12.4 7.7
Aug. 86.0 26.2 17.3 59.9 67.7 15.9 –3.7 –19.6 13.8 10.5 –0.4 –12.4 16.1
Sep. 82.3 –2.4 –1.9 84.6 83.9 37.1 –33.3 –70.4 7.8 –9.3 –0.2 17.3 –0.1
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2019 Feb. 12.5 16.4 –0.3 –3.9 –1.4 24.3 –15.4 –39.6 6.6 –0.8 0.1 12.6 –5.2
Mar. 9.7 17.2 0.1 –7.5 –4.8 –32.1 13.9 46.1 –4.0 –3.2 0.2 –4.4 3.4
Apr. 7.6 12.7 –0.5 –5.1 –6.1 19.2 14.8 –4.5 –6.6 –2.7 0.2 –4.0 0.0
May 19.3 19.8 0.5 –0.5 1.4 11.8 2.4 –9.3 9.1 –1.7 0.6 7.5 2.6
June 25.7 26.4 4.3 –0.7 1.2 – 8.0 10.3 18.3 11.5 1.5 0.6 2.4 7.1
July 9.5 7.8 0.0 1.6 –0.8 42.6 6.3 –36.4 0.8 –2.2 –0.3 –1.1 4.4
Aug. 25.2 19.9 1.0 5.2 5.5 –13.6 2.4 16.0 –6.2 –4.4 –0.3 –3.7 2.3
Sep. 5.7 11.8 –0.8 –6.1 –1.3 – 2.8 –24.3 –21.5 4.3 –0.7 –0.6 0.0 5.6
Oct. 10.2 11.0 1.2 –0.8 –4.2 56.3 2.4 –53.9 –2.6 –0.7 –0.8 –3.6 2.5
Nov. 25.3 20.4 5.2 4.9 3.9 –23.5 –17.6 5.9 3.0 –1.9 –0.9 1.6 4.2
Dec. – 4.4 1.5 0.8 –5.9 –1.1 –38.9 –47.5 –8.6 –4.4 –0.3 –1.1 –5.8 2.7
2020 Jan. 16.3 9.5 1.9 6.8 2.6 74.7 37.7 –37.0 –9.0 –2.6 –1.5 3.8 –8.6
Feb. 24.5 25.4 4.3 –0.9 1.2 – 4.3 14.1 18.4 –4.6 –1.2 –0.6 4.8 –7.6
Mar. 47.3 31.4 –6.1 15.9 14.3 –34.3 18.5 52.8 –8.3 –3.7 –0.7 –8.2 4.3
Apr. 33.0 16.0 1.3 16.9 14.8 –28.8 8.9 37.6 –23.8 –5.1 –0.8 –2.1 –15.8
May 58.3 27.1 10.0 31.2 32.7 11.7 –22.1 –33.8 2.3 –1.5 –0.4 –1.2 5.4
June 26.4 2.6 3.5 23.7 25.9 –45.6 –20.9 24.7 –7.9 –7.1 –1.0 –7.9 8.1
July 25.9 13.8 0.3 12.2 10.3 9.4 –9.7 –19.1 –3.0 –6.9 –0.6 1.2 3.3
Aug. 9.3 7.5 1.9 1.8 7.9 5.6 –8.1 –13.7 –5.2 –2.2 –0.4 –4.4 1.8
Sep. 23.1 5.0 1.3 18.1 15.8 –36.2 22.5 58.7 11.1 –2.9 –0.4 5.3 9.1
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
18.6 3.2 – 39.2 46.4 40.2 3.2 37.0 –0.4 6.6 0.2 –8.3 – 0.0 2019 Feb.
–21.7 –20.4 – 122.7 139.8 133.5 6.2 127.3 –6.5 12.8 – 7.3 0.7 –19.0 Mar.
–33.1 28.9 – 73.8 55.4 46.2 7.4 38.9 2.5 6.7 22.3 14.3 – 0.4 Apr.
17.8 –7.4 – 81.1 88.6 87.6 5.1 82.5 –12.4 13.4 – 7.7 –9.7 5.8 May
33.6 –71.2 – 73.5 87.2 98.3 7.5 90.8 –14.5 3.4 –20.7 –11.9 – 2.0 June
–13.0 47.0 – 50.0 31.1 25.7 9.0 16.7 1.4 4.0 17.9 21.1 – 5.2 July
6.3 –81.9 – 113.1 110.1 86.1 1.3 84.7 19.1 4.9 4.7 18.0 –13.5 Aug.
5.8 42.9 – –36.5 –18.4 – 1.1 3.3 – 4.4 –15.6 – 1.7 –17.9 –13.9 – 0.4 Sep.
–37.7 51.8 – 58.3 45.6 60.1 2.8 57.3 –10.1 – 4.5 42.1 1.4 6.5 Oct.
– 1.1 –53.7 – 100.6 103.3 122.4 6.9 115.5 –17.6 – 1.5 –14.7 3.1 – 0.7 Nov.
–66.5 –26.2 – –40.1 1.5 7.2 16.3 – 9.2 –9.3 3.6 –33.6 –22.5 –18.3 Dec.
84.6 41.9 – 5.2 –44.3 –52.0 –7.3 –44.7 0.2 7.6 – 7.1 34.8 14.0 2020 Jan.
43.7 –34.5 – 95.8 82.6 84.1 5.2 79.0 –1.2 – 0.3 19.7 –4.7 4.9 Feb.
4.7 –7.6 – 350.5 320.8 300.1 23.8 276.3 16.2 4.5 30.0 –19.4 24.9 Mar.
72.1 –17.7 – 171.8 174.8 175.1 20.4 154.8 –15.0 14.7 – 4.6 24.0 –18.4 Apr.
100.9 –38.2 – 218.0 226.2 189.5 20.1 169.4 16.8 19.9 9.6 0.1 – 9.0 May
123.4 –1.5 – 84.0 79.3 88.9 13.1 75.8 –20.6 11.0 –42.7 14.5 – 5.2 June
– 4.6 –68.7 – 183.8 149.1 123.6 14.3 109.3 19.9 5.7 18.1 31.0 –10.4 July
40.5 29.1 – 18.6 35.4 45.0 5.9 39.1 –18.7 9.1 – 4.8 –0.3 – 3.8 Aug.
20.3 4.8 – 86.5 79.7 61.1 3.5 57.5 16.7 2.0 –29.5 7.6 – 2.5 Sep.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
– 2.7 20.3 2.9 0.4 12.5 8.3 3.6 1.0 0.3 – 0.0 – 0.7 2019 Feb.
17.7 – 58.0 2.5 1.2 21.8 20.9 – 1.5 2.2 0.0 – 0.2 0.3 Mar.
– 15.2 33.9 3.9 2.1 14.7 17.9 – 3.7 0.0 1.1 – 0.1 – 0.6 Apr.
19.0 – 20.1 4.0 0.8 23.0 23.8 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.3 0.1 0.4 May
3.7 – 7.7 3.0 2.1 10.3 10.3 – 1.4 – 0.4 1.7 – 0.0 0.2 June
– 27.1 74.0 3.6 3.2 4.4 7.2 – 3.3 – 0.6 1.0 0.1 0.1 July
10.7 – 26.8 5.8 – 0.7 33.9 26.1 5.7 – 1.2 3.1 0.0 0.3 Aug.
9.9 – 6.6 4.9 0.8 – 4.7 0.1 – 4.8 – 0.7 – 1.1 0.1 1.7 Sep.
– 19.8 74.2 4.3 0.2 14.7 18.7 – 0.4 – 1.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.3 Oct.
8.2 – 29.5 4.5 0.7 20.0 24.1 – 3.4 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 Nov.
– 2.0 – 32.4 4.9 3.4 – 4.5 – 0.4 – 6.6 0.6 1.8 – 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 5.6 108.0 2.1 – 0.6 – 2.5 – 7.8 5.9 – 3.0 – 1.0 – 0.1 3.4 2020 Jan.
24.4 – 14.0 4.9 0.1 14.5 17.7 1.2 – 1.7 – 0.6 0.1 – 2.2 Feb.
7.5 – 71.9 12.2 0.9 85.7 93.3 – 0.4 – 3.4 – 0.3 0.4 – 3.8 Mar.
17.9 8.6 3.2 4.3 1.5 9.9 – 8.1 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 – 1.9 Apr.
28.6 – 9.3 0.3 5.3 48.4 43.4 6.2 0.3 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.4 May
57.8 – 69.3 – 0.4 4.7 0.1 9.9 – 7.7 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.2 – 0.3 June
14.2 – 11.1 2.4 3.9 35.2 27.4 8.6 – 1.1 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.8 July
21.0 – 14.2 3.8 0.9 13.3 18.6 – 4.9 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 – 0.3 Aug.
15.3 – 58.0 2.7 0.6 18.5 25.6 – 5.3 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.2 – 1.4 Sep.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2018 Aug. 26,807.8 18,127.6 13,530.9 11,227.3 1,524.1 779.5 4,596.7 1,001.7 3,595.0 5,477.5 3,202.7
Sep. 26,763.1 18,146.6 13,538.6 11,248.0 1,508.3 782.3 4,608.1 1,000.7 3,607.4 5,457.8 3,158.6
Oct. 27,077.1 18,151.7 13,555.3 11,266.2 1,510.9 778.1 4,596.4 1,002.6 3,593.8 5,667.4 3,258.0
Nov. 27,216.6 18,243.5 13,638.0 11,337.8 1,516.2 784.1 4,605.5 1,001.0 3,604.5 5,694.7 3,278.5
Dec. 26,990.0 18,173.2 13,568.7 11,295.5 1,502.0 771.2 4,604.5 1,002.8 3,601.8 5,557.1 3,259.8
2019 Jan. 27,392.5 18,309.1 13,637.4 11,345.0 1,517.2 775.3 4,671.7 1,015.9 3,655.8 5,770.3 3,313.0
Feb. 27,436.5 18,354.8 13,683.9 11,368.3 1,528.3 787.3 4,670.9 1,001.2 3,669.7 5,763.8 3,317.9
Mar. 27,733.7 18,397.2 13,735.5 11,413.7 1,526.2 795.7 4,661.7 1,001.4 3,660.3 5,841.6 3,494.9
Apr. 27,886.9 18,468.4 13,828.8 11,472.8 1,529.8 826.1 4,639.6 1,001.1 3,638.6 5,942.4 3,476.2
May 28,185.6 18,497.0 13,854.0 11,494.6 1,549.1 810.4 4,643.0 1,000.3 3,642.7 6,027.7 3,660.8
June 28,305.8 18,522.0 13,874.9 11,521.2 1,552.5 801.2 4,647.1 1,000.0 3,647.1 5,991.6 3,792.1
July 28,772.3 18,601.9 13,939.3 11,583.7 1,550.8 804.7 4,662.6 1,002.8 3,659.8 6,208.8 3,961.6
Aug. 29,374.0 18,658.9 13,961.4 11,612.7 1,549.4 799.3 4,697.5 1,003.1 3,694.4 6,311.5 4,403.7
Sep. 29,193.7 18,651.6 13,971.2 11,595.9 1,566.6 808.7 4,680.4 996.7 3,683.7 6,300.2 4,241.9
Oct. 28,966.1 18,689.3 14,042.6 11,660.4 1,550.6 831.5 4,646.8 1,002.5 3,644.3 6,259.5 4,017.3
Nov. 29,017.9 18,729.5 14,099.4 11,684.4 1,569.3 845.7 4,630.0 998.6 3,631.4 6,270.8 4,017.6
Dec. 28,328.2 18,591.7 14,008.8 11,617.1 1,544.1 847.6 4,582.8 981.0 3,601.8 5,930.8 3,805.7
2020 Jan. 29,020.8 18,722.4 14,062.6 11,668.9 1,542.7 851.0 4,659.8 1,003.4 3,656.4 6,302.2 3,996.2
Feb. 29,486.3 18,767.3 14,101.8 11,697.4 1,563.0 841.4 4,665.5 992.2 3,673.3 6,414.4 4,304.6
Mar. 30,019.0 19,013.3 14,239.2 11,884.9 1,557.1 797.2 4,774.0 1,006.7 3,767.3 6,486.5 4,519.2
Apr. 30,447.3 19,307.8 14,348.6 11,933.2 1,613.0 802.4 4,959.2 1,018.0 3,941.3 6,584.9 4,554.5
May 30,496.1 19,607.5 14,466.3 12,020.4 1,643.2 802.7 5,141.2 1,013.7 4,127.5 6,465.2 4,423.4
June 30,401.7 19,757.8 14,448.0 11,980.9 1,651.1 816.0 5,309.8 1,005.3 4,304.5 6,297.5 4,346.4
July 30,604.7 19,911.1 14,334.0 12,012.5 1,507.0 814.5 5,577.1 1,006.0 4,571.1 6,276.7 4,417.0
Aug. 30,434.2 19,985.5 14,355.4 12,018.2 1,526.2 811.1 5,630.0 997.8 4,632.2 6,241.6 4,207.2
Sep. 30,515.7 20,083.4 14,350.2 12,017.6 1,522.7 809.9 5,733.2 998.6 4,734.6 6,231.7 4,200.6
German contribution (€ billion)
2018 Aug. 6,121.9 4,279.7 3,313.6 2,863.9 183.8 265.9 966.0 300.5 665.5 1,189.8 652.4
Sep. 6,119.7 4,295.4 3,331.0 2,880.3 184.8 265.9 964.4 297.5 666.9 1,194.5 629.8
Oct. 6,154.2 4,303.6 3,339.1 2,888.2 185.3 265.6 964.5 300.8 663.7 1,208.1 642.4
Nov. 6,177.4 4,323.4 3,356.8 2,905.6 188.1 263.0 966.7 299.8 666.9 1,202.7 651.3
Dec. 6,194.1 4,317.4 3,353.6 2,903.7 187.8 262.2 963.7 296.4 667.3 1,208.5 668.2
2019 Jan. 6,252.9 4,333.5 3,366.6 2,917.4 188.8 260.4 966.9 299.2 667.7 1,232.6 686.9
Feb. 6,243.9 4,343.3 3,382.0 2,932.6 189.2 260.2 961.3 296.6 664.7 1,221.0 679.6
Mar. 6,392.0 4,373.9 3,414.7 2,963.7 189.7 261.3 959.2 293.9 665.3 1,265.4 752.8
Apr. 6,408.7 4,379.3 3,427.3 2,976.4 189.1 261.9 951.9 294.8 657.1 1,278.2 751.2
May 6,524.8 4,402.6 3,446.8 2,995.6 190.0 261.1 955.8 293.1 662.8 1,284.5 837.7
June 6,619.8 4,431.8 3,473.1 3,017.0 194.4 261.7 958.6 291.2 667.5 1,294.2 893.7
July 6,698.2 4,445.3 3,481.1 3,024.8 194.0 262.3 964.2 293.7 670.5 1,312.3 940.7
Aug. 6,973.5 4,478.6 3,501.8 3,044.3 196.5 261.0 976.8 293.5 683.3 1,330.9 1,163.9
Sep. 6,872.6 4,462.9 3,497.0 3,040.4 196.0 260.5 965.9 288.3 677.6 1,311.9 1,097.8
Oct. 6,769.9 4,466.0 3,506.4 3,049.0 195.9 261.4 959.5 291.6 667.9 1,303.7 1,000.3
Nov. 6,785.4 4,490.1 3,527.4 3,064.8 199.7 262.9 962.6 292.6 670.0 1,289.6 1,005.8
Dec. 6,716.1 4,480.4 3,527.3 3,064.0 197.9 265.4 953.1 288.5 664.6 1,236.4 999.3
2020 Jan. 6,847.7 4,503.3 3,537.5 3,071.5 198.2 267.8 965.8 292.8 673.0 1,290.1 1,054.4
Feb. 7,028.5 4,531.0 3,562.2 3,092.6 203.2 266.4 968.8 290.8 678.0 1,306.1 1,191.4
Mar. 7,148.1 4,567.1 3,589.0 3,128.9 202.1 258.0 978.1 292.4 685.7 1,321.3 1,259.6
Apr. 7,258.0 4,605.2 3,606.5 3,143.8 206.5 256.1 998.7 294.8 703.9 1,346.6 1,306.2
May 7,230.4 4,666.4 3,640.1 3,167.2 215.9 257.1 1,026.2 293.8 732.5 1,326.0 1,238.1
June 7,225.3 4,692.6 3,641.6 3,164.7 220.4 256.6 1,051.0 291.5 759.6 1,304.2 1,228.5
July 7,267.6 4,718.8 3,634.9 3,175.5 202.7 256.7 1,083.9 293.4 790.5 1,282.9 1,265.8
Aug. 7,167.3 4,723.0 3,642.2 3,180.7 202.9 258.6 1,080.8 287.4 793.3 1,268.8 1,175.5
Sep. 7,236.4 4,749.3 3,647.1 3,184.0 205.0 258.1 1,102.1 289.7 812.4 1,293.8 1,193.3
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,148.3 12,595.3 11,752.9 11,802.7 6,593.5 812.0 208.9 1,890.6 2,245.0 52.7 2018 Aug.
1,150.4 12,662.2 11,780.0 11,831.5 6,656.7 796.3 205.9 1,878.0 2,242.3 52.3 Sep.
1,152.2 12,639.5 11,788.3 11,848.3 6,668.8 812.8 203.6 1,872.0 2,239.0 52.1 Oct.
1,157.5 12,719.4 11,861.8 11,912.4 6,750.6 801.6 200.7 1,866.9 2,241.2 51.3 Nov.
1,175.4 12,713.3 11,926.3 11,989.2 6,799.1 800.5 200.7 1,888.7 2,248.7 51.5 Dec.
1,162.4 12,768.0 11,911.1 11,976.6 6,777.8 798.0 199.4 1,888.0 2,262.2 51.3 2019 Jan.
1,165.6 12,833.0 11,959.7 12,005.4 6,806.3 795.2 196.8 1,887.9 2,268.0 51.2 Feb.
1,171.7 12,947.7 12,078.5 12,135.0 6,931.6 785.8 199.5 1,886.3 2,280.5 51.3 Mar.
1,179.1 12,958.0 12,120.9 12,180.6 6,970.5 788.5 201.8 1,880.4 2,287.8 51.5 Apr.
1,184.2 13,059.3 12,198.6 12,257.0 7,049.7 775.7 201.4 1,876.7 2,301.5 52.1 May
1,191.7 13,181.6 12,288.1 12,335.7 7,122.9 762.3 198.3 1,894.2 2,304.7 53.2 June
1,200.7 13,178.8 12,300.1 12,350.5 7,148.0 767.3 198.9 1,873.6 2,309.0 53.7 July
1,202.0 13,283.3 12,388.8 12,438.4 7,227.7 782.1 201.0 1,860.5 2,313.8 53.4 Aug.
1,205.4 13,298.4 12,383.2 12,446.2 7,222.9 768.9 200.8 1,886.9 2,313.7 53.0 Sep.
1,208.2 13,292.6 12,422.5 12,487.1 7,284.6 758.3 201.3 1,883.1 2,310.5 49.4 Oct.
1,215.1 13,388.9 12,520.7 12,572.4 7,387.7 740.7 200.6 1,885.1 2,309.7 48.6 Nov.
1,231.5 13,311.3 12,508.3 12,583.4 7,391.8 738.5 200.2 1,892.5 2,314.2 46.2 Dec.
1,224.1 13,359.5 12,460.6 12,555.5 7,362.9 734.6 200.1 1,890.8 2,322.3 44.7 2020 Jan.
1,229.3 13,477.0 12,528.4 12,615.5 7,430.7 731.7 198.6 1,888.4 2,322.0 44.1 Feb.
1,253.1 13,774.3 12,781.8 12,902.7 7,697.8 759.6 192.1 1,882.6 2,327.5 43.1 Mar.
1,273.5 13,995.4 12,952.4 13,064.6 7,852.0 762.5 188.2 1,876.4 2,343.3 42.1 Apr.
1,293.5 14,300.6 13,161.8 13,262.7 8,009.4 779.9 188.4 1,880.1 2,363.6 41.4 May
1,306.6 14,475.7 13,206.2 13,308.1 8,066.4 763.6 186.8 1,875.1 2,375.6 40.6 June
1,320.9 14,591.0 13,272.4 13,361.6 8,090.0 782.9 186.4 1,880.8 2,381.1 40.4 July
1,326.8 14,666.9 13,301.0 13,389.9 8,116.9 767.1 184.6 1,891.4 2,389.9 40.0 Aug.
1,330.4 14,756.3 13,357.4 13,465.7 8,173.2 780.8 195.7 1,884.2 2,392.0 39.8 Sep.
German contribution (€ billion)
256.4 3,703.1 3,568.1 3,417.3 2,051.8 153.7 34.0 601.1 537.7 38.9 2018 Aug.
256.1 3,737.2 3,588.3 3,437.1 2,076.9 153.2 33.2 597.4 537.8 38.6 Sep.
256.3 3,730.6 3,595.8 3,453.9 2,092.2 155.1 33.6 596.9 538.0 38.1 Oct.
257.2 3,774.2 3,632.0 3,482.3 2,127.4 149.8 33.2 595.9 538.5 37.4 Nov.
260.0 3,766.4 3,629.3 3,481.1 2,120.4 152.5 33.7 596.7 540.6 37.2 Dec.
267.6 3,737.2 3,622.2 3,471.2 2,113.7 154.3 33.5 592.1 540.9 36.7 2019 Jan.
268.0 3,747.2 3,634.2 3,474.2 2,117.5 153.9 33.2 591.0 541.8 36.7 Feb.
269.1 3,785.8 3,652.3 3,490.2 2,136.2 152.2 33.0 587.7 544.0 37.1 Mar.
271.3 3,782.3 3,667.4 3,506.4 2,156.4 151.2 32.8 584.8 544.1 37.2 Apr.
272.1 3,824.2 3,689.1 3,523.2 2,176.6 149.4 32.7 582.9 543.7 37.9 May
274.2 3,837.7 3,697.8 3,528.6 2,183.2 147.8 32.3 583.5 543.3 38.4 June
277.3 3,812.4 3,701.4 3,532.6 2,191.7 147.0 31.6 581.4 542.7 38.1 July
276.6 3,849.7 3,730.3 3,550.9 2,213.2 149.7 31.7 576.9 541.5 37.8 Aug.
277.4 3,853.5 3,722.1 3,546.0 2,213.9 146.4 31.5 576.1 540.8 37.2 Sep.
277.6 3,848.5 3,734.8 3,571.5 2,240.3 148.6 31.2 575.2 539.9 36.4 Oct.
278.4 3,874.7 3,753.7 3,580.0 2,257.7 143.0 30.8 573.7 539.2 35.6 Nov.
281.8 3,863.9 3,744.4 3,574.3 2,250.5 144.8 31.0 573.5 540.0 34.5 Dec.
281.2 3,850.4 3,733.8 3,572.3 2,255.2 145.3 31.0 570.6 537.2 33.0 2020 Jan.
281.3 3,890.4 3,750.4 3,576.3 2,265.3 142.0 31.3 569.8 535.4 32.5 Feb.
282.2 3,982.8 3,830.4 3,655.2 2,346.4 147.3 30.5 567.2 532.0 31.8 Mar.
286.5 3,997.3 3,828.9 3,665.7 2,359.6 149.2 30.0 563.6 532.2 31.1 Apr.
291.8 4,080.7 3,885.8 3,710.9 2,396.9 158.3 29.0 563.6 532.5 30.7 May
296.5 4,132.2 3,873.6 3,711.6 2,408.7 152.1 29.6 559.0 532.6 29.7 June
300.4 4,170.7 3,880.3 3,716.8 2,409.9 163.5 30.0 552.8 531.5 29.2 July
301.3 4,202.4 3,889.9 3,720.2 2,419.2 159.3 30.1 551.3 531.6 28.8 Aug.
301.9 4,235.6 3,905.8 3,745.4 2,445.3 160.6 30.3 549.2 531.5 28.4 Sep.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2018 Aug. 377.4 415.1 208.7 90.6 31.0 54.4 25.9 4.6 257.8 257.3 507.3 2,084.9 1,439.1
Sep. 414.4 416.3 211.2 87.8 32.4 54.8 25.5 4.6 247.2 246.7 486.2 2,109.6 1,457.3
Oct. 375.6 415.5 213.2 84.0 32.3 55.7 25.8 4.5 237.4 236.9 511.5 2,165.4 1,474.6
Nov. 383.1 423.9 218.9 85.1 33.6 56.3 25.7 4.3 268.8 268.4 511.8 2,162.9 1,469.0
Dec. 322.5 401.6 203.7 78.7 34.2 56.9 23.8 4.3 254.5 254.2 513.3 2,158.0 1,471.8
2019 Jan. 389.2 402.2 196.8 86.0 34.9 55.8 24.2 4.5 270.1 269.6 524.5 2,176.2 1,484.6
Feb. 407.9 419.6 207.3 92.2 34.2 56.3 25.1 4.5 270.5 269.7 516.3 2,205.0 1,506.2
Mar. 386.0 426.7 212.1 92.6 35.4 56.7 25.5 4.4 272.7 272.3 520.2 2,185.7 1,489.6
Apr. 352.9 424.6 212.2 91.4 34.5 56.9 25.3 4.4 295.0 294.6 532.3 2,174.9 1,488.0
May 370.7 431.6 216.9 94.9 33.4 57.0 25.1 4.3 287.4 287.0 522.6 2,191.0 1,497.2
June 404.2 441.8 224.4 94.6 35.1 58.1 25.2 4.4 266.0 265.7 510.6 2,182.2 1,493.8
July 391.2 437.1 221.5 93.8 34.1 58.2 25.2 4.4 284.1 283.8 533.0 2,189.1 1,492.7
Aug. 397.4 447.4 228.3 97.2 34.1 58.3 25.3 4.3 289.0 288.5 550.9 2,173.6 1,484.1
Sep. 402.9 449.3 231.4 98.0 31.7 58.9 25.0 4.2 257.0 256.5 537.1 2,181.1 1,484.7
Oct. 365.0 440.5 224.5 95.5 32.3 59.1 25.2 3.9 298.8 298.3 538.6 2,174.6 1,488.4
Nov. 363.9 452.6 235.7 95.5 33.8 59.1 24.8 3.8 284.3 283.7 541.6 2,187.8 1,493.0
Dec. 297.4 430.4 224.7 85.9 33.7 59.1 23.6 3.6 250.3 249.8 520.3 2,154.0 1,486.9
2020 Jan. 381.8 422.3 209.6 92.6 33.2 59.5 23.2 4.1 243.4 242.9 555.2 2,187.8 1,500.3
Feb. 425.5 436.0 219.8 96.8 32.8 59.2 23.3 4.0 263.2 262.7 550.5 2,191.5 1,497.9
Mar. 430.2 441.4 232.8 93.3 31.0 58.2 22.3 3.9 293.2 292.6 531.0 2,177.5 1,484.5
Apr. 502.3 428.6 233.8 84.0 29.4 56.4 21.1 3.8 289.0 288.6 554.9 2,160.0 1,472.9
May 603.1 434.7 245.8 81.7 28.4 54.7 20.3 3.8 297.8 297.5 555.0 2,134.7 1,470.7
June 726.5 441.1 259.4 82.4 24.6 51.8 19.4 3.4 254.8 254.6 569.5 2,107.0 1,454.4
July 788.0 441.3 264.1 80.1 23.2 51.0 19.4 3.5 271.8 271.6 600.5 2,057.1 1,435.7
Aug. 828.6 448.4 273.5 79.5 22.1 50.3 19.6 3.5 266.9 266.7 600.9 2,037.8 1,425.5
Sep. 849.0 441.6 274.6 74.0 20.8 49.1 19.5 3.4 237.7 237.5 608.5 2,060.2 1,431.2
German contribution (€ billion)
2018 Aug. 61.7 224.1 67.3 78.9 26.4 47.7 3.1 0.6 1.2 1.2 1.9 527.7 282.0
Sep. 73.9 226.2 69.6 76.9 27.8 48.3 3.1 0.6 1.3 1.3 1.9 536.3 287.6
Oct. 56.1 220.6 66.1 73.9 28.0 48.9 3.1 0.6 2.4 2.4 1.9 544.5 286.9
Nov. 65.7 226.3 69.4 74.8 28.7 49.7 3.1 0.7 1.3 1.3 2.2 544.9 290.3
Dec. 60.3 225.0 74.6 67.5 29.3 49.9 3.0 0.6 0.8 0.8 2.2 532.5 283.4
2019 Jan. 41.8 224.2 67.1 74.8 30.0 48.7 3.0 0.6 1.7 1.7 2.2 546.6 294.1
Feb. 38.8 234.3 71.8 80.3 29.3 49.1 3.1 0.6 2.0 2.0 2.2 560.4 302.9
Mar. 56.4 239.2 75.9 80.0 30.3 49.4 3.1 0.6 11.4 11.4 2.0 557.3 298.2
Apr. 41.2 234.7 73.6 78.4 29.4 49.6 3.1 0.6 12.5 12.5 1.9 552.8 293.5
May 60.3 240.7 77.4 81.7 28.3 49.6 3.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 2.0 560.1 300.1
June 64.0 245.1 80.4 81.5 29.0 50.6 3.1 0.5 12.9 12.9 2.0 558.0 301.8
July 36.9 242.9 79.6 80.7 28.2 50.8 3.1 0.5 13.9 13.9 2.0 559.4 296.9
Aug. 47.6 251.2 84.7 83.8 28.1 50.9 3.2 0.5 16.9 16.7 2.0 557.3 295.0
Sep. 57.3 250.3 84.6 85.0 25.8 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.5 1.3 2.2 563.5 297.7
Oct. 37.4 239.6 76.3 82.4 26.1 51.3 3.1 0.5 1.2 1.0 2.1 555.2 299.2
Nov. 45.4 249.3 83.4 83.9 27.4 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.7 1.5 1.9 560.4 302.2
Dec. 43.4 246.2 89.5 75.4 27.0 51.0 2.9 0.4 3.5 3.4 1.8 551.4 301.6
2020 Jan. 37.8 240.2 77.8 81.4 26.6 51.3 2.7 0.4 2.5 2.4 1.8 560.9 306.5
Feb. 62.2 251.9 85.5 86.0 26.3 50.9 2.8 0.4 2.0 1.8 1.8 563.9 310.3
Mar. 69.7 257.9 97.6 82.5 24.7 49.8 2.8 0.4 1.7 1.6 2.2 553.0 310.7
Apr. 87.5 244.0 94.7 74.4 23.7 48.3 2.7 0.4 3.4 3.3 2.1 550.6 306.2
May 116.2 253.6 108.0 72.9 22.9 46.7 2.8 0.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 543.1 305.4
June 174.0 246.5 106.1 74.1 19.5 44.0 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 1.8 532.8 297.2
July 208.5 245.3 109.6 71.4 18.3 43.2 2.5 0.3 2.1 2.0 1.6 523.3 293.3
Aug. 229.5 252.8 118.7 71.3 17.4 42.4 2.6 0.3 1.7 1.5 1.9 517.9 291.1
Sep. 244.7 245.5 119.4 65.6 16.5 41.2 2.5 0.3 1.3 1.1 2.0 524.2 296.1
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
39.8 24.1 2,020.9 4,649.3 2,663.2 17.7 2,884.1 – 8,082.1 11,519.2 12,166.7 6,686.5 155.5 2018 Aug.
40.6 22.1 2,046.9 4,574.8 2,663.2 23.4 2,846.0 – 8,152.5 11,566.5 12,185.1 6,699.8 157.9 Sep.
39.6 23.7 2,102.1 4,704.7 2,709.2 – 14.4 2,971.7 – 8,160.1 11,581.4 12,226.4 6,795.6 149.7 Oct.
38.9 21.7 2,102.3 4,659.6 2,711.2 6.6 3,018.8 – 8,256.6 11,668.3 12,313.3 6,792.3 153.3 Nov.
47.5 20.7 2,089.8 4,503.3 2,727.3 8.7 2,936.1 – 8,302.9 11,714.7 12,363.6 6,818.5 149.8 Dec.
36.3 23.9 2,116.1 4,696.6 2,752.7 10.8 3,031.2 – 8,264.1 11,693.2 12,349.0 6,868.4 151.7 2019 Jan.
33.2 26.1 2,145.8 4,661.2 2,740.5 15.1 3,029.3 – 8,305.1 11,741.1 12,389.0 6,886.1 150.4 Feb.
16.0 22.5 2,147.2 4,647.4 2,766.8 23.2 3,198.4 – 8,442.9 11,886.7 12,519.2 6,912.7 151.9 Mar.
17.0 21.4 2,136.5 4,770.1 2,761.0 14.1 3,202.5 – 8,488.9 11,942.4 12,591.3 6,890.6 151.5 Apr.
23.4 22.1 2,145.4 4,776.2 2,774.6 26.3 3,364.1 – 8,576.2 12,032.4 12,675.1 6,910.2 149.7 May
20.0 21.6 2,140.6 4,640.6 2,830.3 33.7 3,469.1 – 8,670.3 12,114.5 12,741.2 6,980.8 155.2 June
16.1 21.3 2,151.6 4,796.8 2,878.9 25.7 3,685.2 – 8,699.0 12,150.2 12,798.2 7,020.3 151.7 July
2.7 20.7 2,150.1 4,854.7 2,940.4 – 2.9 4,083.0 – 8,787.9 12,264.2 12,915.0 7,067.0 152.7 Aug.
3.2 19.0 2,158.9 4,803.5 2,942.8 25.4 3,943.0 – 8,790.0 12,251.2 12,883.4 7,104.7 153.4 Sep.
7.5 19.8 2,147.2 4,768.1 2,935.0 34.3 3,716.0 – 8,847.2 12,293.3 12,936.6 7,077.6 152.9 Oct.
6.8 19.5 2,161.5 4,770.3 2,922.8 31.2 3,675.8 – 8,972.8 12,401.5 13,041.9 7,080.9 157.9 Nov.
– 11.3 19.2 2,146.1 4,452.2 2,913.9 25.2 3,469.5 – 8,975.4 12,396.0 12,995.6 7,061.4 152.0 Dec.
– 0.4 21.9 2,166.3 4,759.3 2,951.2 24.4 3,715.8 – 8,927.5 12,357.7 13,006.7 7,116.6 154.9 2020 Jan.
3.6 23.4 2,164.5 4,817.2 2,967.9 26.5 3,963.1 – 9,012.8 12,442.0 13,104.8 7,128.2 156.9 Feb.
32.0 21.6 2,123.8 4,906.1 2,930.7 12.6 4,140.5 – 9,312.2 12,761.8 13,456.0 7,042.4 152.5 Mar.
13.4 21.5 2,125.1 5,048.2 2,947.0 – 25.3 4,204.6 – 9,490.2 12,940.8 13,632.0 7,050.8 153.0 Apr.
4.4 22.3 2,108.0 4,946.1 2,952.8 – 33.2 4,048.8 – 9,681.5 13,165.8 13,848.8 7,040.7 154.7 May
0.7 21.1 2,085.3 4,710.9 2,977.9 – 4.8 4,004.1 – 9,768.8 13,242.8 13,930.6 7,034.2 158.0 June
– 10.9 20.1 2,047.9 4,731.8 3,019.7 – 52.7 4,064.5 – 9,812.8 13,307.6 14,026.7 7,043.3 159.4 July
– 14.4 19.2 2,033.0 4,698.2 3,017.3 – 38.9 3,858.2 – 9,855.7 13,339.9 14,042.3 7,035.5 160.0 Aug.
– 14.5 18.1 2,056.5 4,657.1 3,011.8 – 23.7 3,877.4 – 9,921.4 13,425.6 14,136.3 7,044.9 164.6 Sep.
German contribution (€ billion)
18.3 12.0 497.4 966.5 672.6 –1,024.8 1,273.6 386.9 2,119.1 2,953.0 2,986.4 1,858.4 –2018 Aug.
17.8 11.0 507.4 979.8 670.9 –1,059.4 1,251.7 390.8 2,146.5 2,978.4 3,010.4 1,863.3 – Sep.
20.2 11.0 513.2 952.8 676.1 –1,031.2 1,277.1 394.6 2,158.3 2,990.0 3,025.5 1,873.8 – Oct.
19.4 10.3 515.2 932.7 675.8 –1,041.8 1,288.0 397.1 2,196.8 3,024.9 3,058.2 1,874.7 – Nov.
17.7 10.1 504.6 967.9 689.9 –1,063.4 1,297.9 401.1 2,195.0 3,021.7 3,052.5 1,879.0 – Dec.
18.2 9.6 518.7 920.7 690.0 –971.6 1,326.1 391.5 2,180.7 3,017.3 3,049.1 1,886.9 –2019 Jan.
19.1 8.2 533.2 882.8 684.4 –966.0 1,330.9 394.4 2,189.4 3,030.9 3,062.3 1,895.1 – Feb.
19.2 8.3 529.8 958.7 695.9 –1,031.3 1,412.2 396.9 2,212.1 3,054.7 3,095.5 1,900.4 – Mar.
18.6 8.2 525.9 953.9 692.7 –985.8 1,398.5 400.8 2,230.0 3,069.0 3,110.2 1,890.7 – Apr.
18.9 8.4 532.9 944.9 702.5 –1,016.3 1,496.1 404.8 2,254.0 3,093.0 3,133.5 1,906.3 – May
19.7 7.6 530.7 957.2 722.3 –1,013.1 1,542.9 407.8 2,263.6 3,100.7 3,142.8 1,926.0 – June
19.7 7.9 531.9 925.0 735.6 –950.3 1,600.3 411.4 2,271.3 3,104.7 3,148.2 1,938.3 – July
20.3 7.6 529.4 944.3 757.0 –980.7 1,826.9 417.2 2,297.9 3,135.9 3,182.8 1,952.6 – Aug.
22.3 7.4 533.8 927.2 755.6 –992.1 1,761.2 422.1 2,298.5 3,131.2 3,164.7 1,954.3 – Sep.
20.7 6.7 527.8 867.4 750.0 –918.5 1,664.0 426.3 2,316.5 3,147.7 3,178.4 1,941.3 – Oct.
21.4 5.8 533.1 877.7 749.1 –951.9 1,671.9 430.8 2,341.2 3,168.5 3,199.3 1,943.1 – Nov.
21.0 6.1 524.3 863.5 750.1 –999.8 1,681.4 435.8 2,340.1 3,161.1 3,193.6 1,933.9 – Dec.
23.9 6.7 530.2 831.0 757.2 –900.5 1,744.6 437.9 2,333.0 3,157.1 3,192.1 1,942.8 –2020 Jan.
21.7 6.8 535.4 850.2 764.8 –912.0 1,867.4 442.7 2,350.9 3,174.6 3,207.0 1,953.8 – Feb.
18.4 6.3 528.3 901.4 757.6 –990.7 1,940.1 455.0 2,444.0 3,263.9 3,292.5 1,935.1 – Mar.
15.9 6.9 527.8 942.0 759.1 –1,003.6 2,007.1 458.2 2,454.3 3,266.4 3,294.7 1,930.3 – Apr.
14.9 7.3 520.8 917.3 756.1 –1,003.8 1,932.8 458.5 2,505.0 3,323.2 3,349.8 1,918.3 – May
14.8 7.1 510.9 939.7 769.1 –1,074.1 1,923.1 458.1 2,514.8 3,325.2 3,349.7 1,913.0 – June
12.8 6.7 503.7 907.0 784.6 –1,089.1 1,967.5 460.5 2,519.5 3,336.8 3,360.1 1,913.6 – July
12.0 7.2 498.7 891.2 778.4 –1,114.7 1,888.5 464.3 2,537.9 3,350.2 3,372.9 1,899.9 – Aug.
11.2 6.8 506.2 953.6 787.3 –1,172.9 1,905.4 467.0 2,564.7 3,371.9 3,393.1 1,912.5 – Sep.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
November 2020
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
current
account
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including
maintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base
period currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2019         Jan. 655.8 7.9 723.8 0.1 2,652.8 640.0 0.0 1,218.8 231.3 618.2 1,332.1 3,190.9
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 665.5 6.0 723.1 0.1 2,645.8 637.6 0.0 1,209.2 257.3 571.4 1,364.8 3,211.7
         Apr. 678.6 5.7 720.3 0.1 2,635.9 619.6 0.0 1,215.8 270.5 555.6 1,379.0 3,214.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 689.7 5.5 718.6 0.4 2,630.6 601.9 0.0 1,228.2 248.2 561.9 1,404.6 3,234.7
         July 710.3 4.6 700.1 0.0 2,620.4 570.8 0.0 1,240.8 295.9 592.2 1,335.7 3,147.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 720.2 3.0 692.5 0.0 2,612.4 555.7 0.0 1,251.1 268.5 621.2 1,331.5 3,138.3
         Oct. 758.5 2.0 668.5 0.0 2,608.7 456.6 0.0 1,252.7 298.6 641.3 1,388.5 3,097.8
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 773.3 1.8 663.7 0.0 2,618.8 257.9 0.0 1,262.9 226.6 648.1 1,662.1 3,182.9
2020         Jan. 768.6 2.9 616.1 0.0 2,639.1 254.6 0.0 1,282.2 211.8 654.3 1,623.7 3,160.6
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 767.1 1.4 615.9 0.0 2,666.7 244.6 0.0 1,277.1 268.6 618.4 1,642.3 3,164.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 926.3 0.6 865.7 0.0 2,784.2 271.8 0.0 1,321.9 374.4 788.6 1,820.2 3,413.8
         June 950.4 0.3 984.2 0.0 2,986.9 299.9 0.0 1,347.9 477.1 830.5 1,966.5 3,614.4
         July 871.3 0.8 1,401.5 0.0 3,168.2 356.0 0.0 1,365.7 671.2 703.1 2,345.9 4,067.5
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 865.9 1.3 1,593.2 0.0 3,323.6 413.2 0.0 1,381.2 712.9 651.0 2,625.7 4,420.1
         Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Deutsche Bundesbank
2019         Jan. 155.8 1.7 87.6 0.1 570.4 153.1 0.0 293.4 60.5 − 144.9 453.7 900.1
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 158.3 0.6 87.6 0.0 569.5 163.3 0.0 294.3 49.3 − 157.0 466.0 923.7
         Apr. 160.8 0.6 86.7 0.0 563.7 172.5 0.0 296.1 61.2 − 199.4 481.6 950.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .
         June 163.6 0.6 86.1 0.0 565.2 166.3 0.0 299.6 58.0 − 213.6 505.3 971.1
         July 169.4 0.7 85.3 0.0 563.1 150.1 0.0 303.0 65.7 − 175.0 474.5 927.7
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 172.5 0.5 84.9 0.0 562.7 150.1 0.0 305.6 57.6 − 157.6 464.9 920.6
         Oct. 182.8 0.4 82.8 0.0 560.0 151.5 0.0 306.5 70.8 − 159.4 456.6 914.7
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Dec. 186.9 0.4 82.4 0.0 566.1 82.2 0.0 307.6 55.9 − 135.3 525.4 915.3
2020         Jan. 186.0 0.9 74.0 0.0 567.9 73.6 0.0 311.7 52.7 − 95.7 486.5 871.8
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Mar. 185.0 0.4 74.0 0.0 573.7 65.4 0.0 311.2 64.4 − 125.0 517.1 893.7
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 238.0 0.2 106.8 0.0 585.3 76.3 0.0 324.1 102.0 − 174.5 602.8 1,003.2
         June 248.7 0.1 122.5 0.0 623.1 85.0 0.0 326.4 137.6 − 172.6 618.1 1,029.5
         July 222.1 0.5 235.2 0.0 655.9 108.2 0.0 331.5 205.0 − 238.1 707.1 1,146.8
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Sep. 212.1 0.8 284.0 0.0 692.0 136.0 0.0 336.4 239.6 − 298.0 774.8 1,247.3
         Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
November 2020
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 30.7 + 1.1 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 4.1 + 0.0 + 16.4 − 8.9 + 75.3 − 47.3 − 26.8 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 9.7 − 1.9 − 0.7 + 0.0 − 7.0 − 2.4 + 0.0 − 9.6 + 26.0 − 46.8 + 32.7 + 20.8          Mar.
+ 13.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 18.0 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 13.2 − 15.8 + 14.2 + 2.7          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 11.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 17.7 + 0.0 + 12.4 − 22.3 + 6.3 + 25.6 + 20.3          June
+ 20.6 − 0.9 − 18.5 − 0.4 − 10.2 − 31.1 + 0.0 + 12.6 + 47.7 + 30.3 − 68.9 − 87.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 9.9 − 1.6 − 7.6 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 15.1 + 0.0 + 10.3 − 27.4 + 29.0 − 4.2 − 9.1          Sep.
+ 38.3 − 1.0 − 24.0 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 99.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 30.1 + 20.1 + 57.0 − 40.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 14.8 − 0.2 − 4.8 + 0.0 + 10.1 −198.7 + 0.0 + 10.2 − 72.0 + 6.8 + 273.6 + 85.1          Dec.
− 4.7 + 1.1 − 47.6 + 0.0 + 20.3 − 3.3 + 0.0 + 19.3 − 14.8 + 6.2 − 38.4 − 22.3 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 27.6 − 10.0 + 0.0 − 5.1 + 56.8 − 35.9 + 18.6 + 3.5          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 159.2 − 0.8 + 249.8 + 0.0 + 117.5 + 27.2 + 0.0 + 44.8 + 105.8 +170.2 + 177.9 + 249.7          May
+ 24.1 − 0.3 + 118.5 + 0.0 + 202.7 + 28.1 + 0.0 + 26.0 + 102.7 + 41.9 + 146.3 + 200.6          June
− 79.1 + 0.5 + 417.3 + 0.0 + 181.3 + 56.1 + 0.0 + 17.8 + 194.1 −127.4 + 379.4 + 453.1          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 5.4 + 0.5 + 191.7 + 0.0 + 155.4 + 57.2 + 0.0 + 15.5 + 41.7 − 52.1 + 279.8 + 352.6          Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Oct.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 8.8 + 1.2 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 5.0 + 0.0 + 9.7 − 9.2 + 40.2 − 35.9 − 21.1 2019          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
+ 2.5 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.9 + 10.3 + 0.0 + 1.0 − 11.2 − 12.0 + 12.3 + 23.6          Mar.
+ 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 12.0 − 42.5 + 15.6 + 26.5          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 6.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.2 − 14.2 + 23.7 + 21.0          June
+ 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 7.6 + 38.6 − 30.7 − 43.5          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 8.1 + 17.4 − 9.6 − 7.1          Sep.
+ 10.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 13.2 − 1.8 − 8.3 − 5.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 − 69.3 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 14.9 + 24.1 + 68.8 + 0.6          Dec.
− 0.9 + 0.4 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 1.8 − 8.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 3.2 + 39.6 − 38.9 − 43.5 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 11.7 − 29.3 + 30.7 + 21.9          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 53.0 − 0.2 + 32.9 − 0.0 + 11.6 + 10.9 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 37.6 − 49.6 + 85.6 + 109.5          May
+ 10.7 − 0.1 + 15.7 + 0.0 + 37.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 35.6 + 2.0 + 15.3 + 26.3          June
− 26.6 + 0.4 + 112.6 − 0.0 + 32.8 + 23.2 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 67.5 − 65.5 + 89.0 + 117.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 10.0 + 0.3 + 48.9 + 0.0 + 36.1 + 27.9 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 34.6 − 59.9 + 67.6 + 100.5          Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Oct.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2020 Apr. 10 5,257.5 509.9 358.3 82.4 275.9 148.8 13.0 13.0 –
17 5,282.9 509.8 358.2 83.0 275.2 148.6 12.5 12.5 –
24 5,347.0 509.8 360.4 83.6 276.7 150.1 13.7 13.7 –
May 1 5,395.2 509.8 359.7 83.6 276.1 151.6 12.9 12.9 –
8 5,451.0 509.8 359.0 83.6 275.4 153.8 13.8 13.8 –
15 5,505.5 509.8 360.3 84.5 275.8 153.1 12.7 12.7 –
22 5,555.3 509.8 361.3 84.5 276.8 152.7 13.3 13.3 –
29 5,596.1 509.8 362.0 84.6 277.4 153.2 13.4 13.4 –
June 5 5,655.4 509.8 362.5 84.6 277.9 153.3 14.6 14.6 –
12 5,630.3 509.8 362.2 85.0 277.1 86.1 13.1 13.1 –
19 5,636.4 509.8 361.3 85.1 276.2 63.8 12.6 12.6 –
26 6,236.1 509.8 361.0 85.1 276.0 50.7 13.3 13.3 –
July 3 6,289.0 548.8 358.0 84.3 273.7 37.5 13.3 13.3 –
10 6,309.2 548.8 356.9 84.3 272.6 35.7 13.6 13.6 –
17 6,322.6 548.8 356.3 84.3 272.0 35.4 13.3 13.3 –
24 6,351.4 548.7 357.1 84.3 272.8 32.9 12.9 12.9 –
31 6,360.8 548.7 357.0 85.9 271.1 32.4 13.6 13.6 –
Aug. 7 6,385.3 548.7 357.1 85.8 271.3 29.9 12.7 12.7 –
14 6,404.7 548.7 357.1 85.8 271.3 29.7 12.8 12.8 –
21 6,424.0 548.7 357.9 85.8 272.0 28.5 12.7 12.7 –
28 6,440.2 548.8 358.6 85.8 272.8 27.8 11.5 11.5 –
Sep. 4 6,458.9 548.8 359.5 85.8 273.7 27.5 13.8 13.8 –
11 6,474.6 548.8 359.3 85.8 273.5 25.5 12.0 12.0 –
18 6,502.4 548.8 360.4 85.8 274.6 24.1 11.7 11.7 –
25 6,534.8 548.8 360.5 86.6 273.9 24.6 12.5 12.5 –
Oct. 2 6,705.1 559.3 351.3 84.7 266.6 22.2 12.4 12.4 –
9 6,725.7 559.3 350.8 84.7 266.0 23.0 12.6 12.6 –
16 6,743.5 559.3 351.8 84.7 267.1 21.1 13.0 13.0 –
23 6,781.8 559.3 352.6 84.8 267.8 20.9 12.1 12.1 –
30 6,775.8 559.3 353.4 84.9 268.6 20.2 11.9 11.9 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 Apr. 10 1,923.4 158.7 55.3 21.1 34.2 45.3 1.0 1.0 –
17 1,905.4 158.7 55.5 21.3 34.2 46.0 0.7 0.7 –
24 1,909.6 158.7 55.9 21.6 34.3 47.4 1.0 1.0 –
May 1 1,938.0 158.7 56.0 21.6 34.4 47.8 0.2 0.2 –
8 1,963.2 158.7 56.4 21.6 34.8 48.7 0.8 0.8 –
15 1,995.5 158.7 56.5 21.7 34.8 49.2 0.3 0.3 –
22 1,996.4 158.7 56.2 21.7 34.5 49.7 0.5 0.5 –
29 1,979.8 158.7 56.0 21.7 34.3 49.8 0.5 0.5 –
June 5 2,001.7 158.7 56.5 21.7 34.8 49.9 2.0 2.0 –
12 2,003.6 158.6 56.1 21.7 34.4 32.4 0.9 0.9 –
19 2,047.0 158.6 55.4 21.7 33.7 23.7 0.4 0.4 –
26 2,197.3 158.6 55.3 21.7 33.6 19.1 1.3 1.3 –
July 3 2,215.8 170.7 54.9 21.6 33.3 9.3 1.3 1.3 –
10 2,199.9 170.7 55.1 21.6 33.5 7.8 1.1 1.1 –
17 2,230.8 170.7 54.7 21.6 33.1 6.5 1.3 1.3 –
24 2,217.8 170.7 54.7 21.6 33.2 5.1 1.0 1.0 –
31 2,257.3 170.7 54.8 22.3 32.5 3.8 1.7 1.7 –
Aug. 7 2,271.2 170.7 54.7 22.3 32.4 1.6 1.0 1.0 –
14 2,277.4 170.7 54.3 22.3 32.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 –
21 2,274.8 170.7 54.7 22.3 32.4 1.1 1.3 1.3 –
28 2,293.3 170.7 54.5 22.3 32.3 1.0 0.4 0.4 –
Sep. 4 2,306.2 170.7 54.1 22.3 31.8 0.9 2.5 2.5 –
11 2,299.5 170.7 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.7 0.5 0.5 –
18 2,310.9 170.7 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.5 0.2 0.2 –
25 2,325.1 170.7 54.1 22.4 31.7 0.5 0.5 0.5 –
Oct. 2 2,383.8 174.0 53.2 21.9 31.2 0.1 1.2 1.2 –
9 2,379.0 174.0 53.1 21.9 31.2 0.1 1.4 1.4 –
16 2,382.2 174.0 53.3 21.9 31.4 0.1 1.7 1.7 –
23 2,401.0 174.0 53.4 21.9 31.5 0.1 0.8 0.8 –
30 2,394.5 174.0 53.3 21.9 31.4 0.1 0.8 0.8 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
888.6 0.3 888.2 – – 0.0 – 35.4 2,997.4 2,791.8 205.6 23.3 282.9 2020 Apr. 10
893.1 0.2 892.9 – – – – 39.7 3,017.2 2,812.3 204.9 23.3 280.5 17
911.9 0.2 911.8 – – 0.0 – 40.1 3,052.4 2,846.8 205.6 23.3 285.3 24
948.9 0.3 948.6 – – – – 34.4 3,067.9 2,865.9 202.0 23.3 286.7 May 1
963.2 0.3 962.8 – – – – 31.0 3,113.4 2,910.8 202.7 23.3 283.6 8
969.9 0.3 969.7 – – – – 37.3 3,156.5 2,954.1 202.4 23.3 282.7 15
979.4 0.2 979.2 – – 0.0 – 35.7 3,197.9 2,995.5 202.4 23.3 281.8 22
998.0 0.5 997.5 – – 0.1 – 34.4 3,222.6 3,019.9 202.7 23.3 279.2 29
1,012.4 0.4 1,012.0 – – 0.0 – 36.1 3,262.1 3,058.8 203.3 23.3 281.3 June 5
1,026.2 0.4 1,025.8 – – 0.0 – 30.7 3,297.9 3,094.9 203.0 23.3 280.9 12
1,026.3 0.5 1,025.8 – – 0.0 – 34.9 3,325.9 3,123.2 202.7 23.3 278.6 19
1,590.1 0.7 1,589.4 – – 0.0 – 39.3 3,365.1 3,162.5 202.7 23.3 283.4 26
1,590.8 1.4 1,589.4 – – – – 37.3 3,391.9 3,188.4 203.5 22.8 288.7 July 3
1,590.5 1.1 1,589.4 – – – – 33.3 3,416.2 3,213.5 202.8 22.8 291.3 10
1,590.5 1.0 1,589.4 – – 0.0 – 33.1 3,435.2 3,232.5 202.7 22.8 287.3 17
1,590.6 1.1 1,589.4 – – 0.0 – 37.7 3,462.8 3,259.7 203.2 22.8 285.9 24
1,590.0 1.1 1,588.9 – – – – 34.0 3,477.5 3,274.7 202.8 22.8 284.7 31
1,595.5 1.0 1,594.6 – – – – 34.9 3,499.3 3,296.2 203.2 22.8 284.3 Aug. 7
1,595.6 1.0 1,594.6 – – – – 32.0 3,518.1 3,316.1 202.1 22.8 287.8 14
1,595.9 1.3 1,594.6 – – – – 33.3 3,537.7 3,335.3 202.4 22.8 286.6 21
1,595.9 1.6 1,594.3 – – 0.0 – 32.0 3,554.3 3,351.2 203.1 22.8 288.5 28
1,596.6 1.6 1,595.0 – – 0.0 – 35.2 3,567.9 3,366.2 201.8 22.8 286.7 Sep. 4
1,596.7 1.7 1,595.0 – – – – 35.7 3,589.3 3,388.2 201.1 22.8 284.4 11
1,596.7 1.7 1,595.0 – – – – 37.5 3,613.8 3,413.0 200.8 22.8 286.7 18
1,596.9 1.9 1,595.0 – – – – 36.7 3,643.3 3,442.5 200.8 22.8 288.7 25
1,753.3 1.2 1,752.1 – – – – 34.6 3,654.3 3,454.5 199.8 22.7 294.9 Oct. 2
1,754.3 1.2 1,753.1 – – – – 29.2 3,678.4 3,478.6 199.7 22.7 295.6 9
1,754.1 1.0 1,753.1 – – – – 33.2 3,693.6 3,494.9 198.7 22.7 294.7 16
1,754.1 1.0 1,753.1 – – 0.0 – 35.7 3,717.5 3,519.1 198.3 22.7 306.8 23
1,754.1 1.0 1,753.1 – – 0.0 – 26.0 3,723.9 3,529.9 194.0 22.7 304.0 30
Deutsche Bundesbank
110.7 0.1 110.6 – – 0.0 – 7.1 588.7 588.7 – 4.4 952.2 2020 Apr. 10
111.7 0.1 111.7 – – – – 7.3 583.7 583.7 – 4.4 937.5 17
114.8 0.0 114.8 – – 0.0 – 7.7 590.9 590.9 – 4.4 928.9 24
116.3 0.0 116.3 – – – – 7.7 596.7 596.7 – 4.4 950.1 May 1
119.4 0.0 119.4 – – 0.0 – 6.9 605.6 605.6 – 4.4 962.2 8
120.9 0.1 120.8 – – 0.0 – 7.3 614.7 614.7 – 4.4 983.4 15
122.1 0.0 122.1 – – 0.0 – 6.4 625.9 625.9 – 4.4 972.5 22
125.0 0.3 124.7 – – 0.1 – 5.8 632.0 632.0 – 4.4 947.6 29
126.1 0.3 125.8 – – 0.0 – 11.5 638.5 638.5 – 4.4 954.2 June 5
138.3 0.3 138.0 – – 0.0 – 6.6 641.8 641.8 – 4.4 964.4 12
138.2 0.1 138.0 – – 0.0 – 6.8 647.1 647.1 – 4.4 1,012.4 19
284.0 0.2 283.8 – – 0.0 – 5.9 655.0 655.0 – 4.4 1,013.7 26
284.8 1.0 283.8 – – – – 7.2 660.6 660.6 – 4.4 1,022.6 July 3
284.6 0.8 283.8 – – 0.0 – 5.4 662.5 662.5 – 4.4 1,008.5 10
284.5 0.7 283.8 – – 0.0 – 5.3 669.4 669.4 – 4.4 1,034.0 17
284.7 1.0 283.8 – – 0.0 – 5.6 676.1 676.1 – 4.4 1,015.4 24
284.7 0.9 283.8 – – 0.0 – 5.1 682.1 682.1 – 4.4 1,049.9 31
284.7 0.6 284.0 – – 0.0 – 5.6 685.6 685.6 – 4.4 1,062.9 Aug. 7
284.7 0.6 284.0 – – 0.0 – 5.7 690.3 690.3 – 4.4 1,064.9 14
284.9 0.8 284.0 – – 0.0 – 5.2 694.8 694.8 – 4.4 1,057.7 21
285.0 0.9 284.1 – – 0.0 – 5.2 699.5 699.5 – 4.4 1,072.3 28
285.1 0.8 284.3 – – 0.0 – 8.1 701.8 701.8 – 4.4 1,078.6 Sep. 4
285.1 0.8 284.3 – – 0.0 – 4.5 703.4 703.4 – 4.4 1,076.1 11
285.0 0.7 284.3 – – 0.0 – 5.6 710.4 710.4 – 4.4 1,080.0 18
285.1 0.8 284.3 – – – – 5.9 718.2 718.2 – 4.4 1,085.6 25
333.8 0.7 333.1 – – – – 6.0 723.5 723.5 – 4.4 1,087.5 Oct. 2
334.5 0.8 333.8 – – 0.0 – 4.8 730.5 730.5 – 4.4 1,076.1 9
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 5.8 732.9 732.9 – 4.4 1,075.5 16
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 9.1 740.2 740.2 – 4.4 1,084.5 23
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 5.0 745.2 745.2 – 4.4 1,077.3 30

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2020 Apr. 10 5,257.5 1,327.1 2,129.5 1,867.2 262.4 – – – 8.2 – 505.4 377.3 128.1
17 5,282.9 1,326.9 2,133.8 1,861.8 272.0 – – – 7.9 – 519.3 391.1 128.2
24 5,347.0 1,329.7 2,133.2 1,801.5 331.6 – – 0.0 9.4 – 563.9 435.3 128.6
May 1 5,395.2 1,334.1 2,188.7 1,826.9 361.8 – – 0.0 9.3 – 534.9 403.8 131.0
8 5,451.0 1,339.2 2,262.3 2,007.9 254.3 – – – 8.1 – 508.9 382.4 126.5
15 5,505.5 1,344.0 2,237.4 1,968.4 269.0 – – – 8.4 – 576.0 455.0 121.0
22 5,555.3 1,348.2 2,245.0 1,945.4 299.6 – – – 9.6 – 630.5 505.1 125.5
29 5,596.1 1,353.3 2,274.3 1,952.0 322.4 – – – 8.2 – 646.2 518.4 127.8
June 5 5,655.4 1,356.8 2,323.2 1,961.2 362.0 – – 0.0 12.5 – 653.0 524.3 128.7
12 5,630.3 1,359.2 2,327.1 2,080.5 246.5 – – 0.0 9.3 – 701.4 569.7 131.7
19 5,636.4 1,360.7 2,253.3 1,985.7 267.6 – – – 7.2 – 799.2 668.9 130.4
26 6,236.1 1,363.2 2,830.2 2,531.0 299.2 – – – 7.9 – 828.3 699.3 128.9
July 3 6,289.0 1,368.2 2,919.4 2,500.4 418.9 – – – 9.2 – 764.1 702.8 61.3
10 6,309.2 1,372.0 2,957.8 2,498.1 459.7 – – – 8.2 – 741.9 674.8 67.1
17 6,322.6 1,372.7 2,916.1 2,463.7 452.4 – – – 6.9 – 792.6 724.7 67.9
24 6,351.4 1,374.6 2,928.6 2,638.8 289.8 – – 0.0 6.8 – 816.0 750.9 65.1
31 6,360.8 1,377.8 2,997.8 2,650.4 347.4 – – – 6.0 – 760.8 697.7 63.1
Aug. 7 6,385.3 1,381.6 3,051.0 2,674.8 376.2 – – – 6.3 – 728.0 665.3 62.7
14 6,404.7 1,382.9 3,035.7 2,583.9 451.7 – – – 5.6 – 772.1 712.6 59.6
21 6,424.0 1,382.3 3,045.9 2,600.4 445.4 – – – 5.9 – 781.9 725.0 57.0
28 6,440.2 1,383.1 3,025.6 2,549.4 476.2 – – – 6.1 – 822.2 763.7 58.5
Sep. 4 6,458.9 1,384.5 3,115.1 2,621.9 493.2 – – – 9.6 – 737.8 679.2 58.5
11 6,474.6 1,385.7 3,123.2 2,623.1 500.1 – – – 6.2 – 747.1 690.4 56.7
18 6,502.4 1,385.7 3,060.9 2,732.1 328.8 – – – 7.4 – 836.1 784.4 51.7
25 6,534.8 1,386.1 3,056.1 2,722.2 333.8 – – – 7.4 – 862.4 810.1 52.3
Oct. 2 6,705.1 1,387.9 3,303.1 2,807.7 495.4 – – – 7.4 – 787.8 732.8 55.1
9 6,725.7 1,390.2 3,338.2 2,787.6 550.6 – – – 7.1 – 771.4 714.8 56.6
16 6,743.5 1,390.3 3,322.9 2,788.9 534.0 – – – 7.0 – 797.6 737.6 60.0
23 6,781.8 1,391.6 3,360.6 3,242.3 118.3 – – 0.0 6.1 – 806.5 747.1 59.4
30 6,775.8 1,394.0 3,370.2 2,750.0 620.2 – – 0.0 6.3 – 787.8 721.9 65.9
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 Apr. 10 1,923.4 324.5 695.8 633.1 62.8 – – – 3.6 – 143.3 101.8 41.5
17 1,905.4 323.7 696.3 625.3 71.0 – – – 3.4 – 119.6 92.4 27.1
24 1,909.6 324.7 679.7 575.5 104.2 – – – 3.5 – 129.4 104.3 25.1
May 1 1,938.0 323.6 696.9 585.2 111.7 – – – 3.6 – 124.7 101.0 23.7
8 1,963.2 324.5 712.6 650.0 62.6 – – – 3.1 – 128.2 105.2 23.0
15 1,995.5 325.4 701.8 637.2 64.6 – – – 2.8 – 166.7 136.3 30.4
22 1,996.4 326.3 695.4 595.7 99.8 – – – 3.7 – 185.7 154.6 31.2
29 1,979.8 328.2 701.7 594.6 107.1 – – – 2.8 – 167.5 136.1 31.4
June 5 2,001.7 328.6 706.4 600.1 106.2 – – – 6.6 – 181.5 152.4 29.1
12 2,003.6 329.4 708.6 647.6 61.0 – – – 3.7 – 190.2 165.0 25.3
19 2,047.0 329.3 707.6 646.2 61.4 – – – 2.1 – 235.9 207.7 28.2
26 2,197.3 330.2 836.6 761.1 75.5 – – – 3.1 – 264.0 236.0 27.9
July 3 2,215.8 332.5 874.1 733.5 140.7 – – – 4.2 – 228.7 221.2 7.5
10 2,199.9 334.0 884.5 734.8 149.8 – – – 3.0 – 200.3 192.8 7.5
17 2,230.8 334.4 879.8 718.7 161.1 – – – 2.2 – 231.0 223.5 7.4
24 2,217.8 334.6 874.0 786.5 87.4 – – – 1.8 – 228.1 220.8 7.3
31 2,257.3 334.2 908.2 812.3 95.9 – – – 1.4 – 233.6 226.6 7.0
Aug. 7 2,271.2 336.5 921.4 813.2 108.2 – – – 2.0 – 231.0 223.9 7.2
14 2,277.4 337.3 904.2 749.3 155.0 – – – 1.8 – 259.0 252.0 7.1
21 2,274.8 337.6 903.3 751.9 151.4 – – – 1.4 – 258.2 251.1 7.2
28 2,293.3 339.0 904.0 748.2 155.9 – – – 2.3 – 276.9 269.3 7.6
Sep. 4 2,306.2 336.4 947.4 773.9 173.5 – – – 5.5 – 238.6 231.4 7.2
11 2,299.5 337.4 934.1 760.5 173.6 – – – 2.3 – 246.8 239.7 7.1
18 2,310.9 337.8 905.4 810.9 94.6 – – – 2.9 – 286.3 279.0 7.3
25 2,325.1 338.3 908.3 812.5 95.8 – – – 2.9 – 286.3 278.9 7.3
Oct. 2 2,383.8 337.0 1,000.3 870.0 130.3 – – – 3.0 – 252.3 245.0 7.3
9 2,379.0 338.2 996.6 812.7 183.9 – – – 2.5 – 247.4 240.2 7.2
16 2,382.2 338.7 975.6 796.8 178.7 – – – 2.8 – 264.5 257.4 7.1
23 2,401.0 339.1 1,016.1 1,010.1 6.1 – – – 2.0 – 252.8 245.5 7.3
30 2,394.5 338.1 1,030.5 812.5 218.0 – – – 1.1 – 230.2 223.1 7.1
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
331.2 7.3 5.8 5.8 – 57.9 268.9 – 507.1 108.9 2020 Apr. 10
334.2 6.9 6.3 6.3 – 57.9 273.7 – 507.1 108.9 17
343.4 7.5 6.8 6.8 – 57.9 279.1 – 507.1 109.1 24
360.2 7.5 6.7 6.7 – 57.9 279.7 – 507.1 109.1 May 1
364.9 8.1 7.0 7.0 – 57.9 278.6 – 507.1 108.9 8
369.6 7.9 7.1 7.1 – 57.9 281.2 – 507.1 108.9 15
352.6 8.7 7.0 7.0 – 57.9 279.7 – 507.1 108.9 22
348.3 9.0 6.9 6.9 – 57.9 275.9 – 507.1 108.9 29
346.2 8.1 7.5 7.5 – 57.9 274.1 – 507.1 108.9 June 5
270.0 7.7 8.5 8.5 – 57.9 273.2 – 507.1 108.9 12
251.0 7.8 8.1 8.1 – 57.9 275.2 – 507.1 108.9 19
238.1 7.4 8.1 8.1 – 57.9 278.9 – 507.1 109.0 26
230.0 6.9 7.4 7.4 – 57.1 274.7 – 542.9 109.0 July 3
228.9 6.1 7.7 7.7 – 57.1 277.5 – 542.9 109.0 10
237.0 6.0 7.5 7.5 – 57.1 274.6 – 542.9 109.0 17
227.2 5.6 7.9 7.9 – 57.1 275.6 – 542.9 109.0 24
224.2 5.7 7.4 7.4 – 57.1 272.1 – 542.9 109.0 31
220.3 5.6 7.5 7.5 – 57.1 275.8 – 542.9 109.0 Aug. 7
210.6 5.9 7.5 7.5 – 57.1 275.3 – 542.9 109.0 14
209.6 5.6 7.7 7.7 – 57.1 276.1 – 542.9 109.0 21
204.2 5.4 7.4 7.4 – 57.1 277.2 – 542.9 109.0 28
209.9 5.7 7.2 7.2 – 57.1 280.2 – 542.9 108.9 Sep. 4
209.4 5.7 7.2 7.2 – 57.1 281.2 – 542.9 108.9 11
206.0 5.8 6.9 6.9 – 57.1 284.6 – 542.9 108.9 18
216.2 5.9 6.9 6.9 – 57.1 284.9 – 542.9 108.9 25
219.0 5.8 6.6 6.6 – 55.9 279.1 – 543.5 108.9 Oct. 2
220.6 5.8 6.4 6.4 – 55.9 277.8 – 543.5 108.9 9
224.4 5.9 6.4 6.4 – 55.9 280.7 – 543.5 108.9 16
212.5 6.1 6.3 6.3 – 55.9 284.0 – 543.5 108.9 23
212.0 6.1 6.3 6.3 – 55.9 284.8 – 543.5 108.9 30
Deutsche Bundesbank
93.6 – – – – 15.0 29.1 455.0 157.8 5.7 2020 Apr. 10
99.7 0.0 – – – 15.0 29.3 455.0 157.8 5.7 17
109.2 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 15.0 29.5 455.0 157.8 5.7 24
122.9 – 0.2 0.2 – 15.0 29.5 458.2 157.8 5.7 May 1
127.8 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 15.0 29.7 458.2 157.8 5.7 8
131.6 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 15.0 29.8 458.2 157.8 5.7 15
118.2 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 15.0 29.9 458.2 157.8 5.7 22
112.2 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 15.0 30.1 458.5 157.8 5.7 29
110.8 0.0 0.8 0.8 – 15.0 30.1 458.5 157.8 5.7 June 5
103.2 0.0 0.9 0.9 – 15.0 30.4 458.5 157.8 5.7 12
104.2 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 15.0 30.3 458.5 157.8 5.7 19
96.1 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 15.0 29.7 458.5 157.8 5.7 26
99.1 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 14.8 29.3 458.1 168.8 5.7 July 3
99.7 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 14.8 30.2 458.1 168.8 5.7 10
105.3 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 14.8 30.4 458.1 168.8 5.7 17
100.7 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 14.8 30.6 458.1 168.8 5.7 24
99.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.8 30.6 460.5 168.8 5.7 31
99.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.8 30.6 460.5 168.8 5.7 Aug. 7
94.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.8 30.6 460.5 168.8 5.7 14
93.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 14.8 30.7 460.5 168.8 5.7 21
89.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 14.8 30.9 460.5 168.8 5.7 28
93.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 14.8 31.3 464.3 168.8 5.7 Sep. 4
93.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 14.8 31.4 464.3 168.8 5.7 11
93.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.8 31.8 464.3 168.8 5.7 18
103.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.8 31.8 464.3 168.8 5.7 25
102.9 0.0 – – – 14.5 30.6 467.0 170.4 5.7 Oct. 2
106.0 0.0 – – – 14.5 30.8 467.0 170.4 5.7 9
112.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 30.8 467.0 170.4 5.7 16
101.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 31.9 467.0 170.4 5.7 23
103.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 30.9 469.4 170.4 5.7 30
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2018 Dec. 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 Jan. 7,902.3 36.7 2,267.3 1,827.4 1,559.5 267.8 439.9 304.8 135.1 3,878.8 3,468.7 3,032.2 2,737.6
Feb. 7,935.7 36.9 2,304.8 1,862.5 1,591.5 271.1 442.3 304.8 137.5 3,893.1 3,477.0 3,044.8 2,751.0
Mar. 8,121.3 37.0 2,343.5 1,885.9 1,614.7 271.2 457.6 319.3 138.4 3,921.0 3,488.4 3,059.8 2,765.7
Apr. 8,154.6 38.2 2,354.4 1,893.6 1,625.2 268.5 460.8 321.6 139.1 3,928.3 3,492.4 3,068.0 2,774.1
May 8,280.9 37.9 2,376.8 1,919.0 1,648.5 270.5 457.8 317.9 139.9 3,944.5 3,509.1 3,085.5 2,790.5
June 8,321.9 37.9 2,332.5 1,869.9 1,600.4 269.6 462.6 321.6 141.0 3,972.1 3,530.5 3,108.0 2,809.6
July 8,372.1 37.4 2,311.4 1,845.2 1,575.0 270.2 466.2 324.2 142.0 3,984.9 3,539.6 3,114.5 2,815.1
Aug. 8,645.5 38.3 2,327.7 1,857.2 1,589.6 267.6 470.5 327.6 142.9 4,009.7 3,554.6 3,127.0 2,827.3
Sep. 8,550.4 38.0 2,323.6 1,835.8 1,569.4 266.4 487.8 344.3 143.5 4,001.0 3,562.6 3,139.5 2,839.7
Oct. 8,445.6 39.3 2,312.0 1,810.4 1,543.9 266.5 501.6 358.5 143.1 4,008.1 3,569.7 3,149.2 2,847.6
Nov. 8,509.2 40.1 2,361.5 1,860.2 1,590.2 270.0 501.3 358.1 143.2 4,027.4 3,586.5 3,166.8 2,863.7
Dec. 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 39.4 2,293.1 1,800.7 1,531.5 269.2 492.4 348.1 144.3 4,033.9 3,591.5 3,173.1 2,867.5
Feb. 8,666.7 40.3 2,308.1 1,815.4 1,545.5 269.9 492.7 348.9 143.8 4,055.3 3,606.4 3,190.1 2,885.8
Mar. 8,912.6 48.1 2,421.0 1,920.7 1,651.9 268.8 500.4 357.5 142.8 4,096.9 3,641.9 3,215.5 2,915.9
Apr. 9,014.6 48.6 2,442.9 1,943.2 1,674.0 269.2 499.7 355.0 144.8 4,115.5 3,656.4 3,225.2 2,926.3
May 8,915.3 48.1 2,395.2 1,896.4 1,631.8 264.6 498.8 355.2 143.6 4,149.8 3,682.9 3,247.5 2,946.1
June 9,026.9 46.0 2,542.6 2,056.2 1,788.0 268.2 486.4 343.6 142.8 4,153.0 3,683.1 3,249.8 2,949.1
July 9,069.0 45.5 2,574.4 2,099.6 1,830.7 268.9 474.8 333.3 141.5 4,153.7 3,688.0 3,258.4 2,958.3
Aug. 8,985.5 46.0 2,595.4 2,127.5 1,858.5 269.0 467.9 328.0 139.9 4,148.3 3,691.9 3,266.7 2,966.1
Sep. 9,097.4 46.1 2,657.3 2,197.1 1,926.5 270.6 460.2 320.7 139.5 4,154.0 3,696.5 3,269.8 2,968.7
Changes 3
2011 54.1 – 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 –33.0 –26.0 – 12.1 –13.9 –51.8 –35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 –129.2 2.9 –81.9 –28.4 3.0 –31.4 –53.5 – 39.7 –13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 –703.6 – 0.5 –257.1 –249.2 –216.5 –32.7 – 7.9 1.6 – 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2019 Jan. 128.9 – 3.9 79.5 59.2 58.8 0.5 20.3 20.0 0.3 17.0 12.6 10.0 11.4
Feb. 31.1 0.1 36.8 34.8 31.7 3.0 2.1 – 0.4 2.5 15.5 9.5 13.7 14.5
Mar. 124.6 0.2 32.4 25.5 26.3 – 0.8 6.9 6.5 0.4 12.4 10.7 14.4 14.6
Apr. 33.9 1.2 10.8 7.7 10.5 – 2.8 3.1 2.4 0.7 7.6 4.4 8.4 8.9
May 124.6 – 0.3 22.1 25.4 23.2 2.1 – 3.2 – 3.9 0.7 16.3 16.3 17.4 16.2
June 50.5 0.0 –42.3 –48.3 –47.7 – 0.6 6.0 4.8 1.2 27.8 21.7 22.9 19.4
July 49.8 – 0.5 –23.0 –25.4 –26.0 0.6 2.4 1.5 0.9 12.1 9.1 6.8 5.6
Aug. 265.9 0.8 14.8 11.4 14.2 – 2.8 3.4 2.7 0.7 23.9 14.6 12.3 11.9
Sep. –100.4 – 0.3 –19.8 –19.0 –18.0 – 1.0 – 0.7 – 1.3 0.6 7.9 8.2 12.1 12.1
Oct. –93.5 1.2 – 9.8 –24.8 –25.0 0.2 15.0 15.3 – 0.3 8.8 8.1 10.5 8.8
Nov. 55.4 0.8 48.2 49.3 45.9 3.3 – 1.1 – 1.2 0.1 18.6 16.6 17.3 15.8
Dec. –187.4 3.3 –129.3 –99.6 –96.3 – 3.3 –29.7 – 29.4 – 0.3 – 6.1 – 1.2 2.2 1.6
2020 Jan. 162.1 – 4.0 61.4 40.5 37.7 2.8 21.0 19.6 1.4 13.0 6.8 4.7 3.1
Feb. 193.8 0.8 20.5 18.6 13.8 4.8 1.9 0.5 1.3 21.8 15.0 17.2 18.3
Mar. 251.0 7.9 113.4 105.3 106.1 – 0.9 8.2 8.8 – 0.6 44.3 36.8 26.5 31.0
Apr. 96.1 0.5 20.8 21.8 21.5 0.3 – 1.1 – 3.0 1.9 18.2 14.2 9.8 10.5
May –40.6 – 0.6 22.6 22.4 19.3 3.1 0.2 1.3 – 1.1 27.3 24.9 20.5 18.0
June 118.6 – 2.1 149.4 161.5 157.8 3.7 –12.1 – 11.2 – 0.9 5.0 1.7 3.6 4.3
July 67.5 – 0.5 36.5 45.1 44.3 0.8 – 8.6 – 7.5 – 1.1 3.1 6.6 10.2 10.8
Aug. –79.5 0.5 21.7 28.2 28.0 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.9 – 1.5 – 4.9 4.3 8.7 8.1
Sep. 112.2 0.1 61.9 69.5 68.1 1.5 – 7.7 – 7.2 – 0.4 6.2 4.9 3.3 2.9
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018 Dec.
294.6 436.5 265.9 170.6 410.1 291.8 179.6 118.3 28.9 89.5 1,049.5 794.1 670.0 2019 Jan.
293.8 432.2 263.3 168.9 416.1 294.1 181.5 122.0 28.8 93.1 1,037.8 781.6 663.2 Feb.
294.1 428.5 260.6 168.0 432.6 311.4 197.8 121.2 28.9 92.4 1,084.1 826.7 735.7 Mar.
293.8 424.5 260.8 163.7 435.9 315.7 202.0 120.2 29.6 90.5 1,099.5 840.3 734.2 Apr.
295.0 423.6 259.2 164.4 435.5 317.7 205.0 117.8 29.4 88.4 1,101.0 839.1 820.6 May
298.5 422.5 257.7 164.7 441.6 320.9 207.2 120.7 29.0 91.7 1,103.8 841.8 875.6 June
299.4 425.0 260.2 164.8 445.3 322.2 209.5 123.1 29.0 94.1 1,114.6 851.7 923.8 July
299.7 427.6 260.2 167.4 455.1 330.1 216.8 125.0 28.9 96.1 1,122.3 857.7 1,147.5 Aug.
299.8 423.2 255.1 168.1 438.3 313.4 200.6 124.9 28.8 96.1 1,106.8 841.9 1,081.1 Sep.
301.6 420.5 257.1 163.4 438.4 313.1 201.3 125.3 30.1 95.2 1,102.8 842.5 983.5 Oct.
303.1 419.8 257.7 162.0 440.8 315.2 201.0 125.6 30.5 95.1 1,091.3 828.7 989.0 Nov.
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 Dec.
305.6 418.3 258.6 159.8 442.4 316.4 203.8 126.0 29.8 96.2 1,078.6 819.6 1,037.1 2020 Jan.
304.3 416.3 256.5 159.8 448.9 322.8 206.6 126.2 29.9 96.3 1,088.6 829.3 1,174.5 Feb.
299.6 426.4 258.5 167.9 455.0 325.2 212.8 129.8 29.5 100.3 1,104.4 838.8 1,242.1 Mar.
298.8 431.2 259.2 172.0 459.1 329.0 217.4 130.2 31.1 99.1 1,119.2 852.3 1,288.4 Apr.
301.4 435.4 258.3 177.1 466.9 334.5 220.6 132.3 31.0 101.3 1,102.1 840.8 1,220.2 May
300.7 433.3 257.8 175.5 469.9 331.1 215.4 138.8 29.2 109.6 1,075.8 816.4 1,209.5 June
300.1 429.6 259.1 170.5 465.7 313.2 217.1 152.5 29.9 122.6 1,047.3 792.5 1,248.1 July
300.7 425.1 253.7 171.4 456.5 311.1 214.5 145.4 29.2 116.1 1,037.6 784.0 1,158.2 Aug.
301.1 426.7 256.0 170.8 457.4 311.1 215.2 146.4 29.3 117.0 1,063.9 808.9 1,176.2 Sep.
Changes 3
–18.0 –74.0 –59.1 –14.9 –16.6 –13.8 – 5.5 – 2.7 8.0 –10.7 –39.5 –34.9 112.9 2011
–11.8 10.7 –10.5 21.2 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 0.5 – 2.2 2.7 –15.5 –17.7 –62.2 2012
2.0 – 7.0 –10.9 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.4 – 9.3 0.5 – 2.6 3.1 –38.8 –47.2 –420.8 2013
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
– 1.4 2.6 2.4 0.2 4.4 5.1 3.2 – 0.8 0.3 – 1.0 16.5 15.8 19.8 2019 Jan.
– 0.8 – 4.2 – 2.6 – 1.7 6.0 2.4 2.2 3.7 – 0.0 3.7 –14.5 –15.1 – 6.9 Feb.
– 0.2 – 3.7 – 2.8 – 1.0 1.7 3.0 2.5 – 1.2 0.0 – 1.2 16.1 17.2 63.6 Mar.
– 0.4 – 4.0 0.2 – 4.2 3.1 4.2 4.3 – 1.1 0.7 – 1.8 15.8 14.1 – 1.5 Apr.
1.2 – 1.0 – 1.7 0.7 – 0.1 2.3 3.1 – 2.4 – 0.2 – 2.2 0.0 – 2.8 86.5 May
3.5 – 1.2 – 1.5 0.3 6.1 3.4 2.7 2.6 – 0.4 3.1 10.5 9.9 54.5 June
1.2 2.2 2.5 – 0.2 3.0 1.3 2.1 1.7 – 0.0 1.8 4.4 4.1 56.8 July
0.4 2.3 – 0.2 2.5 9.3 7.5 7.0 1.8 – 0.1 1.9 2.6 1.2 223.7 Aug.
0.0 – 4.0 – 4.7 0.8 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 –21.9 –21.7 –66.4 Sep.
1.7 – 2.4 2.1 – 4.6 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.5 1.3 – 0.8 3.9 7.7 –97.7 Oct.
1.5 – 0.8 0.6 – 1.4 2.1 1.7 – 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 –17.6 –19.3 5.3 Nov.
0.7 – 3.4 – 3.0 – 0.4 – 4.9 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 3.5 – 1.8 – 1.7 –47.9 –44.3 – 7.5 Dec.
1.6 2.1 3.9 – 1.8 6.2 3.2 4.5 3.0 0.4 2.6 36.0 35.9 55.6 2020 Jan.
– 1.1 – 2.2 – 2.1 – 0.1 6.8 6.7 2.8 0.1 0.1 – 0.0 13.5 12.5 137.3 Feb.
– 4.5 10.2 2.0 8.3 7.5 3.3 6.5 4.2 – 0.4 4.6 17.8 11.2 67.6 Mar.
– 0.7 4.5 0.6 3.9 4.0 3.7 4.3 0.3 1.6 – 1.3 10.4 9.3 46.3 Apr.
2.5 4.4 – 0.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 – 1.2 1.6 – 0.6 2.2 –23.0 –18.2 –67.0 May
– 0.7 – 1.9 – 0.3 – 1.6 3.3 – 3.2 – 4.9 6.4 – 1.8 8.2 –22.9 –21.2 –10.8 June
– 0.6 – 3.6 1.3 – 4.9 – 3.5 1.6 2.7 – 5.1 0.6 – 5.7 –10.3 – 7.1 38.7 July
0.6 – 4.4 – 5.4 0.9 – 9.2 – 2.3 – 2.5 – 6.9 – 0.7 – 6.2 – 7.0 – 6.0 –89.8 Aug.
0.4 1.6 2.2 – 0.6 1.4 0.5 1.3 0.8 0.1 0.7 26.1 24.6 17.9 Sep.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2018 Dec. 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 Jan. 7,902.3 1,238.4 1,040.5 197.9 3,646.4 3,530.1 2,074.3 877.3 277.3 578.4 541.4 104.9 45.9
Feb. 7,935.7 1,258.4 1,046.6 211.8 3,658.9 3,544.0 2,083.6 880.9 281.8 579.5 542.4 103.3 44.6
Mar. 8,121.3 1,281.9 1,050.1 231.8 3,676.8 3,554.7 2,095.7 877.1 280.6 582.0 544.7 109.9 51.7
Apr. 8,154.6 1,298.3 1,061.2 237.0 3,689.3 3,569.8 2,117.1 870.5 276.7 582.2 544.7 105.8 47.5
May 8,280.9 1,291.2 1,057.1 234.1 3,721.9 3,599.3 2,147.3 869.5 277.3 582.5 544.4 108.1 50.1
June 8,321.9 1,292.1 1,048.3 243.8 3,728.4 3,595.5 2,144.7 868.1 274.5 582.6 544.0 116.0 56.6
July 8,372.1 1,291.9 1,055.1 236.8 3,728.8 3,605.7 2,160.6 863.3 271.9 581.8 543.4 110.3 51.1
Aug. 8,645.5 1,306.3 1,062.2 244.1 3,754.1 3,626.8 2,182.9 863.7 276.0 580.2 542.2 114.6 54.3
Sep. 8,550.4 1,299.7 1,038.3 261.4 3,745.4 3,618.0 2,179.8 859.2 273.5 579.0 541.5 115.2 55.7
Oct. 8,445.6 1,313.5 1,050.3 263.2 3,761.4 3,633.5 2,201.7 854.6 270.4 577.2 540.6 114.1 51.4
Nov. 8,509.2 1,326.4 1,057.3 269.1 3,791.3 3,663.8 2,238.9 849.3 266.7 575.6 539.9 115.8 52.6
Dec. 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 1,293.2 1,033.0 260.2 3,775.6 3,647.0 2,229.5 846.8 267.2 570.7 537.5 116.3 54.3
Feb. 8,666.7 1,313.5 1,047.8 265.7 3,794.5 3,664.6 2,249.1 847.1 270.3 568.4 535.8 117.0 55.2
Mar. 8,912.6 1,418.4 1,135.8 282.6 3,853.2 3,705.0 2,299.1 841.5 268.6 564.4 532.5 135.5 72.3
Apr. 9,014.6 1,426.3 1,156.6 269.6 3,872.7 3,729.4 2,339.0 826.7 259.6 563.8 532.6 130.3 65.2
May 8,915.3 1,386.1 1,112.0 274.0 3,913.5 3,764.4 2,370.9 829.9 266.6 563.6 532.9 136.6 70.6
June 9,026.9 1,503.5 1,230.4 273.1 3,906.1 3,754.5 2,379.1 812.8 256.1 562.5 532.8 139.2 71.1
July 9,069.0 1,488.7 1,209.5 279.2 3,937.1 3,783.3 2,408.1 814.3 263.0 560.9 531.7 132.9 65.5
Aug. 8,985.5 1,489.8 1,213.2 276.6 3,951.0 3,790.7 2,421.8 808.3 258.8 560.6 531.8 129.7 63.6
Sep. 9,097.4 1,523.9 1,252.4 271.5 3,975.9 3,795.1 2,436.7 798.3 251.4 560.1 531.7 140.6 72.8
Changes 4
2011 54.1 –48.4 –28.8 –19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 – 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 –129.2 –68.7 –70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 –90.4 –50.2 1.5 14.1 – 1.4 5.4
2013 –703.6 –106.2 –73.9 –32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 –56.3 –26.6 – 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2019 Jan. 128.9 24.8 18.9 6.0 3.6 3.0 – 1.2 4.4 10.1 – 0.2 0.3 0.4 1.0
Feb. 31.1 19.6 5.6 13.9 12.0 13.3 9.0 3.2 4.1 1.1 1.0 – 1.7 – 1.4
Mar. 124.6 19.3 2.7 16.6 15.7 9.5 11.1 – 4.1 – 1.4 2.5 2.2 5.7 6.3
Apr. 33.9 16.4 11.2 5.2 12.6 15.1 21.4 – 6.6 – 3.9 0.2 0.1 – 4.1 – 4.3
May 124.6 – 7.3 – 4.2 – 3.1 32.4 29.5 30.1 – 0.9 0.6 0.3 – 0.3 2.3 2.7
June 50.5 2.1 – 8.2 10.3 7.3 – 3.2 – 2.0 – 1.3 – 2.8 0.2 – 0.4 7.9 6.6
July 49.8 – 1.3 6.3 – 7.6 – 0.7 9.3 15.4 – 5.2 – 2.8 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 5.8 – 5.6
Aug. 265.9 13.7 6.8 6.9 24.7 20.5 21.9 0.2 4.0 – 1.5 – 1.2 4.2 3.1
Sep. –100.4 –19.2 –21.7 2.5 – 9.5 – 9.5 – 3.5 – 4.7 – 2.7 – 1.2 – 0.7 0.5 1.3
Oct. –93.5 15.0 12.5 2.5 17.1 16.2 22.5 – 4.5 – 3.1 – 1.8 – 1.0 – 0.9 – 4.2
Nov. 55.4 11.9 6.6 5.3 29.1 29.5 36.7 – 5.7 – 3.8 – 1.6 – 0.7 1.5 1.1
Dec. –187.4 –82.4 –46.4 –36.0 –12.2 –13.2 – 7.3 – 5.4 – 4.9 – 0.5 0.6 0.7 2.2
2020 Jan. 162.1 49.3 22.2 27.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 – 2.0 2.9 5.3 – 4.5 – 3.0 – 0.1 – 0.4
Feb. 193.8 20.0 14.6 5.4 18.5 17.3 19.4 0.2 3.0 – 2.2 – 1.7 0.6 0.9
Mar. 251.0 104.6 87.7 16.9 58.9 40.4 50.1 – 5.6 – 1.7 – 4.0 – 3.4 18.5 17.1
Apr. 96.1 7.0 20.3 –13.3 18.8 24.0 39.6 –15.0 – 9.2 – 0.7 0.1 – 5.3 – 7.1
May –40.6 22.0 16.8 5.2 34.0 33.3 29.9 3.6 7.3 – 0.2 0.3 1.2 0.1
June 118.6 118.2 118.9 – 0.7 – 7.0 – 9.6 8.3 –16.8 –10.5 – 1.1 – 0.1 2.6 0.6
July 67.5 –11.0 –19.0 8.1 34.1 31.5 31.0 2.1 7.4 – 1.6 – 1.1 – 5.7 – 5.4
Aug. –79.5 1.6 4.0 – 2.4 14.4 7.7 13.8 – 5.9 – 4.1 – 0.2 0.2 – 3.2 – 1.9
Sep. 112.2 34.0 39.2 – 5.1 24.9 4.4 14.5 – 9.6 – 7.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 10.9 9.2
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018 Dec.
56.2 15.3 2.8 2.5 11.5 10.1 1.7 2.4 1,048.1 32.1 636.9 688.3 640.1 2019 Jan.
55.9 14.9 2.8 2.5 11.7 10.0 2.0 2.3 1,067.9 32.2 621.9 684.9 639.5 Feb.
55.4 14.9 2.8 2.5 12.1 10.5 11.4 2.1 1,065.3 32.7 666.8 699.3 717.8 Mar.
55.5 15.0 2.8 2.5 13.7 11.2 12.5 2.0 1,060.0 32.1 698.4 696.3 697.8 Apr.
55.2 14.8 2.8 2.5 14.4 12.0 11.2 2.0 1,071.8 32.4 688.6 703.5 790.6 May
56.6 16.1 2.8 2.5 17.0 14.0 12.9 2.0 1,071.1 33.1 676.3 706.6 832.5 June
56.4 15.6 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 13.9 2.1 1,075.3 33.4 667.9 709.9 882.4 July
57.5 17.4 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 16.9 2.2 1,072.7 33.9 676.2 713.0 1,103.9 Aug.
56.8 15.2 2.7 2.4 12.2 10.9 1.5 2.3 1,077.8 35.7 671.4 719.2 1,033.2 Sep.
60.1 17.8 2.7 2.4 13.8 10.6 1.2 2.2 1,067.5 33.4 657.4 711.0 931.3 Oct.
60.6 18.3 2.7 2.4 11.7 10.6 1.7 2.0 1,076.7 33.7 653.6 723.6 933.9 Nov.
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 Dec.
59.4 17.1 2.7 2.4 12.3 10.8 2.5 1.8 1,078.0 36.0 622.5 712.5 996.0 2020 Jan.
59.2 15.3 2.6 2.4 12.9 11.2 2.0 1.9 1,087.4 34.6 638.8 714.0 1,114.6 Feb.
60.6 16.5 2.6 2.4 12.8 11.2 1.7 2.5 1,074.1 30.8 674.1 713.4 1,175.2 Mar.
62.4 17.6 2.6 2.4 13.0 11.1 3.4 2.4 1,078.1 29.6 704.0 693.5 1,234.2 Apr.
63.4 16.4 2.6 2.4 12.5 10.8 2.2 2.2 1,076.9 28.8 693.7 686.4 1,154.4 May
65.4 19.2 2.6 2.4 12.5 11.8 0.9 2.1 1,074.0 28.6 696.8 702.1 1,141.4 June
64.8 20.2 2.6 2.3 20.8 20.1 2.1 1.9 1,067.4 25.9 698.3 694.7 1,178.9 July
63.6 19.3 2.6 2.3 30.6 29.8 1.7 1.9 1,063.9 25.5 682.1 699.9 1,095.2 Aug.
65.2 21.8 2.6 2.3 40.2 39.0 1.2 2.6 1,076.1 24.4 687.2 721.6 1,108.9 Sep.
Changes 4
– 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.7 10.0 – 3.7 –76.9 – 6.6 –80.5 13.7 137.8 2011
– 7.2 – 3.6 0.5 0.3 – 7.9 – 9.2 –19.6 1.2 –107.0 –18.6 54.2 21.0 –68.5 2012
– 0.5 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 –11.3 –10.0 4.1 – 3.2 –104.9 –17.6 –134.1 18.9 –417.1 2013
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
– 0.6 – 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.2 – 0.4 0.9 0.0 13.9 0.2 61.2 – 7.3 31.7 2019 Jan.
– 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.5 0.2 0.3 – 0.1 17.8 – 0.0 –16.4 – 4.0 1.9 Feb.
– 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.5 0.6 0.0 – 0.3 – 6.0 0.4 15.8 11.6 68.4 Mar.
0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 0.8 1.1 – 0.0 – 5.3 – 0.5 31.6 – 3.0 –19.4 Apr.
– 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 1.3 0.0 11.8 0.2 –10.4 7.2 92.3 May
1.4 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.5 2.0 1.7 0.0 3.4 0.9 – 8.2 4.8 39.5 June
– 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 4.2 – 2.8 1.0 0.1 1.0 0.2 –11.7 2.2 59.2 July
1.1 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.1 0.1 – 5.4 0.4 5.8 2.3 221.7 Aug.
– 0.8 – 2.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 1.1 0.1 1.3 1.7 – 8.3 5.3 –69.0 Sep.
3.4 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.8 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 6.5 – 2.1 – 9.7 – 6.9 –102.1 Oct.
0.4 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 0.2 0.4 – 0.2 5.6 0.2 – 7.2 11.5 4.2 Nov.
– 1.5 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 9.2 – 1.3 –90.5 6.4 0.7 Dec.
0.3 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.5 1.1 – 0.1 11.0 3.5 59.9 –17.2 61.4 2020 Jan.
– 0.3 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 0.4 – 0.6 0.1 8.6 – 1.4 15.5 1.3 130.4 Feb.
1.4 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.3 0.6 –11.9 – 3.8 36.2 – 0.3 63.2 Mar.
1.8 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 1.6 – 1.3 27.6 –20.7 60.3 Apr.
1.1 – 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 5.1 – 0.6 –21.9 3.5 –82.0 May
2.0 2.8 – 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 – 1.3 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.1 4.6 16.4 –10.8 June
– 0.3 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 8.3 8.3 1.3 – 0.2 3.3 – 1.2 10.9 – 4.3 33.3 July
– 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.8 9.8 – 0.5 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.4 –14.9 5.7 –83.7 Aug.
1.7 2.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.7 9.2 – 0.5 0.7 13.3 – 0.0 5.1 20.8 13.8 Sep.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
 
 
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
 
 of which: of which:
 
Loans
 Cash in
 hand and
 credit
Number of balances for
reporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Other
month tions total  1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2020         Apr. 1,531 9,064.2 635.2 2,490.7 1,990.1 496.6 4,437.5 420.0 3,317.7 0.3 680.8 105.7 1,395.1
         May 1,530 8,968.3 638.6 2,431.2 1,929.3 497.4 4,470.6 427.6 3,335.7 0.3 684.9 98.0 1,329.9
         June 1,530 9,082.2 819.6 2,384.2 1,880.4 498.9 4,459.5 405.3 3,339.4 0.3 690.7 98.1 1,320.8
         July 1,527 9,126.2 859.0 2,353.6 1,853.2 495.7 4,454.7 405.3 3,348.1 0.3 678.0 98.5 1,360.4
         Aug. 1,526 9,043.3 810.5 2,414.9 1,917.9 492.4 4,449.5 389.7 3,361.2 0.3 673.5 98.4 1,269.9
         Sep. 1,518 9,155.2 933.3 2,378.3 1,882.5 491.2 4,456.2 383.5 3,371.2 0.3 677.6 98.5 1,288.9
Commercial banks 6
2020         Aug. 258 3,832.2 459.8 965.8 883.9 81.1 1,392.1 241.2 935.2 0.2 200.7 36.8 977.8
         Sep. 260 3,871.1 472.3 979.7 898.4 80.6 1,392.3 234.7 938.1 0.2 204.9 36.8 990.0
   Big banks 7
2020         Aug. 3 2,286.4 168.2 528.5 495.3 33.2 656.1 126.3 418.3 0.1 100.9 30.7 902.9
         Sep. 3 2,288.8 158.3 531.7 499.0 32.7 658.2 121.8 421.9 0.1 104.2 30.7 909.9
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2020         Aug. 146 1,111.2 172.5 249.8 203.2 46.4 614.8 75.6 442.1 0.1 93.4 5.4 68.8
         Sep. 146 1,131.5 182.4 256.6 210.0 46.4 613.2 73.7 441.6 0.1 94.3 5.4 73.9
   Branches of foreign banks
2020         Aug. 109 434.6 119.1 187.4 185.4 1.5 121.3 39.4 74.8 0.1 6.4 0.7 6.1
         Sep. 111 450.8 131.6 191.4 189.4 1.6 120.9 39.2 74.5 0.1 6.5 0.7 6.3
Landesbanken
2020         Aug. 6 864.5 82.0 250.1 190.8 58.8 405.3 43.1 314.6 0.0 43.1 8.6 118.6
         Sep. 6 867.0 85.6 247.5 188.9 58.1 402.7 42.8 312.5 0.0 43.3 8.6 122.6
Savings banks
2020         Aug. 377 1,420.6 116.9 178.0 59.4 118.5 1,089.0 47.4 869.8 0.0 171.0 14.8 22.0
         Sep. 377 1,431.5 124.5 178.0 59.5 118.4 1,092.7 48.4 873.2 0.0 170.6 14.8 21.5
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2020         Aug. 839 1,042.3 45.1 188.8 74.7 113.8 767.7 33.2 616.4 0.0 118.0 17.8 22.9
         Sep. 829 1,048.5 47.5 188.5 74.8 113.5 771.3 33.9 619.1 0.0 118.2 17.9 23.3
Mortgage banks
2020         Aug. 10 238.4 8.1 22.7 12.9 9.6 199.1 3.4 176.4 − 19.3 0.2 8.5
         Sep. 10 240.5 9.5 22.8 13.0 9.7 199.6 3.5 177.1 − 19.1 0.2 8.3
Building and loan associations
2020         Aug. 18 241.2 1.6 46.1 29.7 16.4 189.2 1.0 162.5 . 25.7 0.3 4.1
         Sep. 18 242.1 1.5 46.0 29.9 16.1 190.2 1.0 163.7 . 25.5 0.2 4.1
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2020         Aug. 18 1,404.0 97.1 763.5 666.6 94.2 407.3 20.3 286.3 0.0 95.7 19.9 116.2
         Sep. 18 1,454.6 192.5 715.8 618.1 94.8 407.3 19.3 287.7 0.0 96.0 20.0 119.0
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2020         Aug. 143 1,355.0 227.0 422.8 385.1 37.1 558.9 103.7 358.2 0.2 92.2 3.7 142.6
         Sep. 145 1,379.7 249.7 418.5 380.3 37.7 556.7 101.2 358.1 0.2 93.1 3.7 151.1
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2020         Aug. 34 920.4 107.9 235.3 199.6 35.5 437.7 64.3 283.4 0.1 85.7 3.0 136.5
         Sep. 34 928.9 118.1 227.1 190.9 36.1 435.9 62.0 283.6 0.1 86.6 3.0 144.8
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
1,990.2 579.8 1,410.3 4,015.9 2,488.4 270.1 653.6 41.2 570.2 538.4 33.7 1,177.6 539.2 1,341.3 2020          Apr.
1,939.0 590.8 1,348.1 4,056.2 2,527.2 276.2 650.2 40.0 570.0 538.7 32.6 1,172.9 533.3 1,266.9          May2,065.1 603.9 1,461.1 4,042.0 2,530.5 270.4 640.1 36.8 569.0 538.6 32.1 1,179.5 539.1 1,256.6          June
2,051.8 614.3 1,437.5 4,074.1 2,553.4 282.3 639.4 41.9 567.3 537.5 31.8 1,162.0 540.2 1,298.1          July
2,040.4 601.0 1,439.3 4,084.0 2,562.5 279.1 643.9 40.8 567.0 537.6 31.5 1,162.2 540.0 1,216.6          Aug.2,084.0 610.3 1,473.7 4,103.9 2,588.3 270.4 647.6 34.1 566.5 537.4 31.1 1,188.5 544.8 1,234.1          Sep.
Commercial banks 6
1,010.9 442.5 568.4 1,611.5 1,088.7 174.8 237.4 38.2 98.0 93.2 12.6 166.0 176.1 867.6 2020          Aug.
1,023.3 444.7 578.6 1,617.7 1,104.1 167.3 235.8 31.9 98.0 93.3 12.5 167.3 180.8 882.1          Sep.
Big banks 7
491.7 196.6 295.2 786.8 510.5 101.8 90.2 37.8 82.7 78.8 1.5 123.4 82.7 801.8 2020          Aug.
474.6 182.1 292.5 788.1 522.0 93.2 88.5 31.8 82.8 78.9 1.5 124.9 82.8 818.4          Sep.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
271.1 102.1 168.9 657.4 462.3 43.4 125.8 0.3 14.9 14.1 11.0 42.2 83.4 57.2 2020          Aug.
288.1 106.8 181.2 658.4 465.2 42.7 124.7 . 14.9 14.1 10.9 41.9 88.0 55.1          Sep.
Branches of foreign banks
248.1 143.8 104.3 167.4 115.9 29.7 21.4 − 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.4 10.0 8.6 2020          Aug.
260.7 155.7 104.9 171.1 116.8 31.3 22.6 . 0.3 0.3 0.1 0.4 10.0 8.6          Sep.
Landesbanken
265.3 51.9 213.4 258.7 132.9 42.0 77.4 2.6 6.2 6.1 0.2 181.3 42.9 116.4 2020          Aug.
269.8 52.0 217.8 256.6 135.2 38.4 76.7 2.0 6.2 6.1 0.1 180.0 42.9 117.6          Sep.
Savings banks
161.4 7.3 154.1 1,067.9 749.4 13.0 14.0 − 278.5 259.8 13.0 17.7 127.7 45.8 2020          Aug.
172.3 6.1 166.2 1,067.9 749.8 13.1 13.9 − 278.2 259.7 12.8 17.6 127.7 46.0          Sep.
 
Credit cooperatives
 
143.3 2.0 141.3 767.8 537.3 29.4 13.2 − 183.8 178.0 4.1 10.6 88.1 32.5 2020          Aug.
147.7 2.5 145.2 768.8 539.0 29.5 12.6 − 183.6 177.8 4.0 10.5 88.2 33.3          Sep.
Mortgage banks
60.2 2.9 57.2 65.4 2.4 3.6 59.3 − − − . 95.5 10.7 6.7 2020          Aug.
59.9 2.9 57.0 65.3 2.6 3.7 58.9 − − − . 97.9 10.7 6.7          Sep.
Building and loan associations
27.9 2.9 25.1 188.1 3.2 1.2 183.1 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.7 12.3 11.2 2020          Aug.
28.3 2.7 25.6 188.2 3.2 1.2 183.3 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 1.7 12.3 11.6          Sep.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
371.4 91.6 279.8 124.6 48.5 15.1 59.4 0.1 − − . 689.3 82.1 136.6 2020          Aug.
382.8 99.4 283.3 139.4 54.5 17.1 66.3 0.2 − − . 713.5 82.1 136.8          Sep.
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
521.9 265.6 256.3 600.6 447.1 57.7 72.7 3.4 19.1 18.7 4.0 35.4 64.7 132.4 2020          Aug.
532.4 272.1 260.2 608.0 453.9 57.7 73.5 1.4 19.0 18.7 4.0 36.5 69.1 133.5          Sep.
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
273.8 121.8 151.9 433.2 331.2 28.1 51.3 3.4 18.7 18.4 4.0 35.0 54.7 123.8 2020          Aug.
271.8 116.4 155.3 436.9 337.1 26.4 50.9 1.4 18.6 18.3 3.9 36.1 59.1 125.0          Sep.
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to Ap ril 2018)
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Br anches (with
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking cat egories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills and
hand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  1 
End of year or month *
 
2010 16.0 79.6 1,686.3 1,195.4 − 7.5 483.5 1.8 3,220.9 2,770.4 0.8 27.9 421.8
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.9
2012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.1
2013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.2
2014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.8
2017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.5
2018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.9
2019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2019         Apr. 38.0 501.2 1,363.8 1,123.2 0.0 0.8 239.8 6.0 3,428.9 3,034.7 0.2 1.1 393.0
         May 37.7 517.6 1,371.8 1,129.7 0.0 0.8 241.3 5.5 3,445.6 3,049.5 0.2 1.5 394.4
         June 37.7 477.9 1,362.5 1,121.2 0.0 1.0 240.3 5.2 3,467.1 3,067.0 0.2 1.3 398.5
         July 37.2 460.1 1,355.5 1,113.6 0.0 0.9 241.0 5.1 3,476.1 3,075.1 0.2 2.3 398.6
         Aug. 38.0 462.1 1,365.8 1,126.4 0.0 0.9 238.4 4.8 3,491.7 3,087.2 0.2 2.9 401.4
         Sep. 37.8 452.7 1,354.1 1,115.7 0.0 0.8 237.6 4.7 3,499.8 3,094.5 0.2 3.8 401.3
         Oct. 39.0 529.1 1,252.1 1,013.6 0.0 0.9 237.6 4.6 3,506.7 3,104.5 0.2 3.4 398.6
         Nov. 39.9 529.6 1,301.7 1,059.6 0.0 1.1 241.0 4.6 3,523.5 3,121.1 0.2 3.3 398.9
         Dec. 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020         Jan. 39.2 515.2 1,256.9 1,015.4 0.0 0.8 240.7 4.6 3,528.4 3,125.8 0.3 3.3 399.1
         Feb. 40.0 509.4 1,280.0 1,035.2 0.0 0.9 243.8 5.0 3,544.7 3,141.9 0.3 4.6 397.8
         Mar. 47.9 621.7 1,273.0 1,029.4 0.0 1.0 242.6 5.1 3,580.0 3,174.1 0.2 5.1 400.6
         Apr. 48.4 582.3 1,334.6 1,090.6 0.0 1.2 242.8 5.0 3,594.3 3,185.3 0.2 7.2 401.6
         May 47.8 586.2 1,291.8 1,044.7 0.0 1.1 246.0 6.0 3,620.9 3,204.2 0.1 10.1 406.4
         June 45.7 767.6 1,270.4 1,019.6 0.0 1.1 249.6 6.9 3,621.1 3,206.6 0.2 8.0 406.2
         July 45.2 810.5 1,270.5 1,019.2 0.0 1.2 250.0 7.5 3,625.7 3,217.2 0.2 8.0 400.3
         Aug. 45.7 760.8 1,348.1 1,096.7 0.0 1.1 250.3 7.8 3,629.7 3,219.6 0.2 9.4 400.5
         Sep. 45.8 884.4 1,294.1 1,041.2 0.0 1.0 251.8 8.3 3,634.2 3,224.4 0.2 8.4 401.3
Changes *
2011 − 0.2 + 14.2 + 47.3 + 80.5 − − 0.4 − 32.8 − 0.1 − 30.6 − 3.2 + 0.0 − 21.5 − 5.9
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.7
2013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.8
2014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.9
2017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.6
2018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.2
2019 + 2.8 + 59.7 − 63.0 − 61.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 5.5
2019         Apr. + 1.2 + 24.8 − 16.6 − 14.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 0.0 + 3.8 + 8.5 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.7
         May − 0.3 + 16.4 + 8.0 + 6.5 − − 0.0 + 1.5 − 0.5 + 16.7 + 14.8 − 0.0 + 0.4 + 1.5
         June − 0.0 − 39.7 − 9.2 − 8.4 − + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.3 + 21.5 + 17.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 4.1
         July − 0.5 − 17.7 − 7.2 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0
         Aug. + 0.8 + 1.9 + 10.3 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.2 + 15.6 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 2.8
         Sep. − 0.2 − 9.4 − 9.2 − 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.1 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.1
         Oct. + 1.2 + 76.4 − 102.1 − 102.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.8
         Nov. + 0.9 + 0.4 + 49.6 + 46.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 16.8 + 16.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3
         Dec. + 3.3 − 53.0 − 46.9 − 43.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
2020         Jan. − 4.0 + 38.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 0.8 − 5.9 + 23.1 + 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 16.3 + 16.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.3
         Mar. + 7.8 +112.4 − 7.0 − 5.9 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 35.3 + 32.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 2.8
         Apr. + 0.5 − 39.4 + 61.6 + 61.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 14.4 + 11.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.0
         May − 0.6 + 3.9 + 16.9 + 13.7 − − 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 24.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.8
         June − 2.1 +181.4 − 21.4 − 25.0 − − 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.2
         July − 0.5 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 4.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.9
         Aug. + 0.5 − 49.7 + 77.6 + 77.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.2
         Sep. + 0.1 +123.6 − 54.0 − 55.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.7
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 33.7 96.8 1,238.3 135.3 1,102.6 0.0 13.8 2,935.2 1,104.4 1,117.1 618.2 95.4 37.5 2010− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
− 17.5 90.7 1,060.8 131.5 929.3 0.0 4.6 3,582.0 2,122.7 841.6 582.3 35.4 33.9 2019          Apr.
− 17.5 91.2 1,056.4 121.5 934.9 0.0 4.6 3,611.4 2,152.7 841.0 582.5 35.2 33.7          May− 17.5 90.9 1,047.1 122.5 924.6 0.0 4.6 3,609.5 2,150.7 841.2 582.7 34.9 33.4          June
− 17.1 91.0 1,053.9 123.2 930.6 0.0 4.5 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 581.8 34.8 32.9          July
− 17.1 90.3 1,061.4 127.7 933.7 0.0 4.5 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 580.3 34.7 32.7          Aug.− 17.0 90.0 1,037.5 121.4 916.1 0.0 4.5 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 579.0 34.4 32.6          Sep.
− 17.1 90.1 1,049.3 129.3 920.0 0.0 4.5 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 577.2 34.1 32.5          Oct.
− 17.1 90.2 1,055.9 126.6 929.4 0.0 4.5 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 575.7 33.8 32.5          Nov.− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5          Dec.
− 16.9 90.0 1,031.4 125.4 906.0 0.0 4.4 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 570.7 32.6 32.3 2020          Jan.
− 16.9 86.1 1,046.8 133.2 913.6 0.0 4.4 3,675.9 2,254.4 820.8 568.5 32.2 32.8          Feb.− 16.9 86.3 1,134.7 147.5 987.2 0.0 4.3 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 564.5 31.8 32.5          Mar.
− 17.1 86.4 1,154.9 141.2 1,013.6 0.0 4.3 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 563.8 31.1 32.8          Apr.
− 19.4 78.8 1,110.9 131.6 979.3 0.0 7.1 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 563.6 30.7 33.3          May− 20.8 78.8 1,229.5 131.4 1,098.1 0.0 9.4 3,766.3 2,385.3 788.2 562.6 30.3 33.4          June
− 22.2 79.3 1,207.9 125.0 1,082.8 0.0 11.1 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 560.9 29.9 33.8          July
− 22.5 79.2 1,211.5 126.2 1,085.3 0.0 11.5 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 560.6 29.6 34.0          Aug.− 22.7 79.2 1,251.6 123.8 1,127.8 0.0 12.0 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 560.1 29.3 34.3          Sep.
Changes *
− − 1.1 − 2.2 − 25.0 − 20.0 − 5.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 111.2 + 63.7 + 40.9 − 2.6 + 9.3 − 1.1 2011− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018− − 0.7 + 0.1 − 8.6 + 1.6 − 10.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 2019
− − 0.1 − 0.2 + 11.3 + 9.2 + 2.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 16.7 + 21.6 − 4.7 + 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 2019          Apr.
− + 0.0 + 0.5 − 4.3 − 10.0 + 5.7 − + 0.0 + 29.4 + 30.0 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          May− − 0.1 − 0.1 − 9.2 + 1.2 − 10.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.3          June
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.7 + 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5          July
− + 0.0 − 0.6 + 7.6 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 0.0 − + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2          Aug.− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 21.4 − 6.3 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          Sep.
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 11.8 + 7.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 6.7 − 2.7 + 9.4 − + 0.0 + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 0.2 − 45.8 − 19.3 − 26.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec.
− − 0.3 − 0.4 + 21.2 + 18.2 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 2020          Jan.
− − 0.0 − 3.9 + 15.4 + 7.8 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 17.7 + 19.3 + 1.1 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4          Feb.− − 0.1 + 0.2 + 87.9 + 14.3 + 73.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar.
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 20.2 − 6.2 + 26.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2          Apr.
− + 2.2 − 0.2 + 15.6 − 4.6 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 2.7 + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6          May− + 1.5 + 0.0 + 118.6 − 0.2 + 118.8 − 0.0 + 2.3 − 9.0 + 8.8 − 16.4 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1          June
− + 0.9 + 0.5 − 21.7 − 6.4 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 37.1 + 28.7 + 10.5 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4          July
− + 0.3 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 17.4 + 13.6 + 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2          Aug.− + 0.2 + 0.0 + 40.0 − 2.5 + 42.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 13.4 + 15.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3          Sep.
including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium market
banknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securities
and Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2010 0.5 1,154.1 892.7 607.7 285.1 2.1 259.3 1.8 773.8 461.4 112.6 348.8 10.1 302.3
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.1
2012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.8
2013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.8
2014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.6
2017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.5
2018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.1
2019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2019         Apr. 0.2 1,106.2 858.3 579.0 279.3 2.8 245.2 3.3 807.9 529.0 130.3 398.7 6.6 272.2
         May 0.2 1,090.6 840.9 564.1 276.8 2.8 246.8 3.6 820.1 542.9 140.2 402.7 6.4 270.8
         June 0.2 1,109.3 857.3 578.3 279.0 3.1 248.9 3.8 816.2 535.9 135.8 400.1 6.6 273.6
         July 0.2 1,099.0 844.6 563.6 281.0 3.3 251.1 3.8 829.3 548.2 143.9 404.3 8.6 272.5
         Aug. 0.2 1,099.5 844.9 562.8 282.1 3.4 251.1 3.9 850.7 564.8 158.0 406.8 9.4 276.4
         Sep. 0.2 1,120.8 867.0 583.4 283.5 3.9 249.9 3.9 826.7 539.6 131.1 408.5 8.6 278.5
         Oct. 0.2 1,132.8 880.2 590.3 289.9 3.8 248.8 3.9 826.5 544.3 140.7 403.7 9.2 273.0
         Nov. 0.2 1,122.8 870.5 585.6 284.9 3.4 248.9 3.8 828.1 541.1 136.8 404.3 9.9 277.1
         Dec. 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020         Jan. 0.2 1,111.1 859.7 578.2 281.5 2.7 248.7 3.8 821.5 536.9 133.0 403.8 7.7 277.0
         Feb. 0.2 1,119.0 865.9 590.7 275.2 2.9 250.2 3.8 832.3 543.7 136.8 406.9 8.6 279.9
         Mar. 0.3 1,145.4 889.8 615.5 274.4 3.0 252.5 3.5 834.1 543.2 135.7 407.5 11.7 279.2
         Apr. 0.3 1,156.2 899.6 626.2 273.4 2.8 253.8 3.5 843.1 552.5 142.6 410.0 11.4 279.2
         May 0.3 1,139.4 884.7 613.2 271.5 3.3 251.4 3.7 849.7 559.2 152.6 406.5 12.1 278.4
         June 0.3 1,113.8 860.8 592.4 268.5 3.7 249.3 3.8 838.4 538.2 134.7 403.5 15.8 284.5
         July 0.3 1,083.1 834.0 574.4 259.6 3.4 245.7 3.9 829.1 536.3 138.8 397.5 15.1 277.6
         Aug. 0.3 1,066.8 821.2 563.3 257.9 3.5 242.1 4.1 819.9 531.3 133.7 397.6 15.6 272.9
         Sep. 0.2 1,084.3 841.3 583.2 258.1 3.6 239.4 4.1 821.9 530.4 130.3 400.2 15.2 276.3
Changes *
2011 + 0.1 − 48.4 − 32.6 − 45.3 + 12.7 + 2.5 − 18.4 + 0.0 − 38.9 − 13.6 − 12.8 − 0.9 − 1.6 − 23.6
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.5
2013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.6
2014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.5
2017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.4
2018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.7
2019 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 11.3 − 21.9 + 10.7 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 26.8 + 19.9 + 12.7 + 7.3 + 3.0 + 3.8
2019         Apr. + 0.0 + 13.7 + 13.5 + 13.5 − 0.0 + 0.8 − 0.5 + 0.1 + 9.1 + 9.6 + 7.7 + 1.9 − 1.1 + 0.7
         May − 0.0 − 17.6 − 19.4 − 16.4 − 3.0 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 0.3 + 12.1 + 13.9 + 10.0 + 3.9 − 0.2 − 1.6
         June + 0.0 + 23.8 + 21.3 + 15.8 + 5.5 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 3.7 − 3.2 − 0.5 + 0.2 + 3.4
         July − 0.0 − 15.1 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 7.7 + 2.2 + 2.0 − 1.6
         Aug. + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 19.0 + 14.5 + 13.9 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.7
         Sep. − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.5 − 11.3 − 10.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 1.6
         Oct. + 0.0 + 18.1 + 18.9 + 9.8 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 7.5 + 10.1 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.2
         Nov. − 0.0 − 14.2 − 13.8 − 6.7 − 7.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 6.1 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 0.7 + 3.7
         Dec. + 0.0 − 53.1 − 51.2 − 50.3 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 29.1 − 24.9 − 24.9 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.9
2020         Jan. − 0.0 + 42.2 + 41.2 + 43.2 − 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 23.1 + 21.1 + 21.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.9
         Feb. + 0.0 + 6.5 + 4.7 + 11.5 − 6.8 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.1 + 6.4 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 2.8
         Mar. + 0.0 + 27.5 + 24.9 + 25.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.6
         Apr. + 0.0 + 7.4 + 6.5 + 5.5 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4
         May − 0.0 − 22.7 − 21.4 − 22.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1
         June + 0.0 − 23.5 − 21.8 − 19.6 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 9.8 − 19.7 − 17.5 − 2.2 + 3.7 + 6.2
         July − 0.0 − 17.9 − 14.4 − 11.2 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 5.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 5.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 14.4 − 11.1 − 10.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 4.2 − 4.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 4.7
         Sep. − 0.0 + 13.9 + 16.6 + 18.0 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 3.8 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 3.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
15.6 48.8 741.7 258.7 483.0 349.3 133.6 0.1 227.6 84.8 142.7 76.7 66.0 1.5 201032.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 201811.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
13.0 22.3 787.1 441.7 345.4 255.0 90.4 1.3 268.4 124.2 144.2 86.9 57.3 0.1 2019          Apr.
13.0 22.3 783.6 482.4 301.2 210.0 91.2 1.3 261.3 120.7 140.6 83.6 57.0 0.1          May12.8 22.3 787.2 471.3 315.9 225.1 90.7 1.3 265.6 126.9 138.8 81.8 56.9 0.1          June
12.8 22.0 768.5 460.7 307.8 214.3 93.5 1.3 262.9 126.2 136.7 79.5 57.2 0.1          July
12.8 22.0 779.4 436.0 343.4 247.8 95.6 1.3 274.2 127.1 147.1 90.2 56.9 0.1          Aug.12.8 22.2 806.6 440.4 366.2 269.8 96.4 1.3 244.6 123.1 121.5 63.1 58.4 0.1          Sep.
12.6 21.8 787.8 430.9 356.9 259.3 97.6 1.1 251.8 119.9 131.9 73.3 58.6 0.1          Oct.
12.6 21.6 790.4 452.4 338.0 239.5 98.5 1.1 251.6 120.5 131.1 72.4 58.7 0.1          Nov.11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1          Dec.
11.4 21.4 756.2 433.4 322.8 223.1 99.8 − 247.8 121.8 126.0 68.1 57.8 0.1 2020          Jan.
11.4 19.0 770.5 433.8 336.7 230.1 106.6 − 255.3 129.1 126.2 66.5 59.6 0.1          Feb.11.4 19.0 826.9 463.3 363.6 250.9 112.6 − 269.0 146.3 122.7 62.8 60.0 0.1          Mar.
11.4 19.0 835.3 438.6 396.7 288.0 108.7 − 274.1 143.0 131.1 69.9 61.2 0.1          Apr.
11.4 19.0 828.1 459.2 368.9 260.8 108.0 − 280.8 150.9 129.9 67.9 62.0 0.1          May11.3 19.1 835.5 472.5 363.0 247.2 115.9 − 275.7 145.2 130.5 69.5 61.1 0.1          June
11.2 19.0 843.9 489.3 354.7 238.8 115.8 − 270.6 139.4 131.3 72.5 58.8 0.1          July
11.2 19.0 828.9 474.8 354.1 238.8 115.2 − 263.2 134.8 128.3 69.9 58.5 0.1          Aug.11.4 19.0 832.4 486.5 345.9 226.4 119.6 − 269.6 145.5 124.1 66.0 58.1 0.1          Sep.
Changes *
− 0.1 − 3.9 − 88.8 − 13.8 − 75.0 − 61.8 − 13.1 − 0.0 − 9.3 + 6.4 − 15.7 − 10.4 − 5.3 − 0.2 2011− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018− 0.3 − 0.9 − 9.5 − 49.4 + 39.8 + 28.0 + 11.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 2019
− 0.0 + 0.8 + 24.4 − 22.2 + 46.6 + 45.9 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 9.3 + 10.4 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 2019          Apr.
− 0.0 − 0.0 − 4.2 + 40.4 − 44.6 − 45.3 + 0.8 + 0.0 − 7.2 − 7.9 + 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.3 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.0 + 7.2 − 9.6 + 16.8 + 14.6 + 2.2 − + 5.4 + 6.6 − 1.2 − 1.2 − 0.0 − 0.0          June
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 22.0 − 12.0 − 10.0 − 12.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 2.4 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 25.9 + 34.3 + 32.8 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.6 + 10.0 + 10.3 − 0.4 −          Aug.− 0.0 + 0.1 + 9.8 − 3.1 + 12.9 + 12.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 2.3 − 18.6 − 20.0 + 1.4 + 0.0          Sep.
− 0.2 − 0.3 − 14.6 − 8.1 − 6.5 − 8.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.7 + 10.9 + 10.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 20.3 − 20.9 − 21.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.− 1.1 − 0.2 − 106.0 −111.5 + 5.5 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 20.7 − 7.7 − 12.9 − 11.4 − 1.6 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 73.0 + 92.9 − 19.8 − 21.6 + 1.7 − + 16.7 + 9.2 + 7.6 + 7.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Jan.
− 0.0 − 2.4 + 13.3 + 5.0 + 8.4 + 5.9 + 2.5 − + 7.3 + 7.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.0          Feb.+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 57.2 + 29.9 + 27.3 + 21.1 + 6.2 − + 14.2 + 17.4 − 3.2 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 − 25.9 + 31.9 + 33.0 − 1.1 − + 4.4 − 3.7 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 1.2 − 0.0          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 15.3 + 9.3 − 24.6 − 24.6 + 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.8 + 13.9 − 5.1 − 13.1 + 8.0 − − 4.7 − 5.6 + 0.9 + 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 17.6 + 20.7 − 3.1 − 4.1 + 1.0 − − 2.7 − 4.7 + 2.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 13.9 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.5 − − 7.2 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0          Aug.+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 9.5 − 13.5 + 4.0 − + 5.8 + 10.4 − 4.6 − 4.1 − 0.5 + 0.0          Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
 
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-
negotiable money able
market paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2010 3,220.9 2,771.3 428.0 283.0 282.8 0.2 145.0 117.2 27.7 2,793.0 2,305.6
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.9
2012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.9
2013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.6
2014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.0
2017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.0
2018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.8
2019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2019         Apr. 3,428.9 3,034.9 256.3 235.0 234.3 0.7 21.4 21.0 0.4 3,172.6 2,769.9
         May 3,445.6 3,049.7 257.3 236.6 235.7 0.9 20.7 20.1 0.6 3,188.3 2,785.8
         June 3,467.1 3,067.2 271.3 249.8 249.2 0.6 21.5 20.8 0.7 3,195.8 2,795.2
         July 3,476.1 3,075.3 270.3 243.8 243.2 0.6 26.5 24.9 1.6 3,205.9 2,807.7
         Aug. 3,491.7 3,087.4 266.2 238.8 238.3 0.5 27.4 25.0 2.4 3,225.5 2,825.7
         Sep. 3,499.8 3,094.7 269.2 246.1 245.6 0.6 23.1 19.9 3.2 3,230.6 2,831.0
         Oct. 3,506.7 3,104.7 261.6 237.1 236.5 0.6 24.5 21.6 2.8 3,245.1 2,849.5
         Nov. 3,523.5 3,121.3 262.6 239.8 239.2 0.6 22.8 20.1 2.7 3,260.9 2,864.3
         Dec. 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020         Jan. 3,528.4 3,126.0 261.5 236.3 235.7 0.6 25.2 22.6 2.6 3,266.9 2,874.2
         Feb. 3,544.7 3,142.3 264.8 240.0 239.3 0.7 24.8 20.8 4.0 3,279.9 2,888.9
         Mar. 3,580.0 3,174.3 288.4 261.9 261.1 0.8 26.4 22.2 4.2 3,291.6 2,892.2
         Apr. 3,594.3 3,185.5 285.0 255.6 254.9 0.7 29.4 22.9 6.5 3,309.3 2,908.0
         May 3,620.9 3,204.4 285.3 254.3 253.2 1.1 31.1 22.0 9.1 3,335.6 2,931.7
         June 3,621.1 3,206.8 278.9 248.5 247.6 0.8 30.4 23.3 7.2 3,342.2 2,939.8
         July 3,625.7 3,217.4 274.8 243.4 242.6 0.8 31.5 24.2 7.3 3,350.9 2,953.2
         Aug. 3,629.7 3,219.7 265.6 237.7 236.9 0.8 28.0 19.4 8.6 3,364.0 2,967.3
         Sep. 3,634.2 3,224.6 261.9 232.0 231.3 0.7 29.9 22.3 7.7 3,372.3 2,976.0
Changes *
2011 − 30.6 − 3.2 − 45.2 + 33.6 + 33.3 + 0.2 − 78.7 − 57.0 − 21.7 + 14.6 + 9.4
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.9
2013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.6
2014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.8
2017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.4
2018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.0
2019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2019         Apr. + 3.8 + 8.5 − 4.7 − 5.5 − 5.6 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 8.6 + 13.4
         May + 16.7 + 14.8 + 1.0 + 1.6 + 1.4 + 0.2 − 0.7 − 0.9 + 0.2 + 15.7 + 16.0
         June + 21.5 + 17.6 + 14.0 + 13.2 + 13.5 − 0.3 + 0.8 + 0.7 + 0.1 + 7.5 + 9.4
         July + 9.2 + 8.2 − 1.0 − 6.1 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 10.2 + 12.9
         Aug. + 15.6 + 12.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 19.8 + 18.2
         Sep. + 8.1 + 7.3 + 3.1 + 7.4 + 7.3 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 5.1 + 0.8 + 5.1 + 4.8
         Oct. + 6.9 + 10.0 − 7.4 − 8.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 14.4 + 18.4
         Nov. + 16.8 + 16.7 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 15.9 + 14.9
         Dec. − 1.9 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.5
2020         Jan. + 6.8 + 6.5 + 1.1 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 7.2
         Feb. + 16.3 + 16.2 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.3 + 13.0 + 14.7
         Mar. + 35.3 + 32.1 + 23.6 + 21.9 + 21.8 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 11.7 + 3.3
         Apr. + 14.4 + 11.2 − 3.3 − 6.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 2.3 + 17.7 + 15.9
         May + 24.1 + 16.4 − 2.2 − 3.9 − 4.2 + 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 26.3 + 23.7
         June + 0.2 + 2.5 − 6.4 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 6.6 + 7.9
         July + 4.6 + 10.5 − 5.9 − 6.9 − 6.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 10.5 + 15.2
         Aug. + 4.0 + 2.4 − 7.5 − 4.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 11.5 + 12.6
         Sep. + 4.6 + 4.9 − 3.7 − 5.6 − 5.6 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.9 − 0.9 + 8.3 + 8.6
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,070.0 238.1 1,831.8 235.7 30.7 487.3 301.2 36.1 265.1 186.1 − 3.1 20102,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 20182,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5 2019
2,539.8 291.3 2,248.5 230.0 16.2 402.7 239.8 18.4 221.4 162.9 − 1.3 2019          Apr.
2,554.8 293.7 2,261.1 231.0 16.3 402.5 239.1 18.2 220.9 163.4 − 1.3          May2,560.3 294.3 2,266.1 234.9 16.2 400.6 237.0 17.9 219.0 163.7 − 1.3          June
2,571.9 295.2 2,276.8 235.8 15.8 398.2 235.4 17.4 218.0 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,588.9 298.3 2,290.5 236.8 15.9 399.7 235.2 17.4 217.8 164.5 − 1.2          Aug.2,594.1 297.2 2,296.8 236.9 15.8 399.6 235.2 17.0 218.2 164.4 − 1.2          Sep.
2,611.0 299.7 2,311.3 238.5 15.9 395.6 235.5 16.9 218.6 160.1 − 1.2          Oct.
2,624.4 301.6 2,322.8 240.0 15.9 396.5 237.6 17.6 220.0 158.9 − 1.2          Nov.2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5          Dec.
2,631.8 300.0 2,331.8 242.4 15.7 392.7 236.0 17.0 219.0 156.7 − 1.2 2020          Jan.
2,646.4 302.5 2,344.0 242.5 15.7 391.0 235.7 17.2 218.5 155.3 − 1.2          Feb.2,654.8 304.5 2,350.2 237.5 15.6 399.4 236.3 17.2 219.1 163.1 − 1.2          Mar.
2,671.3 307.2 2,364.1 236.7 15.9 401.3 236.4 17.3 219.1 164.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,692.9 310.7 2,382.2 238.9 18.1 403.9 236.3 17.4 218.9 167.6 − 1.3          May2,701.4 310.8 2,390.6 238.4 19.6 402.4 234.5 17.1 217.4 167.9 − 1.2          June
2,715.7 312.5 2,403.2 237.5 21.0 397.7 234.9 16.7 218.1 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,729.1 313.1 2,416.0 238.2 21.3 396.7 234.4 16.7 217.7 162.3 − 1.2          Aug.2,737.4 313.1 2,424.2 238.6 21.5 396.3 233.7 16.2 217.5 162.6 − 1.2          Sep.
Changes *
+ 22.6 + 2.2 + 20.4 − 13.2 − 1.0 + 5.2 − 2.1 + 4.9 − 7.0 + 7.3 − − 0.2 2011+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018+ 126.0 + 18.9 + 107.2 + 6.8 − 0.8 − 17.8 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 12.3 − + 0.1 2019
+ 13.9 + 4.5 + 9.4 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 4.8 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 4.3 − − 0.0 2019          Apr.
+ 15.0 + 2.4 + 12.7 + 0.9 + 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.5 − − 0.0          May+ 5.6 + 0.6 + 5.0 + 3.9 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 + 0.2 − − 0.0          June
+ 11.7 + 1.0 + 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.0          July
+ 17.1 + 3.3 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 4.7 − 0.7 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 16.8 + 2.4 + 14.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 13.4 + 1.9 + 11.6 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − + 0.3          Dec.
+ 5.3 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 − − 0.3 2020          Jan.
+ 14.6 + 2.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.3 − + 0.0          Feb.+ 8.3 + 2.1 + 6.3 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 7.8 − − 0.0          Mar.
+ 16.7 + 2.7 + 14.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Apr.
+ 21.5 + 3.5 + 18.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May+ 8.4 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 0.5 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.3 − − 0.1          June
+ 16.1 + 1.6 + 14.5 − 0.9 + 0.9 − 4.7 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 5.1 − + 0.0          July
+ 11.9 + 0.7 + 11.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Aug.+ 8.2 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0          Sep.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-
loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ation
secured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excluding
by disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insurance
loans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2018 2,727.0 1,382.2 1,391.2 1,116.4 274.8 1,483.6 392.7 139.3 116.5 71.9 138.7 53.2 50.6 157.3
2019         Sep. 2,839.6 1,487.2 1,450.4 1,197.0 253.4 1,551.7 411.6 150.1 118.6 77.4 139.9 54.8 50.1 166.2
         Dec. 2,864.8 1,512.1 1,470.4 1,213.0 257.4 1,560.5 416.1 146.6 119.0 77.1 141.6 54.2 50.3 168.2
2020         Mar. 2,915.9 1,533.2 1,488.6 1,225.8 262.8 1,598.9 421.9 155.8 120.1 79.4 143.5 54.5 52.5 176.4
         June 2,949.0 1,558.5 1,510.6 1,246.6 263.9 1,613.5 423.2 164.5 120.6 80.8 138.1 55.4 56.6 175.2
         Sep. 2,968.6 1,580.1 1,537.3 1,265.4 272.0 1,616.8 434.6 157.2 121.1 82.2 135.9 55.5 57.7 173.7
 Short-term lending
2018 227.6 − 7.2 − 7.2 195.9 4.1 35.5 4.9 14.7 48.3 3.7 4.9 28.0
2019         Sep. 245.6 − 8.4 − 8.4 213.6 5.0 41.1 5.3 16.7 48.0 4.4 4.5 30.1
         Dec. 238.4 − 8.1 − 8.1 206.2 4.7 35.9 5.6 15.7 48.6 3.8 4.6 27.0
2020         Mar. 261.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 230.3 4.9 43.4 6.7 17.1 49.5 4.1 6.1 34.6
         June 247.6 − 8.2 − 8.2 217.9 4.7 44.5 6.1 16.9 41.8 4.2 5.4 33.4
         Sep. 231.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 201.4 5.0 36.9 6.5 16.9 38.4 4.2 5.3 30.0
 Medium-term lending
2018 282.6 − 35.4 − 35.4 202.5 15.4 24.9 4.5 12.5 19.0 4.5 10.6 49.0
2019         Sep. 297.1 − 36.4 − 36.4 215.4 16.5 27.3 4.9 13.7 19.6 4.7 10.0 50.1
         Dec. 301.3 − 36.6 − 36.6 219.5 16.6 28.5 4.9 13.9 19.7 4.6 10.2 52.0
2020         Mar. 304.5 − 36.9 − 36.9 222.8 17.0 29.7 5.1 13.9 20.4 4.5 10.4 51.3
         June 310.8 − 37.7 − 37.7 229.8 17.6 33.6 5.2 14.2 19.6 4.5 13.4 50.2
         Sep. 313.1 − 38.0 − 38.0 232.1 17.9 33.1 5.3 14.6 19.2 4.6 14.3 51.4
 Long-term lending
2018 2,216.8 1,382.2 1,348.6 1,116.4 232.2 1,085.2 373.2 78.9 107.2 44.7 71.4 45.0 35.1 80.3
2019         Sep. 2,296.8 1,487.2 1,405.6 1,197.0 208.6 1,122.7 390.2 81.8 108.5 46.9 72.3 45.7 35.6 85.9
         Dec. 2,325.1 1,512.1 1,425.7 1,213.0 212.7 1,134.9 394.8 82.2 108.6 47.6 73.3 45.8 35.5 89.2
2020         Mar. 2,350.2 1,533.2 1,443.4 1,225.8 217.6 1,145.7 400.0 82.7 108.4 48.4 73.6 45.9 36.0 90.6
         June 2,390.6 1,558.5 1,464.7 1,246.6 218.1 1,165.8 400.8 86.4 109.3 49.7 76.7 46.6 37.8 91.6
         Sep. 2,424.2 1,580.1 1,490.9 1,265.4 225.5 1,183.3 411.6 87.2 109.3 50.7 78.2 46.7 38.2 92.2
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2019         Q3 + 29.8 + 18.0 + 22.4 + 15.4 + 7.0 + 12.0 + 6.1 − 0.2 − 2.2 + 1.3 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 4.8
         Q4 + 25.3 + 20.1 + 20.0 + 13.9 + 6.1 + 9.2 + 4.6 − 3.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.0
2020         Q1 + 51.0 + 15.6 + 17.8 + 12.4 + 5.4 + 38.2 + 5.4 + 9.2 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 8.2
         Q2 + 30.6 + 17.8 + 21.0 + 13.7 + 7.3 + 17.1 + 5.2 + 8.8 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 4.4 + 0.9 + 4.1 − 4.0
         Q3 + 19.7 + 21.7 + 26.5 + 18.8 + 7.7 − 1.9 + 6.4 − 7.4 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 2.1
 Short-term lending
2019         Q3 − 3.6 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 3.8 + 0.3 − 1.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − 0.8 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.8
         Q4 − 7.0 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 7.5 − 0.2 − 5.2 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 3.2
2020         Q1 + 22.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 24.2 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 7.6
         Q2 − 16.0 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 14.9 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 4.2
         Q3 − 16.5 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 16.7 + 0.3 − 7.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.4
 Medium-term lending
2019         Q3 + 3.5 − + 0.8 − + 0.8 + 3.1 + 0.5 + 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.4 + 1.3
         Q4 + 4.2 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 1.9
2020         Q1 + 3.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.7
         Q2 + 6.2 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 + 7.4 + 0.7 + 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.0
         Q3 + 2.3 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.6
 Long-term lending
2019         Q3 + 30.0 + 18.0 + 21.3 + 15.4 + 5.9 + 12.7 + 5.3 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 2.7
         Q4 + 28.1 + 20.1 + 20.1 + 13.9 + 6.2 + 12.6 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.3
2020         Q1 + 25.1 + 15.6 + 17.3 + 12.4 + 4.9 + 10.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.4
         Q2 + 40.4 + 17.8 + 20.4 + 13.7 + 6.8 + 24.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 3.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.2
         Q3 + 33.9 + 21.7 + 26.0 + 18.8 + 7.2 + 12.7 + 6.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.7
*Excluding lending by foreign branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
756.0 237.0 47.3 196.9 432.6 48.0 1,228.4 994.8 233.7 172.9 8.3 15.0 3.7 2018
794.7 252.9 50.9 200.6 444.7 48.3 1,272.5 1,035.0 237.5 176.4 8.5 15.4 3.8 2019          Sep.
803.6 264.5 51.1 193.9 447.5 47.6 1,288.4 1,050.4 238.0 176.5 7.9 15.9 3.9          Dec.
816.6 273.2 54.2 196.6 450.6 48.0 1,301.0 1,062.8 238.2 178.0 7.9 16.0 3.9 2020          Mar.
822.2 277.8 55.9 198.5 447.1 48.1 1,319.4 1,083.5 235.9 176.9 7.3 16.2 3.9          June833.5 281.7 55.1 201.9 458.9 48.1 1,335.9 1,098.8 237.0 178.3 7.5 16.0 3.9          Sep.
Short-term lending
55.9 12.0 8.1 10.4 24.0 5.2 31.2 3.1 28.2 1.5 8.3 0.5 − 201863.5 13.5 9.5 10.7 24.3 5.4 31.5 3.4 28.1 1.6 8.5 0.5 0.0 2019          Sep.
65.0 14.4 9.7 10.2 23.9 4.9 31.6 3.3 28.2 1.3 7.9 0.7 0.0          Dec.
69.0 14.8 12.2 11.1 23.8 5.2 30.0 3.4 26.6 1.4 7.9 0.7 0.0 2020          Mar.
65.5 14.8 11.9 11.4 21.8 4.7 29.0 3.4 25.6 1.4 7.3 0.7 0.0          June63.1 15.6 10.7 10.9 21.7 4.3 29.3 3.5 25.8 1.3 7.5 0.6 0.0          Sep.
Medium-term lending
77.5 14.8 9.9 21.3 31.5 3.5 79.6 19.9 59.7 56.4 − 0.5 0.1 201885.1 17.5 11.2 22.6 32.0 3.7 81.3 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 2019          Sep.
85.7 18.1 11.0 22.9 31.9 3.5 81.4 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0          Dec.
87.4 19.1 11.6 23.3 31.9 3.6 81.2 19.8 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 2020          Mar.
89.0 19.7 12.6 23.5 31.6 3.5 80.4 20.0 60.4 56.9 − 0.6 0.0          June89.6 20.0 12.6 24.1 31.9 3.6 80.6 20.0 60.6 57.2 − 0.5 0.0          Sep.
Long-term lending
622.6 210.2 29.2 165.3 377.2 39.3 1,117.6 971.8 145.8 115.0 − 14.0 3.7 2018646.1 222.0 30.3 167.3 388.4 39.2 1,159.7 1,011.7 147.9 116.7 − 14.4 3.7 2019          Sep.
652.9 232.0 30.4 160.9 391.7 39.1 1,175.5 1,027.1 148.3 117.1 − 14.7 3.8          Dec.
660.2 239.3 30.5 162.3 394.9 39.3 1,189.8 1,039.5 150.2 118.6 − 14.8 3.8 2020          Mar.
667.7 243.3 31.4 163.6 393.7 39.9 1,210.0 1,060.1 149.9 118.5 − 14.9 3.8          June680.8 246.1 31.8 166.9 405.3 40.1 1,226.0 1,075.4 150.7 119.8 − 15.0 3.9          Sep.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 9.0 + 5.6 − 0.7 + 1.2 + 3.6 − 0.3 + 17.9 + 16.3 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 2019          Q3
+ 9.1 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 15.9 + 15.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Q4
+ 13.0 + 4.9 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 0.5 + 12.6 + 12.3 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 10.0 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 13.4 + 15.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 7.0 + 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.2 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 21.7 + 20.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Short-term lending
+ 0.5 + 1.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 2019          Q3
+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q4
+ 4.0 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2020          Q1
− 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 −          Q2− 2.6 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Medium-term lending
+ 0.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.0 − − 0.0 − 0.0 2019          Q3
+ 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0          Q4
+ 1.8 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 1.8 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
Long-term lending
+ 7.6 + 3.7 − 0.0 + 0.9 + 3.9 − 0.2 + 17.4 + 16.0 + 1.4 + 1.5 − − 0.1 − 0.0 2019          Q3
+ 7.0 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 15.5 + 15.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
+ 7.3 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.2 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.8 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 11.6 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 5.7 + 0.6 + 15.7 + 15.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 8.6 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 3.0 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 21.1 + 20.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excluding
to and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2017 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 207.6 645.6 57.3 588.3 582.9 43.7 30.0 16.3 1.6
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.5
2019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2019         Oct. 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 211.7 614.3 51.8 562.6 577.2 34.1 32.5 15.1 0.5
         Nov. 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 207.5 613.4 52.4 561.0 575.7 33.8 32.5 14.9 0.5
         Dec. 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.2
2020         Jan. 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 208.4 611.3 52.4 558.9 570.7 32.6 32.3 14.8 0.5
         Feb. 3,675.9 2,254.4 820.8 212.2 608.6 52.2 556.4 568.5 32.2 32.8 14.6 0.3
         Mar. 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 212.7 602.8 50.1 552.7 564.5 31.8 32.5 14.6 0.6
         Apr. 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 206.0 595.6 48.5 547.1 563.8 31.1 32.8 14.4 1.5
         May 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 214.1 590.6 47.1 543.5 563.6 30.7 33.3 14.4 0.3
         June 3,766.3 2,385.3 788.2 206.7 581.5 44.3 537.2 562.6 30.3 33.4 14.3 0.2
         July 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 215.6 583.1 46.6 536.5 560.9 29.9 33.8 14.3 0.2
         Aug. 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 215.0 587.9 45.8 542.0 560.6 29.6 34.0 14.4 0.5
         Sep. 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 210.1 591.9 48.1 543.8 560.1 29.3 34.3 14.3 0.4
Changes*
2018 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 3.5 − 7.3 − 0.1 − 7.2 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 − 1.4 − 1.2
2019 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 0.8 − 24.9 − 4.1 − 20.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.3
2019         Oct. + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 3.1 − 1.2 + 0.0 − 1.2 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 4.2 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0
         Dec. − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 4.8 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
2020         Jan. − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 17.7 + 19.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2
         Mar. + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 2.1 − 3.7 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr. + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 6.8 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.9
         May + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 + 8.1 − 4.9 − 1.3 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2
         June − 9.0 + 8.8 − 16.4 − 7.4 − 9.0 − 2.8 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 37.1 + 28.7 + 10.5 + 8.9 + 1.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 17.4 + 13.6 + 4.3 − 0.6 + 4.9 − 0.7 + 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2
         Sep. + 13.4 + 15.1 − 0.9 − 4.9 + 4.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
Domestic government End of year or month*
2017 201.7 58.9 134.7 65.8 69.0 27.4 41.5 3.6 4.4 25.7 2.3 −
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2019         Oct. 234.5 66.0 160.7 82.5 78.2 25.2 53.0 3.6 4.2 24.7 2.3 0.2
         Nov. 245.6 74.7 163.2 83.9 79.3 26.4 52.8 3.6 4.2 24.7 2.2 0.2
         Dec. 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.2
2020         Jan. 236.9 69.1 160.5 81.6 78.9 25.7 53.2 3.2 4.1 24.4 2.2 0.2
         Feb. 247.0 74.8 164.8 86.7 78.1 25.4 52.7 3.3 4.1 25.0 2.2 0.2
         Mar. 238.6 72.7 158.6 83.1 75.5 23.8 51.7 3.2 4.1 25.0 2.1 0.2
         Apr. 228.7 73.9 147.8 75.1 72.7 22.8 50.0 3.1 4.0 25.3 2.1 0.2
         May 232.1 81.1 143.9 73.5 70.4 22.0 48.4 3.1 4.0 26.0 2.1 0.2
         June 221.4 75.4 139.1 75.0 64.1 18.5 45.5 2.9 3.9 25.8 2.1 0.2
         July 226.5 76.7 143.0 73.4 69.6 20.3 49.3 2.8 3.9 25.9 2.1 0.2
         Aug. 237.6 79.4 151.3 76.1 75.2 19.4 55.8 2.9 3.9 26.0 2.1 0.2
         Sep. 236.6 77.4 152.6 72.4 80.2 21.5 58.7 2.8 3.8 26.1 2.1 0.2
Changes*
2018 + 16.9 + 3.6 + 13.5 + 2.0 + 11.5 + 1.1 + 10.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2019 + 17.1 + 11.8 + 5.8 + 7.8 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.2
2019         Oct. − 8.3 − 6.0 − 2.3 − 2.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0
         Nov. + 11.1 + 8.7 + 2.5 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Dec. − 8.5 + 0.0 − 8.3 − 7.9 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
2020         Jan. − 0.2 − 5.6 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Feb. + 10.1 + 5.7 + 4.3 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − −
         Mar. − 8.4 − 2.1 − 6.3 − 3.6 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Apr. − 9.9 + 1.2 − 10.8 − 8.0 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.3 + 7.2 − 3.9 − 1.6 − 2.4 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 −
         June − 10.7 − 5.7 − 4.8 + 1.5 − 6.3 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         July + 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.9 − 1.6 + 5.5 + 1.8 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug. + 11.1 + 2.8 + 8.3 + 2.7 + 5.6 − 0.9 + 6.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Sep. − 0.8 − 2.1 + 1.3 − 3.7 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2017 3,219.2 1,882.1 718.5 141.9 576.6 29.9 546.8 579.3 39.3 4.3 14.0 1.62018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.52019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2019         Oct. 3,409.9 2,141.1 665.4 129.2 536.1 26.6 509.5 573.6 29.9 7.9 12.9 0.3
         Nov. 3,429.2 2,169.8 657.7 123.6 534.1 25.9 508.2 572.1 29.6 7.8 12.8 0.4         Dec. 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.0
2020         Jan. 3,421.2 2,166.0 659.2 126.8 532.4 26.7 505.7 567.5 28.5 7.9 12.6 0.4
         Feb. 3,428.9 2,179.6 656.0 125.5 530.5 26.8 503.7 565.2 28.1 7.7 12.4 0.2         Mar. 3,477.9 2,232.2 656.9 129.6 527.3 26.2 501.0 561.2 27.6 7.5 12.4 0.5
         Apr. 3,513.1 2,271.6 653.8 130.9 522.8 25.7 497.1 560.7 27.1 7.4 12.3 1.4
         May 3,543.3 2,295.2 660.9 140.6 520.2 25.2 495.1 560.5 26.7 7.4 12.3 0.2         June 3,545.0 2,309.9 649.1 131.7 517.4 25.8 491.6 559.7 26.3 7.5 12.3 0.1
         July 3,577.0 2,337.3 655.6 142.1 513.5 26.3 487.2 558.1 26.0 7.9 12.2 0.1
         Aug. 3,583.2 2,348.2 651.6 138.8 512.7 26.4 486.3 557.8 25.7 8.0 12.3 0.3         Sep. 3,597.6 2,365.4 649.4 137.7 511.7 26.6 485.1 557.3 25.5 8.2 12.2 0.2
Changes*
2018 + 100.8 + 135.7 − 24.3 − 5.5 − 18.8 − 1.3 − 17.5 − 4.3 − 6.3 + 4.1 − 1.3 − 1.22019 + 105.4 + 144.0 − 31.5 − 8.6 − 22.9 − 1.5 − 21.4 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.4
2019         Oct. + 23.7 + 27.7 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 − 1.3 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. + 19.3 + 28.7 − 7.7 − 5.7 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.4 − 1.5 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec. − 5.3 − 8.2 + 3.7 + 3.1 + 0.6 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
2020         Jan. − 2.7 + 4.3 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 7.7 + 13.6 − 3.2 − 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 49.0 + 52.6 + 0.9 + 4.1 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr. + 35.2 + 39.5 − 3.2 + 1.2 − 4.4 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.9
         May + 27.1 + 20.6 + 7.1 + 9.7 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.2         June + 1.7 + 14.5 − 11.6 − 8.9 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 32.0 + 27.4 + 6.5 + 10.4 − 3.9 + 0.5 − 4.4 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 6.3 + 10.8 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 14.2 + 17.2 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 1.0 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2017 1,039.6 558.9 461.0 92.9 368.2 17.2 351.0 6.8 12.8 2.7 11.6 1.62018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.52019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2019         Oct. 1,045.5 622.3 405.2 82.8 322.4 15.5 306.9 7.0 11.0 2.4 10.4 0.3
         Nov. 1,036.2 620.2 398.2 77.9 320.3 14.9 305.4 6.9 10.9 2.4 10.3 0.4         Dec. 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.0
2020         Jan. 1,030.8 616.3 397.5 81.7 315.8 15.4 300.3 6.6 10.5 2.4 10.2 0.4
         Feb. 1,020.4 608.8 394.7 81.2 313.5 15.6 297.9 6.5 10.4 2.4 10.0 0.2         Mar. 1,080.3 665.3 398.2 87.3 310.9 15.4 295.5 6.5 10.3 2.3 10.0 0.5
         Apr. 1,087.9 674.4 397.0 89.9 307.2 15.1 292.0 6.2 10.2 2.3 9.8 1.4
         May 1,095.7 676.0 403.5 99.2 304.2 14.5 289.7 6.2 10.1 2.4 9.9 0.2         June 1,090.9 683.7 391.2 90.0 301.2 14.5 286.6 6.2 9.9 2.4 9.8 0.1
         July 1,108.0 694.4 397.6 100.6 297.1 14.5 282.6 6.1 9.8 2.4 9.8 0.1
         Aug. 1,108.0 698.2 393.8 97.5 296.3 14.6 281.6 6.1 9.9 2.3 9.8 0.3         Sep. 1,114.5 707.3 391.4 96.5 294.9 14.7 280.2 6.0 9.8 2.3 9.7 0.2
Changes*
2018 − 3.2 + 25.1 − 27.2 − 5.9 − 21.3 + 0.3 − 21.7 + 0.2 − 1.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 1.22019 − 3.4 + 30.4 − 32.8 − 4.8 − 28.0 − 1.6 − 26.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.4
2019         Oct. + 12.1 + 13.5 − 1.2 + 0.6 − 1.7 − 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.2
         Nov. − 9.4 − 2.2 − 7.0 − 4.9 − 2.1 − 0.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1         Dec. − 4.7 − 5.8 + 1.5 + 3.2 − 1.7 + 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.4
2020         Jan. − 0.7 + 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. − 10.5 − 7.6 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 60.0 + 56.6 + 3.5 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr. + 7.6 + 9.2 − 1.2 + 2.5 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.9
         May + 4.8 − 1.4 + 6.4 + 9.4 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2         June − 4.8 + 7.5 − 12.1 − 9.2 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 17.0 + 10.7 + 6.4 + 10.5 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Aug. − 1.7 + 2.1 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 7.7 + 10.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.4 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
 
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestic
households
and Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2017 2,179.7 1,323.1 1,286.6 223.4 907.6 155.7 36.5 257.5 243.5 23.4 182.9 37.1
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.7
2019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.3
2020         Apr. 2,425.3 1,597.1 1,556.7 275.9 1,117.7 163.0 40.5 256.7 243.9 19.2 188.9 35.8
         May 2,447.6 1,619.2 1,578.5 279.0 1,134.8 164.6 40.7 257.4 244.2 19.4 189.0 35.8
         June 2,454.0 1,626.2 1,585.3 275.2 1,143.8 166.3 40.9 257.9 244.6 19.9 189.2 35.5
         July 2,469.0 1,642.9 1,602.0 282.4 1,154.4 165.2 40.9 258.0 244.5 19.9 189.2 35.4
         Aug. 2,475.2 1,650.0 1,608.8 284.2 1,160.2 164.5 41.1 257.8 244.2 19.7 190.3 34.2
         Sep. 2,483.1 1,658.1 1,616.7 283.1 1,169.7 164.0 41.4 258.0 244.3 19.5 190.6 34.2
Changes*
2018 + 104.0 + 110.5 + 109.7 + 20.3 + 83.1 + 6.2 + 0.9 + 3.0 + 3.2 − 2.3 + 5.8 − 0.3
2019 + 108.8 + 113.6 + 111.8 + 18.5 + 88.7 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.7
2020         Apr. + 27.6 + 30.3 + 29.9 + 9.0 + 19.0 + 1.9 + 0.4 − 2.0 − 1.6 − 0.6 − 0.9 − 0.1
         May + 22.3 + 22.0 + 21.8 + 3.1 + 17.1 + 1.6 + 0.3 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0
         June + 6.5 + 7.0 + 6.9 − 1.4 + 7.6 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.5 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.2 − 0.3
         July + 15.0 + 16.7 + 16.7 + 7.2 + 9.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug. + 8.0 + 8.7 + 8.4 + 1.7 + 6.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2
         Sep. + 6.5 + 6.8 + 6.5 − 2.2 + 9.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
 
 
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2017 201.7 8.7 4.3 1.5 2.8 0.1 12.9 37.5 11.9 9.9 14.5 1.3 12.7
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.0
2019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.1
2020         Apr. 228.7 11.1 5.5 1.4 4.2 0.1 11.6 68.4 26.1 26.4 15.1 0.9 13.7
         May 232.1 10.8 5.4 1.3 4.1 0.1 11.6 68.7 26.8 26.0 15.0 0.9 14.4
         June 221.4 11.8 6.2 1.5 4.1 0.1 11.4 63.8 23.1 25.2 14.7 0.9 14.4
         July 226.5 20.1 5.9 2.5 11.6 0.1 11.3 60.7 23.8 21.6 14.5 0.8 14.6
         Aug. 237.6 29.8 5.7 5.3 18.8 0.1 11.4 59.6 23.2 21.1 14.4 0.8 14.7
         Sep. 236.6 39.0 6.1 6.9 25.9 0.0 11.5 60.0 24.6 20.2 14.5 0.8 14.7
Changes*
2018 + 16.9 + 2.1 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 1.4 − 0.0 − 0.7 + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 0.1 + 0.5
2019 + 17.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.0
2020         Apr. − 9.9 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.3 + 3.1 − 1.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3
         May + 3.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 − − 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.8 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.7
         June − 10.7 + 1.0 + 0.8 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 4.9 − 3.8 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.1
         July + 5.1 + 8.3 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 7.5 − − 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.8 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
         Aug. + 11.1 + 9.8 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 7.2 − + 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1
         Sep. − 0.8 + 9.2 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 7.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
14.0 49.0 208.5 12.7 195.8 572.4 564.6 7.9 26.6 1.7 2.4 − 201713.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 201813.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 − 2019
12.8 41.1 215.7 10.6 205.1 554.5 547.7 6.8 16.9 5.1 2.4 − 2020          Apr.
13.2 41.4 216.0 10.6 205.4 554.3 547.6 6.7 16.6 5.0 2.4 −          May13.3 41.6 216.3 11.2 205.0 553.5 546.8 6.7 16.4 5.1 2.4 −          June
13.5 41.6 216.4 11.8 204.7 552.0 545.4 6.6 16.1 5.5 2.5 −          July
13.6 41.3 216.5 11.8 204.6 551.7 545.1 6.6 15.8 5.7 2.5 −          Aug.13.7 41.2 216.8 11.9 204.9 551.3 544.7 6.6 15.7 5.8 2.5 −          Sep.
Changes*
− 0.2 + 0.4 + 2.6 − 1.6 + 4.2 − 4.5 − 3.9 − 0.6 − 5.0 + 4.0 + 0.0 − 2018− 0.4 − 3.8 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 2019
− 0.4 − 1.3 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 2020          Apr.
+ 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 −          May+ 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          June
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          July
+ 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Aug.+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Sep.
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
61.6 33.2 8.8 14.1 5.5 0.0 93.8 9.5 45.6 37.6 1.1 − 201765.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 201865.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 − 2019
57.5 30.3 8.3 13.6 5.3 0.0 91.7 12.0 39.0 39.8 0.8 − 2020          Apr.
62.3 34.8 8.8 13.4 5.2 0.0 90.2 14.1 37.4 37.9 0.9 −          May58.8 31.8 8.6 13.3 5.1 0.0 87.0 14.4 39.7 32.1 0.8 −          June
59.4 32.8 8.4 13.1 5.1 0.0 86.2 14.1 40.8 30.5 0.8 −          July
62.4 35.6 8.6 13.1 5.1 0.0 85.8 14.9 41.1 28.9 0.8 −          Aug.56.9 30.8 8.3 12.9 5.0 0.0 80.7 15.9 37.1 27.0 0.8 −          Sep.
Changes*
+ 3.6 + 1.9 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 9.9 − 0.0 − 0.8 +10.8 − 0.1 − 2018− 0.8 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2019
− 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 10.2 − 1.7 − 5.8 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2020          Apr.
+ 4.7 + 4.6 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 − − 1.5 + 2.0 − 1.6 − 2.0 + 0.1 −          May− 3.5 − 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 3.2 + 0.3 + 2.3 − 5.8 − 0.1 −          June
+ 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − − 0.7 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 0.0 −          July
+ 3.0 + 2.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 −          Aug.− 5.5 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 5.1 + 1.0 − 4.1 − 2.0 + 0.0 −          Sep.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
 
 
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturities
Special Special At 3 on of more
savings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2017 590.3 582.9 541.0 348.3 41.9 30.3 7.4 6.5 2.7 52.0 43.7 31.4 8.2
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.9
2019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.6
2020         May 570.0 563.6 532.9 296.2 30.8 21.3 6.4 5.8 0.1 32.6 30.7 23.6 1.9
         June 569.0 562.6 532.8 295.4 29.8 20.3 6.4 5.8 0.1 32.1 30.3 23.3 1.9
         July 567.3 560.9 531.7 293.2 29.2 19.8 6.4 5.8 0.1 31.8 29.9 23.1 1.9
         Aug. 567.0 560.6 531.8 291.2 28.8 19.4 6.3 5.8 0.1 31.5 29.6 22.9 1.9
         Sep. 566.5 560.1 531.7 290.3 28.4 19.1 6.3 5.7 0.1 31.1 29.3 22.7 1.9
Changes*
2018 − 4.7 − 4.3 + 1.2 − 15.9 − 5.5 − 3.2 − 0.5 − 0.3 . − 9.1 − 6.5 − 3.6 − 2.6
2019 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 21.3 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 . − 5.3 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.2
2020         May − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 2.8 − 0.4 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.7
         June − 1.1 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 1.0 − 1.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.3 − 0.0
         July − 1.7 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 2.2 − 0.6 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Aug. − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Sep. − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 
specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
 
 
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiable
rate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2017 1,066.5 147.2 26.0 370.4 89.8 107.4 4.1 32.9 6.4 926.2 0.4 0.2 30.5 0.5
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.4
2019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.4
2020         May 1,141.5 121.0 24.9 337.5 80.7 97.4 1.8 27.4 3.6 1,016.7 0.8 0.7 31.4 0.4
         June 1,148.1 126.1 27.7 344.5 86.5 107.0 1.7 27.1 3.4 1,014.0 0.8 0.7 31.4 0.4
         July 1,128.7 120.2 25.2 327.9 77.2 94.8 1.8 25.7 3.4 1,008.2 0.9 0.7 33.3 0.4
         Aug. 1,127.8 118.8 12.5 328.6 93.6 98.2 1.8 25.6 3.3 1,003.9 1.0 0.8 34.5 0.4
         Sep. 1,153.2 119.6 12.4 343.7 106.9 111.0 1.8 25.7 3.3 1,016.5 1.0 0.8 35.2 0.4
Changes*
2018 + 33.6 − 7.8 + 1.5 − 14.3 − 1.6 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 10.5 − 0.3 + 45.3 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
2019 + 40.6 − 15.9 + 1.1 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 11.5 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 1.9 + 27.4 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.3
2020         May − 4.5 + 1.3 − 0.4 − 10.9 − 3.7 − 4.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0
         June + 6.6 + 5.1 + 2.7 + 6.9 + 5.8 + 9.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 2.7 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0
         July − 18.2 − 4.6 − 2.5 − 16.6 − 9.3 − 10.9 + 0.1 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 −
         Aug. − 1.0 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.2 −
         Sep. + 25.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 15.1 + 13.3 + 12.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
November 2020
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2018 20 233.4 39.4 0.0 15.7 11.9 110.2 25.7 25.8 2.8 20.4 174.3 10.0 3.3 11.7 86.6
2019 19 237.9 34.0 0.0 16.2 11.4 117.6 28.0 25.9 2.9 21.0 179.7 9.8 1.8 12.0 88.7
2020         July 18 241.1 32.0 0.0 16.3 11.1 121.6 30.1 25.8 2.9 25.0 179.5 8.5 1.7 12.3 6.4
         Aug. 18 241.2 31.3 0.0 16.4 11.0 122.1 30.4 25.7 2.9 25.0 179.7 8.3 1.7 12.3 5.6         Sep. 18 242.1 31.4 0.0 16.1 11.0 123.0 30.7 25.5 2.9 25.4 179.9 8.4 1.7 12.3 6.1
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         July 10 166.8 16.5 − 6.9 8.2 94.7 25.7 11.4 1.7 22.3 116.4 8.1 1.7 8.4 4.1
         Aug. 10 166.6 15.8 − 6.9 8.2 95.1 25.9 11.4 1.7 22.2 116.5 8.0 1.7 8.4 3.8         Sep. 10 167.7 16.1 − 6.8 8.1 95.8 26.2 11.3 1.7 22.8 116.6 8.1 1.7 8.4 3.9
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         July 8 74.3 15.5 0.0 9.4 2.8 26.9 4.4 14.3 1.2 2.7 63.1 0.4 − 3.8 2.3
         Aug. 8 74.5 15.4 0.0 9.4 2.8 27.0 4.5 14.3 1.2 2.8 63.2 0.3 − 3.8 1.8         Sep. 8 74.4 15.4 0.0 9.3 2.8 27.1 4.5 14.2 1.2 2.6 63.3 0.3 − 3.8 2.2
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2018 27.0 2.1 7.4 45.2 25.1 40.2 15.9 4.3 4.8 3.7 19.5 16.6 6.8 6.6 5.5 0.2
2019 27.3 2.1 7.5 49.2 25.8 42.9 16.4 4.2 4.6 3.6 21.9 18.1 6.5 7.2 5.4 0.2
2020         July 2.1 0.0 0.9 4.7 2.4 4.3 1.6 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.3 18.6 6.4 0.6 0.0
         Aug. 2.0 0.0 0.5 4.1 2.2 3.6 1.4 0.3 0.3 0.3 1.9 18.7 6.5 0.5 0.0         Sep. 2.2 0.0 0.6 4.3 2.1 4.0 1.5 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.2 18.6 6.4 0.5 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         July 1.4 0.0 0.4 3.5 1.7 3.3 1.2 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.9 14.0 3.5 0.4 0.0
         Aug. 1.3 0.0 0.3 3.0 1.5 2.9 1.0 0.3 0.2 0.2 1.6 13.9 3.5 0.4 0.0         Sep. 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.2 1.5 3.0 1.0 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.8 14.0 3.5 0.4 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         July 0.8 0.0 0.5 1.2 0.7 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.5 4.7 2.9 0.1 0.0
         Aug. 0.6 0.0 0.2 1.1 0.8 0.8 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 4.8 3.0 0.1 0.0         Sep. 0.7 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.7 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.7 2.9 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2017 52 188 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2019 Nov. 52 199 1,582.4 418.6 403.2 219.9 183.2 15.5 581.6 481.8 20.0 461.8 99.8 582.2 417.1
Dec. 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 Jan. 52 198 1,597.9 431.9 413.6 224.2 189.4 18.3 566.2 470.8 19.9 450.8 95.4 599.8 433.8
Feb. 52 199 1,725.2 445.3 427.1 240.5 186.6 18.2 583.5 493.8 19.5 474.3 89.7 696.4 534.6
Mar. 52 199 1,888.5 483.7 465.3 248.9 216.4 18.4 590.4 495.8 20.5 475.3 94.6 814.4 650.7
Apr. 52 199 1,875.4 473.2 455.1 261.5 193.7 18.0 584.5 492.6 20.5 472.1 91.9 817.8 646.0
May 52 198 1,823.5 442.7 425.6 248.0 177.6 17.2 571.6 475.7 19.6 456.1 95.9 809.2 632.1
June 52 198 1,780.3 440.7 426.2 250.4 175.8 14.5 559.5 463.9 19.6 444.3 95.6 780.1 608.1
July 51 206 1,774.6 438.1 424.1 264.7 159.4 14.0 546.4 452.9 19.7 433.3 93.5 790.1 625.7
Aug. 51 206 1,684.1 419.5 405.5 250.8 154.8 14.0 535.1 437.8 19.2 418.6 97.2 729.5 563.8
Changes *
2018 –3 –5 –250.2 –101.0 –102.0 –5.0 –97.0 +1.0 –24.8 –27.1 +7.0 –34.1 +2.4 –148.2 –102.6
2019 +3 +15 +51.5 –4.7 –7.7 +23.9 –31.6 +2.9 +12.6 +0.9 –0.3 +1.2 +11.7 + 30.6 +49.6
2019 Dec. – –1 –127.9 –9.2 –11.9 –3.9 –8.0 +2.7 –41.5 –40.8 –0.3 –40.4 –0.7 – 69.2 –52.7
2020 Jan. – – +144.8 +24.6 +24.4 +8.1 +16.3 +0.2 +31.9 +34.7 +0.3 +34.4 –2.8 + 88.3 +72.0
Feb. – +1 +126.9 +12.9 +13.0 +16.4 –3.4 –0.1 +16.2 +22.0 –0.5 +22.5 –5.9 + 96.2 +100.2
Mar. – – +163.4 +38.8 +38.6 +8.4 +30.2 +0.2 +8.6 +3.5 +1.0 +2.5 +5.1 +118.1 +116.4
Apr. – – –13.6 –12.1 –11.7 +12.6 –24.2 –0.5 –9.6 –6.3 +0.1 –6.4 –3.2 + 2.8 – 6.4
May – –1 –50.5 –27.0 –26.4 –13.5 –12.9 –0.6 –4.4 –9.4 –1.0 –8.4 +5.0 – 7.1 – 9.0
June – – –42.8 –1.2 +1.4 +2.4 –1.0 –2.7 –9.8 –9.9 +0.0 –9.9 +0.1 – 28.7 –22.8
July –1 +9 –3.1 +2.4 +2.6 +14.3 –11.7 –0.2 +0.7 +0.8 +0.1 +0.7 –0.1 + 12.6 +26.8
Aug. – – –90.2 –17.9 –17.9 –13.9 –4.0 –0.1 –9.5 –13.5 –0.4 –13.1 +4.1 – 60.2 –60.6
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 –
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 –
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 –
2019 Nov. 15 41 237.2 54.2 48.3 18.6 29.6 5.9 136.2 113.1 14.1 99.1 23.1 46.8 –
Dec. 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 –
2020 Jan. 15 40 240.2 52.4 47.0 20.1 26.9 5.5 141.0 117.5 14.0 103.4 23.6 46.8 –
Feb. 15 40 247.0 57.7 52.0 20.3 31.7 5.7 141.4 117.6 14.0 103.5 23.9 47.8 –
Mar. 15 40 246.2 55.7 49.3 19.5 29.9 6.4 143.9 121.7 15.1 106.7 22.1 46.7 –
Apr. 14 39 244.4 50.8 44.2 19.7 24.5 6.6 143.9 120.6 15.4 105.3 23.3 49.6 –
May 14 39 245.7 52.1 45.9 19.4 26.5 6.2 142.9 119.2 15.6 103.6 23.7 50.8 –
June 13 38 247.4 53.5 47.2 20.9 26.3 6.4 143.1 118.3 15.1 103.2 24.8 50.7 –
July 13 37 238.4 46.0 40.3 19.9 20.4 5.7 141.2 115.8 14.8 101.1 25.4 51.2 –
Aug. 12 36 237.6 46.8 41.2 19.6 21.6 5.6 140.9 115.9 14.6 101.3 25.0 49.8 –
Changes *
2018 –3 –7 –42.2 –20.9 –19.9 –4.9 –15.1 –1.0 –14.2 –11.6 –8.4 –3.2 –2.6 – 7.0 –
2019 –2 –2 –7.2 +0.4 +0.5 –1.8 +2.3 –0.2 +1.6 +3.5 +0.5 +3.0 –1.9 – 9.1 –
2019 Dec. – – –1.0 –1.2 –1.2 –0.3 –0.9 –0.0 +3.2 +3.4 +0.3 +3.1 –0.2 – 3.0 –
2020 Jan. – –1 +4.0 –0.6 –0.2 +1.7 –2.0 –0.4 +1.5 +0.8 –0.3 +1.2 +0.7 + 3.0 –
Feb. – – +6.4 +5.1 +4.9 +0.3 +4.6 +0.2 +0.3 –0.1 –0.0 –0.0 +0.3 + 1.0 –
Mar. – – –0.6 –2.1 –2.7 –0.9 –1.8 +0.7 +2.6 +4.3 +1.1 +3.2 –1.7 – 1.1 –
Apr. –1 –1 –2.5 –5.2 –5.3 +0.2 –5.5 +0.2 –0.3 –1.4 +0.3 –1.7 +1.1 + 3.0 –
May – – +3.0 +2.0 +2.3 –0.3 +2.5 –0.3 –0.2 –0.6 +0.2 –0.8 +0.4 + 1.1 –
June –1 –1 +2.0 +1.6 +1.4 +1.5 –0.1 +0.2 +0.4 –0.7 –0.5 –0.2 +1.2 – 0.1 –
July – –1 –5.8 –5.9 –5.5 –0.9 –4.6 –0.3 –0.5 –1.0 –0.3 –0.7 +0.5 + 0.6 –
Aug. –1 –1 –0.5 +1.0 +1.0 –0.3 +1.4 –0.0 –0.1 +0.2 –0.2 +0.4 –0.3 – 1.4 –
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
1,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
945.8 644.9 465.2 179.7 300.9 14.9 12.2 2.7 286.0 107.3 53.6 475.8 416.2 2019 Nov.
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 Dec.
955.1 659.0 468.1 190.9 296.1 13.6 10.8 2.7 282.5 106.3 54.1 482.4 432.8 2020 Jan.
975.4 660.5 471.1 189.4 314.9 13.7 10.7 3.0 301.2 110.1 54.2 585.5 533.6 Feb.
1,030.8 718.6 458.6 260.0 312.3 15.1 12.0 3.1 297.2 97.2 54.7 705.7 650.4 Mar.
1,028.3 725.0 474.8 250.2 303.4 14.6 11.9 2.7 288.7 92.2 55.0 699.9 644.4 Apr.
994.0 695.4 484.1 211.3 298.7 15.3 13.1 2.2 283.3 93.5 54.7 681.2 630.2 May
979.1 680.0 484.2 195.8 299.1 14.5 12.6 1.9 284.6 85.7 54.3 661.3 607.6 June
959.1 661.2 468.6 192.6 297.9 17.3 15.6 1.8 280.6 80.2 53.5 681.8 624.2 July
943.2 655.1 460.9 194.2 288.1 14.4 12.7 1.7 273.7 74.9 52.4 613.6 563.1 Aug.
Changes *
–113.1 –84.7 +56.0 –140.8 – 28.3 – 4.6 – 4.4 – 0.2 –23.8 – 9.4 + 2.0 –139.7 – 105.7 2018
– 7.2 + 2.4 +24.4 –22.0 – 9.6 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 –10.9 + 3.0 – 0.6 + 52.0 + 58.5 2019
–49.6 –29.3 –12.0 –17.2 –20.3 – 2.2 – 2.1 – 0.1 –18.1 –11.2 –0.2 – 64.8 – 55.1 2019 Dec.
+61.0 +45.4 +14.9 +30.5 +15.6 + 0.8 + 0.8 + 0.1 +14.8 +11.6 +0.8 + 71.5 + 71.7 2020 Jan.
+19.7 +0.9 +3.0 –2.1 +18.7 + 0.1 – 0.1 + 0.2 +18.6 + 3.4 +0.1 +103.1 + 100.8 Feb.
+56.0 +58.5 –12.5 +71.0 – 2.5 + 1.4 + 1.5 – 0.1 – 3.9 –12.8 +0.5 +120.2 + 116.8 Mar.
– 4.6 +4.5 +16.3 –11.8 – 9.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 – 8.6 – 5.6 +0.3 – 5.8 – 6.1 Apr.
–29.9 –25.4 +9.3 –34.7 – 4.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 – 0.4 – 5.2 + 2.8 –0.3 – 18.6 – 14.2 May
–14.0 –14.5 +0.1 –14.6 + 0.5 – 0.9 – 0.5 – 0.4 + 1.4 – 7.4 –0.5 – 20.0 – 22.6 June
–13.9 –13.2 –15.6 +2.4 – 0.7 + 2.9 + 3.0 – 0.1 – 3.6 – 2.8 –0.8 + 20.5 + 16.6 July
–15.0 –5.1 –7.7 +2.5 – 9.8 – 2.9 – 2.9 – 0.0 – 6.9 – 5.0 –1.1 – 68.2 – 61.1 Aug.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 –2017
171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 –2018
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 –2019
167.3 70.7 36.7 34.0 96.6 6.9 4.2 2.7 89.7 16.1 22.1 31.6 –2019 Nov.
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 – Dec.
170.1 70.5 37.3 33.2 99.6 6.4 3.6 2.7 93.2 16.5 21.7 32.0 –2020 Jan.
176.3 73.5 38.6 35.0 102.7 6.8 4.1 2.7 95.9 16.4 21.7 32.7 – Feb.
176.1 75.1 39.8 35.3 101.0 6.7 4.1 2.6 94.3 15.6 21.3 33.3 – Mar.
175.3 76.8 43.3 33.6 98.5 6.9 4.4 2.5 91.6 15.8 20.8 32.4 – Apr.
177.7 76.5 42.2 34.3 101.2 7.1 4.5 2.5 94.2 15.5 20.8 31.7 – May
178.8 74.8 41.0 33.7 104.1 6.8 4.3 2.5 97.3 16.4 20.8 31.4 – June
171.1 67.2 38.9 28.3 103.9 7.3 4.8 2.5 96.6 16.6 20.7 30.1 – July
171.1 66.1 38.1 28.0 105.0 7.1 4.6 2.5 97.9 16.5 20.6 29.4 – Aug.
Changes *
–37.4 –25.8 –13.7 –12.0 – 11.7 – 2.8 + 0.2 – 3.0 – 8.8 + 1.3 – 1.8 – 4.3 –2018
– 6.7 – 3.2 + 0.5 – 3.8 – 3.5 – 2.5 – 2.5 + 0.0 – 1.0 + 1.7 – 0.4 – 1.8 –2019
– 0.8 –1.5 –0.1 –1.4 + 0.8 – 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.0 – 0.1 –0.0 – 0.1 –2019 Dec.
+ 3.7 +1.4 +0.7 +0.8 + 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.5 + 0.5 –0.4 + 0.2 –2020 Jan.
+ 6.0 +2.9 +1.3 +1.6 + 3.0 + 0.4 + 0.5 – 0.1 + 2.6 – 0.1 –0.0 + 0.5 – Feb.
– 0.1 +1.6 +1.2 +0.4 – 1.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.8 –0.4 + 0.7 – Mar.
– 1.1 +1.5 +3.5 –2.0 – 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.9 + 0.2 –0.5 – 1.0 – Apr.
+ 3.4 +0.2 –1.1 +1.3 + 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 3.0 – 0.3 –0.0 – 0.2 – May
+ 1.4 –1.6 –1.1 –0.5 + 3.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.9 –0.0 – 0.2 – June
– 5.4 –6.4 –2.1 –4.3 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 –0.1 – 0.5 – July
+ 0.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.5 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.6 – Aug.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
November 2020
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.0
2015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.0
2016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.0
2017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.0
2018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.0
2019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020         Sep. 14,394.3 143.9 143.6 2,797.0 2,653.5 0.0
         Oct. . . . . . .
         Nov.  p ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 4
2015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 0
2016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 0
2017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 2
2018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 1
2019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020         Sep. 3,967,784 27.6 39,678 39,530 825,970 786,440 0
         Oct. . . . . . . .
         Nov.  p 4,006,632 ... 40,066 39,920 ... ... ...
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,312
2015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,578
2016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,859
2017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,699
2018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,658
2019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020         Sep. 8,125 6,138 3,051 12,822 7,404 103 1,885
         Oct. . . . . . . .
         Nov. 8,212 6,214 3,158 12,650 7,456 110 2,119
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,740
2015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,146
2016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,776
2017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,894
2018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,621
2019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020         Sep. 2,851,123 1,763 450,584 561,901 102,410
         Oct. . . . . .
         Nov. 2,883,892 1,662 443,559 561,169 116,350
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / base rates
% per annum
ECB interest rates Base rates
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2020 Oct. 14 1,010 1,010 0.00 - - - 7
Oct. 21 1,007 1,007 0.00 - - - 7
Oct. 28 1,036 1,036 0.00 - - - 7
Nov. 4 925 925 0.00 - - - 7
Nov. 11 583 583 0.00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2020 Sep. 3 794 794 2      … - - - 357
Oct. 1 510 510 2      … - - - 77
Oct. 8 1,008 1,008 2      … - - - 322
Oct. 29 92 92 2      … - - - 91
Nov. 5 747 747 2      … - - - 266
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2020 Apr. – 0.537 – 0.45 – 0.51 – 0.43 – 0.25 – 0.19 – 0.11
May – 0.542 – 0.46 – 0.51 – 0.46 – 0.27 – 0.14 – 0.08
June – 0.546 – 0.46 – 0.52 – 0.49 – 0.38 – 0.22 – 0.15
July – 0.550 – 0.46 – 0.53 – 0.51 – 0.44 – 0.35 – 0.28
Aug. – 0.553 – 0.47 – 0.53 – 0.52 – 0.48 – 0.43 – 0.36
Sep. – 0.554 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.49 – 0.46 – 0.41
Oct. – 0.554 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.54 – 0.51 – 0.49 – 0.47
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 untilSeptember 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. Since
October 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Sep. 0.21 59,625 1.15 217,918 0.01 65,179 0.85 27,581
Oct. 0.21 58,785 1.14 217,872 – 0.01 64,731 0.85 27,684
Nov. 0.22 57,815 1.12 217,794 – 0.02 63,482 0.85 27,757
Dec. 0.23 57,910 1.12 219,819 – 0.05 66,312 0.84 27,528
2020 Jan. 0.23 57,198 1.11 220,060 – 0.05 65,777 0.83 27,355
Feb. 0.23 56,142 1.10 220,286 – 0.05 65,820 0.84 26,651
Mar. 0.24 54,034 1.10 219,797 – 0.07 68,925 0.82 26,158
Apr. 0.24 52,567 1.09 219,117 – 0.07 71,964 0.82 25,694
May 0.24 53,093 1.08 219,267 – 0.08 80,523 0.83 24,937
June 0.25 53,752 1.07 218,668 – 0.05 77,282 0.85 24,172
July 0.26 53,945 1.06 218,177 – 0.08 86,703 0.90 22,652
Aug. 0.26 53,971 1.03 218,020 – 0.08 82,164 0.89 22,508
Sep. 0.26 54,068 1.02 218,212 – 0.10 82,940 0.92 23,489
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Sep. 2.16 4,636 1.75 26,538 2.27 1,250,520 7.23 51,134 3.46 87,317 3.71 315,907
Oct. 2.11 4,749 1.73 26,605 2.24 1,257,680 7.16 49,728 3.45 87,489 3.69 317,081
Nov. 2.07 4,787 1.71 26,726 2.22 1,265,217 7.13 48,412 3.44 87,638 3.67 318,019
Dec. 2.07 4,610 1.71 26,616 2.20 1,268,612 7.12 50,916 3.44 87,320 3.65 316,610
2020 Jan. 2.05 4,755 1.69 26,351 2.18 1,271,558 7.18 49,713 3.43 87,413 3.63 317,814
Feb. 2.01 4,813 1.69 26,388 2.16 1,278,149 7.18 49,016 3.43 87,594 3.62 318,931
Mar. 2.04 4,755 1.68 26,516 2.14 1,284,212 7.33 49,209 3.42 87,284 3.61 318,802
Apr. 1.99 4,673 1.66 26,483 2.12 1,291,221 7.17 45,827 3.41 86,755 3.59 319,658
May 1.97 4,752 1.66 26,603 2.10 1,299,073 7.03 44,605 3.41 86,303 3.57 320,868
June 1.98 4,628 1.65 26,702 2.09 1,303,405 7.05 46,438 3.41 86,046 3.57 319,461
July 1.99 4,720 1.65 26,707 2.06 1,312,369 7.02 45,560 3.41 86,188 3.55 321,139
Aug. 1.98 4,727 1.64 26,690 2.05 1,315,489 6.98 45,609 3.40 86,216 3.53 321,757
Sep. 1.95 4,704 1.62 26,939 2.03 1,329,054 6.96 46,440 3.39 86,241 3.50 322,134
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Sep. 2.18 164,445 1.64 167,202 1.92 730,591
Oct. 2.19 160,244 1.63 169,633 1.91 735,730
Nov. 2.21 163,260 1.63 171,713 1.90 739,461
Dec. 2.24 162,074 1.64 171,388 1.88 737,455
2020 Jan. 2.20 161,563 1.64 169,238 1.86 741,004
Feb. 2.21 163,078 1.62 171,571 1.86 745,054
Mar. 2.05 182,434 1.62 174,636 1.84 746,742
Apr. 1.98 185,780 1.63 177,975 1.83 752,025
May 1.95 181,594 1.62 182,819 1.82 761,686
June 2.02 172,708 1.66 184,793 1.81 766,896
July 1.96 169,944 1.66 186,433 1.80 769,953
Aug. 1.98 165,184 1.66 187,678 1.79 779,570
Sep. 2.07 160,017 1.68 186,684 1.77 774,032
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Sep. 0.01 1,504,996 0.14 3,322 0.50 342 0.63 820 0.12 540,525 0.25 37,218
Oct. 0.01 1,519,599 0.17 2,945 0.44 404 0.99 956 0.12 539,574 0.23 36,402
Nov. 0.01 1,550,441 0.18 2,617 0.66 674 0.58 999 0.12 538,889 0.23 35,551
Dec. 0.01 1,548,036 0.08 3,590 0.49 729 0.60 818 0.12 539,678 0.21 34,476
2020 Jan. 0.01 1,550,487 0.14 4,181 0.44 640 0.63 939 0.11 536,842 0.19 32,999
Feb. 0.00 1,571,470 0.15 3,157 0.39 388 0.58 826 0.11 535,065 0.19 32,449
Mar. 0.00 1,567,320 0.12 2,538 0.40 286 0.60 658 0.11 531,723 0.18 31,794
Apr. 0.00 1,597,323 0.14 3,086 0.49 308 0.69 601 0.11 531,921 0.18 31,083
May 0.00 1,619,447 0.19 3,300 0.59 1,117 0.60 629 0.11 532,140 0.17 30,662
June 0.00 1,626,420 0.17 3,283 0.78 1,455 0.69 854 0.11 532,292 0.18 29,671
July 0.00 1,643,393 0.15 3,296 0.60 1,161 0.74 750 0.10 531,191 0.18 29,168
Aug. 0.00 1,650,273 0.16 2,643 0.59 563 0.64 555 0.10 531,277 0.18 28,764
Sep. 0.00 1,658,764 0.10 3,027 0.51 501 0.61 590 0.10 531,223 0.18 28,417
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2019 Sep. – 0.04 468,092 – 0.22 11,961 – 0.33 1,000 x .x .
Oct. – 0.04 477,961 – 0.20 10,900 – 0.06 155 x .x .
Nov. – 0.04 476,945 – 0.21 11,165 – 0.03 389 0.32 654
Dec. – 0.05 476,493 – 0.22 17,148 0.04 554 0.28 911
2020 Jan. – 0.06 468,336 – 0.11 18,221 0.12 278 0.34 158
Feb. – 0.06 462,673 – 0.25 12,289 – 0.04 158 x .x .
Mar. – 0.07 482,538 – 0.27 20,845 0.04 235 x .x .
Apr. – 0.08 495,710 – 0.17 33,483 0.48 288 0.18 78
May – 0.08 501,848 – 0.24 37,552 0.55 707 0.30 259
June – 0.08 508,658 – 0.33 31,980 0.37 633 0.38 313
July – 0.08 520,954 – 0.33 40,301 0.36 592 0.26 208
Aug. – 0.08 528,905 – 0.34 35,771 – 0.02 170 0.20 164
Sep. – 0.08 532,590 – 0.36 37,956 – 0.01 112 0.43 275
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2019 Sep. 5.92 5.87 8,928 6.72 1,837 9.41 461 4.44 3,178 6.42 5,289
Oct. 5.91 5.85 9,336 6.70 1,894 9.23 528 4.39 3,350 6.42 5,459
Nov. 5.75 5.73 8,369 6.60 1,654 8.54 493 4.36 3,056 6.32 4,821
Dec. 5.74 5.75 7,033 6.47 1,288 8.59 590 4.38 2,640 6.26 3,804
2020 Jan. 6.07 6.03 10,080 6.85 2,379 8.94 626 4.45 3,307 6.58 6,148
Feb. 5.81 5.81 9,284 6.65 1,995 8.58 538 4.41 3,155 6.34 5,591
Mar. 5.84 5.81 9,742 6.35 1,982 8.46 483 4.57 3,209 6.26 6,050
Apr. 6.31 6.21 7,843 6.08 1,482 8.11 361 5.06 2,291 6.59 5,190
May 5.93 5.80 7,945 6.23 1,620 7.79 494 4.49 2,843 6.39 4,608
June 5.87 5.72 8,758 6.41 1,841 8.62 401 4.39 3,258 6.34 5,099
July 5.74 5.63 9,986 6.52 2,114 8.75 439 4.26 3,744 6.29 5,804
Aug. 5.74 5.62 8,340 6.43 1,738 8.79 391 4.33 3,050 6.18 4,899
Sep. 5.56 5.52 8,640 6.42 1,726 8.53 417 4.12 3,288 6.19 4,936
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2019 Sep. 1.78 4,757 1.73 1,279 1.82 2,154 2.34 630 1.55 1,973
Oct. 1.83 4,987 1.68 1,481 1.96 2,229 2.40 635 1.52 2,123
Nov. 1.63 5,178 1.58 1,046 1.61 2,022 2.28 722 1.45 2,434
Dec. 1.63 6,393 1.74 1,399 1.66 2,662 2.07 1,016 1.44 2,715
2020 Jan. 1.67 5,644 1.62 1,608 1.63 2,341 2.32 782 1.50 2,521
Feb. 1.77 4,739 1.57 1,108 1.79 1,860 2.52 666 1.53 2,213
Mar. 1.73 5,746 1.76 1,425 1.70 2,347 2.44 821 1.53 2,578
Apr. 1.71 6,505 1.95 2,109 1.73 2,042 2.04 944 1.60 3,519
May 1.80 6,580 1.96 2,043 1.98 2,118 2.07 833 1.63 3,629
June 1.83 6,513 1.95 2,438 1.82 2,252 2.43 1,070 1.63 3,191
July 1.78 5,293 1.61 1,536 1.84 2,241 2.32 774 1.53 2,278
Aug. 1.88 4,210 1.60 1,055 1.94 1,710 2.55 773 1.51 1,727
Sep. 1.83 4,515 1.60 1,170 1.98 1,997 2.38 610 1.51 1,908
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2019 Sep. 1.79 3,219 . . 1.80 1,458 2.42 449 1.57 1,312
Oct. 1.78 3,572 . . 1.82 1,568 2.46 476 1.52 1,528
Nov. 1.74 3,478 . . 1.80 1,297 2.40 532 1.48 1,649
Dec. 1.79 4,258 . . 1.93 1,691 2.40 637 1.47 1,930
2020 Jan. 1.83 3,752 . . 1.98 1,420 2.47 559 1.51 1,773
Feb. 1.80 3,430 . . 1.82 1,301 2.57 518 1.53 1,611
Mar. 1.83 3,818 . . 1.89 1,544 2.48 636 1.52 1,638
Apr. 1.75 4,582 . . 1.88 1,402 2.02 752 1.60 2,428
May 1.81 5,056 . . 2.03 1,460 2.14 633 1.64 2,963
June 1.86 4,702 . . 1.83 1,501 2.46 806 1.68 2,395
July 1.81 3,472 . . 1.87 1,355 2.30 600 1.57 1,517
Aug. 1.76 2,755 . . 1.70 1,135 2.47 462 1.55 1,158
Sep. 1.85 3,019 . . 1.90 1,357 2.53 431 1.55 1,231
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2019 Sep. 1.34 1.28 21,803 1.45 3,348 1.88 2,182 1.38 1,613 1.14 6,714 1.24 11,294
Oct. 1.31 1.27 23,169 1.44 3,714 1.91 2,452 1.31 1,738 1.12 7,268 1.22 11,711
Nov. 1.31 1.26 22,234 1.41 3,066 1.84 2,206 1.30 1,663 1.09 6,889 1.25 11,475
Dec. 1.34 1.29 20,048 1.48 2,938 1.81 2,396 1.37 1,553 1.14 6,622 1.27 9,477
2020 Jan. 1.39 1.34 21,927 1.47 3,871 1.83 2,545 1.32 1,797 1.16 7,106 1.35 10,479
Feb. 1.33 1.28 20,546 1.36 2,902 1.82 2,019 1.33 1,499 1.13 6,555 1.26 10,474
Mar. 1.27 1.22 25,314 1.38 3,761 1.83 2,503 1.32 1,872 1.07 8,045 1.18 12,894
Apr. 1.29 1.25 24,541 1.51 5,102 1.78 2,525 1.32 1,822 1.11 7,769 1.22 12,425
May 1.37 1.33 22,361 1.65 5,153 1.93 3,000 1.47 1,643 1.12 6,872 1.27 10,845
June 1.38 1.34 22,793 1.63 5,171 1.94 2,235 1.59 1,947 1.17 7,983 1.28 10,628
July 1.32 1.27 24,349 1.44 4,233 1.81 2,518 1.39 1,847 1.12 8,036 1.24 11,949
Aug. 1.28 1.23 21,280 1.41 3,135 1.80 2,209 1.44 1,500 1.07 7,032 1.20 10,539
Sep. 1.26 1.21 21,782 1.35 3,121 1.77 2,213 1.35 1,542 1.07 6,957 1.17 11,070
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2019 Sep. . 1.22 8,966 . . 1.89 689 1.19 689 1.08 2,919 1.21 4,669
Oct. . 1.20 9,660 . . 1.82 818 1.09 799 1.06 3,118 1.20 4,925
Nov. . 1.19 9,173 . . 1.75 738 1.09 787 1.03 2,848 1.22 4,800
Dec. . 1.20 8,740 . . 1.79 758 1.15 719 1.07 2,898 1.19 4,365
2020 Jan. . 1.26 9,963 . . 1.77 891 1.14 888 1.07 3,130 1.30 5,054
Feb. . 1.18 8,867 . . 1.73 641 1.14 702 1.04 2,785 1.19 4,739
Mar. . 1.13 11,461 . . 1.76 828 1.15 925 0.98 3,673 1.13 6,035
Apr. . 1.16 11,495 . . 1.70 951 1.21 939 1.03 3,594 1.14 6,011
May . 1.24 10,084 . . 1.86 1,046 1.31 835 1.05 3,065 1.22 5,138
June . 1.26 10,090 . . 1.84 803 1.41 935 1.10 3,656 1.25 4,696
July . 1.22 10,687 . . 1.76 951 1.23 876 1.05 3,621 1.23 5,239
Aug. . 1.16 9,074 . . 1.77 748 1.17 673 0.98 3,137 1.17 4,516
Sep. . 1.14 9,865 . . 1.75 795 1.14 753 1.00 3,201 1.14 5,116
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Sep. 7.91 41,961 7.91 33,243 15.08 4,561 2.97 82,771 2.99 82,352
Oct. 7.81 40,630 7.80 32,063 15.05 4,479 2.96 79,242 2.98 78,810
Nov. 7.72 39,142 7.62 30,666 15.11 4,517 2.95 81,340 2.97 80,912
Dec. 7.62 41,902 7.69 32,556 15.11 4,576 3.05 79,862 3.07 79,476
2020 Jan. 7.72 40,805 7.65 32,270 15.13 4,497 2.99 80,217 3.00 79,819
Feb. 7.72 40,187 7.63 31,840 15.14 4,456 2.94 82,171 2.95 81,754
Mar. 7.89 40,211 7.64 32,857 15.19 4,364 2.77 88,805 2.78 88,517
Apr. 7.73 36,930 7.35 30,063 15.19 4,262 2.71 85,888 2.72 85,702
May 7.60 35,719 7.23 28,731 15.24 4,194 2.66 83,133 2.67 82,928
June 7.63 37,486 7.39 30,074 15.22 4,183 2.86 81,829 2.87 81,584
July 7.54 36,402 7.35 28,738 15.19 4,170 2.84 77,749 2.84 77,478
Aug. 7.51 36,716 7.31 29,015 15.08 4,204 2.77 76,935 2.78 76,674
Sep. 7.51 37,568 7.33 30,004 15.04 4,147 2.84 76,372 2.85 76,088
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2019 Sep. 1.18 81,376 1.27 23,112 1.98 10,331 2.46 1,320 1.42 2,182 1.00 55,486 1.53 2,877 1.03 10,138
Oct. 1.22 80,549 1.31 23,322 1.93 10,875 2.41 1,503 1.43 2,452 1.06 55,298 1.32 3,647 1.08 7,913
Nov. 1.27 72,910 1.33 19,516 2.04 10,266 2.48 1,416 1.42 2,206 1.10 48,917 1.43 3,070 1.09 7,990
Dec. 1.29 102,587 1.40 27,151 2.10 10,584 2.40 1,608 1.45 2,396 1.15 73,303 1.36 4,483 1.18 11,129
2020 Jan. 1.24 73,322 1.34 22,883 1.98 10,775 2.45 1,509 1.53 2,545 1.03 51,717 1.39 2,121 1.26 5,911
Feb. 1.19 65,885 1.36 17,452 1.95 9,727 2.45 1,329 1.47 2,019 0.98 43,225 1.30 3,425 1.07 7,058
Mar. 1.20 96,389 1.44 24,539 1.88 10,920 2.34 1,666 1.47 2,503 1.06 69,385 1.31 3,884 1.14 9,067
Apr. 1.35 80,293 1.53 22,726 1.90 8,269 2.05 1,460 1.76 2,525 1.25 53,150 1.27 3,999 1.15 9,620
May 1.38 70,416 1.50 19,086 1.83 8,544 2.23 1,466 2.03 3,000 1.20 41,644 1.27 3,723 1.25 9,345
June 1.36 86,295 1.45 30,002 1.93 10,537 2.35 1,714 1.81 2,235 1.18 53,115 1.69 4,895 1.26 12,072
July 1.43 72,399 1.41 23,407 1.94 10,302 2.35 1,419 1.66 2,518 1.29 44,151 1.55 4,770 1.25 9,141
Aug. 1.52 55,855 1.36 16,568 1.78 8,324 2.39 1,235 1.51 2,209 1.46 35,797 1.62 3,186 1.22 5,659
Sep. 1.37 71,554 1.49 21,841 2.00 10,505 2.42 1,308 1.55 2,213 1.22 45,047 1.42 3,107 1.18 10,041
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2019 Sep. 1.30 12,814 . . 1.86 487 2.80 113 1.26 378 1.27 7,572 1.95 1,094 1.03 3,170
Oct. 1.28 10,710 . . 1.64 630 2.52 140 1.24 362 1.24 6,623 1.72 588 1.11 2,367
Nov. 1.35 9,204 . . 1.87 465 2.47 129 1.19 329 1.47 4,566 1.66 800 0.95 2,915
Dec. 1.38 17,816 . . 1.71 553 2.43 174 1.28 402 1.41 11,704 1.46 1,422 1.17 3,561
2020 Jan. 1.23 9,108 . . 1.71 661 2.47 147 1.43 395 1.15 6,021 1.46 316 1.14 1,568
Feb. 1.48 8,690 . . 1.66 448 2.23 96 1.25 346 1.63 5,276 1.42 822 0.98 1,702
Mar. x .x . . . 1.74 548 x .x . 1.20 411 1.29 7,469 1.88 522 1.02 2,620
Apr. 1.34 9,734 . . 1.72 492 1.56 243 1.22 556 1.39 5,375 1.44 513 1.15 2,555
May 1.48 7,873 . . 2.02 471 1.73 171 1.90 865 1.43 4,286 1.72 336 1.16 1,744
June 1.39 13,750 . . 1.81 558 2.05 224 1.71 776 1.31 8,391 1.64 1,048 1.28 2,753
July 1.37 10,021 . . 1.80 504 1.96 133 1.31 478 1.42 5,085 1.59 1,108 1.10 2,713
Aug. 1.47 7,045 . . 1.85 362 2.14 123 1.26 369 1.52 4,544 1.79 458 1.05 1,189
Sep. 1.37 11,060 . . 1.72 508 2.08 105 1.22 354 1.41 7,417 1.85 535 1.03 2,141
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets *
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesInsurance
technical
reservesNon-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations
2017 Q4 2,212.7 321.1 387.0 354.3 336.1 671.3 2.9 48.3 34.3 57.3
2018 Q1 2,218.0 344.1 394.6 326.9 342.8 664.0 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.6
Q2 2,226.3 346.8 400.1 319.6 346.3 669.9 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6
Q3 2,224.8 326.3 401.1 327.9 349.4 677.8 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6
Q4 2,213.5 318.3 400.5 330.4 349.7 665.8 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019 Q1 2,344.4 332.3 432.0 330.0 380.9 708.8 2.6 59.3 37.1 61.4
Q2 2,407.9 336.8 449.5 339.3 387.8 735.7 3.6 57.9 37.1 60.3
Q3 2,493.0 333.0 469.2 357.2 398.1 768.2 4.6 58.7 38.0 66.0
Q4 2,474.4 317.1 449.3 355.8 407.1 778.2 3.6 64.9 39.8 58.7
2020 Q1 2,431.1 316.8 453.1 365.9 384.8 739.3 4.5 68.3 39.0 59.5
Q2 2,523.3 318.3 461.8 371.6 411.9 789.6 4.3 68.3 39.0 58.5
    Life insurance
2017 Q4 1,193.2 199.2 192.4 226.1 41.4 487.8 1.8 8.6 20.0 16.0
2018 Q1 1,187.6 212.5 198.8 206.7 43.1 481.8 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
Q2 1,195.2 215.3 201.6 200.5 46.3 487.9 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
Q3 1,194.1 199.7 201.6 209.0 47.3 493.9 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
Q4 1,185.3 194.5 200.1 208.4 50.4 484.7 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019 Q1 1,239.7 202.9 213.7 206.1 52.8 517.7 1.6 10.4 20.3 14.1
Q2 1,291.9 205.8 227.6 214.1 55.4 538.9 2.4 10.0 20.3 17.4
Q3 1,350.0 205.3 242.5 225.2 57.9 563.6 3.1 10.4 20.9 21.0
Q4 1,325.0 194.5 227.6 217.8 61.0 570.4 2.4 13.7 21.1 16.5
2020 Q1 1,296.5 190.6 230.6 221.4 62.0 538.8 2.2 13.7 20.7 16.4
Q2 1,348.0 192.9 234.1 223.3 64.2 577.8 2.8 13.6 20.7 18.6
    Non-life insurance
2017 Q4 606.9 111.6 108.1 82.3 70.8 165.9 0.4 31.5 9.7 26.6
2018 Q1 623.2 120.2 112.7 75.1 72.1 167.0 0.3 34.6 9.8 31.5
Q2 621.6 120.1 115.7 72.9 72.9 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
Q3 617.9 116.3 116.1 72.8 73.7 168.9 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
Q4 616.2 113.8 117.4 73.7 73.8 167.4 0.2 33.5 10.8 25.6
2019 Q1 655.3 119.1 127.7 74.4 76.1 177.1 0.3 38.1 11.0 31.4
Q2 665.9 119.8 131.6 76.1 78.1 182.4 0.4 37.6 11.0 29.0
Q3 683.1 116.9 136.0 79.9 80.6 189.3 0.4 38.8 11.3 30.0
Q4 674.2 111.1 131.4 79.7 83.5 193.2 0.4 36.1 12.2 26.6
2020 Q1 673.1 110.6 132.8 80.9 81.8 187.1 0.3 38.6 11.9 29.1
Q2 690.4 112.6 136.0 82.5 83.7 197.1 0.4 39.4 12.0 26.6
    Reinsurance 3
2017 Q4 412.6 10.3 86.5 45.9 224.0 17.6 0.7 8.3 4.7 14.7
2018 Q1 407.2 11.4 83.1 45.1 227.6 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
Q2 409.5 11.5 82.9 46.1 227.1 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
Q3 412.7 10.2 83.4 46.0 228.4 15.0 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019 Q1 449.4 10.2 90.6 49.5 252.0 14.0 0.7 10.8 5.8 15.9
Q2 450.1 11.1 90.4 49.0 254.3 14.4 0.8 10.2 5.8 13.9
Q3 459.9 10.8 90.7 52.1 259.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Q4 475.2 11.5 90.2 58.4 262.6 14.5 0.8 15.1 6.6 15.6
2020 Q1 461.5 15.7 89.7 63.6 241.1 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 484.8 12.8 91.7 65.8 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Pension funds 4
2017 Q4 646.8 96.7 65.1 29.7 25.0 360.4 – 7.1 41.2 21.5
2018 Q1 651.2 94.5 65.3 30.0 26.2 364.6 – 7.4 41.7 21.5
Q2 658.7 94.8 65.7 30.4 28.1 368.2 – 7.6 42.2 21.7
Q3 666.0 92.1 66.3 30.5 29.6 375.1 – 7.9 42.8 21.8
Q4 672.2 91.5 67.5 30.7 30.6 378.0 – 8.1 43.8 22.1
2019 Q1 689.2 89.4 72.0 30.7 31.5 389.8 – 8.3 44.9 22.6
Q2 703.0 87.4 75.6 31.3 32.1 399.3 – 8.5 45.4 23.5
Q3 718.3 85.3 79.2 31.5 33.1 410.9 – 8.6 45.7 23.9
Q4 726.8 84.9 77.8 31.9 33.4 417.2 – 8.8 47.6 25.1
2020 Q1 709.2 81.1 75.2 31.7 33.2 405.1 – 8.9 48.4 25.5
Q2 728.5 80.0 79.4 31.9 33.3 419.8 – 8.9 48.7 26.5
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I super-
visory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  * Valuation of
listed securities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities data-
base. 1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered
bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including deposits retainedon assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and regis-
tered Pfandbriefe.  3 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insur-
ers, which is included there.  4 The term "pension funds" refers to the institutional sec-
tor "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise
company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed.
Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Insurance technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity TotalLife/
claims on
pension fund
reserves  2 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  5
Insurance corporations
2017 Q4 2,212.7 28.3 62.6 466.0 1,523.0 1,335.0 187.9 2.2 130.6 –
2018 Q1 2,218.0 28.0 61.9 460.2 1,539.4 1,333.8 205.6 1.5 127.0 –
Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 456.8 1,553.7 1,348.0 205.7 1.9 122.2 –
Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.3 1,545.4 1,344.1 201.4 2.0 122.4 –
Q4 2,213.5 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.3 1,332.4 197.9 1.6 124.6 –
2019 Q1 2,344.4 31.6 68.3 488.3 1,625.8 1,403.7 222.0 1.5 128.9 –
Q2 2,407.9 31.9 69.4 489.6 1,687.3 1,465.9 221.4 1.8 128.0 –
Q3 2,493.0 31.7 69.3 488.4 1,769.2 1,542.9 226.3 2.2 132.2 –
Q4 2,474.4 31.7 75.8 515.2 1,714.7 1,499.5 215.2 1.9 135.2 –
2020 Q1 2,431.1 31.8 82.4 466.7 1,721.4 1,482.7 238.7 2.4 126.4 –
Q2 2,523.3 33.1 82.2 509.2 1,767.4 1,527.4 240.1 1.9 129.4 –
    Life insurance
2017 Q4 1,193.2 4.1 12.8 121.9 1,007.5 1,007.5 – 1.1 45.8 –
2018 Q1 1,187.6 4.0 13.3 119.5 1,007.4 1,007.4 – 0.7 42.6 –
Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.3 1,017.4 1,017.4 – 0.8 40.6 –
Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.0 1,013.7 1,013.7 – 0.9 41.9 –
Q4 1,185.3 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.7 1,000.7 – 0.5 42.2 –
2019 Q1 1,239.7 4.1 14.4 120.9 1,058.9 1,058.9 – 0.4 41.1 –
Q2 1,291.9 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,108.6 1,108.6 – 0.4 42.4 –
Q3 1,350.0 3.7 15.6 116.0 1,171.8 1,171.8 – 0.6 42.4 –
Q4 1,325.0 3.6 19.1 127.6 1,129.6 1,129.6 – 0.5 44.6 –
2020 Q1 1,296.5 3.6 19.3 114.4 1,117.6 1,117.6 – 0.6 41.0 –
Q2 1,348.0 3.8 19.2 130.2 1,150.3 1,150.3 – 0.5 44.0 –
    Non-life insurance
2017 Q4 606.9 1.1 6.7 141.3 405.9 309.8 96.1 0.1 51.8 –
2018 Q1 623.2 1.1 7.7 141.4 423.0 311.1 111.9 0.0 50.0 –
Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 –
Q3 617.9 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 –
Q4 616.2 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.6 315.5 101.1 0.0 50.0 –
2019 Q1 655.3 1.1 9.3 144.1 448.4 328.9 119.6 0.0 52.4 –
Q2 665.9 1.1 8.8 146.9 459.3 341.5 117.8 0.1 49.7 –
Q3 683.1 1.2 9.1 149.5 471.8 354.8 117.0 0.1 51.4 –
Q4 674.2 1.2 9.3 153.5 457.1 349.4 107.7 0.1 53.0 –
2020 Q1 673.1 1.3 9.8 144.5 468.6 344.4 124.2 0.1 48.9 –
Q2 690.4 1.2 9.5 153.3 478.7 355.6 123.1 0.1 47.7 –
    Reinsurance 3
2017 Q4 412.6 23.1 43.1 202.8 109.6 17.7 91.9 1.0 33.1 –
2018 Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 –
Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 –
Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 –
Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 –
2019 Q1 449.4 26.5 44.6 223.4 118.4 15.9 102.5 1.1 35.5 –
Q2 450.1 26.6 46.1 220.8 119.4 15.8 103.6 1.3 35.9 –
Q3 459.9 26.8 44.7 222.8 125.6 16.3 109.3 1.5 38.5 –
Q4 475.2 26.9 47.4 234.0 128.0 20.6 107.5 1.3 37.7 –
2020 Q1 461.5 26.9 53.3 207.8 135.3 20.8 114.5 1.7 36.5 –
Q2 484.8 28.1 53.5 225.8 138.5 21.5 117.0 1.3 37.7 –
Pension funds 4
2017 Q4 646.8 – 7.1 7.6 574.3 574.3 – – 2.7 55.2
2018 Q1 651.2 – 7.3 7.6 580.5 580.5 – – 2.7 53.0
Q2 658.7 – 7.5 7.7 588.1 588.1 – – 2.8 52.5
Q3 666.0 – 7.7 7.8 595.2 595.2 – – 2.9 52.4
Q4 672.2 – 7.9 8.0 605.8 605.8 – – 2.8 47.6
2019 Q1 689.2 – 8.1 8.1 613.9 613.9 – – 2.9 56.3
Q2 703.0 – 8.1 8.3 619.8 619.8 – – 2.9 64.0
Q3 718.3 – 8.2 8.4 626.8 626.8 – – 2.9 72.1
Q4 726.8 – 8.4 8.6 637.5 637.5 – – 2.9 69.4
2020 Q1 709.2 – 8.6 8.7 639.4 639.4 – – 3.0 49.6
Q2 728.5 – 8.5 8.8 645.1 645.1 – – 3.0 63.1
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I super-
visory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including de-
posits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Insurance technical reserves "life" taking account of tran-
sitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance" sector.3 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is in-
cluded there.  4 The term "pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension
funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company
pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social secu-
rity funds are not included.  5 Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and the
liability item "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2008 76,490 66,139 –45,712 86,527 25,322 10,351 18,236 68,049 . – 49,813 58,254
2009 70,208 – 538 –114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 – 19,945
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 53,796 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 42,233 140,417 – 71,454 161,012 50,859 – 86,621
2018 61,984 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 45,354 99,011 – 24,417 67,328 56,100 – 37,028
2019 125,037 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 56,501 85,203 8,059 2,408 74,736 39,834
2019 Nov. 45,338 38,355 13,461 6,468 18,426 6,983 28,913 5,649 7,457 15,807 16,425
Dec. – 29,741 –24,349 – 4,293 – 3,847 –16,209 – 5,392 – 2,131 – 12,043 2,062 7,850 – 27,610
2020 Jan. 40,861 29,951 4,293 10,672 14,987 10,910 7,512 3,447 2,985 1,080 33,349
Feb. 41,836 33,199 14,383 1,337 17,479 8,637 32,132 9,014 4,202 18,916 9,705
Mar. 2,160 3,798 – 4,596 – 5,516 13,910 – 1,638 – 10,935 17,837 4,747 – 33,519 13,095
Apr. 37,012 31,119 2,401 15,964 12,755 5,893 40,472 5,669 17,982 16,821 – 3,460
May 81,153 79,902 – 1,777 16,851 64,828 1,251 40,102 9,749 35,151 – 4,798 41,050
June 65,725 47,036 6,695 5,329 35,013 18,689 37,147 9,099 25,469 2,579 28,578
July 48,626 49,142 – 2,041 15,549 35,635 – 516 18,636 – 15,536 25,721 8,451 29,990
Aug. 55,841 60,373 1,689 8,741 49,943 – 4,532 313 – 7,604 18,004 – 10,087 55,527
Sep. 69,629 66,377 23,528 23,694 19,155 3,252 19,516 1,692 22,121 – 4,297 50,113
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2008 – 29,452 11,326 – 40,778 2,743 – 23,079 25,822 – 32,195
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 – 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 53,024 15,570 37,454 51,372 7,031 44,341 1,652
2018 58,446 16,188 42,258 84,528 – 11,184 95,712 – 26,082
2019 45,092 9,076 36,015 29,463 – 1,119 30,582 15,629
2019 Nov. 4,230 236 3,994 4,445 1,801 2,644 – 215
Dec. 5,878 4,669 1,209 – 11,994 1,453 – 13,447 17,872
2020 Jan. 6,836 795 6,041 6,946 – 286 7,232 – 110
Feb. 2,975 416 2,559 1,000 – 947 1,947 1,975
Mar. – 2,200 566 – 2,766 5,605 – 7,442 13,047 – 7,805
Apr. 4,869 235 4,634 10,760 – 1,266 12,026 – 5,891
May 7,487 1,370 6,117 9,396 371 9,025 – 1,909
June 5,064 685 4,379 6,320 2,509 3,811 – 1,256
July 9,101 2,144 6,957 25,177 676 24,501 – 16,076
Aug. 9,459 2,900 6,559 8,808 1,020 7,788 652
Sep. 27,552 20,689 6,863 26,969 161 26,808 584
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2008 1,337,337 961,271 51,259 70,520 382,814 456,676 95,093 280,974
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,421
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 Jan. 151,486 82,405 7,081 1,350 64,648 9,326 19,477 49,604
Feb. 124,109 69,386 3,219 200 56,112 9,855 10,143 44,580
Mar. 115,696 55,561 7,719 4,505 39,367 3,970 10,452 49,684
Apr. 175,116 69,399 4,405 4,750 51,309 8,936 23,003 82,713
May 170,970 56,055 9 125 48,088 7,833 28,199 86,715
June 166,901 71,340 6,736 1,750 53,696 9,158 18,489 77,072
July 169,956 61,678 1,366 20 55,810 4,483 21,023 87,255
Aug. 144,802 56,957 16 13 53,343 3,585 8,547 79,298
Sep. 177,296 75,616 3,186 250 65,309 6,872 14,763 86,916
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2008 387,516 190,698 13,186 31,393 54,834 91,289 84,410 112,407
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 Jan. 50,576 27,474 7,032 1,250 13,813 5,379 8,300 14,802
Feb. 31,590 16,290 2,899 50 9,994 3,348 1,619 13,681
Mar. 30,174 13,703 3,859 1,905 5,833 2,106 865 15,607
Apr. 41,373 10,274 2,165 1,300 5,943 866 8,561 22,538
May 65,814 12,372 9 125 8,134 4,104 12,419 41,024
June 60,991 17,946 5,561 1,500 5,198 5,686 9,125 33,920
July 60,086 14,074 1,366 20 11,331 1,356 13,242 32,769
Aug. 42,389 6,750 16 13 5,299 1,422 1,597 34,043
Sep. 61,762 18,442 3,036 250 9,713 5,443 7,430 35,889
Net sales 5
2008 119,472 8,517 15,052 – 65,773 25,165 34,074 82,653 28,302
2009 76,441 – 75,554 858 – 80,646 25,579 – 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 – 87,646 – 3,754 – 63,368 28,296 – 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 Jan. 19,138 3,753 3,260 135 – 4,112 4,470 10,748 4,638
Feb. 27,420 10,817 2,633 – 679 9,318 – 455 436 16,168
Mar. 10,873 2,608 5,741 3,137 – 134 – 6,136 – 4,187 12,452
Apr. 34,368 3,134 1,210 4,324 – 1,083 – 1,317 11,594 19,640
May 82,872 1,010 – 1,593 – 604 4,536 – 1,330 14,387 67,476
June 47,941 10,175 3,362 1,664 5,404 – 255 2,856 34,910
July 37,510 – 4,679 – 1,443 – 714 240 – 2,762 12,135 30,054
Aug. 61,259 1,724 – 1,512 – 136 4,496 – 1,124 465 59,069
Sep. 43,920 19,271 – 1,493 – 45 20,898 – 90 3,346 21,302
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification ofdebt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales less
redemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the
most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2008 3,250,195 1,876,583 150,302 377,091 490,641 858,550 178,515 1,195,097
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 Jan. 3,132,103 1,182,330 179,415 47,491 686,211 269,213 348,115 1,601,658
Feb. 3,160,234 1,193,470 182,045 46,835 695,862 268,727 348,656 1,618,108
Mar. 2 3,161,739 1,191,655 187,630 49,962 692,049 262,015 2 339,172 1,630,911
Apr. 3,204,248 1,200,654 188,949 54,307 696,203 261,194 351,258 1,652,335
May 3,282,783 1,199,035 189,074 57,391 693,994 258,576 365,185 1,718,563
June 2 3,328,134 2 1,205,292 192,323 59,050 697,628 2 256,290 368,001 1,754,841
July 3,343,839 1,186,873 190,611 58,228 685,891 252,143 379,558 1,777,408
Aug. 2 3,402,114 1,187,546 189,114 58,096 689,290 251,046 2 378,952 1,835,616
Sep. 3,449,963 1,209,935 187,644 58,079 713,010 251,202 382,476 1,857,551
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-September 2020
bis unter 2   1 150 714   441 581   48 978   16 436   298 875   77 292   71 765   637 368 
 2 bis unter 4    660 395   287 134   50 738   15 318   167 685   53 394   63 558   309 703 
 4 bis unter 6    495 555   194 907   33 968   11 635   102 761   46 544   58 808   241 840 
6 bis unter 8    376 805   136 238   29 953   7 525   65 151   33 610   41 642   198 925 
 8 bis unter 10    250 011   69 289   14 619   3 999   37 975   12 696   25 143   155 580 
 10 bis unter 15    156 894   39 730   6 633   2 191   18 987   11 920   33 708   83 456 
 15 bis unter 20    109 134   19 471   1 760    854   14 673   2 184   9 141   80 522 
 20 und darüber    250 455   21 584    995    123   6 904   13 562   78 713   150 158 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Increase due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the most recent date
are provisional. Revisions are not specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2008 168,701 4,142 5,006 1,319 152 – 428 – 608 – 1,306 830,622
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 – 3,741 – 1,269 – 974 927,256
2010 174,596 – 1,096 3,265 497 178 – 486 – 993 – 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,700 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,747 1,950,224
2020 Jan. 183,341 – 120 27 – – –– 29 – 118 1,928,328
4Feb. 183,247 33 67 5 –– 1 – 1 – 37 1,746,035
Mar. 181,792 – 1,455 78 40 – – 12 – 1,584 1,475,909
Apr. 181,785 – 4 77 – –– 22 – 1 – 58 1,657,055
May 181,471 – 314 163 87 26 – 576 – 1 – 12 1,741,382
June 180,042 – 1,430 83 4 1 – 1,112 – 350 – 56 1,784,980
July 180,473 431 470 19 –– 3 – 6 – 48 1,799,062
Aug. 180,820 409 434 36 –– 23 22 – 61 1,887,713
Sep. 182,039 604 896 10 60 – 3 – 23 – 335 1,870,873
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2008 4.2 4.0 4.0 4.0 4.5 4.7 6.3 121.68 102.06 266.33 4,810.20
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 2.9 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 May – 0.1 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 0.1 0.2 2.0 144.54 112.80 502.26 11,586.85
June – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.4 – 0.4 0.0 0.1 1.6 145.24 113.18 525.07 12,310.93
July – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 0.0 1.3 145.85 113.27 522.53 12,313.36
Aug. – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.0 1.2 145.81 111.72 549.79 12,945.38
Sep. – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.0 1.1 145.96 112.79 544.40 12,760.73
Oct. – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 1.1 146.56 113.81 492.31 11,556.48
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2008 2,598 –7,911 –14,409 –12,171 –11,149 799 6,498 10,509 11,315 –16,625 –9,252 27,940 19,761 –8,717
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 –5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 –14,995 –8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,484 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,562 156,002 4,938 1,048 151,064 57,514 –2,520
2018 131,958 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,263 138,254 2,979 –2,306 135,275 30,569 –6,298
2019 175,476 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 52,930 180,439 2,719 – 812 177,720 53,742 –4,961
2020 Mar. –22,365 4,783 –5,255 699 –5,862 673 10,038 –27,148 –22,138 –3,270 –2,578 –18,868 –24,570 – 228
Apr. 3,766 –1,760 2,799 – 166 2,318 294 –4,558 5,526 3,539 – 656 – 387 4,195 5,913 227
May 9,255 3,378 2,921 – 156 2,471 380 457 5,877 9,666 143 – 164 9,523 6,041 – 411
June 10,087 7,065 1,789 – 181 1,634 471 5,276 3,022 9,668 –2,048 15 11,716 3,007 419
July 18,259 7,417 1,671 – 195 1,460 400 5,746 10,842 17,389 – 143 – 89 17,532 10,931 870
Aug. 16,662 6,268 2,049 12 1,759 297 4,219 10,394 16,630 740 – 104 15,890 10,498 32
Sep. 16,127 10,083 1,146 112 – 18 1,052 8,937 6,044 16,266 – 705 250 16,971 5,794 – 138
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2019 2020
 Item 2017 2018 2019 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 46.39 21.80 25.89 –18.76 –9.14 37.45 16.34 8.56 46.90
   Debt securities –7.53 5.24 –2.23 0.60 –1.31 –0.59 –0.94 0.15 1.86
     Short-term debt securities –2.97 1.42 –1.31 –0.08 –1.26 0.33 –0.31 –0.32 0.48
     Long-term debt securities –4.55 3.82 –0.91 0.68 –0.05 –0.92 –0.63 0.47 1.38
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –3.64 0.65 –0.47 0.54 –0.24 –0.46 –0.31 –0.04 1.48
         Non-financial corporations –0.61 0.59 0.51 0.70 –0.25 0.31 –0.25 –0.02 0.19
         Financial corporations –0.52 1.40 –0.56 –0.11 0.08 –0.71 0.18 –0.16 0.39
         General government –2.50 –1.34 –0.41 –0.05 –0.07 –0.05 –0.24 0.14 0.91
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.88 4.60 –1.76 0.06 –1.06 –0.13 –0.63 0.19 0.38
   Loans 56.22 –25.67 2.21 12.12 –6.79 –7.51 4.39 –1.00 9.56
     Short-term loans 27.83 –0.14 7.85 14.89 –7.92 –5.41 6.29 –1.34 16.87
     Long-term loans 28.39 –25.53 –5.64 –2.77 1.13 –2.11 –1.90 0.34 –7.31
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 24.05 –10.63 –9.00 0.86 –5.70 –7.02 2.86 –1.17 6.18
         Non-financial corporations 15.23 –10.03 –8.19 0.94 –6.71 –8.09 5.67 –1.29 6.25
         Financial corporations 8.42 –0.97 –1.03 –0.13 0.96 1.01 –2.87 0.11 –0.07
         General government 0.40 0.36 0.22 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world 32.17 –15.03 11.21 11.26 –1.09 –0.50 1.54 0.17 3.38
   Equity and investment fund shares 79.82 120.60 76.61 14.29 10.76 33.88 17.68 57.65 –4.76
     Equity 71.73 118.60 67.61 11.72 9.07 30.68 16.14 56.80 –5.67
       Listed shares of domestic sectors –3.82 18.82 6.18 1.82 –3.35 15.19 –7.49 –1.51 –18.72
         Non-financial corporations –3.76 18.27 4.62 1.84 –3.32 15.24 –9.14 –1.32 –18.55
         Financial corporations –0.06 0.55 1.55 –0.02 –0.03 –0.05 1.65 –0.19 –0.18
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 6.99 –3.84 5.55 1.06 1.14 2.80 0.55 0.72 –1.45
       Other equity  1 68.56 103.62 55.88 8.84 11.28 12.68 23.08 57.59 14.51
     Investment fund shares 8.09 2.01 9.00 2.57 1.69 3.21 1.54 0.85 0.91
       Money market fund shares –0.85 –0.53 1.78 –0.03 0.23 –0.03 1.61 –1.80 0.98
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 8.94 2.54 7.22 2.60 1.46 3.24 –0.08 2.65 –0.07
   Insurance technical reserves 1.56 0.38 1.63 0.49 0.44 0.38 0.32 0.32 0.61
   Financial derivatives –11.32 2.15 0.52 1.03 –7.36 –3.73 10.57 –1.08 –10.52
   Other accounts receivable 155.71 11.07 –62.59 24.30 –40.07 –5.66 –41.15 0.08 –57.61
   Total 320.86 135.58 42.05 34.08 –53.47 54.23 7.21 64.68 –13.96
 External financing
   Debt securities 8.56 7.08 19.19 5.77 5.87 5.00 2.55 5.75 23.51
     Short-term securities 0.60 4.08 2.74 1.23 1.75 0.46 –0.70 1.60 2.78
       Long-term securities 7.95 3.00 16.45 4.54 4.12 4.54 3.25 4.15 20.73
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 7.09 3.94 7.03 4.05 0.17 2.67 0.14 1.32 11.06
           Non-financial corporations –0.61 0.59 0.51 0.70 –0.25 0.31 –0.25 –0.02 0.19
           Financial corporations 9.16 3.35 5.72 2.46 0.91 2.38 –0.03 1.82 10.79
           General government 0.01 0.01 0.47 0.69 –0.61 –0.04 0.42 –0.10 –0.19
           Households –1.47 –0.01 0.34 0.20 0.12 0.03 –0.01 –0.39 0.26
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.46 3.14 12.15 1.72 5.69 2.33 2.41 4.43 12.45
   Loans 99.28 126.08 76.61 22.71 38.82 10.75 4.33 26.43 20.83
     Short-term loans 23.11 60.22 19.68 16.28 17.70 –6.91 –7.39 6.93 –5.86
     Long-term loans 76.18 65.87 56.93 6.43 21.12 17.65 11.73 19.50 26.69
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 51.38 70.84 49.84 19.69 18.18 –6.60 18.57 9.62 23.81
         Non-financial corporations 15.23 –10.03 –8.19 0.94 –6.71 –8.09 5.67 –1.29 6.25
         Financial corporations 37.09 79.18 57.07 22.44 24.07 1.80 8.76 15.18 1.52
         General government –0.95 1.68 0.96 –3.69 0.82 –0.31 4.14 –4.27 16.04
       Loans from the rest of the world 47.91 55.25 26.78 3.02 20.64 17.35 –14.24 16.81 –2.98
   Equity 33.18 20.63 17.97 5.12 4.19 3.82 4.83 6.51 9.69
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 8.46 73.23 –24.47 4.47 –34.72 15.17 –9.39 7.19 –13.51
       Non-financial corporations –3.76 18.27 4.62 1.84 –3.32 15.24 –9.14 –1.32 –18.55
       Financial corporations 11.11 46.75 –33.11 –0.26 –32.78 –0.68 0.60 1.64 1.45
       General government 0.51 0.53 –0.01 –0.04 0.04 0.04 –0.05 0.20 0.09
       Households 0.60 7.67 4.03 2.93 1.33 0.57 –0.80 6.66 3.50
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –4.12 –31.96 –1.61 –4.23 2.75 –14.41 14.28 –5.94 18.38
     Other equity  1 28.84 –20.65 44.05 4.88 36.17 3.06 –0.06 5.26 4.83
   Insurance technical reserves 6.89 6.08 2.81 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 1.35 –0.49 –1.38 1.19 –2.06 2.69 –3.21 1.94 –1.74
   Other accounts payable 58.94 22.29 7.95 12.39 –18.43 16.19 –2.20 –16.77 –48.24
   Total 208.20 181.66 123.15 47.89 29.10 39.15 7.01 24.56 4.75
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2019 2020
 Item 2017 2018 2019 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 550.8 560.2 556.8 528.2 508.7 558.4 556.8 577.2 609.6
   Debt securities 47.0 50.8 49.6 52.2 51.0 51.1 49.6 48.2 51.8
     Short-term debt securities 3.5 4.9 3.7 4.8 3.6 3.9 3.7 3.4 3.8
     Long-term debt securities 43.5 45.9 45.9 47.3 47.4 47.1 45.9 44.9 47.9
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.1 21.3 21.1 22.2 22.1 21.7 21.1 20.3 22.3
         Non-financial corporations 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.2 5.0 5.3 5.0 4.7 5.0
         Financial corporations 12.7 13.8 13.6 14.0 14.2 13.6 13.6 12.9 13.6
         General government 4.4 3.0 2.6 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.6 2.7 3.7
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 25.8 29.5 28.4 30.0 29.0 29.3 28.4 28.0 29.5
   Loans 620.9 591.4 595.3 605.1 597.4 591.8 595.3 593.9 602.8
     Short-term loans 495.1 491.1 499.9 506.7 498.4 494.1 499.9 498.2 514.6
     Long-term loans 125.8 100.3 95.4 98.3 99.0 97.8 95.4 95.7 88.2
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 402.1 391.5 382.5 392.4 386.7 379.7 382.5 381.4 387.5
         Non-financial corporations 297.8 287.8 279.6 288.7 282.0 273.9 279.6 278.3 284.6
         Financial corporations 97.6 96.7 95.6 96.5 97.5 98.5 95.6 95.8 95.7
         General government 6.7 7.1 7.3 7.1 7.2 7.2 7.3 7.3 7.3
       Loans to the rest of the world 218.8 199.9 212.8 212.7 210.7 212.2 212.8 212.6 215.3
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,153.0 2,110.7 2,349.8 2,207.5 2,215.5 2,246.2 2,349.8 2,145.7 2,311.9
     Equity 1,981.3 1,944.4 2,159.8 2,031.2 2,035.0 2,059.6 2,159.8 1,969.9 2,125.4
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 332.2 302.6 342.0 318.3 319.7 328.8 342.0 288.4 337.2
         Non-financial corporations 325.3 296.0 332.9 311.3 312.1 321.4 332.9 281.4 329.6
         Financial corporations 6.8 6.6 9.0 7.0 7.7 7.3 9.0 7.0 7.6
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 48.3 40.2 50.7 44.6 45.8 47.8 50.7 45.3 47.3
       Other equity  1 1,600.8 1,601.6 1,767.1 1,668.4 1,669.4 1,683.0 1,767.1 1,636.3 1,740.8
     Investment fund shares 171.7 166.4 190.0 176.3 180.6 186.6 190.0 175.8 186.5
       Money market fund shares 1.6 1.0 3.2 1.0 1.2 1.2 3.2 1.4 2.4
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 170.1 165.4 186.8 175.3 179.3 185.4 186.8 174.4 184.1
   Insurance technical reserves 54.2 56.3 59.1 57.0 57.7 58.4 59.1 59.9 60.6
   Financial derivatives 34.1 33.4 31.5 31.4 32.6 32.1 31.5 44.9 34.7
   Other accounts receivable 1,122.7 1,154.8 1,231.4 1,200.6 1,181.3 1,206.3 1,231.4 1,183.1 1,091.6
   Total 4,582.8 4,557.6 4,873.6 4,681.9 4,644.3 4,744.3 4,873.6 4,652.9 4,763.0
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 210.6 187.8 214.0 196.4 205.6 217.0 214.0 229.3 245.8
     Short-term securities 3.4 6.1 8.8 7.4 9.1 9.5 8.8 14.0 16.8
     Long-term securities 207.2 181.6 205.2 189.1 196.5 207.4 205.2 215.2 229.0
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 83.1 79.6 88.5 85.9 86.4 89.1 88.5 85.1 100.3
         Non-financial corporations 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.2 5.0 5.3 5.0 4.7 5.0
         Financial corporations 64.4 61.0 68.6 65.5 66.7 69.2 68.6 67.1 81.2
         General government 0.1 0.1 0.6 0.8 0.2 0.2 0.6 0.5 0.3
         Households 14.5 14.0 14.4 14.4 14.5 14.5 14.4 12.8 13.8
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 127.4 108.2 125.5 110.5 119.2 127.8 125.5 144.2 145.5
   Loans 1,631.0 1,749.6 1,828.6 1,775.5 1,811.6 1,826.3 1,828.6 1,855.2 1,877.3
     Short-term loans 650.7 710.2 732.9 729.2 745.8 740.8 732.9 739.8 732.5
     Long-term loans 980.3 1,039.4 1,095.7 1,046.3 1,065.8 1,085.5 1,095.7 1,115.4 1,144.8
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,225.2 1,281.2 1,330.0 1,301.4 1,318.4 1,312.7 1,330.0 1,339.6 1,365.4
         Non-financial corporations 297.8 287.8 279.6 288.7 282.0 273.9 279.6 278.3 284.6
         Financial corporations 874.4 939.9 995.7 962.6 985.5 988.1 995.7 1,010.3 1,013.3
         General government 53.0 53.5 54.7 50.1 50.9 50.7 54.7 51.0 67.5
       Loans from the rest of the world 405.8 468.4 498.6 474.1 493.2 513.6 498.6 515.6 511.9
   Equity 3,078.3 2,707.0 3,108.1 2,806.1 2,894.0 2,900.3 3,108.1 2,579.1 2,956.5
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 721.3 659.3 733.5 704.8 682.4 692.4 733.5 595.2 710.9
       Non-financial corporations 325.3 296.0 332.9 311.3 312.1 321.4 332.9 281.4 329.6
       Financial corporations 149.6 161.9 157.4 173.7 145.9 145.7 157.4 126.2 150.1
       General government 46.0 41.6 51.8 44.3 45.0 47.9 51.8 41.8 50.5
       Households 200.4 159.8 191.3 175.5 179.5 177.4 191.3 145.7 180.8
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 960.5 764.8 959.2 788.8 859.9 857.6 959.2 689.3 856.3
     Other equity  1 1,396.5 1,282.9 1,415.5 1,312.5 1,351.6 1,350.2 1,415.5 1,294.7 1,389.2
   Insurance technical reserves 263.7 269.8 272.6 270.5 271.2 271.9 272.6 273.3 274.0
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 63.1 65.3 76.1 69.4 83.3 91.8 76.1 96.6 97.8
   Other accounts payable 1,124.9 1,174.3 1,305.5 1,203.3 1,202.4 1,262.8 1,305.5 1,259.1 1,218.3
   Total 6,371.5 6,153.8 6,804.9 6,321.1 6,468.0 6,570.1 6,804.9 6,292.4 6,669.7
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2019 2020
 Item 2017 2018 2019 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 107.93 138.24 139.78 24.80 42.34 23.63 49.02 24.14 72.49
     Currency 21.42 30.20 32.78 3.80 8.50 10.34 10.13 19.55 16.39
     Deposits 86.51 108.04 107.01 21.00 33.83 13.29 38.89 4.59 56.10
       Transferable deposits 99.78 109.88 111.01 17.18 34.39 17.27 42.16 18.74 58.64
       Time deposits –4.03 6.79 1.47 1.86 –0.79 –0.30 0.70 –3.11 –0.85
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –9.24 –8.63 –5.47 1.95 0.23 –3.68 –3.97 –11.04 –1.70
   Debt securities –8.39 1.62 –1.85 0.51 0.60 –1.35 –1.61 –1.47 0.32
     Short-term debt securities –0.20 –0.13 –0.53 –0.23 –0.13 –0.19 0.02 –0.03 0.16
     Long-term debt securities –8.19 1.74 –1.32 0.73 0.73 –1.16 –1.63 –1.44 0.16
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –5.11 2.24 –2.93 0.69 0.28 –1.52 –2.38 –0.14 0.54
         Non-financial corporations –1.45 –0.10 0.21 0.21 0.08 –0.04 –0.04 –0.32 0.19
         Financial corporations –2.68 2.81 –2.22 0.57 0.27 –1.31 –1.75 –0.35 0.46
         General government –0.99 –0.46 –0.92 –0.09 –0.07 –0.18 –0.58 0.53 –0.11
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.27 –0.62 1.08 –0.18 0.32 0.18 0.77 –1.32 –0.22
   Equity and investment fund shares 55.17 38.44 49.78 10.72 10.90 11.96 16.20 19.39 28.81
     Equity 14.88 18.84 18.94 6.83 4.29 4.40 3.43 13.62 15.57
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 0.85 9.44 6.61 4.31 1.43 1.11 –0.24 8.07 6.35
         Non-financial corporations 0.49 6.28 3.52 2.52 1.31 0.88 –1.19 6.47 3.41
         Financial corporations 0.36 3.16 3.09 1.79 0.12 0.23 0.95 1.61 2.94
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 9.87 4.37 7.46 0.97 1.72 2.19 2.58 3.02 6.40
       Other equity  1 4.16 5.03 4.86 1.55 1.13 1.10 1.08 2.53 2.82
     Investment fund shares 40.29 19.60 30.84 3.89 6.61 7.57 12.78 5.76 13.24
       Money market fund shares –0.30 –0.22 –0.32 –0.12 –0.01 0.18 –0.37 0.38 –0.14
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 40.59 19.81 31.16 4.01 6.62 7.39 13.14 5.38 13.39
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 20.23 15.80 17.93 3.44 3.45 4.46 6.57 5.29 5.62
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 37.42 28.18 38.28 10.90 9.24 8.62 9.52 10.62 6.44
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 35.52 37.28 27.51 11.20 6.59 4.98 4.75 11.53 7.90
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –25.91 –9.52 –3.60 22.06 –7.78 7.25 –25.13 20.87 –12.41
   Total 221.96 250.03 267.83 83.61 65.34 59.56 59.32 90.36 109.17
 External financing
   Loans 55.38 68.41 81.16 15.88 23.84 24.85 16.59 13.08 17.62
     Short-term loans –2.19 2.44 0.92 0.47 0.87 –0.62 0.20 –1.58 –2.29
     Long-term loans 57.57 65.97 80.23 15.41 22.97 25.47 16.39 14.66 19.90
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 47.24 57.42 67.17 9.09 16.62 21.66 19.79 15.65 18.46
       Consumer loans 11.25 11.14 14.42 6.15 6.56 3.67 –1.96 –2.67 –2.05
       Entrepreneurial loans –3.11 –0.14 –0.43 0.65 0.66 –0.49 –1.25 0.10 1.21
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 49.99 61.72 73.41 12.51 21.22 21.09 18.60 15.52 17.96
       Loans from other financial institutions 5.40 6.69 7.74 3.38 2.62 3.76 –2.01 –2.44 –0.35
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.66 0.80 0.31 0.51 0.10 0.20 –0.50 –0.16 0.25
   Total 56.04 69.21 81.46 16.39 23.94 25.04 16.09 12.92 17.87
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2019 2020
 Item 2017 2018 2019 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,317.5 2,457.4 2,597.2 2,482.2 2,524.6 2,548.2 2,597.2 2,621.4 2,693.8
     Currency 197.1 227.3 260.1 231.1 239.6 249.9 260.1 279.6 296.0
     Deposits 2,120.3 2,230.1 2,337.1 2,251.1 2,285.0 2,298.3 2,337.1 2,341.7 2,397.8
       Transferable deposits 1,288.4 1,398.0 1,509.1 1,415.2 1,449.6 1,466.9 1,509.1 1,527.8 1,586.4
       Time deposits 245.4 252.4 253.9 254.3 253.5 253.2 253.9 250.8 249.9
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 586.5 579.7 574.2 581.6 581.9 578.2 574.2 563.2 561.5
     Debt securities 122.5 117.5 121.4 121.2 123.1 122.5 121.4 108.9 114.5
       Short-term debt securities 2.5 2.1 1.6 2.0 1.8 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.7
       Long-term debt securities 120.0 115.4 119.7 119.3 121.2 120.9 119.7 107.4 112.7
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 82.9 80.2 81.4 83.3 84.5 83.4 81.4 72.3 76.7
           Non-financial corporations 12.6 12.1 12.4 12.5 12.6 12.5 12.4 11.0 11.8
           Financial corporations 66.4 64.6 66.6 67.4 68.6 67.7 66.6 58.2 61.9
           General government 3.9 3.4 2.5 3.4 3.3 3.2 2.5 3.1 3.0
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 39.6 37.4 39.9 37.9 38.6 39.2 39.9 36.6 37.7
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,242.4 1,160.2 1,381.9 1,253.1 1,290.1 1,319.8 1,381.9 1,216.0 1,369.5
     Equity 646.5 586.8 701.7 638.4 658.9 669.8 701.7 614.1 703.7
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 227.9 184.1 223.9 203.7 210.1 209.3 223.9 171.7 209.2
         Non-financial corporations 191.5 151.9 182.3 166.9 171.0 169.3 182.3 138.7 172.3
         Financial corporations 36.4 32.2 41.6 36.8 39.1 40.0 41.6 33.0 36.9
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 103.1 100.1 136.1 116.4 120.0 126.1 136.1 116.8 144.5
       Other equity  1 315.4 302.7 341.6 318.3 328.8 334.5 341.6 325.7 349.9
     Investment fund shares 595.9 573.4 680.2 614.7 631.2 650.0 680.2 601.9 665.8
       Money market fund shares 2.7 2.4 2.3 2.2 2.3 2.5 2.3 2.7 2.7
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 593.2 571.1 678.0 612.5 628.9 647.5 678.0 599.2 663.2
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 360.1 375.9 393.8 379.3 382.8 387.2 393.8 399.1 404.7
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 991.4 1,011.1 1,069.1 1,027.6 1,041.6 1,054.7 1,069.1 1,080.2 1,087.0
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 846.5 883.8 911.4 889.4 894.0 899.6 911.4 922.9 930.8
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 31.1 29.6 29.6 30.6 31.5 32.3 29.6 29.0 29.6
   Total 5,911.5 6,035.6 6,504.5 6,183.5 6,287.6 6,364.3 6,504.5 6,377.4 6,629.9
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,711.8 1,775.6 1,857.8 1,791.4 1,816.3 1,841.1 1,857.8 1,871.0 1,886.6
     Short-term loans 54.4 58.1 58.8 58.5 59.4 58.8 58.8 57.2 54.9
     Long-term loans 1,657.3 1,717.5 1,799.0 1,732.9 1,756.9 1,782.4 1,799.0 1,813.8 1,831.6
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,247.3 1,307.9 1,378.6 1,316.9 1,337.4 1,359.0 1,378.6 1,394.3 1,412.5
       Consumer loans 211.8 218.1 231.4 224.1 229.7 233.3 231.4 228.8 226.0
       Entrepreneurial loans 252.7 249.7 247.7 250.4 249.2 248.8 247.7 247.8 248.1
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,610.0 1,667.2 1,741.6 1,679.6 1,701.8 1,722.9 1,741.6 1,757.2 1,773.2
       Loans from other financial institutions 101.8 108.5 116.2 111.8 114.5 118.2 116.2 113.8 113.4
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 17.3 18.3 19.2 20.2 20.4 20.8 19.2 20.7 21.6
   Total 1,729.1 1,793.9 1,877.0 1,811.6 1,836.7 1,862.0 1,877.0 1,891.7 1,908.1
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
November 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
 
 
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local security
government government government government funds government government government government funds
Period € billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2014 + 17.0 + 15.5 + 2.0 − 3.9 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 + 29.1 + 17.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 + 36.4 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.3 + 8.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.3
2017 p + 44.4 + 7.8 + 13.9 + 11.4 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.3
2018 p + 61.6 + 20.8 + 12.1 + 12.8 + 16.0 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
2019 p + 52.5 + 22.7 + 16.0 + 5.1 + 8.7 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3
2018         H1  p + 51.3 + 18.9 + 15.5 + 7.7 + 9.3 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.6
         H2  p + 10.3 + 1.9 − 3.4 + 5.1 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2019         H1  p + 46.5 + 19.0 + 13.0 + 6.4 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  p + 6.0 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2020         H1  pe − 51.6 − 27.1 − 10.2 − 6.4 − 7.8 − 3.2 − 1.7 − 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.5
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2014 2,213.6 1,395.8 658.2 176.1 1.4 75.6 47.7 22.5 6.0 0.0
2015 2,188.4 1,371.6 658.2 176.3 1.4 72.3 45.3 21.8 5.8 0.0
2016 2,171.6 1,365.2 640.9 178.0 1.1 69.3 43.6 20.4 5.7 0.0
2017 p 2,122.2 1,349.7 613.6 175.2 0.8 65.1 41.4 18.8 5.4 0.0
2018 p 2,073.6 1,322.5 599.8 167.4 0.7 61.8 39.4 17.9 5.0 0.0
2019 p 2,057.2 1,299.4 609.4 165.1 0.7 59.6 37.7 17.7 4.8 0.0
2018         Q1  p 2,100.3 1,337.1 604.1 174.0 1.0 64.0 40.7 18.4 5.3 0.0
         Q2  p 2,085.8 1,328.7 600.6 172.5 0.9 62.9 40.1 18.1 5.2 0.0
         Q3  p 2,086.2 1,334.9 599.9 167.2 0.8 62.6 40.0 18.0 5.0 0.0
         Q4  p 2,073.6 1,322.5 599.8 167.4 0.7 61.8 39.4 17.9 5.0 0.0
2019         Q1  p 2,083.9 1,324.0 611.7 165.7 0.7 61.6 39.2 18.1 4.9 0.0
         Q2  p 2,074.3 1,319.9 609.9 164.3 0.7 61.1 38.9 18.0 4.8 0.0
         Q3  p 2,091.2 1,327.6 619.9 163.7 0.6 61.0 38.7 18.1 4.8 0.0
         Q4  p 2,057.2 1,299.4 609.4 165.1 0.7 59.6 37.7 17.7 4.8 0.0
2020         Q1  p 2,110.1 1,327.0 631.8 165.1 0.8 61.1 38.4 18.3 4.8 0.0
         Q2  p 2,278.5 1,473.2 653.0 165.2 1.0 67.4 43.6 19.3 4.9 0.0
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus   
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. 2Quarterly  
GDP ratios are based on the national output of the four preceding quarters. 
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
 
 
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2014 1,313.9 673.0 482.3 158.5 1,296.9 691.3 227.5 147.1 60.5 47.1 123.4 + 17.0 1,160.0
2015 1,364.9 705.1 501.2 158.6 1,335.8 721.9 233.0 153.0 64.5 42.2 121.2 + 29.1 1,213.3
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 + 36.4 1,270.4
2017 p 1,485.2 773.1 549.5 162.5 1,440.8 783.9 250.1 168.4 71.6 33.7 133.0 + 44.4 1,329.4
2018 p 1,553.8 808.0 572.6 173.2 1,492.2 806.0 259.6 173.4 78.7 31.1 143.5 + 61.6 1,387.6
2019 p 1,610.6 834.1 597.5 179.0 1,558.1 845.9 271.5 181.9 86.2 27.5 145.1 + 52.5 1,438.7
As a percentage of GDP
2014 44.9 23.0 16.5 5.4 44.3 23.6 7.8 5.0 2.1 1.6 4.2 + 0.6 39.6
2015 45.1 23.3 16.6 5.2 44.1 23.9 7.7 5.1 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 1.0 40.1
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.5
2017 p 45.6 23.7 16.9 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 + 1.4 40.8
2018 p 46.3 24.1 17.1 5.2 44.5 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.3 + 1.8 41.3
2019 p 46.7 24.2 17.3 5.2 45.2 24.5 7.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 4.2 + 1.5 41.7
Percentage growth rates
2014 + 3.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.8 − 8.4 + 1.0 . + 3.5
2015 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 6.6 − 10.5 − 1.8 . + 4.6
2016 + 4.5 + 4.8 + 4.6 + 2.9 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.2 + 5.6 − 11.7 + 4.9 . + 4.7
2017 p + 4.1 + 4.6 + 4.8 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 3.9 + 3.9 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 9.5 + 4.6 . + 4.6
2018 p + 4.6 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 6.6 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 9.8 − 7.8 + 7.8 . + 4.4
2019 p + 3.6 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 3.3 + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 4.9 + 9.6 − 11.6 + 1.1 . + 3.7
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  
Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
November 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2013 p 761.8 619.7 14.7 773.6 225.3 286.9 65.7 42.8 23.5 − 11.8 536.7 531.9 + 4.9 1,198.1 1,205.0 − 6.9
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.4 799.4 11.2 975.4 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 35.0 684.7 676.6 + 8.0 1,573.7 1,530.6 + 43.1
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
         Q4  p 255.2 203.9 2.2 262.1 73.1 89.7 6.2 20.3 9.6 − 6.9 174.6 163.4 + 11.2 400.7 396.4 + 4.3
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 230.4 71.0 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 10.5 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 366.8 + 7.5
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 233.4 67.5 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 22.8 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 371.9 + 24.3
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
         Q4  p 269.3 210.6 3.2 272.1 76.1 87.5 5.1 22.5 7.7 − 2.8 181.9 172.6 + 9.3 420.9 414.4 + 6.5
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.4 2.5 239.1 75.6 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 5.7 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 381.7 − 1.7
         Q2  p 212.1 158.0 2.7 269.2 69.5 119.2 8.6 15.4 3.4 − 57.1 175.9 187.0 − 11.1 354.6 422.9 − 68.2
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2013 p 313.2 335.6 − 22.4 324.3 323.9 + 0.4 207.6 206.3 + 1.3
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.3 419.5 + 17.9 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 113.4 118.5 − 5.1 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 99.4 + 6.2 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 97.5 + 8.5 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 115.6 118.2 − 2.6 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 102.4 + 3.2 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
         Q2  p 70.8 114.8 − 44.0 108.2 125.3 − 17.1 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
November 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
 
 
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2013 619,708 535,173 287,641 216,430 31,101 84,274 + 262 27,775
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,836
2017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,368
2018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,775
2019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2018         Q1 189,457 159,974 83,370 69,413 7,191 19,173 + 10,310 6,398
         Q2 194,715 166,191 88,450 71,995 5,745 29,064 − 540 6,592
         Q3 189,015 161,683 84,952 69,414 7,317 27,579 − 248 7,579
         Q4 203,128 177,157 92,363 76,459 8,335 35,492 − 9,521 6,206
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 202,383 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 29,784 + 37 6,179
         Q3 193,918 166,676 86,117 72,677 7,882 27,569 − 327 7,402
         Q4 210,062 182,556 98,381 78,809 5,365 37,733 − 10,227 6,146
2020         Q1 198,351 168,099 83,086 75,420 9,593 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 158,161 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 25,107 − 2,131 6,997
         Q3 ... 156,397 78,502 72,613 5,282 ... ... 9,705
2019         Sep. . 67,409 34,984 29,786 2,639 . . 2,201
2020         Sep. . 58,657 29,021 27,468 2,167 . . 2,046
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
 
 
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Domestic Import trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total VAT VAT fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2013 570,213 245,909 158,198 42,280 19,508 25,923 196,843 148,315 48,528 7,053 100,454 15,723 4,231 35,040
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,345
2017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,141
2018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,571
2019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2018         Q1 172,111 81,713 48,059 17,640 9,418 6,595 59,248 45,272 13,977 291 23,752 5,836 1,271 12,136
         Q2 178,102 86,322 51,395 14,889 9,302 10,736 55,801 41,220 14,581 2,215 26,474 6,170 1,119 11,912
         Q3 173,202 78,105 50,368 12,683 7,192 7,862 59,169 43,951 15,218 2,315 26,424 5,797 1,391 11,519
         Q4 190,161 86,001 58,409 15,204 7,513 4,876 60,581 44,994 15,587 4,257 31,936 6,109 1,276 13,004
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770
         Q3 179,020 81,267 53,668 13,614 7,607 6,379 61,057 45,976 15,081 2,221 26,654 6,485 1,336 12,344
         Q4 196,300 89,619 60,632 16,575 7,128 5,284 62,696 47,175 15,520 3,660 32,301 6,746 1,279 13,745
2020         Q1 181,350 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,114 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175
         Q3 168,308 73,766 47,470 13,492 5,411 7,392 59,819 47,933 11,886 796 25,930 6,784 1,212 11,910
2019         Sep. 72,852 40,248 16,460 14,743 7,574 1,471 20,915 16,081 4,834 1 9,139 2,092 458 5,443
2020         Sep. 63,521 33,650 12,521 14,001 5,664 1,464 18,229 14,668 3,562 1 8,853 2,388 399 4,864
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2019: 48.9:47.7:3.4. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2019: 24.0:76.0. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
November 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2013 39,364 14,378 13,820 11,553 8,490 7,009 2,102 3,737 8,394 4,633 1,635 1,060 56,549 43,027 12,377
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2018         Q1 4,865 4,587 2,425 6,388 2,602 1,725 591 569 3,576 1,431 479 350 17,638 13,880 3,291
         Q2 10,158 5,127 3,485 2,442 2,360 1,805 466 631 3,270 2,166 470 264 18,827 14,548 3,853         Q3 10,423 4,353 3,886 2,752 2,128 1,677 531 674 3,592 1,463 464 278 18,128 13,764 3,919         Q4 15,436 4,860 4,543 2,197 1,956 1,650 545 749 3,645 1,752 481 231 17,224 13,713 3,140
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 17,959 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 19,163 14,869 3,881         Q3 10,519 4,624 3,667 2,770 2,251 1,639 515 668 3,923 1,824 474 264 17,118 12,659 4,019         Q4 15,379 5,086 4,507 2,281 2,035 1,745 538 730 4,223 1,798 488 237 17,422 13,861 3,190
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 12,971 8,842 3,895         Q3 9,985 4,365 3,978 2,817 2,366 1,499 506 414 3,730 2,262 509 283 ... ... ...
2019         Sep. 3,671 2,248 923 670 689 541 174 224 1,298 546 158 90 . . .
2020         Sep. 3,497 2,064 1,035 700 773 453 188 143 1,268 837 171 111 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2013 260,166 181,991 77,067 258,268 219,560 15,528 + 1,898 33,114 29,193 3,701 119 100 4,250
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949         Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 − 3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
November 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
 
 
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2013 32,636 27,594 1,224 245 32,574 15,411 1,082 6,040 . 912 5,349 + 61 −
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −
2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −
2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −
2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −
         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −
         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −
         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −
         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −
         Q3 8,350 6,934 153 − 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 . 472 1,414 − 10,269 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
 
 
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2013 196,405 182,179 11,500 194,537 62,886 30,052 32,799 12,619 12,087 9,758 9,979 + 1,867
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 757
2017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,041
2018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,654
2019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264
         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934
         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736
         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573
         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
         Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 − 1,378
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. 
sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
November 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2013 24,972 24,891 24,405 3,389 10,058 5,674 896 1,155 + 567
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 4,778 12,957 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 47,228 46,508 44,008 4,990 13,043 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,202 3,251 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,229 3,251 2,835 561 384 − 510
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 1,198 3,232 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 1,205 3,237 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 1,288 3,277 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 1,288 3,296 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 1,288 3,280 3,067 633 489 + 249
         Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 1,266 3,281 3,173 664 468 + 105
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2013 + 246,781 + 19,473 + 7,292 − 4,601 2013 2,211,421 12,438 661,141 190,555 43,675 1,303,612
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,213,569 12,774 632,927 190,130 44,640 1,333,098
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,188,404 85,952 621,415 186,661 48,583 1,245,794
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,171,646 205,391 598,526 179,755 45,046 1,142,9292017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,122,248 319,159 552,504 175,617 42,121 1,032,8472018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018 2,073,595 364,731 508,821 181,077 42,009 976,9562019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019  
p 2,057,166 366,562 476,020 177,601 49,707 987,276
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1 2,100,279 329,387 529,897 176,495 42,221 1,022,280
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2 2,085,756 344,279 514,227 179,856 41,938 1,005,455         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3 2,086,219 356,899 502,476 180,464 42,726 1,003,653         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4 2,073,595 364,731 508,821 181,077 42,009 976,956
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1  
p 2,083,861 359,884 498,724 179,512 42,186 1,003,554
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2  p 2,074,252 361,032 492,046 179,168 41,438 1,000,567
         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3  p 2,091,213 358,813 489,832 179,228 47,831 1,015,509
         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4  p 2,057,166 366,562 476,020 177,601 49,707 987,276
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1  p 2,110,059 371,076 496,703 180,477 56,098 1,005,705
         Q2 + 185,560 + 126,585 + 31,212 − 7,314          Q2  p 2,278,477 424,141 561,244 181,288 55,800 1,056,004
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
November 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
 
 
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other government
or quarter) Total and deposits  1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2013 2,211,421 10,592 85,836 1,470,698 100,594 543,700 . .
2014 2,213,569 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,896 531,412 . .
2015 2,188,404 14,303 65,676 1,499,010 89,074 520,341 . .
2016 2,171,646 15,845 69,715 1,483,871 94,976 507,239 . .
2017 2,122,248 14,651 48,789 1,484,462 86,513 487,832 . .
2018         Q1 2,100,279 12,472 48,431 1,479,513 76,260 483,604 . .
         Q2 2,085,756 12,636 54,933 1,465,727 73,256 479,204 . .
         Q3 2,086,219 15,607 59,989 1,465,852 68,923 475,847 . .
         Q4 2,073,595 14,833 52,572 1,456,543 75,999 473,648 . .
2019         Q1  p 2,083,861 15,663 64,218 1,460,634 71,234 472,112 . .
         Q2  p 2,074,252 12,868 56,256 1,463,027 74,511 467,589 . .
         Q3  p 2,091,213 17,586 62,602 1,465,529 79,144 466,353 . .
         Q4  p 2,057,166 14,595 49,180 1,459,128 68,519 465,743 . .
2020         Q1  p 2,110,059 11,564 70,930 1,472,976 89,468 465,121 . .
         Q2  p 2,278,477 13,282 122,238 1,534,559 132,678 475,720 . .
Central government
2013 1,389,791 10,592 78,996 1,113,029 64,970 122,204 2,696 10,303
2014 1,395,841 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,100 1,202 12,833
2015 1,371,573 14,303 49,512 1,138,951 45,256 123,550 1,062 13,577
2016 1,365,248 15,845 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 120,337 556 8,478
2017 1,349,683 14,651 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,078 1,131 10,603
2018         Q1 1,337,071 12,472 35,923 1,132,746 37,211 118,719 1,065 9,887
         Q2 1,328,657 12,636 42,888 1,119,893 35,048 118,192 1,036 10,693
         Q3 1,334,898 15,607 46,614 1,118,470 36,633 117,575 817 10,260
         Q4 1,322,526 14,833 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,250 933 9,959
2019         Q1  p 1,323,993 15,663 50,032 1,102,604 39,185 116,508 809 11,566
         Q2  p 1,319,861 12,868 42,752 1,109,057 38,950 116,234 835 13,845
         Q3  p 1,327,584 17,586 48,934 1,105,439 39,067 116,558 704 13,833
         Q4  p 1,299,384 14,595 38,480 1,101,866 28,592 115,850 605 10,285
2020         Q1  p 1,327,045 11,564 56,680 1,103,935 38,708 116,157 546 8,229
         Q2  p 1,473,233 13,282 109,221 1,139,513 80,942 130,275 510 7,296
State government
2013 663,944 − 6,847 360,706 11,921 284,470 12,141 2,655
2014 658,164 − 8,391 361,916 19,245 268,612 14,825 2,297
2015 658,234 − 16,169 362,376 22,133 257,557 15,867 2,348
2016 640,887 − 14,515 361,996 19,266 245,110 11,273 1,694
2017 613,601 − 12,543 354,688 18,412 227,958 14,038 2,046
2018         Q1 604,075 − 12,548 349,682 17,372 224,473 12,997 1,882
         Q2 600,595 − 12,073 348,833 17,668 222,020 13,952 2,018
         Q3 599,864 − 13,392 350,399 15,235 220,838 13,674 1,936
         Q4 599,845 − 10,332 352,376 17,647 219,490 14,035 1,891
2019         Q1  p 611,666 − 14,190 361,293 18,657 217,526 15,229 2,004
         Q2  p 609,890 − 13,508 357,571 24,068 214,743 17,631 1,887
         Q3  p 619,884 − 13,671 363,723 29,048 213,442 17,755 1,957
         Q4  p 609,431 − 10,703 361,084 25,049 212,595 14,934 1,831
2020         Q1  p 631,833 − 14,252 372,596 34,508 210,477 12,233 1,815
         Q2  p 652,968 − 13,020 398,890 34,218 206,839 11,073 2,190
Local government
2013 173,759 − − 646 25,325 147,788 2,523 530
2014 176,120 − − 1,297 26,009 148,814 1,959 734
2015 176,259 − − 2,047 27,414 146,798 2,143 463
2016 178,016 − − 2,404 26,941 148,671 1,819 431
2017 175,220 − − 3,082 24,503 147,636 1,881 466
2018         Q1 173,997 − − 2,426 24,662 146,909 1,777 460
         Q2 172,519 − − 2,561 24,467 145,490 1,909 465
         Q3 167,189 − 1 2,703 20,543 143,943 2,031 485
         Q4 167,403 − 1 3,046 20,344 144,012 1,884 497
2019         Q1  p 165,673 − 1 2,960 18,801 143,911 2,139 498
         Q2  p 164,257 − − 2,961 18,757 142,538 2,016 525
         Q3  p 163,691 − − 3,016 18,517 142,158 2,065 555
         Q4  p 165,057 − − 2,996 19,052 143,009 1,862 532
2020         Q1  p 165,094 − − 3,128 18,125 143,842 1,893 528
         Q2  p 165,159 − − 3,094 18,307 143,759 2,265 367
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
November 2020
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2013 1,287 − − − 360 927 − 3,872
2014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,1222015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,6852016 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,0442017 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2018         Q1 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,610
         Q2 883 − − − 383 500 − 3,721         Q3 790 − − − 400 390 − 3,841         Q4 674 − − − 372 302 − 4,506
2019         Q1  
p 707 − − − 437 270 − 4,110
         Q2  p 726 − − − 541 185 − 4,224
         Q3  p 578 − − − 375 203 − 4,179
         Q4  p 695 − − − 359 336 − 4,753
2020         Q1  p 759 − − − 271 488 − 4,100
         Q2  p 964 − − − 565 399 − 3,995
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 983,807 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,548
2008 1,015,846 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 74,6262009 1,082,101 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,048
2010 1,333,248 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 238,339
2011 1,343,276 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 211,5162012 1,387,104 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,1942013 1,389,791 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,1742014 1,395,841 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 177,488
2015 1,371,573 14,303 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 168,806
2016 1,365,248 15,845 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 170,3412017 1,349,683 14,651 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 166,8392018 1,322,526 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,3072019 
p 1,299,384 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,442
2018         Q1 1,337,071 12,472 951 1,168,669 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 155,930
         Q2 1,328,657 12,636 941 1,162,780 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,240         Q3 1,334,898 15,607 932 1,165,084 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,208         Q4 1,322,526 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,307
2019         Q1  
p 1,323,993 15,663 902 1,152,636 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 155,693
         Q2  p 1,319,861 12,868 852 1,151,809 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,184
         Q3  p 1,327,584 17,586 822 1,154,373 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 155,625
         Q4  p 1,299,384 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,442
2020         Q1  p 1,327,045 11,564 . 1,160,616 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 154,865
         Q2  p 1,473,233 13,282 . 1,248,734 774,587 178,329 56,061 − 3,752 95,622 79,987 . 211,217
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
November 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
  
  
  
  2018   2019   2020
  2017   2018   2019   2017   2018   2019   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
Item Index 2015 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector
(excluding construction) 108.6 109.3 105.4 3.9 0.7 − 3.6 − 1.6 − 1.9 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 4.3 − 6.2 − 19.4
Construction 102.0 103.7 107.3 0.1 1.7 3.5 3.0 6.3 2.3 4.7 1.4 6.7 1.6
Wholesale/retail trade, transport
and storage, hotel and restaurant
services 105.0 107.5 109.7 2.7 2.3 2.1 1.7 2.2 1.1 3.4 1.7 − 0.4 − 12.9
Information and communication 108.2 115.8 120.2 5.0 7.0 3.8 7.5 4.4 3.7 4.2 2.8 0.3 − 3.1
Financial and insurance
activities 100.8 97.1 99.1 4.2 − 3.6 2.0 − 2.6 0.3 2.4 3.6 1.9 1.0 − 0.2
Real estate activities 100.4 100.8 101.8 − 0.1 0.3 1.0 − 0.2 0.7 0.7 1.2 1.5 0.5 − 0.6
Business services  1 107.2 109.8 110.8 4.8 2.4 0.9 0.9 1.6 0.3 1.0 0.7 − 2.0 − 16.0
Public services, education and
health 104.2 105.7 107.4 1.7 1.4 1.6 1.2 1.8 1.3 1.9 1.5 − 0.3 − 9.1
Other services 99.4 101.0 102.1 1.2 1.6 1.1 1.9 1.1 1.0 1.6 0.7 − 2.4 − 19.9
Gross value added 105.0 106.4 106.9 2.7 1.3 0.4 0.5 1.0 − 0.3 1.1 0.0 − 1.6 − 11.3
Gross domestic product  2 104.9 106.2 106.8 2.6 1.3 0.6 0.5 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 0.2 − 1.8 − 11.3
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 104.0 105.6 107.2 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.5 1.3 1.7 2.2 1.0 − 1.6 − 13.0
Government consumption 105.8 107.0 109.9 1.6 1.2 2.7 0.5 2.3 1.7 3.6 3.2 2.7 3.8
Machinery and equipment 107.4 112.1 112.7 4.2 4.4 0.5 3.6 2.8 1.1 1.7 − 2.7 − 9.5 − 27.9
Premises 104.7 107.4 111.5 0.8 2.6 3.8 4.1 6.8 2.5 4.1 2.2 6.2 1.4
Other investment  4 109.3 114.2 117.3 3.9 4.5 2.7 4.5 2.9 2.5 2.9 2.6 − 1.1 − 1.4
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.7 0.1 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.6 0.0
Domestic demand 105.8 107.7 109.0 2.7 1.8 1.2 1.9 2.3 1.6 0.9 0.2 − 1.0 − 8.4
Net exports  6 . . . 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 1.1 − 1.7 0.4 0.0 − 0.9 − 3.4
Exports 107.3 109.8 110.8 4.7 2.3 1.0 0.1 1.7 − 1.3 2.7 0.8 − 3.2 − 22.2
Imports 110.0 114.1 117.0 5.3 3.6 2.6 3.3 4.7 2.7 2.0 0.9 − 1.6 − 17.3
Gross domestic product  2 104.9 106.2 106.8 2.6 1.3 0.6 0.5 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 0.2 − 1.8 − 11.3
At current prices ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,704.1 1,755.4 1,806.9 3.0 3.0 2.9 3.3 2.4 3.3 3.6 2.3 0.0 − 11.7
Government consumption 648.2 670.3 704.5 3.9 3.4 5.1 2.8 4.8 4.2 6.0 5.4 5.5 7.2
Machinery and equipment 224.5 235.6 240.1 4.8 5.0 1.9 4.4 3.8 2.4 3.3 − 1.2 − 8.1 − 26.9
Premises 321.0 344.9 373.7 4.3 7.4 8.4 9.4 12.3 7.4 8.3 6.0 9.7 4.3
Other investment  4 120.5 128.8 134.2 5.4 6.9 4.2 6.9 4.4 3.9 4.3 4.1 0.2 0.1
Changes in inventories  5 13.6 15.0 − 10.3 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,031.8 3,150.0 3,249.1 4.4 3.9 3.1 4.5 4.2 3.8 2.7 2.0 0.9 − 7.5
Net exports 228.1 206.4 199.9 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,538.8 1,590.0 1,617.4 6.5 3.3 1.7 1.9 3.1 − 0.4 3.0 1.2 − 2.9 − 22.5
Imports 1,310.7 1,383.6 1,417.4 8.1 5.6 2.4 6.1 5.9 3.4 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 21.1
Gross domestic product  2 3,259.9 3,356.4 3,449.1 4.0 3.0 2.8 2.7 3.0 1.9 3.6 2.5 0.6 − 8.9
IV. Prices (2015 = 100)
Private consumption 102.2 103.7 105.1 1.5 1.5 1.3 1.7 1.1 1.6 1.4 1.3 1.7 1.4
Gross domestic product 102.7 104.4 106.7 1.4 1.7 2.2 2.1 1.9 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.7
Terms of trade 100.9 100.1 100.9 − 0.9 − 0.8 0.9 − 0.9 0.3 0.2 1.4 1.5 1.4 4.4
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,694.7 1,771.8 1,845.9 4.3 4.5 4.2 4.3 4.5 4.4 4.5 3.5 2.9 − 3.6
Entrepreneurial and property
income 741.8 738.3 718.2 3.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 − 1.9 − 1.9 − 6.1 0.1 − 3.4 − 4.6 − 17.6
National income 2,436.5 2,510.1 2,564.1 3.9 3.0 2.2 2.6 2.4 1.4 3.1 1.7 0.6 − 7.3
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,337.2 3,447.4 3,542.8 3.9 3.3 2.8 2.9 3.1 2.2 3.5 2.3 0.7 − 8.3
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2020. 1Professional, sci- stitutions serving households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer soft-
entific, technical, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added ware and entertainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Includ-
plus taxes on products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit in- ing net increase in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy TotalInter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2016 101.5 105.3 98.6 101.1 100.9 101.3 102.6 101.0 101.6 101.0 99.6 102.1
2017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.8 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.3
2018 2 105.8 2 108.9 97.4 105.9 105.5 106.0 106.1 106.9 107.3 109.0 106.5 103.5
2019 102.5 112.7 90.4 101.7 101.8 101.4 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.5 92.0
2019 Q3 102.3 119.1 81.1 101.1 102.0 100.1 104.2 101.1 102.7 107.5 102.0 89.1
Q4 103.4 124.2 94.3 100.5 97.2 102.0 109.2 102.7 97.2 106.0 108.6 84.9
2020 Q1 96.4 100.2 94.0 95.9 101.1 90.5 101.5 99.0 98.0 103.5 91.3 79.1
r Q2 84.1 115.7 72.7 79.5 85.6 70.9 84.9 91.2 78.7 89.1 81.4 44.1
x,p Q3 93.7 118.3 75.8 90.7 94.2 84.6 98.1 100.6 90.6 96.7 86.6 71.9
2019 Sep. 106.8 121.4 81.7 106.2 103.9 108.2 117.3 103.0 106.5 113.9 109.1 99.5
Oct. 105.0 121.8 91.8 103.0 104.9 99.6 114.0 107.2 104.5 108.6 100.5 89.9
Nov. 108.7 126.4 95.2 106.7 103.3 108.6 116.3 107.4 105.0 111.1 108.7 97.9
Dec. 96.6 124.4 95.9 91.8 83.3 97.7 97.2 93.6 82.2 98.2 116.6 66.8
2020 Jan. 92.2 86.0 99.3 92.7 98.6 86.1 98.7 97.6 95.0 99.8 83.3 79.6
Feb. 97.0 97.3 92.0 97.4 100.8 94.3 103.2 97.4 98.4 102.8 91.1 90.3
Mar. 99.9 117.3 90.6 97.6 103.9 91.0 102.7 102.1 100.5 107.9 99.5 67.4
r Apr. 76.9 112.7 72.9 70.9 84.1 54.9 72.4 89.0 74.0 86.0 70.9 14.6
r May 82.2 113.1 71.6 77.7 83.4 69.5 85.2 88.6 77.0 86.0 77.5 45.6
r June 93.3 121.2 73.7 90.0 89.4 88.2 97.2 96.1 85.0 95.2 95.8 72.1
x July 93.7 119.3 75.4 90.6 93.0 85.8 93.4 99.7 87.3 94.1 86.4 76.2
x Aug. 88.3 113.8 76.3 84.7 91.3 75.6 92.1 96.4 86.9 93.8 79.1 57.4
x,p Sep. 99.0 121.8 75.7 96.9 98.3 92.5 108.7 105.6 97.5 102.3 94.3 82.1
Annual percentage change
2016 + 1.8 + 5.7 – 1.4 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 1.6 + 3.0 + 1.2 + 1.8 + 1.3 – 0.1 + 2.5
2017 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.1
2018 2+ 0.9 2+ 0.2 – 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 – 1.7
2019 – 3.1 + 3.5 – 7.2 – 4.0 – 3.5 – 4.3 + 0.1 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.3 – 2.8 –11.1
2019 Q3 – 3.7 + 2.6 –13.0 – 4.3 – 4.4 – 2.9 + 0.1 – 9.2 – 4.9 – 2.5 – 3.0 – 7.6
Q4 – 4.0 + 1.8 – 5.6 – 5.0 – 4.6 – 6.7 + 2.7 – 2.2 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 6.2 –13.0
2020 Q1 – 5.0 + 6.8 – 8.2 – 6.7 – 3.5 –10.8 – 6.2 – 1.4 – 7.9 – 3.7 – 9.2 –19.5
r Q2 –18.1 + 1.7 –13.0 –22.3 –17.2 –30.6 –17.6 – 8.4 –25.0 –15.1 –20.7 –53.8
x,p Q3 – 8.5 – 0.6 – 6.6 –10.2 – 7.6 –15.5 – 5.9 – 0.5 –11.8 –10.0 –15.1 –19.3
2019 Sep. – 4.0 + 2.1 –10.9 – 4.7 – 4.5 – 3.5 – 1.3 – 9.9 – 4.7 – 2.2 – 3.1 – 8.2
Oct. – 4.5 + 1.2 – 5.8 – 5.7 – 3.9 – 8.2 + 1.6 – 3.3 – 6.9 – 3.4 – 7.5 –13.8
Nov. – 2.3 + 3.6 – 3.8 – 3.4 – 3.6 – 4.3 + 3.8 – 0.9 – 6.3 – 3.1 – 4.1 – 9.2
Dec. – 5.2 + 0.5 – 7.0 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 7.7 + 2.6 – 2.2 – 9.1 – 5.5 – 6.8 –17.1
2020 Jan. – 1.3 +14.1 – 9.1 – 2.7 – 2.3 – 3.6 – 2.0 – 1.6 – 6.0 – 0.8 – 5.1 – 7.2
Feb. – 1.6 + 4.4 – 5.0 – 2.3 – 0.1 – 5.6 – 1.9 + 2.9 – 4.3 + 0.5 – 6.6 – 9.2
Mar. –11.1 + 4.0 –10.4 –13.8 – 7.6 –20.9 –13.6 – 5.0 –12.8 – 9.8 –14.4 –38.5
r Apr. –24.5 ± 0.0 –17.3 –29.7 –18.9 –44.5 –28.2 –10.7 –29.5 –16.3 –28.6 –84.3
r May –19.2 + 1.6 –15.1 –23.4 –19.1 –30.8 –16.1 –11.3 –25.7 –17.0 –22.0 –52.7
r June –10.9 + 3.3 – 6.0 –14.0 –13.6 –17.6 – 8.9 – 3.2 –19.9 –12.1 –12.4 –25.9
x July – 9.5 – 2.2 – 7.4 –11.2 –10.3 –15.0 – 6.2 – 1.9 –16.4 –10.8 –16.0 –16.4
x Aug. – 8.7 ± 0.0 – 5.0 –10.8 – 7.2 –17.1 – 3.9 – 2.2 –10.6 – 9.0 –15.9 –25.3
x,p Sep. – 7.3 + 0.3 – 7.3 – 8.8 – 5.4 –14.5 – 7.3 + 2.5 – 8.5 –10.2 –13.6 –17.5
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 As of January 2018 weights in structural and civilengineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical Office.  3 Influenced by a change
in holiday dates.  x Provisional; estimated and adjusted in advance by the Federal
Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly Production Survey and the Quarterly
Survey in the specialised construction industry, respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2016 100.7 + 0.9 98.9 – 0.9 101.9 + 2.1 100.6 + 0.8 105.3 + 5.6 99.0 – 0.8
2017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 +10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.7 + 5.1 116.5 +10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.1 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.1 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
2019 Sep. 105.4 – 3.9 100.1 – 8.3 108.4 – 1.1 108.4 – 4.2 139.8 +11.5 98.1 –10.2
Oct. 106.2 – 4.8 104.0 – 8.7 106.8 – 3.4 111.6 + 2.5 128.1 + 0.5 106.1 + 3.3
Nov. 106.2 – 5.6 103.2 – 7.3 107.3 – 5.9 111.6 + 5.6 138.1 +13.5 102.9 + 2.5
Dec. 102.2 – 8.4 92.7 – 4.2 109.2 –11.1 93.7 – 2.3 120.5 +10.0 84.9 – 7.1
2020 Jan. 107.4 – 0.6 110.1 – 1.2 105.4 – 0.5 110.5 + 2.4 131.9 +11.3 103.5 – 0.8
Feb. 104.9 + 2.2 105.6 + 0.9 103.1 + 2.2 114.9 + 7.6 125.5 + 9.6 111.4 + 6.8
Mar. 98.7 –15.6 108.6 – 4.8 90.5 –23.8 114.3 – 0.8 125.5 – 2.3 110.7 – 0.2
Apr. 65.7 –37.0 77.6 –26.2 54.8 –47.1 93.0 –11.9 92.7 –19.4 93.1 – 9.2
May 71.4 –29.6 77.0 –25.1 64.8 –35.4 96.3 – 7.2 115.2 + 1.9 90.2 –10.4
June 96.8 –10.8 87.0 –17.4 102.4 – 7.7 100.5 – 4.6 120.1 – 0.7 94.1 – 6.1
July 96.0 – 7.2 94.1 – 8.5 96.0 – 6.7 104.4 – 5.6 120.5 – 1.1 99.1 – 7.3
Aug. 91.3 – 1.9 90.2 – 6.0 90.2 + 0.3 103.9 + 0.2 124.2 + 2.6 97.3 – 0.8
p Sep. 102.9 – 2.4 100.0 – 0.1 103.6 – 4.4 110.8 + 2.2 146.0 + 4.4 99.2 + 1.1
From the domestic market
2016 99.8 ± 0.0 97.6 – 2.2 101.8 + 2.1 98.0 – 1.8 103.1 + 3.4 96.3 – 3.5
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.9 101.6 + 3.7 108.7 + 5.4 99.3 + 3.1
2018 107.2 + 0.2 108.6 + 1.4 106.6 – 1.1 102.9 + 1.3 114.7 + 5.5 98.9 – 0.4
2019 101.2 – 5.6 99.1 – 8.7 102.9 – 3.5 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 – 2.7
2019 Sep. 100.3 – 7.0 95.2 –11.4 104.2 – 4.6 103.6 + 2.8 131.5 +10.2 94.1 – 0.4
Oct. 99.1 – 7.2 98.5 –10.8 98.5 – 5.0 107.0 – 0.4 131.9 + 9.5 98.6 – 4.2
Nov. 102.8 – 8.4 100.7 – 9.3 103.5 – 9.1 109.6 + 1.3 135.7 +11.9 100.8 – 2.9
Dec. 93.6 – 7.7 84.2 – 8.1 102.3 – 8.2 89.2 – 1.9 107.4 + 8.4 83.1 – 5.7
2020 Jan. 100.6 – 6.6 104.1 – 3.4 97.4 –10.4 102.2 + 2.0 111.0 + 3.3 99.2 + 1.5
Feb. 101.9 – 2.8 99.9 – 2.7 103.0 – 3.1 105.9 – 1.0 110.5 + 0.2 104.4 – 1.4
Mar. 96.8 –13.8 102.8 – 5.9 89.7 –22.3 110.2 + 2.2 107.9 –15.3 111.0 + 9.7
Apr. 67.7 –32.4 74.6 –25.4 59.5 –40.9 83.4 –13.3 74.0 –31.9 86.6 – 5.9
May 74.9 –24.5 75.1 –24.7 72.3 –27.2 91.6 – 4.9 109.8 + 3.7 85.5 – 8.2
June 104.9 + 4.2 82.0 –17.3 126.0 +22.7 94.8 – 1.5 110.9 + 4.9 89.4 – 3.9
July 94.6 – 7.6 92.7 – 7.9 95.8 – 7.5 97.5 – 6.1 103.8 – 9.4 95.3 – 4.9
Aug. 88.2 – 3.1 88.5 – 2.9 86.1 – 4.2 99.9 + 2.4 112.1 + 3.7 95.8 + 1.8
p Sep. 98.3 – 2.0 94.6 – 0.6 101.1 – 3.0 101.3 – 2.2 126.4 – 3.9 92.8 – 1.4
From abroad
2016 101.5 + 1.7 100.3 + 0.5 101.9 + 2.1 102.6 + 2.8 107.1 + 7.3 101.1 + 1.3
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 +11.6 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 +14.7 104.5 + 3.4
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 111.9 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 – 0.5 113.4 + 8.5
2019 107.7 – 4.7 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.5 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.6
2019 Sep. 109.3 – 1.7 105.3 – 5.1 110.9 + 0.9 112.1 – 8.7 146.4 +12.4 101.1 –16.1
Oct. 111.5 – 3.3 110.0 – 6.5 111.8 – 2.6 115.1 + 4.5 125.1 – 6.0 111.8 + 9.0
Nov. 108.8 – 3.5 106.0 – 5.0 109.6 – 4.0 113.1 + 9.1 140.1 +14.8 104.5 + 6.9
Dec. 108.7 – 9.0 101.8 – 0.7 113.3 –12.6 97.1 – 2.6 131.1 +11.2 86.2 – 8.2
2020 Jan. 112.6 + 4.0 116.5 + 1.0 110.3 + 5.9 117.0 + 2.8 148.8 +16.9 106.8 – 2.4
Feb. 107.1 + 6.0 111.8 + 4.7 103.1 + 5.6 121.8 +14.3 137.6 +16.8 116.7 +13.3
Mar. 100.1 –16.8 114.9 – 3.6 91.0 –24.7 117.5 – 2.9 139.6 + 8.0 110.4 – 6.7
Apr. 64.1 –40.4 80.8 –27.0 51.9 –50.7 100.4 –11.1 107.7 –10.3 98.0 –11.4
May 68.8 –33.3 79.0 –25.6 60.3 –40.2 100.0 – 8.8 119.6 + 0.6 93.8 –12.0
June 90.6 –20.8 92.4 –17.4 88.1 –23.9 104.9 – 6.8 127.5 – 4.4 97.7 – 7.7
July 97.0 – 6.9 95.7 – 8.9 96.1 – 6.2 109.8 – 5.3 133.9 + 4.9 102.0 – 9.0
Aug. 93.6 – 1.2 92.1 – 9.1 92.7 + 3.1 107.0 – 1.4 134.0 + 1.8 98.4 – 2.7
p Sep. 106.3 – 2.7 105.9 + 0.6 105.1 – 5.2 118.2 + 5.4 161.8 +10.5 104.1 + 3.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2016 114.4 +14.5 115.0 +15.1 116.9 +17.0 114.9 +15.0 108.9 +9.1 113.7 +13.8 111.7 +11.8 116.0 +16.1
2017 122.4 +7.0 123.1 +7.0 123.1 +5.3 123.4 +7.4 121.8 +11.8 121.6 +6.9 119.8 +7.3 125.0 +7.8
2018 134.7 +10.0 131.2 +6.6 136.6 +11.0 127.9 +3.6 125.2 +2.8 138.8 +14.1 135.6 +13.2 132.4 +5.9
2019 146.0 +8.4 145.1 +10.6 150.2 +10.0 142.2 +11.2 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +6.0 147.9 +9.1 141.3 +6.7
2019 Aug. 134.7 +4.7 135.6 +13.2 139.3 +10.8 131.3 +12.7 139.2 +24.0 133.6 –3.9 137.2 +7.7 129.0 –2.2
Sep. 147.9 +5.9 146.7 +2.2 157.0 +0.6 130.5 +0.2 173.0 +13.8 149.4 +10.4 143.5 +6.6 147.6 +8.8
Oct. 136.8 +3.6 137.4 +6.8 154.8 +9.6 124.2 +1.6 129.6 +17.0 136.2 +0.1 135.1 +0.4 127.9 +3.4
Nov. 145.4 +13.1 154.8 +23.2 149.7 +7.3 166.8 +42.3 127.1 +13.6 134.5 +1.9 167.9 +22.6 117.1 +4.1
Dec. 148.2 –1.3 148.9 +2.2 178.2 +7.0 131.1 –3.0 119.1 +2.4 147.3 –5.2 154.3 –5.7 122.9 –1.3
2020 Jan. 129.3 +10.2 134.0 +10.9 137.4 +11.0 134.0 +8.3 122.8 +23.0 123.9 +9.3 140.8 +11.2 111.3 +8.3
Feb. 134.5 +1.2 143.0 +10.5 148.3 +24.6 141.0 +4.9 133.1 –8.3 124.6 –9.1 139.3 +5.2 120.5 –15.1
Mar. 158.8 –7.5 154.0 –6.0 169.6 –0.5 141.1 –10.9 150.6 –7.6 164.4 –9.1 155.2 –6.6 156.4 –12.5
Apr. 149.6 –2.3 134.0 –10.1 131.6 –12.1 137.2 –9.5 130.1 –5.0 167.6 +6.1 140.3 –3.6 171.1 +4.4
May 138.9 –6.0 124.1 –14.2 146.7 –0.1 103.2 –30.7 127.9 +5.0 156.2 +3.2 121.6 –18.0 154.2 +4.3
June 168.4 +3.9 153.2 –5.3 165.1 +4.2 139.5 –14.9 164.8 +0.7 186.1 +14.4 144.4 –12.9 197.9 +23.5
July 150.0 –2.5 151.5 +2.4 157.8 +2.1 136.8 –3.6 186.0 +25.7 148.1 –7.9 136.5 –10.4 160.6 +3.5
Aug. 136.9 +1.6 135.6 ±0.0 159.6 +14.6 114.4 –12.9 135.4 –2.7 138.4 +3.6 130.4 –5.0 130.5 +1.2
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2016 102.5 +2.4 102.1 +2.0 101.6 +1.5 101.0 +0.8 99.9 –0.3 101.5 +1.3 103.9 +3.9 109.5 +9.4
2017 107.6 +5.0 105.8 +3.6 105.9 +4.2 108.1 +7.0 106.2 +6.3 103.0 +1.5 107.7 +3.7 120.5 +10.0
2018 110.7 +2.9 107.5 +1.6 109.6 +3.5 105.6 –2.3 107.1 +0.8 103.1 +0.1 112.4 +4.4 127.7 +6.0
3 2019 114.8 +3.7 110.9 +3.2 112.1 +2.3 106.5 +0.9 108.7 +1.5 107.1 +3.9 118.4 +5.3 138.3 +8.3
2019 Sep. 112.0 +3.9 107.9 +3.8 106.5 +0.9 110.0 +1.2 110.4 +2.0 103.6 +4.9 117.5 +6.2 139.4 +11.3
Oct. 117.1 +2.4 112.5 +2.3 112.8 +1.8 116.3 +0.1 110.2 +2.1 111.1 +2.6 121.7 +5.5 141.3 +3.3
Nov. 123.4 +3.8 118.7 +3.5 114.8 +4.9 115.6 +3.0 133.0 +0.9 115.9 +3.4 123.9 +5.0 164.3 +1.0
Dec. 133.1 +3.3 128.2 +2.3 128.0 +1.2 118.7 –3.0 158.9 +1.0 113.3 +3.3 133.0 +6.7 171.8 +11.6
2020 Jan. 107.8 +3.5 104.0 +2.3 103.9 +1.6 87.9 –2.7 113.3 +1.8 96.5 +4.9 119.9 +5.6 138.3 +5.4
Feb. 105.7 +3.7 101.3 +2.3 108.1 +6.4 80.6 –6.5 96.5 +2.6 97.1 +3.3 114.5 +3.5 126.4 +3.7
Mar. 118.0 +1.8 112.8 +0.4 130.7 +14.9 49.2 –53.9 83.4 –21.5 106.9 –6.8 135.2 +14.7 154.4 +15.3
Apr. 110.6 –4.2 105.1 –5.5 125.2 +10.5 28.7 –74.9 55.1 –40.4 100.4 –12.8 112.8 –3.3 173.4 +28.3
May 123.0 +8.6 117.2 +7.7 127.7 +14.2 78.2 –23.6 93.5 +0.6 127.0 +15.7 111.5 –3.7 169.8 +33.1
June 120.9 +5.1 115.5 +4.1 119.4 +3.4 96.0 –16.2 100.9 +3.0 121.7 +14.3 117.4 +2.1 162.9 +23.5
July 122.5 +6.2 117.1 +4.8 119.3 +4.8 98.0 –5.6 107.1 +13.2 125.0 +15.3 120.4 ±0.0 156.1 +13.9
Aug. 119.8 +7.9 114.4 +6.4 121.0 +9.1 90.4 –8.2 101.3 –0.7 116.3 +15.0 118.3 +3.2 154.1 +24.1
4 Sep. 117.6 +5.0 112.0 +3.8 114.0 +7.0 100.6 –8.5 103.8 –6.0 115.8 +11.8 114.9 –2.2 158.0 +13.3
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2019 figures are provisional and particularly
uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.  4 Unadjusted figures
partially estimated by the Federal Statistical Office.

Deutsche Bundesbank
70  Monthly Report
November 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
6. Labour market * 
 
 
 
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4 
Total of which: of which: of which:
Assigned
to the
legal
category
Solely of the
jobs Third Book
Services exempt of the
excluding from Social
Produc- temporary social Unem- Temporary Security
tion employ- employ- contri- Cyclically Code ploy- Vacan-
 Annual Annual sector ment ment butions  2 Total induced Total (SGB III) ment cies,  4, 6 
Thou- percentage Thou- percentage rate 4, 5 thou-
Period sands change sands change Thousands in % sands
2015 43,122 + 0.9 30,823 + 2.1 8,938 20,840 806 4,856 130 44 2,795 859 6.4 569
2016 43,661 + 1.2 31,508 + 2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 44,262 + 1.4 32,234 + 2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,868 + 1.4 32,964 + 2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,268 + 0.9 33,518 + 1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 8 2,267 827 8 5.0 774
2017         Q3 44,450 + 1.4 32,324 + 2.3 9,172 22,011 892 4,766 28 16 2,504 833 5.6 763
         Q4 44,699 + 1.4 32,759 + 2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 82 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018         Q1 44,398 + 1.5 32,563 + 2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 325 24 2,525 909 5.7 760
         Q2 44,790 + 1.4 32,802 + 2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 5.1 794
         Q3 45,028 + 1.3 33,040 + 2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
         Q4 45,257 + 1.2 33,452 + 2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019         Q1 44,920 + 1.2 33,214 + 2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
         Q2 45,240 + 1.0 33,388 + 1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 8 2,227 778 8 4.9 795
         Q3 45,376 + 0.8 33,548 + 1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
         Q4 45,538 + 0.6 33,924 + 1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020         Q1 r 45,066 r + 0.3 33,642 + 1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
         Q2 r 44,656 r − 1.3 9 33,428 9 + 0.1 9 9,390 9 23,145 9 641 9 4,247 ... 9 5,369 2,770 1,154 10 6.0 593
         Q3 11 44,722 11 − 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
2017         June 44,305 + 1.4 32,165 + 2.3 9,135 21,902 878 4,802 33 22 2,473 796 5.5 731
         July 44,344 + 1.5 32,128 + 2.4 9,123 21,869 890 4,803 30 18 2,518 842 5.6 750
         Aug. 44,385 + 1.4 32,396 + 2.3 9,189 22,060 896 4,739 28 15 2,545 855 5.7 765
         Sep. 44,621 + 1.3 32,732 + 2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
         Oct. 44,693 + 1.3 32,778 + 2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
         Nov. 44,763 + 1.4 32,830 + 2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772
         Dec. 44,640 + 1.4 32,609 + 2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 194 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018         Jan. 44,345 + 1.6 32,504 + 2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 287 23 2,570 941 5.8 736
         Feb. 44,376 + 1.5 32,551 + 2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 359 23 2,546 927 5.7 764
         Mar. 44,472 + 1.4 32,660 + 2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778
         Apr. 44,646 + 1.4 32,782 + 2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
         May 44,826 + 1.5 32,857 + 2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 5.1 793
         June 44,898 + 1.3 32,870 + 2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
         July 44,930 + 1.3 32,844 + 2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
         Aug. 44,981 + 1.3 33,131 + 2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
         Sep. 45,173 + 1.2 33,422 + 2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
         Oct. 45,262 + 1.3 33,488 + 2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
         Nov. 45,325 + 1.3 33,513 + 2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
         Dec. 45,184 + 1.2 33,286 + 2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019         Jan. 44,866 + 1.2 33,156 + 2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
         Feb. 44,908 + 1.2 33,199 + 2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
         Mar. 44,985 + 1.2 33,286 + 1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
         Apr. 45,146 + 1.1 33,383 + 1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
         May 45,269 + 1.0 33,433 + 1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 8 2,236 772 8 4.9 792
         June 45,304 + 0.9 33,407 + 1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
         July 45,315 + 0.9 33,360 + 1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
         Aug. 45,305 + 0.7 33,610 + 1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
         Sep. 45,509 + 0.7 33,938 + 1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
         Oct. 45,578 + 0.7 33,966 + 1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
         Nov. 45,601 + 0.6 33,968 + 1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
         Dec. 45,434 + 0.6 33,740 + 1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020         Jan. r 45,097 r + 0.5 33,608 + 1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
         Feb. r 45,104 r + 0.4 33,624 + 1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
         Mar. r 44,996 r + 0.0 33,648 + 1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
         Apr. r 44,718 r − 0.9 33,430 + 0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
         May r 44,622 r − 1.4 9 33,354 9 − 0.2 9 9,374 9 23,100 9 626 9 4,234 ... 9 5,688 2,813 1,172 10 6.1 584
         June r 44,628 r − 1.5 9 33,348 9 − 0.2 9 9,362 9 23,100 9 631 9 4,276 ... 9 4,423 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
         July r 44,655 r − 1.5 9 33,255 9 − 0.3 9 9,328 9 23,039 9 637 9 4,313 ... 9 3,317 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
         Aug. r 44,652 r − 1.4 9 33,507 9 − 0.3 9 9,373 9 23,236 9 644 9 4,270 ... 9 2,581 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
         Sep. 11 44,860 11 − 1.4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
         Oct. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency. *Annual and persons in the legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB
quarterly figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official II). 9Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Employment Agency. In 2018 and
figures are due to rounding. 1Workplace concept; averages. 2Monthly figures: end 2019, the estimated values for Germany deviated from the final data by a maximum
of month. 3Number within a given month. 4Mid-month level. 5Relative to the total of 0.1% for employees subject to social contributions, by a maximum of 0.7% for per-
civilian labour force. 6Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seaso- sons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by a maximum of 55.3% for
nal jobs, including jobs located abroad. 7From January 2017 persons receiving cyclically induced short-time work. 10From May 2020, calculated on the basis of
additional income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at new labour force figures. 11Initial preliminary estimate by the Federal Statistical
the same time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social Office. 
Security Code (SGB III) 8Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed

Deutsche Bundesbank
71  Monthly Report
November 2020
 XI. Economic conditions in Germany
 
7. Prices
  
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices HWWI
Index of Indices of Index of World Market
of which:  1 producer foreign trade prices Prices of Raw Materials  7 
prices ofindustrial
of which:
products Index of Memo  item:
Non- Actual Consumer Con- producer sold on
energy rents struction the prices  of price index
Energy Services for (national price domestic Other raw agricultural industrial
Total 2 Food 3 4, 5 2, 4 concept) index market  6 Exports Imports Energy  8 products  6 goods  4 housing materials  9 
Period 2015 = 100
Index level  
  
2016 100.4 101.3 101.0 94.6 101.1 101.2 100.5 101.9 98.4 98.7 99.0 96.7 83.2 98.4
2017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.12018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.22019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 111.5 102.4 101.7 110.0 108.1
 
2018         Dec. 104.4 107.0 103.8 103.5 104.0 105.2 104.2 104.7 111.6 102.1 102.4 111.4 103.2
2019         Jan. 103.4 107.4 102.9 101.5 102.9 105.4 103.4 105.1 111.5 102.2 102.2 112.3 104.4
         Feb. 103.9 107.9 103.4 101.7 103.6 105.6 103.8 114.0 105.0 112.1 102.3 102.5 114.3 109.4         Mar. 104.4 107.7 103.9 102.4 104.1 105.7 104.2 104.9 113.0 102.4 102.5 115.2 108.3
         Apr. 105.4 107.9 104.6 104.4 105.3 105.8 105.2 105.4 115.5 102.6 102.8 119.2 108.8
         May 105.7 108.3 104.6 106.1 105.3 105.9 105.4 115.0 105.3 115.7 102.5 102.7 116.6 106.6         June 106.0 108.4 104.1 104.9 106.6 106.1 105.7 104.9 115.1 102.3 101.3 102.8 108.6
         July 106.4 108.7 103.3 104.7 107.9 106.2 106.2 105.0 114.3 102.4 101.1 105.7 113.0
         Aug. 106.3 108.8 103.4 103.8 107.8 106.3 106.0 115.8 104.5 112.5 102.3 100.5 100.2 106.0         Sep. 106.2 108.8 104.7 103.8 106.9 106.4 106.0 104.6 109.9 102.4 101.1 105.9 107.5
         Oct. 106.3 108.6 105.0 103.8 106.9 106.6 106.1 104.4 110.3 102.4 101.0 105.7 107.1
         Nov. 105.4 109.0 105.2 103.7 104.9 106.7 105.3 116.4 104.4 112.1 102.4 101.5 110.5 106.9         Dec. 106.0 109.2 105.1 103.6 106.1 106.8 105.8 104.5 114.5 102.5 101.7 112.5 110.4
2020         Jan. 105.1 110.1 104.0 104.9 104.3 107.0 105.2 105.3
10 113.3 102.7 101.3 107.4 112.2
         Feb. 105.7 111.2 104.3 103.9 105.2 107.1 105.6 117.8 104.9 114.2 102.6 100.4 94.3 108.7         Mar. 105.8 111.0 105.2 101.6 105.5 107.3 105.7 104.1 113.8 101.9 96.9 61.3 104.9
         Apr. 106.2 112.2 105.4 98.6 106.7 107.4 106.1 103.4 112.5 101.5 95.2 49.7 101.0
         May 106.2 112.5 105.4 97.4 106.7 107.5 106.0 118.3 103.0 109.2 101.3 95.5 55.5 102.1         June 106.9 112.7 104.8 98.7 108.1 107.6 106.6 103.0 109.9 101.3 96.1 65.2 105.1
         July
11 106.4 11 110.2 11 102.5 11 98.0 11 109.4 11 107.7 11 106.1 103.2 107.5 101.3 96.4 68.3 107.5
         Aug. 11 106.2 11 110.1 11 102.6 11 97.6 11 109.0 11 107.8 11 106.0 11 115.7 103.2 104.8 101.2 96.5 71.2 111.7
         Sep. 11 105.8 11 109.9 11 103.6 11 96.9 11 108.0 11 107.8 11 105.8 103.6 103.3 101.3 96.8 70.4 117.9
         Oct. 11 105.8 11 110.2 11 103.9 11 97.0 11 107.6 11 108.0 11 105.9 ... ... ... ... 73.4 118.9
Annual percentage change  
  
2016 + 0.4 + 1.3 + 1.0 − 5.4 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.5 + 1.9 − 1.6 − 1.3 − 1.0 − 3.3 − 16.8 − 1.6
2017 + 1.7 + 2.7 + 1.2 + 3.1 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 3.3 + 2.7 + 10.0 + 1.7 + 3.5 + 19.7 + 8.82018 + 1.9 + 2.6 + 0.8 + 4.9 + 1.6 + 1.6 + 1.8 + 4.7 + 2.6 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 25.1 − 0.82019 + 1.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 4.6 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 0.5 − 1.0 − 11.7 + 1.8
 
2018         Dec. + 1.7 + 1.4 + 1.1 + 5.1 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 2.7 + 2.5 + 1.3 + 1.6 − 2.0 − 0.4
2019         Jan. + 1.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 2.6 + 2.1 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 2.6 + 6.0 + 1.1 + 0.8 − 3.1 − 0.9
         Feb. + 1.7 + 1.6 + 1.3 + 3.2 + 1.7 + 1.5 + 1.5 + 5.3 + 2.6 + 7.0 + 1.3 + 1.6 + 5.2 + 3.2         Mar. + 1.4 + 1.2 + 0.8 + 4.6 + 1.2 + 1.5 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 6.8 + 1.3 + 1.7 + 5.2 + 3.2
         Apr. + 2.1 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 4.9 + 2.4 + 1.4 + 2.0 + 2.5 + 9.4 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 2.1 + 2.5
         May + 1.3 + 1.3 + 1.4 + 4.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 5.1 + 1.9 + 10.8 + 0.7 − 0.2 − 10.2 − 5.2         June + 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.3 + 2.4 + 1.6 + 1.5 + 1.6 + 1.2 + 10.0 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 21.2 − 2.4
         July + 1.1 + 2.0 + 1.6 + 2.3 + 0.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 6.7 + 0.2 − 2.1 − 18.6 + 6.8
         Aug. + 1.0 + 2.3 + 1.1 + 0.7 + 0.7 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 4.3 + 0.3 + 1.8 − 0.1 − 2.7 − 23.2 + 0.3         Sep. + 0.9 + 1.6 + 0.9 − 1.2 + 1.2 + 1.4 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 1.5
+ 0.0 − 2.5 − 24.8 + 4.7
         Oct. + 0.9 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 2.2 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.1 − 0.6 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 3.5 − 27.0 + 1.5
         Nov. + 1.2 + 1.9 + 1.1 − 4.0 + 2.4 + 1.5 + 1.1 + 3.9 − 0.7 + 0.4 − 0.1 − 2.1 − 10.7 + 1.6         Dec. + 1.5 + 2.1 + 1.3 + 0.1 + 2.0 + 1.5 + 1.5 − 0.2 + 2.6 + 0.4 − 0.7 + 1.0 + 7.0
2020         Jan. + 1.6 + 2.5 + 1.1 + 3.3 + 1.4 + 1.5 + 1.7 + 0.2
10 + 1.6 + 0.5 − 0.9 − 4.4 + 7.5
         Feb. + 1.7 + 3.1 + 0.9 + 2.2 + 1.5 + 1.4 + 1.7 + 3.3 − 0.1 + 1.9 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 17.5 − 0.6         Mar. + 1.3 + 3.1 + 1.3 − 0.8 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 1.4 − 0.8 + 0.7 − 0.5 − 5.5 − 46.8 − 3.1
         Apr. + 0.8 + 4.0 + 0.8 − 5.6 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 0.9 − 1.9 − 2.6 − 1.1 − 7.4 − 58.3 − 7.2
         May + 0.5 + 3.9 + 0.8 − 8.2 + 1.3 + 1.5 + 0.6 + 2.9 − 2.2 − 5.6 − 1.2 − 7.0 − 52.4 − 4.2         June + 0.8 + 4.0 + 0.7 − 5.9 + 1.4 + 1.4 + 0.9 − 1.8 − 4.5 − 1.0 − 5.1 − 36.6 − 3.2
         July
11 + 0.0 11 + 1.4 11 − 0.8 11 − 6.4 11 + 1.4 11 + 1.4 11 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 5.9 − 1.1 − 4.6 − 35.4 − 4.9
         Aug. 11 − 0.1 11 + 1.2 11 − 0.8 11 − 6.0 11 + 1.1 11 + 1.4 11 + 0.0 11 − 0.1 − 1.2 − 6.8 − 1.1 − 4.0 − 28.9 + 5.4
         Sep. 11 − 0.4 11 + 1.0 11 − 1.1 11 − 6.6 11 + 1.0 11 + 1.3 11 − 0.2 − 1.0 − 6.0 − 1.1 − 4.3 − 33.5 + 9.7
         Oct. 11 − 0.5 11 + 1.5 11 − 1.0 11 − 6.6 11 + 0.7 11 + 1.3 11 − 0.2 ... ... ... ... − 30.6 + 11.0
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on Consumption according to Purpose (ECOICOP). 5Electricity, gas and other fuels as
data from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw well as transport fuels and lubricants, from January 2017 excludi ng lubricants. 6Exclu-
Materials: HWWI. 1Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding. 2With ding value added tax. 7For the euro area, in euro. 8Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natu-
effect from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of ral gas. 9Food, beverages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials. 10From
package holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series. 3Including alcoholic be- January 2020 onwards provisional figures. 11Influenced by a temporary reduction of
verages and tobacco. 4Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the value added tax. 
basis of the five digit structure set out in the European Classification of Individual

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
November 2020
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
  
  
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- As
age age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2012 1,150.0 4.2 776.1 4.0 376.8 1.5 1,152.9 3.2 1,668.4 2.5 161.0 − 1.3 9.7
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 − 2.5 9.3
2014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.2
2017 1,394.1 4.2 931.6 3.9 440.9 3.4 1,372.5 3.8 1,905.9 3.5 201.9 7.5 10.6
2018 1,461.3 4.8 975.2 4.7 452.8 2.7 1,428.0 4.0 1,970.8 3.4 215.4 6.7 10.9
2019 1,521.6 4.1 1,020.3 4.6 470.8 4.0 1,491.1 4.4 2,027.1 2.9 220.3 2.2 10.9
2019         Q1 355.3 4.4 239.0 5.0 117.8 3.1 356.8 4.4 508.3 2.5 73.0 2.7 14.4
         Q2 371.6 4.4 243.7 4.9 116.4 4.1 360.2 4.7 500.3 3.1 51.0 1.3 10.2
         Q3 378.1 4.5 259.1 5.1 118.9 4.4 378.0 4.9 506.1 3.5 46.6 2.1 9.2
         Q4 416.6 3.3 278.4 3.6 117.8 4.3 396.2 3.8 512.5 2.4 49.7 2.6 9.7
2020         Q1 365.6 2.9 246.3 3.1 123.2 4.6 369.5 3.6 521.2 2.6 85.9 17.7 16.5
         Q2 353.7 − 4.8 233.3 − 4.3 126.5 8.7 359.8 − 0.1 496.3 − 0.8 99.8 95.6 20.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in August 2020. *Households in- salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
cluding non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
  
  
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2012 92.5 2.6 92.7 2.5 92.7 2.8 92.7 2.8 92.4 2.9
2013 94.8 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 94.4 2.2
2014 97.7 3.1 97.8 2.9 97.7 2.8 97.7 2.8 97.2 2.9
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.5
2017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.0 104.3 2.1 104.5 2.3 105.1 2.5
2018 107.1 2.8 107.1 2.8 107.0 2.7 107.3 2.7 108.4 3.2
2019 110.2 2.9 110.2 2.9 109.7 2.5 110.0 2.5 111.6 2.9
2019         Q1 101.8 2.9 101.8 2.9 101.8 3.0 109.0 3.0 105.1 3.0
         Q2 103.0 2.1 103.0 2.1 102.9 2.2 109.8 2.2 109.2 3.1
         Q3 114.2 4.3 114.1 4.2 112.4 2.6 110.5 2.5 110.9 3.4
         Q4 121.9 2.4 121.8 2.3 121.8 2.4 110.7 2.3 121.3 2.4
2020         Q1 104.2 2.4 104.2 2.3 104.2 2.4 111.6 2.4 107.5 2.3
         Q2 105.0 1.9 104.9 1.9 105.1 2.1 112.1 2.1 104.9 − 3.9
2020         Mar. 104.3 2.5 104.3 2.4 104.4 2.5 111.8 2.4 . .
         Apr. 105.0 2.1 104.9 2.0 105.1 2.1 112.0 2.1 . .
         May 105.2 2.3 105.2 2.2 105.3 2.2 112.1 2.2 . .
         June 104.7 1.5 104.7 1.5 104.8 2.1 112.2 2.1 . .
         July 138.5 1.9 138.5 1.9 133.3 1.8 112.4 1.9 . .
         Aug. 105.1 1.8 105.1 1.8 105.0 1.8 112.5 1.8 . .
         Sep. 104.9 1.7 104.9 1.7 105.0 1.7 112.5 1.7 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such August 2020. 
as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10.Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2016 2,367.7 1,478.1 493.4 595.9 288.9 889.6 226.8 218.0 150.5 672.2 1,695.6 889.3 482.6 806.3 249.1 192.8
2017 2,400.8 1,490.0 500.0 602.9 295.9 910.8 230.6 225.7 158.2 758.8 1,642.0 867.3 496.4 774.7 236.4 195.7
3 2018 2,595.4 1,539.0 542.2 611.2 288.5 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.4 792.2 1,803.2 927.4 560.1 875.9 257.6 205.2
p 2019 2,808.8 1,772.1 588.0 737.7 333.5 1,036.7 257.7 239.0 172.6 824.3 1,984.5 1,093.3 678.1 891.2 289.9 207.8
3 2018 H1 2,551.8 1,533.0 541.7 602.5 288.3 1,018.8 250.1 236.1 143.3 775.6 1,776.2 909.4 541.0 866.7 254.7 210.2
H2 2,595.4 1,539.0 542.2 611.2 288.5 1,056.4 249.5 235.8 175.4 792.2 1,803.2 927.4 560.1 875.9 257.6 205.2
2019 H1 2,709.3 1,659.8 551.1 683.0 314.5 1,049.4 269.3 241.7 144.1 779.7 1,929.6 1,026.1 615.5 903.5 301.9 210.9
pH2 2,808.8 1,772.1 588.0 737.7 333.5 1,036.7 257.7 239.0 172.6 824.3 1,984.5 1,093.3 678.1 891.2 289.9 207.8
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 62.4 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.6 9.6 9.2 6.4 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.1
2017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.1 12.3 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.6 31.6 68.4 36.1 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
3 2018 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.8 9.9 7.9
p 2019 100.0 63.1 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.9 9.2 8.5 6.2 29.4 70.7 38.9 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
3 2018 H1 100.0 60.1 21.2 23.6 11.3 39.9 9.8 9.3 5.6 30.4 69.6 35.6 21.2 34.0 10.0 8.2
H2 100.0 59.3 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.7 9.6 9.1 6.8 30.5 69.5 35.7 21.6 33.8 9.9 7.9
2019 H1 100.0 61.3 20.3 25.2 11.6 38.7 9.9 8.9 5.3 28.8 71.2 37.9 22.7 33.4 11.1 7.8
pH2 100.0 63.1 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.9 9.2 8.5 6.2 29.4 70.7 38.9 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2016 1,910.1 1,147.2 322.5 473.9 270.8 762.9 209.7 170.0 115.5 514.5 1,395.7 715.9 370.3 679.8 223.1 140.9
2017 1,936.3 1,150.3 323.1 474.5 281.8 786.0 212.5 175.2 127.0 588.2 1,348.0 698.4 381.6 649.6 215.5 148.4
3 2018 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.8
p 2019 2,236.8 1,345.1 388.2 548.5 319.7 891.7 240.3 181.6 135.2 636.4 1,600.4 861.0 502.1 739.4 252.0 156.3
3 2018 H1 2,072.0 1,177.0 360.2 460.4 277.5 895.0 232.7 185.6 115.2 604.9 1,467.0 727.9 411.2 739.2 229.5 167.5
H2 2,093.2 1,173.8 359.3 462.9 277.5 919.4 231.4 182.2 136.5 612.2 1,481.0 741.9 428.3 739.1 231.3 150.8
2019 H1 2,164.7 1,247.6 358.0 501.5 302.7 917.2 252.0 187.0 114.4 604.2 1,560.5 805.6 452.6 754.9 260.2 162.6
pH2 2,236.8 1,345.1 388.2 548.5 319.7 891.7 240.3 181.6 135.2 636.4 1,600.4 861.0 502.1 739.4 252.0 156.3
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 60.1 16.9 24.8 14.2 39.9 11.0 8.9 6.1 26.9 73.1 37.5 19.4 35.6 11.7 7.4
2017 100.0 59.4 16.7 24.5 14.6 40.6 11.0 9.1 6.6 30.4 69.6 36.1 19.7 33.6 11.1 7.7
3 2018 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
p 2019 100.0 60.1 17.4 24.5 14.3 39.9 10.7 8.1 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.5 22.5 33.1 11.3 7.0
3 2018 H1 100.0 56.8 17.4 22.2 13.4 43.2 11.2 9.0 5.6 29.2 70.8 35.1 19.9 35.7 11.1 8.1
H2 100.0 56.1 17.2 22.1 13.3 43.9 11.1 8.7 6.5 29.3 70.8 35.4 20.5 35.3 11.1 7.2
2019 H1 100.0 57.6 16.5 23.2 14.0 42.4 11.6 8.6 5.3 27.9 72.1 37.2 20.9 34.9 12.0 7.5
pH2 100.0 60.1 17.4 24.5 14.3 39.9 10.7 8.1 6.1 28.5 71.6 38.5 22.5 33.1 11.3 7.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2016 457.6 330.9 170.9 122.0 18.1 126.7 17.1 48.0 34.9 157.7 299.9 173.4 112.3 126.5 25.9 51.9
2017 464.5 339.7 176.9 128.4 14.1 124.8 18.1 50.4 31.3 170.6 293.9 168.9 114.8 125.0 20.9 47.3
3 2018 502.2 365.2 182.9 148.3 11.0 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.0 322.2 185.5 131.7 136.7 26.4 54.4
p 2019 572.0 427.0 199.8 189.2 13.7 145.0 17.4 57.5 37.4 187.9 384.1 232.3 176.1 151.8 37.9 51.5
3 2018 H1 479.8 356.0 181.4 142.1 10.8 123.8 17.4 50.5 28.1 170.7 309.2 181.6 129.8 127.6 25.2 42.7
H2 502.2 365.2 182.9 148.3 11.0 137.1 18.2 53.6 38.9 180.0 322.2 185.5 131.7 136.7 26.4 54.4
2019 H1 544.6 412.3 193.2 181.6 11.9 132.3 17.3 54.7 29.7 175.4 369.1 220.5 162.9 148.6 41.7 48.3
pH2 572.0 427.0 199.8 189.2 13.7 145.0 17.4 57.5 37.4 187.9 384.1 232.3 176.1 151.8 37.9 51.5
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 72.3 37.3 26.7 4.0 27.7 3.7 10.5 7.6 34.5 65.5 37.9 24.5 27.7 5.7 11.3
2017 100.0 73.1 38.1 27.6 3.0 26.9 3.9 10.9 6.7 36.7 63.3 36.4 24.7 26.9 4.5 10.2
3 2018 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.2 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.8 35.8 64.2 36.9 26.2 27.2 5.3 10.8
p 2019 100.0 74.7 34.9 33.1 2.4 25.3 3.0 10.1 6.5 32.9 67.2 40.6 30.8 26.6 6.6 9.0
3 2018 H1 100.0 74.2 37.8 29.6 2.3 25.8 3.6 10.5 5.9 35.6 64.4 37.8 27.1 26.6 5.2 8.9
H2 100.0 72.7 36.4 29.5 2.2 27.3 3.6 10.7 7.8 35.8 64.2 36.9 26.2 27.2 5.3 10.8
2019 H1 100.0 75.7 35.5 33.3 2.2 24.3 3.2 10.1 5.5 32.2 67.8 40.5 29.9 27.3 7.7 8.9
pH2 100.0 74.7 34.9 33.1 2.4 25.3 3.0 10.1 6.5 32.9 67.2 40.6 30.8 26.6 6.6 9.0
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From this point onwards: significant changes in
IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2012 1,532.9 6.6 188.8 3.2 12.3 – 0.4 5.4 10.2 17.5 95.7 – 7.7 6.2 – 0.9 2.0 6.1 11.0
2013 1,541.1 – 0.6 187.2 – 2.8 12.2 – 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.5 99.5 5.5 6.5 0.4 2.0 5.9 11.1
2014 1,565.7 1.0 198.9 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.5 109.4 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.2 11.2
2015 1,635.4 6.9 196.2 – 1.0 12.0 – 1.0 6.1 10.6 18.1 91.7 – 16.3 5.6 – 1.5 1.7 6.7 11.6
2016 1,626.1 – 0.4 214.9 8.0 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.5 18.1 112.1 9.2 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,721.7 5.1 243.9 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.4 33.2 8.3 1.7 2.5 6.9 12.2
6 2018 1,709.6 0.7 233.4 – 0.8 13.7 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.8 129.7 – 6.2 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
p 2019 1,768.2 2.6 234.5 0.5 13.3 – 0.3 6.9 12.3 19.2 106.3 – 17.5 6.0 – 1.5 1.5 5.9 11.8
2015 H1 815.3 8.7 102.9 5.7 12.6 – 0.4 5.0 10.2 17.6 59.1 1.3 7.3 – 0.5 1.2 5.9 10.9
H2 831.4 5.1 93.6 – 7.6 11.3 – 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.5 32.7 – 36.6 3.9 – 2.5 2.3 7.2 11.7
2016 H1 782.7 – 1.9 111.8 6.3 14.3 1.1 6.1 10.5 18.0 65.7 2.9 8.4 0.4 1.7 6.4 11.4
H2 843.4 1.1 103.1 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.2 46.4 21.0 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.6 12.5
2017 H1 845.0 6.8 125.9 14.5 14.9 1.0 5.8 10.1 17.2 78.6 29.4 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.7
H2 879.8 3.5 117.7 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.4 63.2 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.5 12.4
6 2018 H1 849.5 – 0.0 120.7 – 2.4 14.2 – 0.4 5.1 10.6 18.2 72.9 – 5.2 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.4 12.5
H2 870.9 1.4 115.2 0.9 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.2 18.0 58.3 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.7 12.5
2019 H1 862.9 2.7 112.7 – 3.6 13.1 – 0.9 6.5 11.7 18.6 53.7 – 23.1 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
pH2 905.7 2.5 121.8 4.6 13.5 0.3 6.8 11.9 20.0 52.6 – 10.9 5.8 – 0.9 0.9 6.1 12.6
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2012 1,173.8 7.8 140.8 5.3 12.0 – 0.3 5.8 10.3 16.1 81.7 2.2 7.0 – 0.4 1.9 6.1 9.8
2013 1,179.0 – 0.8 138.8 – 2.5 11.8 – 0.2 5.1 10.3 15.7 74.5 – 5.7 6.3 – 0.3 1.6 5.8 10.5
2014 1,197.4 1.0 148.1 5.9 12.4 0.6 5.6 10.0 15.5 82.0 9.7 6.9 0.6 1.5 5.9 10.3
2015 1,282.5 7.0 144.0 – 2.6 11.2 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.0 65.2 – 19.8 5.1 – 1.8 2.1 6.5 10.3
2016 1,267.1 – 1.1 156.5 6.1 12.4 0.8 6.5 10.6 16.0 80.6 3.9 6.4 0.3 2.8 6.3 10.5
2017 1,362.9 5.6 181.6 16.8 13.3 1.3 6.8 10.9 15.6 108.0 40.8 7.9 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.4
6 2018 1,334.9 1.0 169.1 – 1.6 12.7 – 0.3 6.8 10.6 15.6 95.5 – 7.1 7.2 – 0.6 2.7 6.8 10.9
p 2019 1,376.3 2.1 161.2 – 3.9 11.7 – 0.7 6.6 11.3 16.6 71.8 – 23.1 5.2 – 1.8 1.2 5.7 10.0
2015 H1 636.4 8.8 80.1 7.9 12.6 – 0.1 5.4 10.2 15.5 48.8 5.6 7.7 – 0.2 2.1 6.1 10.0
H2 646.7 5.3 63.9 – 13.2 9.9 – 2.1 5.3 11.1 15.6 16.4 – 52.4 2.5 – 3.3 1.8 6.9 10.7
2016 H1 611.3 – 2.5 84.0 1.4 13.7 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.8 50.7 – 7.0 8.3 – 0.4 2.9 6.4 10.0
H2 655.9 0.4 72.6 12.0 11.1 1.2 6.2 11.3 16.4 29.9 34.5 4.6 0.9 2.4 6.3 10.6
2017 H1 678.7 7.3 98.5 18.8 14.5 1.4 6.0 10.1 16.1 64.0 37.6 9.4 2.1 2.3 5.8 10.8
H2 684.9 3.9 83.1 14.5 12.1 1.2 6.9 11.7 16.5 44.0 45.8 6.4 1.9 3.4 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 665.8 – 0.1 90.9 – 3.9 13.7 – 0.5 6.5 10.8 16.7 57.1 – 6.0 8.6 – 0.6 2.9 6.6 11.5
H2 678.8 2.1 80.6 1.2 11.9 – 0.1 6.2 11.1 15.9 39.8 – 8.6 5.9 – 0.7 1.9 6.4 10.9
2019 H1 673.0 2.5 80.0 – 7.8 11.9 – 1.3 7.1 10.6 16.0 39.7 – 26.2 5.9 – 2.4 1.7 5.8 9.4
pH2 703.4 1.7 81.2 0.3 11.6 – 0.2 5.9 10.8 16.5 32.2 – 19.0 4.6 – 1.2 0.6 5.2 11.1
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2012 359.1 2.8 48.0 – 3.2 13.4 – 0.8 5.1 10.1 23.0 14.0 – 46.6 3.9 – 3.0 2.1 5.7 14.2
2013 362.0 – 0.1 48.4 – 3.5 13.4 – 0.5 5.2 10.5 21.6 25.0 82.0 6.9 2.9 2.4 5.9 12.5
2014 368.3 0.9 50.8 1.9 13.8 0.1 6.2 12.7 22.6 27.3 4.3 7.4 0.2 2.9 6.5 13.7
2015 352.9 6.2 52.2 4.4 14.8 – 0.3 6.1 11.4 22.1 26.4 – 3.1 7.5 – 0.7 1.4 6.7 14.1
2016 358.9 2.6 58.4 14.0 16.3 1.6 6.9 13.5 25.8 31.6 26.5 8.8 1.6 2.5 8.3 15.5
2017 358.7 3.2 62.3 7.6 17.4 0.7 7.3 11.6 23.0 34.3 10.2 9.6 0.6 2.4 7.5 15.1
6 2018 374.7 – 0.6 64.4 1.7 17.2 0.4 5.7 10.5 24.7 34.2 – 2.9 9.1 – 0.2 1.6 5.9 16.6
p 2019 391.8 4.8 73.3 14.1 18.7 1.5 6.9 14.3 24.5 34.5 2.1 8.8 – 0.2 3.0 7.6 16.2
2015 H1 178.9 8.2 22.8 – 2.5 12.7 – 1.4 4.4 10.9 21.5 10.3 – 19.7 5.8 – 1.8 – 0.5 4.5 14.2
H2 184.7 4.5 29.7 10.3 16.1 0.8 7.0 12.1 23.5 16.3 9.7 8.8 0.4 2.5 7.7 15.0
2016 H1 171.5 1.0 27.8 26.8 16.2 3.3 5.1 10.3 23.8 15.0 68.2 8.7 3.4 1.0 6.4 14.9
H2 187.4 4.1 30.6 4.2 16.3 0.0 7.4 13.7 24.4 16.6 2.8 8.8 – 0.1 4.0 9.0 17.2
2017 H1 166.3 4.4 27.4 – 0.4 16.5 – 0.8 5.3 10.5 21.2 14.6 – 1.0 8.8 – 0.5 1.3 5.8 14.6
H2 195.0 2.0 34.7 14.9 17.8 2.1 6.9 12.5 24.6 19.2 20.8 9.9 1.5 3.0 8.2 17.9
6 2018 H1 183.7 0.5 29.8 3.4 16.2 0.5 4.0 9.7 22.9 15.8 – 1.0 8.6 – 0.1 – 0.9 5.1 15.5
H2 192.1 – 1.6 34.6 0.3 18.0 0.3 6.8 12.1 25.6 18.4 – 4.3 9.6 – 0.3 2.7 7.2 17.8
2019 H1 189.9 3.8 32.7 11.5 17.2 1.2 5.8 12.7 24.8 14.1 – 9.1 7.4 – 1.0 0.3 5.4 15.2
pH2 202.3 5.7 40.6 16.3 20.1 1.8 7.5 15.1 24.4 20.4 11.0 10.1 0.5 3.2 8.3 16.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From this point on-
wards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous pe-
riods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
November 2020
XII. External sector
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2019 2020
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q4 Q1 Q2 June July Aug.  p
Current account + 349,402 + 334,328 + 272,857 + 86,309 + 32,633 + 30,942 + 19,909 + 25,791 + 21,771A.
1. Goods
Exports 2,264,461 2,333,092 2,410,872 622,749 578,610 463,489 173,972 190,684 165,324Imports 1,918,923 2,046,438 2,083,735 524,386 501,626 407,759 145,993 154,572 140,518
Balance + 345,535 + 286,654 + 327,138 + 98,363 + 76,985 + 55,730 + 27,979 + 36,111 + 24,806
2. Services
Receipts 890,900 941,556 997,984 263,311 220,638 190,212 70,176 71,584 65,119Expenditure 803,086 828,078 939,691 267,163 236,044 178,594 65,975 64,138 58,702
Balance + 87,816 + 113,478 + 58,290 − 3,851 − 15,405 + 11,618 + 4,201 + 7,446 + 6,417
3. Primary income
Receipts 772,703 850,553 851,320 212,860 190,508 185,243 62,425 52,752 52,529Expenditure 718,927 764,515 812,307 190,185 172,137 185,764 65,339 59,421 52,694
Balance + 53,778 + 86,037 + 39,014 + 22,676 + 18,371 − 521 − 2,914 − 6,669 − 165
4. Secondary income
Receipts 106,489 110,165 113,380 30,062 27,749 28,167 10,148 9,038 8,144Expenditure 244,215 262,009 264,961 60,940 75,065 64,052 19,505 20,134 17,431
Balance − 137,726 − 151,844 − 151,581 − 30,877 − 47,316 − 35,885 − 9,357 − 11,097 − 9,287
Capital account − 20,154 − 35,493 − 25,205 − 2,607 + 60 − 4,753 − 1,717 + 163 + 2,214B.
Financial account (increase: +) + 350,102 + 301,200 + 226,372 + 82,099 + 11,612 + 5,994 + 41,429 − 14,204 + 35,665C.
1. Direct investment + 48,150 + 137,001 − 55,962 − 82,118 + 27,058 − 132,943 − 43,515 + 19,163 + 25,485
By resident units abroad + 373,767 − 230,442 + 42,937 − 144,668 − 33,442 + 22,905 − 52,098 + 32,961 + 62,055By non-resident units in the euro area + 325,618 − 367,443 + 98,896 − 62,551 − 60,500 + 155,847 − 8,584 + 13,798 + 36,570
2. Portfolio investment + 360,951 + 204,517 − 49,623 + 143,547 − 186,497 + 194,405 − 14,381 − 33,344 − 2,631
By resident units abroad + 651,777 + 192,849 + 434,814 + 155,163 − 127,378 + 383,253 + 114,219 + 25,307 + 41,839
Equity and
investment fund shares + 204,779 + 33,357 + 67,857 + 83,174 − 50,074 + 93,295 + 40,070 + 29,737 − 627
Long-term debt securities + 372,797 + 209,586 + 362,009 + 92,441 − 30,047 + 134,393 + 30,327 − 1,731 + 25,808Short-term debt securities + 74,200 − 50,092 + 4,949 − 20,451 − 47,257 + 155,565 + 43,822 − 2,699 + 16,658
By non-resident units in the euro area + 290,825 − 11,665 + 484,439 + 11,616 + 59,119 + 188,847 + 128,600 + 58,651 + 44,470
Equity and
investment fund shares + 420,726 + 112,108 + 255,284 + 77,902 − 72,236 + 119,699 + 39,465 + 54,879 + 24,922
Long-term debt securities − 137,401 − 59,148 + 222,427 − 24,221 + 54,040 − 31,298 + 45,334 − 5,844 + 22,757Short-term debt securities + 7,502 − 64,626 + 6,727 − 42,064 + 77,316 + 100,446 + 43,801 + 9,616 − 3,208
3. Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 22,866 + 40,233 − 2,809 − 5,261 + 12,232 + 37,454 + 17,563 + 6,350 − 66
4. Other investment − 80,583 − 105,624 + 331,533 + 28,448 + 155,394 − 96,207 + 81,852 − 5,858 + 11,540
Eurosystem − 179,132 − 133,831 + 142,656 − 37,545 − 58,087 + 45,217 + 68,871 + 43,168 + 7,460General government + 24,957 − 4,966 − 83 + 11,176 + 4,118 − 8,143 − 5,345 + 2,695 + 3,364MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 144,402 + 108,053 + 182,364 + 10,327 + 126,261 − 136,353 − 6,419 − 61,629 − 2,094Enterprises and households − 70,813 − 74,878 + 6,601 + 44,491 + 83,106 + 3,071 + 24,744 + 9,907 + 2,811
5. Reserve assets − 1,279 + 25,075 + 3,231 − 2,518 + 3,425 + 3,285 − 90 − 516 + 1,338
Net errors and omissions + 20,857 + 2,365 − 21,280 − 1,602 − 21,083 − 20,196 + 23,236 − 40,158 + 11,680D.
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary  
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
November 2020
XII. External sector
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.)  1 
of which:
Supple-
mentary Balance of of which: Errors
trade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2005 + 106,942 + 156,563 − 6,515 − 37,580 + 19,300 − 31,341 − 2,334 + 96,436 − 2,182 − 8,172
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 − 4,687 − 31,777 + 40,499 − 32,014 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 20,796
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 − 1,183 − 32,465 + 35,620 − 33,390 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,273
2008 + 144,954 + 184,160 − 3,947 − 29,122 + 24,063 − 34,147 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 22,725
2009 + 142,744 + 140,626 − 6,605 − 17,642 + 54,524 − 34,764 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 11,194
2010 + 147,298 + 160,829 − 6,209 − 25,255 + 51,306 − 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 − 9,357 − 29,930 + 69,087 − 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 − 11,388 − 30,774 + 65,658 − 38,703 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 43,882
2013 + 184,352 + 203,802 − 12,523 − 39,321 + 63,284 − 43,413 − 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,224
2014 + 210,906 + 219,629 − 14,296 − 25,303 + 57,752 − 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 − 2,564 + 26,416
2015 + 260,286 + 248,394 − 15,405 − 18,516 + 69,262 − 38,854 − 48 + 234,392 − 2,213 − 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 − 19,921 − 20,987 + 76,199 − 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 − 7,708
2017 + 253,883 + 252,831 − 15,448 − 24,372 + 75,419 − 49,995 − 2,999 + 283,208 − 1,269 + 32,323
2018 + 247,471 + 226,275 − 20,613 − 19,686 + 89,453 − 48,571 + 436 + 236,936 + 392 − 10,971
2019 r + 244,797 + 221,800 − 28,012 − 21,703 + 92,312 − 47,612 − 323 + 205,543 − 544 − 38,932
2017         Q4 + 72,464 + 59,651 − 6,472 − 2,974 + 28,816 − 13,029 − 3,322 + 80,237 − 1,446 + 11,094
2018         Q1 + 72,518 + 64,662 − 1,877 − 2,379 + 24,754 − 14,520 + 3,656 + 75,991 + 699 − 183
         Q2 + 65,001 + 65,174 − 3,051 − 2,912 + 8,042 − 5,302 − 508 + 61,968 − 374 − 2,526
         Q3 + 51,101 + 51,183 − 4,170 − 12,695 + 24,845 − 12,232 − 1,642 + 40,976 − 493 − 8,482
         Q4 + 58,852 + 45,257 − 11,515 − 1,700 + 31,812 − 16,517 − 1,069 + 58,001 + 560 + 219
2019         Q1  r + 64,465 + 56,962 − 4,195 − 1,755 + 25,936 − 16,677 + 844 + 40,491 − 63 − 24,818
         Q2  r + 53,626 + 53,142 − 7,003 − 3,998 + 10,714 − 6,232 − 406 + 42,597 + 444 − 10,623
         Q3  r + 58,947 + 59,752 − 6,859 − 13,011 + 24,513 − 12,308 + 197 + 29,606 − 349 − 29,538
         Q4  r + 67,759 + 51,945 − 9,954 − 2,939 + 31,148 − 12,395 − 958 + 92,848 − 576 + 26,047
2020         Q1 + 65,441 + 53,574 − 2,210 − 1,125 + 27,016 − 14,024 − 541 + 42,281 + 133 − 22,618
         Q2 + 36,119 + 28,429 − 1,594 + 3,482 + 13,319 − 9,111 + 459 + 45,358 + 243 + 8,779
         Q3  p + 64,006 + 57,699 − 218 − 6,463 + 22,880 − 10,111 − 1,209 + 60,369 − 1,276 − 2,429
2018         Apr. + 23,518 + 21,136 − 1,475 + 49 + 4,866 − 2,533 + 119 + 31,696 − 670 + 8,059
         May + 14,544 + 21,195 − 189 − 1,448 − 5,308 + 105 − 143 + 8,832 + 83 − 5,569
         June + 26,939 + 22,843 − 1,388 − 1,513 + 8,483 − 2,874 − 485 + 21,439 + 213 − 5,016
         July + 14,275 + 16,174 − 764 − 4,944 + 7,857 − 4,812 − 368 + 6,223 + 266 − 7,684
         Aug. + 16,805 + 17,232 − 1,536 − 5,192 + 8,462 − 3,697 − 41 + 23,333 − 640 + 6,569
         Sep. + 20,020 + 17,777 − 1,870 − 2,560 + 8,526 − 3,723 − 1,234 + 11,420 − 119 − 7,366
         Oct. + 18,495 + 18,411 − 1,812 − 4,210 + 8,651 − 4,357 − 945 + 3,533 + 700 − 14,017
         Nov. + 20,435 + 16,693 − 4,707 + 510 + 8,799 − 5,566 − 586 + 25,067 − 124 + 5,218
         Dec. + 19,921 + 10,153 − 4,995 + 2,000 + 14,362 − 6,595 + 462 + 29,401 − 17 + 9,018
2019         Jan.  r + 17,769 + 14,465 − 2,284 − 983 + 9,324 − 5,037 + 2,163 + 16,856 + 158 − 3,076
         Feb.  r + 15,814 + 17,758 − 1,453 − 405 + 6,479 − 8,018 + 143 + 15,799 + 112 − 158
         Mar.  r + 30,883 + 24,739 − 459 − 368 + 10,133 − 3,622 − 1,463 + 7,836 − 333 − 21,584
         Apr.  r + 20,638 + 17,568 − 2,277 − 715 + 7,453 − 3,668 − 73 + 20,138 + 547 − 427
         May  r + 13,402 + 19,259 − 2,905 − 258 − 6,395 + 797 − 37 + 5,567 + 182 − 7,798
         June  r + 19,586 + 16,315 − 1,821 − 3,025 + 9,656 − 3,361 − 296 + 16,892 − 285 − 2,397
         July  r + 19,402 + 21,458 − 2,739 − 4,723 + 7,265 − 4,599 + 201 + 8,459 + 348 − 11,144
         Aug.  r + 16,008 + 16,983 − 1,358 − 5,514 + 8,747 − 4,208 + 773 + 8,178 + 755 − 8,604
         Sep.  r + 23,537 + 21,311 − 2,762 − 2,774 + 8,501 − 3,501 − 777 + 12,970 − 1,452 − 9,790
         Oct.  r + 18,990 + 21,317 − 2,866 − 6,137 + 8,431 − 4,621 − 893 + 32,238 − 107 + 14,141
         Nov.  r + 23,515 + 17,876 − 2,549 + 480 + 8,727 − 3,568 − 498 + 34,837 − 356 + 11,820
         Dec.  r + 25,253 + 12,751 − 4,539 + 2,718 + 13,990 − 4,206 + 433 + 25,773 − 113 + 86
2020         Jan. + 16,607 + 14,306 − 744 − 740 + 10,194 − 7,153 + 301 + 3,033 + 898 − 13,875
         Feb. + 23,347 + 20,495 − 1,664 − 243 + 7,275 − 4,181 + 65 + 20,957 + 750 − 2,454
         Mar. + 25,487 + 18,773 + 199 − 142 + 9,547 − 2,690 − 907 + 18,292 − 1,514 − 6,289
         Apr. + 8,896 + 3,957 − 536 + 791 + 8,471 − 4,324 + 132 + 14,114 + 950 + 5,086
         May + 6,953 + 9,331 + 870 + 1,142 − 88 − 3,432 + 65 + 2,712 + 33 − 4,307
         June + 20,271 + 15,140 − 1,928 + 1,550 + 4,936 − 1,354 + 262 + 28,532 − 740 + 7,999
         July + 21,043 + 20,091 − 247 − 2,649 + 7,158 − 3,556 − 901 + 10,417 − 611 − 9,724
         Aug. + 16,641 + 14,424 − 18 − 2,966 + 8,359 − 3,176 + 614 + 36,168 − 611 + 18,913
         Sep.  p + 26,323 + 23,185 + 46 − 848 + 7,364 − 3,379 − 921 + 13,783 − 53 − 11,618
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions resulting from the difference between the balance on the finan cial account
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account . 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
November 2020
 XII. External sector
 
 3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
  by country and group of countries*
 
 € million
 2020
Group of countries/country  2017  2018  2019 May June July Aug. Sep.  p Jan./Sep.  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,278,958 1,317,440 1,328,152 880,003 80,214 96,029 102,296 91,233 109,778
Imports 1,031,013 1,088,720 1,104,141 751,073 73,261 80,636 83,093 79,305 88,990Balance + 247,946 + 228,720 + 224,010 + 128,931 + 6,953 + 15,393 + 19,202 + 11,928 + 20,788
I. Exports 872,427 900,141 902,831 602,645 54,250 66,504 68,319 63,155 76,487European countries
Imports 699,677 744,575 747,692 498,185 47,325 54,657 54,976 51,908 59,662Balance + 172,749 + 155,566 + 155,140 + 104,461 + 6,925 + 11,847 + 13,343 + 11,246 + 16,825
Exports 664,410 696,480 698,257 463,604 42,326 51,171 52,393 48,173 59,100 1. EU Member States (27)
Imports 549,250 586,433 593,251 398,797 38,315 44,934 44,382 42,290 48,663Balance + 115,160 + 110,047 + 105,006 + 64,807 + 4,011 + 6,237 + 8,012 + 5,883 + 10,437
Euro area (19) Exports 471,213 492,469 492,308 322,749 29,918 36,084 36,786 32,435 41,075
countries Imports 378,700 405,810 409,863 273,531 26,624 31,048 30,077 28,679 32,573
Balance + 92,513 + 86,659 + 82,445 + 49,219 + 3,294 + 5,036 + 6,709 + 3,756 + 8,502
of which:
Austria Exports 62,656 65,027 66,076 44,169 4,278 4,824 4,954 4,718 5,492
Imports 40,686 42,994 44,059 29,184 2,762 3,263 3,618 2,869 3,354Balance + 21,970 + 22,033 + 22,017 + 14,985 + 1,516 + 1,561 + 1,336 + 1,849 + 2,137
Belgium and Exports 50,071 50,389 52,006 35,313 3,136 4,086 3,910 3,627 4,495
Luxembourg Imports 43,689 49,315 46,322 29,552 2,893 3,145 3,093 3,099 3,363
Balance + 6,381 + 1,074 + 5,683 + 5,761 + 243 + 941 + 817 + 528 + 1,132
France Exports 105,687 105,359 106,564 66,752 6,091 7,742 7,693 6,479 8,408
Imports 64,329 65,024 66,199 41,253 3,926 4,444 4,372 4,160 4,824Balance + 41,359 + 40,335 + 40,364 + 25,498 + 2,165 + 3,298 + 3,321 + 2,319 + 3,584
Italy Exports 65,422 69,813 67,887 44,106 4,367 4,897 5,293 4,105 5,704
Imports 55,342 60,223 57,100 38,942 3,921 4,350 4,583 4,111 4,691Balance + 10,080 + 9,591 + 10,786 + 5,164 + 446 + 547 + 710 − 6 + 1,014
Netherlands Exports 84,661 91,061 91,528 62,130 6,027 6,856 6,817 6,441 7,641
Imports 90,597 97,709 97,816 65,589 6,647 6,870 7,033 6,755 7,554Balance − 5,935 − 6,649 − 6,288 − 3,459 − 620 − 14 − 216 − 314 + 87
Spain Exports 43,067 44,184 44,218 27,368 2,342 3,102 3,258 2,530 3,568
Imports 31,396 32,399 33,126 22,883 2,218 3,073 2,690 2,119 2,732Balance + 11,671 + 11,785 + 11,092 + 4,485 + 125 + 29 + 568 + 411 + 836
Other EU Member Exports 193,198 204,011 205,949 140,855 12,408 15,087 15,608 15,739 18,025
States Imports 170,551 180,623 183,387 125,267 11,691 13,886 14,305 13,611 16,089
Balance + 22,647 + 23,388 + 22,561 + 15,588 + 717 + 1,201 + 1,303 + 2,128 + 1,935
Exports 208,016 203,661 204,575 139,041 11,924 15,333 15,925 14,981 17,387 2. Other European
Imports 150,427 158,142 154,441 99,387 9,009 9,723 10,594 9,618 11,000 countries
Balance + 57,589 + 45,519 + 50,134 + 39,654 + 2,915 + 5,610 + 5,331 + 5,363 + 6,387
of which:
Switzerland Exports 53,913 54,021 56,345 42,279 4,385 4,877 4,752 4,313 4,745
Imports 45,689 45,913 45,824 33,727 3,608 3,476 3,794 3,095 3,772Balance + 8,224 + 8,108 + 10,521 + 8,552 + 777 + 1,401 + 957 + 1,218 + 972
United Exports 85,440 82,164 79,166 48,808 3,441 4,995 5,493 5,593 6,359
Kingdom Imports 36,820 37,025 38,397 25,725 2,147 2,425 2,426 2,447 2,784
Balance + 48,620 + 45,139 + 40,770 + 23,082 + 1,294 + 2,570 + 3,067 + 3,146 + 3,575
II. Exports 403,490 413,483 421,728 276,226 25,905 29,512 33,869 27,974 33,198Non-European
Imports 328,606 342,980 355,390 251,748 25,844 25,770 27,963 27,247 29,158 countries
Balance + 74,884 + 70,503 + 66,338 + 24,478 + 61 + 3,742 + 5,907 + 727 + 4,040
Exports 25,431 22,524 23,627 14,756 1,187 1,606 1,576 1,451 1,706 1. Africa
Imports 20,428 22,542 24,475 13,426 937 1,195 1,472 1,399 1,594Balance + 5,003 − 18 − 848 + 1,330 + 250 + 411 + 105 + 51 + 112
Exports 154,644 158,952 165,602 103,232 8,649 9,982 12,737 10,628 12,719 2. America
Imports 89,927 92,444 100,007 69,454 6,400 6,244 7,144 7,661 8,402Balance + 64,717 + 66,508 + 65,595 + 33,778 + 2,249 + 3,738 + 5,594 + 2,967 + 4,317
of which:
Exports 111,805 113,341 118,680 75,217 6,463 7,325 9,338 7,689 9,339 United States
Imports 61,902 64,493 71,334 50,503 4,452 4,449 5,195 5,572 6,238Balance + 49,903 + 48,847 + 47,346 + 24,714 + 2,011 + 2,876 + 4,143 + 2,117 + 3,101
Exports 212,070 219,716 221,278 150,306 14,807 17,097 18,531 15,103 17,870 3. Asia
Imports 214,393 224,355 227,036 165,864 18,121 18,025 19,002 17,922 18,813Balance − 2,323 − 4,639 − 5,759 − 15,558 − 3,314 − 928 − 471 − 2,819 − 943
of which:
Middle East Exports 33,104 29,144 28,663 17,890 1,694 1,824 2,133 1,876 1,964
Imports 6,963 8,156 7,460 4,423 377 577 457 511 526Balance + 26,141 + 20,989 + 21,202 + 13,468 + 1,317 + 1,247 + 1,675 + 1,365 + 1,438
Japan Exports 19,546 20,436 20,662 12,774 1,424 1,283 1,447 1,137 1,471
Imports 22,955 23,710 23,904 15,666 1,386 1,664 1,705 1,540 1,661Balance − 3,410 − 3,275 − 3,243 − 2,892 + 38 − 381 − 257 − 403 − 190
Exports 86,141 93,004 95,984 68,712 7,176 8,304 8,707 7,306 8,482 People‘s Republic
Imports 101,837 106,065 110,054 85,165 10,779 9,725 10,292 9,362 9,725 of China  
2 
Balance − 15,695 − 13,061 − 14,070 − 16,452 − 3,603 − 1,420 − 1,585 − 2,056 − 1,242
Exports 53,425 54,995 54,164 37,803 3,471 4,167 4,594 3,544 4,132 New industrial countries
Imports 50,873 52,945 51,748 35,938 3,688 3,802 3,817 3,561 3,806 and emerging markets
Balance + 2,552 + 2,050 + 2,416 + 1,866 − 217 + 365 + 777 − 17 + 326 of Asia  3 
Exports 11,344 12,291 11,221 7,931 1,263 827 1,025 793 903 4. Oceania and
Imports 3,857 3,639 3,872 3,003 386 307 345 265 349 polar regions
Balance + 7,487 + 8,652 + 7,349 + 4,928 + 877 + 521 + 679 + 527 + 553
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, imports aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong.
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of
the current position. EU excl. UK. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
November 2020
XII. External sector
 
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
 
 
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,
the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2015 − 18,516 − 5,203 − 36,595 + 8,621 + 12,602 − 3,920 − 1,216 + 3,161 + 1,114 + 68,506 − 358
2016 − 20,987 − 5,950 − 38,247 + 8,612 + 15,790 − 7,156 − 1,520 + 3,092 + 474 + 76,800 − 1,076
2017 − 24,372 − 3,723 − 43,558 + 9,663 + 14,759 − 8,181 − 690 + 2,177 − 521 + 77,314 − 1,374
2018 − 19,686 − 1,808 − 44,543 + 9,610 + 17,240 − 7,477 − 358 + 3,324 − 1,065 + 91,442 − 924
2019 − 21,703 + 536 − 46,098 + 10,302 + 17,889 − 9,330 − 2,798 + 3,568 − 1,347 + 94,453 − 793
2019         Q1 − 1,755 − 438 − 6,692 + 2,057 + 4,481 − 2,559 − 573 + 921 + 361 + 26,360 − 785
         Q2 − 3,998 + 422 − 10,382 + 2,592 + 4,366 − 1,921 − 1,204 + 934 − 537 + 13,434 − 2,183
         Q3 − 13,011 + 344 − 18,603 + 2,811 + 3,263 − 2,267 − 386 + 936 − 1,078 + 26,837 − 1,245
         Q4 − 2,939 + 208 − 10,422 + 2,841 + 5,778 − 2,584 − 635 + 777 − 93 + 27,821 + 3,420
2020         Q1 − 1,125 − 452 − 5,386 + 1,857 + 4,387 − 2,259 − 926 + 785 + 407 + 27,603 − 994
         Q2 + 3,482 − 1,288 − 1,490 + 2,433 + 4,946 − 1,491 − 1,431 + 786 − 51 + 15,753 − 2,384
         Q3  p − 6,463 − 1,424 − 8,360 + 2,351 + 3,484 − 1,927 − 1,840 + 797 − 1,056 + 25,059 − 1,123
2019         Nov. + 480 + 261 − 1,821 + 737 + 1,254 − 439 − 152 + 257 − 32 + 9,147 − 387
         Dec. + 2,718 − 99 − 1,277 + 1,157 + 3,097 − 510 − 336 + 238 + 3 + 9,729 + 4,258
2020         Jan. − 740 + 43 − 1,694 + 893 + 1,144 − 810 − 804 + 290 + 112 + 10,433 − 351
         Feb. − 243 + 51 − 1,967 + 545 + 1,425 − 641 − 46 + 241 + 136 + 7,381 − 242
         Mar. − 142 − 546 − 1,725 + 419 + 1,818 − 808 − 77 + 254 + 159 + 9,789 − 401
         Apr. + 791 − 348 − 194 + 907 + 1,659 − 880 − 963 + 267 + 12 + 8,982 − 523
         May + 1,142 − 555 − 117 + 747 + 1,456 − 632 − 434 + 242 + 27 + 1,339 − 1,454
         June + 1,550 − 385 − 1,179 + 779 + 1,832 + 21 − 33 + 277 − 90 + 5,432 − 406
         July − 2,649 − 375 − 2,320 + 1,006 + 682 − 866 − 1,009 + 273 − 373 + 7,984 − 453
         Aug. − 2,966 − 470 − 3,530 + 601 + 1,382 − 843 − 517 + 254 − 330 + 8,997 − 308
         Sep.  p − 848 − 579 − 2,510 + 745 + 1,420 − 218 − 314 + 270 − 352 + 8,078 − 362
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001 the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which: of which:
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which: resident and Non-produced
international non-resident Workers’ Capital income, wealth, non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2015 − 38,854 − 24,087 − 6,805 + 10,455 − 14,766 − 3,540 − 3,523 − 48 + 1,787 − 1,835
2016 − 40,931 − 25,417 − 11,516 + 10,739 − 15,514 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 2,142 + 3,219 − 1,077
2017 − 49,995 − 22,488 − 9,852 + 10,372 − 27,506 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 2,999 + 922 − 3,921
2018 − 48,571 − 28,524 − 10,098 + 10,275 − 20,047 − 5,152 − 5,142 + 436 + 3,453 − 3,017
2019 − 47,612 − 28,599 − 10,428 + 11,758 − 19,013 − 5,445 − 5,431 − 323 + 2,795 − 3,118
2019         Q1 − 16,677 − 12,363 − 2,794 + 2,093 − 4,314 − 1,360 − 1,358 + 844 + 652 + 192
         Q2 − 6,232 − 591 − 1,354 + 6,701 − 5,641 − 1,361 − 1,358 − 406 + 20 − 426
         Q3 − 12,308 − 7,712 − 1,890 + 1,616 − 4,595 − 1,363 − 1,358 + 197 + 1,271 − 1,073
         Q4 − 12,395 − 7,933 − 4,389 + 1,348 − 4,462 − 1,363 − 1,358 − 958 + 853 − 1,811
2020         Q1 − 14,024 − 9,690 − 2,318 + 2,477 − 4,334 − 1,482 − 1,477 − 541 − 741 + 200
         Q2 − 9,111 − 5,165 − 2,262 + 4,183 − 3,946 − 1,480 − 1,477 + 459 + 665 − 206
         Q3  p − 10,111 − 6,378 − 3,249 + 1,858 − 3,733 − 1,481 − 1,477 − 1,209 − 262 − 947
2019         Nov. − 3,568 − 2,125 − 1,296 + 220 − 1,443 − 453 − 453 − 498 − 32 − 467
         Dec. − 4,206 − 2,591 − 2,123 + 899 − 1,615 − 455 − 453 + 433 + 1,309 − 876
2020         Jan. − 7,153 − 5,705 − 1,060 + 331 − 1,448 − 494 − 492 + 301 + 32 + 269
         Feb. − 4,181 − 2,689 − 645 + 1,049 − 1,492 − 494 − 492 + 65 − 267 + 331
         Mar. − 2,690 − 1,296 − 614 + 1,097 − 1,394 − 494 − 492 − 907 − 507 − 400
         Apr. − 4,324 − 2,961 − 483 + 243 − 1,363 − 494 − 492 + 132 + 192 − 60
         May − 3,432 − 2,212 − 688 + 2,307 − 1,221 − 493 − 492 + 65 − 36 + 101
         June − 1,354 + 8 − 1,091 + 1,632 − 1,362 − 494 − 492 + 262 + 508 − 247
         July − 3,556 − 2,129 − 1,085 + 631 − 1,427 − 493 − 492 − 901 − 459 − 442
         Aug. − 3,176 − 2,210 − 1,149 + 167 − 967 − 495 − 492 + 614 + 699 − 85
         Sep.  p − 3,379 − 2,039 − 1,015 + 1,060 − 1,340 − 493 − 492 − 921 − 502 − 420
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
November 2020
XII. External sector
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2020
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q1 Q2 Q3  p July Aug. Sep.  p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 406,588 + 390,059 + 213,212 + 277,296 + 134,310 + 223,363 + 43,237 + 64,811 + 115,315
1. Direct investment + 143,931 + 148,042 + 119,972 + 51,695 + 5,278 + 15,089 + 9,038 + 12,955 − 6,904
Equity + 92,843 + 147,471 + 105,956 + 41,164 + 22,728 + 13,355 + 5,815 + 9,915 − 2,376
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 32,233 + 34,769 + 40,983 + 16,572 + 4,033 + 6,159 + 3,768 + 5,030 − 2,639
Debt instruments + 51,088 + 571 + 14,016 + 10,531 − 17,451 + 1,735 + 3,223 + 3,040 − 4,528
2. Portfolio investment + 115,466 + 83,229 + 123,681 + 8,730 + 59,227 + 44,441 + 18,245 + 10,706 + 15,489
Shares  2 + 14,673 + 9,613 + 14,248 + 4,988 + 18,970 + 18,958 + 7,919 + 4,845 + 6,193
Investment fund shares  3 + 58,562 + 28,263 + 52,930 − 14,167 + 14,425 + 27,280 + 10,842 + 10,394 + 6,044
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 42,724 + 41,577 + 54,493 + 15,801 + 23,042 − 579 − 1,855 − 2,671 + 3,947
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 492 + 3,776 + 2,009 + 2,107 + 2,790 − 1,217 + 1,339 − 1,861 − 695
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 10,974 + 23,126 + 22,383 + 32,058 + 31,257 + 26,519 + 11,571 + 9,316 + 5,632
4. Other investment  7 + 137,485 + 135,271 − 52,280 + 184,680 + 38,306 + 138,589 + 4,994 + 32,445 + 101,151
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 20,985 + 49,862 + 9,292 + 104,408 − 47,120 − 12,604 − 11,754 − 14,686 + 13,836
Long-term + 19,642 + 4,462 + 18,194 − 4,261 − 1,101 − 3,976 − 3,660 − 425 + 109Short-term − 40,627 + 45,400 − 8,901 + 108,669 − 46,019 − 8,628 − 8,094 − 14,261 + 13,727
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 5,827 + 37,324 + 13,584 + 32,751 + 24,211 + 31,057 − 6,387 + 12,646 + 24,798
Long-term − 2,291 + 17,182 + 10,566 + 9,160 + 5,849 + 39,351 − 729 + 15,455 + 24,626Short-term + 8,118 + 20,143 + 3,018 + 23,591 + 18,362 − 8,294 − 5,657 − 2,809 + 172
General government − 3,993 − 8,710 − 4,242 + 4,385 + 1,014 + 1,432 + 1,834 − 2,754 + 2,352
Long-term − 4,408 − 999 − 3,103 − 289 − 154 − 638 − 543 − 5 − 90Short-term + 415 − 7,711 − 1,139 + 4,674 + 1,168 + 2,070 + 2,377 − 2,749 + 2,442
Bundesbank + 156,637 + 56,795 − 70,915 + 43,136 + 60,201 + 118,704 + 21,300 + 37,239 + 60,165
5. Reserve assets − 1,269 + 392 − 544 + 133 + 243 − 1,276 − 611 − 611 − 53
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(increase: +) + 123,380 + 153,123 + 7,670 + 235,015 + 88,952 + 162,994 + 32,820 + 28,643 + 101,531
1. Direct investment + 105,218 + 143,602 + 64,284 + 30,053 + 1,499 + 28,064 + 18,617 + 10,656 − 1,209
Equity + 40,568 + 60,751 + 40,113 + 10,536 + 4,806 + 2,292 − 4,537 + 1,137 + 5,692
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 17,094 + 15,743 + 17,310 + 6,006 + 1,110 + 2,259 + 560 + 757 + 942
Debt instruments + 64,650 + 82,851 + 24,172 + 19,517 − 3,307 + 25,772 + 23,154 + 9,519 − 6,902
2. Portfolio investment − 89,846 − 73,978 + 28,479 + 49,231 + 57,347 + 137,028 + 30,324 + 56,161 + 50,543
Shares  2 − 705 − 30,651 − 6,392 − 6,120 − 9,056 + 634 − 536 + 602 + 568
Investment fund shares  3 − 2,519 − 6,298 − 4,963 − 797 + 235 + 763 + 870 + 32 − 138
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 72,291 − 41,376 + 32,911 + 29,298 + 34,249 + 85,902 + 21,297 + 36,835 + 27,769
Short-termdebt securities  
5 − 14,330 + 4,348 + 6,923 + 26,850 + 31,919 + 49,728 + 8,692 + 18,692 + 22,344
3. Other investment  7 + 108,008 + 83,499 − 85,093 + 155,731 + 30,106 − 2,097 − 16,121 − 38,174 + 52,198
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 17,508 − 35,902 − 10,010 + 181,993 − 1,879 + 1,338 + 14,686 − 21,235 + 7,887
Long-term + 7,574 − 8,433 + 10,968 + 12,909 + 8,172 + 1,970 − 913 − 724 + 3,607Short-term + 9,935 − 27,469 − 20,978 + 169,084 − 10,051 − 632 + 15,599 − 20,511 + 4,280
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 22,063 + 14,829 + 21,959 + 26,093 + 29,490 − 24,217 − 11,057 − 11,246 − 1,915
Long-term + 6,881 + 7,805 + 12,412 + 5,945 − 108 + 5,971 + 4,008 + 2,507 − 545Short-term + 15,182 + 7,024 + 9,547 + 20,149 + 29,598 − 30,188 − 15,065 − 13,753 − 1,370
General government − 8,719 + 2,926 + 257 + 3,478 + 1,364 − 10,518 − 367 − 7,195 − 2,956
Long-term − 3,724 + 697 + 133 + 565 − 104 − 191 + 143 − 333 − 2Short-term − 4,996 + 2,230 + 124 + 2,914 + 1,468 − 10,327 − 511 − 6,862 − 2,954
Bundesbank + 77,156 + 101,646 − 97,299 − 55,834 + 1,131 + 31,300 − 19,382 + 1,502 + 49,181
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 283,208 + 236,936 + 205,543 + 42,281 + 45,358 + 60,369 + 10,417 + 36,168 + 13,783
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
November 2020
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
 
 
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts position
drawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col. 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  1 col. 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan.  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,475
2001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,670
2002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,670
2003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,891
2006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,308
2007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,923
2008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,454
2011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,932
2012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,003
2013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,921
2016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,727
2017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,673 474,172
2018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,688 439,293
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 673,626 487,345
2018         Feb. 1,147,979 166,370 117,138 13,949 4,138 31,146 928,275 913,989 53,333 636,808 511,171
         Mar. 1,158,983 165,830 116,630 13,906 4,114 31,181 939,229 923,466 53,924 678,955 480,029
         Apr. 1,139,056 166,970 117,867 14,043 4,150 30,910 917,971 902,364 54,115 633,741 505,314
         May 1,198,995 171,469 120,871 14,287 4,172 32,139 973,323 956,150 54,203 656,505 542,490
         June 1,213,511 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 991,577 976,266 54,857 701,011 512,500
         July 1,147,878 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 930,107 913,270 54,463 666,323 481,554
         Aug. 1,145,283 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 929,073 912,448 53,864 644,636 500,647
         Sep. 1,189,175 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,380 956,487 54,717 686,368 502,807
         Oct. 1,167,004 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 943,644 927,555 55,089 664,608 502,396
         Nov. 1,184,703 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 960,478 941,130 56,026 674,449 510,254
         Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,688 439,293
2019         Jan. 1,123,169 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,039 648,602 474,568
         Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 634,080 493,375
         Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 655,655 534,761
         Apr. 1,167,188 177,378 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,482 935,563 919,696 54,247 627,265 539,923
         May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 618,780 567,614
         June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 649,898 551,143
         July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 622,006 512,343
         Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 638,696 534,944
         Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 626,128 559,014
         Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 597,432 505,662
         Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 591,913 542,217
         Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 673,626 487,345
2020         Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 582,526 508,198
         Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 577,841 528,192
         Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 617,919 600,896
         Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 616,319 598,532
         May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925
         June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
         July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
         Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747
         Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
         Oct. 1,346,262 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 56,997 619,445 726,816
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to respective country designation), since November 2000 also bal ances with non-euro
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad. 4See
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5Euro opening
valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
November 2020
81•
XII. External sector
9. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
2016 877,815 246,093 631,722 421,163 210,558 196,385 14,173 1,055,685 132,817 922,868 725,655 197,213 124,628 72,585
2017 897,685 218,669 679,016 453,895 225,121 211,461 13,660 1,107,500 142,473 965,027 764,104 200,923 130,887 70,036
2018 929,542 234,581 694,961 463,631 231,330 217,163 14,167 1,210,748 143,373 1,067,374 860,496 206,878 135,879 70,999
2019 947,344 225,353 721,991 489,939 232,052 216,675 15,377 1,257,797 162,100 1,095,697 888,066 207,630 134,394 73,236
2020 Apr. 962,991 253,658 709,333 499,540 209,793 193,762 16,031 1,328,673 206,582 1,122,091 934,526 187,566 110,041 77,525
May 969,823 263,459 706,364 506,239 200,125 184,090 16,036 1,314,249 191,307 1,122,942 938,814 184,128 105,846 78,282
June 975,229 254,117 721,112 510,166 210,947 195,052 15,895 1,330,129 203,271 1,126,858 934,616 192,242 115,882 76,361
July 975,280 254,803 720,478 507,223 213,255 197,218 16,037 1,340,169 196,590 1,143,579 949,361 194,217 116,893 77,324
Aug. 986,363 266,626 719,737 510,559 209,178 193,214 15,964 1,338,975 188,054 1,150,920 959,588 191,333 113,525 77,808
Sep. 1,007,507 287,590 719,918 499,983 219,935 203,918 16,017 1,332,122 183,208 1,148,915 945,271 203,644 126,705 76,939
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
2016 520,274 188,982 331,292 248,172 83,121 74,410 8,711 672,896 89,243 583,653 509,751 73,902 52,626 21,275
2017 519,346 167,197 352,148 260,241 91,907 83,432 8,475 715,975 92,715 623,260 540,950 82,310 62,079 20,231
2018 542,346 176,454 365,892 273,495 92,397 84,139 8,258 787,342 86,085 701,257 618,154 83,103 62,625 20,477
2019 560,077 175,004 385,073 294,466 90,607 82,278 8,330 804,572 88,201 716,371 631,133 85,238 63,845 21,392
2020 Apr. 570,622 191,945 378,677 296,090 82,587 73,793 8,794 859,840 125,575 734,265 661,442 72,823 50,025 22,798
May 579,264 198,931 380,333 300,396 79,937 71,247 8,690 853,710 117,706 736,004 662,877 73,127 50,046 23,081
June 585,834 195,133 390,701 304,935 85,766 77,265 8,501 859,671 118,270 741,401 662,197 79,204 56,279 22,926
July 583,436 191,914 391,522 306,807 84,714 75,983 8,731 874,183 110,177 764,006 684,264 79,743 56,675 23,067
Aug. 591,126 203,358 387,768 305,361 82,407 73,692 8,715 874,563 109,859 764,705 687,362 77,343 54,281 23,061
Sep. 615,151 221,675 393,476 304,402 89,074 80,321 8,753 859,562 97,774 761,788 678,135 83,653 60,696 22,957
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
2016 357,541 57,112 300,429 172,992 127,438 121,976 5,462 382,789 43,574 339,215 215,904 123,311 72,002 51,310
2017 378,339 51,472 326,867 193,654 133,214 128,029 5,185 391,525 49,758 341,767 223,154 118,613 68,809 49,804
2018 387,196 58,127 329,068 190,135 138,933 133,024 5,909 423,406 57,288 366,117 242,342 123,776 73,254 50,522
2019 387,267 50,349 336,918 195,473 141,444 134,397 7,047 453,224 73,899 379,326 256,933 122,392 70,549 51,843
2020 Apr. 392,369 61,713 330,656 203,450 127,206 119,969 7,237 468,833 81,007 387,827 273,084 114,743 60,016 54,726
May 390,559 64,528 326,031 205,843 120,189 112,843 7,346 460,539 73,601 386,938 275,937 111,001 55,800 55,201
June 389,395 58,984 330,411 205,230 125,181 117,787 7,393 470,458 85,001 385,457 272,419 113,038 59,603 53,435
July 391,844 62,888 328,956 200,415 128,541 121,235 7,305 465,986 86,413 379,573 265,098 114,475 60,218 54,257
Aug. 395,237 63,268 331,969 205,198 126,771 119,522 7,249 464,411 78,196 386,216 272,226 113,990 59,244 54,746
Sep. 392,356 65,915 326,442 195,581 130,861 123,597 7,264 472,560 85,433 387,127 267,136 119,991 66,009 53,982
Euro area (19)
2016 450,914 171,302 279,612 214,911 64,701 57,972 6,729 613,595 70,202 543,393 487,188 56,204 41,334 14,870
2017 451,219 150,346 300,873 228,761 72,112 64,643 7,469 650,641 75,398 575,243 509,470 65,773 50,395 15,378
2018 466,584 156,425 310,159 238,570 71,588 64,391 7,197 723,072 68,499 654,573 588,121 66,452 50,655 15,797
2019 484,879 156,743 328,135 257,791 70,344 62,945 7,399 733,299 68,393 664,906 597,241 67,664 50,955 16,710
2020 Apr. 496,760 172,558 324,202 259,552 64,650 56,870 7,780 788,300 103,454 684,846 626,882 57,964 40,488 17,476
May 501,356 176,735 324,622 262,842 61,780 54,146 7,633 777,957 92,207 685,750 628,154 57,596 39,916 17,679
June 504,206 172,924 331,282 264,849 66,433 58,989 7,443 785,117 96,167 688,950 626,885 62,065 44,310 17,755
July 503,799 171,546 332,253 266,887 65,366 57,739 7,627 798,703 88,669 710,033 648,187 61,846 44,029 17,817
Aug. 514,981 185,746 329,235 265,935 63,300 55,708 7,592 801,812 90,321 711,491 651,296 60,195 42,378 17,816
Sep. 535,848 203,231 332,617 264,766 67,851 60,239 7,612 785,183 78,506 706,676 642,163 64,513 46,954 17,559
Extra-Euro area (19)
2016 426,901 74,791 352,110 206,252 145,857 138,413 7,444 442,090 62,615 379,475 238,467 141,009 83,294 57,715
2017 446,465 68,323 378,142 225,134 153,008 146,818 6,191 456,859 67,076 389,784 254,634 135,149 80,492 54,658
2018 462,958 78,156 384,802 225,060 159,742 152,772 6,970 487,676 74,875 412,801 272,375 140,426 85,224 55,202
2019 462,465 68,610 393,855 232,148 161,708 153,730 7,978 524,498 93,707 430,791 290,825 139,966 83,440 56,526
2020 Apr. 466,231 81,100 385,131 239,988 145,143 136,892 8,251 540,373 103,128 437,245 307,643 129,602 69,553 60,049
May 468,466 86,724 381,742 243,397 138,346 129,943 8,402 536,292 99,100 437,192 310,660 126,532 65,929 60,603
June 471,023 81,193 389,830 245,316 144,514 136,062 8,451 545,011 107,104 437,907 307,730 130,177 71,572 58,605
July 471,482 83,257 388,225 240,336 147,889 139,480 8,409 541,466 107,921 433,545 301,174 132,371 72,864 59,507
Aug. 471,382 80,881 390,502 244,624 145,878 137,506 8,371 537,163 97,734 439,430 308,292 131,138 71,147 59,991
Sep. 471,660 84,359 387,301 235,217 152,084 143,679 8,405 546,940 104,701 442,239 303,108 139,131 79,751 59,379
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
November 2020
XII. External sector
 
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
 
 
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2008 1.7416 1.5594 10.2236 7.4560 152.45 8.2237 9.6152 1.5874 0.79628 1.4708
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.3920
2012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.2848
2013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.3281
2014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.1069
2017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.1297
2018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.1810
2019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2019         June 1.6264 1.5011 7.7937 7.4669 122.08 9.7465 10.6263 1.1167 0.89107 1.1293
         July 1.6061 1.4693 7.7151 7.4656 121.41 9.6587 10.5604 1.1076 0.89942 1.1218
         Aug. 1.6431 1.4768 7.8581 7.4602 118.18 9.9742 10.7356 1.0892 0.91554 1.1126
         Sep. 1.6162 1.4578 7.8323 7.4634 118.24 9.9203 10.6968 1.0903 0.89092 1.1004
         Oct. 1.6271 1.4581 7.8447 7.4693 119.51 10.1165 10.8023 1.0981 0.87539 1.1053
         Nov. 1.6181 1.4630 7.7571 7.4720 120.34 10.1087 10.6497 1.0978 0.85761 1.1051
         Dec. 1.6154 1.4640 7.7974 7.4720 121.24 10.0429 10.4827 1.0925 0.84731 1.1113
2020         Jan. 1.6189 1.4523 7.6832 7.4729 121.36 9.9384 10.5544 1.0765 0.84927 1.1100
         Feb. 1.6356 1.4485 7.6302 7.4713 120.03 10.1327 10.5679 1.0648 0.84095 1.0905
         Mar. 1.7788 1.5417 7.7675 7.4703 118.90 11.2943 10.8751 1.0591 0.89460 1.1063
         Apr. 1.7271 1.5287 7.6858 7.4617 116.97 11.3365 10.8845 1.0545 0.87547 1.0862
         May 1.6724 1.5219 7.7482 7.4577 116.87 10.9862 10.5970 1.0574 0.88685 1.0902
         June 1.6322 1.5254 7.9734 7.4548 121.12 10.7298 10.4869 1.0712 0.89878 1.1255
         July 1.6304 1.5481 8.0352 7.4467 122.38 10.6544 10.3538 1.0711 0.90467 1.1463
         Aug. 1.6433 1.5654 8.1954 7.4460 125.40 10.5797 10.3087 1.0767 0.90081 1.1828
         Sep. 1.6307 1.5586 8.0333 7.4418 124.50 10.7769 10.4279 1.0786 0.90947 1.1792
         Oct. 1.6521 1.5559 7.9225 7.4424 123.89 10.9220 10.3967 1.0739 0.90741 1.1775
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    
rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.    
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399
Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573
France French franc FRF 6.55957
Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583
Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564
Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27
Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399
Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371
Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482
Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.750
2007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.640
2008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.1260
2011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.6466
2014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.702804
2015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
83  Monthly Report
November 2020
XII.  External sector
 
12.  Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness *
  
Q1 1999 = 100
Indicators of the German economy’s price competitiveness Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3  vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis
26 selected industrial countries  4 
In real terms In real terms
of which: based on based on
In real terms the deflators unit labour In real terms
based on of gross costs of based on Non- 26 selected
consumer domestic national consumer Euro  area euro area industrial
Period Nominal price indices product  3 economy  3 Nominal price indices Total countries countries 37 countries  5 countries  4 37 countries  5 60 countries  6 
1999 96.3 96.1 96.0 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.5 95.9 97.7 98.2 98.1 97.8
2000 87.2 86.8 86.1 85.8 88.1 86.1 91.9 97.4 85.5 91.1 93.0 92.2 91.2
2001 87.6 87.1 86.8 86.8 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.5 86.1 90.5 92.9 91.6 91.02002 89.9 90.2 89.9 90.4 94.5 90.5 92.4 95.6 88.6 91.1 93.4 92.1 91.92003 100.5 101.3 101.1 101.8 106.4 101.5 95.9 94.7 97.7 95.3 97.0 96.6 96.82004 104.3 105.2 104.0 105.2 110.8 105.3 96.2 93.5 100.2 95.6 98.4 98.1 98.4
2005 102.9 103.9 102.1 103.4 109.0 102.9 94.8 91.9 99.0 93.3 98.4 97.1 96.8
2006 102.9 103.9 101.5 102.3 109.1 102.3 93.6 90.3 98.4 91.6 98.5 96.7 96.02007 106.4 106.9 103.8 104.7 112.7 104.5 94.5 89.5 102.1 92.0 100.9 98.2 97.42008 110.2 109.8 106.0 109.0 117.4 106.9 94.9 88.3 105.3 91.3 102.3 98.4 97.62009 111.7 110.6 107.1 114.7 120.5 108.0 95.2 89.1 104.8 92.0 101.9 98.5 98.0
2010 104.5 102.9 99.0 106.6 111.9 99.0 92.6 88.7 98.3 88.2 98.7 94.2 92.5
2011 104.3 102.0 97.0 105.0 112.7 98.6 92.2 88.5 97.7 87.4 98.2 93.4 91.92012 98.6 96.8 91.5 98.9 107.5 93.8 90.1 88.3 92.6 84.7 95.9 90.5 89.02013 102.2 99.9 94.4 101.9 112.2 96.8 92.4 88.8 97.6 86.7 98.2 92.3 90.92014 102.4 99.3 94.3 102.6 114.6 97.2 92.9 89.6 97.8 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.6 89.6 85.8 92.2 106.1 88.7 89.8 90.3 88.9 83.6 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.3 91.6 88.0
p 93.4 110.1 90.7 90.6 90.7 90.5 84.9 95.1 88.8 88.2
2017 97.5 93.5 89.1 p 94.1 112.4 91.9 91.8 90.7 93.2 85.6 96.4 89.9 89.0
2018 100.0 95.7 90.5 p 95.5 117.3 95.1 92.9 90.7 96.0 86.4 97.7 91.1 90.9
2019 98.2 93.3 88.7 p 92.8 115.5 92.4 92.0 91.0 93.2 85.6 96.4 89.9 89.5
2018         May 99.4 95.2 90.3 p 95.4 116.2 94.4 92.9 90.7 96.2 86.2 97.8 90.8 90.5
         June 99.1 94.9 116.1 94.2 97.5 90.7 90.4
         July 100.2 95.9 117.4 95.2 97.4 91.1 90.8
         Aug. 99.9 95.5 90.4 p 95.8 117.8 95.4 92.6 90.6 95.6 86.4 97.3 91.0 91.0
         Sep. 100.4 96.0 119.1 96.4 97.7 91.5 91.8
         Oct. 99.7 95.5 117.8 95.3 97.4 91.2 91.1
         Nov. 99.2 95.0 89.9 p 94.8 116.8 94.5 92.5 90.9 94.8 86.3 97.3 91.0 90.8
         Dec. 99.3 94.8 117.0 94.3 97.2 90.8 90.6
2019         Jan. 98.8 94.3 116.3 93.7 96.8 90.4 90.1
         Feb. 98.4 93.8 88.9 p 93.3 115.6 93.1 92.0 90.7 93.8 85.5 96.7 90.1 89.7
         Mar. 97.9 93.2 115.2 92.5 96.4 89.7 89.4
         Apr. 97.7 93.0 115.0 92.3 96.5 89.8 89.4
         May 98.2 93.4 88.6 p 93.0 115.7 92.8 92.1 90.9 93.6 85.5 96.6 90.1 89.7
         June 98.8 93.9 116.2 93.1 96.8 90.2 89.9
         July 98.4 93.4 115.4 92.3 96.7 90.1 89.5
         Aug. 98.9 93.9 88.9 p 93.2 116.2 93.0 92.0 91.1 93.1 85.7 96.5 90.3 89.8
         Sep. 98.2 93.1 115.3 92.1 96.2 89.9 89.3
         Oct. 98.1 92.9 115.3 91.9 96.2 89.8 89.2
         Nov. 97.5 92.2 88.4 p 92.0 114.6 91.3 91.8 91.3 92.3 85.5 96.0 89.4 88.8
         Dec. 97.4 92.1 114.7 91.1 95.9 89.4 88.8
2020         Jan. 97.0 91.4 114.2 90.5 95.9 89.1 88.4
         Feb. 96.3 90.7 88.1 p 92.6 113.5 89.9 91.5 91.3 91.6 85.3 95.6 88.8 88.2
         Mar. 99.0 93.1 117.8 p 93.1 96.6 90.2 p 90.2
         Apr. 98.2 92.6 117.5 p 93.0 96.3 90.1 p 90.3
         May 98.4 92.8 p 88.1 p 92.1 117.6 p 93.0 91.5 91.5 91.4 85.9 96.2 90.0 p 90.2
         June 99.8 94.0 119.1 p 94.1 96.9 90.7 p 90.8
         July 100.5 p 94.6 120.3 p 94.9 96.0 p 90.0 p 90.2
         Aug. 101.6 p 95.1 ... ... 122.4 p 96.0 ... ... ... ... 97.0 p 90.8 p 91.4
         Sep. 101.6 p 95.1 122.5 p 95.9 96.9 p 90.7 p 91.2
         Oct. 101.4 p 94.9 122.4 p 95.8 p 96.6 p 90.4 p 91.1
*The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the were used. 2ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the group EER-19 and
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German additionally Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, Ind ia, Indonesia, Is-
economy’s price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to rael, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines , the Russian Fe-
compute the effective exchange rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an deration, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and the
increase in competitiveness. The weights are based on trade in manufactured goods United Arab Emirates. 3Annual and quarterly averages. 4Euro area countries (from
and, as from the publication of 1 July 2020, additionally on trade in services. For 2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 incl uding Cyprus
more detailed information on methodology, see the website of the Deutsche and Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014
Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162). 1ECB calculations are including Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan,
based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral exchange rates of the Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United Sta tes.5Euro
euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia, Bulgaria, Canada, area countries (current composition) and countries belong ing to the group EER-19.
China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan, Norway, Poland, 6Euro area countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the group
Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the EER-42. United States. Where current price and wage indices were not available, estimates

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
For information on the articles published be -
tween 2010 and 2019, see the index attached 
to the January 2020 Monthly Report.
Monthly Report articles
December 2019
– Outlook for the German economy – macro -
economic projections for 2020 and 2021 and 
an outlook for 2022
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2018
– The relevance of surveys of expectations for 
the Deutsche Bundesbank
– The mixing of euro coins in Germany
January 2020
– The upswing in loans to enterprises in Ger -
many between 2014 and 2019
– Consequences of increasing protectionismFebruary 2020
– The current economic situation in Germany
March 2020
– German balance of payments in 2019
– Households’ digital purchases in the balance  
of payments
– New benchmark rates, new challenges: 
introducing the €STR in the euro area
April 2020
– Sectoral portfolio adjustments in the euro 
area during the low interest rate period
– The EU budget and its financing: looking 
back and ahead
May 2020
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2020
– Outlook for the German economy for 2020 
to 2022
– Cash withdrawals and payments in urban 
and rural areas
July 2020
– The German current account surplus through 
the lens of macroeconomic modelsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
85•

– Cash hoarding by German households – how 
much cash do they store and why?
August 2020
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2020
– The impact of monetary policy on the euro’s 
exchange rate
– Global financial interconnectedness and spill -
overs between the G20 countries
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2019
October 2020
– Developments in the German banking sys -
tem during the negative interest rate policy 
period
– Patterns of international business cycles
– The protracted rise in residential property 
prices in Germany from a macroeconomic 
perspective: transmission channels and fun -
damental determinants
– State government budgets: results for 2019
November 2020
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, January 20202
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
January 20202
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131Discussion Paperso
41/2020  
Household savings, capital investments and 
public policies: What drives the German current 
account?
42/2020  
Estimation of heterogeneous agent models: A 
likelihood approach
43/2020  
Interactions between bank levies and corporate 
taxes: How is bank leverage affected?
44/2020  
Predicting monetary policy using artificial neural 
networks
45/2020  
Backtesting macroprudential stress tests
46/2020  
Beta dispersion and market timing
47/2020  
Capital controls checkup: Cases, customs, con -
sequences
48/2020  
Connected funds
49/2020  
Coin migration between Germany and other 
euro area countries
50/2020  
Interest rate pegs and the reversal puzzle: On 
the role of anticipation
51/2020  
Classification of monetary and fiscal dominance 
regimes using machine learning techniques
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
87•

52/2020  
Anticipation effects of protectionist U.S. trade 
policies
53/2020  
Real effects of foreign exchange risk migration: 
Evidence from matched firm-bank microdata
54/2020  
Sovereign risk and bank fragility
55/2020  
A random forest-based approach to identifying 
the most informative seasonality tests
56/2020  
Bank capital forbearance and serial gambling
57/2020  
Demographic change and the rate of return in 
PAYG pension systemsBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
November 2020  
88•

