Monthly Report
February 2021
Vol. 73  
No 2

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14  
60431 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Postfach 10 06 02  
60006 Frankfurt am Main  
Germany
Tel.: +49 (0)69 9566 3512  
Email: www.bundesbank.de/kontakt
Internet: www.bundesbank.de
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated.
ISSN 0418-8292 (print edition)  
ISSN 1862-1325 (online edition)
The German original of this Monthly Report 
went to press at 11 a.m. on 19 February 2021.Publishing schedules for selected statistics can 
be downloaded from our website. The statis -
tical data are also published on the website.
The Monthly Report is published by the 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Frankfurt am Main, by 
virtue of Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act. It is 
available to interested parties free of charge.
This is a translation of the original German 
 language version, which is the sole authorita -
tive text.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
2

Contents
The current economic situation in Germany  ................................................  5
Overview  ........................................................................................................................  6
Global and European setting  ..................................................................................  11
How will economic relations between the United Kingdom and the European Union be 
governed going forward?  ...................................................................................................  16
Monetary policy and banking business  ..............................................................  23
Money market management and liquidity needs  ................................................................  24
Negative interest rates on the deposits of non- financial  corporations and households 
in Germany  .........................................................................................................................  34
Financial markets  ........................................................................................................  40
Movements in the nominal effective exchange rate of the euro  ..........................................  41
The German economy  ...............................................................................................  52
Housing prices in Germany in 2020  ....................................................................................  60
One- off effects relating to COVID-  19 in the HICP in 2021  ....................................................  63
Public finances  .............................................................................................................  69
Public finances in 2020: automatic stabilisers and  temporary measures strongly 
 supported the economy  ......................................................................................................  70Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
3

Statistical Section ....................................................................................................  1 •
Key economic data for the euro area  ..................................................................................  5 •
Overall monetary survey in the euro area  ............................................................................  8 •
Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem  ............................................................  16 •
Banks  ..................................................................................................................................  20 •
Minimum reserves  ...............................................................................................................  42 •
Interest rates  .......................................................................................................................  43 •
Insurance corporations and pension funds  ..........................................................................  48 •
Capital market  ....................................................................................................................  50 •
Financial accounts  ...............................................................................................................  54 •
Public finances in Germany  .................................................................................................  58 •
Economic conditions in Germany  ........................................................................................  66 •
External sector  ....................................................................................................................  75 •
Overview of publications by the Deutsche Bundesbank  ..........................  85 •
Abbreviations and symbols
e Estimated
p Provisional
pe Partly estimated
r Revised
… Data available at a later date
. Data unknown, not to be published or not meaningful
0 Less than 0.5 but more than nil
– Nil
Discrepancies in the totals are due to rounding.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
4

The current economic situation in GermanyDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
5

Overview
Resurgence of pandemic 
is slowing economic recovery 
worldwide
The exceptionally rapid global economic recov -
ery, which had allowed a sizeable part of the 
severe downturn caused by the pandemic to 
already be recouped over the summer months, 
lost considerable momentum in the fourth 
quarter. This was due mainly to new waves of 
infections across much of the world. The con -
tainment measures were tightened again in 
Europe, in particular, which placed a marked 
strain on the region’s economies. Economic 
output in the euro area fell by 0.6% on the 
quarter in the fourth quarter of 2020. In the 
United States, growth in real gross domestic 
product (GDP) dropped off significantly. In 
China, meanwhile, which has not yet experi -
enced a new wave of the pandemic, growth 
remained brisk. China also made a significant 
contribution to the ongoing global industrial 
recovery, with industry visibly decoupling from 
developments in the services sector.
With infection rates still high and containment 
measures having been further tightened in 
many places, the global economy looks set to 
get off to a weak start to 2021. However, the 
rapid development of vaccines at least means 
that vaccination campaigns are now under way 
in many countries. There are consequently 
hopes that it will be possible to ease restric -
tions noticeably over the next few months. 
However, there are also potential risks if new 
strains of the virus spread. Nonetheless, other 
factors have brought about a marked brighten -
ing of the risk assessment as of late. A trade 
deal was struck between the European Union 
and the United Kingdom. Moreover, a number 
of countries look set to introduce additional, 
large- scale fiscal stimulus measures, which 
could further fuel global economic activity. 
Nonetheless, a sustainable global economic re -
covery can still only be achieved if the pan -demic is combatted successfully. Efforts to ac -
celerate the production and distribution of vac -
cines around the world are therefore particu -
larly important, and not merely for humanitarian 
reasons.
The international financial markets were shaped 
by a bifurcation during the final quarter of 
2020 and first quarter of 2021: while the avail -
ability of vaccines strengthened market partici -
pants’ optimism, the renewed rise in infections 
and containment measures were perceived as a 
drag on growth. Within the euro area, the 
Governing Council of the ECB responded to the 
second wave of infections with a decision to 
increase the envelope of the pandemic emer -
gency purchase programme (PEPP) and to ex -
tend the horizon for net purchases under the 
programme. This helped bring down the yields 
on sovereign bonds of euro area countries with 
relatively low credit ratings. Average yields on 
euro area corporate bonds also continued to 
decline, hitting new lows in January. By con -
trast, yields on highly rated European sovereign 
bonds picked up, mainly due to the interest 
rate linkage with the United States, where 
yields on US Treasuries rose sharply. Market 
participants now see a greater likelihood of the 
incoming US administration undertaking sub -
stantial deficit spending. An increase in market- 
based measures of long- term inflation expect -
ations, which was observed in numerous coun -
tries, was also particularly pronounced in the 
United States. The combined impact of the 
aforementioned developments sent global 
equity markets sharply higher. Financial market 
participants upgraded their earnings outlook, 
particularly for US enterprises. In foreign ex -
change markets, hopes that the vaccinations 
would help global activity bounce back far 
more quickly than previously expected damp -
ened demand for currencies regarded as rela -
tively safe havens. This meant that the US dol -
lar and yen lost value in effective terms. The Global eco -
nomic recovery 
lost momentum 
in Q4
Economic devel -
opments in 2021 
depend on how 
the pandemic 
unfoldsOptimistic view 
starting to assert 
itself in the 
financial 
 marketsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
6

euro also depreciated slightly on a weighted 
average.
At its December 2020 monetary policy meet -
ing, the ECB Governing Council recalibrated its 
monetary policy measures in view of the eco -
nomic consequences of the resurgence in 
coronavirus infections. In particular, it increased 
the envelope for the PEPP by €500 billion to a 
total of €1,850 billion. If favourable financing 
conditions can be maintained with overall 
lower purchase volumes, the decision states 
that the envelope need not be used in full. At 
the same time, the Governing Council ex -
tended the horizon for net purchases under the 
PEPP to at least the end of March 2022. In add -
ition, it recalibrated the conditions of the third 
series of targeted longer- term refinancing op -
erations (TLTRO- III) again and will offer three 
additional operations in 2021. It will, moreover, 
offer four additional pandemic emergency 
longer- term refinancing operations (PELTROs) 
in 2021. The Governing Council said that it 
would continue conducting regular lending op -
erations as fixed rate tender procedures with 
full allotment at the prevailing conditions for as 
long as necessary. In addition, it extended the 
collateral easing measures up until June 2022 
and the Eurosystem repo facility for central 
banks (EUREP) and all temporary swap and 
repo lines with non- euro area central banks 
until March 2022.
In the final quarter of the year, monetary 
growth was also shaped by the impact of the 
coronavirus pandemic and economic policy ac -
tion taken in response to it. The annual growth 
rate of the broad monetary aggregate M3 
climbed to 12.3% by end- December, more 
than double its rate at the end of the previous 
year. Given the persistently high level of uncer -
tainty about how the pandemic will unfold, 
precautionary considerations still dominated 
for households and enterprises, with highly li -
quid overnight deposits, in particular, recording 
substantial net growth. On the counterparts 
side, this development was driven by three fac -
tors in particular. First, the Eurosystem’s on -going asset purchases again fostered monetary 
growth. Second, the commercial banks signifi -
cantly stepped up their securitised lending to 
private issuers. Third, loans to the domestic pri -
vate sector saw major growth overall, even 
though non- financial corporations sought 
fewer loans than in the preceding quarter. The 
banks participating in the Bank Lending Survey 
(BLS) also reported a drop in demand for loans 
to enterprises. At the same time, though, they 
reported tightening their credit standards in all 
loan categories surveyed, particularly on ac -
count of elevated risk related to the pandemic.
The economic recovery in Germany was 
brought to a standstill in the final quarter of 
2020. According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate, real GDP was up by a mar -
ginal 0.1% after seasonal and calendar adjust -
ment. This means that economic activity was 
still almost 4% down on the pre- crisis level of 
the fourth quarter of 2019. The catch- up was 
halted by the resurgent infection rates and the 
associated gradual tightening of containment 
measures. These measures primarily targeted 
contact- intensive areas such as recreational 
and cultural services, hotel and restaurant ser -
vices, and bricks- and- mortar retail outlets, lead -
ing them to report considerable losses in some 
cases. By contrast, many sectors that were not 
directly affected by the measures continued to 
recover. The industrial sector, in particular, 
stepped up production substantially.
The construction sector also increased its value 
added. It has so far remained largely unscathed 
by the pandemic. On the expenditure side, the 
tightened restrictions had a noticeable effect 
on household consumption especially, which is 
likely to have shrunk considerably despite the 
strong increase in car purchases. Exports re -
mained on an upward trajectory, by contrast. 
Economic indicators are also signalling that en -
terprises are likely to have increased their in -
vestment in machinery and equipment as well.
These developments are also feeding through 
to bank lending, which was more dynamic Monetary pol -
icy: ECB Govern -
ing Council 
recalibrates 
monetary policy 
measures
Monetary 
dynamics still 
highly acceler -
ated due to 
coronavirus 
pandemicSecond wave 
of pandemic 
thwarted 
 Germany’s eco -
nomic recovery 
at end of 2020
Sectors hit by 
containment 
measures to 
varying degreesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
7

overall than it had been in the preceding quar -
ter. Loans to households once again made the 
largest contribution to growth; demand for 
loans to households for house purchase con -
tinued to rise. Loans to non- financial corpor -
ations also saw distinct growth in the fourth 
quarter. Heightened uncertainty about future 
economic developments and the resultant re -
luctance to invest did, in and of themselves, 
dampen German enterprises’ demand for bank 
loans. However, not all economic sectors were 
equally affected by this; in particular, financing 
needs remained high among enterprises in the 
loan- intensive construction and real estate sec -
tors. In addition, the enterprises affected by the 
lockdown again saw an increasing need for 
funds, partly because of delays in the payment 
of government bridging aid. Respondents to 
the BLS tightened their credit standards and 
credit conditions on balance for loans to enter -
prises.
The labour market proved relatively robust in 
the face of tightened measures taken during 
the fourth quarter to contain the pandemic. 
Based on the data available so far, the level of 
employment remained more or less constant 
compared with the third quarter. However, this 
may mask a significant bifurcation depending 
on the form of employment and economic sec -
tor. This heterogeneity also applies to take- up 
of short- time working arrangements. Overall, 
the number of people in short- time work rose 
again at last report, but on the other hand, un -
employment fell fairly significantly up to Janu -
ary, despite the restrictions caused by the pan -
demic. The expanded contact restriction meas -
ures in place since mid- December dampened 
expectations and the outlook for the next few 
months, however.
The pandemic is continuing to shape wage de -
velopments. Negotiated wages rose moder -
ately in the fourth quarter as well. The latest 
wage agreements provide for low wage in -
creases following several zero months at the 
start of the contractual term. Having decreased 
in the third quarter, actual earnings may have increased again in the fourth quarter owing to 
a decline in short- time work. Even so, wage 
drift (i.e. the difference between the growth 
rates of negotiated and actual wages) is likely 
to have been distinctly negative, as in the two 
preceding quarters. The wage demands of the 
trade unions in this year’s major wage round 
currently amount to 4% to 6% for a period of 
12 months and continue to reflect the ongoing 
strains of the pandemic.
In the final quarter of 2020, consumer prices 
(HICP) remained constant on the quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms after falling markedly 
in the third quarter owing to the temporary re -
duction in value added tax (VAT). The tempor -
ary VAT cut and energy prices continued to 
have a significant dampening effect year on 
year. At -0.6%, inflation in the final quarter of 
2020 was even slightly lower than in the previ -
ous quarter (-0.2%). The inflation rate exclud -
ing energy and food was likewise in slightly 
negative territory (-0.1%, after 0.5%). In Janu -
ary 2021, consumer prices surged upwards. In -
flation rose exceptionally sharply, from -0.7% in 
December to 1.6%. The core rate also picked 
up significantly (from -0.1% to 2.0%). The in -
crease was thus even stronger than had been 
expected as a result of the reintroduction of 
the regular VAT rates and the implementation 
of the measures contained in the climate pack -
age. This is likely to be explained by extensive 
updates to the expenditure weights underlying 
the HICP .
The increased burdens caused by the strict con -
tainment measures in place until at least early 
March are likely to hamper aggregate output in 
the first quarter of 2021. However, there is no 
reason to fear that economic activity will sink 
to the lows recorded during the lockdown in 
the second quarter of 2020. First of all, this is 
because many sectors that are hardly directly 
affected by the measures, such as industry, 
have continued to recover so far. Second, en -
terprises in the sectors strongly affected by the 
containment measures, such as retail trade and 
the accommodation and food services sector, Fresh uptick in 
German banks’ 
loans to domes -
tic private sector
Labour market 
robust
Negotiated pay 
rose moderately 
in Q4, and 
actual earnings 
hardly, owing 
to pandemicInflation in Q4 
2020 clearly 
dampened by 
temporary VAT 
cut and energy 
prices, but up 
strongly in 
January 
German eco -
nomic output 
likely to contract 
markedly in Q1 
2021 but return 
to significantly 
higher level 
from Q2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
8

are likely to be increasingly adapting to the 
conditions of the pandemic. According to the 
ifo Institute, enterprises from the retail and ac -
commodation and food services sectors, for ex -
ample, were distinctly more optimistic about 
their business situation in January than in April 
2020. However, industry could encounter 
headwinds from growing supply bottlenecks 
for a number of intermediate products owing, 
for example, to border closures or stricter bor -
der controls. On the demand side, private con -
sumption is likely to suffer owing not only to 
the closure of consumption opportunities dur -
ing the pandemic but also to the restoration of 
VAT rates to their original levels. As infection 
figures decline, vaccines become more widely 
available and the containment measures are 
gradually eased, the current drags on growth 
should slowly recede, however. Economic out -
put is therefore likely to return to a significantly 
higher level from the second quarter and con -
tinue its recovery. However, the future outlook 
remains closely linked to developments in the 
pandemic, with the risk of further setbacks 
stemming from mutations of the virus, in par -
ticular.
The coronavirus crisis also shaped German fis -
cal policy last year. Starting from the first wave 
of infections in March, extensive measures 
were taken to support the healthcare system, 
enterprises, and households. General govern -
ment investment continued to grow at a dy -
namic pace. Moreover, the tax and social se -
curity system had an automatic stabilising ef -
fect during the economic downturn, with tax 
and social security contributions decreasing in 
line with corporate earnings, wage income and 
private consumption, and wage income losses 
being offset to some extent by social benefits. 
As a result, a large general government deficit 
was recorded in 2020. Initial reports in January 
put it at almost 5% of GDP , following a surplus 
of 1½% of GDP a year earlier. The debt ratio 
could have risen by roughly 10  percentage 
points to around 70% by the end of 2020.The outlook for this year remains uncertain. As 
things stand, both the deficit and the debt ratio 
could move more or less sideways. Because 
parts of the economy will remain severely im -
paired by the containment measures at first, 
many support measures will stay in place or be 
adapted. In addition, the solidarity surcharge 
has been partially abolished and child benefits 
significantly raised. However, the upturn should 
gradually pick up speed over the course of the 
year, also increasingly easing the burden on 
public finances.
Although the deficit recorded by the central 
government budget was very large at the end 
of 2020, it was nonetheless considerably 
smaller than planned. The standard limits im -
posed by the debt brake were exceed by only 
around €40 billion rather than by around €120 
billion. In line with this, the annual repayments, 
which are due from 2023 onwards, will run at 
just €2 billion instead of €6 billion. A very large 
volume of net borrowing is expected again this 
year. However, this will contain generous buf -
fers which can be used fairly flexibly during the 
crisis. Some of these buffers have already been 
earmarked as part of the most recent govern -
ment decisions – for example, for a second 
child bonus or additional spending on vaccines. 
Nonetheless, a great deal of leeway remains to 
allow the funding of additional measures if re -
quired by the crisis. Setting a time limit on 
these measures will prevent strain on future 
budgets.
The general government deficit is likely to fall 
significantly in 2022. To wit, the economic re -
covery is set to firm once the coronavirus pan -
demic has died down, and support measures 
may be discontinued. Many of the projections 
published since the autumn indicate a struc -
tural deficit of around 2% of GDP . Rising social 
insurance contribution rates have probably al -
ready been factored in here, as was the case in 
the Bundesbank’s December projection, for ex -
ample. For the most part, this is not a direct 
consequence of the coronavirus crisis, but in -
stead reflects additional spending on educa -Government’s 
significant 
contribution  to 
stabilising  the 
coronavirus cri -
sis reflected by 
high deficit and 
clear rise in debtDeficit and debt 
ratio expected 
to stay at similar 
levels in 2021
2021 central 
government 
budget contains 
buffers for 
 further crisis 
support
Public finances 
will recover 
as pandemic 
subsides , but 
expenditure set 
to rise regard -
less of the 
coronavirus 
crisis Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
9

tion, climate policy and digitalisation, for ex -
ample. Moreover, expenditure on pensions, 
healthcare and long- term care is growing rap -
idly in the wake of political decisions and as a 
result of demographic change. While interest 
expenditure declines, growth in other expend -
iture (primary expenditure) is therefore likely to 
remain dynamic. It could thus reach a new 
peak as a share of GDP . The tax and social con -
tributions ratio is also expected to reach a rela -
tively high level in historical terms.
Overall, it is appropriate for fiscal policy to re -
main focused on stabilisation at first in order to 
deal with the crisis as effectively as possible. 
Once the pandemic subsides, it will be time to 
return public finances to a sound footing. A 
good way to anchor a multitiered policy of this 
sort consists of fiscal rules that provide fiscal 
leeway in a crisis while at the same time ensur -
ing a solid outlook for public finances. This 
could take various forms. Both the European 
fiscal rules and the German debt brake cater to 
this two-pronged objective.
Fiscal rules ultimately mean that receipts and 
expenditure need to be matched and that pri -
orities need to be set. Given the high levels of 
uncertainty at present, it is difficult to reliably gauge exactly how much need there will be to 
adjust German public finances in the future. Al -
though there will probably not be sufficient 
room for additional spending, or for tax cuts, 
the need for consolidation at all levels of gov -
ernment does not appear exceptionally great 
overall from today’s perspective. Moreover, the 
rules allow adjustments to be spread out over a 
period of time. Central government can thus 
use its generous reserves, which amount to al -
most €50 billion. No specific decisions will be 
made until the central government budget for 
2022 is adopted after the general election.
Regardless of the coronavirus crisis, social se -
curity funds will require considerable structural 
adjustment in the future. This is mainly the re -
sult of demographic change, but also of the ex -
tensive benefit increases adopted over the last 
few years. Contribution rates are therefore ex -
pected to rise sharply – first for health insur -
ance and then for pension and long- term care 
insurance schemes. It will be key here to set 
out a roadmap for social security contribution 
rates, central government funds and the level 
of benefits going forward. Without further ad -
justment, the central government budget is un -
likely to have the capacity to take on additional 
structural burdens here.Remain focused 
on managing 
the crisis, then 
return finances 
to sound footingAdjustment 
needs are 
limited from 
today’s perspec -
tive and should 
be spread over 
several years
Social security 
funds under 
financing 
 pressureDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
10

Global and European setting
Global economic 
 developments
The exceptionally rapid global economic recov -
ery, thanks to which a sizeable part of the 
slump caused by the pandemic was already re -
couped over the summer months, lost consid -
erable steam in the fourth quarter. This was 
due mainly to new waves of infections across 
much of the world. The containment measures 
were re-  tightened in Europe, in particular, 
which placed a marked strain on its economies. 
Economic output in the euro area fell by 0.6% 
in the fourth quarter of 2020 on the previous 
quarter. In the United States, Japan and the 
United Kingdom, growth of real gross domestic 
product (GDP) decelerated, albeit to varying 
degrees. The pace of recovery in some emer -
ging market economies likewise slowed down 
perceptibly. However, in China, where no new 
pandemic wave has occurred thus far, growth 
remained brisk in the fourth quarter. China is 
the only large economy to have grown in the 
crisis year of 2020.
In response to the experience of the spring, the 
containment measures taken in the past few 
months were more specifically directed at con -
tact reduction. Manufacturing was therefore 
largely spared from production stoppages and 
disruptions to international supply chains and 
benefited from the (pandemic- induced) shift in 
demand from services to goods. According to 
the CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic Pol -
icy Analysis, global industrial output picked up 
markedly in the fourth quarter and, like global 
goods trade before it already, is likely to have 
returned to its pre- crisis level towards year’s 
end.
In the fourth quarter, activity in contact-  
intensive service sectors, especially in countries 
in which tighter restrictions had been imposed, 
suffered a distinct setback. The across- the- 
board closure of non- essential businesses in some European countries was reflected in areas 
such as mobility behaviour. In many places, 
however, losses were less drastic than in the 
spring. This is especially the case for retail sales. 
One possible reason for this is that households 
and enterprises have now become more suc -
cessful in adapting to the pandemic and the re -
strictions and, for instance, are making greater 
use of contactless distribution channels. An -
other reason why the decline was smaller 
amongst service providers was that many of 
them had previously only partly recovered from 
their pandemic- induced losses.
Owing to the persistently high incidence of in -
fections and the further tightening of contain -
ment measures in some regions, the global 
economy is set to have experienced a sluggish 
start to the new year. However, the rapid devel -
opment of vaccines means that vaccination Global eco -
nomic recovery 
lost steam in Q4
Global industrial 
activity and 
trade in goods 
still riding tail -
wind
Pandemic- 
induced setback 
with regard to 
contact- intensive 
servicesIMF raises 
global growth 
forecast for the 
current year 
slightly
Real GDP in selected major economies
Sources: National Bureau of Statistics of China, Bureau of Eco-
nomic  Analysis,  Eurostat,  Office  for  National  Statistics  and 
Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020859095100Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
United KingdomUnited States
90951009095100105110
Euro areaChina
80859095100Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
11

campaigns have now started in many industrial 
countries and some emerging market econ -
omies. This means there are hopes that it will 
be possible to ease restrictions markedly over 
the next few months. In addition, the latest in -
creases made to fiscal stimulus packages in 
some industrial countries, particularly the 
United States and Japan, have led to a bright -
ening of the economic outlook. Against this 
background, in the regular January update of 
the World Economic Outlook, the International 
Monetary Fund (IMF) staff raised its global eco -
nomic growth projection slightly to 5.5% for 
the current year.1 It left its projection for growth 
in the following year unchanged at 4.2%.
Nonetheless, the economic outlook remains 
surrounded by major uncertainty regarding 
how the pandemic will unfold. One possibility 
is that tighter restrictions over a longer period 
of time might become necessary in order to 
contain the new, apparently more contagious 
variants of the virus. However, other factors 
having nothing to do with the pandemic have 
recently caused the risk assessment to brighten 
markedly. A trade and cooperation agreement 
was concluded between the European Union 
(EU) and the United Kingdom (see box on 
p. 16 f.), thereby avoiding a disorderly Brexit. 
Moreover, an additional sizeable fiscal stimulus 
package in the United States is on the cards under the new president. These actions, along 
with similar measures in other countries, could 
have continued to jump- start global economic 
activity in the current year. Nonetheless, a sus -
tainable global economic recovery can still only 
be achieved if the pandemic is combatted suc -
cessfully. Efforts to accelerate the production 
and distribution of vaccines around the world 
are therefore particularly important – and not 
only for humanitarian reasons.
Expectations of increased demand have prob -
ably contributed to the very recent hike in the 
prices of key commodities. In the reporting 
period, crude oil prices went up by over 40%. 
As this report went to press, a barrel of Brent 
crude oil cost US$63 after trading at US$43 in 
November 2020. Given that infection numbers 
are currently still high in much of the world, the 
OPEC members and their partners also agreed 
to only gradually increase production up until 
at least March 2021. Saudi Arabia additionally 
declared its intent to cut its own production 
considerably for two months as of February. 
This means that, according to forecasts by the 
International Energy Agency, global oil demand 
in the first quarter will have continued to mar -
ginally exceed global production.2 Non- energy 
commodity prices, too, have risen across the 
board since November, according to the HWWI 
index, with prices for industrial commodities, in 
particular, once again surging – due, amongst 
other things, to persistently strong demand 
from China. As this report went to press, they 
were just under 50% higher than the pre- crisis 
levels of December 2019.
Surging prices for many commodities are likely 
to gradually feed through to consumer prices 
in the coming months. As 2020 was coming to 
a close, annual consumer price inflation was 
once again shaped by the weak price tenden -
cies of the preceding second quarter. The aver -
age headline rate across the industrial countries 
rose to merely 0.7% by December. Core infla -Outlook sur -
rounded by 
major uncer -
taintyCommodity 
prices up con -
siderably across 
the board
Consumer price 
inflation in 
industrial coun -
tries remains 
subduedGlobal economic indicators*
Sources:  CPB,  national  data  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Groups of countries vary due to data availability.
Deutsche BundesbankOND J FMAM J J A S OND
2019 202084889296100104108December 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
Real retail sales
Industrial output
1 See International Monetary Fund (2021).
2 See International Energy Agency (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
12

tion (from which energy and food prices are 
stripped out) remained stable at 1.1%.
China
Unlike many other countries, China was spared 
a second wave of infections in the fourth quar -
ter, which gave the economy the necessary 
headroom to continue its strong expansion. 
Real GDP in the fourth quarter of 2020 was up 
by 6.5% on the year, according to the official 
estimate. Aggregate output was thus even 
somewhat higher than the level expected prior 
to the pandemic for this period. In the quarter 
just ended, the strong economic growth was 
again largely propelled by the industrial sector. 
Buoyant export business was the main driver 
here, with revenue from goods exports up by 
nearly 17% from the previous year on a US dol -
lar basis. In the process, Chinese exporters 
benefited from the substantial growth of goods 
consumption in many industrial countries.
Services grew at a considerably more moderate 
pace. In the meantime, however, all of its major 
sectors, including accommodation and food 
services, have likewise markedly exceeded their 
pre- crisis levels. Consistent with this picture, 
the unemployment rate continued to fall in the 
past few months, reaching its level of the pre -
vious year in December 2020. Despite the 
widespread return of economic activity to nor -
mal, upward pressure on consumer prices re -
mained quite weak. On average for the months 
from October to December, the inflation rate 
excluding energy and food held steady at 
0.5%. The headline rate even shrank to 0.1%. 
This was due primarily to a distinct decline in 
meat prices, which had previously increased 
sharply as a result of African swine fever.
Other selected emerging 
 market economies
In the past few months, India’s economy has 
continued to recover from a slump in the second quarter that was particularly severe by 
international standards. Although no official 
estimate of real GDP for the fourth quarter is 
available yet, the indicators are pointing to a 
potential return to its previous year’s level. The 
recent improvement was aided by a consider -
able reduction in infection figures. The number 
of reported new infections is now down by 
nearly 90% from its peak in September. India 
has launched a vaccination campaign with the 
goal of inoculating 300 million people – with 
particularly at- risk segments of the population 
being given priority treatment – by the early 
summer. A fall in food prices caused consumer 
price inflation to weaken considerably to 4.6% 
in December. The central bank has left its pol -
icy rate unchanged at 4% since May.
The Brazilian economy continued to recover in 
the final quarter, albeit at a reduced pace. An 
increase in the infection rate weighed markedly 
on economic activity. Real GDP is therefore un -
likely to have returned to its pre- crisis level yet. Economic out -
put surpasses 
pre- crisis trend
Widespread 
return to normal 
in services, tooRecovery of 
India’s economy 
making progress
Increased infec -
tion rate ham -
pers Brazil’s 
recoveryWorld market prices for crude oil,
industrial commodities and
food and beverages
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., HWWI and Bundesbank cal-
culations. • Latest figures: average of 1 to 12 February 2021, 
or 1 to 18 February 2021 for crude oil.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2125304050607080Monthly averages, log scale
80100120140160180
801001202016 = 100, US dollar basis
Industrial commoditiesCrude oil (Brent)
in US$ per barrel
Food and beveragesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
13

Owing to the strong fourth- quarter increase in 
production, output in industrial sector, how -
ever, has already significantly surpassed its pre- 
crisis level. On the other hand, accommodation 
and food services, in particular, are still lagging 
far behind. The situation in the labour market 
also remained difficult. Since peaking in the 
third quarter, the unemployment rate has di -
minished only slightly. Consumer price inflation 
strengthened to 4.3% on the year. The Brazil -
ian central bank left its policy rate unchanged 
at 2%.
The economic recovery appears to have con -
tinued in Russia, too. Like elsewhere, there ap -
pears to have been a hidden bifurcation: 
whereas parts of the services sector suffered a 
setback following the resurgence of new infec -
tions, industrial production picked up sharply. 
Manufacturing output in the fourth quarter 
even exceeded pre-  pandemic levels. For 2020 
as a whole, the only period for which an official 
estimate is available, real GDP contracted by 
3.1%. This contraction was rather mild by inter -
national standards, even though the Russian 
economy not only had to cope with the strains 
caused by the pandemic but also took a hit due 
to a sharp slump in oil exports. On the whole, 
oil revenues last year fell by 40% on a US dol -
lar basis owing to falling prices and production 
cutbacks. Since the onset of the pandemic, the rouble has trended markedly downwards. The 
inflation rate as measured by the consumer 
price index (CPI) therefore picked up in the 
fourth quarter to 4.4%, thus slightly exceeding 
the central bank’s target of 4%.
United States
In the United States, the overall economic re -
covery continued with diminished momentum 
in the final quarter of 2020. According to the 
preliminary estimate, real GDP increased by 
1.0% on the quarter after seasonal adjustment. 
This followed a third quarter in which eco -
nomic output had achieved growth of 7.5%, 
thus recouping most of the pandemic- related 
losses from the first half of the year. The main 
reason for the considerable deceleration in 
growth was that private consumption hardly 
grew in the fourth quarter. Amidst mounting 
pandemic- related burdens, consumers even cut 
back their spending distinctly in the last two 
months of the year. By contrast, business in -
vestment in machinery and equipment and pri -
vate residential construction strongly acceler -
ated once again in the reporting quarter, even 
far exceeding pre-  crisis levels. Enterprises also 
increased their inventories. In addition, exports 
– particularly to China – rose markedly. How -
ever, imports grew even more dynamically, 
causing aggregate growth to be somewhat 
weaker than demand growth.
The situation in the US labour market remained 
difficult at the beginning of the year. In January, 
employment in the area of contact- intensive 
services such as, in particular, leisure and hospi -
tality remained far short of its pre- crisis level. 
Initial easing of containment measures in eco -
nomically significant states could potentially 
jump- start an economic recovery in the coming 
months. A contribution may well be made by 
the extensive stimulus package adopted in late Russian econ -
omy contracted 
comparatively 
moderately in 
pandemic yearRecovery lost 
considerable 
momentum in 
Q4
Prospect of 
improvement 
following slug -
gish start to 
yearConsumption and investment 
in the United States
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bundesbank calcula-
tions.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020889092949698100102Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally and price adjusted, log scale
Private consumptionPrivate gross fixed capital
formationDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
14

2020, too.3 The new administration has add -
itionally pledged even more extensive fiscal 
stimulus programmes. Given muted inflationary 
pressures, monetary policy is likewise set to re -
main highly accommodative for the foresee -
able future. CPI- based annual inflation clocked 
in at 1.4% in January.
Japan
Japan’s economic upturn decelerated during 
the fourth quarter. According to the initial offi -
cial estimate, real GDP was up, after seasonal 
adjustment, by 3% from the third quarter, in 
which it had grown by just over 5%. Private 
consumption was the main factor behind the 
moderation of growth. In an environment of 
resurging infection counts, households were 
holding back on consumer spending. By con -
trast, exporters benefited from the buoyant 
global demand for goods, with goods exports 
once again increasing strongly. Business invest -
ment showed a significant revival in the fourth 
quarter, in the light of which imports rose 
sharply. The labour market proved robust. The 
fourth- quarter unemployment rate held steady 
at 3%, as in the previous quarter. Annual con -
sumer price inflation, in negative territory since 
October, clocked in at -0.6% in January. The 
Japanese central bank maintained its accom -
modative stance.
United Kingdom
Following a resurgence of infections in the 
United Kingdom beginning in October, con -
tainment measures were tightened in more 
and more parts of the country and only tem -
porarily eased somewhat in December. The re -
covery, which had still been strong in the third 
quarter, consequently decelerated considerably 
in the fourth quarter of 2020. Real GDP in -
creased after seasonal adjustment by only 1% 
on the third quarter. It contracted by 7.8% on 
the year. Various contact- intensive services 
were affected once again by the restrictions. Activity slowed back down considerably in the 
accommodation and food services sector, in 
particular, such that its output in December 
was only around half of its pre- pandemic level. 
Other sectors, by contrast, continued to re -
cover in the fourth quarter. Construction activ -
ity and manufacturing output were up percep -
tibly from the third quarter. The labour market 
took a slight turn for the worse. The average 
unemployment rate for the three months end -
ing in November rose to 5% as against 4.5% 
on average for the June to August period.
In the light of the spread of a more highly con -
tagious variant of the coronavirus, containment 
measures in the UK were tightened consider -
ably towards the end of the year and, despite 
falling infection counts, have not been eased 
again. Business sentiment accordingly deterior -
ated at the end of the period under review. The 
Purchasing Managers’ Index for the economy 
as a whole slipped well below the expansion 
threshold in January. Although the trade deal 
with the EU averted the imposition of tariffs 
and quantitative restrictions, it brought with it 
other constraints for many sectors of the econ -
omy which have been making themselves felt 
since the beginning of the year (see box on 
p. 16 f.). The inflation rate as measured by the 
consumer price index (CPI) picked up slightly in 
January to 0.7%. The Bank of England main -
tained its accommodative stance.
Poland
Poland, too, faced a drastic increase in infec -
tion counts in the fourth quarter. Measures in 
retail trade and other contact- intensive ser -
vices, as well as in education, were therefore Recovery con -
tinued at dimin -
ished pace in Q4
Strong 
pandemic- 
induced deceler -
ation of recov -
ery in Q4Strains caused 
by pandemic 
and withdrawal 
from the EU at 
the beginning of 
the year
Poland less 
hamstrung by 
pandemic wave 
in Q4 than 
expected
3 To wit, easier access to extra unemployment benefits has 
been extended until mid- March. In addition, new one- off 
stimulus payments of US$600 to each eligible citizen and a 
revamped assistance programme for small and medium-  
sized enterprises were adopted. The overall fiscal cost of 
the package is estimated to run to nearly 4½% of GDP . The 
non- partisan Congressional Budget Office assumes that the 
measures taken could boost GDP by 1½% on average for 
2021 and 2022. See Congressional Budget Office (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
15

How will economic relations between the United Kingdom 
and the European Union be governed going forward?
Following intensive negotiations, the Euro-
pean Union and the United Kingdom con-
cluded a trade and cooperation agreement 
shortly before 2020 drew to an end.1 This 
sets out fairly comprehensive rules for trade 
in goods and generally excludes tariffs and 
quantitative restrictions. It goes further than 
any other EU trade agreement to date. A 
mechanism has also been agreed that is de-
signed to prevent competition- distorting 
state aid and the undermining of certain so-
cial and environmental standards. In the 
event of a suspected breach of level playing 
fi  eld rules, both partners may unilaterally 
impose sanctions, which can then be re-
viewed by an arbitration tribunal. However, 
the agreement represents a clear step back-
wards compared with membership of the 
EU single market, even for trade in goods. 
For example, product standards are no 
longer subject to automatic mutual recog-
nition, and there are import controls and 
other forms of red tape. Furthermore, the 
zero tariff provisions do not apply to goods 
with a high share of value added from third 
countries.2The agreement contains only rudimentary 
provisions on trade in services and lacks ex-
tensive rules on fi  nancial services, for ex-
ample. Many market participants are hop-
ing for quick follow- up negotiations and 
better arrangements in future.3 However, as 
these would also touch on the compe-
tences of the individual EU Member States, 
supplementary arrangements will be diffi   -
cult to agree. There are retrograde steps in 
many other areas, too. For instance, both 
the free movement of people and the mu-
tual recognition of professional qualifi  ca-
tions have come to an end, making labour 
mobility considerably more diffi   cult.
Overall, the United Kingdom is therefore ex-
pected to suffer considerable economic 
losses in spite of the trade and cooperation 
agreement.4 Although transitional arrange-
ments still apply in some areas and many 
fi  rms increased their stockholdings in the 
The United Kingdom’s trade links with 
the European Union*
02468101214
Sources: Office for National Statistics, Eurostat, Haver Analytics 
and Bundesbank calculations. * Averages for 2016 to 2019.
Deutsche Bundesbank02468101214Imports from the EU
(% of EU and
German GDP)Exports to the EU
(% of UK GDP)
Services
Goods
of which: 
Germanyof which:
Germany1 The agreement is currently in force only on a provi-
sional basis. For it to remain in force permanently, it 
needs to be ratifi  ed by the European Parliament. The 
agreement does not have to be ratifi  ed by the Member 
States’ national parliaments, however, as the European 
Commission has deemed it to be an “EU- only” agree-
ment that covers only areas of exclusive EU compe-
tence.
2 According to simulations, total UK trade in goods 
could shrink by around one- tenth over the medium 
term as a result of the aforementioned new barriers. 
See International Relations Committee Brexit Task 
Force (2020).
3 Financial services, in particular, are very important for 
the United Kingdom, having accounted for around 9% 
of UK exports to the EU in recent years. The corres-
ponding fi  gure for the services sector as a whole is 
more than 40%.
4 Analyses conducted by the International Relations 
Committee Brexit Task Force (2020) show that UK GDP 
could shrink by signifi  cantly more than 1% over the 
medium term as a result of the reduction in EU- UK 
trade caused by new non- tariff barriers alone. This is 
compounded by potential net migration outfl  ows, 
subdued foreign direct investment (FDI), and product-
ivity losses. However, owing to the lack of precedents, 
estimating the effects is subject to considerable uncer-
tainty.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
16

tightened considerably again. Nonetheless, the 
economic recovery was less hamstrung by the 
recent wave of the pandemic than expected. 
Real GDP contracted by merely 0.7% in the 
final quarter of the year after seasonal adjust -
ment. This was due primarily to the sharp quar -
terly rise in industrial production by nearly 5%. 
Despite the renewed restrictions, price- adjusted 
retail sales picked up once again somewhat 
compared with the third quarter after seasonal 
adjustment. According to an initial estimate, 
GDP contracted by 2.8% for full-  year 2020, 
which was relatively mild by international 
standards. However, it should be borne in mind 
that the Polish economy had grown by as much 
as 4.5% in 2019. Owing to extensive support 
measures, including those promoted by the EU, 
the crisis has had virtually nil impact on the la -
bour market thus far. The average unemploy -
ment rate for the fourth quarter, at 3.3%, was 
a mere 0.4 percentage point up on the year. 
Annual consumer price inflation decelerated to 
2.4% by December. By contrast, the core rate, excluding energy and food, fell only slightly to 
3.7%. The Polish central bank kept its policy 
rate at a historically low level of 0.1%.
Macroeconomic trends  
in the euro area
Macroeconomic activity in the euro area con -
tracted again somewhat in the final quarter of 
2020 against the backdrop of a resurgence of 
new infections and tighter containment meas -
ures. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, 
seasonally adjusted real GDP fell by 0.6% in the 
fourth quarter compared with the third quarter. 
The year- on- year shortfall increased to 5%. Ac -
cording to preliminary calculations, aggregate 
output decreased by 6.8% on an annual aver -
age for 2020. The downturn was thus much 
stronger than during the 2009 global financial 
and economic crisis, when real GDP declined 
by 4.5%.Economic activ -
ity contracted 
again in Q4fi  nal quarter of 2020 in anticipation of pos-
sible disruptions at the beginning of this 
year, it is likely that initial problems were al-
ready noticeable in the current quarter.5 
New bureaucratic requirements have cre-
ated diffi   culties for many enterprises. In the 
fi  nancial services sector, some business ac-
tivities have been relocated to other coun-
tries. For the UK economy, which is already 
facing severe restrictions due to the corona-
virus pandemic, the additional burdens 
come at a very bad time. It remains to be 
seen whether the regained possibilities of 
forging a more independent economic pol-
icy will give the United Kingdom an edge in 
its trading activities.
The new relationship with the United King-
dom will also entail economic losses for the 
European Union, especially for those Mem-
ber States with particularly close trade links 
with the United Kingdom. However, the losses in relation to economic output are 
likely to be signifi  cantly smaller for most 
Member States than for the United King-
dom.
5 Freight volumes in the UK’s external trade in goods 
were exceptionally low in January. Possible explan-
ations for this include transactions being brought for-
ward and COVID- related falls in demand. However, it is 
also possible that enterprises in the United Kingdom 
lost export orders or preferred not to trade on account 
of the new rules, or that this is at least the reason why 
delays occurred. See also Bank of England (2021).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
17

The pandemic had already picked up momen -
tum again in some Member States in the third 
quarter. In November, the infection rate then 
increased so significantly that several Member 
States felt compelled to tighten containment 
measures again considerably. Restrictions were 
eased in some cases in December, but other 
Member States have now tightened their meas -
ures. The time profile of the restrictions was 
therefore less homogeneous in the fourth quar -
ter than in the second quarter. However, a fea -
ture they shared was that they were primarily 
geared to contact- intensive services and parts 
of the retail sector. Most governments also 
tried to keep child daycare centres and schools 
open.
Industry and construction were not directly af -
fected by the renewed tightening of measures 
and benefited from the rapid recovery in global 
trade and robust construction demand. Along -
side switching effects by consumers, this was 
the main reason why aggregate losses were 
considerably lower than in the second quarter.
From a monthly perspective, aggregate output 
is even likely to have risen somewhat further in 
October. In November, it then fell markedly. It 
probably recovered a little in December, but re -
mained roughly just under 6% lower than its 
pre- crisis level.4Private consumption, in particular, suffered in 
the fourth quarter as a result of the tightening 
of containment measures. There were particu -
larly heavy losses in services used by house -
holds, above all in accommodation and food 
services, in culture, entertainment and recre -
ation and in personal services. Household ex -
penditure on the purchase of goods declined 
only in some segments. Overall, retail sales, 
after price adjustment, only fell by just under 
1% on the quarter. However, they were still up 
by around 2% on the year. Household demand 
for furnishings and electronic equipment con -
tinued to increase. In addition, the number of 
new motor vehicle registrations rose markedly 
in the fourth quarter. This is probably due to 
pull-forward effects associated with the expiry 
of various fiscal incentives. In the light of the 
increased restrictions on consumption oppor -
tunities, households’ saving ratio is likely to 
have risen again recently.
Investment in the fourth quarter is likely to 
have risen slightly compared with the third 
quarter. Expenditure on machinery and equip -
ment, which had contracted sharply in the first 
half of 2020 and subsequently recovered only 
partially, probably increased slightly, at best. Al -
though capital goods manufacturers’ sales in 
the euro area continued to rise in October and 
November, imports of capital goods fell some -
what. New registrations of commercial vehicles 
also declined markedly in comparison with the 
preceding quarter. By contrast, investment in 
intellectual property probably expanded again 
significantly. In particular, the trend towards 
digitalisation, which has been accelerated by 
the conditions of the pandemic, is likely to 
have had a stimulating effect here. Investment 
in this area had already returned to pre-  Considerably 
tighter restric -
tions again from 
November
Industry and 
construction not 
directly affected
Marked decline 
in economic 
activity in 
NovemberFurther decline 
in consumption 
of services, 
relatively  robust 
consumption of 
goods
Investment 
probably up 
slightlyEstimated monthly path for aggregate 
output in the euro area
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Eurostat data.
Deutsche BundesbankJan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.
20207580859095100Q4 2019 = 100, price and seasonally adjusted, log scale
Quarterly 
average
Quarter-on-quarter 
percentage change– 0.6
+ 12.4
– 11.7– 3.7
Real GDP
4 In order to gain an overview of the monthly dynamics of 
macroeconomic activity, an econometric method and key 
economic indicators were used to convert quarterly GDP 
into a monthly frequency. For details on the methodology, 
see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
18

pandemic levels in the third quarter.5 Construc -
tion investment probably stagnated. In any 
case, construction output remained virtually 
unchanged in comparison with the previous 
quarter.
Foreign trade was the main driver of growth in 
the final quarter. Exports to non- euro area 
countries picked up substantially in this period. 
Exports to the United Kingdom rose particularly 
sharply, probably first and foremost owing to 
uncertainty about the outcome of negotiations 
between the EU and the United Kingdom. Ex -
ports to China also went up significantly. Ex -
ports to the United States likewise increased 
markedly, but, unlike exports to the United 
Kingdom and China, they remained well below 
their pre- crisis level. Euro area exports of ser -
vices to non- euro area countries also continued 
to recover, but still suffered from the persistent 
weakness in tourism. The exchange of goods 
amongst euro area countries, which had made 
significant progress towards recovery in the 
third quarter, continued to normalise. Euro area 
imports from non- euro area countries increased 
less sharply than exports in the light of sub -
dued domestic activity once again.
Industrial output continued to recover in the 
fourth quarter, supported by brisk demand for 
goods at home and abroad. Capacity utilisation 
in the manufacturing industry rose significantly 
between October and January, but remained 
below its long- term average. Above all, the 
manufacture of computers and electronic and 
optical devices picked up.6 There were also sig -
nificant increases in the production of other 
capital goods and intermediate goods. In De -
cember, the production of automobiles edged 
much closer toward its pre- crisis level. By con -
trast, the manufacture of other transport equip -
ment, and above all aircraft production, despite 
some recovery, remained distinctly below pre-  
crisis levels. Consumer goods output increased 
only marginally from an already high level.
In several services sectors, the situation deterior -
ated again considerably in the fourth quarter owing to the pandemic, with the hotel and res -
taurant sector, trade fairs and travel agencies 
bearing the brunt once more. Art and cultural 
activities also returned to a very low level of 
activity  . By contrast, the situation for certain 
business- related services, such as advertising or 
the activities of employment placement agen -
cies improved. They probably benefited from the 
ongoing recovery in industry. Much the same 
was true for some transport services and infor -
mation and communication technology (ICT).Significant 
recovery in for -
eign trade with 
non- euro area 
countries
Significant 
improvement in 
manufacturingSome services 
again severely 
affected by 
pandemic Sentiment indicators for the euro area*
Source: European Commission. * Deviations from the respect-
ive average since 2000.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21–100+1050403020100102030
–––––+++
Consumer confidenceBusiness sectorBalance of positive and negative responses as a percentage 
of all responses, seasonally adjusted, monthly data
Services sector
Manufacturing industry
Construction
5 In the euro area excluding Ireland. For several years now, 
the statistical recording of intellectual property investment 
in the euro area has been strongly influenced by the busi -
ness activities of multinational enterprises domiciled in Ire -
land (see Deutsche Bundesbank (2018)). In the final quarter 
of 2019, this investment shot up by more than 30% owing 
to a one- off effect in Ireland. Investment volumes were sig -
nificantly lower in the subsequent three quarters. In the 
third quarter of 2020, the investment volume for the euro 
area as a whole was therefore one- quarter down on the 
pre- pandemic level. Excluding Ireland, by contrast, it 
reached its pre- crisis level once again.
6 This increased massively in November, especially in Ire -
land, probably in connection with the business activities of 
multinational enterprises domiciled in Ireland.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
19

Whilst economic output had risen sharply in all 
Member States in the third quarter, it declined 
markedly in some Member States in the final 
quarter, whereas in others it stagnated or even 
rose. This was mainly due to differences in how 
the pandemic developed and in the economic 
structure of the individual countries. These also 
had a bearing on the differing degrees of vari -
ation from the pre- pandemic level, which re -
mained high, especially in countries heavily reli -
ant on tourism.
In France, economic output contracted by 
1.3% in the final quarter compared with the 
third quarter, in which it had increased again to 
just over 96% of its pre- crisis level. This meant 
that the slump was comparatively mild despite 
the considerable tightening of containment 
measures once more. One reason for this was 
that investment activity was barely affected by 
the additional restrictions and picked up again. 
This is particularly true of construction invest -
ment, which, however, is likely to have bene -fited again from some catch- up effects. Exports 
of vehicles and pharmaceutical products, in 
particular, also increased significantly. By con -
trast, there were major shortfalls as a result of 
the operating bans for restaurant services and 
for various service providers, as well as in the 
retail sector on account of the temporary clos -
ure of non- essential shops. As the measures 
were eased, the economy appears to have re -
vived at the end of the quarter. According to 
estimates by the national statistical office, the 
backlog in GDP compared with pre- crisis levels 
narrowed from 8% in November to 4% in De -
cember. For 2020 as a whole, GDP declined by 
8.3%.
In Italy, too, economic output fell again signifi -
cantly in the fourth quarter after recovering a 
large part of its pandemic- related losses in the 
third quarter. Real GDP fell by 2% on the quar -
ter. This meant that it was around 7% down on 
its pre- pandemic level. Here, too, resurgent in -
fection rates and the tightening of contain -
ment measures had an impact on consumer-  
related services sectors in particular. But other 
sectors of the economy did not maintain the 
third- quarter level either. Industrial output, es -
pecially of consumer goods, dropped some -
what in the fourth quarter. Construction out -
put, which had already risen significantly above 
its pre- pandemic level in the third quarter, was 
probably down sharply. Consumption of goods 
is also likely to have declined. In any case, on 
average over the fourth quarter, retail sales 
were down markedly on the level of the previ -
ous period. Thus, while the domestic economy 
tended to be weak again, exports of goods in -
creased somewhat. In 2020 as a whole, real 
GDP fell by 8.9%.
In Spain, economic output even rose slightly by 
0.4% in the final quarter. However, it remained 
around 9% down on its pre- pandemic level. 
The further steep rise in public consumption of 
4.5% was a key factor in the – albeit small – 
aggregate gain. In addition, activity in the 
manufacturing industry and in some business-  
related services sectors continued to recover. Diverging devel -
opments in 
Member States 
in some 
instances
Decline in eco -
nomic output in 
FranceClear GDP 
decline in Italy
Level of activity 
in Spain remains 
very depressed 
despite slight 
GDP growthReal GDP in France, Italy and Spain
Sources: Eurostat and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020Q4 2019 = 100, seasonally adjusted, log scale
80859095100105
758085909510010580859095100105
Italy
SpainFranceDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
20

There was also a small increase in the retail sec -
tor. By contrast, aggregate activity was weighed 
down by the steady decline in construction ac -
tivity. In 2020 as a whole, real GDP fell by 11%.
In the smaller Member States, too, develop -
ments in macroeconomic activity presented a 
mixed picture in the fourth quarter. In Austria, 
the decline in real GDP , at -4.3%, was very 
large compared with the third quarter. In the 
Netherlands, economic output was virtually 
stagnant (-0.1%). In Belgium and Portugal, by 
contrast, aggregate output rose slightly by 
0.2% and 0.4%, respectively. In Latvia and 
Lithuania, real GDP even increased by around 
1% in both countries.
Despite the economic setback, the number of 
persons employed in the euro area increased 
slightly in seasonally adjusted terms by 0.3% in 
the fourth quarter, but was still around 2% 
down on the final quarter of 2019. The number 
of unemployed persons declined until Novem -
ber; only in December did it rise again slightly. 
On a quarterly average, the standardised un -
employment rate stood at 8.4%, following on 
from 8.6% in the third quarter. At the same 
time, enterprises reported that their employ -
ment plans had improved. The same applies to 
service providers. This suggests that they con -
sider the most recent setback to be temporary 
and are looking to the future with greater con -
fidence. It should also be borne in mind that 
employment continues to be massively sup -
ported by various economic policy measures. 
Although short- time work is decreasing in most 
countries, it continues to play a major role.
Consumer prices remained unchanged in sea -
sonally adjusted terms in the fourth quarter 
compared with the previous quarter. Prices for 
energy, food and services increased moder -
ately, while prices for non- energy industrial 
goods fell considerably. The annual inflation 
rate as measured by the Harmonised Index of 
Consumer Prices (HICP) dropped further from 
0.0% to -0.3% in the final quarter. The rate ex -cluding energy and food decreased markedly 
from 0.6% to 0.2%.
Lower prices for clothing and footwear played 
a major role in the decline in the core rate in 
the fourth quarter. Excluding the weaker end-  
of- season sales effect in the summer, the core 
rate would probably have been lower at that 
time. In addition, the temporary reduction in 
VAT rates in Germany continued to dampen 
the core rate. Prices for recreational and per -
sonal services as well as transport services 
probably also rose only slightly again owing to 
the lower demand caused by the pandemic. 
But the increase in the prices of the other com -
ponents of the HICP basket of goods was also 
somewhat weaker. Accordingly, the rate ex -
cluding energy, food, travel and clothing also 
fell to 0.8% in the fourth quarter, following on 
from 0.9% in the third quarter.
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, the an -
nual inflation rate (HICP) rose sharply overall in 
January to 0.9%, and the rate excluding energy 
and food rose to 1.4% – its highest level since 
2015. The sharp rise is likely to be partly attrib -
utable to a statistical effect as a result of the 
annual adjustment of the HICP weights, which 
was particularly pronounced this time owing to 
pandemic- induced changes in the consump -
tion structure in 2020. Alongside this, shifts in Economic devel -
opments also 
different in 
smaller Member 
States
Despite improve -
ments in second 
half of year, 
labour market 
situation still 
depressed
Consumer prices 
in euro area 
unchanged in 
Q4Core rate signifi -
cantly lower in 
Q4
Inflation rate 
rose sharply in 
JanuaryCore HICP rates in the euro area
Source: Eurostat.
Deutsche Bundesbank2011 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 210.20.40.60.81.01.21.41.6Annual growth rates (%), quarterly data
Jan.Excluding energy and food
Excluding energy, food, 
travel and clothingDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
21

end- of- season sales and sharp increases in 
electricity prices probably played a role in some 
countries. In addition, one- off effects in Ger -
many placed upward pressure on prices (see 
the box on pp. 63 ff.).
The macroeconomic situation in the euro area 
is likely to remain strained for the time being. 
Although vaccination campaigns have been 
rolled out in the euro area countries, the initial 
low availability of vaccine quantities means 
that only slow progress has been made so far. 
The vaccination campaign is unlikely to gain 
more momentum until the second quarter. In 
addition, there was a resurgence of infections 
in several Member States owing to the spread 
of different variants of the virus. The contain -
ment measures were therefore not only ex -
tended in many places, but also tightened in 
some cases. This is reflected in the Purchasing 
Managers’ Index for the economy as a whole, 
which fell further below the expansion thresh -old in January. This was primarily due to the 
much gloomier assessment in the services sec -
tor, whilst in the manufacturing industry, the 
signs continue to point to expansion. A similar 
split development across sectors is reflected in 
the European Commission’s survey results, 
which show that sentiment in industry even im -
proved and almost reached its long- term aver -
age in January. According to the surveys, the 
stock of orders in the construction sector in -
creased again from an already high level. By 
contrast, sentiment among service providers in -
dicated that the gap compared with the long- 
term average widened further. Household con -
fidence also deteriorated, with less favourable 
assessments of the economic outlook, in par -
ticular. This could mean that, if restrictions 
were eased, the additional savings resulting 
from the pandemic would not be dissolved 
quickly. Overall, the macroeconomic recovery is 
expected to remain on hold in the first quarter.Overall eco -
nomic recovery 
likely to remain 
on hold in Q1
List of references
Bank of England (2021), Monetary Policy Report, February 2021.
Congressional Budget Office (2021), An Overview of the Economic Outlook: 2021 to 2031, February  
2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), The monthly development of aggregate output in the euro area, 
Monthly Report, May 2020, p. 21.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2018), Activities of multinational enterprise groups and national economic 
statistics, Monthly Report, October 2018, pp. 65-78.
International Energy Agency (2021), Oil Market Report, February 2021.
International Monetary Fund (2021), World Economic Outlook Update: Policy Support and Vaccines  
Expected to Lift Activity, January 2021.
International Relations Committee Brexit Task Force (2020), A review of economic analyses on the 
potential impact of Brexit, ECB Occasional Paper Series, No 249.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
22

Monetary policy and banking business
Monetary policy and money 
market developments
At the December 2020 monetary policy meet -
ing, the Governing Council of the European 
Central Bank (ECB) recalibrated its monetary 
policy measures in view of the economic fallout 
from the resurgence of the coronavirus pan -
demic, increasing the envelope of the pan -
demic emergency purchase programme (PEPP) 
by €500 billion to a total of €1,850 billion and 
extending the horizon for net purchases under 
the PEPP to at least the end of March 2022. In 
any case, the Governing Council will conduct 
net purchases until it judges that the corona -
virus crisis phase is over. Purchases are being 
conducted flexibly on the basis of market con -
ditions and with a view to preventing a tighten -
ing of financing conditions that is inconsistent 
with countering the downward impact of the 
pandemic on the projected path of inflation. If 
favourable financing conditions can be main -
tained with asset purchase flows that do not 
exhaust the envelope, the envelope need not 
be used in full. Equally, the envelope of the 
PEPP can also be increased if necessary. The re -
investment of principal payments from matur -
ing securities purchased under the PEPP was 
extended until at least the end of 2023.
The Governing Council left the asset purchase 
programme (APP) and the key interest rates un -
changed. Net purchases under the APP will 
continue at a monthly pace of €20 billion. The 
main refinancing rate remains at 0%, while the 
rate on the marginal lending facility stands at 
0.25% and the deposit facility rate at -0.5%.
The ECB Governing Council decided to further 
recalibrate the conditions of the third series of 
targeted longer-  term refinancing operations 
(TLTRO- III). Specifically, it decided to extend the period over which considerably more favour -
able terms will apply by 12 months, to June 
2022. Three additional operations will also be 
conducted between June and December 2021. 
Moreover, the Governing Council raised the 
total amount that counterparties will be en -
titled to borrow in TLTRO- III operations from 
50% to 55% of their stock of eligible loans. In 
order to provide an incentive for banks to sus -
tain the current level of bank lending, the recal -
ibrated TLTRO- III borrowing conditions will be 
made available only to banks that achieve a 
new lending performance target.1 Moreover, 
the Governing Council also decided to offer 
four additional pandemic emergency longer-  
term refinancing operations (PELTROs) in 2021 
with unchanged conditions and maturities of 
approximately one year. The Governing Council 
also announced that it would continue con -
ducting its regular lending operations as fixed ECB Governing 
Council recali -
brates pandemic 
emergency 
purchase  
programme 
APP and key 
interest rates 
unchanged
ECB Governing 
Council adjusts 
refinancing 
operations
1 For more details on the modalities of these operations, 
see European Central Bank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
23
Money market interest rates 
in the euro area
Sources:  ECB  and  Bloomberg.  1 Monthly  averages.  2 From 
1 October 2019, EONIA calculated as €STR + 8.5 basis points. 
3 Three-month EURIBOR less three-month EONIA swap rate. 
• Average 1 to 18 February 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank2017 2018 2019 2020 20210.60.50.40.30.20.100.10.20.3
––––––+++
–100+10+20 Money market risk premium:
EURIBOR-OIS spread 1,3Basis
points% p. a.
EONIA1,2Three-month EURIBOR 1
Deposit facility rateMain refinancing rateMarginal lending rate
€STR 1

Money market management and liquidity needs
In the two reserve maintenance periods 
under review running from 4  November 
2020 to 26  January 2021, liquidity needs 
stemming from autonomous factors fell by 
€37.7 billion to €1,889.5 billion (see the 
table below).1 This development was attrib-
utable to a clear decline in government de-
posits with the Eurosystem, although all 
other autonomous factors each had a 
liquidity- absorbing effect. At an average of 
€530.3 billion in the December 2020- 
January 2021 period, government deposits, 
which had been rising very sharply since the 
second quarter of 2020 in the wake of the 
coronavirus pandemic (see the chart on 
p. 25), were €218.7 billion below the aver-
age for the September- November 2020 
period. Lower government deposits with 
the Bundesbank – down by €65.3 billion to 
€189.4 billion – accounted for 30% of this 
decline. In comparison, the volume of bank-notes in circulation in the Eurosystem rose 
signifi  cantly by €40.3 billion to an average 
of €1,429.4 billion. Cumulative net bank-
note issuance by Germany increased by 
€14.9 billion to €819.5 billion. Changes in 
net foreign assets and other factors, which 
are considered together owing to liquidity- 
neutral valuation effects, ultimately gave rise 
to an additional need for liquidity of €140.7 
billion in the period under review. This de-
velopment was mainly driven by a consider-
able rise in liabilities to non- euro area resi-
dents denominated in euro, stemming to a 
large degree from higher deposits from for-
eign central banks at the end of 2020. The 
1 Average of the eighth reserve maintenance period of 
2020 (December 2020- January 2021) compared with 
the average of the sixth reserve maintenance period of 
2020 (September- November 2020), which was covered 
in the November 2020 issue of the Monthly Report. 
This comparative approach is also used for the indi-
vidually cited autonomous factors.
Factors determining banks’ liquidity*
€ billion; changes in the daily averages of the reserve maintenance periods vis-à-vis the previous period
Item2020/2021
4 November
to
15 December16 December
to
26 January
I. Provision (+) or  absorption (–) of  central bank balances due to changes 
in autonomous factors
1. Banknotes in  circulation (increase: –) –  14.8 –  25.5
2. Government  deposits with the Eurosystem ( increase: –) + 102.0 + 116.7
3. Net foreign assets 1 +   0.7 –  16.5
4. Other factors 1 –  34.2 –  90.7
Total +  53.7 –  16.0
II. Monetary policy  operations of the Eurosystem
1. Open market  operations
a) Main refi  nancing operations –   0.8 –   0.2
b) Longer-term refi  nancing  operations +  46.6 +  38.2
c) Other operations + 138.9 +  98.2
2. Standing facilities
a) Marginal lending facility 0.0 0.0
b) Deposit facility (increase: –) –  74.7 –  51.5
Total + 110.0 +  84.7
III. Change in credit  institutions’  current accounts (I. + II.) + 163.7 +  68.7
IV. Change in the  minimum reserve requirement ( increase: –) –   0.4 –   1.4
* For longer-term trends and the Bundesbank’s contribution, see pp. 14 • and 15 • of the Statistical Section of this Monthly 
Report . 1 Including end-of- quarter liquidity-neutral valuation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
24

rise in the minimum reserve requirement – 
by €1.9 billion to €14.5 billion in the Decem-
ber 2020- January 2021 period – also caused 
the need for central bank liquidity to in-
crease. In Germany, the reserve requirement 
went up by €0.5 billion to €40.1 billion.
In the period under review, central bank li-
quidity was largely provided by purchase 
programmes, with a focus on the pandemic 
emergency purchase programme (see the 
chart on p. 27). However, at €50.4 billion, 
bids in the sixth operation of the third series 
of targeted longer- term refi  nancing oper-
ations (TLTRO- III) were lower than in previ-
ous operations. At the time when bids were 
submitted, it was not yet known that the 
Governing Council of the ECB would extend 
the period of favourable interest rates (for 
more information on the Governing Coun-
cil’s monetary policy decisions in December 
2020, see pp. 23ff.). On balance, the sixth 
TLTRO- III operation as well as the maturities 
and repayments from TLTRO- II resulted in a 
net liquidity injection of €37 billion on 
16 December 2020. Demand for pandemic 
emergency longer- term refi  nancing oper-
ations (PELTROs) was down for the sixth and 
seventh operations (to €2.6 billion in total). 
Interest in the regular main refi  nancing op-
erations and three- month tenders likewise 
remained subdued. Total tender volume in 
the Eurosystem amounted to an average of 
€1,793 billion in the December 2020- January 
2021 period. In Germany, the outstanding 
volume of longer- term operations – which 
include TLTROs, PELTROs and three- month 
tenders – rose by an average of €21.6 billion 
to €341.1 billion in the period under review, 
which represented a share of 19% in long- 
term tenders in the Eurosystem.
At an average of €3,713 billion, balance 
sheet holdings of the asset purchase pro-
grammes in the December 2020- January 
2021 period were around €237 billion above the average for the September- 
November 2020 period (see also the table 
above).
In net terms, there was a considerable in-
crease of €357 billion overall in excess li-
quidity in the period under review to an 
average of €3,471 billion. Whilst excess li-
quidity in the November- December 2020 
period rose by €238 billion, it increased by 
a further €119 billion in the following De-
cember 2020- January 2021 period. The 
lower increase in the second period was 
above all due to seasonal effects, including 
higher deposits from foreign central banks Autonomous factors in the Eurosystem*
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Liquidity-provid-
ing  (liquidity-absorbing)  factors  are  preceded  by  a  positive 
(negative)  sign.  1 Including  end-of-quarter  liquidity-neutral 
valuation adjustments.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 2020 211,5001,2501,00075050025002505007501,000
––––––++++€ billion, mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period
Net foreign assets1
Banknotes in circulationOther factors1Government deposits
with the Eurosystem
Eurosystem purchase programmes
€ billion
ProgrammeChange 
across the 
two reserve 
periodsBalance sheet 
holdings as at
12 February 
2021
Active programmes 1
PSPP +  46.4 2,363.6
CBPP3 +   1.4 289.0
CSPP +  11.6 258.6
ABSPP –   0.7 28.9
PEPP + 165.3 837.4
Completed programmes 
SMP +   0.1 28.7
CBPP1 0.0 0.5
CBPP2 –   0.1 2.6
1 Changes due to net purchases, maturities, reinvestments 
and amortisation adjustments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
25

as well as lower purchase volumes in mon-
etary policy programmes at year- end.
At 98.9%, Eurosystem banks made roughly 
the same use of the exemption allowances 
under the two- tier system for remunerating 
excess reserve holdings in the December 
2020- January 2021 period as in the 
September- November 2020 period. In Ger-
many, utilisation was still below the Euro-
system average and amounted to 98.5%, 
which was also close to the value recorded 
in the September- November 2020 period. 
The increase in the minimum reserve re-
quirement caused the absolute exemption allowances to rise; however, given the 
much stronger growth in excess liquidity, 
excess reserves – remunerated at -0.50% – 
grew once again (see the adjacent chart). 
This meant that, on average, around 25% 
of excess liquidity in the Eurosystem was ex-
empted from remuneration at negative 
interest rates in the December 2020- January 
2021 period, compared with around 28% 
in the September- November 2020 period.
In the money market, interest rates fell 
slightly during the reporting period in the 
light of a continued increase in excess liquid-
ity (see the adjacent chart). The secured mar-
ket saw overnight rates in GC Pooling decline 
for the ECB basket, for the most part by 1 
basis point to between -0.52% and -0.54%, 
although there was a signifi  cant decline to 
-1.15% with very low turnover at the end of 
2020. While the rate for the ECB EXTended 
basket, which contains an extended pool of 
collateral, also fell marginally by around 1 
basis point – with the exception of a sharper 
decline by 10 basis points to -0.60% at year- 
end – in the second half of January 2021, this 
rate generally stood at -0.51%. These devel-
opments should be seen in the context of a 
slight rise in turnover on the GC Pooling plat-
form for secured transactions with maturities 
of one day (ON, TN, SN; combined in the 
Deferred Funding Rate). Over the timeframe 
from 1  January to the end of the period 
under review on 26 January 2021, turnover 
increased by around €3 billion compared 
with the average for November and Decem-
ber 2020 to an average of €7.5 billion, but 
was still at a low level. The unsecured euro 
short term rate (€STR) generally stood be-
tween -0.56% and -0.57% at the beginning 
of 2021 and was thus also somewhat lower 
than in November and December 2020. 
With the exception of the period between 
Christmas and New Year, €STR turnover was 
broadly stable and averaged €46 billion in 
January 2021.Central bank interest rates, money 
market rates and excess liquidity
Sources: ECB, Eurex Repo and Bundesbank calculations. 1 Central 
bank balance minus the minimum reserve requirement plus the 
deposit facility. 2 The last period displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche BundesbankSep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb.
2020 20210.90.80.70.60.50.40.30.20.10
–––––––––Daily data
€ bn% p.a.
05001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,500Excess liquidity1Main refinancing rate
Mean value for the 
reserve maintenance period 2Deposit facility rate
ECB basket
ECB EXTended basketSTOXX GC Pooling Overnight€STR
GermanyEuro areaTheoretical allowances– 1.146Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
26

rate tender procedures with full allotment at 
the prevailing conditions for as long as neces -
sary.
Furthermore, the ECB Governing Council de -
cided to extend to June 2022 the duration of 
the set of collateral easing measures adopted 
by the Governing Council on 7 and 22 April 
2020. The extension of these measures should 
continue to ensure that banks can make full 
use of the Eurosystem’s liquidity operations, 
most notably the recalibrated TLTROs. The Gov -
erning Council will reassess the collateral eas -
ing measures before June 2022. Lastly, the 
Governing Council extended the Eurosystem 
repo facility for central banks (EUREP) and all 
temporary swap and repo lines with non- euro 
area central banks until March 2022.
The package of monetary policy measures 
adopted at the December meeting are in -
tended to contribute to preserving favourable 
financing conditions over the pandemic period, thereby supporting the flow of credit to all sec -
tors of the economy, underpinning economic 
activity and safeguarding medium- term price 
stability.
APP holdings recorded on the balance sheet 
rose by €67.3 billion during the reporting 
period. On 12 February, the Eurosystem as a 
whole held assets totalling €2,940.0 billion as 
part of the APP (see the box on pp. 24 ff. for a 
breakdown of the holdings by individual pro -
gramme). The holdings are furthermore being 
influenced by the smoothing over time of re -
investments in line with the technical param -
eters agreed upon in December 2018 and by 
the use of amortised cost accounting.2 Secur -
ities holdings reported under the PEPP 
amounted to €837.4 billion on 12 February, up 
by €195.8 billion.Extension of col -
lateral measures 
and swap and 
repo lines
Monetary policy 
measures aim to 
preserve favour -
able financing 
conditionsAPP and PEPP 
securities hold -
ings recorded 
on balance 
sheet see further 
increase
2 In particular, the difference between the acquisition and 
redemption value is amortised over the security’s residual 
maturity, treated as part of interest income and measured 
at amortised cost.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
27
Outstanding liquidity broken down by open market operation in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. 1 The bar width corresponds to the length of the reserve maintenance period. The last peri-
od displayed is still ongoing.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 202105001,0001,5002,0002,5003,0003,5004,0004,5005,0005,5006,000€ billion
Mean values for the relevant reserve maintenance period 1
Main refinancing operations
Three-month tenders
Three-year tenders
Purchase programmesFirst series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-I)Third series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-III)
Second series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-II)Pandemic emergency longer-term refinancing operations (PELTROs)
Additional longer-term refinancing operations

The sixth operation of the TLTRO- III series was 
settled on 16 December 2020, with 156 banks 
taking up a total of €50.4 billion. This means 
that €1,749 billion is currently outstanding 
across all TLTRO- III operations. Banks were un -
able to take into account the further recali -
brated conditions of the TLTRO- III in that par -
ticular operation because the deadline for 
counterparties to submit bids expired before 
the ECB Governing Council’s decision. Demand 
for PELTROs in November and December re -
mained very low, with a combined total of €2.6 
billion, and €26.6 billion is currently outstand -
ing on all the PELTROs settled to date.
The trend increase in excess liquidity continued, 
particularly on the back of the Eurosystem’s on -
going net asset purchases. As this report went 
to press, the volume of excess liquidity stood at 
€3,575.5 billion, which corresponds to an in -
crease of around €267.5 billion (see the box on 
pp. 24 ff.).
In the context of the ongoing increase in liquid -
ity, short- term money market rates continued 
their decline overall. The unsecured euro over -
night index average rate (EONIA), which is 
computed by applying a fixed spread to the 
euro short- term rate (€STR), fell by 1 basis point 
to -0.48% at last count, while the three- month 
euro interbank offered rate (EURIBOR) dropped 
more steeply in January to a new all- time low 
of -0.56%, leaving it only marginally higher 
than €STR. But by the time this report went to 
press, the three- month EURIBOR had climbed 
back to -0.54%, halting, for a time, the sharp 
downward trend that had persisted since May 
2020. The yield spread between the three-  
month EURIBOR and three- month EONIA swap 
rate, which had once been used as an indicator 
for money market risk, remained negative.
Money market forward rates have risen mark -
edly since the monetary policy meeting in De -
cember 2020, probably because market partici -
pants’ medium- term economic outlook has 
brightened and expectations of interest rate 
cuts receded further following the ECB Govern -ing Council’s decisions in December. At the cur -
rent end, the forward curve is now only slightly 
inverted in the short to medium- term maturity 
segments. The curve bottoms out at -0.52% in 
the second quarter of 2022, which is presently 
just a few basis points below the current EONIA 
level. This means that only a low probability of 
a reduction in the Eurosystem deposit facility 
rate is currently priced into forward rates for all 
maturity segments. A very large majority of re -
spondents to surveys conducted ahead of the 
Governing Council’s monetary policy meetings 
in December and January are likewise not ex -
pecting to see any further interest rate cuts.
Monetary developments 
in the euro area
The final quarter of the year saw monetary 
growth once again being shaped by the impact 
of the coronavirus pandemic and the economic 
policy response. Annual growth in the broad 
monetary aggregate M3 climbed to 12.3% by 
end- December, taking it to more than double 
its rate at the close of last year. Given the per -
sistently high level of uncertainty about how 
the pandemic will unfold, precautionary con -
siderations still dominated for households and 
enterprises, with highly liquid overnight de -
posits, in particular, recording substantial net 
growth. On the counterparts side, this develop -
ment was driven notably by three factors: first, 
the Eurosystem’s ongoing asset purchases 
again shored up monetary growth; second, 
commercial banks significantly stepped up their 
securitised lending to private issuers; and third, 
loans to the domestic private sector registered 
robust inflows overall, even though non-  
financial corporations showed less demand for 
loans than in the previous quarter. The banks 
surveyed in the Bank Lending Survey (BLS) also 
reported a decline in demand for loans to en -
terprises. At the same time, however, they also 
reported tightening their credit standards in all 
the loan categories surveyed, in particular due 
to higher risks caused by the pandemic.Sixth TLTRO- III 
sees banks take 
up €50.4 billion
Continued trend 
increase in 
excess liquidity
Short- term 
money market 
rates down 
slightly
Money market 
forward rates 
markedly higherMonetary 
dynamics still 
very fast- paced 
due to corona -
virus pandemicDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
28

Among the components of M3, overnight de -
posits once again made by far the largest con -
tribution to monetary growth. As in the previ -
ous quarters, additional inflows into this type 
of deposit came mainly from households and 
to a lesser extent from non- financial corpor -
ations as well. Precautionary considerations are 
again likely to have had a major bearing on 
this. Another factor behind this strong prefer -
ence for liquidity, however, will have been the 
persistently low interest rate level and the asso -
ciated low opportunity cost of holding highly li -
quid instruments, especially in relation to other 
forms of deposit. Unlike in the previous quar -
ters, though, the fourth quarter also saw gen -
eral government (excluding central govern -
ment) considerably expand their overnight de -
posits. In their executive capacity as bodies 
paying government assistance, they appear to 
have received fairly substantial inflows of funds 
from central government whose deposits do 
not count towards M3.
Unlike the tiers of government below the cen -
tral government level, euro area central govern -
ments significantly reduced their deposit hold -
ings in the fourth quarter. Since this liability item 
does not count towards M3, but rather its 
counterparts, its decline, when viewed in isol -
ation, supported monetary growth (see the 
table on p.  30). The drop in central govern -
ments’ deposits probably has something to do 
with the payment of assistance to the private 
sector against the backdrop of the tight restric -
tions imposed by many euro area countries in 
response to the pandemic. Central governments 
were able to draw on funds they had accumu -
lated during the year through increased bor -
rowing. In addition to this (pandemic- related) 
one- off factor, MFI lending to domestic non- 
banks was another major factor fuelling monet -
ary growth once again in the fourth quarter.
The largest contribution to domestic lending 
came once again from securities- based lending 
to general government, even though it faded 
in importance relative to lending to the private 
sector. Compared with the exceptionally high Monetary 
inflows again 
mainly driven 
by overnight 
deposits
Lending to 
domestic non- 
banks signifi -
cantly expanded
Expansion of 
securitised lend -
ing, particularly 
in the form of 
government 
bonds and 
sharesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
29
Monetary aggregates and counterparts 
in the euro area
Source: ECB. 1 Denoted with a negative sign because, per se, 
an increase curbs M3 growth. 2 Adjusted for loan sales and se-
curitisation as well as for positions arising from notional cash 
pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Non-monetary financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 4 Non-financial corpora-
tions and quasi-corporations. 5 Including non-profit institutions 
serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20202024681012
–++++++
–4–20+2+4+6+8+10+12+14
20246
–+++Year-on-year change,
end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjusted
M3 and counterparts
of which:
Loans to selected sectorsM3 and components
M3 – M2
M2 – M1
M1
Remaining counterparts
Longer-term financial liabilities1
Net external assets
Credit to the private sector 2
Financial corporations 3
Non-financial corporations 4
Households5Contribution of components 
in percentage points
Securities-based lending to 
general governmentPercentage change
in M3
Percentage change
in M3Contribution of counterparts
in percentage points
Percentage change in loans
to the private sector 2Contribution of sectors in percentage points

levels seen in the previous two quarters, how -
ever, net inflows in this credit segment were 
markedly lower for two reasons. First, commer -
cial banks noticeably reduced their net holdings 
of government bonds. Second, monthly net 
purchases by the Eurosystem were also down 
slightly on the quarter.
A much smaller contribution to M3 growth, 
though one that was larger than it had been 
one quarter earlier, came from securitised lend -
ing to the domestic private sector, with the MFI 
sector purchasing both shares and investment 
fund shares as well as bonds and debt secur -
ities. One factor spurring banks’ increased de -
mand for equities will have been the general 
uptick in sentiment on news that the first 
coronavirus vaccines had been approved.
Loans to households recorded strong net in -
flows in the fourth quarter in a continuation of 
the upward trend they have been charting 
since 2014 and which was interrupted in the 
first half of 2020 as action was taken to con -
tain the pandemic. The most significant contri -
butions were made by banks in Germany and 
France, which had also recorded the strongest 
growth prior to the outbreak of the pandemic. 
Growth was again driven primarily by loans for 
house purchase, the interest rates for which hit 
new historical lows. At the end of the fourth quarter, their annual growth rate increased to 
4.7%, the highest rate seen since 2008. Other 
lending, which mainly comprises loans to self- 
employed persons, recorded further growth. 
Consumer credit, meanwhile, saw interest rates 
remain largely unchanged and receded slightly 
in the fourth quarter, which probably had 
something to do with the tighter containment 
measures introduced in response to corona -
virus, giving households less of an opportunity 
to spend. However, the decline in this market 
segment was significantly weaker than it had 
been in the first phase of pandemic- related re -
strictions in the second quarter of 2020.
According to the bank managers surveyed as 
part of the BLS, household demand for loans 
for house purchase in the euro area increased 
again in the fourth quarter, exceeding the ex -
pectations they had reported in the previous 
quarter. They reported that credit demand had 
particularly been stimulated by the low general 
level of interest rates. The coronavirus pan -
demic, when viewed in isolation, had both 
positive and negative effects on demand. In 
some countries, banks reported that catch- up 
effects impacted positively on demand. How -
ever, the bank managers surveyed as part of 
the BLS also pointed to the downside of the 
coronavirus pandemic, such as the difficulties it 
presented for property viewings and notary Loans to house -
holds continue 
pre- COVID-  19 
upward trendBanks report 
brisker demand 
for housing 
loans among 
households, …Consolidated balance sheet of the MFI sector in the euro area*
Quarter-on-quarter change in € billion, seasonally adjusted
Liabilities Q3 2020 Q4 2020
Holdings against central government 2 69.2 – 57.0
Monetary aggregate M3 348.4 377.3
of which components:
Currency in circulation and 
overnight deposits (M1) 296.7 321.6
Other short-term deposits 
(M2-M1) 28.6 –  8.8
Marketable instruments (M3-M2) 23.0 64.4
Longer-term fi  nancial liabilities 5.2 –  0.6
of which:
Capital and reserves 8.8 47.4
Other longer-term fi  nancial 
 liabilities – 3.7 – 48.0Assets Q3 2020 Q4 2020
Credit to private non-MFIs 
in the euro area 136.1 189.1
of which:
Loans 1 86.8 117.1
Securities 49.2 72.0
Credit to general government 
in the euro area 258.8 179.3
of which:
Loans – 2.8 –  1.4
Securities 261.6 180.7
Net external assets 29.9 – 95.7
Other counterparts of M3 – 2.0 47.0
* Adjusted for statistical changes and revaluations. 1 Loans to the private non-fi  nancial sector are adjusted for loan sales and securitisation 
as well as for positions arising from notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 2 Including central government deposits with the 
MFI sector and securities issued by the MFI sector held by central governments.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
30

visits. Asked to report on consumer credit and 
other lending to households, the banks sur -
veyed in the BLS said that credit demand had 
declined in the fourth quarter because of a lack 
of consumer confidence and dwindling spend -
ing on durable consumer goods.
On the supply side, the banks that responded 
to the survey tightened their standards for 
housing loans once again. However, standards 
were tightened to a much lesser extent than 
they had been in the preceding two quarters. 
One reason for the current tightening of stand -
ards was the banks’ deteriorated assessment of 
the general economic situation and outlook. 
Borrowers’ creditworthiness was also assessed 
somewhat less positively in the fourth quarter. 
In addition, lower risk tolerance again led 
standards to be made more restrictive. By con -
trast, for the first time in a year, the banks sur -
veyed by the BLS responded somewhat more 
optimistically again when assessing the outlook 
on the residential real estate market and the 
prospective development of prices for residen -
tial real estate. On balance, banks in the euro 
area also tightened their conditions for con -
sumer credit and other lending marginally 
again in the fourth quarter of 2020 after having 
tightened them considerably in some cases in 
the preceding three quarters. The rejection rate 
rose only slightly after having increased sharply 
in the previous three quarters. For this reason, 
it is currently likely to persist at an elevated 
level.
In contrast to the upward trend in loans for 
house purchase, the growth in loans to non-  
financial corporations continued to decelerate 
in the fourth quarter. In this context, there was 
a continued tendency to redeem short- term 
loans in net terms in favour of building up 
longer- term loans, albeit at a somewhat slower 
pace. Overall, despite the persistently very low 
interest rate level, net inflows fell short of the 
quarterly figures during the last two years be -
fore the pandemic. A key reason for the rela -
tively weak demand for credit among non-  
financial corporations in the fourth quarter was that, on the whole, this sector had built up 
extraordinarily large liquidity reserves since the 
beginning of the coronavirus pandemic. As de -
scribed above, non- financial corporations re -
cently continued to top up their stock of short- 
term bank deposits. In conjunction with the 
fact that economic activity in the euro area de -
clined less sharply at the end of the year than it 
had in the first phase of the pandemic, this 
suggests that enterprises’ need for additional 
funding was, on balance, low. However, the 
weaker overall demand for credit was attribut -
able to seemingly large differences in the li -
quidity situations of individual enterprises and 
sectors resulting from the differing extents to 
which they were impacted by the pandemic.
The bank managers interviewed as part of the 
BLS likewise reported that demand for loans 
among non- financial corporations had fallen 
slightly again in the fourth quarter. As in the 
preceding quarter, respondents mainly put the 
decreased need for funding down to enter -
prises’ reluctance to engage in fixed invest -
ment, mergers, takeovers, and restructuring as 
a result of the pandemic. By contrast, they re -
ported that enterprises’ funding requirements 
for inventories and working capital as well as 
for refinancing, debt restructuring and renego -
tiation had risen once again.… while credit 
standards were 
tightened at the 
same time
Loans to non- 
financial corpor -
ations continue 
to grow at a 
decelerated 
paceBLS banks 
reported decline 
in credit 
demand 
amongst 
 enterprises …Securities-based lending to general 
government in the euro area
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202020002004006008001,000
–+++++€ billion, 12-month accumulated flows
Eurosystem
Other MFIsof which:By the euro area MFI sectorDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
31

At the same time, the surveyed banks stated 
that, on balance, they had continued to tighten 
their corporate credit standards in the fourth 
quarter. According to the banks, this was again 
primarily attributable to their deteriorated risk 
assessments. First, the euro area banks justified 
their tightening of standards on the basis of 
the darker current economic situation and gen -
eral economic outlook. Second, in comparison 
to the preceding quarter, they took a bleaker 
view of both the situations of individual sectors 
and enterprises as well as the creditworthiness 
of borrowers. Alongside this, the banks’ lower 
risk tolerance and a decline in the underlying 
value of collateral contributed to the tightening of standards. The banks’ improved liquidity 
position per se led to a slight easing of stand -
ards. At the same time as tightening their credit 
standards, the surveyed banks also tightened 
their credit terms and conditions in the fourth 
quarter, particularly for small and medium- sized 
enterprises. The heightened risk sensitivity 
among respondents was reflected above all in 
higher requirements for loan collateral, but also 
in wider margins for riskier loans as well as 
stricter covenants.
Only the net external position of the MFI sector 
had a noticeably dampening impact on monet -
ary growth in the fourth quarter of 2020. Ac -
cording to the non- seasonally adjusted balance 
of payments data, which are currently only 
available for October and November, the strong 
outflows of funds were the result of opposing 
effects. On the one side, the considerable net 
capital exports in the balance of cross- border 
securities transactions was a major factor. As in 
previous quarters, residents purchased larger 
volumes of foreign securities, especially shares 
and investment fund shares. What is more, un -
like in previous quarters, non- residents also 
sold off securities issued by domestic non-  
banks in net terms –  primarily government 
bonds – against the background of the strong 
euro. On the other side, the current account 
surplus, which had grown further, exerted a 
positive influence on the net external position. 
The supporting factors, which also included the 
rise in the balance of direct investment in the 
fourth quarter, were nevertheless unable to off -
set the strong dampening impact of securities 
transactions.
German banks’ deposit 
and lending business with 
 domestic customers
In the final quarter of 2020, German banks’ de -
posit business with domestic customers was 
also characterised by an exceptionally strong 
preference for liquidity among domestic invest -
ors. In this context, banks’ customers once … and tight -
ened lending 
standardsNet capital 
exports damp -
ened monetary 
growth
Deposit growth 
still dominated 
by build- up of 
overnight 
depositsMFI loans to the non-financial private 
sector in the euro area*
20020406080100120140
–+++++++€ billion, 3-month accumulated flows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Sources: ECB and Bundesbank calculations. * Adjusted for loan 
sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial  corporations  and 
quasi-corporations. 2 Also adjusted for positions arising from 
notional cash pooling services provided by MFIs. 3 Including 
non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank... France
... Italy
... Spain
... Germanyof which: MFIs in ...
–200+20+40+60+80 To households 3To non-financial corporations1
Total 2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
32

again significantly increased their holdings of 
overnight deposits from October to December. 
At the same time, they continued to scale back 
their holdings of less flexible time and savings 
deposits –  in some cases at a significantly 
quicker pace – for both short- term and longer- 
term maturities. The yields that these types of 
deposit offer over overnight deposits are still at 
a record low level (see the adjacent chart).
Sectoral developments in the fourth quarter 
showed only little change against the preced -
ing quarters. Households in particular strongly 
increased their holdings of overnight deposits 
again. One likely reason for this, besides the 
interest rate levels, is the pandemic- related re -
strictions to travel and the renewed business 
closures. These meant that a large portion of 
the consumption expenditure otherwise usually 
seen in the fourth quarter failed to materialise.
In addition, non- financial corporations also 
markedly topped up their overnight deposits 
once again, even though net growth in this 
sector was weaker than in previous quarters. At 
the same time, and unlike in previous quarters, 
non- financial corporations’ short- term time de -
posits remunerating at close- to- market rates 
registered heavy outflows, which left the in -
crease in non- financial corporations’ holdings 
of deposits well down on the level seen in pre -
vious quarters overall. Any assessment of this 
development needs to bear two factors in 
mind. First, interest rates on overnight and time 
deposits have fallen deeper into negative terri -
tory (for more information, see the box on 
pp.  34 f.). Second, the comparatively weak 
build- up of deposits in this sector is also likely 
to be related to the reimposition of significantly 
tighter restrictions to contain the pandemic: for 
the enterprises directly affected, this meant 
considerable losses of sales and income. Con -
sequently, it is to be assumed that these enter -
prises had to make greater use of existing li -
quidity buffers or take out loans to cover their 
current expenditure, while other enterprises hit 
less strongly by the pandemic continued to re -
ceive inflows of funds.Compared with the previous quarter, banks’ 
lending business with the domestic non- bank 
sector regained momentum in the fourth quar -
ter of 2020. This was because lending to the 
domestic private sector picked up considerably 
again in the reporting quarter. By contrast, 
banks in Germany markedly reduced their lend -
ing to the public sector – as they had in the 
previous quarter – both in terms of loans and 
securities in an ongoing reversal of the notice -
able uptick in lending to general government in 
the first half of the year.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, the largest net 
growth in loans to the private sector was again 
recorded by households. Demand here was 
fuelled primarily by persistently brisk demand 
for housing loans, which gained fresh momen -
tum alongside the exceptionally robust activity 
in the construction sector. On balance, the 
growth rate of loans taken out for house pur -
chase rose further to 6.5% on the year, repre -
senting its highest value since 2000.Little change in 
investment 
behaviour in 
individual 
sectors 
Lending business 
with non- banks 
regains momen -
tum
Household 
demand for 
housing loans 
still briskInterest rates on bank deposits
in Germany*
* Deposits  of  households  and  non-financial  corporations  ac-
cording to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics (volume-
weighted interest rates). Interest rate levels for overnight and 
savings deposits may also be interpreted as new business due 
to potential daily changes in interest rates.
Deutsche Bundesbank2010 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 202001234% p.a., monthly data
–10+1+2+3Overall volume
New business... up to 2 years
... over 2 years
... up to 3 monthsSavings deposits redeemable 
at notice of ...
... over 3 monthsTime deposits with an agreed maturity of ...
Overnight depositsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
33

Negative interest rates on the deposits of non- fi  nancial 
 corporations and households in Germany
The proportion of banks in Germany charging, 
on average, negative interest rates on cus-
tomer deposits continued to grow in 2020. 
Regarding overnight deposits and time de-
posits of non- fi  nancial corporations, the ag-
gregate interest rate calculated in the MFI 
interest rate statistics1 has likewise been nega-
tive since 2016. By contrast, the interest rate 
on the time deposits of households remained 
positive on average. The aggregate interest 
rate on households’ overnight deposits is mar-
ginally above zero.
The MFI interest rate statistics calculate the 
level of interest rates applied to non- fi  nancial 
corporations and households (as well as the 
corresponding volumes) on a monthly basis. 
The collected data are designed to provide a 
representative sample, with each of the 212 
banks currently in the sample reporting its 
volume- weighted average interest rates for 
the individual deposit items to the Bundes-
bank. Since the average fi  gures are calculated 
by the reporting bank, these data provide no basis for determining how many banks in Ger-
many have introduced negative deposit rates. 
Furthermore, the interest rate statistics give 
no insight into the actual proportion of de-
posits remunerated at negative rates in Ger-
many. The data from the interest rate statistics 
do, however, serve as a tool for extrapolating 
the share of the volume of deposits held by 
institutions charging, on average, a negative 
interest rate in the total volume of deposits 
held by German banks. Because the sample is 
representative in nature, such extrapolation 
allows qualifi  ed conclusions to be drawn 
about the distribution, in relative terms, of 
negative interest rates across customer de-
posits within the German banking sector.
In December 2020, 64% of reporting institu-
tions reported a negative volume- weighted 
average interest rate on overnight deposits 
held by enterprises. The sum of all deposits (at 
both positive and negative interest rates) held 
at these institutions corresponds to 77% of 
the total volume of overnight deposits of en-
terprises held at German banks. In this con-
text, the policy of charging enterprises nega-
tive interest rates is no longer limited to cer-
tain banking groups, but now appears to have 
become standard practice.
In the case of households’ overnight deposits, 
the share of German institutions reporting a 
negative volume- weighted average interest 
rate stood at 42% in December 2020, repre-
senting a signifi  cant rise on the previous year. 
The volume of deposits (at both positive and 
negative interest rates) at these institutions 
corresponds to 37% of the total volume of 
households’ overnight deposits at German 
banks, with negative interest rates being lev-
ied mainly by savings banks and cooperative 
banks, and to a lesser extent by big banks and 
regional banks. Any account management 
fees that might be charged in addition or as 
an alternative to negative interest rates are 
1 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2017). For the purpose 
of analysing time deposits, the aforementioned statis-
tics rely on rates and volumes recorded under new de-
posits activity. In the case of overnight deposits, the 
focus lies on interest rate levels, which, however, may 
also be interpreted as new business due to potential 
daily changes in interest rates.Bank deposits remunerated at a negative 
interest rate in Germany
1 Share of reporting institutions with a volume-weighted neg-
ative average interest rate in the full MFI interest rate statistics 
sample comprising 212 institutions.  2 Share of the extrapol-
ated deposit volume of institutions with a negative average in-
terest rate in the total deposit volume of banks in Germany. 
3 Including non-profit institutions serving households.
Deutsche Bundesbank01020304050607080%, month-end data: December 2020
Time
depositsOvernight
depositsTime
depositsOvernight
depositsNon-financial
corporations 
Households3Share of institutions 
with a negative average 
interest rate1Share of the deposit 
volume remunerated 
at a negative interest 
rate2Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
34

not encompassed in the MFI interest rate stat-
istics.
With regard to time deposits, the practice of 
charging negative interest is less widespread. 
In December 2020, only around 8% of institu-
tions reported negative average interest rates 
on time deposits for enterprises, and around 
1% of institutions reported negative average 
interest rates on time deposits for households. 
These results represent volume shares of 48% 
and 1% respectively.
Since 2015, there has been a steady increase 
in the share of the deposit volume of institu-
tions with a negative average interest rate in 
the total deposit volume of banks. At fi  rst, this 
development only applied to enterprises’ 
overnight deposits. The average remuneration 
posted at the institution level for these de-
posits is now negative at the vast majority of 
banks. According to the reporting institutions, 
large- scale deposits are the main reason for 
negative volume- weighted average rates at 
this level. Negative interest has been levied on 
enterprises’ time deposits to a notable extent 
since 2016. In this context, the proportion of 
deposits subject to negative interest went up 
by 15  percentage points in 2020. A similar, 
hitherto uninterrupted, upward trend affect-
ing households’ overnight deposits has also 
been observed: since 2016, the extrapolated 
deposit volume of institutions with a negative 
average interest rate as a share of the total 
deposit volume has risen by just under 10 per-
centage points each year. By contrast, nega-
tive interest rates have thus far remained the 
exception, rather than the rule, in the case of 
households’ time deposits.
Empirical studies on interest rate pass- through 
show that, in Germany, interest rates on cus-
tomers’ deposits usually refl  ect developments 
in short- term market interest rates, albeit at a 
more elevated level, at least in aggregate 
terms.2 The relationship between deposit 
rates and market interest rates evident prior to 
the onset of the negative interest rate envir-
onment has not changed to any signifi  cant 
degree in the past few years. Viewed in the 
long term, it remains the case that just over 
70% of any changes in the twelve- month 
EURIBOR rate are passed through to the inter-
est rate on time deposits held by households 
and non- fi  nancial corporations.3 Overnight 
deposits have a long- term relationship with EONIA: 56% of any changes in this market 
rate are passed through to non- fi  nancial cor-
porations’ overnight deposits over the long 
term, and just under half of these changes are 
passed through to households’ time deposits.4 
Given the level of market rates, the current 
level of aggregate deposit rates is neither sur-
prisingly high nor unexpectedly low.
2 The twelve- month EURIBOR has lingered in negative 
territory since February 2016, dipping to -0.5% at the 
end of December 2020. EONIA has been negative 
since November 2014, sliding to -0.47% at the end of 
December 2020.
3 The interest rate on households’ time deposits has, 
on average, hovered 41 basis points above the twelve- 
month EURIBOR rate since 2003. Meanwhile, the 
spread for time deposits held by non- fi  nancial corpor-
ations has stood at around 7 basis points (model con-
stants within the framework of a single- equation error- 
correction model).
4 The interest rate charged, on average, on the over-
night deposits of non- fi  nancial corporations has stood 
at around 14 basis points above the EONIA rate since 
2003, compared with 20 basis points for households’ 
overnight deposits.Bank deposits remunerated at a negative 
interest rate in Germany*
* Share of the extrapolated deposit volume of institutions with 
a negative average interest rate in the total deposit volume of 
banks in Germany. 1 Including non-profit institutions serving 
households.
Deutsche Bundesbank2016 2017 2018 2019 2020020406080100%, month-end data
Overnight deposits of non-financial corporations
Overnight deposits of households 1
Time deposits of non-financial corporations
Time deposits of householdsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
35

The lively demand for housing loans was 
buoyed by what remained extraordinarily fa -
vourable funding costs: the MFI interest rate 
statistics indicate that the interest rate for hous -
ing loans fell again slightly in the fourth quarter 
to a new record low. Alongside this, the labour 
market situation, which stayed largely stable 
despite the stricter measures to contain the 
pandemic, and households’ income and asset 
situation, which likewise remained solid, are 
likely to have supported their demand for hous -
ing loans. The BLS results suggest that other 
factors were at play as well: the banks surveyed 
by the BLS reported that the low general level 
of interest rates as well as the good outlook for 
both the residential real estate market and real 
estate prices were key factors driving the uptick 
in demand. Refinancing, restructuring and re -
negotiation also had a positive influence on de -
mand.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, credit standards 
for private housing loans remained unchanged on balance. This means that, since the out -
break of the pandemic, the banks surveyed by 
the BLS only significantly tightened their stand -
ards in this lending segment in the second 
quarter of 2020. By contrast, the tightening of 
credit terms and conditions that began in the 
second quarter of 2019 also continued in the 
final quarter of 2020. In this context, the sur -
veyed banks widened their margins for riskier 
loans by somewhat more than for loans with 
average risk levels. Bank managers stated their 
lower risk tolerance and the somewhat lower 
degree of competition as their reasons for 
widening margins. Furthermore, the cost of 
funds and balance sheet constraints also con -
tributed to the widening of margins.
In contrast to housing loans, consumer credit 
to households decreased in net terms in the 
fourth quarter, following a marked expansion 
in the preceding quarter. The decisive factor for 
this was the reluctance to consume arising 
from the second wave of the coronavirus pan -
demic and the measures taken to contain it: 
due to the pandemic-  related travel restrictions 
and business closures, many of the opportun -
ities for consumption that would otherwise be 
typical of this time of year were either partially 
or entirely unavailable. In addition, according 
to the assessments of the banks surveyed by 
the BLS, demand for credit was dampened by 
the lower consumer confidence that resulted 
from the uncertainty surrounding the economic 
fallout from the pandemic. Despite this, the 
BLS banks reported that demand for consumer 
credit (and other lending) remained largely 
stable over the reporting quarter. Both the 
standards as well as the terms and conditions 
for consumer credit and other lending were left 
unchanged overall by the surveyed banks dur -
ing the fourth quarter of 2020.
In the final quarter of the year, loan business 
with domestic non- financial corporations in -
creased markedly on balance, after having de -
clined slightly in the previous quarter. Net 
growth was recorded solely for maturities 
longer than five years, which bounced back Standards for 
housing loans 
unchanged, 
credit terms and 
conditions tight -
ened once again
Consumer credit 
business nega -
tive due to 
pandemic- 
related 
 reluctance to 
consume 
Lending business 
with non- 
financial corpor -
ations notice -
ably positive …MFI* lending and deposits in Germany
€ billion, 3-month accumulated fl  ows, end-of-quarter data, 
seasonally adjusted
Item2020
Q3 Q4
Deposits of domestic non-MFIs 1
Overnight 63.9 54.0
With an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years – 5.0 – 20.9
over 2 years – 9.9 –  5.9
Redeemable at notice of
up to 3 months – 0.3 –  0.9
over 3 months – 1.4 –  0.9
Lending
to domestic general government
Loans – 1.7 –  2.9
Securities – 5.1 –  9.1
to domestic enterprises and 
households
Loans 2 21.7 34.0
of which: to households 3 22.3 24.7
to non-fi  nancial 
 corporations 4 – 0.6 5.8
Securities 2.3 0.2
* As well as banks (including building and loan associations, but 
excluding the Bundesbank), monetary fi  nancial institutions (MFIs) 
here also include money market funds. Data adjusted for statis-
tical changes and revaluations. 1 Enterprises, households and 
general government excluding central government. 2  Adjusted 
for loan sales and securitisation. 3 Including non-profi  t institu-
tions serving households. 4  Non- fi  nancial corporations and 
quasi- corporations.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
36

Banking conditions in Germany
1 Including non-profit institutions serving households. 2 New business. According to the harmonised MFI interest rate statistics. 3 Ac-
cording to the Bank Lending Survey; for credit standards: difference between the number of respondents reporting “tightened consi-
derably” and “tightened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “eased somewhat” and “eased considerably” as a per-
centage of the responses given; for margins: difference between the number of respondents reporting “widened considerably” and 
“widened somewhat” and the number of respondents reporting “narrowed somewhat” and “narrowed considerably” as a percentage 
of the responses given. 4 Expectations for Q1 2021.
Deutsche Bundesbank13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 20211.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.05.56.06.57.07.58.08.5
–300+30–300+30
–300+30–300+30
2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 2100.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.5
30030
–+
3003060
–++Credit to non-financial corporations
% p. a. % p. a.
%
Riskier loans
Average loans
Average loansRiskier loans%
Average loansChange in margins3 for ...
Change in margins3
for loans to enterprises... with an initial rate 
    fixation of over one year 
    and up to five yearsBank interest rates for consumer credit2...
... with an initial rate fixation of 
    over five years
... consumer credit... up to €1 million
4
Riskier loansBank interest rates for loans to enterprises2...
... consumer credit
0.51.01.52.02.53.03.54.04.55.0
... loans for house purchase... up to €1 million
... over €1 million
4... loans for house purchaseBank interest rates on
loans for house purchase2 ...
... with an initial rate
    fixation of over ten years
Change in credit standards3
for loans to enterprisesChange in credit standards3 for ...
4... with an initial rate fixation of
    over five years ...Credit to households1
... with an initial rate fixation of
    up to one year ...Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
37

more strongly following a slowdown in the 
summer months. By contrast, short- term loans 
to non- financial corporations declined in net 
terms for the third consecutive quarter.
The most recent results of the BLS give some 
indication of the reasons for the increase in 
overall demand for loans among non- financial 
corporations: according to bank managers’ re -
sponses, the uptick was caused primarily by the 
greater funding needs for refinancing, debt re -
structuring and renegotiation as well as the 
high financing needs for inventories and work -
ing capital. The surveyed banks again identified 
enterprises’ reluctance to engage in fixed in -vestment, which had already been observed in 
the preceding quarters, as a factor that damp -
ened demand.
Nevertheless, the heightened uncertainty re -
garding future economic developments as well 
as the resulting reluctance to invest did not af -
fect all economic sectors to the same degree. 
The borrowers statistics show that some sec -
tors of the economy that are not directly im -
pacted by the coronavirus- related restrictions 
– the construction and real estate sector in par -
ticular – continue to require high amounts of 
funding.
BLS data furthermore suggest that banks in 
Germany again made their lending policies 
more restrictive for corporate customers in the 
fourth quarter in response to the economic fall -
out from the coronavirus pandemic. Credit 
standards for corporate financing were tight -
ened again on balance in the fourth quarter of 
2020, with standards being tightened to a simi -
lar extent across all maturities and enterprise 
sizes. As justification for making their standards 
more restrictive, the surveyed bank managers 
stated the depressed general economic situ -
ation and the deteriorated economic outlook 
resulting from the pandemic. However, a simi -
larly important role was also played by their 
more pessimistic assessments of both the situ -
ations of individual sectors and enterprises as 
well as of borrowers’ creditworthiness in re -
sponse to the pandemic. The proportion of re -
jected loan applications grew somewhat over 
the previous quarter during the reporting 
period. Following the rises observed in the 
second and third quarters, the rejection rate is 
thus holding steady at an elevated level. In par -
ticular, enterprises in sectors that are especially 
hard hit by the crisis – such as hotel and res -
taurant services and retail trade  – had more 
limited access to credit than those in sectors 
that were less strongly impacted by the eco -
nomic fallout from the pandemic.
The surveyed banks also tightened their credit 
terms and conditions overall, mainly due to the … on the back 
of strong 
demand for 
funds to cover 
current expend -
iture …… and individ -
ual sectors still 
proving to be 
robust
Lending policies 
more restrictive 
overall
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020–10+1+2+3+4+5Year-on-year change, end-of-quarter data, seasonally adjustedLoans* by German banks to the domestic 
non-financial private sector
210123456
––++++++Non-financial corporations1
* Adjusted  for  loan  sales  and  securitisation.  1 Non-financial 
corporations and quasi-corporations. 2 Including non-profit in-
stitutions serving households.
Deutsche BundesbankHouseholds2
Other lending
Consumer credit
Loans for house purchase
Total,
percentage changeLoan contributions in percentage pointsTotal,
percentage changeUp to 1 yearMaturity contributions in percentage points
Over 1 year and up to 5 years
Over 5 yearsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
38

fact that they considered credit risk to have 
risen as a result of the pandemic. This was re -
flected, first, in a widening of margins for risk -
ier loans in particular. Second, credit institu -
tions tightened their collateral requirements for 
the fourth time in succession.
In response to the ad hoc questions asked in 
the January BLS, German banks reported that 
their funding situations had improved again on 
the quarter, especially with regard to raising 
funding through bank debt securities and on 
the unsecured money market. Banks responded 
to new regulatory and supervisory activities by 
continuing to strengthen their capital position 
last year. These activities largely had no impact 
on credit standards during the same period, 
though they did have a restrictive effect on the 
margins in corporate lending. According to banks, the share of non- performing loans in 
the gross book value of loans – i.e. the NPL 
ratio – contributed only marginally to a tighten -
ing of their lending policies in the second half 
of 2020. In the first half of 2021, however, 
banks are anticipating an increase in its restrict -
ive impact, especially with regard to lending to 
enterprises.
In contrast to the standards for loans without 
government guarantees, standards for corona -
virus assistance loans fully or partially guaran -
teed by government were eased in 2020. Ac -
cording to the banks’ responses, enterprises 
mainly showed an interest in coronavirus assis -
tance loans to cover their acute liquidity needs 
or to build up liquidity buffers as a precaution -
ary measure.Impact of NPL 
ratio on German 
banks’ lending 
policy margin -
ally restrictive in 
second half of 
2020Demand among 
firms for 
government- 
guaranteed 
coronavirus 
assistance loans 
mainly to cover 
acute liquidity 
needs and build 
up liquidity 
 buffers
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2017), Changes to the MFI interest rate statistics, Monthly Report, July 
2017, pp. 93 ff.
European Central Bank (2020), Press release of 10 December 2020, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/
press/pr/date/2020/html/ecb.pr201210_1~e8e95af01c.en.htmlDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
39

Financial markets
Financial market setting
Global financial markets have been shaped by 
countervailing developments over the final 
quarter of 2020 and so far in the first quarter of 
this year: while the availability of vaccines has 
strengthened market participants’ optimism, 
the renewed rise in infections and containment 
measures has been perceived as a drag on 
growth. Within the euro area, the Governing 
Council of the ECB responded to the second 
wave of infections with a decision to increase 
the envelope of the pandemic emergency pur -
chase programme (PEPP) and to extend the 
horizon for net purchases under the pro -
gramme. This helped bring down the yields on 
sovereign bonds of euro area countries with 
relatively low credit ratings. Average yields on 
euro area corporate bonds also continued to 
decline, hitting new lows in January. By con -
trast, yields on highly rated European sovereign 
bonds picked up, mainly due to the interest 
rate linkage with the United States, where 
yields on US Treasuries rose sharply. Market 
participants now saw a greater likelihood of 
the incoming US administration undertaking 
substantial deficit spending. An increase in 
market- based measures of long- term inflation 
expectations, which was observed in numerous 
countries, was also particularly pronounced in 
the United States. The combined impact of the 
aforementioned developments sent global 
equity markets sharply higher. Financial market 
participants upgraded their earnings outlook, 
particularly for US enterprises. In foreign ex -
change markets, hopes that the vaccinations 
would help global activity bounce back far 
more quickly than previously expected damp -
ened demand for currencies regarded as rela -
tively safe havens. This meant that the US dol -
lar and yen lost value in effective terms. The 
euro also depreciated on a weighted average, 
though its losses were small by comparison.Exchange rates
The euro appreciated markedly against the US 
dollar up until the first week of January. Though 
infection rates worldwide were still on the in -
crease, brighter sentiment in financial markets 
toward the end of 2020 fuelled net capital out -
flows from the United States, weighing on the 
price of the US dollar. Besides vaccine rollouts, 
there were a number of other factors which 
helped cheer markets. One was the negative 
impact on the US dollar of speculation that the 
US Federal Reserve might further loosen its 
monetary policy stance, despite rising inflation 
expectations. By contrast, the ECB Governing 
Council’s decision in early December to signifi -
cantly increase the PEPP envelope had already 
been priced into exchange rates. Mid-  
December, furthermore, saw the EUR/ USD ex -
change rate get a boost from surprisingly up -
beat economic data for the euro area, which 
contrasted with gloomier- than- expected eco -
nomic news from the United States. The EU- UK 
trade and cooperation agreement, which was 
concluded only shortly before the transitional 
period expired at the end of 2020, gave the 
euro additional traction relative to the US dol -
lar.
After hitting US$1.23 on 6  January 2021, its 
highest level since April 2018, the euro’s ex -
change rate against the US dollar has gone into 
reverse. Yields in US bond markets rose percep -
tibly in anticipation of heavier government 
spending, providing broad-  based support for 
the US dollar. However, sentiment in financial 
markets deteriorated again somewhat of late 
amid the spread of particularly infectious vari -
ants of the COVID-  19 virus, delays in vaccin -
ation programmes and the ongoing economic 
and social constraints in euro area countries. 
The euro closed the reporting period at 
US$1.21, up 3.2% on its level at the end of 
September.Financial 
markets  pricing 
receding uncer -
tainty into 
valuations Euro gains in 
value against 
the US dollar …Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
40

Movements in the nominal effective exchange rate 
of the euro
Movements in the nominal trade- weighted 
exchange rate of the euro depend to a con-
siderable extent on the group of partner 
currencies against which it is calculated.1 
For example, the Bundesbank and the ECB 
publish the effective exchange rate of the 
euro on a daily basis against the currencies 
of both 19 and a far broader group of 42 
partner countries. Both groups include the 
currencies of major European trading part-
ners (i.e. the pound sterling, the Swiss franc 
and the Polish zloty) and of the biggest 
non- European industrial countries, such as 
the US dollar, the yen and the Canadian 
dollar. The broad group includes numerous 
other currencies on top of those, e.g. cur-
rencies of emerging market economies and 
commodity- exporting countries. These in-
clude the Brazilian real, the Russian rouble 
and the Turkish lira.
In effective terms, the euro tends to appre-
ciate much more strongly against the cur-
rencies of the broad group of countries 
than against those of the narrower group. 
This was the case over the course of last 
year as well. At the end of the period under 
review, the effective exchange rate of the 
euro against the currencies of the group of 
19 trading partners was 3.0% higher than 
at the start of 2020. However, the euro’s 
appreciation was higher on a weighted 
average against the currencies of the broad 
group of 42 countries (5.4%). Gains against 
the US dollar and the pound sterling, in par-
ticular, made a major contribution to the 
euro’s effective appreciation in both groups. 
Although appreciation against some other 
currencies, such as the zloty, was even 
stronger, currencies such as these have a 
lower trade weight in the calculation of the 
weighted average. The differing exchange rate movements of the euro seen in the two 
groups of partner countries is due primarily 
to the very strong appreciation of the euro 
against those other currencies that are only 
part of the broad group of 42 trading part-
ners. For example, the euro appreciated by 
44.5% against the real, 27.2% against the 
rouble and, despite its recent rebound, 
25.6% against the Turkish lira between the 
start of 2020 and the end of the period 
under review.
Longer- term observations also reveal that 
the nominal effective euro displays a clear 
tendency to appreciate against the curren-
cies of the broad group of countries. To be 
more specifi  c, the effective exchange rate 
of the euro against the group of 42 partner 
currencies is currently 18.2% higher than its 
launch exchange rate in early 1999. It is 
therefore only slightly short of the all- time 
high it reached in December 2008. By con-
trast, the same rate against the narrower 
group of 19 partner currencies is currently 
2.5% lower than its launch exchange rate 
and, at -13.1%, far off its record high.
One key reason for the effective euro’s ten-
dency to appreciate against the broad 
group in the long term is that infl  ation rates 
in many emerging market economies, 
whose currencies are included in this group, 
were, on average, markedly higher than in 
the euro area. However, high infl  ation ad-
versely affects the price competitiveness of 
the affected country and therefore tends to 
lead to a deterioration in its current account 
balance and a nominal depreciation of its 
1 For information on the recalculation of country 
weights, which now take account of trade in services 
as well as goods, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
41

currency. Nominal appreciation of the euro 
against a group comprising such countries 
is therefore structural in nature and can be 
seen as an equilibrium phenomenon that 
balances out international infl  ation differen-
tials.
By contrast, infl  ation differentials for the 
narrower group of 19 partner currencies 
compared to the euro area are, on a 
weighted average, small at most. For this 
reason, it is not possible to discern any sig-
nifi  cant longer- term appreciation trend for 
the effective euro in this group, either. The 
real effective exchange rate of the euro re-
fl  ects the interaction between the relative 
infl  ation rates between the euro area and 
the partner countries being looked at here, 
on the one hand, and the nominal appreci-
ation trend for the effective euro in the 
broad group, on the other. In addition to 
nominal exchange rate movements, the real 
effective exchange rate also takes into ac-
count the infl  ation differentials arising at 
the same time between the euro area and 
its trading partners. This indicates that there 
is likewise no discernible long- term real ap-
preciation trend for the euro against the 
broad group of 42 partner countries. 
Against this background, the relatively sig-
nifi  cant nominal appreciation of the euro 
against the broad group can be seen as a 
corrective movement that is helping to 
smooth out international infl  ation differen-
tials.Effective euro exchange rates*
* Euro area 19. Rising curves indicate a nominal or real appreci-
ation of the effective euro. 1 Based on consumer price indices.
Deutsche Bundesbank1999 00 05 10 15 2080859095100105110115120Log scale
808590951001051101154 January 1999 = 100, weekly averages
Nominal effective exchange rate of the 
euro against ...
... 42 trading partners
... 19 trading partners
Q1 1999 = 100, monthly values
Real effective exchange rate against the 
currencies of 42 trading partners1Linear
trend
Nominal appreciation of the euro since 
the start of 2020
Source: ECB. 1 Selected currencies that are factored into the 
calculation of the effective exchange rate of the euro against 
42  trading  partners  but  not  into  the  calculation  against  19 
trading  partners.  The  remaining  currencies  are  factored  into 
both calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank0 + 10 + 20 + 30 + 40 + 50%
Turkish lira1Rouble1Real1 (Brazil)ZlotyYenPound sterlingAgainst the ...
US dollarDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
42

The euro also appreciated against the yen on 
balance. Reports surrounding the coronavirus 
pandemic played a key role in this regard, given 
their impact on market sentiment. It is a com -
mon tendency for investors to withdraw some 
of their assets from Japan when risk appetite 
increases, and so it was in the second half of 
November, when the euro gained in value 
against the yen as the markets showed a 
greater propensity to take risk. Another factor 
weighing on the yen was the announcement 
of a surprisingly steep drop in consumer prices, 
which amplified market concerns that the Bank 
of Japan might come under fresh pressure to 
loosen its monetary policy stance even further. 
After the United Kingdom and EU reached an 
agreement on their future relationship, the 
euro gained further ground against the yen in 
the last week of December, climbing to ¥128 in 
mid- February, the highest it has been since De -
cember 2018. As this report went to press, the 
euro was around 3.2% up on the end of the 
third quarter of 2020.
In the last few months of 2020, movements in 
the euro’s exchange rate against the pound 
sterling were characterised primarily by chan -
ging assessments about the likelihood of a suc -
cessful outcome to the UK’s negotiations with 
the EU. The pound sterling experienced a bout 
of distinct downward pressure in mid-  
December when negotiations seemed to have 
stalled and talks were postponed for a number 
of days. Shortly after that, the UK currency 
came under additional pressure amid market 
speculation surrounding the introduction of 
negative policy rates, which had been dis -
cussed by the Bank of England. However, this 
bad patch for the pound sterling later gave 
way to burgeoning hopes that a trade and co -
operation agreement might be reached with 
the EU, as indeed it was, which sent the UK 
currency broadly higher. Mid-  January saw the 
pound sterling firm up again after the Bank of 
England governor expressed scepticism about 
the introduction of negative policy rates. When 
this report went to press, the euro was trading at £0.87, around 5.1% lower than at the end of 
September.
On a weighted average against the currencies 
of 19 major trading partners, the euro depreci -
ated on balance compared to the end of Sep -
tember (-1.1%). It recorded losses not just 
against the pound sterling, but against other 
currencies, too, including those of major part -
ner countries in central Europe, losing 1.3% 
against the zloty, 5.0% against the Czech kor -
una and 1.9% against the forint. More infor -
mation on movements in the effective euro ex -
change rate against various groups of countries 
can be found in the box on pp. 41f. On bal -
ance, the price competitiveness of euro area 
suppliers improved somewhat over the period 
under review, but looking at the long- term 
average, their competitive position can cur -
rently still be considered neutral.… and against 
the yen …
… but depreci -
ates against the 
pound sterling
Euro down in 
effective termsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
43
Exchange rate of the euro
Source: ECB.
Deutsche BundesbankSep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb.
2020 20211.161.181.201.221.24
122124126128
0.860.880.900.920.94Daily data, log scale
US$
¥
£against the ...
... US dollar
... yen
... pound sterling

Securities markets and 
 portfolio investment
Bond market
Government bond yields in the major currency 
areas registered differently sized gains during 
the period under review. Ten- year US Treasuries 
were yielding 1.3% at last count, 61 basis 
points more than at the end of September. In 
the US Treasury market, the welcome news on 
the vaccines front coincided with a reassess -
ment of the outlook for economic activity and 
inflation, in particular in the wake of the US 
elections in November and the Senate elections 
in Georgia in January. Financial market partici -
pants responded to the incoming US adminis -
tration’s plans for extensive fiscal action by pri -
cing in a higher risk of rising inflation. One 
major feature of the rise in yields at the mo -
ment is a higher nominal term premium, which 
compensates investors for taking on interest 
rate risk.
Ten- year Bunds yielded -0.4% on balance, 18 
basis points up on the end of September. News 
of an imminent vaccine rollout also sent Bund 
yields higher in November, but the prospect of 
the economy making a steady recovery was 
not the only factor at play in the market for 
Federal bonds. Indeed, with a way out of the 
pandemic slowly coming into view, Bunds at -
tracted less demand as a safe haven. The rise in 
yields was counteracted by the ECB Governing 
Council’s decision in December to further 
loosen the degree of monetary policy accom -
modation and expand and extend PEPP pur -
chases. This is why Bund yields did not fully 
keep pace with the rise in US Treasury yields 
over the reporting period. As a result, the 
spread between ten-  year US Treasuries and 
ten- year Bunds widened by 44 basis points to 
165 basis points, though it remained below the 
five- year average of 197 basis points.
The yield curve derived from yields on Federal 
securities has steepened since the end of Sep -
tember. Measured in terms of the difference Ten- year US 
Treasury yields 
up
Ten- year Bund 
yields up slightly
Yield curve 
steeperDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
44
Bond yields* in the euro area and
selected countries
Source: Bloomberg. * Government bonds with a residual ma-
turity of ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20210.90.60.300.30.60.91.21.51.82.12.42.73.0
–––++++++++++% p. a., daily data
United StatesEuro area
Japan
United KingdomGermany
Spreads of ten-year government bonds 
over Federal bonds
Sources: Bloomberg and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 2021050100150200250300350400450Basis points, daily data
Italy
Spain
Ireland FranceGreece
Portugal

between ten-  year and two- year yields, the 
spread stood at 33 basis points (up 17 basis 
points). As this report went to press, yields on 
Federal securities were no longer negative as of 
around the 20- year mark. A model breakdown 
indicates that implicit expectations for short-  
term interest rates contained in the yield curve 
are almost unchanged overall (down 1 basis 
point). However, the term premium compon -
ent, at 21 basis points, is up on the end of Sep -
tember, though it is still in negative territory. In 
effect, then, an investor would still earn more, 
in terms of the expected value, by rolling over 
investments in short- dated paper than by pur -
chasing a long- dated bond with the same ma -
turity.
Yield spreads between ten- year Federal bonds 
and matched- maturity government bonds from 
other euro area countries (GDP- weighted aver -
age excluding Germany) narrowed by 10 basis 
points to 51 basis points over the course of the 
reporting period, leaving them more or less 
back at 2008 levels. The ECB Governing Coun -
cil’s December decision to expand and extend 
PEPP purchases caused yield spreads to narrow 
further, with the gap declining particularly dis -
tinctly for euro area government bonds with 
lower credit ratings. Country- specific risks, such 
as the government crisis in Italy, had no more 
than a moderate and short- lived impact on 
yield levels by historical standards. Moreover, 
market liquidity indicators showed no signs of 
tension in euro area sovereign bond markets.
Ten- year UK government bonds saw yields 
move in line with global developments to reach 
0.6% at last count, 39 basis points up on the 
end of September. Yields remained calm be -
fore, during and after the successful conclusion 
of the EU- UK trade and cooperation agreement 
on 24 December and the expiry of the transi -
tion period at the end of the year. Ten- year Jap -
anese government bonds saw yields add 7 
basis points to reach 0.1%, which is somewhat 
higher than at the end of September. At the 
close of the reporting period, yields were thus 
at the upper end of the target range in which market participants assume that the Bank of 
Japan wishes to keep interest rates as part of its 
policy to control the yield curve.
These factors also drove forward inflation rates 
over a five- year period starting in five years’ 
time, as implied by inflation- linked swaps (5y5y 
ILS rates), sharply higher for the euro area to 
1.3% (+18 basis points). This left them close to 
their pre- COVID-  19 level and distinctly above 
their low of 0.7% from March 2020. Survey-  
based inflation expectations for the euro area 
six to ten years ahead, as computed by Con -
sensus Economics, also picked up of late, rising 
slightly to 1.9%. Inflation risk and liquidity pre -Euro area yield 
spreads 
narrower 
Yields up in UK 
and Japan
Forward infla -
tion rates up in 
euro area and 
United StatesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
45
Forward inflation rates* and expectations 
in the euro area and the United States
Sources: Bloomberg, Thomson Reuters, Consensus Economics 
and  Bundesbank  calculations.  * Derived  from  the  fixed  cash 
flow arising from inflation swaps which is swapped for the ac-
tual annual inflation rates (HICP excluding tobacco for the euro 
area and CPI Urban Consumers for the United States) realised 
over the next five or ten years. 
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20211.41.82.22.6Weekly averages
00.40.81.2% p. a.
Five-year forward 
inflation rate in 
five years derived from swapsConsensus Economics inflation
expectations in six to ten years
United StatesEuro area
Difference between the forward inflation 
rates in the United States and the euro areaPercentage 
points0.81.21.62.0
% p. a.

mia are chiefly responsible for the gap between 
market and survey- based expectations. In the 
United States, market- based five- year forward 
inflation rates in five years also registered a 
strong increase, advancing by 31 basis points 
to 2.4%.
Yields on European corporate bonds have 
fallen sharply since the end of the third quarter 
of 2020, with some of them touching all- time 
lows in January. Bonds issued by BBB- rated fi -
nancial corporations with a residual maturity of 
between seven and ten years were yielding 
1.0% as this report went to press, 39 basis 
points lower than at the end of September. 
Yields on non-  financial corporate bonds de -
clined, too, shedding 26 basis points to reach 
0.6%. Since the yields on matched- maturity 
Federal securities rose on balance, the spreads 
of European financial and non- financial corpor -
ate bonds over Bunds narrowed by 55 and 42 
basis points, respectively. The drop in yields on 
high- yield bonds was particularly heavy, with spreads plummeting by more than 150 basis 
points. Remarkably, CDS spreads for European 
enterprises have eased only moderately since 
the end of the third quarter of 2020, with the 
ten- year iTraxx 125 losing 8 basis points. The 
sharp drop in interest rate spreads over safe 
haven assets suggests that market participants 
were prepared to take risks onto their balance 
sheets in return for comparatively low premia. 
This could be an indication that market partici -
pants are expecting fiscal policy to continue 
shielding enterprises with access to capital 
markets against revenue declines and the cen -
tral bank to carry on keeping financial market 
conditions favourable. As in the market for 
lower- rated government bonds, conditions like 
these mean that fundamental risks have a rela -
tively mild impact on financing conditions. 
Overall, then, financing conditions for Euro -
pean enterprises can be considered highly fa -
vourable at the current juncture.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, gross issuance in 
the German bond market was well down on 
the figure for the preceding three- month 
period. Overall, German borrowers issued 
paper to the tune of €332 billion, down from 
€499 billion in the previous three months. Net 
of redemptions and changes in issuers’ own 
holdings, domestic issuers reduced their capital 
market borrowing by €50½ billion. The out -
standing volume of foreign debt securities in 
the German market rose by €14½ billion in the 
fourth quarter. Following very high issuance in 
the first three quarters of 2020, the outstand -
ing volume of bond securities in Germany fell 
by €36 billion on balance in the final quarter.
In the quarter under review, domestic enter -
prises redeemed bonds worth a net €30½ bil -
lion, following net issuance amounting to €65 
billion in the previous quarter. Other financial 
institutions, in particular, redeemed bonds on 
balance, especially structured products such as 
certificates and warrants. The high issuance 
and redemptions of such securities, which are 
often traded across borders, have recently 
played an important role again in the German Corporate bond 
yields very lowNet redemptions 
of German debt 
securities
Net redemption 
of corporate 
bondsDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
46
Yield spreads of corporate bonds
in the euro area*
Sources:  Thomson  Reuters  and  Bundesbank  calculations. 
* Compared with Federal securities with a residual maturity of 
seven to ten years. 1 Merrill Lynch index across all maturities. 
2 In each case, iBoxx indices with a residual maturity of seven 
to ten years.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 20210100200300400500600700800900
100200300400High yield 1
BBB 2
AA 2
By sector
BBB financial 
corporations 2
BBB non-financial corporations 2By rating categoryBasis points, daily data

bond market and in financial transactions with 
non- residents.
Domestic credit institutions reduced their cap -
ital market debt in the quarter under review by 
€29 billion, following net issuance of €23 bil -
lion in the third quarter. Debt securities issued 
by special purpose credit institutions, in par -
ticular, saw net redemptions (€18 billion). In 
addition, there was also a decline in the out -
standing volume of other bank debt securities 
that can be structured flexibly (€5½ billion), 
mortgage Pfandbriefe (€3 billion) and public 
Pfandbriefe (€2 billion).
In the final quarter of 2020, the public sector 
issued debt instruments worth €8½ billion net, 
compared with €104½ billion in the previous 
quarter in which the Finance Agency had raised 
large amounts of funds, including short- term 
funds, to cover the costs of the pandemic in 
particular. The Federal government (including 
the resolution agency classified as part of cen -
tral government) issued mainly ten- year Federal 
bonds (Bunds) in the amount of €12 billion. 
Furthermore, following the first placement of a 
green Federal bond in September 2020, it 
strengthened its supply of green Federal secur -
ities by issuing a green Federal note at the be -
ginning of November. This contrasted with net 
redemptions of Treasury discount paper (Bu -
bills) amounting to €15 billion. State and local 
governments issued bonds worth €6 billion net.
The Bundesbank was the chief net purchaser of 
debt securities in the fourth quarter of 2020, 
taking a net total of €70½ billion onto its 
books, principally under the Eurosystem’s asset 
purchase programmes. Domestic non- banks 
acquired debt securities for €14 billion net, 
with foreign paper the focus of interest. By 
contrast, foreign investors and domestic credit 
institutions disposed of fixed- income securities 
amounting to €106 billion and €14½ billion net 
respectively. For non- resident investors, around 
one- quarter of the aforementioned amount 
was attributable to sales and redemptions of 
structured products.Equity market
Prices on the international equity markets rose 
significantly in the reporting period. This re -
flected the hope that the newly approved vac -
cines would contain the pandemic and lead to 
a stable path of economic recovery. Further -
more, the political uncertainties mentioned at 
the beginning of this article eased in the re -
porting period. Some indices recorded new 
highs in January. One explanation for the fa -
vourable equity market developments is that 
market participants are looking beyond the 
current economic slowdown. However, the 
price increases may also be driven by the ex -
pectation that fiscal policy and monetary policy 
will continue to absorb the financial risks for 
publicly traded entities. On balance, European 
and German equities, as measured by the 
EURO STOXX and CDAX, have seen gains of 
16.0% and 10.4% respectively since the end of 
the third quarter of 2020. The British FTSE-  All Fall in credit 
institutions’ cap -
ital market debt
Net public 
sector  issuance
Purchases of 
debt securitiesConsiderable 
gains on the 
international 
equity marketsInvestment activity 
in the German securities markets
€ billion
Item2019 2020
Q4 Q3 Q4
Debt securities
Residents 15.6 55.3 70.0
Credit institutions – 15.4 – 21.5 –  14.4
of which:
Foreign debt securities –  8.0 – 18.9 2.0
Deutsche Bundesbank 10.0 65.8 70.5
Other sectors 21.0 10.9 13.9
of which:
Domestic debt securities 11.1 –  5.5 1.6
Non-residents – 37.3 136.1 – 106.1
Shares
Residents 3.1 60.8 30.2
Credit institutions 3.1 1.9 5.2
of which:
Domestic shares 3.0 0.2 1.8
Non-banks 0.1 58.9 25.0
of which:
Domestic shares – 15.4 40.4 3.0
Non-residents 17.6 – 14.8 –   0.6
Mutual fund shares
Investment in specialised funds 52.1 18.9 43.3
Investment in retail funds 4.9 4.9 8.0
of which:
Equity funds 0.7 3.4 4.3
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
47

Share index has risen by 14.7%, while US shares 
have climbed 16.4%. The price gains in the Jap -
anese Nikkei 225 have been particularly pro -
nounced, rising by 30.4%.
Since the end of the third quarter of 2020, 
bank stocks on each side of the Atlantic have 
outperformed their respective overall market, 
albeit on the back of a weaker recovery in the 
previous quarters. US bank shares have risen by 
50.4%, while those in the euro area have seen 
similar price gains of 47.8%. Above all, higher 
earnings expectations for banks are likely to 
have been the key factor in their above- average 
performance. Market participants clearly ex -
pected fewer loan defaults than previously, 
given the more positive economic outlook.
Price uncertainty in the equity market –  as 
measured by the implied volatility of equity in -
dices calculated from options  – decreased 
somewhat on balance compared to the end of 
September 2020. However, volatility spiked again at the end of January from its previously 
lower levels. Strong fluctuations in individual 
stocks with unusually high trading volumes on 
several trading platforms, especially in the 
United States, contributed to this volatility. Ac -
cording to data supplied by the US Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC), this heavy 
trading involved an exceptionally high level of 
short selling for certain stocks.1 Short selling 
allows market participants that did not previ -
ously hold a security in their portfolio to ex -
press their view that this security is too expen -
sive. In January, individual stocks were evidently 
subject to a situation known as a short squeeze. 
In a short squeeze, market participants who 
have shorted securities have to buy these by 
the expiration date of their position in order to 
fulfil their contractual delivery obligation, but 
are unable to do so or only at elevated prices. 
This can lead to the failure to deliver. During 
such a short squeeze, a share’s price can be -
come uncoupled from the fundamentals and 
rise dramatically due to the obligation to cover 
the position. By the same token, if the short 
squeeze comes to an end, prices may fall again 
considerably. Individual shares in Germany and 
the euro area also saw strong price swings. 
Overall, volatility in the major equity indices at 
the end of the period under review was higher 
than its respective five- year average.
Equity valuation levels saw similar develop -
ments on both sides of the Atlantic during the 
reporting period. According to the Bundes -
bank’s dividend discount model, in the euro 
area there was a fall in the equity risk premium 
in particular. Thus, in the current environment, 
market participants were prepared to hold euro 
area equities for lower compensation. For the 
EURO STOXX, both the implied cost of equity 
and earnings yields continue to be close to his -Bank stocks out -
perform market 
as a whole
Equity market 
volatility some -
what higher 
again of lateValuation level 
remains high
1 In a short sale, a market participant sells a certain secur -
ity at the current price without owning this security at the 
time of the sale. The short seller borrows the share before -
hand from another market participant (usually a broker) 
and pledges to return the share later on. The difference be -
tween the price at the time of the short sale and the price 
at the time of delivery (less the lending fee) is the short sell -
er’s profit or loss.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
48
Equity market
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bundesbank calculations.
Deutsche BundesbankBank indicesBeginning of 2019 = 100, log scale, daily data
Total market indices
8090100110120130140150160
5560708090100110120130140
2019 2020 2021Euro area
(EURO STOXX)Japan
(Nikkei 225)United States
(S&P 500)

torical lows, thus signalling a comparatively 
high stock market valuation. As mentioned 
earlier, the valuation may also potentially reflect 
the euro area’s current extremely accommoda -
tive fiscal and monetary policy. Higher earnings 
expectations were the main reason for the 
price gains in the S&P 500. By contrast, the rise 
in risk- free US interest rates, taken in isolation, 
dampened the increase in prices. As in the euro 
area, the earnings yield for the S&P 500 re -
mained close to its all-time low. The implied 
capital costs were somewhat higher, but still 
significantly below the long- term average. As 
such, valuation also appears to be high for the 
S&P 500.
On balance, funding in the German stock mar -
ket totalled €4 billion in the reporting quarter, 
compared with €25½ billion in the preceding 
quarter. The volume of foreign shares circulat -
ing in the German market rose by €25½ billion 
over the same period. On balance, equities 
were purchased mainly by resident non- banks, 
which include, for example, funds and other 
financial  corporations (€25 billion). Domestic 
credit institutions added €5 billion net to their 
share portfolios, while foreign investors re -
duced their equity exposure in Germany by €½ 
billion on balance.
Mutual funds
In the final quarter of 2020, domestic invest -
ment companies recorded a significant net in -
flow of €51½ billion, compared with €24 bil -
lion in the previous quarter. Investment com -
panies often register higher inflows of funds in 
the final months of a year. On balance, the bulk 
of the fresh funds was channelled to special -
ised funds reserved for institutional investors 
(€43½ billion). Among the asset classes, mixed 
securities funds, in particular, saw significant in -
flows of capital (€23½ billion), with equity 
funds (€9½ billion), funds of funds (€6 billion), 
open- end real estate funds and bond funds (€5 
billion each) also recording inflows. The out -
standing volume of foreign mutual fund shares in Germany rose by €30½ billion in the report -
ing period. Mutual fund shares were bought on 
balance almost exclusively by domestic non-  
banks, which added fund shares worth €77½ 
billion net to their portfolios. Most of this paper 
was issued by domestic mutual funds. Domes -
tic credit institutions and non- resident investors 
increased their fund portfolios by €2½ billion 
and €2 billion net respectively.
Direct investment
Transactions in cross- border portfolio invest -
ment resulted in net capital exports of €173½ Equity market 
funding
Sales and 
purchases  of 
mutual fund 
sharesImplied volatility
in the financial markets
Sources: Bloomberg and Thomson Reuters. 1 Calculated using 
the prices of index options with a maturity of 30 days. 2 Im-
plied  volatility  of  currency  options  with  a  maturity  of  three 
months.  3 Implied  volatility  of  options  on  the  Bund  future 
(Germany) and T-Note future (United States) for a three-month 
horizon.
Deutsche Bundesbank2019 2020 202136912102030405060708090100
369121518
Bond market 3 Equity market 1
Enlarged scale
Foreign exchange market 2%, daily data
United StatesEuro area
VSTOXX 
(EURO STOXX 50)
GermanyUnited States
VIX (S&P 500)
Euro/US dollar
Euro/yenGermany
VDAXDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
49

billion in the fourth quarter of 2020. Direct in -
vestment, too, led to capital outflows (€11 bil -
lion), with significantly larger intra- group loans 
once again being granted in both directions.
Enterprises domiciled in Germany expanded 
their direct investment abroad by €46 billion in 
the final quarter of 2020 (previous quarter: €18 
billion). Above all, they issued intra- group loans 
to their branches abroad on a much larger 
scale (€30½ billion). On balance, this occurred 
primarily through financial loans, driven mainly 
by domestic enterprises lending to affiliated en -
terprises abroad. Domestic subsidiaries, in par -
ticular, also provided additional funds to their 
foreign parent companies (“reverse invest -
ments”). Furthermore, domestic enterprises 
also boosted their equity in foreign firms (€16 
billion). In the fourth quarter, direct investment 
was channelled to affiliates in the United States 
on a large scale (€24½ billion). In addition, 
there were also relatively high outflows of 
funds to Luxembourg (€7½ billion) and Swe -
den (€5½ billion).
Foreign firms upped their direct investment in 
Germany by €35½ billion between October 
and December; in the third quarter, the volume 
of such investment had amounted to €28½ bil -
lion. This increase was predominantly due to 
higher investment in the form of equity capital 
(€15 billion) in domestic enterprises. However, 
as before, most of these funds were made 
available through intra- group lending (€20½ 
billion), which was primarily in the form of fi -
nancial loans granted by affiliated enterprises 
abroad to their affiliates in Germany. A particu -
larly large proportion of direct investment in -
flows in the fourth quarter came from the 
United States (€18 billion). There were also 
relatively high inflows of funds from Malta 
(€6½ billion), as well as from Sweden and the 
United Kingdom (€6 billion each).Direct invest -
ment sees net 
capital exports
German direct 
investment 
abroad results in 
capital exports
Foreign direct 
investment in 
Germany gener -
ates capital 
inflowsMajor items of the balance of payments
€ billion
Item2019 2020
Q4 Q3 Q4p
I. Current account +67.8 + 62.4 + 72.3
1. Goods 1 +51.9 + 56.6 + 56.0
2. Services 2 – 2.9 –  6.6 +  3.9
3. Primary income +31.1 + 22.3 + 29.9
4. Secondary income –12.4 –  9.9 – 17.6
II. Capital account – 1.0 –  1.0 –  2.2
III. Financial account 
(increase: +) +92.8 + 70.4 + 92.7
1. Direct investment +25.2 – 10.6 + 10.8
Domestic investment 
abroad +23.5 + 17.9 + 46.2
Foreign investment in the 
reporting country – 1.7 + 28.5 + 35.3
2. Portfolio investment +71.5 – 92.0 +173.4
Domestic investment in 
foreign securities +32.8 + 44.4 + 68.2
Shares 3 + 9.4 + 18.9 + 22.9
Investment fund shares 4 +20.9 + 27.3 + 30.7
of which:
Money market fund 
shares + 4.7 + 11.7 +  8.8
Short-term debt 
 securities 5 – 2.0 –  0.9 –  1.9
Long-term debt 
 securities 6 + 4.4 –  0.8 + 16.5
of which:
Denominated in euro 7 + 3.8 – 18.5 +  7.7
Foreign investment in 
 domestic securities –38.7 +136.4 –105.2
Shares 3 – 2.8 +  0.7 –  1.0
Investment fund shares + 1.4 –  0.4 +  1.8
Short-term debt 
 securities 5 –17.0 + 49.4 – 33.2
Long-term debt 
 securities 6 –20.3 + 86.6 – 72.9
of which:
Issued by the public 
sector 8 –18.0 + 18.2 – 39.0
3. Financial derivatives 9 + 1.8 + 26.5 +  8.6
4. Other investment 10 – 5.0 +147.8 –101.0
Monetary fi  nancial 
 institutions 11 +61.9 – 13.9 + 23.9
Enterprises and 
 households 12 + 2.0 + 62.2 – 13.1
General government – 0.0 + 12.1 –  1.0
Bundesbank –69.0 + 87.4 –110.8
5. Reserve assets – 0.6 –  1.3 +  0.8
IV. Errors and omissions 13 +26.0 +  9.0 + 22.7
1 Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2 In-
cluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 3 Including 
participation certifi  cates. 4  Including reinvested earnings. 5  Short- 
term: original maturity of up to one year. 6 Long- term: original 
maturity of more than one year or unlimited. 7 Including out-
standing foreign D- Mark bonds. 8 Including bonds issued by the 
former Federal Railways, the former Federal Post Offi   ce and the 
former Treuhand agency. 9 Balance of transactions arising from 
options and fi  nancial futures contracts as well as employee 
stock options. 10   Includes in particular fi  nancial and trade 
credits as well as currency and deposits. 11  Excluding the Bundes-
bank. 12 Includes the following sectors: fi  nancial corporations 
(excluding monetary fi  nancial institutions) as well as non- fi  nancial 
corporations, households and non- profi  t institutions serving 
households. 13  Statistical errors and omissions resulting from 
the difference between the balance on the fi  nancial account 
and the balances on the current account and the capital ac-
count.
Deutsche BundesbankDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
50

List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020), Recalculated weights for indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness, Monthly Report, August 2020, pp. 49-52.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
51

The German economy
Macroeconomic situation
The economic recovery in Germany was 
brought to a standstill in the final quarter of 
2020. According to the Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s flash estimate, real gross domestic prod -
uct (GDP) was up by a marginal 0.1% after sea -
sonal and calendar adjustment. This means 
that economic activity was still almost 4% 
down on the pre- crisis level of the final quarter 
of 2019. The catch- up was halted by the resur -
gent infection rates and the associated gradual 
tightening of containment measures. These 
measures primarily targeted contact- intensive 
areas such as leisure and culture- related ser -
vices, hotel and restaurant services, and bricks- 
and- mortar retail outlets, leading them to sus -
tain considerable losses in revenue in some 
cases. By contrast, many sectors that were not 
directly affected by the measures continued to recover. The industrial sector, in particular, 
stepped up production substantially. The lead -
ing indicators suggest that the upturn in indus -
try will continue at the beginning of 2021 – 
albeit  with reduced momentum. Nevertheless, 
aggregate economic activity is likely to decline 
markedly in the first quarter of 2021 due to the 
measures to contain the pandemic being more 
protracted and stricter compared with the pre -
vious quarter. With the gradual easing of con -
tainment measures and the wider availability of 
vaccines, however, the economy should return 
to significantly higher output from the second 
quarter and continue its recovery. Even so, the 
pandemic’s behaviour still poses the risk of set -
backs, in particular due to virus mutations.
The individual economic sectors were affected 
very differently by the renewed tightening of 
measures to contain the pandemic in the au -
tumn. On the supply side, they are likely to 
have led to a decline in gross value added in 
the services sector. Turnover even declined con -
siderably in the case of hotels and restaurants, 
whose business activity was severely restricted 
from November. By contrast, retail trade actu -
ally recorded a slight rise in turnover in the 
fourth quarter overall, with sales figures still 
climbing steeply in October and November. The 
mandatory closure of retail stores led to a 
slump in December, however. The manufactur -
ing sector meanwhile continued to recover on 
the back of buoyant domestic and foreign de -
mand for industrial products. The construction 
sector also increased its value added, so far re -
maining largely unscathed by the pandemic. 
On the expenditure side, the tightened restric -
tions had a particularly noticeable effect on 
household consumption, which is likely to have 
shrunk considerably despite the strong increase 
in motor vehicle purchases. Exports remained 
on an upward trajectory, by contrast. Economic 
indicators are also signalling that enterprises 
are likely to have increased their investment in 
machinery and equipment as well.Second wave 
of pandemic 
caused Germa -
ny’s economic 
recovery to stall 
at end of 2020
Sectors hit by 
containment 
measures to 
varying degreesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
52
Overall output
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Price 
and calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020949698100102104106108
–12–9–6–30+3+6Price and seasonally adjusted
2015 = 100, log scale
GDP
%Lin scale
Year-on-year change 1

German exports of goods were up substantially 
after price adjustment in the fourth quarter of 
2020. One factor behind this was the con -
tinued revival of world trade. In a regional 
breakdown, the increase in the volume of Ger -
man enterprises’ exports was broadly based, 
with a noticeably sharper rise in deliveries to 
non- euro area countries than to the euro area. 
This is probably also due to the fact that eco -
nomic output in the euro area was more 
strongly affected by the pandemic than in 
many non- euro area countries and that the 
shortfall against the pre- crisis level of the last 
quarter of 2019 was somewhat larger in the 
latter group. There was a particularly steep rise 
in the value of exports to Japan, the OPEC 
countries, the United States and China. Broken 
down by category of goods, price- adjusted ex -
ports of intermediate goods recorded a par -
ticularly substantial increase, according to the 
figures available up to November. Exports of 
capital goods were likewise up significantly, 
with motor vehicle exports playing a particular 
part in this. Exports of consumer goods rose 
sharply.
Investment in commercial machinery and 
equipment is likely to have increased markedly 
in the final quarter of 2020. Both the nominal 
sales of capital goods in Germany and the 
value of capital goods imports were substan -
tially higher on average in the fourth quarter. 
New purchases of motor vehicles also contrib -
uted to the rise in investment expenditure. 
Registration figures for commercial passenger 
cars were up distinctly on the third quarter. 
There was also an increase in commercial ve -
hicle registrations, albeit to a significantly 
smaller extent. One probable reason for the 
growth in investment in commercial machinery 
and equipment is that, according to the ifo In -
stitute, industrial capacity utilisation continued 
to rise between October and January, falling 
only slightly short of pre- crisis levels. In add -
ition, enterprises possibly made investments in 
order to be better able to adapt to conditions 
imposed by the pandemic.Construction investment is likely to have grown 
again in the final quarter of 2020. This is sug -
gested by sales in the main construction sector 
– figures for which are available up to Novem -
ber – which were up significantly on the quar -
ter in terms of value. Housing investment is 
likely to have experienced a particularly steep 
increase but investment in commercial build -
ings has probably risen markedly, too.
Private consumption is likely to have declined 
significantly at the end of 2020. This was mainly 
due to the gradual re- tightening of contain -
ment measures in the fourth quarter, severely 
restricting consumption opportunities in some Goods exports 
up substantially
Probable 
marked increase 
in commercial 
machinery and 
equipment
Growth in 
 construction 
investment
Tightened 
 containment 
measures place 
heavy burden 
on private 
 consumptionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
53
8590100110Foreign trade
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Ad-
justed using the price indices for foreign trade.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20208590100110
90100110120Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
to euro area countries2015 = 100, log scale 
Exports of goods
Price adjusted1
Total
020406080Lin scale
Foreign trade balanceImports of goods
Price adjusted 18590100110
€ bnto non-euro area countries

areas. This is particularly true of the hotel and 
restaurant sector, whose business has been 
largely prohibited since November. Compared 
with the pre- crisis level, the drops in sales were 
slightly smaller than during the lockdown in the 
second quarter, however. This suggests that 
enterprises have now adapted somewhat bet -
ter to the pandemic- related restrictions. Retail 
sales in December were down considerably on 
the month, mainly due to the store closures im -
posed on parts of the bricks-  and- mortar retail 
segment from mid- December. Owing to strong 
sales figures in October and November, how -
ever, retail trade sales were up slightly on aver -
age over the final quarter compared with the 
third quarter, although performance within the 
retail sector was very mixed. Sales of textiles, 
clothing, footwear and leather goods col -
lapsed. As in spring, online and mail order 
trade profited from the closure of bricks- and- 
mortar stores, posting a steep increase on the 
previous quarter. New vehicle registrations by 
private buyers suggest that motor vehicle sales 
are likely to have counterbalanced the setbacks 
in the hotel and restaurant sector and in retail. 
They rose steeply shortly before the temporary 
reduction in German VAT rates ceased to apply 
at the end of the year.
In the final quarter of 2020, German imports of 
goods rose sharply in real terms. Imports from 
non- euro area countries showed a somewhat 
steeper increase than imports from euro area 
countries. Broken down by category of goods, 
price- adjusted imports of intermediate goods 
recorded steep growth, according to the fig -
ures available up to November. The volume of 
imported capital goods was likewise up strongly 
and there was also significantly increased de -
mand for imported consumer goods, which 
had been robust up to now.
Sectoral trends
The industrial sector stepped up production 
substantially in the final quarter of 2020. It has 
hardly been affected by the containment meas -ures so far and profited from a strong increase 
in demand for industrial goods both from 
within Germany and abroad. Seasonally ad -
justed industrial output rose by 6¾% com -
pared with the third quarter, primarily driven by 
the steep rise in the production of intermediate 
goods and capital goods. The automotive sec -
tor, which had been severely hit in the first 
wave of the pandemic, and manufacturers of 
computer, electronic and optical products saw 
a particularly strong rise in production. By con -
trast, the production of consumer goods was 
only slightly higher. In spite of the continued 
catch- up movement, industrial output was still 
3% lower than the pre- crisis level of the final 
quarter of 2019. Only the production of inter -
mediate goods was already up on pre- crisis 
levels again.
In line with the increase in output, manufactur -
ing capacity utilisation also continued to rise 
markedly, according to the ifo Institute. In 
January 2021, capacity utilisation in the inter -
mediate goods sector was significantly higher 
than in the previous survey in October 2020, 
but it fell distinctly in the case of capital goods 
producers. Overall, capacity utilisation was al -
most back at its pre- crisis level.
Construction was barely affected by the second 
wave of the coronavirus pandemic in the final 
quarter of 2020. Instead, in the fourth quarter 
of 2020, construction output recorded a steep 
rise on the quarter after seasonal adjustment 
(+4%). This was attributable to a considerable 
expansion in construction activity in the finish -
ing trades, where the data are highly prone to 
revision. By contrast, output in the main con -
struction sector was only slightly higher. A no -
ticeable increase in building construction was 
offset by a slight fall in civil engineering work. 
Overall, construction activity continues to be 
quite favourable, with activities in both building 
construction and civil engineering being 
stepped up significantly compared with levels 
in the final quarter of 2019. Furthermore, cap -
acity utilisation in the main construction sector 
and the firms’ assessment of the situation ac -Strong increase 
in goods 
imports
Continued 
rebound in 
industryFurther increase 
in industrial cap -
acity utilisation
Construction 
sector barely 
affected by lock -
down so farDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
54

cording to the ifo Institute’s survey were high 
compared with the long- term average.
Economic output in the services sector is likely 
to have fallen in the fourth quarter of 2020 but 
with very varied developments in the individual 
services sectors. Hotel and restaurant services 
suffered considerable losses in turnover due to 
the strong pandemic- related restrictions on 
business activity. In addition, real retail sales 
saw only a slight rise on the third quarter owing 
to the enforced closures for many areas from 
mid- December. Sales of textiles, clothing, foot -
wear and leather goods suffered a considerable 
slump. Bricks- and- mortar retail stores selling 
furniture and furnishings, household appliances 
and home improvement materials experienced 
a marked decline in sales. By contrast, sales of 
food, beverages and tobacco remained at a 
high level. Online and mail order trade profited 
from the closures of stores and posted a steep 
increase in turnover. Wholesale trade, which 
often behaves similarly to industry, is also likely 
to have seen growth in the final quarter. Taking 
the average of October and November, the 
months available so far, sales in this area were 
up markedly, with ifo Institute data also indicat -
ing a significant improvement in the assess -
ment of the business situation here in the 
fourth- quarter months. Motor vehicle sales are 
also likely to have been dynamic, as signalled 
by the steep increase in motor vehicle registra -
tions, which was probably also partly due to 
the end of the VAT reduction.
Labour market
The labour market proved relatively robust in 
the face of tightened measures taken during 
the fourth quarter to contain the pandemic. 
Based on the data available so far, the level of 
employment remained more or less constant 
compared with the third quarter. However, this 
may mask a significant bifurcation depending 
on the form of employment and economic sec -
tor. This heterogeneity also applies to take- up 
of short- time working arrangements. Overall, the number of people in short- time work rose 
again at last report, but on the other hand, un -
employment fell fairly significantly up to Janu -
ary, despite all the restrictions caused by the 
pandemic. The expanded contact restriction 
measures in place since mid- December damp -
ened expectations and the outlook for the next 
few months, however.
Employment had stabilised quickly in the third 
quarter, but barely recovered going forward 
from the low reached in June. Instead, the 
higher volume of work resulting from the 
macroeconomic recovery was used to reduce 
short- time working. Employment also remained 
remarkably stable in the face of the restrictions 
brought about by the second wave of the pan -
demic from November, however. On an aver -
age of the fourth quarter, total employment 
was up by around 21,000 persons on the level 
of the previous quarter (+0.0%). This reflects 
varying developments depending on the form 
of employment. Exclusively low- paid part- time Heterogeneous 
development in 
services sector
Labour market 
robustEmployment 
stable overall in 
spite of varying 
developments 
depending on 
forms of 
employment …Output in industry and
in construction
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Main 
construction sector and finishing trades.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 202080859095100105110
1001051101151201251301352015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data, log scale
Main constructionConstruction1Industry
Industrie excluding 
automotiveDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
55

employment dropped considerably in Novem -
ber, the most recent month for which data are 
available, mainly due to the enforced closures 
in accommodation and food services. After a 
modest recovery in the third quarter, it is now 
even below the low following the first wave in 
May. Towards the end of the period under re -
view, the number of persons working exclu -
sively in “mini- jobs” was 8% lower than before 
the pandemic. Self- employment has shown a 
downward tendency for quite some time, with 
its share in the areas heavily affected by the 
containment measures, such as the hotel and 
restaurant sector, arts, entertainment, recre -
ation and personal services being above aver -
age. From February to December, the number 
of self- employed persons therefore showed a 
somewhat stronger decline, with 4¼%, than 
before the pandemic.
When it comes to employment subject to so -
cial security contributions, the picture is quite 
different. As vacancies were increasingly filled 
up to November, more than half of the job 
losses in the second quarter were recouped, 
leaving figures now just over ½% short of the 
pre- pandemic level. The sectoral disaggrega -
tion for positions subject to social security con -
tributions shows, by way of example, how het -
erogeneous the impact of the pandemic con -
tainment measures has been across the differ -
ent economic sectors. Employment in the hotel 
and restaurant sector, for instance, fell steeply 
again during the second wave of the pan -
demic. The manufacturing sector (excluding 
construction), which is underpinning the eco -
nomic recovery, shed jobs throughout the re -
porting period, albeit at an increasingly slow 
pace at the current end. Having said that, the 
volume of work in that sector is likely to have 
expanded, partly because short- time work was 
scaled back sharply. By contrast, temporary 
agency employment saw vigorous hiring activ -
ity. Temporary workers are often deployed in 
the manufacturing sector. It is possible that 
new hires are only taking place cautiously and 
in such a way as to allow swift workforce ad -
justments. Recruitment was also substantial in … and sectors 
of employment 
subject to social 
security contri -
butionsLabour market
Sources  of  unadjusted  figures:  Federal  Statistical  Office  and 
Federal Employment Agency. 1 Not seasonally adjusted. 2 Ex-
cluding seasonal jobs and jobs located abroad.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 21Jan.42.543.043.544.044.545.045.5
30.030.531.031.532.032.533.033.534.0–1,000–5000+500+1,000
2.22.42.62.83.0
–2000+200+400+600Jan.Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Jan.Million
Million
Million400600800Thousand
Thousand
Thousand
Year-on-year change1Registered
unemployedUnemployedTotalEmployment
Enlarged scale
Unsubsidised vacancies 2EmployedJobs subject to social security
contributionsYear-on-year change1
Oct.-
Nov.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
56

business- related services, construction, logistics 
and the (predominantly) public services sector 
(health and social services, education, civil ser -
vice).
By October, the number of employees in eco -
nomically induced short- time work had fallen 
to 2.06 million, down by two- thirds on the 
peak in April 2020. Short- time work was still 
very widespread in the manufacturing sector 
and in the hotel and restaurant trade. The lat -
est estimate by the Federal Employment Agency 
covers the period up to November. The number 
of people in short- time work climbed by 
200,000 on the month (+10%) as the pan -
demic intensified once more. However, since 
the average amount of working time lost per 
short- time worker rose again considerably in 
November, the volume of labour lost grew sig -
nificantly more strongly (+45%). Sectoral data 
on utilisation of short- time work schemes in 
November are not yet available. In November, 
short- time work notifications mainly concerned 
employees in the catering and accommodation 
sectors, while the manufacturing sector con -
tinued to recover. Based on its own surveys, 
the ifo Institute believes that there were 2.6 
million people in short- time work in January 
2021.1 The further increase is likely to be mainly 
attributable to trade.
Unemployment fell sharply in the fourth quar -
ter, with the number of people officially regis -
tered as unemployed down by a seasonally ad -
justed 94,000 persons and the corresponding 
rate 0.2 percentage point lower than before. 
Unemployment continued to decline markedly 
in January too, leaving the current unemploy -
ment rate at 6.0%. The reduction was more 
pronounced than employment developments 
would suggest. Active labour market policy 
measures have not been stepped up signifi -
cantly either. It is therefore reasonable to as -
sume that unemployment has fallen because 
people have moved out of the labour force. In 
particular, persons previously working in low-  
paid part-time jobs or the self- employed are 
generally not entitled to unemployment insur -ance benefits and often do not register as un -
employed.
Expectations for employment growth in the 
coming months were dampened only very 
moderately by the measures taken to contain 
the pandemic. Over the past two months, firms 
only made minor downward revisions to their 
short- term employment plans according to the 
ifo employment barometer. The corresponding 
indicators published by the Institute for Em -
ployment Research (IAB) and the Federal Em -
ployment Agency’s BA-  X job index even re -
mained virtually unchanged. Overall, it is cur -
rently unlikely that the labour market situation 
will deteriorate significantly over the next few 
months.
Wages and prices
The pandemic is continuing to shape wage de -
velopments as well. The rise in negotiated 
wages in the autumn months was again mod -
erate. As in the third quarter, there was only 
muted growth in basic negotiated rates of pay 
in year- on- year terms (1.7%). However, if add -
itional benefits are taken into account, wage 
growth in the final quarter of the year was sig -
nificantly higher than when looking at basic 
pay (2.6%). A driving factor here has been the 
granting of one- off coronavirus special pay -
ments in several sectors. For employees these 
payments are tax- free and not subject to social 
security contributions.2 The latest wage agree -
ments provide for low wage increases follow -
ing pay freezes of several months at the start of 
the contracts. Having decreased in the third 
quarter, actual earnings may have picked up 
again in the fourth quarter due to the decline Short- time work 
on rise again 
since November
Sharp fall in 
unemployment 
throughout the 
periodLeading indica -
tors barely any 
lower, despite 
lockdown
Negotiated pay 
rates rose 
 moderately and 
actual earnings 
hardly at all in 
Q4 on account 
of pandemic
1 See ifo Institute, Munich, press release of 1  February 
2021: https://www.ifo.de/en/node/61427
2 Under Section 3 No 11a of the Income Tax Act (Einkom -
mensteuergesetz), employers can pay their employees spe -
cial tax- exempt payments up to an amount of €1,500. Ini -
tially these could be made up to 31 December 2020 but 
the Federal Ministry of Finance has since extended the ar -
rangement until 30 June 2021. The special payment is in -
tended to cushion the additional strain caused by the 
coronavirus crisis in 2020.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
57

in short- time work and the temporary easing of 
the measures designed to contain the pan -
demic. Even so, wage drift (i.e. the difference 
between negotiated wages and actual earn -
ings) is likely to have been distinctly negative, 
as in the two preceding quarters.
At 2.1%, the overall rise in negotiated wages in 
2020 was significantly smaller than in the previ -
ous two years.3 Initial figures calculated by the 
Federal Statistical Office indicate that actual 
earnings even fell by 0.4%, primarily on ac -
count of the high volume of short- time work. 
Wage drift was thus well into negative territory 
at -2.5 percentage points.
This year’s major pay round will affect around 
11 million employees. The wage demands put 
forward by the trade unions currently amount 
to between 4% and 6% for a period of 12 
months and continue to reflect the ongoing 
strains of the pandemic. Alongside pay levels, 
the negotiations currently under way in the metal and electrical engineering industry are 
concerned with aspects of structural change. 
These include job protection initiatives (for in -
stance, through models with reduced working 
hours for upskilling) and framework agree -
ments for operational investment commit -
ments to secure the viability of business sites. 
Based on a notional duration of 12 months, the 
most recent pay agreement in the textile and 
clothing industry of western Germany culmin -
ated in a fairly low wage increase of 1.1%. Fur -
ther talks are currently pending at Volkswagen 
and in the steel industry. Over the rest of the 
year, wage negotiations are set to take place in 
a number of areas, including the retail and 
wholesale trade, private banks, the main con -
struction sector and the public sector of the 
Federal states.
Effective from January 2021, the German Gov -
ernment brought the general statutory min -
imum wage up from €9.35 to €9.50 per hour 
(+1.6%). A further moderate increase to €9.60 
per hour (+1.1%) will come in July 2021.
In the final quarter of 2020, consumer prices 
(HICP) remained unchanged on the quarter in 
seasonally adjusted terms after falling markedly 
in the third quarter owing to the temporary re -
duction in VAT. While food and services be -
came slightly more expensive, prices for indus -
trial goods excluding energy went down some -
what. Energy also became slightly cheaper 
again. By contrast, the temporary VAT cut and 
energy prices continued to have a significant 
dampening effect in a year-on-year compari -
son.4 At -0.6%, inflation in the final quarter of 
2020 was even slightly lower than in the previ -
ous quarter (-0.2%). The rate excluding energy 
and food was likewise in slightly negative terri -
tory (-0.1% from 0.5%).
Average inflation for 2020 was considerably 
lower than the corresponding figure for 2019, Past year brings 
significantly 
smaller rise in 
negotiated pay 
rates than 
before and even 
a fall in actual 
earnings
Wage demands 
between 4% 
and 6% for 
major pay round 
of 2021Rise in general 
minimum wage 
to €9.50 per 
hour from 
 January 2021
Inflation rate still 
negative in Q4 
2020; …2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20200.500.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–+++++++Year-on-year change, on monthly basis
Per-
centage
points
–4–20+2%
Wage drift1Negotiated rates of payActual earningsRates of pay and wage drift
Sources:  Federal  Statistical  Office  (actual  earnings)  and 
Deutsche Bundesbank (negotiated rates of pay). 1 The wage 
drift is calculated as the annual change in the ratio of actual 
earnings to negotiated rates of pay.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 For a review of the 2020 pay round, see Deutsche Bun -
desbank (2020a).
4 See: Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
58

with the inflation rate falling from 1.4% to 
0.4%. The reduction in VAT, which was limited 
to the months from July to December 2020, 
exerted considerable downward pressure on 
inflation, as did the sharp fall in energy prices 
at the beginning of the year. At the same time, 
however, food prices rose more sharply than in 
the previous year. This meant that the rate ex -
cluding energy and food declined slightly less 
strongly, from 1.4% to 0.7%. By contrast, the 
official consumer price statistics indicate that 
the increase in housing rents remained virtually 
unchanged (see the box on pp. 60 ff. for an ac -
count of developments in house prices in 
2020).
Consumer prices experienced a strong increase 
in January 2021. The inflation rate rose excep -
tionally steeply, from -0.7% in December to 
+1.6%.5 The core rate also picked up signifi -
cantly (from -0.1% to 2.0%). The increase was 
thus even stronger than had been expected as 
a result of the reintroduction of the regular VAT 
rates and the measures contained in the cli -
mate package. This is likely to be explained by 
extensive updates to the HICP expenditure 
weights, in particular those applied for package 
holidays. In accordance with the HICP Frame -
work Regulation, the weights underwent their 
customary annual update in January. This year, 
however, the updates were more extensive 
than usual owing to the shifts in consumption 
observed during the coronavirus pandemic (see 
also the box on pp.  63 ff.). In the coming 
months, the HICP is likely to be affected by fur -
ther one-  off effects, stemming in particular 
from the weight update for the volatile pack -
age holiday prices.6
Order books and outlook
The increased burdens caused by the strict con -
tainment measures in place until at least early 
March are likely to hamper aggregate output in 
the first quarter of 2021. However, there is no 
reason to fear that economic activity will sink 
to the low recorded during the lockdown in the second quarter of 2020. One key reason for 
this is that many sectors that are hardly directly 
affected by the measures, such as industry, 
have so far continued to recover. In addition, 
enterprises in the sectors strongly impacted by 
the measures, such as retail trade and the hotel 
and restaurant sector, are likely to be increas -
ingly adapting to the conditions of the pan -
demic. According to the ifo Institute, enter -… temporary 
VAT cut and 
energy prices 
likewise exerting 
significant 
dampening 
effect on 2020 
annual average
Strong increase 
in inflation rate 
(HICP) in January 
primarily due to 
VAT increase 
and significant 
adjustments to 
the weighting 
scheme
German eco -
nomic output 
likely to contract 
markedly in Q1 
2021, but return 
to a significantly 
higher level 
from Q2 
onwardsExport pricesImport, export, producer and 
consumer prices
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  1 Pro-
ducer  price  index  for  industrial  products  in  domestic  sales. 
2 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices. 3 Not seasonally ad-
justed.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 219396100104
96100104108
96100104108
10123
–+++Seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Lin scale
Year-on-year change 3Consumer prices 2Producer prices1
%2015 = 100, log scale
96100104
Jan.Import prices
Jan.
5 However, due to the renewed tightening of measures to 
contain the coronavirus pandemic at the end of the year, 
just under one- quarter of the prices had to be estimated, 
much like in April 2020. See Federal Statistical Office 
(2021).
6 See also Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
59

Housing prices in Germany in 2020
The broad- based, sharp rise in housing 
prices in Germany continued in 2020 during 
the coronavirus pandemic. At the same 
time, the attraction of non- urban regions 
seemed to grow further. Housing prices in 
towns and cities also continued to climb 
and remained well above the level that ap-
pears justifi  ed by the longer- term economic 
and demographic determinants. The pan-
demic has not, to date, caused a decline in 
housing demand in Germany, while hous-
ing supply was further expanded in the re-
porting year.1
The coronavirus pandemic had little impact 
on housing prices last year. Having re-
mained more or less unchanged in the fi  rst 
half of the year, housing price infl  ation 
picked up in the second half. According to 
data provided by the Association of Ger-
man Pfandbrief banks (vdp), the prices of 
owner- occupied housing rose by 7½% in 
the reporting year, following an increase of 
6¾% in 2019. At 7%, the house price index 
of the Federal Statistical Offi   ce likewise 
shows higher rates of price increase for the 
fi  rst three quarters of 2020 than in the pre-
ceding year. Hypoport AG’s Europace house 
price index (EPX) indicates that housing 
prices grew by 11% in the reporting year.
In urban areas, housing price momentum in 
the year under review and the previous year 
remained signifi  cantly slower across all seg-
ments than in the years 2015 to 2018. Cal-
culations based on bulwiengesa AG data 
for 127 German towns and cities show that 
prices rose by 6¼% last year, which is simi-
lar to the rate in 2019. At 7%, housing infl  a-
tion in the seven major cities was barely 
higher than in the previous year.2 According 
to data provided by vdp, residential prop-
erty prices in the seven major cities grew more strongly in the reporting year than in 
the preceding year, at 5%, but also signifi  -
cantly less than in the years 2015 to 2018.
Looking at rents for new tenancies, the 
trend towards lower rates of increase con-
tinued last year. According to calculations 
based on data provided by bulwiengesa 
AG, rents for new lettings in towns and cit-
ies rose by 2¼% in 2020. In the seven major 
cities, rents for new tenancies also rose 
moderately, at 2½%. Data provided by vdp 
likewise suggest less momentum in rent de-
velopments. According to this data, rent 
adjustments for new lettings were slightly 
smaller than a year earlier, at 3¼%, for Ger-
many as a whole. According to the vdp 
data, this slowdown was fairly pronounced 
in the seven major cities, with rents rising 
by just 1¾%.
The fact that the tendency towards slower 
housing price momentum that appeared in 
2019 did not continue last year could be 
because the coronavirus pandemic boosted 
housing demand to some extent. Even 
though growth in households’ disposable 
income was signifi  cantly weaker than in 
preceding years, this dampened housing 
demand only marginally, as households may 
not have expected a persistent loss of in-
come. By contrast, the restrictions imposed 
to contain the pandemic may have perman-
ently boosted the importance of residential 
property in households’ consumption plans. 
Moreover, residential real estate appears to 
1 This box deals with residential property price devel-
opments in the context of the real economy. For an as-
sessment from a fi  nancial stability perspective, aspects 
relating to mortgage fi  nancing also need to be taken 
into account.
2 The seven major cities are Berlin, Cologne, Düssel-
dorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
gart.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
60

have remained an attractive investment in 
the low interest rate environment, espe-
cially as fi  nancing conditions improved fur-
ther. The average rate of mortgage loans, 
which was already at a historically low level, 
fell further to 1.3% in the reporting year. 
Nevertheless, residential property did not 
become more affordable overall, as house-
hold incomes rose only moderately com-
pared with housing prices in the reporting 
year.3
The coronavirus pandemic caused no ser-
ious disruption to the expansion of housing 
supply last year. The additional supply is 
likely to have exceeded that of the previous 
year, in which just over 290,000 apart-
ments were completed. Last year, the num-
ber of building permits granted was also 
above average, with approximately more 
than 350,000 units approved. Even in the 
months in which social distancing measures 
applied to contain the pandemic, the num-
ber of building permits remained stable. 
Capacity utilisation in the construction sec-
tor fell somewhat over the course of the 
year, albeit from a previously extremely high 
level. Nonetheless, construction prices rose 
less strongly than a year earlier – even ex-
cluding value added tax. Construction costs 
did not increase as sharply as in the previ-
ous year, partly because material costs re-
mained unchanged. Federal Statistical Of-
fi  ce data show that the prices of building 
land were just 4¾% above the average of 
the previous year in the fi  rst half of 2020, 
the most recent period for which data are 
available. However, these price data cap-
ture only the fi  rst phase of the coronavirus 
pandemic.
3 See the Bundesbank’s system of indicators for the 
German residential property market, which is available 
at https://www.bundesbank.de/en/statistics/sets-of-
indicators/system-of-indicators-for-the-german-
residential-property-market/system-of-indicators-for-
the-german-residential-property-market-795268Price indices for housing
1 Weighted by transaction. Bundesbank calculations based on 
price  data  provided  by  bulwiengesa  AG.  2 Berlin,  Cologne, 
Düsseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg, Munich and Stutt-
gart.
Deutsche Bundesbank2009 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 202010 = 100, annual data, log scale
95100110120130140150160170180190200210220230
95100110 110120130140150160170
95100110120130140150160170 170180190
95100110120130140150160170
Destatis house price indexHypoport AG composite indexvdp price index for
owner-occupied housingDeutsche Bundesbank1
Quarterlyof which:
7 major cities2Total
127 towns and citiesDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
61

prises from the retail, and hotel and restaurant 
sectors, for example, were distinctly more opti -
mistic about their business situation in January 
than during the first lockdown in April 2020.7 
However, industry could encounter headwinds 
from growing supply bottlenecks for a number 
of intermediate products owing, for example, 
to border closures or stricter border controls. 
On the demand side, private consumption is 
likely to suffer on account not only of the with -
drawal of consumption opportunities during 
the pandemic but also the restoration of VAT 
rates to their original levels. As infection figures 
decline, vaccines become more widely available 
and the containment measures are gradually 
eased, the current drags on growth should 
slowly recede, however. Economic output is 
therefore likely to return to a significantly 
higher level from the second quarter and re -
sume its path of recovery. However, the future 
outlook remains closely linked to developments 
in the pandemic, with the risk of further set -backs stemming from mutations of the virus, in 
particular.
Sentiment in the German economy has dipped 
distinctly of late. According to the ifo Institute, 
the Business Climate Index for Germany deteri -
orated markedly in January 2021. Enterprises’ 
assessment of the business situation and busi -
ness expectations were both contributing fac -
tors here. The main reason for this downturn in 
sentiment is likely to have been the renewed 
tightening of restrictions on economic activity 
brought into force from mid- December 2020 
onwards. For the most part, these new curbs 
had not yet been reflected in the December 
survey. Sentiment in the retail sector, which 
was particularly hard hit by the measures, thus 
collapsed. The business climate deteriorated in 
most other sectors, too. By contrast, sentiment Distinct dip 
in  economic 
sentimentIn terms of housing price valuations, the net 
impact of the coronavirus pandemic was 
limited. According to recent estimates, 
prices in urban areas remained between 
15% and 30% above the level suggested by 
the demographic and economic fundamen-
tals.4 Standard indicators for assessing 
housing price developments suggest that 
the marked price exaggerations in the 
urban housing markets increased some-
what during the coronavirus pandemic in 
the reporting year. The price- rent ratio for 
apartments in towns and cities was more 
than 25% above its long- term mean since 
reunifi  cation in the reporting year; in the 
seven major cities, the ratio was slightly 
more than 35% above its long- term aver-
age.
4 For an explanation of the valuation approaches 
used, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c).
7 At the same time, retailers felt more negatively about 
their situation than they had done in December due to the 
mandatory store closures imposed.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
62

One- off effects relating to COVID- 19 in the HICP in 2021
At the start of the year, there was an unex-
pected sharp rise in consumer prices in Ger-
many. The annual infl  ation rate as measured 
by the Harmonised Index of Consumer 
Prices (HICP) surged from -0.7% in Decem-
ber 2020 to 1.6% in January 2021, an in-
crease of 2.3  percentage points. Prior to 
this, a distinctly higher infl  ation rate had 
been expected owing to the reversal of the 
temporary lowering of VAT rates1 and the 
implementation of measures contained in 
the climate package,2 but the increase was 
far stronger than anticipated in the Decem-
ber forecast and by market participants. 
The jump in the HICP rate was also signifi  -
cantly larger than that of the national con-
sumer price index (CPI), which climbed from 
-0.3% in December to 1.0% in January. The 
unusually large difference of 0.6 percent-
age point between the HICP and CPI rates 
in January –  and equally the expectation 
errors – can be explained for the most part 
by adjustments to the HICP’s weighting 
scheme and the specifi  c way in which the 
index is constructed.3 While the CPI weights 
are normally only updated every fi  ve years, 
the HICP weights are adjusted annually in 
January for the current year in accordance 
with the EU Framework Regulation. The 
HICP weights are essentially based on the 
pattern of consumption expenditure in the 
previous year, which is usually obtained 
from the national accounts.4 This means 
that the annual HICP rate is calculated from two index levels which are based on differ-
ent weightings and therefore are not com-
pletely compatible. This can lead to statis-
tical distortions, which are generally min-
imal when only minor changes are made to 
the weighting scheme.
On account of the coronavirus pandemic, 
however, the adjustments to the HICP 
weighting scheme in 2021 were more ex-
tensive than usual. Households’ patterns of 
expenditure changed signifi  cantly in some 
areas, for example, owing to the restric-
tions caused by the pandemic in 2020. 
Within a year, the expenditure shares for 
food and for other goods excluding energy 
included in the HICP rose by almost 2 per-
centage points and by 1 percentage point, 
respectively, while the weight for services 
dropped by nearly 3 percentage points. By 
Comparison of HICP and CPI
10123
–+++
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 
1 Difference between CPI and HICP at the time of initial public-
ation (real-time data).
Deutsche Bundesbank–0.6–0.30+0.3+0.6Difference1
Enlarged scaleYear-on-year change
Percentage
pointsCPIHICP%
1 The December forecast had assumed that the return 
to the higher VAT rates in January 2021 would be 
passed on in the same way as the temporary lowering 
in July 2020. For more on the estimated pass- through 
in July, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b).
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b).
3 For a description of the coronavirus- related changes 
to the offi   cial methodology for weight updates, see 
Federal Statistical Offi   ce (2021).
4 See Chapter 3 of Eurostat (2018) for information on 
the annual updating of HICP weights.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
63

contrast, the expenditure share of energy 
remained virtually unchanged on balance.
Looking in detail at the goods and services 
contained in the HICP , a number of espe-
cially large weight updates become appar-
ent.5 The clearest drop was in the case of 
package holidays, which were subject to 
particularly tight restrictions. Their weight 
fell by more than 2  percentage points to 
the new level of 1%. The expenditure share 
of clothing and footwear also went down 
markedly, as did that of restaurant visits and 
accommodation services, since, due to the 
pandemic, there was less demand for these goods and services or they were unavail-
able. Consumption of transport fuels was 
probably lower as well, seeing as mobility 
was restricted. Weights were increased pri-
marily for rents, the share of which grew by 
just over 1 percentage point, as well as for 
some basic food products. Aside from these 
ten or so components with especially large 
updates to the HICP weights for 2021, 
which make up just under one- third of the 
current HICP basket of goods and services, 
barely any notable adjustments were made. 
5 This analysis looked at 94 goods and services con-
tained in the HICP (“four- digit” level).HICP by special aggregate
 
ItemHICP weight
Difference 
(‰ points)Average in-
fl  ation rate 1Standard 
deviation 1 2020 2021
(‰) 2011 to 2020
Food incl. alcohol and tobacco 155.5 174.0 18.5 2.2 1.0
Energy 108.7 107.7 –  1.0 0.6 5.7
Non-energy industrial goods 265.6 275.1 9.5 0.8 0.5
Clothing and footwear 51.4 43.8 –  7.6 1.0 1.4
Services 470.3 443.2 – 27.1 1.5 0.6
Package holidays 31.5 10.3 – 21.2 2.9 8.1
Total 1,000 1,000 . 1.3 0.8
1 Based on monthly year-on-year rates in the period from January 2011 to December 2020.
Deutsche Bundesbank
Adjustment of HICP weights in 2021 as a historical comparison, 94 HICP components*
* Decomposition of HICP into 94 components at the “four-digit” level. The ten HICP categories in bold have the highest positive or neg-
ative HICP weight adjustment in 2021. For the five other categories (not in bold), relatively strong weight adjustments were made in 
the past. 1 The HICP weight of “heat energy” fell markedly in 2015 as a large portion of the energy products it contained were alloc-
ated to “gas”. 2 The edges of the grey band denote the strongest positive and negative adjustment to the weight of a HICP category 
between 2010 and 2020. Weight adjustments in 2021 that fall within this band therefore are not exceptionally large by historical 
standards.
Deutsche BundesbankPercentage points
2.01.51.00.500.51.01.5
––––+++
HICP weights 2021 minus 2020GasActual 
rentals
Milk, cheese, eggs
Social protection
TobaccoOther services relating 
to the dwelling n.e.c.
Heat 
energy1Other services 
in respect of 
personal 
transport 
equipmentCultural 
servicesLiquid 
fuels
Package holidaysAccommodation services
Solid fuels
Clothing
Restaurants, cafesMaximum weight adjustment 2010 to 20202Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
64

This is because the weight updates for 
many HICP components were still within 
the range of what has been observed in the 
past few years.6
One way to gauge the impact of the up-
dated weights on the infl  ation rate in 2021 
is to apply the 2021 weights to the Bundes-
bank’s December 2020 infl  ation forecast, 
which was based on the 2020 HICP weight-
ing scheme, and to compare the results. 
The December forecast had predicted the 
HICP infl  ation rate would remain at roughly 
1% overall in the fi  rst half of 2021, before 
temporarily picking up to almost 3% in the 
second half of 2021 on account of the VAT 
base effect, and reaching 1.8% on an an-
nual average. This pattern is only roughly 
maintained when applying the new weight-
ing scheme for 2021, mainly due to pack-
age holidays, which make widely varying 
monthly contributions to the infl  ation rate. 
However, the reason for this is not just the 
updating of the HICP weight for package 
holidays; it is also because the prices of 
package holidays vary a great deal through-
out the year and because of the specifi  c 
way in which the HICP is constructed as a 
chain- linked index with December as the 
link month. These three aspects in combin-
ation produce a statistical effect, which had 
already materialised in 2019, inter alia.7 As a 
result, package holidays made a counterin-
tuitive, strongly positive contribution to the 
infl  ation rate in January, despite a negative 
year- on- year rate. In the HICP , this contribu-
tion can be described as the sum of two 
opposing price movements within the past 
12 months, both of which relate to the link 
month of December 2020.8 Thus, package 
holiday prices rose from January 2020 until 
the usual seasonal peak in December 2020, 
while they fell from December 2020 to 
January 2021.9 The past year’s price rise 
then fed into the calculation of the contri-
bution with the relatively high 2020 HICP weight and thus weighed more heavily than 
the price drop at the start of the year, which 
was accounted for with the lower 2021 
HICP weight. Overall, then, the price in-
crease for package holidays last year out-
weighed the price drop, and thus also made 
a positive contribution to overall infl  ation in 
6 The derivation of HICP weights is not based exclu-
sively on the average consumption patterns of the pre-
vious year. Relative price changes over the course of 
the year are also taken into account. This means that 
very volatile HICP sub- indices can undergo marked 
weight updates solely on the basis of price fl  uctu-
ations.
7 In 2019, however, the weight update was based less 
on changed demand for package holidays and more 
on a methodological change in the HICP sub- index for 
package holidays. See also Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2019a).
8 A sub- component’s contribution to the annual rate 
of the chain- linked HICP can be further broken down 
into a this- year term and a last- year term using the 
Ribe formula. See Chapter 8 of Eurostat (2018).
9 It should be noted that the prices of package holi-
days in most months of 2020 as well as in January 
2021 had to be estimated (“imputed”) because many 
holidays were not being offered at all. See https://
ec.europa.eu/eurostat/de/web/hicp/methodology for 
more information.Updated (HICP) inflation forecast from 
December 2020 with 2021 weights
Source: Bundesbank forecast based on data provided by the 
Federal Statistical Office.
Deutsche BundesbankJ FMAM J J A S OND
20210.51.01.52.02.53.03.5
–0.8–0.6–0.4–0.20+0.2+0.4+0.6+0.8 Annual rates Contribution of 
package holidaysDifference in percentage pointsMonthly data (2020 weighting)
Annual average (2020 weighting)
Monthly data (2021 weighting)
Annual average (2021 weighting)%Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
65

January 2021. Strongly positive one- off ef-
fects relating to package holidays are likely 
to be evident over the course of the year, 
too, with the effect reversing in the summer 
months. On an annual average, the one- off 
effects at the start of the year and in mid- 
year will more or less balance out, meaning 
that the forecast for the average infl  ation 
rate in 2021 ultimately remains unaffected 
by the weight update. In other words, 
when analysing the effects of weights, it is 
necessary to look at the price dynamics of 
the components in question, in addition to 
the update of the weights themselves. 
Strong weight updates for components 
which display fairly average and less volatile 
price dynamics throughout the year are un-
likely to have much effect on the general 
rate of infl  ation. By contrast, signifi  cant up-
dates to the weights of HICP components 
with very volatile prices throughout the year 
can have a marked impact on the path of 
the infl  ation rate.
Overall, the unexpectedly high January rate 
in Germany compared with the December 
forecast can be explained almost entirely by 
the one- off effect relating to package holi-
days. By comparison, the impact of other 
structural effects on the infl  ation rate was 
relatively minor and is also likely to have 
largely dissipated. On balance, the price ef-
fects of the VAT adjustment and the impact 
of the climate package probably matched 
expectations.
A number of other euro area countries also 
saw an unexpectedly strong rise in the infl  a-
tion rate in January. In those countries, this 
unexpected development does not seem to 
be caused primarily by shifts in consump-
tion patterns, but instead by other one- off 
effects such as changes in seasonal sales 
activities or higher electricity costs. Since 
Eurostat did not publish all the updated 
HICP country weights for 2021 until 23 Feb-ruary, however, the precise impact of the 
shifts in weights in the euro area remains 
unclear. Information on the weights is par-
ticularly relevant for the HICP , however, be-
cause it is a chain- linked index always com-
paring index levels that were calculated on 
the basis of differing weights, and this can 
generally lead to distortions in the year- on- 
year rates. To identify the underlying infl  a-
tion trend, it would therefore be extremely 
useful if statistical offi   ces were to provide 
up- to- date information on consumption 
patterns of relevance to the HICP weighting 
scheme in a more timely way in future. This 
is especially true given that a potential nor-
malisation of consumption patterns in 2021 
will entail signifi  cant shifts in the HICP 
weights for some components in 2022 as 
well. In general, weight updates such as 
this are consistent with the HICP Frame-
work Regulation and can help to ensure 
that the HICP is representative in the sense 
that it is based on the most up- to- date bas-
ket of goods and services possible. How-
ever, should such updates to the weights 
lead to strong fl  uctuations of a purely stat-
istical nature in the annual HICP rate, with 
its importance for monetary policy, it would 
be a welcome step if statistical authorities 
could at least improve ways of communi-
cating them in advance.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
66

in the hotel and restaurant sector, which had 
already been heavily impacted by the measures 
from November 2020 onwards, improved 
markedly for the second time in a row. This 
could be the result of possible adjustments in 
the sector due to lessons learnt. The business 
climate in the manufacturing sector deterior -
ated slightly on the month but was neverthe -
less distinctly better than the fourth- quarter 
average. In industry, the business situation and 
short- term expectations for exports and pro -
duction were a marked improvement on De -
cember, whereas business expectations for the 
longer term deteriorated distinctly. Overall, the 
sentiment indicators suggest that industry is 
likely to continue to bolster economic activity 
in the first quarter of 2021. In addition, while 
sentiment in the hotel and restaurant sector 
and the retail trade is very depressed, it is bet -
ter than during the first lockdown in April 2020.
German industry enjoyed healthy order books 
in autumn. Industrial orders rose sharply in the 
final quarter of 2020 compared with the third 
quarter and are now significantly higher than 
before the crisis. There was a substantial in -
crease in demand for intermediate goods and 
computer, electronic and optical products as 
well as in the mechanical engineering sector. 
Broken down by region, growth in new orders 
from non- euro area countries and from Ger -
many was particularly strong. The inflow of 
orders from the euro area also rose consider -
ably, however. According to the ifo Institute’s 
survey results, the assessment of order books in 
the manufacturing sector improved for the sev -
enth time in a row in January and significantly 
exceeded the level of the pre- crisis quarter.
Construction activity is likely to remain favour -
able in the first quarter of 2021. This is signalled 
by orders received by the main construction 
sector, which on an average of October and 
November – the latest period for which statis -
tics are available  – showed a substantial in -
crease on the third quarter after seasonal ad -
justment. The inflow of orders in housing con -
struction rose particularly sharply, with the Positive order 
situation in 
industry
Construction 
activity likely to 
remain favour -
able as 2021 
gets under wayDemand for industrial goods and 
construction services
Source of unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office. 1 Only 
calendar adjusted.
Deutsche Bundesbank2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020859095100105110
758085
510
++
–25–20–15–10–50+5
727580859095100105110115
80859095100105110
Oct.-
Nov.Oct.-
Nov.
9295100105110115120125130
505101520
–++++Volumes, 2015 = 100, seasonally adjusted, quarterly data
Domesticdavon:
Log scaleLin scale
Year-on-year change1Log scale
Industrial orders
Lin scale
Year-on-year change1%
Main construction orders%
%Total
InternationalDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
67

same being true of building permits in that par -
ticular sector. Survey indicators also paint a fa -
vourable picture for the construction sector, al -
though there has been a slight deterioration of 
late. According to the ifo Institute, equipment 
utilisation in the main construction sector de -
clined in January, but was still significantly 
higher than the long- term average. The reach 
of the order books fell only slightly from a very 
high level. However, there has been a distinct 
deterioration in the business climate recently.
Private consumption is likely to decline further 
in the first quarter of 2021. Some contact-  
intensive opportunities for consumption are set 
to remain under tight restrictions until at least 
the beginning of March. This particularly af -
fects the retail trade, the hotel and restaurant sector and other leisure and culture- related ser -
vices. In addition, the restoration of VAT rates 
to their higher levels is likely to exert a damp -
ening effect on private consumption, primarily 
because purchases of consumer durables were 
probably brought forward. January saw a mas -
sive drop in new passenger car registrations by 
private owners, for example, after they had sig -
nificantly overshot the pre- crisis level of the 
final quarter of 2019 between July and Decem -
ber. This is also consistent with the survey re -
sults gathered by the market research institu -
tion Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung (GfK), 
which found that there was a significant de -
cline particularly in consumers’ propensity to 
purchase in January. The GfK consumer climate 
index forecast for February deteriorated as a re -
sult.Private con -
sumption prob -
ably even more 
strongly 
depressed in first 
quarter of 2021
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), The German economy, Monthly Report, November 2020, p. 54.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), Impact of the temporary reduction in VAT on consumer prices, 
 November 2020, pp. 56-57.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), The protracted rise in residential property prices in Germany from 
a macroeconomic perspective: transmission channels and fundamental determinants, Monthly 
 Report, October 2020, pp. 67-85.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019a), Dampening special effect in the HICP in July 2019, Monthly Report, 
August 2019, pp. 57-59.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2019b), The impact of the Climate Package on economic growth and infla -
tion, Monthly Report, December 2019, pp. 29-33.
Eurostat (2018), Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) Methodological Manual, Luxem -
bourg: Publications Office of the European Union, November 2018.
Federal Statistical Office (2021), Impact of the corona crisis on the CPI/  HICP price collection, 
method report of 10  February 2021, https://www.destatis.de/EN/Themes/Economy/Prices/
Consumer-Price-Index/Methods/corona-cpi-hicp.pdf?__blob=publicationFileDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
68

Public finances*
General government budget
German fiscal policy was strongly geared to -
wards tackling the coronavirus crisis in the past 
year. Starting from the first wave of infections 
in March, policymakers took extensive meas -
ures to support the healthcare system, enter -
prises and households. General government in -
vestment also continued to grow at a dynamic 
pace – relative to trend economic output, it 
thus returned to a level last seen in the mid-  
1990s. Furthermore, the automatic stabilisers 
took effect, with tax and social contribution 
shortfalls as a result of the economic downturn 
and lost wage income being offset to some ex -
tent by social benefits.
As a result, a considerable general government 
deficit was recorded. The Federal Statistical Of -
fice’s first calculations published in January put 
it at 4.8% of gross domestic product (GDP). The 
balance had still been positive in 2019, with a 
surplus of 1.5% of GDP being posted (for more 
details on developments, see pp. 70ff.). The de -
terioration was more or less in line with the 
surge in the expenditure ratio (see the adjacent 
chart). This surge was due in large part to the 
economic downturn: nominal GDP in the de -
nominator decreased, whereas wage replace -
ment benefits increased. By contrast, as is usual, 
the revenue ratio changed less due to cyclical 
conditions, as revenue (numerator) and nominal 
GDP (denominator) declined to a similar extent.1By the end of the third quarter of 2020, the 
debt ratio had risen to 70.0% (end- 2019: 
59.6%). The decreased nominal GDP in the ra -
tio’s denominator accounted for 2 percentage 
points of this increase. A far more significant 
contributing factor was debt growth. First, it 
reflected budget deficits. Second, government 
budgets included borrowing to top up de -
posits in net terms – especially at the central 
government level. One particular reason for 
this was presumably to put funds aside as a 
precautionary measure during uncertain crisis Public finances 
played major 
stabilising role 
in 2020
High deficitStrong debt 
growth
General government fiscal ratios and 
main components affecting 
developments *
* General government budget as defined in the national ac-
counts.  1 For  information  on  the  breakdown,  see  pp. 70 ff. 
2 Change in the ratio to trend GDP. 3 In 2020, these largely 
concern the fiscal policy measures implemented in response to 
the coronavirus crisis.
Deutsche Bundesbank2013 14 15 16 17 18 19 20204446485052
–6–4–20+2Revenue
ExpenditureExpenditure
Fiscal balance
Year-on-year change in the ratio to GDP 
in percentage points1
20246
–+++
–6–4–20+2 Fiscal balanceCyclical component
Temporary effects2,3
Other2
TotalAs a percentage of GDP
* The section entitled “General government budget” relates 
to data from the national accounts and the Maastricht 
debt ratio. This is followed by more detailed reporting on 
budgetary developments (government finance statistics). 
No data for the fourth quarter of 2020 are yet available for 
local government or the statutory health and public long- 
term care insurance schemes. These will be analysed in the 
short commentaries in upcoming issues of the Monthly 
Report.
1 Looking at cyclical factors alone, the revenue ratio 
actually increased, as taxes and social contributions were 
less adversely affected by the crisis than nominal GDP . This 
very largely offset the decrease caused by fiscal policy 
measures, especially tax relief measures intended to 
support the economy.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
69

Public fi  nances in 2020: automatic stabilisers and  temporary 
measures strongly supported the economy*
In 2020, developments in Germany’s public fi  -
nances were shaped by the coronavirus crisis. 
As a result, the surplus of 1.5% of gross do-
mestic product (GDP) recorded in 2019 was 
followed by a large defi  cit. According to the 
preliminary data from January, this defi  cit 
amounted to 4.8% of GDP . This box outlines 
the impact of cyclical, special temporary and 
other (structural) effects on this development. 
It is important to note that the data are cur-
rently subject to greater uncertainty than 
usual.1 It is likely that subsequent revisions to 
the fi  gures given here will thus be more sig-
nifi  cant as a result.
Economic downturn had signifi  cant 
 impact
While the cyclical impact on the government 
budget was still positive in 2019, the corona-
virus pandemic caused it to turn signifi  cantly 
negative in 2020. The economic downturn led to a fall in taxes and placed a dampener on 
social contributions. At the same time, ex-
penditure on short- time working and un-
employment benefi  t rose substantially. These 
factors acted as automatic stabilisers to coun-
ter the economic downturn, i.e. they took ef-
fect without any additional government meas-
ures. Calculations using the Bundesbank’s 
methodology show that unfavourable cyclical 
infl  uences caused the general government fi  s-
cal balance to deteriorate by 2¼% of GDP in 
2020 (see also the table on p. 71, row “Cyc-
lical component”).
Temporary burdens due to extensive 
 support measures
Fiscal policy measures to tackle the corona-
virus crisis had an even greater impact than 
cyclical developments. These pandemic re-
sponse measures were designed to be tem-
porary, meaning that their negative infl  uence 
on the government budget is also temporary. 
Their aim is to support the healthcare system, 
enterprises and households and to stabilise 
the economy.2 These measures combined in-
creased the government defi  cit in 2020 by an 
estimated 3% of GDP (see the adjacent chart 
and the table on p. 71, row “Special tempor-
ary effects”).Temporary coronavirus response 
measures in 2020*
* Bundesbank  estimates.  Transfers  to  enterprises  and  house-
holds comprise all measures that provide comprehensive relief 
and do not entail any repayment obligation. 1 Special tax rules 
that shift enterprises' tax payments along the time axis.
Deutsche Bundesbank00.51.01.52.02.53.03.5As a percentage of GDP
Reduction in VAT 
ratesSpending on 
health protection
Transfers 
to enterprisesLiquidity assistance 
for enterprises1Transfers 
to households* The calculations are based on the January national 
accounts fi  gures and also include assumptions about 
future developments. See Deutsche Bundesbank 
(2006) for methodological notes on the analytical ap-
proach used here.
1 For example, cash infl  ows from tax revenue in 2020, 
data for which are now available, exceed the offi   cial 
tax estimate made in November 2020. These usually 
feed into the preliminary national accounts fi  gures. In 
addition, the effects of the coronavirus crisis on 
medium- term economic developments, and thus also 
the current deviations from the trend level, are diffi   cult 
to gauge. Furthermore, not all pandemic- related tem-
porary effects on the government budget can be sep-
arated from structural developments. These include 
lower expenditure on medical treatments unrelated to 
COVID- 19 and a loss of revenue from fees due to tem-
porary closures of public institutions.
2 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), pp. 21-23 for 
more details on the fi  scal policy coronavirus response 
measures.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
70

Support measures for enterprises were the 
largest item in terms of quantity. Of these 
measures, by far the largest share was ac-
counted for by the immediate assistance for 
small businesses, the self- employed and free-
lancers. In addition, the Federal Employment 
Agency paid enterprises’ social contributions 
for recipients of short- time working benefi  ts.3 
Various special tax arrangements boosted en-
terprises’ liquidity. Households were sup-
ported primarily via a bonus child benefi  t pay-
ment. In addition, VAT rates were lowered in 
the second half of 2020. Health protection 
measures comprised additional expenditure 
on personal protective equipment, intensive 
care beds, promoting the development of 
vaccines and providing information to the 
general public. Furthermore, central govern-
ment made compensation payments to hos-
pitals for keeping beds unoccupied. Other 
parts of the healthcare sector received com-
pensation for the reduced demand for certain 
services caused by the pandemic and their re-
sulting losses of income.Moderate deterioration in the structural 
balance
Adjusting for the cyclical and temporary 
coronavirus response measures outlined 
above reveals the structural deterioration in 
the government budget,4 which is less strong. 
The structural fi  scal balance declined by ¾% 
of GDP (see the table above, row “Fiscal bal-
ance”). The government budget thus stabil-
ised the economy primarily via the temporary 
coronavirus response measures and the effect 
of the automatic stabilisers.
The structural deterioration in the fi  scal bal-
ance was due in roughly equal measure to a 
falling revenue ratio and a rising expenditure Structural development of the government budget*
Year-on-year change in the ratio to trend GDP in percentage points
Item 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 20202019 
in rela-
tion to 
2012
Unadjusted fi  scal balance 1 0.0 0.5 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.5 – 0.3 – 6.3 1.5
Cyclical component 1 – 0.5 0.1 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.3 – 0.2 – 2.3 0.6
Special temporary effects 1 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.3 0.2 0.1 – 3.1 0.1
Fiscal balance 0.4 0.6 0.1 – 0.2 0.2 0.0 – 0.2 – 0.8 0.8
Interest payable – 0.5 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 1.5
Primary balance – 0.1 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.0 – 0.7
Revenue 0.0 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.3 – 0.5 1.9
Taxes and social contributions 0.1 0.0 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.3 0.3 – 0.2 2.0
Fiscal drag 2 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.7
Decoupling of macroeconomic 
reference variables from GDP 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.4
Legislative changes – 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.6
Residual 0.2 – 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.4 0.3 0.3 – 0.1 1.5
Other revenue 3 – 0.1 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1
Primary expenditure 0.1 – 0.2 0.2 0.8 0.4 0.6 0.6 0.4 2.5
Social payments – 0.2 0.1 0.3 0.5 0.4 0.1 0.3 0.0 1.4
Subsidies 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0
Compensation of employees 0.0 0.0 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2
Intermediate consumption 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.4
Gross fi  xed capital formation – 0.1 – 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3
Other expenditure 4 0.3 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.1 – 0.1 0.2 0.1 0.1 0.3
* The structural fi  gures are derived by adjusting for cyclical infl  uences and special temporary effects. 1 Change in the ratio to 
GDP . 2 The term “fi  scal drag” encompasses the positive revenue effect of bracket creep in income taxation and the negative 
impact of the fact that specifi  c excise duties are largely independent of prices. 3 Other current transfers receivable, sales and 
total capital revenue. 4 Other current transfers payable, other net acquisitions of non- fi  nancial assets and capital transfers pay-
able.
Deutsche Bundesbank
3 Expenditure on short- time working benefi  ts accruing 
to employees is largely included in the category of cyc-
lical infl  uences (similarly to employment benefi  t I).
4 When comparing the calculations of the Federal 
Government with those of the European Commission, 
it is important to note that the Commission’s fi  gure for 
the structural fi  scal balance does not factor out the 
temporary coronavirus response measures.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
71

conditions. Third, debt growth of just under 
1% of GDP was generated by crisis support, 
which was accompanied by financial asset ac -
quisitions (and thus recorded as having no im -
pact on the  deficit). This debt comprises 
government- guaranteed assistance loans, 
which are refinanced in large part by the Eco -
nomic Stabilisation Fund, and government 
stakes in individual firms. The debt ratio may 
have stood at around 70% at the end of 2020, 
too. Some deposits that had previously been 
topped up appear to have been used in the 
fourth quarter to cover deficits and bring debt 
back down somewhat.
Given that it is very difficult to predict the fu -
ture course of the pandemic, the outlook for 
government finances this year remains ex -
tremely uncertain. As things stand, the deficit is 
likely to be roughly on a par with the one seen 
in 2020. Some parts of the economy will ini -
tially continue to feel the debilitating force of 
the restrictions in place. Accordingly, numerous support measures that are of a fundamentally 
temporary nature will either remain in force or 
be adapted and prolonged. In addition, meas -
ures implemented in 2020 will have a delayed 
impact in some cases. All in all, however, the 
temporary strains stemming from economic 
developments and time- limited support meas -
ures will diminish somewhat. However, there 
are new structural budgetary burdens working 
in the other direction, stemming notably from 
the partial abolition of the solidarity surcharge 
and a significant raising of child benefits. The 
debt ratio could remain around the 70% mark 
this year: while new borrowing will inflate the 
ratio, a return to nominal GDP growth in the 
denominator will push it down.
A significant drop in the deficit and debt ratios 
is therefore on the horizon over the coming 
years. This is because, as things stand, the 
economy will recover further and many sup -
port measures will no longer be in place. 
Nevertheless, a structural deficit can be ex -2021: deficit 
and debt ratio 
expected to be 
on similar scale 
as in 2020Public finances 
will recover as 
crisis subsides, 
but structural 
deficit still 
foreseeable ratio. On the revenue side, there was, for ex-
ample, a decline in receipts from fees. This re-
fl  ected the fact that many public institutions 
were subject to temporary closures as a result 
of contact restrictions. In addition, there were 
cuts to income taxes (particularly via the Fam-
ily Relief Act (Familienentlastungsgesetz)), to 
the contribution rate to the unemployment in-
surance scheme and to health insurance con-
tributions on occupational pensions. On the 
expenditure side, although interest expenses 
continued to fall, personnel expenditure and 
fi  xed asset formation experienced dynamic 
growth. Moreover, substantial additional 
funds were transferred to the EU budget at 
the end of the seven- year planning period. It 
is important to note that medical services that 
were not used or were merely postponed had 
a temporary easing effect on the structural 
balance. This special effect is likely to have 
been larger than the aforementioned special 
effect relating to receipts from fees.Government budget broadly back in 
 balance in structural terms
The current assessment is that, in structural 
terms, the government budget closed 2020 
broadly in balance. The actual defi  cit is thus 
essentially explained by the unfavourable eco-
nomic conditions and the temporary corona-
virus response measures. This brought the 
phase of structural surpluses that began in 
2013 to an end. During this period, the sharply 
rising structural social contributions ratio and 
falling interest expenditure had a very signifi  -
cant easing effect on public fi  nances. Mean-
while, however, there was high expenditure 
growth in other areas – primarily in pensions, 
healthcare and long- term care. Government 
investment spending also increased consider-
ably; having experienced dynamic growth in 
recent years, the latest fi  gures put it at 2½% 
in relation to trend GDP , its highest point since 
the mid- 1990s.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
72

pected in the medium term in the absence of 
any further adjustments. For 2022, for ex -
ample, many of the projections published since 
the fourth quarter of 2020 indicate a structural 
deficit of around 2% of GDP . In light of the 
economic recovery and the foreseeable in -
crease in contribution rates, taxes and contri -
butions are expected to rise significantly. The 
structural tax and social contributions ratio 
could thus potentially come close to the record 
high reached in 2000. However, spending is 
also likely to experience dynamic growth. Add -
itional funds have been – and are continuing 
to be, irrespective of the COVID-  19 crisis – ear -
marked for areas including education, climate 
policy and digitalisation. Moreover, expend -
iture on pensions, healthcare and long- term 
care is growing rapidly in the wake of political 
decisions and as a result of demographic 
change. The structural primary expenditure 
ratio (total expenditure excluding interest) 
could thus hit a new record high in the next 
few years.2 By contrast, interest expenditure is 
likely to remain exceptionally low, despite the 
higher debt level. This is due to the very fa -
vourable financing conditions that have been 
maintained for several years now.
Overall, it is appropriate for fiscal policy to re -
main focused on stabilisation at first in order to 
deal with the crisis as effectively as possible. 
That said, crisis support should remain tempor -
ary in nature. In general, it is important to keep 
an eye on medium- term fiscal challenges when 
considering permanent additional expenditure 
or revenue decreases. A good way to anchor a 
multitiered policy of this sort consists of fiscal 
rules that provide fiscal leeway in a crisis while 
at the same time ensuring a solid outlook for 
public finances. In principle, this could take 
various forms. This two- pronged objective has 
been catered for in both the European fiscal 
rules and the German debt brake.
The extent to which the fiscal rules will necessi -
tate fiscal consolidation after the coronavirus 
crisis is currently difficult to gauge. However, 
the latest projections indicate that the add -itional need for action by the government as a 
whole as a result of the crisis does not appear 
exceptionally great. Moreover, the rules allow 
the necessary overall consolidation to be spread 
out over a period of years. Under EU rules, a 
country’s non- compliance with its medium-  
term objective may be corrected gradually ra -
ther than all at once. Under the national debt 
brake, consolidation can be spread out over 
time by making use of the large reserves. At 
present, however, the first item on the agenda 
is to tackle the pandemic. In any case, the cen -
tral government budget for 2022 will not be 
adopted until after the German general elec -
tion. At that point, it should be possible to bet -
ter assess the success of the vaccination pro -
gramme, in particular, and to more reliably 
evaluate the general economic recovery pro -
cess.
Regardless of the COVID-  19 crisis, the social se -
curity funds will require considerable structural 
adjustment in the future. This is mainly the re -
sult of demographic change, but also of the ex -
tensive benefit increases adopted over the last 
few years. Contribution rates are therefore ex -
pected to rise sharply – first for the health in -
surance scheme and then for the pension and 
long- term care insurance schemes. It will be 
key here to set out a roadmap for social contri -
bution rates, government funds and the level 
of benefits going forward. Without further ad -
justment, the central government budget is un -
likely to have the capacity to take on additional 
structural burdens here.Focus still on cri -
sis management 
while keeping 
an eye on 
medium- term 
challengesAs things stand 
today, post- crisis 
need for con -
solidation not 
excessive and to 
span multiple 
years
Social security 
funds under 
financing 
pressure 
2 In the period from 1991 to 2020, the structural tax and 
social contributions ratio reached its peak of 42% in 2000, 
while the structural primary expenditure ratio hit a high of 
46½% in 1991. In 2020, these figures stood at 41% and 
45½%, respectively. In the case of structural ratios, specific 
temporary effects (such as one- off expenditure in response 
to the coronavirus pandemic) and cyclical effects are 
disregarded (estimated using the Bundesbank framework; 
see pp. 70 ff.).Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
73

Budgetary development 
of central, state and local 
government
Tax revenue
Tax revenue3 went down by 7½% in 2020 (see 
the above chart and the table on p. 75). Be -
sides the economic downturn stemming from 
the coronavirus pandemic, this was also the re -
sult of tax cuts, most of which were measures 
to mitigate the fallout from the crisis. To wit, 
VAT was temporarily cut in the second half of 
the year and a bonus child benefit payment 
was made. However, revenue was considerably 
higher than projected in the official tax esti -
mate of November 2020 (+€9 billion). The rate 
of change was thus 1½  percentage points 
more favourable than in the official estimate. 
The positive deviations are spread across the 
major individual taxes and, as a positive base 
effect, are likely to raise expectations to a large 
extent for the current year.
Just under half of the tax revenue shortfall was 
attributable to VAT (-10%). One of the main 
reasons for this was that private consumption 
has declined significantly during the pandemic. 
Unlike in the 2008-09 financial and economic 
crisis, it has not had a stabilising effect on rev -enue. The VAT cuts were another key factor in 
this. However, their impact had not yet been 
fully felt, as VAT is paid with a lag of up to two 
months. Wage tax fell by 4½%. Lost wages 
due to short- time working were a major con -
tributing factor here.4 Added to this was a 
bonus child benefit payment together with the 
fact that child benefits were raised in mid- 2019: 
both are deducted from wage tax revenue. The 
raising of tax allowances and shifting to the 
right of the income tax scale5 at the start of 
2020 likewise had a dampening effect on rev -
enue. All in all, profit- related taxes fell consider -
ably owing to the decline in economic activity, 
with corporation tax being most affected 
(-24%).
The tax estimate of November 2020 forecast 
revenue growth of 6½% (including local gov -
ernment taxes) for the current year. Slower 
growth is then expected in the years thereafter. 
On the one hand, the more favourable 2020 
outturn than the one projected in the Novem -
ber estimate is likely to raise revenue expect -
ations markedly. On the other hand, the slightly 
more unfavourable economic prospects in the 
Federal Government’s latest macroeconomic 
projection from the start of the year will lower 
them somewhat.
Tax cuts that have been implemented in the 
meantime will also have an impact: in particu -
lar, the November estimate did not take ac -
count of the fact that tax allowances and the 
income tax scale have been adjusted for 2021 
and 2022 and that child benefits were raised 
significantly at the start of the year. In order to 
improve their liquidity position, enterprises can 
– in much the same way as last year – have 
special advance VAT payments deferred for one Tax revenue 
down signifi -
cantly in 2020
Measures taken 
to combat 
COVID-  19 crisis 
cause VAT, wage 
tax and profit- 
related taxes to 
drop sharplyStarting in 2021, 
tax revenue still 
under pressure 
from corona -
virus crisis 
and …
… fresh tax cutsTax revenue*
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance. * Comprises joint taxes as 
well as central government taxes and state government taxes. 
Including EU shares in German tax revenue, including customs 
duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes.
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 2019 202020151050510
––––++Year-on-year percentage change, quarterly figures
3 Including EU shares in German tax revenue but excluding 
receipts from local government taxes, which are not yet 
known for the year.
4 Short- time working reduces wages, and short- time 
working benefits themselves are not taxed. However, they 
are factored in when determining an individual’s tax rate 
(Progressionsvorbehalt ), which will probably bolster 
assessed income tax somewhat, especially this year.
5 When the scale is shifted to the right, the rising tax rates 
that it contains then apply as of higher income brackets.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
74

year on request. Taken by themselves, these 
and other measures will reduce the tax revenue 
generated in 2021 by 2% compared with the 
last official estimate. Next year, shortfalls will 
be smaller, at 1%, as this year’s special advance 
VAT payments will probably have been made at 
that point (without these being offset by sub -
sequent deferrals). In the medium term, tax 
revenue will then be 1½% lower due to the tax 
cuts made since the tax estimate was prepared. 
Further legislative changes are in the pipeline: 
for instance, the governing coalition agreed in 
early February to extend the VAT rate cut on 
restaurant meals until the end of 2022. A bonus 
child benefit payment of €150 per child will be 
made this year. By contrast, tax loss carrybacks 
were only increased rather than being ex -
panded to cover years before 2019 or to in -
clude local business tax. Hopes for a more sign -
ficant expansion of this targeted rapid assis -
tance for crisis-hit businesses were thus not ful -
filled. The package will result in tax revenue 
shortfalls of around €4½ billion (½% of tax rev -enue) this year and €3 billion next year. In add -
ition, giving firms the ability to write off IT 
equipment more quickly is currently being dis -
cussed.
Overall, tax revenue will thus fall significantly 
short of pre- crisis expectations in the medium 
term, too.6
Central government budget
According to preliminary figures, central gov -
ernment posted a very large deficit of €131 bil -
lion at the end of the pandemic year of 2020 
(2019: surplus of €13 billion). Additional spend -
ing directed, inter alia, at central government 
off- budget entities, the Federal Employment 
Agency and local government, placed a heavy Taxes short of 
pre- crisis expect -
ations in 
medium term
Very large deficit 
in 2020 due to 
COVID-  19 
pandemic Tax revenue
 
Type of taxYear as a wholeEstimate 
for 2020 1Q4
2019 2020 2019 2020
Year-on-year changeYear- on- 
year 
change 
%Year-on-year change
€ billion € billion % € billion € billion %
Tax revenue, total 2 735.9 682.3 – 53.5 –  7.3 –  8.5 196.3 186.3 – 10.0 –  5.1
of which:
Wage tax 219.7 209.3 – 10.4 –  4.7 –  5.1 60.6 57.7 –  3.0 –  4.9
Profi  t-related taxes 124.4 111.5 – 12.8 – 10.3 – 15.1 29.0 31.4 +  2.4 +  8.4
Assessed income tax 3 63.7 59.0 –  4.7 –  7.4 –  8.9 16.6 16.1 –  0.4 –  2.6
Corporation tax 32.0 24.3 –  7.7 – 24.2 – 34.1 7.1 8.0 +  0.9 + 12.4
Non- assessed taxes 
on earnings 23.5 21.5 –  2.0 –  8.5 – 15.1 4.0 5.6 +  1.6 + 40.6
Withholding tax on 
interest income  and 
capital  gains 5.1 6.8 +  1.6 + 31.4 + 25.3 1.3 1.6 +  0.4 + 27.9
VAT4 243.3 219.5 – 23.8 –  9.8 – 10.1 62.7 55.3 –  7.4 – 11.7
Other consumption- 
related taxes 5 93.0 90.1 –  2.9 –  3.1 –  3.8 27.9 27.3 –  0.6 –  2.2
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Working Party on Tax Revenue Estimates and Bundesbank calculations. 1  According to offi   cial tax 
estimate of November 2020. 2 Comprises joint taxes as well as central government taxes and state government taxes. Including EU shares 
in German tax revenue, including customs duties, but excluding receipts from local government taxes. 3 Employee refunds deducted from 
revenue. 4 VAT and import VAT. 5  Taxes on energy, tobacco, insurance, motor vehicles, electricity, alcohol, air traffi   c, coffee, sparkling 
wine, intermediate products, alcopops, betting and lottery, beer and fi  re protection.
Deutsche Bundesbank
6 For more details on the official tax estimate, see Deutsche 
Bundesbank (2020b), pp. 63 ff.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
75

strain on the budget in the final quarter of the 
year, in particular.
Revenue fell by 11% (-€41 billion) last year, due 
primarily to lower tax revenue. Expenditure 
rose by 28% (+€103 billion). Payments to cen -
tral government off- budget entities grew by a 
particularly large amount (+€31 billion). Much 
of this sum was used to finance the Energy and 
Climate Fund in advance. Payments to state 
governments rose by €23 billion. These were 
used to provide extensive support to local gov -
ernments and hospitals, in particular. The social 
security funds received a €9 billion increase in 
transfers, of which just over half was special 
funds for the health fund and the long- term 
care insurance scheme. Furthermore, the Fed -
eral Employment Agency was granted a loan to 
balance its budget (€7 billion). Transfers to en -
terprises went up by €20 billion and largely 
took the form of emergency and bridging aid.7 
Investment grants and other operating expend -
iture (such as purchases of personal protective 
equipment) likewise went up sharply. By con -
trast, interest expenditure fell substantially due 
to the large- scale issuance of Federal securities 
seeing even higher premiums being collected 
overall.
While there was a very sharp year- on- year de -
terioration in the budget balance, it was still 
€87 billion better than projected in the second 
supplementary budget passed in the summer 
of 2020. Less unfavourable economic condi -
tions contributed to a €19 billion improvement 
in tax revenue. Spending was €67 billion below 
authorised expenditure limits, with €25 billion 
less than allotted being spent on business aid 
alone. Including advance payments for Novem -
ber and December aid, only €4 billion (just 
under one-sixth of allotted funds) was spent on 
the sub-item bridging aid. The application 
deadline had not yet passed at the end of the 
period under review, and barely one- third of 
the aid applied for had been paid out. Invest -
ment expenditure (according to the broad 
budgetary definition) was €21 billion lower 
than budgeted. However, this did not have a strong impact on fixed asset formation. In -
stead, almost no claims from guarantees had 
to be paid out, though these had been put at 
€7 billion. The €6 billion recapitalisation of 
Deutsche Bahn was postponed to this year. Fi -
nally, the loan to the Federal Employment 
Agency and the investment grants were signifi -
cantly smaller than envisaged. In the case of 
the basic allowance for job seekers, payments 
were €9 billion lower than budgeted. It would 
appear that the rate of additional take- up fol -
lowing the relaxation of eligibility criteria was 
heavily overestimated. The Federal Ministry of 
Health spent €3 billion less than was allotted 
for personal protective equipment and medica -
tion. Lower interest expenditure brought €3 
billion in relief due to premiums being higher 
than expected.
The high level of borrowing was made possible 
by activating the debt brake’s escape clause. It 
had been envisaged that the standard limit 
would be exceeded by €119 billion. At €39 bil -
lion, the amount by which the limit was over -
shot was ultimately far lower.8 As a result, the 
annual repayments to be made between 2023 
and 2042 are only €2 billion rather than the ex -
pected €6 billion. The main reason for the 
more favourable outcome was that the amount 
borrowed was €87 billion less than envisaged. 
In addition, the surpluses generated by the off- 
budget entities that are included in the debt 
brake were €9 billion higher. The fact that 
smaller than envisaged amounts of net funds 
borrowed were attributable to the cyclical bur -
den and financial transactions had a negative 
impact (+€8 billion in each case), however. The 
former was due to better than expected eco -
nomic developments, while the latter related to 
the postponement of Deutsche Bahn’s recapit -
alisation and the smaller loan to the Federal 
Employment Agency.Year- on- year 
comparison: 
 revenue down 
sharply and 
expenditure 
soaring
Compared to 
second supple -
mentary budget, 
budget balance 
far betterRepayment 
obligation  in 
connection with 
debt brake: 
€2 billion per 
year from 2023 
to 2042 and far 
lower than 
expected
7 The funds were ultimately directed to enterprises via 
state governments. That is why this aid was initially 
recorded in state government budgets as revenue from 
central government.
8 The final figure will be determined in early September on 
the basis of the revised national accounts data. Significant 
changes are not expected.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
76

Central government envisages net borrowing 
of just under €180 billion for the current year. 
In view of the further intensification of efforts 
to combat the pandemic, the September draft 
expenditure framework was expanded signifi -
cantly in the final deliberations at the end of 
November. In particular, funds for business aid 
(+€38 billion), general provisioning (+€30 bil -
lion) and healthcare expenditure (+€11 billion 
for vaccines, personal protective equipment 
and unoccupied hospital beds, for example) 
were topped up. Furthermore, the postponed 
recapitalisation of Deutsche Bahn was factored 
into the budget planning (+€6 billion). The 
credit limit imposed under the debt brake is 
now set to be exceeded by €164 billion. The 
necessary repayments envisaged from 2026 to 
2042 amount to €10 billion each year. As 
things currently stand, however, the budget 
should close the year with a much better result. 
Some of the relief afforded by 2020’s more fa -
vourable budget outturn, for instance, is con -
tinuing to take effect, and very large amounts 
have been earmarked for general provisioning 
and business aid. The decisions taken by the 
coalition committee on 3 February will use only 
a small portion of these funds: the child bonus 
and one- time payments for recipients of the 
basic allowance, each totalling €150, increased 
tax loss carryback options, the extension of the 
VAT rate cut for restaurants and of the ex -
panded entitlement to basic allowance benefits 
as well as additional aid for those in cultural 
professions could cost central government 
around €3 billion in total. Other announced 
additional spending, for instance on vaccines 
and the public long- term care insurance 
scheme in the order of €10 billion does not 
change the overall picture, either.
In its fiscal plan of autumn 2020, the German 
Federal Government expressed its intention to 
return to the normal fiscal rules as of 2022. In 
March, it will adopt the benchmark figures for 
the 2022 budget and for the fiscal plan up to 
2025. Here it is important to transparently 
present any additional budgetary burdens that 
are planned. Additionally, it should be clearly shown how the reserves have been planned 
into the budget and what degree of financial 
consolidation is required in the medium term 
from today’s perspective.
In March too, however, budgetary prospects 
are still likely to be very uncertain. The need for 
action may therefore change significantly in ei -
ther direction. Furthermore, the focus is cur -
rently on the ongoing need for fiscal support in 
response to the pandemic. Under these circum -
stances, the government does not yet have to 
make concrete consolidation decisions for the 
benchmark figures. However, it is important 
that the estimated need for action does not get 
overlooked – for example, in election cam -
paigns and government programmes. Accord -
ing to current expectations, the pandemic will 
subside in Germany during the course of this 
year. The most recent Federal Government fi -
nancial plan therefore does not include any fur -
ther activation of the debt brake escape clause 
as of 2022. Pursuant to the plan, the budget Very large deficit 
planned for 
2021, too, but 
more favourable 
result possible, 
not least due 
to factored- in 
buffers
Benchmark fig -
ures for subse -
quent years 
should identify 
need for action 
to comply with 
debt brake from 
today’s perspec -
tiveConsolidation 
measures not 
yet necessaryCentral government fiscal balance *
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Fe-
deral Ministry of Finance. * Core budget excluding off-budget 
entities. Not adjusted for financial transactions or cyclical ef-
fects. Since 2019, interest expenditure due at the beginning of 
July has been assigned to the second quarter.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q4755025025
–––+
–125–100–75–50–250+25
2018
20202018Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192019€ billion
2020Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
77

gap would have to be closed in the draft 
budget for 2022 by the next Federal Govern -
ment. The extensive reserves could then be 
used to smooth the adjustment in harmony 
with economic developments.
Central government’s off- budget entities con -
cluded 2020 with a deficit of €6 billion (exclud -
ing the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund 
(SoFFin), bad banks and other entities that use 
commercial double- entry bookkeeping),9 hav-
ing posted a surplus of €5 billion the previous 
year. Outflows of €40 billion from the Eco -
nomic Stabilisation Fund, largely for refinancing 
coronavirus assistance loans offered by the KfW banking group, were the decisive factor in 
this deficit. The Economic Stabilisation Fund’s 
total authorised borrowing limit of €200 billion 
therefore still affords considerable scope for 
further aid. The Energy and Climate Fund re -
corded a high surplus of €25 billion (budgeted 
figure: €20 billion); it received extensive finan - Central govern -
ment’s off- 
budget entities 
recorded clear 
deficit in 2020 
owing to Eco -
nomic Stabilisa -
tion FundKey central government budget data in connection with the debt brake*
€ billion
Item2019 2020 2021
Actual Second sup-
plementary 
budget Actual Budget
 1. Expenditure 1 343.2 508.5 441.8 498.6
 of which:
 Investment 38.1 71.3 50.3 61.9
 Global spending increases/cuts – –   2.3 – 26.3
 2. Revenue 1,2 356.5 290.4 311.1 318.6
 of which:
 Tax revenue 1 329.0 264.4 283.3 292.8
 Global revenue increases/shortfalls – – – –   3.0
 3. Fiscal balance (2.–1.) 13.3 – 218.1 – 130.7 – 180.1
 4. Coin seigniorage 0.2 0.3 0.2 0.2
 5. Transfer to (–)/withdrawal from (+) reserves – 13.5 – – –
 6. Net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) (3.+4.+5.) – – 217.8 – 130.5 – 179.8
 7. Cyclical component in the budget procedure –  2.7 –  53.6 –  45.3 –  12.8
 8. Balance of fi  nancial transactions 0.0 –  14.6 –   6.6 –   8.5
 9. Balance of relevant off-budget entities 0.7 19.1 27.7 –  17.8
 Energy and Climate Fund 1.8 20.4 25.3 –  13.8
 Flood Assistance Fund –  0.6 –   0.7 –   0.4 –   0.3
 Fund to Promote Municipal Investment –  0.9 –   1.3 –   1.0 –   1.4
 Digitalisation Fund 0.3 –   1.0 1.3 –   1.8
 Fund for Primary School-Age Childcare Provision 1.8 2.5 –   0.4
10. Structural net borrowing (–)/repayment (+) (6.–7.–8.+9.) 3.3 – 130.4 –  50.9 – 176.3
11. Amount exceeding ceiling (12.–10.) 118.7 39.1 164.2
12. Regular ceiling: structural net borrowing (0.35% of GDP) 3 – 11.5 –  11.7 –  11.7 –  12.1
13. Structural fi  scal balance (3.–7.–8.+9.) 16.7 – 130.8 –  51.1 – 176.5
  as above, with estimate of potential output according to Annual 
Economic Report for 2021 1.7 – 154.9 –  66.9 – 172.5
14. Balance of the general reserve 48.2 48.2 48.2 48.2
15. Balance of the control account 52.0 52.0 52.0 52.0
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. * For methodological notes, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2016). 1 After 
deduction of supplementary central government grants, shares of energy tax revenue, compensation under the 2009 reform of motor 
vehicle tax and consolidation/budgetary recovery assistance to federal states, excluding transfers to/withdrawals from reserves. 2 Exclud-
ing coin seigniorage. 3 Based on gross domestic product in the year before the comprehensive budget is prepared.
Deutsche Bundesbank
9 According to figures from the Federal Ministry of Finance. 
The Federal Ministry of Finance does not publish quarterly 
data for off- budget entities that keep commercial accounts, 
such as the bad bank FMS Wertmanagement. The deficit 
generated by SoFFin, which uses a single- entry accounting 
system, has also been excluded here. SoFFin has been 
taking out loans since 2019 and lending these funds to 
FMS Wertmanagement, which uses them to refinance 
legacy debt. Overall, therefore, SoFFin’s deficit does not 
increase central government’s consolidated debt level.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
78

cing for future expenditure from the central 
government budget upfront and paid out only 
three- fifths of the planned expenditure amount. 
The prefinancing of future spending also re -
sulted in a total surplus of €4 billion for the 
Digitalisation Fund and the All- day Schools 
Fund. While prefinancing off- budget entities 
with new central government loans is incon -
sistent with the principle of annuality, it does 
not circumvent debt brake rules, as these spe -
cial funds are included in the debt brake.
A high deficit of €14 billion is forecast for the 
Energy and Climate Fund in the current year. In 
addition to climate measures, an €11 billion 
grant to stabilise the renewable energy (EEG) 
levy imposed on electricity prices will be paid. 
Further aid is likely to be taken up from the 
Economic Stabilisation Fund on account of the 
ongoing coronavirus pandemic. Return flows 
from, for instance, repayments of assistance 
loans will also probably remain limited, making 
a further deficit plausible. Overall, together 
with the planned outflows from the funds, the 
deficit for off- budget entities recorded last year 
would then be significantly exceeded. How -
ever, it remains to be seen whether there will 
be substantial delays once again in implement -
ing the planned projects.
State government budgets10
The federal states’ core budgets finished 2020 
with a very high deficit of €39 billion. In the 
previous year, they had posted a surplus of €13 
billion. Missing data on the federal states’ off- 
budget entities need to be incorporated in 
order to draw a comprehensive picture. Exten -
sive pandemic-  related payments between the 
core budgets and off- budget entities are cur -
rently making it significantly more difficult to 
assess the budgetary situation. The data avail -
able to date indicate that the off- budget en -
tities recorded a sizeable surplus.11
Revenue rose by almost 8% over the year as a 
whole.12 Tax revenue declined by 5% on ac -count of the coronavirus crisis. Revenue re -
ceived from public administrations, by contrast, 
saw substantial gains of 51%. This was chiefly 
due to government funds to be paid out as 
coronavirus assistance to enterprises and to 
local government. Compensation payments for 
unoccupied hospital beds forwarded from cen -
tral government also made an impact. In add -
ition, state governments made transfers from 
special funds to core budgets. These outflows 
were financed in part by loans taken up by the 
special funds and thus eased the strain on the Increased deficit 
foreseeable for 
2021 chiefly due 
to stabilisation  
of renewable 
energy (EEG) 
levy
Core budgets 
ended 2020 
with very high 
deficitRise in revenue 
and expenditure 
chiefly due to 
transfers 
between public 
administrationsState government fiscal balance*
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on monthly data from 
the Federal Ministry of Finance. * Federal states' core budgets 
excluding off-budget entities.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q430201001020
–––++
–40–30–20–100+10+20+30
2018
20202018Quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year
20192020
2019€ billion
10 The figures are based on the monthly cash statistics on 
the core budgets.
11 According to quarterly data, a core budget deficit of 
€25 billion was recorded after three quarters, vis-  à- vis a 
surplus of €8 billion for off- budget entities.
12 The changes to financial relations between central and 
state government agreed prior to the coronavirus crisis to 
take effect from 2020 had a negligible effect on state 
government finances – taken in isolation, the changes to 
the state government revenue- sharing scheme increased 
the states’ total receipts. At the same time, however, 
transfers from central government stopped, and the 
increased share of local business tax transferred to state 
government expired.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
79

core budgets. Total expenditure went up by 
21%, with payments to public administrations 
surging in particular (+36%). Additional trans -
fers to local government played a major role 
here,13 with central government payments to 
compensate for shortfalls in local business tax 
being almost doubled by state government 
payments of €5 billion. In addition, some fed -
eral states evidently prefinanced special funds, 
into which they incorporated coronavirus-  
related financial flows, on a large scale. Fur -
thermore, other operating expenditure, in par -
ticular, rose markedly (+34%). It appears that 
as well as the procurement of personal protect -ive equipment, transfers to enterprises were, in 
part, recorded under this item.
The coronavirus crisis will continue to place a 
strain on state government budgets in 2021. 
According to the official tax estimate of No -
vember 2020, receipts will be €20 billion lower 
than was expected a year earlier. Further short -
falls of just over €3 billion will result from legis -
lative changes made in the intervening period, 
particularly the increase in child benefits and in -
come tax cuts (Second Family Relief Act (Zwei -
tes Familienentlastungsgesetz) ). Additional, al -
beit lower shortfalls are foreseeable following 
the tax decisions made by the coalition com -
mittee at the start of February. On the expend -
iture side, extensive financial aid could flow to 
local governments once again. The local gov -
ernments are only able to absorb revenue 
shortfalls themselves to a limited extent. There -
fore, the federal states are required to step in – 
in line with their fundamental responsibility to 
adequately furnish local governments with fi -
nancial resources. Overall, the volatile local rev -
enue base makes it difficult to provide steady 
financing for needs- based investment in local 
infrastructure. Aside from urgent crisis assis -
tance, then, the federal states should call for a 
comprehensive reform of local government fi -
nancing.14
Many federal states are taking out emergency 
loans this year, too. Some states still have re -
serves at their disposal – in prefinanced off-  
budget entities or off- budget entities with bor -
rowing authorisation, for instance. As the crisis 
abates and the escape clauses cease to apply, 
budget consolidation measures are likely to be -
come necessary – some of which might be sub -
stantial. Such measures differ in scale, not 
solely on account of the federal states’ diver -
gent budgetary situations. As well as the crisis- 
related annual repayment burdens, the volume COVID-  19 crisis 
continues to 
weigh on state 
government 
budgets this 
year
Federal states 
with varying 
consolidation 
requirements 
after the crisisFinances of the German statutory 
pension insurance scheme*
Source: German statutory pension insurance scheme (Deutsche 
Rentenversicherung Bund). * Preliminary quarterly figures. The 
final annual figures differ from the total of the reported prelim-
inary quarterly figures as the latter are not subsequently re-
vised.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q442024
––++
–8–6–4–20+2+4Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202020192018
2018
2020 20192018 2019 202002468
2018 2019 202002468 Revenue Expenditure
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
€ billion
13 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), p. 9.
14 See Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), pp. 10-11.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
80

of reserves still available and scope for cyclically 
induced debt also vary from state to state.15
Social security funds
Pension insurance scheme
The German statutory pension insurance 
scheme concluded 2020 with a substantial def -
icit of almost €4½ billion. The year before, it 
had posted a surplus of €2 billion. The deficit 
was funded from the sustainability reserve, 
which decreased to €37 billion by the end of 
2020 but still amounted to almost 1.6 times the 
scheme’s monthly expenditure (around €32 bil -
lion over the statutory minimum of 0.2 times 
monthly expenditure).
Revenue went up by 2%. Contributions paid 
for recipients of short- time working and un -
employment benefits compensated for 80% of 
contribution shortfalls from regular employee 
earnings. In addition, government funds rose 
markedly in line with adjustment rules. Expend -
iture saw renewed steep growth of 4%, with 
individual pensions being adjusted by 3½% on 
average across the year.
In the current year, expenditure is likely to con -
tinue rising more rapidly than revenue, result -
ing in a considerably higher deficit. In terms of 
pension expenditure, the relatively high adjust -
ment of mid- 2020 will produce a substantial in -
crease on the year in the first half of 2021.16 At 
mid- year, therefore, general pension adjust -
ments17 are unlikely, partly due to the crisis. An 
overall average annual increase in individual 
pension benefits of 2% can consequently be 
expected. In addition, the number of pensions 
is likely to increase markedly. Furthermore, the 
supplementary contribution rates to the statu -
tory health insurance scheme, which are par -
tially funded by the pension insurance scheme, 
are rising. The new basic pension is driving up 
administrative costs and pension spending; 
however, central government is to pay an add -itional grant for the increased pension entitle -
ments.18
Financial pressure on the pension scheme is 
likely to continue mounting significantly in the 
coming years, with the special rules in place for 
annual pension adjustments further exacerbat -
ing the underlying demographic pressure. This 
means that the replacement rate will probably 
be persistently higher than expected prior to 
the crisis; unlike the situation after the eco -
nomic crisis of 2009, waived pension cuts will 
not be offset later by reduced rises. Based on 
the Federal Government’s pension insurance Significant def -
icit in 2020, but 
reserves remain 
high
Revenue growth 
weak, expend -
iture growth 
persistently 
steep
Considerably 
higher deficit 
expected for 
2021Pension insur -
ance report: 
contribution rate 
just below 
threshold in 
2025; replace -
ment rate way 
above guaran -
teed 48%German statutory pension insurance 
scheme: outlook for replacement rate 
and contribution rate
Sources:  Federal  Ministry  of  Labour  and  Social  Affairs  and 
Bundesbank  calculations.  1 Using  a  comparable  statistical 
basis: from 2021, the level reported here is higher  than in the 
report  of  2019  because  it  contains  an  estimated  revision  of 
compulsory contributions. 2 Standard pension (after 45 years 
of contributions with average pay) in relation to average earn-
ings  subject  to  compulsory  insurance  (both  variables  before 
taxes, but after deduction of the respective social  security con-
tributions due).
Deutsche Bundesbank2018 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 344446485052
18202224%
%Replacement rate 2
Contribution rate201912020According to the Federal Government’s 
pension insurance report of …
15 For more details, see Deutsche Bundesbank (2020d), 
pp. 102-105.
16 For more information on pension adjustments, see 
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), pp. 72-73.
17 The fact that the eastern German level is to be gradually 
raised to the western German level by 2024 is driving up 
expenditure somewhat. Consequently, pensions will in-
crease by 0.2% on average across Germany in mid- 2021.
18 Based on the information available thus far, this will not 
be adjusted to the expected increasing spending going 
forward.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
81

report at the end of 2020, the replacement rate 
will be one percentage point higher in the 
longer term (see the chart on p. 81). The report 
anticipates that the reserve will erode rapidly 
over the coming years. The contribution rate 
will then make significant bounds from its cur -
rent level of 18.6% to 19.3% in 2023 and 
19.9% in 2024. According to the report, the 
maximum threshold of 20% will be slightly 
undershot in 2025, meaning that no additional 
government funds will be needed. The increas -
ing financial pressure is set to make itself felt 
after 2025, too; under current law, the replace -
ment rate will decrease further, contribution rates will rise continuously, and government 
funds will see dynamic growth.
Federal Employment Agency
The Federal Employment Agency has been 
making a crucial contribution to stabilisation 
during the coronavirus crisis. This is reflected in 
the large budgetary burden seen last year; in 
the core budget,19 the Federal Employment 
Agency recorded a deficit of €27 billion, fol -
lowing a surplus of €2 billion the previous year. 
At end- 2019, the free reserves stood at €26 bil -
lion. However, they could not be fully liquid -
ated. Central government thus granted a loan 
of €7 billion to finance the budget, with the re -
sult that the reserves still totalled €6 billion at 
the end of 2020.20
Revenue fell by 4½%; the fact that the contri -
bution rate had been lowered at the start of 
2020 (from 2.5% to 2.4%) accounted for three 
percentage points of this drop. The situation 
was further compounded by crisis- related con -
tribution shortfalls. These, in contrast to other 
branches of social security, are not being allevi -
ated by contributions paid for recipients of 
short- time working and unemployment bene -
fits.
The economic slump resulted in steeply rising 
expenditure (+84%, or €28 billion). Unemploy -
ment benefit payments climbed 37% (+€6 bil -
lion). Per capita benefit rates increased by only 
a moderate 1%. The number of unemployed, 
by contrast, rose by a steep 36%, thus reaching 
a comparable level to that of 2010. Payments 
for short- time working benefits multiplied to Very large deficit 
for 2020 as a 
whole
Revenue 
decreased on 
account of con -
tribution rate cut 
and coronavirus 
crisis
Surge in expend -
iture owing to 
short- time 
working  and 
unemployment 
benefitsFinances of the 
Federal Employment Agency*
Source:  Federal  Employment  Agency.  * Federal  Employment 
Agency core budget including transfers to the civil servants' 
pension fund.
Deutsche BundesbankQ1 Q2 Q3 Q410505
––+
–30–25–20–15–10–50+5+10Fiscal balance, quarterly figures
Cumulated from start of year202020192018
2020201920182018 2019 2020–200+20+40+60+80+100+120+140
2018 2019 202020020406080100120140
–+++++++Revenue Expenditure
€ billion
€ billionYear-on-year percentage change
19 Excluding the civil servants’ pension fund. Transfers to 
the fund are thus recorded as expenditure here, lowering 
the core budget balance. These transfers have been 
suspended from the second quarter of 2020 until the end 
of 2021 because of the COVID-  19 crisis. As a result, the 
fund posted a deficit of almost €½ billion for 2020, and its 
reserves declined to slightly less than €9 billion.
20 Further reserves – financed by specific levies – were the 
insolvency benefit and winter compensation reserves, 
totalling around €1½ billion (€½ billion down on the year) 
and the civil servants’ pension fund.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
82

€23 billion (2019: just under €1 billion), includ -
ing social contributions of €9 billion. The Fed -
eral Employment Agency has been paying 
these on behalf of enterprises as an exceptional 
crisis measure. This measure alone accounted 
for almost 2% of the contributions received by 
other branches of social security. From January 
to November 2020, an average of three million 
people were in short-  time working arrange -
ments, with the reduction in working hours 
amounting to 40%.
The Federal Employment Agency’s budget plan, 
which was approved in December, envisages a deficit of €9 billion in its core budget for the 
current year. Financing is to come from the re -
maining reserves and an additional central gov -
ernment grant of €3 billion. This would reduce 
the deficit significantly in net terms; according 
to the budget plan, contribution receipts are 
expected to rise substantially once more whilst 
expenditure on unemployment and short-  time 
working benefits is set to decline strongly. 
However, the coronavirus restrictions have 
been stepped up and extended again since the 
budget was drawn up. Against this back -
ground, less favourable developments appear 
likely.Substantially 
lower deficit 
planned for 
2021
List of references
Deutsche Bundesbank (2021), Public finances, Monthly Report, January 2021, pp. 9-10.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020a), Outlook for the German economy for 2021 to 2023, Monthly 
 Report, December 2020, pp. 15-35.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020b), Public finances, Monthly Report, November 2020, pp. 62-75.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020c), Reform of local government finances: making financing crisis-  
proof and stable, Monthly Report, July 2020, pp. 10-11.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2020d), The future requirements of state- specific debt brakes on state 
governments ’ budgets, Monthly Report, October 2020, pp. 102-105.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016), Key central government budget data in connection with the debt 
brake, Monthly Report, February 2016, pp. 68-69.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2006), A disaggregated framework for analysing public finances: Germany’s  
fiscal track record between 2000 and 2005, Monthly Report, March 2006, pp. 61-76.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
83

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
84

Statistical  
SectionDeutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
1•

Contents
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates  ..................................................................  5 •
2. External transactions and positions  ..............................................................................  5 •
3. General economic indicators  .......................................................................................  6 •
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts  .........................................................................  8 •
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs)  ...........................  10 •
3. Banking system’s liquidity position  ...............................................................................  14 •
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  16 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  18 •
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche 
Bundes bank) in Germany  .............................................................................................  20 •
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks  ..........  24 •
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents  ..............................  26 •
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents  .......................  28 •
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)  .....................  30 •
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, 
 housing loans, sectors of economic activity  .................................................................  32 •
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany  .....................  34 •
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in 
 Germany  .....................................................................................................................  36 •
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group ........  36 •
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to  
non-banks (non-MFIs) ..................................................................................................  38 •
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany  ...... 38 •
12. Building and loan associations (MFIs) in Germany  ........................................................  39 •
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  40 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
2•

V. Minimum reserves
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area  .........................................................................  42 •
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany  ................................................................................  42 •
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates/base rates  ........................................................................................  43 •
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders  ................................  43 •
3. Money market rates, by month  ...................................................................................  43 •
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of  
German banks (MFIs)  ...................................................................................................  44 •
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets  ..........................................................................................................................  48 •
2. Liabilities  .....................................................................................................................  49 •
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany  .....................................  50 •
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents  ..................................................................  51 •
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents .........................................  52 •
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents  .......................................................................  52 •
5. Yields and indices on German securities  ......................................................................  53 •
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany  ...............................................  53 •
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations  ..... 54 •
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations  .........................................  55 •
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households  ............................  56 •
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households  ................................................................  57 •
X. Public finances in Germany
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty  .. 58 •
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the 
 national accounts  ........................................................................................................  58 •
3. General government: budgetary development  .............................................................  59 •
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development  .....................................  59 •
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue  ........................................................  60 •
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type  ...................  60 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
3•

7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  ..................................................  61 •
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets  ....... 61 •
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development  .................................................  62 •
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development  .......................................  62 •
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development  ..........................  63 •
12. Central government: borrowing in the market  .............................................................  63 •
13. General government: debt by creditor  .........................................................................  63 •
14. Maastricht debt by instrument .....................................................................................  64 •
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category  ............................  65 •
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income  ...........................  66 •
2. Output in the production sector  ..................................................................................  67 •
3. Orders received by industry  .........................................................................................  68 •
4. Orders received by construction  ..................................................................................  69 •
5. Retail trade turnover  ....................................................................................................  69 •
6. Labour market  .............................................................................................................  70 •
7. Prices  ..........................................................................................................................  71 •
8. Households’ income  ....................................................................................................  72 •
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)  .......................................................................  72 •
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups  ...........................................  73 •
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups  ....................................  74 •
XII. External sector
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area  ...........................................  75 •
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany  ..............  76 •
3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany, by country and 
group of countries  .......................................................................................................  77 •
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ................................  78 •
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany  ...............................................  78 •
6. Capital account of the Federal Republic of Germany ....................................................  78 •
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany  .................................................  79 •
8. External position of the Bundesbank ............................................................................  80 •
9. External positions of enterprises  ..................................................................................  81 •
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies  .............................  82 •
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage of 
Economic  and Monetary Union  ...................................................................................  82 •
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy’s price 
competitiveness  ...........................................................................................................  83 •Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
4•

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
5•
I. Key economic data for the euro area
1. Monetary developments and interest rates
Money stock in various definitions  1,2 Determinants of the money stock  1 Interest rates
M3 3
M1 M23-month
moving average
(centred)MFI lending,
totalMFI lending to
enterprises
and
householdsMonetary
capital
formation  4 EONIA  5,73 month
EURIBOR  6,7Yield on Euro-
pean govern-
ment bonds
outstanding  8
Period Annual percentage change % p.a. as a monthly average
2019 May 7.2 5.2 4.9 4.8 2.2 2.8 1.4 – 0.37 – 0.31 0.7
June 7.3 5.0 4.6 4.9 2.2 3.1 2.2 – 0.36 – 0.33 0.4
July 7.7 5.5 5.2 5.2 2.1 3.0 2.0 – 0.37 – 0.36 0.2
Aug. 8.4 6.1 5.8 5.5 2.3 3.3 1.7 – 0.36 – 0.41 – 0.1
Sep. 8.0 5.9 5.7 5.7 2.2 3.3 1.8 – 0.40 – 0.42 – 0.1
Oct. 8.3 6.0 5.7 5.6 2.4 3.7 1.5 – 0.46 – 0.41 – 0.0
Nov. 8.3 5.9 5.6 5.4 2.1 3.4 1.8 – 0.45 – 0.40 0.1
Dec. 8.0 5.7 4.9 5.2 2.0 3.3 1.5 – 0.46 – 0.40 0.2
2020 Jan. 8.0 5.6 5.2 5.2 1.9 3.2 1.2 – 0.45 – 0.39 0.2
Feb. 8.1 5.6 5.5 6.1 1.9 3.2 0.8 – 0.45 – 0.41 – 0.0
Mar. 10.4 7.4 7.5 7.1 3.6 4.2 0.2 – 0.45 – 0.42 0.2
Apr. 11.8 8.3 8.2 8.2 4.8 4.3 – 0.0 – 0.45 – 0.25 0.3
May 12.5 9.1 9.0 8.8 6.1 4.9 0.1 – 0.46 – 0.27 0.2
June 12.7 9.3 9.3 9.4 6.9 4.6 – 0.5 – 0.46 – 0.38 0.2
July 13.5 10.0 10.1 9.6 7.4 4.7 – 0.6 – 0.46 – 0.44 0.0
Aug. 13.3 9.6 9.5 10.0 7.7 4.7 – 0.2 – 0.47 – 0.48 – 0.0
Sep. 13.8 10.3 10.4 10.1 8.1 4.5 – 0.5 – 0.47 – 0.49 – 0.1
Oct. 13.8 10.3 10.5 10.6 8.3 4.2 – 0.6 – 0.47 – 0.51 – 0.2
Nov. 14.5 10.8 11.0 11.3 8.6 4.4 – 0.8 – 0.47 – 0.52 – 0.2
Dec. 15.6 11.7 12.3 ... 9.2 4.9 – 0.6 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.2
2021 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... – 0.48 – 0.55 – 0.2
1 Source: ECB.  2 Seasonally adjusted.  3 Excluding money market fund shares/units,
money market paper and debt securities with a maturity of up to two years held by
non-euro area residents.  4 Longer-term liabilities to euro area non-MFIs.  5 Euroovernight index average.  6 Euro interbank offered rate.  7 See also footnotes to Table
VI.4, p. 43●. 8 GDP-weighted yield on ten-year government bonds. Countries
included: DE, FR, NL, BE, AT, FI, IE, PT, ES, IT, GR, SK, CY, SI.
2. External transactions and positions *
Selected items of the euro area balance of payments Euro exchange rates  1
Current account Financial account Effective exchange rate  3
Balanceof which:
Goods BalanceDirect
investmentPortfolio
investmentFinancial
derivatives  2Other
investmentReserve
assets Dollar rate Nominal Real  4
Period € million EUR 1 = USD ... Q1 1999 = 100
2019 May – 1,806 +27,139 – 1,154 –27,382 –48,846 + 3,715 +69,514 + 1,845 1.1185 98.2 93.4
June +11,164 +26,624 + 8,676 –67,830 +26,867 + 4,975 +46,933 – 2,269 1.1293 98.8 93.9
July +32,210 +34,396 +28,999 –16,204 –23,706 + 8,832 +54,628 + 5,449 1.1218 98.4 93.4
Aug. +32,290 +22,786 +24,907 +38,111 – 5,898 – 5,344 – 2,591 + 629 1.1126 98.9 93.9
Sep. +38,352 +28,258 +39,786 + 9,321 –13,235 – 5,561 +55,201 – 5,939 1.1004 98.2 93.1
Oct. +28,919 +36,559 +38,980 +20,355 +35,243 + 6,382 –23,895 + 894 1.1053 98.1 92.9
Nov. +23,454 +29,955 +22,053 –54,009 +42,274 + 346 +37,313 – 3,870 1.1051 97.5 92.2
Dec. +33,443 +31,059 + 1,997 –66,001 +66,535 –11,982 +12,987 + 458 1.1113 97.4 92.1
2020 Jan. – 8,191 + 9,346 – 9,299 + 8,076 –44,974 + 7,304 +19,312 + 983 1.1100 97.0 91.4
Feb. +15,155 +29,044 +18,700 +26,238 –27,181 + 6,827 +13,925 – 1,108 1.0905 96.3 90.7
Mar. +25,083 +38,239 + 4,707 – 7,526 –116,404 – 1,848 +126,935 + 3,550 1.1063 99.0 93.1
Apr. +11,273 +11,210 –30,556 –34,009 +158,892 +10,904 –168,045 + 1,702 1.0862 98.2 92.6
May – 591 +16,592 +14,661 –34,804 +42,674 + 8,709 – 3,592 + 1,673 1.0902 98.4 92.8
June +19,104 +27,879 +57,279 –23,135 –19,501 +18,405 +81,673 – 163 1.1255 99.8 94.0
July +25,023 +35,876 – 735 +24,210 –49,449 + 5,069 +19,992 – 558 1.1463 100.5 94.6
Aug. +22,573 +24,536 +51,426 +23,887 +24,321 –14,419 +16,332 + 1,304 1.1828 101.6 95.1
Sep. +35,285 +35,487 +43,811 + 7,007 – 1,792 –21,604 +57,564 + 2,637 1.1792 101.6 95.0
Oct. +32,977 +38,693 +32,453 +16,827 +85,474 – 212 –72,547 + 2,911 1.1775 101.4 p 94.9
Nov. +26,808 +35,877 +36,721 –64,046 +176,354 +12,646 –85,637 – 2,596 1.1838 100.7 p 94.4
Dec. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2170 101.9 p 95.4
2021 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1.2171 101.4 p 94.9
* Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary
Fund's Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition).  1 Monthly averages, see also TablesXII.10 and 12, pp. 82●/ 83●.  2 Including employee stock options.  3 Against the
currencies of the EER-19 group.  4 Based on consumer price indices.

Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2021
I. Key economic data for the euro area
 
3. General economic indicators
  
 
 
Period Euro area Belgium Germany Estonia Finland France Greece Ireland Italy Latvia
 
Real gross domestic product 1
Annual percentage change
2018 1.9 1.8 1.3 4.4 1.3 1.8 1.6 8.5 1.0 4.02019 1.3 1.7 0.6 5.0 1.1 1.5 1.9 5.6 0.3 2.1
2020 ... ... − 5.0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
2019         Q3 1.4 1.8 1.2 6.3 2.0 2.0 3.0 6.3 0.8 2.6
         Q4 1.0 1.6 0.2 5.3 0.7 0.7 0.6 5.9 0.1 0.8
2020         Q1 − 3.2 − 2.0 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.7 − 5.3 − 1.0 6.0 − 5.6 − 1.0
         Q2 − 14.7 − 13.9 − 11.3 − 6.9 − 6.3 − 18.7 − 15.3 − 3.2 − 18.4 − 8.9         Q3 − 4.3 − 4.4 − 3.9 − 1.9 − 3.0 − 4.4 ... 8.1 − 5.2 − 2.6         Q4 − 5.0 ... − 2.9 ... ... − 4.5 ... ... ... ...
 
 Industrial production 2
 Annual percentage change
2018 0.7 1.2 1.0 4.8 3.4 0.4 1.8 − 5.0 0.7 2.02019 − 1.3 4.8 − 4.3 0.1 1.6 0.5 − 0.7 2.8 − 1.1 0.8
2020
e − 8.7 − 3.8 p − 10.5 − 5.2 − 3.1 − 10.6 − 2.2 p 4.3 − 11.4 − 1.7
2019         Q3 − 1.5 4.3 − 4.9 − 1.5 3.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 4.7 − 1.2 2.5
         Q4 − 2.1 5.9 − 5.1 − 5.1 0.9 − 0.7 − 5.0 4.7 − 2.2 0.0
2020         Q1 − 6.0 − 0.3 − 6.7 − 4.7 − 0.2 − 7.6 − 1.2 6.8 − 11.4 − 2.3
         Q2 − 20.1 − 11.7 − 21.7 − 13.3 − 5.3 − 23.5 − 8.1 − 1.6 − 25.4 − 5.1         Q3 − 6.9 − 3.5 − 10.2 − 2.8 − 4.9 − 7.0 − 2.1 − 2.2 − 5.1 − 1.9         Q4
e − 1.8 0.3 p − 3.3 0.3 − 2.1 − 4.0 2.8 p 13.0 − 2.7 2.2
 
 Capacity utilisation in industry 3
 As a percentage of full capacity
2018 83.8 81.0 87.7 74.4 84.1 85.9 70.8 76.2 78.1 76.42019 82.3 81.2 84.5 72.8 81.1 84.5 71.5 77.3 77.4 76.3
2020 74.4 75.5 77.0 67.4 76.8 73.5 70.8 68.5 53.1 71.8
2019         Q4 81.1 80.7 82.6 69.9 78.6 83.4 72.1 78.0 76.8 75.5
2020         Q1 80.9 79.7 82.9 70.7 78.4 82.6 72.3 75.5 76.5 74.7
         Q2 68.4 72.8 71.4 63.3 77.2 62.4 67.3 56.7 − 69.1         Q3 72.1 73.4 74.4 66.0 76.0 72.9 70.3 69.6 64.5 70.8         Q4 76.3 75.9 79.1 69.6 75.4 76.0 73.2 72.0 71.4 72.7
2021         Q1 77.6 77.4 80.4 71.6 78.1 77.8 72.5 74.5 72.8 73.1
 
 Standardised unemployment rate 4
 As a percentage of civilian labour force
2018 8.2 6.0 3.4 5.4 7.4 8.7 19.3 5.8 10.6 7.52019 7.5 5.4 3.2 4.5 6.7 8.2 17.3 5.0 10.0 6.3
2020
e 7.8 e 5.6 e 4.2 ... e 7.8 e 8.1 ... e 5.7 e 9.1 e 8.1
2020         Aug. 8.6 6.5 e 4.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 17.0 6.6 9.6 8.6
         Sep. 8.6 6.6 e 4.5 8.1 8.4 8.8 16.6 6.8 9.5 8.3
         Oct. 8.4 6.3 e 4.5 8.1 8.2 8.6 16.4 6.2 9.5 8.1
         Nov. 8.3 6.1 e 4.5 7.8 7.8 8.8 16.2 6.0 8.8 8.1
         Dec. 8.3 5.8 e 4.5 ... 8.4 8.9 ... 5.8 9.0 8.2
2021         Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5.8 ... ...Deutsche Bundesbank
6  Monthly Report
February 2021
 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
Annual percentage change
2018 1.8 2.3 1.9 3.4 1.2 2.1 0.8 0.7 1.2 2.62019 1.2 1.2 1.4 2.3 1.1 1.3 0.5 0.9 0.6 2.7
2020 0.3 0.4
5 0.4 − 0.6 0.4 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.1 0.1
2020         Aug. − 0.2 − 0.9 5 − 0.1 − 1.3 0.3 0.2 − 2.3 − 1.1 − 0.5 − 0.5
         Sep. − 0.3 0.5 5 − 0.4 − 1.3 0.3 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.2 − 1.0 − 0.4
         Oct. − 0.3 0.4 5 − 0.5 − 1.7 0.2 0.1 − 2.0 − 1.5 − 0.6 − 0.7
         Nov. − 0.3 0.2 5 − 0.7 − 1.2 0.2 0.2 − 2.1 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.7
         Dec. − 0.3 0.4 5 − 0.7 − 0.9 0.2 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.3 − 0.5
2021         Jan. e 0.9 0.6 1.6 e 0.1 e 0.9 e 0.8 − 2.4 e − 0.1 e 0.5 − 0.5
 
 General government financial balance 6
 As a percentage of GDP
2018 − 0.5 − 0.8 1.8 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 2.3 1.0 0.1 − 2.2 − 0.82019 − 0.6 − 1.9 1.5 0.1 − 1.0 − 3.0 1.5 0.5 − 1.6 − 0.6
2020 ... ... − 4.8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 
 General government debt 6
 As a percentage of GDP
2017 87.7 102.0 65.1 9.1 61.3 98.3 179.2 67.0 134.1 39.02018 85.8 99.8 61.8 8.2 59.6 98.1 186.2 63.0 134.4 37.12019 84.0 98.1 59.6 8.4 59.3 98.1 180.5 57.4 134.7 36.9
Sources: Eurostat, European Commission, European Central Bank, Federal Statistical and are provisional. 1  Euro area: quarterly data seasonally adjusted. 2  Manu-
Office, Bundesbank calculations. Latest data are partly based on press reports facturing, mining and energy: adjusted for working-day vari ations. 3  Manufacturing: 

Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2021
I. Key economic data for the euro area
    
 
 
Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Austria Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Cyprus Period
 
 Real gross domestic product 1
 Annual percentage change
3.9 3.1 4.8 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.8 4.4 2.4 5.2 20184.3 2.3 5.3 1.7 1.4 2.2 2.3 3.2 2.0 3.1 2019
− 0.9 ... ... − 3.8 ... ... ... ... − 11.0 ... 2020
4.4 3.1 3.7 1.8 1.7 2.2 1.4 3.1 1.8 2.8 2019          Q3
4.2 2.8 5.5 1.6 0.4 2.4 2.0 2.0 1.6 3.6          Q4
2.4 1.5 0.8 − 0.2 − 3.4 − 2.3 − 3.6 − 2.4 − 3.8 1.1 2020          Q1
− 4.6 − 7.6 − 16.1 − 9.4 − 14.1 − 16.2 − 12.1 − 13.0 − 21.6 − 12.2          Q2
0.1 0.4 − 9.9 − 2.5 − 4.0 − 5.7 − 2.4 − 2.6 − 9.1 − 4.1          Q3
... ... ... − 2.9 ... ... − 2.7 ... − 9.1 ...          Q4
Industrial production 2
Annual percentage change
5.2 − 1.1 1.3 0.6 4.9 0.1 4.3 5.3 0.4 6.9 20183.4 − 3.1 1.1 − 0.9 0.0 − 2.2 0.5 2.8 0.6 4.0 2019
− 2.4
p − 10.6 p − 0.2 p − 4.3 ... − 7.4 − 9.1 p − 6.2 p − 9.7 ... 2020
4.1 − 1.7 3.7 0.1 − 0.4 − 3.5 − 2.8 2.5 0.7 4.6 2019          Q3
0.1 − 8.8 2.1 − 0.9 − 4.5 0.5 − 4.7 1.8 0.3 2.9          Q4
− 2.5 − 10.0 10.7 − 1.2 − 5.8 − 1.3 − 7.3 − 2.8 − 6.6 − 1.3 2020          Q1
− 7.5 − 22.3 − 7.1 − 8.6 − 16.8 − 23.8 − 28.1 − 17.3 − 24.6 − 19.7          Q2− 0.3 − 8.1 − 1.8 − 5.1 − 3.1 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 3.5 − 5.2 − 5.2          Q3
0.6
p − 1.2 p − 1.8 p − 2.4 ... − 2.2 1.8 p − 0.9 p − 1.8 ...          Q4
Capacity utilisation in industry 3
As a percentage of full capacity
77.5 81.2 80.3 84.0 88.7 81.6 85.4 85.3 79.5 61.4 201877.3 79.8 77.3 84.2 86.6 78.7 87.7 84.4 80.3 63.8 2019
72.9 72.2 70.4 78.2 79.2 75.5 79.3 78.2 74.3 51.7 2020
77.2 79.0 78.0 84.0 85.3 77.4 84.1 83.8 79.3 63.6 2019          Q4
76.4 83.4 78.8 83.2 84.8 80.6 82.2 83.0 80.0 63.3 2020          Q1
70.0 53.8 61.1 75.2 73.9 71.7 77.1 71.9 70.9 47.4          Q271.9 76.3 68.0 76.3 77.2 71.9 78.3 76.1 71.5 49.2          Q373.4 75.3 73.5 78.0 80.8 77.8 79.7 81.6 74.8 46.7          Q4
72.4 75.6 73.7 79.2 82.2 78.4 81.4 80.9 75.7 48.6 2021          Q1
Standardised unemployment rate 4
As a percentage of civilian labour force
6.2 5.6 3.7 3.9 4.9 7.1 6.6 5.1 15.3 8.4 20186.3 5.6 3.6 3.4 4.5 6.5 5.8 4.5 14.1 7.1 2019
e 8.9 e 6.8 e 4.3 e 3.9 e 5.4 e 6.9 e 6.7 e 4.9 e 15.5 e 7.6 2020
10.2 6.8 4.5 4.6 5.6 8.1 7.2 5.2 16.7 8.5 2020          Aug.
10.5 6.7 4.6 4.4 5.5 7.9 7.0 5.0 16.6 9.3          Sep.
10.4 6.5 4.5 4.3 5.4 7.5 7.1 4.9 16.3 10.5          Oct.
10.4 6.5 4.5 4.0 5.5 7.1 7.1 4.9 16.1 7.8          Nov.10.1 6.7 4.5 3.9 5.8 6.5 7.0 4.7 16.2 7.3          Dec.
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2021          Jan.Deutsche Bundesbank
7  Monthly Report
February 2021
 
 Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
 Annual percentage change
2.5 2.0 1.7 1.6 2.1 1.2 2.5 1.9 1.7 0.8 20182.2 1.6 1.5 2.7 1.5 0.3 2.8 1.7 0.8 0.5 2019
1.1 0.0 0.8 1.1 1.4 − 0.1 2.0 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 1.1 2020
1.2 − 0.2 0.7 0.3 1.4 − 0.2 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 2.9 2020          Aug.
0.6 − 0.3 0.5 1.0 1.2 − 0.8 1.4 − 0.7 − 0.6 − 1.9          Sep.
0.5 − 0.4 0.6 1.2 1.1 − 0.6 1.6 − 0.5 − 0.9 − 1.4          Oct.
0.4 − 0.7 0.2 0.7 1.1 − 0.4 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.8 − 1.1          Nov.
− 0.1 − 0.3 0.2 0.9 1.0 − 0.3 1.6 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.8          Dec.
0.2 1.1
e 0.6 1.6 ... 0.2 e 0.4 − 0.9 0.4 e − 0.6 2021          Jan.
General government financial balance 6
As a percentage of GDP
0.6 3.1 2.0 1.4 0.2 − 0.3 − 1.0 0.7 − 2.5 − 3.5 20180.3 2.4 0.5 1.7 0.7 0.1 − 1.4 0.5 − 2.9 1.5 2019
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2020
General government debt 6
As a percentage of GDP
39.1 22.3 48.8 56.9 78.5 126.1 51.7 74.1 98.6 93.5 201733.7 21.0 45.2 52.4 74.0 121.5 49.9 70.3 97.4 99.2 201835.9 22.0 42.6 48.7 70.5 117.2 48.5 65.6 95.5 94.0 2019
quarterly data seasonally adjusted. Data collection at the beginning of the quarter. 4 unadjusted data from the Federal Statistical Office. 5  Influenced by a temporary
Monthly data seasonally adjusted. Germany: Bundesbank calculation based on reduction of value added tax. 6  According to Maastricht Treaty definition. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
8•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
1. The money stock and its counterparts *
a) Euro area 1
€ billion
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2019 May 39.0 36.7 12.7 2.4 3.2 63.5 69.9 6.3 11.0 –2.9 0.6 7.6 5.7
June – 0.4 23.0 –13.5 –23.4 –22.6 78.1 –15.3 –93.4 41.8 19.9 1.1 6.2 14.7
July 49.7 61.3 –1.4 –11.6 –14.3 35.0 165.1 130.1 0.7 –21.9 0.4 5.0 17.1
Aug. 25.2 19.2 –7.9 5.9 5.7 – 3.9 26.6 30.5 –16.2 –15.5 –0.4 –7.3 7.0
Sep. 6.6 26.5 25.9 –19.9 –13.7 41.8 –45.7 –87.5 36.1 25.1 –1.1 –1.4 13.5
Oct. 43.7 63.3 –9.2 –19.6 –25.7 17.3 16.2 –1.1 –11.5 –1.9 –1.8 –19.8 12.1
Nov. 54.4 54.9 30.9 –0.5 3.3 10.4 –21.5 –31.9 19.0 0.8 –0.8 4.7 14.3
Dec. –118.6 –79.8 –25.2 –38.8 –20.6 –21.8 –299.1 –277.3 –7.9 7.1 –1.4 –6.1 –7.6
2020 Jan. 101.9 51.7 1.7 50.2 28.0 24.6 295.6 271.0 –5.4 –6.2 –1.0 13.1 –11.2
Feb. 60.7 50.1 20.1 10.7 22.1 41.5 92.7 51.2 –2.6 –3.0 –0.7 –3.3 4.4
Mar. 322.7 180.6 –21.1 142.1 127.8 – 5.8 101.6 107.4 –33.2 1.2 –1.0 –42.9 9.5
Apr. 293.0 101.1 54.4 191.9 180.9 –99.0 14.7 113.7 –34.2 –9.4 –1.1 –4.1 –19.7
May 291.9 119.9 30.6 172.1 176.8 8.8 –42.4 –51.2 19.7 3.9 –0.8 –0.7 17.3
June 136.5 –15.8 16.3 152.3 160.5 68.7 –146.0 –214.7 –0.6 –6.2 –1.1 –8.8 15.6
July 155.3 75.9 28.9 79.5 78.9 –47.7 77.8 125.5 –5.2 1.5 –0.1 –12.6 6.0
Aug. 84.6 25.9 17.3 58.7 66.7 17.0 –2.7 –19.7 13.3 9.6 –0.4 –11.5 15.6
Sep. 83.2 –3.6 –3.2 86.9 86.1 46.9 –25.8 –72.7 10.5 –11.0 –0.2 19.4 2.4
Oct. 71.0 31.4 –5.4 39.6 33.6 –22.7 91.4 114.1 –16.9 –4.3 –0.4 –29.5 17.3
Nov. 117.5 72.7 29.3 44.9 45.5 –33.0 92.1 125.1 4.7 13.2 –0.5 –10.3 2.3
Dec. – 5.9 –5.3 28.9 –0.6 7.8 –31.8 –192.1 –160.3 7.6 –5.2 –0.5 –12.9 26.2
b) German contribution
I. Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
in the euro areaII. Net claims on
non-euro area residentsIII. Monetary capital formation at monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises
and householdsGeneral
government
Period Total Totalof which:
Securities Totalof which:
Securities TotalClaims
on non-
euro area
residentsLiabil-
ities to
non-euro 
area
residents TotalDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of over
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
over
3 monthsDebt
securities
with
maturities
of over
2 years
(net)  2Capital
and
reserves  3
2019 May 19.3 19.8 0.5 –0.5 1.4 11.8 2.4 –9.3 9.1 –1.7 0.6 7.5 2.6
June 25.7 26.4 4.3 –0.7 1.2 – 8.0 10.3 18.3 11.5 1.5 0.6 2.4 7.1
July 9.5 7.8 0.0 1.6 –0.8 42.6 6.3 –36.4 0.8 –2.2 –0.3 –1.1 4.4
Aug. 25.2 19.9 1.0 5.2 5.5 –13.6 2.4 16.0 –6.2 –4.4 –0.3 –3.7 2.3
Sep. 5.7 11.8 –0.8 –6.1 –1.3 – 2.8 –24.3 –21.5 4.3 –0.7 –0.6 0.0 5.6
Oct. 10.2 11.0 1.2 –0.8 –4.2 56.3 2.4 –53.9 –2.6 –0.7 –0.8 –3.6 2.5
Nov. 25.3 20.4 5.2 4.9 3.9 –23.5 –17.6 5.9 3.0 –1.9 –0.9 1.6 4.2
Dec. – 4.4 1.5 0.8 –5.9 –1.1 –38.9 –47.5 –8.6 –4.4 –0.3 –1.1 –5.8 2.7
2020 Jan. 16.3 9.5 1.9 6.8 2.6 74.7 37.7 –37.0 –9.0 –2.6 –1.5 3.8 –8.6
Feb. 24.5 25.4 4.3 –0.9 1.2 – 4.3 14.1 18.4 –4.6 –1.2 –0.6 4.8 –7.6
Mar. 47.3 31.4 –6.1 15.9 14.3 –34.3 18.5 52.8 –8.3 –3.7 –0.7 –8.2 4.3
Apr. 33.0 16.0 1.3 16.9 14.8 –28.8 8.9 37.6 –23.8 –5.1 –0.8 –2.1 –15.8
May 58.3 27.1 10.0 31.2 32.7 11.7 –22.1 –33.8 2.3 –1.5 –0.4 –1.2 5.4
June 26.4 2.6 3.5 23.7 25.9 –45.6 –20.9 24.7 –7.9 –7.1 –1.0 –7.9 8.1
July 25.9 13.8 0.3 12.2 10.3 9.4 –9.7 –19.1 –3.0 –6.9 –0.6 1.2 3.3
Aug. 9.3 7.5 1.9 1.8 7.9 5.6 –8.1 –13.7 –5.2 –2.2 –0.4 –4.4 1.8
Sep. 22.6 4.6 1.3 18.1 15.8 –34.8 22.9 57.8 10.4 –3.4 –0.4 5.1 9.1
Oct. 48.7 22.1 6.6 26.7 23.9 30.1 –16.6 –46.8 –2.0 –0.5 –0.4 –4.5 3.4
Nov. 44.0 19.6 4.5 24.5 26.0 –15.1 7.4 22.5 0.6 –1.5 –0.4 0.2 2.3
Dec. – 0.9 7.3 3.6 –8.2 –4.6 –107.3 –35.0 72.3 –7.3 –1.3 –0.3 –7.1 1.4
* The data in this table are based on the consolidated balance sheet of monetary
financial institutions (MFIs) (Table II.2); statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also the "Notes on the figures" in the "Explanatory notes" of the
Statistical Series Banking Statistics).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Excluding MFIs' portfolios.  3 Afterdeduction of inter-MFI participations.  4 Including the counterparts of monetary
liabilities of central governments.  5 Including the monetary liabilities of central
governments (Post Office, Treasury).  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.  7 Paper held
by residents outside the euro area has been eliminated.  8 Less German MFIs' holdings

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
9•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
a) Euro area 1
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)
Money stock M2
Money stock M1
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments Total  4of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue Total Total TotalCurrency
in circu-
lationOvernight
deposits  5Deposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 years  5Deposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  5,6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  2,7,8Debt secur-
ities with
maturities
of up to
2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)
(net)  2,7 Period
17.8 –7.4 0.0 81.1 88.6 87.6 5.1 82.5 –12.4 13.4 – 7.7 –9.7 5.8 2019 May
33.6 –71.2 0.0 73.5 87.2 98.4 7.5 90.8 –14.5 3.4 –20.7 –11.9 – 2.0 June
–13.0 47.0 0.0 50.0 31.1 25.7 9.0 16.7 1.4 4.0 17.9 21.1 – 5.2 July
6.3 –81.9 0.0 113.1 110.1 86.1 1.3 84.7 19.1 4.9 4.7 18.0 –13.5 Aug.
5.8 42.9 0.0 –36.5 –18.4 – 1.0 3.3 – 4.3 –15.6 – 1.8 –17.9 –13.9 – 0.4 Sep.
–37.7 51.8 0.0 58.3 45.6 60.1 2.8 57.3 –10.1 – 4.5 42.1 1.4 6.5 Oct.
– 1.1 –53.7 0.0 100.6 103.3 122.4 6.9 115.5 –17.6 – 1.5 –14.7 3.1 – 0.7 Nov.
–66.5 –25.9 0.0 –40.2 1.5 8.3 16.3 – 8.1 –9.7 2.9 –33.6 –22.6 –18.3 Dec.
84.6 42.0 0.0 5.2 –44.3 –52.0 –7.3 –44.7 0.2 7.6 – 7.1 34.8 14.0 2020 Jan.
43.7 –34.7 0.0 95.9 82.7 84.1 5.2 79.0 –1.2 – 0.3 19.7 –4.7 4.9 Feb.
4.7 –3.5 0.0 348.9 321.2 300.5 23.8 276.8 16.2 4.5 30.0 –19.3 22.8 Mar.
72.1 –17.3 0.0 173.4 174.9 175.2 20.4 154.8 –15.0 14.7 – 4.6 24.0 –16.9 Apr.
100.9 –37.9 0.0 218.0 226.3 189.5 20.1 169.5 16.8 19.9 9.6 0.1 – 9.1 May
123.4 –0.1 0.0 82.5 78.9 88.5 13.1 75.4 –20.5 10.9 –42.7 14.4 – 5.5 June
– 4.6 –65.7 0.0 183.1 149.3 123.4 14.3 109.1 20.1 5.8 18.1 29.9 –11.0 July
40.5 29.3 0.0 18.5 35.5 45.0 5.9 39.1 –18.6 9.1 – 4.8 –0.1 – 4.1 Aug.
20.2 10.9 0.0 88.5 82.3 63.6 3.5 60.1 16.7 1.9 –29.5 8.2 – 2.9 Sep.
–17.2 –29.3 0.0 111.6 85.9 101.2 7.8 93.5 –17.7 2.4 5.3 14.0 15.2 Oct.
–98.4 52.0 0.0 126.3 125.4 151.6 11.8 139.8 –34.3 8.1 – 0.6 –1.4 2.3 Nov.
–128.0 –54.3 0.0 137.0 127.1 114.1 20.8 93.3 11.1 1.8 –24.9 21.3 – 4.7 Dec.
b) German contribution
V. Other factors VI. Money stock M3 (balance I plus II less III less IV less V)  10
of which: Components of the money stock
IV. De-
posits of
central gov-
ernments TotalIntra-
Eurosystem 
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9,11Currency
in circu-
lation TotalOvernight
depositsDeposits
with an
agreed
maturity
of up to
2 yearsDeposits
at agreed
notice of
up to 3
months  6Repo
transac-
tionsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  7,8maturities
with
maturities
of up to 2 years
(incl. money
market
paper)(net)  7 Period
19.0 – 20.1 4.0 0.8 23.0 23.8 0.4 – 0.3 – 1.3 0.1 0.4 2019 May
3.7 – 7.7 3.0 2.1 10.3 10.3 – 1.4 – 0.4 1.7 – 0.0 0.2 June
– 27.1 74.0 3.6 3.2 4.4 7.2 – 3.3 – 0.6 1.0 0.1 0.1 July
10.7 – 26.8 5.8 – 0.7 33.9 26.1 5.7 – 1.2 3.1 0.0 0.3 Aug.
9.9 – 6.6 4.9 0.8 – 4.7 0.1 – 4.8 – 0.7 – 1.1 0.1 1.7 Sep.
– 19.8 74.2 4.3 0.2 14.7 18.7 – 0.4 – 1.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.3 Oct.
8.2 – 29.5 4.5 0.7 20.0 24.1 – 3.4 – 0.7 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.2 Nov.
– 2.0 – 32.4 4.9 3.4 – 4.5 – 0.4 – 6.6 0.6 1.8 – 0.1 0.0 Dec.
– 5.6 108.0 2.1 – 0.6 – 2.5 – 7.8 5.9 – 3.0 – 1.0 – 0.1 3.4 2020 Jan.
24.4 – 14.0 4.9 0.1 14.5 17.7 1.2 – 1.7 – 0.6 0.1 – 2.2 Feb.
7.5 – 71.9 12.2 0.9 85.7 93.3 – 0.4 – 3.4 – 0.3 0.4 – 3.8 Mar.
17.9 8.6 3.2 4.3 1.5 9.9 – 8.1 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 – 1.9 Apr.
28.6 – 9.3 0.3 5.3 48.4 43.4 6.2 0.3 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 0.4 May
57.8 – 69.3 – 0.4 4.7 0.1 9.9 – 7.7 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.2 – 0.3 June
14.2 – 11.1 2.4 3.9 35.2 27.4 8.6 – 1.1 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.8 July
21.0 – 14.2 3.8 0.9 13.3 18.6 – 4.9 0.2 – 0.4 0.3 – 0.3 Aug.
15.3 – 58.3 2.7 0.6 20.4 26.2 – 5.2 – 0.1 – 0.4 0.2 – 0.2 Sep.
– 20.0 70.5 2.4 1.7 30.3 30.6 – 0.1 – 0.0 0.2 0.6 – 1.0 Oct.
– 12.7 3.6 1.3 3.0 37.4 49.3 – 14.3 0.3 3.3 – 0.3 – 0.9 Nov.
– 22.9 – 74.0 2.4 5.6 – 4.1 – 5.6 – 1.7 1.3 3.1 0.1 – 1.3 Dec.
of paper issued by euro area MFIs.  9 Including national banknotes still in circulation.
10 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates should on no
account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are therefore not
comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.  11 Thedifference between the volume of euro banknotes actually issued by the Bundesbank
and the amount disclosed in accordance with the accounting regime chosen by the
Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote circulation in Table III.2).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
10•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) *
Assets
Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households General government
End of
monthTotal
assets or
liabilities Total Total LoansDebt
securities  2Shares and
other
equities Total LoansDebt
securities  3 
 
Claims
on non-
euro area
residentsOther
assets
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2018 Nov. 27,216.6 18,243.5 13,638.0 11,337.8 1,516.2 784.1 4,605.5 1,001.0 3,604.5 5,694.7 3,278.5
Dec. 26,990.0 18,173.2 13,568.7 11,295.5 1,502.0 771.2 4,604.5 1,002.8 3,601.8 5,557.1 3,259.8
2019 Jan. 27,392.5 18,309.1 13,637.4 11,345.0 1,517.2 775.3 4,671.7 1,015.9 3,655.8 5,770.3 3,313.0
Feb. 27,436.4 18,354.8 13,683.9 11,368.3 1,528.3 787.3 4,670.9 1,001.2 3,669.7 5,763.8 3,317.9
Mar. 27,733.7 18,397.2 13,735.5 11,413.7 1,526.2 795.7 4,661.7 1,001.4 3,660.3 5,841.6 3,494.9
Apr. 27,886.9 18,468.4 13,828.8 11,472.8 1,529.8 826.1 4,639.6 1,001.1 3,638.6 5,942.4 3,476.2
May 28,185.6 18,497.0 13,854.0 11,494.6 1,549.1 810.4 4,643.0 1,000.3 3,642.7 6,027.7 3,660.8
June 28,305.8 18,522.0 13,874.9 11,521.2 1,552.5 801.2 4,647.1 1,000.0 3,647.1 5,991.6 3,792.1
July 28,772.3 18,601.9 13,939.3 11,583.7 1,550.8 804.7 4,662.6 1,002.8 3,659.8 6,208.8 3,961.7
Aug. 29,374.0 18,658.9 13,961.4 11,612.7 1,549.4 799.3 4,697.5 1,003.1 3,694.4 6,311.5 4,403.7
Sep. 29,193.7 18,651.6 13,971.2 11,595.9 1,566.6 808.7 4,680.4 996.7 3,683.7 6,300.2 4,241.9
Oct. 28,966.1 18,689.3 14,042.6 11,660.4 1,550.6 831.5 4,646.8 1,002.5 3,644.3 6,259.5 4,017.3
Nov. 29,017.9 18,729.5 14,099.4 11,684.4 1,569.3 845.7 4,630.0 998.6 3,631.4 6,270.8 4,017.6
Dec. 28,327.9 18,591.5 14,008.6 11,617.0 1,543.9 847.7 4,582.9 981.0 3,601.9 5,930.8 3,805.6
2020 Jan. 29,020.9 18,722.5 14,062.6 11,668.8 1,542.9 850.9 4,659.8 1,003.4 3,656.5 6,302.2 3,996.2
Feb. 29,488.7 18,767.4 14,101.9 11,697.4 1,563.2 841.3 4,665.5 992.2 3,673.3 6,414.4 4,306.9
Mar. 30,021.1 19,013.7 14,239.6 11,885.0 1,557.4 797.2 4,774.1 1,006.7 3,767.4 6,486.4 4,521.1
Apr. 30,449.6 19,307.7 14,348.3 11,933.3 1,612.6 802.5 4,959.4 1,018.0 3,941.4 6,585.2 4,556.7
May 30,498.9 19,607.9 14,466.6 12,020.5 1,643.3 802.8 5,141.3 1,013.7 4,127.6 6,465.6 4,425.4
June 30,405.0 19,758.4 14,448.4 11,981.0 1,651.3 816.1 5,309.9 1,005.3 4,304.7 6,298.1 4,348.6
July 30,605.8 19,909.3 14,331.3 12,012.5 1,504.3 814.5 5,578.0 1,006.0 4,572.1 6,276.3 4,420.2
Aug. 30,431.9 19,982.4 14,352.5 12,018.1 1,523.4 811.0 5,629.9 997.8 4,632.1 6,242.3 4,207.1
Sep. 30,521.6 20,081.3 14,346.2 12,017.8 1,518.5 809.9 5,735.1 998.6 4,736.5 6,239.4 4,200.8
Oct. 30,689.4 20,159.4 14,373.3 12,054.1 1,517.9 801.3 5,786.2 1,004.3 4,781.9 6,342.7 4,187.3
Nov. 30,750.6 20,288.9 14,454.1 12,089.3 1,539.8 825.0 5,834.9 1,003.4 4,831.5 6,335.0 4,126.7
Dec. 30,447.9 20,260.8 14,430.6 12,038.8 1,529.8 862.0 5,830.3 990.6 4,839.6 6,112.4 4,074.7
German contribution (€ billion)
2018 Nov. 6,177.4 4,323.4 3,356.8 2,905.6 188.1 263.0 966.7 299.8 666.9 1,202.7 651.3
Dec. 6,194.1 4,317.4 3,353.6 2,903.7 187.8 262.2 963.7 296.4 667.3 1,208.5 668.2
2019 Jan. 6,252.9 4,333.5 3,366.6 2,917.4 188.8 260.4 966.9 299.2 667.7 1,232.6 686.9
Feb. 6,243.9 4,343.3 3,382.0 2,932.6 189.2 260.2 961.3 296.6 664.7 1,221.0 679.6
Mar. 6,392.0 4,373.9 3,414.7 2,963.7 189.7 261.3 959.2 293.9 665.3 1,265.4 752.8
Apr. 6,408.7 4,379.3 3,427.3 2,976.4 189.1 261.9 951.9 294.8 657.1 1,278.2 751.2
May 6,524.8 4,402.6 3,446.8 2,995.6 190.0 261.1 955.8 293.1 662.8 1,284.5 837.7
June 6,619.8 4,431.8 3,473.1 3,017.0 194.4 261.7 958.6 291.2 667.5 1,294.2 893.7
July 6,698.2 4,445.3 3,481.1 3,024.8 194.0 262.3 964.2 293.7 670.5 1,312.3 940.7
Aug. 6,973.5 4,478.6 3,501.8 3,044.3 196.5 261.0 976.8 293.5 683.3 1,330.9 1,163.9
Sep. 6,872.6 4,462.9 3,497.0 3,040.4 196.0 260.5 965.9 288.3 677.6 1,311.9 1,097.8
Oct. 6,769.9 4,466.0 3,506.4 3,049.0 195.9 261.4 959.5 291.6 667.9 1,303.7 1,000.3
Nov. 6,785.4 4,490.1 3,527.4 3,064.8 199.7 262.9 962.6 292.6 670.0 1,289.6 1,005.8
Dec. 6,716.1 4,480.4 3,527.3 3,064.0 197.9 265.4 953.1 288.5 664.6 1,236.4 999.3
2020 Jan. 6,847.7 4,503.3 3,537.5 3,071.5 198.2 267.8 965.8 292.8 673.0 1,290.1 1,054.4
Feb. 7,028.5 4,531.0 3,562.2 3,092.6 203.2 266.4 968.8 290.8 678.0 1,306.1 1,191.4
Mar. 7,148.1 4,567.1 3,589.0 3,128.9 202.1 258.0 978.1 292.4 685.7 1,321.3 1,259.6
Apr. 7,258.0 4,605.2 3,606.5 3,143.8 206.5 256.1 998.7 294.8 703.9 1,346.6 1,306.2
May 7,230.4 4,666.4 3,640.1 3,167.2 215.9 257.1 1,026.2 293.8 732.5 1,326.0 1,238.1
June 7,225.3 4,692.6 3,641.6 3,164.7 220.4 256.6 1,051.0 291.5 759.6 1,304.2 1,228.5
July 7,267.6 4,718.8 3,634.9 3,175.5 202.7 256.7 1,083.9 293.4 790.5 1,282.9 1,265.8
Aug. 7,167.3 4,723.0 3,642.2 3,180.7 202.9 258.6 1,080.8 287.4 793.3 1,268.8 1,175.5
Sep. 7,236.4 4,749.2 3,647.1 3,184.0 204.9 258.1 1,102.1 289.7 812.4 1,293.8 1,193.4
Oct. 7,257.1 4,801.4 3,670.3 3,200.4 210.7 259.3 1,131.1 292.0 839.1 1,278.8 1,176.8
Nov. 7,240.5 4,841.7 3,688.6 3,213.7 214.3 260.6 1,153.1 290.2 862.9 1,261.9 1,136.9
Dec. 7,172.3 4,839.3 3,695.3 3,216.2 214.3 264.8 1,144.0 286.6 857.5 1,223.6 1,109.4
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national
central banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 Including money market paper ofenterprises.  3 Including Treasury bills and other money market paper issued by general
government.  4 Euro currency in circulation (see also footnote 8 on p.12●). Excluding
MFIs` cash in hand (in euro). The German contribution includes the volume of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
11•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
Liabilities
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area
Enterprises and households
With agreed
maturities ofAt agreed
notice of  6
Currency
in
circulation  4 Totalof which:
in euro  5 Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 monthsEnd of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
1,157.5 12,719.4 11,861.8 11,912.4 6,750.6 801.6 200.7 1,866.9 2,241.2 51.3 2018 Nov.
1,175.4 12,713.3 11,926.3 11,989.2 6,797.9 801.0 200.7 1,888.7 2,249.5 51.5 Dec.
1,162.4 12,768.0 11,911.1 11,976.6 6,776.6 798.4 199.4 1,888.0 2,262.9 51.3 2019 Jan.
1,165.6 12,833.0 11,959.7 12,005.4 6,805.1 795.7 196.8 1,887.9 2,268.8 51.2 Feb.
1,171.7 12,947.7 12,078.5 12,135.0 6,930.4 786.3 199.5 1,886.3 2,281.3 51.3 Mar.
1,179.1 12,958.0 12,120.9 12,180.6 6,969.3 788.9 201.8 1,880.4 2,288.5 51.5 Apr.
1,184.2 13,059.3 12,198.6 12,257.0 7,048.4 776.2 201.4 1,876.7 2,302.3 52.1 May
1,191.7 13,181.6 12,288.1 12,335.7 7,121.7 762.8 198.3 1,894.2 2,305.5 53.2 June
1,200.7 13,178.8 12,300.1 12,350.5 7,146.8 767.8 198.9 1,873.6 2,309.7 53.7 July
1,202.0 13,283.3 12,388.8 12,438.4 7,226.5 782.5 201.0 1,860.5 2,314.5 53.4 Aug.
1,205.4 13,298.4 12,383.2 12,446.2 7,221.7 769.3 200.8 1,886.9 2,314.4 53.0 Sep.
1,208.2 13,292.6 12,422.5 12,487.1 7,283.5 758.8 201.3 1,883.1 2,311.1 49.4 Oct.
1,215.1 13,388.9 12,520.7 12,572.4 7,386.6 741.1 200.6 1,885.1 2,310.4 48.6 Nov.
1,231.5 13,311.3 12,508.3 12,583.4 7,391.8 738.5 200.2 1,892.6 2,314.1 46.2 Dec.
1,224.1 13,359.5 12,460.6 12,555.5 7,362.8 734.6 200.1 1,890.9 2,322.3 44.7 2020 Jan.
1,229.3 13,477.0 12,528.4 12,615.5 7,430.6 731.7 198.6 1,888.5 2,322.0 44.1 Feb.
1,253.1 13,775.3 12,782.3 12,903.7 7,698.1 759.6 192.1 1,883.2 2,327.6 43.1 Mar.
1,273.5 13,996.0 12,953.0 13,065.1 7,852.4 762.5 188.2 1,876.5 2,343.4 42.1 Apr.
1,293.5 14,301.2 13,162.3 13,263.2 8,009.7 779.9 188.4 1,880.1 2,363.7 41.4 May
1,306.6 14,476.7 13,207.3 13,309.2 8,066.5 763.7 186.8 1,876.0 2,375.5 40.6 June
1,320.9 14,591.5 13,274.8 13,362.1 8,090.1 783.4 186.3 1,880.7 2,381.1 40.4 July
1,326.8 14,666.7 13,302.7 13,389.6 8,117.1 767.8 184.4 1,890.4 2,390.0 40.0 Aug.
1,330.3 14,757.1 13,359.4 13,466.0 8,175.8 781.0 195.4 1,882.0 2,392.0 39.8 Sep.
1,338.1 14,813.4 13,430.1 13,544.0 8,266.4 782.9 181.8 1,878.9 2,394.6 39.4 Oct.
1,349.9 14,811.8 13,525.7 13,620.1 8,357.9 757.2 179.3 1,884.1 2,402.5 39.0 Nov.
1,370.8 14,771.7 13,618.7 13,727.2 8,457.2 773.2 176.7 1,876.2 2,405.5 38.5 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
257.2 3,774.2 3,632.0 3,482.3 2,127.4 149.8 33.2 595.9 538.5 37.4 2018 Nov.
260.0 3,766.4 3,629.3 3,481.1 2,120.4 152.5 33.7 596.7 540.6 37.2 Dec.
267.6 3,737.2 3,622.2 3,471.2 2,113.7 154.3 33.5 592.1 540.9 36.7 2019 Jan.
268.0 3,747.2 3,634.2 3,474.2 2,117.5 153.9 33.2 591.0 541.8 36.7 Feb.
269.1 3,785.8 3,652.3 3,490.2 2,136.2 152.2 33.0 587.7 544.0 37.1 Mar.
271.3 3,782.3 3,667.4 3,506.4 2,156.4 151.2 32.8 584.8 544.1 37.2 Apr.
272.1 3,824.2 3,689.1 3,523.2 2,176.6 149.4 32.7 582.9 543.7 37.9 May
274.2 3,837.7 3,697.8 3,528.6 2,183.2 147.8 32.3 583.5 543.3 38.4 June
277.3 3,812.4 3,701.4 3,532.6 2,191.7 147.0 31.6 581.4 542.7 38.1 July
276.6 3,849.7 3,730.3 3,550.9 2,213.2 149.7 31.7 576.9 541.5 37.8 Aug.
277.4 3,853.5 3,722.1 3,546.0 2,213.9 146.4 31.5 576.1 540.8 37.2 Sep.
277.6 3,848.5 3,734.8 3,571.5 2,240.3 148.6 31.2 575.2 539.9 36.4 Oct.
278.4 3,874.7 3,753.7 3,580.0 2,257.7 143.0 30.8 573.7 539.2 35.6 Nov.
281.8 3,863.9 3,744.4 3,574.3 2,250.5 144.8 31.0 573.5 540.0 34.5 Dec.
281.2 3,850.4 3,733.8 3,572.3 2,255.2 145.3 31.0 570.6 537.2 33.0 2020 Jan.
281.3 3,890.4 3,750.4 3,576.3 2,265.3 142.0 31.3 569.8 535.4 32.5 Feb.
282.2 3,982.8 3,830.4 3,655.2 2,346.4 147.3 30.5 567.2 532.0 31.8 Mar.
286.5 3,997.3 3,828.9 3,665.7 2,359.6 149.2 30.0 563.6 532.2 31.1 Apr.
291.8 4,080.7 3,885.8 3,710.9 2,396.9 158.3 29.0 563.6 532.5 30.7 May
296.5 4,132.2 3,873.6 3,711.6 2,408.7 152.1 29.6 559.0 532.6 29.7 June
300.4 4,170.7 3,880.3 3,716.8 2,409.9 163.5 30.0 552.8 531.5 29.2 July
301.3 4,202.4 3,889.9 3,720.2 2,419.2 159.3 30.1 551.3 531.6 28.8 Aug.
301.9 4,235.6 3,905.7 3,745.0 2,445.3 160.3 30.3 549.2 531.5 28.4 Sep.
303.6 4,245.3 3,935.3 3,781.4 2,476.4 165.4 30.5 549.7 531.5 28.0 Oct.
306.6 4,260.2 3,961.8 3,804.4 2,507.7 157.7 30.6 549.0 531.8 27.6 Nov.
312.2 4,228.7 3,954.3 3,801.5 2,500.9 160.3 31.0 548.8 533.1 27.3 Dec.
euro banknotes put into circulation by the Bundesbank in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2). The volume of currency actually put into circulation by theBundesbank can be calculated by adding to this total the item "Intra-Eurosystem
liability/claim related to banknote issue" (see "Other liability items").  5 Excluding central
governments' deposits.  6 In Germany, only savings deposits.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
12•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
2. Consolidated balance sheet of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) * (cont'd)
Liabilities (cont'd)
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area (cont'd)
General government 
 
Debt securities 
Other general governmentRepo transactions
with non-banks
in the euro area
 
With agreed maturities of 
At agreed notice of  2
End of
monthCentral
govern-
ment Total Overnightup to
1 yearover
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsup to
3 monthsover
3 months Totalof which:
Enterprises
and
householdsMoney
market
fund
shares
(net)  3 Totalof which:
Denom-
inated
in euro
Euro area (€ billion) 1
2018 Nov. 383.1 423.9 218.9 85.1 33.6 56.3 25.7 4.3 268.8 268.4 511.8 2,162.9 1,469.0
Dec. 322.5 401.6 203.7 78.7 34.2 56.9 23.8 4.3 254.5 254.2 513.3 2,158.0 1,471.8
2019 Jan. 389.2 402.2 196.8 86.0 34.9 55.8 24.2 4.5 270.1 269.6 524.5 2,176.2 1,484.6
Feb. 407.9 419.6 207.3 92.2 34.2 56.3 25.1 4.5 270.5 269.7 516.3 2,205.0 1,506.2
Mar. 386.0 426.7 212.1 92.6 35.4 56.7 25.5 4.4 272.7 272.3 520.2 2,185.7 1,489.6
Apr. 352.9 424.6 212.2 91.4 34.5 56.9 25.3 4.4 295.0 294.6 532.3 2,174.9 1,488.0
May 370.7 431.6 216.9 94.9 33.4 57.0 25.1 4.3 287.4 287.0 522.6 2,191.0 1,497.2
June 404.2 441.8 224.4 94.6 35.1 58.1 25.2 4.4 266.0 265.7 510.6 2,182.2 1,493.8
July 391.2 437.1 221.5 93.8 34.1 58.2 25.2 4.4 284.1 283.8 533.0 2,189.1 1,492.7
Aug. 397.4 447.4 228.3 97.2 34.1 58.3 25.3 4.3 289.0 288.5 550.9 2,173.6 1,484.1
Sep. 402.9 449.3 231.4 98.0 31.7 58.9 25.0 4.2 257.0 256.5 537.1 2,181.1 1,484.7
Oct. 365.0 440.5 224.5 95.5 32.3 59.1 25.2 3.9 298.8 298.3 538.6 2,174.6 1,488.4
Nov. 363.9 452.6 235.7 95.5 33.8 59.1 24.8 3.8 284.3 283.7 541.6 2,187.8 1,493.0
Dec. 297.5 430.4 224.7 85.9 33.7 59.1 23.6 3.6 250.3 249.8 520.3 2,153.8 1,486.7
2020 Jan. 381.8 422.3 209.6 92.7 33.2 59.5 23.2 4.1 243.4 242.9 555.1 2,187.7 1,500.2
Feb. 425.5 436.0 219.8 96.8 32.8 59.2 23.3 4.0 263.2 262.7 550.5 2,191.4 1,497.8
Mar. 430.2 441.4 232.8 93.3 31.0 58.2 22.3 3.9 293.2 292.6 530.9 2,175.2 1,484.3
Apr. 502.3 428.6 233.9 84.0 29.4 56.4 21.1 3.8 289.0 288.6 554.9 2,159.1 1,472.6
May 603.1 434.8 245.9 81.7 28.4 54.7 20.3 3.8 297.8 297.5 554.9 2,134.1 1,470.7
June 726.5 441.1 259.5 82.4 24.6 51.8 19.3 3.4 254.8 254.6 569.4 2,105.3 1,453.4
July 788.0 441.4 264.1 80.1 23.2 51.0 19.4 3.5 271.8 271.6 599.3 2,054.8 1,434.0
Aug. 828.6 448.5 273.6 79.5 22.1 50.3 19.6 3.5 266.9 266.7 599.9 2,036.4 1,424.9
Sep. 849.0 442.1 274.8 74.4 20.8 49.1 19.5 3.4 237.7 237.5 608.1 2,059.9 1,430.7
Oct. 831.8 437.6 277.4 69.5 20.8 47.0 19.5 3.4 243.1 242.9 622.2 2,046.4 1,417.9
Nov. 733.3 458.4 307.1 64.6 17.8 46.1 19.4 3.3 246.4 246.4 620.8 2,028.0 1,406.4
Dec. 605.4 439.1 294.6 60.3 17.2 44.9 18.9 3.3 221.2 221.1 637.7 1,998.7 1,386.6
German contribution (€ billion)
2018 Nov. 65.7 226.3 69.4 74.8 28.7 49.7 3.1 0.7 1.3 1.3 2.2 544.9 290.3
Dec. 60.3 225.0 74.6 67.5 29.3 49.9 3.0 0.6 0.8 0.8 2.2 532.5 283.4
2019 Jan. 41.8 224.2 67.1 74.8 30.0 48.7 3.0 0.6 1.7 1.7 2.2 546.6 294.1
Feb. 38.8 234.3 71.8 80.3 29.3 49.1 3.1 0.6 2.0 2.0 2.2 560.4 302.9
Mar. 56.4 239.2 75.9 80.0 30.3 49.4 3.1 0.6 11.4 11.4 2.0 557.3 298.2
Apr. 41.2 234.7 73.6 78.4 29.4 49.6 3.1 0.6 12.5 12.5 1.9 552.8 293.5
May 60.3 240.7 77.4 81.7 28.3 49.6 3.2 0.5 11.2 11.2 2.0 560.1 300.1
June 64.0 245.1 80.4 81.5 29.0 50.6 3.1 0.5 12.9 12.9 2.0 558.0 301.8
July 36.9 242.9 79.6 80.7 28.2 50.8 3.1 0.5 13.9 13.9 2.0 559.4 296.9
Aug. 47.6 251.2 84.7 83.8 28.1 50.9 3.2 0.5 16.9 16.7 2.0 557.3 295.0
Sep. 57.3 250.3 84.6 85.0 25.8 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.5 1.3 2.2 563.5 297.7
Oct. 37.4 239.6 76.3 82.4 26.1 51.3 3.1 0.5 1.2 1.0 2.1 555.2 299.2
Nov. 45.4 249.3 83.4 83.9 27.4 51.1 3.1 0.5 1.7 1.5 1.9 560.4 302.2
Dec. 43.4 246.2 89.5 75.4 27.0 51.0 2.9 0.4 3.5 3.4 1.8 551.4 301.6
2020 Jan. 37.8 240.2 77.8 81.4 26.6 51.3 2.7 0.4 2.5 2.4 1.8 560.9 306.5
Feb. 62.2 251.9 85.5 86.0 26.3 50.9 2.8 0.4 2.0 1.8 1.8 563.9 310.3
Mar. 69.7 257.9 97.6 82.5 24.7 49.8 2.8 0.4 1.7 1.6 2.2 553.0 310.7
Apr. 87.5 244.0 94.7 74.4 23.7 48.3 2.7 0.4 3.4 3.3 2.1 550.6 306.2
May 116.2 253.6 108.0 72.9 22.9 46.7 2.8 0.3 2.4 2.3 1.9 543.1 305.4
June 174.0 246.5 106.1 74.1 19.5 44.0 2.5 0.3 0.9 0.7 1.8 532.8 297.2
July 208.5 245.3 109.6 71.4 18.3 43.2 2.5 0.3 2.1 2.0 1.6 523.3 293.3
Aug. 229.5 252.8 118.7 71.3 17.4 42.4 2.6 0.3 1.7 1.5 1.9 517.9 291.1
Sep. 244.7 245.8 119.4 66.0 16.5 41.1 2.5 0.3 1.3 1.1 2.0 525.3 296.1
Oct. 224.8 239.1 119.1 61.7 16.6 39.0 2.5 0.3 1.4 1.3 2.7 519.9 296.2
Nov. 212.1 243.7 131.6 57.3 14.0 38.0 2.5 0.2 9.1 9.1 2.4 515.5 296.1
Dec. 189.2 238.0 132.1 52.8 13.5 36.9 2.5 0.2 12.2 12.2 2.5 503.4 290.0
* Monetary financial institutions (MFIs) comprise banks (including building and loan
associations), money market funds, and the European Central Bank and national central
banks (the Eurosystem).  1 Source: ECB.  2 In Germany, only savings deposits.
3 Excluding holdings of MFIs; for the German contribution, excluding German MFIs'
portfolios of securities issued by MFIs in the euro area.  4 In Germany, bank debt
securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money market paper.5 Excluding liabilities arising from securities issued.  6 After deduction of inter-MFI
participations.  7 The German contributions to the Eurosystem's monetary aggregates
should on no account be interpreted as national monetary aggregates and are
therefore not comparable with the erstwhile German money stocks M1, M2 or M3.
8 Including DEM banknotes still in circulation (see also footnote 4 on p. 10●). 9 For
the German contribution, the difference between the volume of euro banknotes

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
13•
II. Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  Memo item:
Other liability items  
 
issued (net)  3Monetary aggregates  7
(from 2002 German contribution
excludes currency in circulation)
With maturities of
up to
1 year  4over
1 year and
up to
2 yearsover
2 yearsLiabilities
to non-
euro area
residents  5Capital
and
reserves  6Excess
of
inter-MFI
liabilities Total  8of which:
Intra-
Eurosystem-
liability/
claim
related to
banknote
issue  9 M1 10 M2 11 M3 12Monetary
capital
forma-
tion  13Monetary
liabilities
of central
govern-
ments
(Post
Office,
Treasury)  14 End of
month
Euro area (€ billion) 1
38.9 21.7 2,102.3 4,659.6 2,711.2 6.6 3,018.8 0.0 8,256.6 11,668.3 12,313.3 6,792.3 153.3 2018 Nov.
47.5 20.7 2,089.8 4,503.3 2,727.3 8.7 2,936.1 0.0 8,301.7 11,714.7 12,363.6 6,818.5 149.8 Dec.
36.3 23.9 2,116.1 4,696.6 2,752.7 10.8 3,031.2 0.0 8,262.9 11,693.2 12,349.0 6,868.4 151.7 2019 Jan.
33.2 26.1 2,145.8 4,661.2 2,740.4 15.1 3,029.3 0.0 8,303.9 11,741.1 12,389.0 6,886.1 150.4 Feb.
16.0 22.5 2,147.2 4,647.4 2,766.7 23.2 3,198.4 0.0 8,441.7 11,886.7 12,519.2 6,912.6 151.9 Mar.
17.0 21.4 2,136.5 4,770.1 2,760.9 14.1 3,202.5 0.0 8,487.7 11,942.4 12,591.3 6,890.6 151.5 Apr.
23.4 22.1 2,145.4 4,776.2 2,774.6 26.3 3,364.1 0.0 8,575.0 12,032.4 12,675.1 6,910.1 149.7 May
20.0 21.6 2,140.6 4,640.6 2,830.3 33.6 3,469.1 0.0 8,669.1 12,114.5 12,741.2 6,980.7 155.2 June
16.1 21.3 2,151.6 4,796.8 2,878.9 25.7 3,685.3 0.0 8,697.8 12,150.2 12,798.2 7,020.3 151.7 July
2.7 20.7 2,150.1 4,854.7 2,940.4 – 2.9 4,083.0 0.0 8,786.7 12,264.2 12,915.0 7,066.9 152.7 Aug.
3.2 19.0 2,158.9 4,803.5 2,942.8 25.4 3,943.1 0.0 8,788.8 12,251.2 12,883.4 7,104.7 153.4 Sep.
7.5 19.8 2,147.2 4,768.1 2,935.0 34.3 3,716.0 0.0 8,846.0 12,293.3 12,936.6 7,077.6 152.9 Oct.
6.8 19.5 2,161.5 4,770.3 2,922.8 31.2 3,675.9 0.0 8,971.7 12,401.5 13,041.9 7,080.9 157.9 Nov.
– 11.3 19.2 2,145.9 4,452.2 2,913.5 25.1 3,469.9 0.0 8,975.4 12,395.9 12,995.5 7,060.8 152.0 Dec.
– 0.4 21.9 2,166.2 4,759.3 2,950.9 24.4 3,716.4 0.0 8,927.4 12,357.6 13,006.6 7,116.2 154.9 2020 Jan.
3.6 23.4 2,164.4 4,817.2 2,967.8 26.5 3,965.8 0.0 9,012.7 12,442.0 13,104.7 7,128.0 156.9 Feb.
29.9 21.7 2,123.7 4,908.2 2,930.7 11.7 4,142.7 0.0 9,312.6 12,762.2 13,454.2 7,042.8 152.5 Mar.
12.8 21.5 2,124.8 5,048.8 2,947.0 – 25.6 4,207.0 0.0 9,490.6 12,941.3 13,631.9 7,050.6 153.0 Apr.
3.8 22.3 2,108.0 4,946.7 2,952.7 – 33.2 4,051.1 0.0 9,682.0 13,166.3 13,848.7 7,040.8 154.7 May
– 0.1 21.1 2,084.3 4,711.9 2,977.9 – 4.5 4,006.8 0.0 9,768.9 13,243.0 13,929.0 7,034.1 158.0 June
– 12.1 20.2 2,046.7 4,734.1 3,018.0 – 53.1 4,068.6 0.0 9,812.9 13,308.1 14,024.9 7,040.3 159.4 July
– 15.4 19.2 2,032.5 4,700.6 3,015.1 – 39.0 3,858.4 0.0 9,856.0 13,340.6 14,040.9 7,031.8 160.0 Aug.
– 14.1 15.8 2,058.3 4,656.3 3,011.7 – 16.5 3,876.9 0.0 9,923.4 13,427.9 14,135.5 7,044.3 163.9 Sep.
– 2.0 18.4 2,029.9 4,779.1 3,038.7 – 48.2 3,856.6 0.0 10,025.8 13,516.4 14,249.4 7,037.3 165.3 Oct.
– 1.3 19.9 2,009.4 4,859.4 2,995.9 – 44.3 3,882.7 0.0 10,167.2 13,629.8 14,367.5 6,977.9 174.0 Nov.
– 3.6 17.4 1,984.8 4,653.2 3,021.7 – 2.9 3,775.9 0.0 10,275.5 13,749.4 14,492.0 6,969.3 175.1 Dec.
German contribution (€ billion)
19.4 10.3 515.2 932.7 675.8 –1,041.8 1,288.0 397.1 2,196.8 3,024.9 3,058.2 1,874.7 0.0 2018 Nov.
17.7 10.1 504.6 967.9 689.9 –1,063.4 1,297.9 401.1 2,195.0 3,021.7 3,052.5 1,879.0 0.0 Dec.
18.2 9.6 518.7 920.7 690.0 –971.6 1,326.1 391.5 2,180.7 3,017.3 3,049.1 1,886.9 0.0 2019 Jan.
19.1 8.2 533.2 882.8 684.4 –966.0 1,330.9 394.4 2,189.4 3,030.9 3,062.3 1,895.1 0.0 Feb.
19.2 8.3 529.8 958.7 695.9 –1,031.3 1,412.2 396.9 2,212.1 3,054.7 3,095.5 1,900.4 0.0 Mar.
18.6 8.2 525.9 953.9 692.7 –985.8 1,398.5 400.8 2,230.0 3,069.0 3,110.2 1,890.7 0.0 Apr.
18.9 8.4 532.9 944.9 702.5 –1,016.3 1,496.1 404.8 2,254.0 3,093.0 3,133.5 1,906.3 0.0 May
19.7 7.6 530.7 957.2 722.3 –1,013.1 1,542.9 407.8 2,263.6 3,100.7 3,142.8 1,926.0 0.0 June
19.7 7.9 531.9 925.0 735.6 –950.3 1,600.3 411.4 2,271.3 3,104.7 3,148.2 1,938.3 0.0 July
20.3 7.6 529.4 944.3 757.0 –980.7 1,826.9 417.2 2,297.9 3,135.9 3,182.8 1,952.6 0.0 Aug.
22.3 7.4 533.8 927.2 755.6 –992.1 1,761.2 422.1 2,298.5 3,131.2 3,164.7 1,954.3 0.0 Sep.
20.7 6.7 527.8 867.4 750.0 –918.5 1,664.0 426.3 2,316.5 3,147.7 3,178.4 1,941.3 0.0 Oct.
21.4 5.8 533.1 877.7 749.1 –951.9 1,671.9 430.8 2,341.2 3,168.5 3,199.3 1,943.1 0.0 Nov.
21.0 6.1 524.3 863.5 750.1 –999.8 1,681.4 435.8 2,340.1 3,161.1 3,193.6 1,933.9 0.0 Dec.
23.9 6.7 530.2 831.0 757.2 –900.5 1,744.6 437.9 2,333.0 3,157.1 3,192.1 1,942.8 0.0 2020 Jan.
21.7 6.8 535.4 850.2 764.8 –912.0 1,867.4 442.7 2,350.9 3,174.6 3,207.0 1,953.8 0.0 Feb.
18.4 6.3 528.3 901.4 757.6 –990.7 1,940.1 455.0 2,444.0 3,263.9 3,292.5 1,935.1 0.0 Mar.
15.9 6.9 527.8 942.0 759.1 –1,003.6 2,007.1 458.2 2,454.3 3,266.4 3,294.7 1,930.3 0.0 Apr.
14.9 7.3 520.8 917.3 756.1 –1,003.8 1,932.8 458.5 2,505.0 3,323.2 3,349.8 1,918.3 0.0 May
14.8 7.1 510.9 939.7 769.1 –1,074.1 1,923.1 458.1 2,514.8 3,325.2 3,349.7 1,913.0 0.0 June
12.8 6.7 503.7 907.0 784.6 –1,089.1 1,967.5 460.5 2,519.5 3,336.8 3,360.1 1,913.6 0.0 July
12.0 7.2 498.7 891.2 778.4 –1,114.7 1,888.5 464.3 2,537.9 3,350.2 3,372.9 1,899.9 0.0 Aug.
12.4 6.7 506.2 952.4 787.3 –1,172.8 1,905.3 467.0 2,564.6 3,371.8 3,394.2 1,912.5 0.0 Sep.
11.1 7.0 501.8 906.4 794.7 –1,107.6 1,894.1 469.4 2,595.4 3,403.6 3,425.7 1,913.5 0.0 Oct.
10.0 7.1 498.4 923.3 780.2 –1,109.5 1,859.4 470.7 2,639.3 3,433.2 3,461.8 1,893.5 0.0 Nov.
9.0 6.7 487.7 990.0 787.6 –1,196.5 1,844.4 473.1 2,632.9 3,426.2 3,456.5 1,888.5 0.0 Dec.
actually issued by the Bundesbank and the amount disclosed in accordance with the
accounting regime chosen by the Eurosystem (see also footnote 2 on banknote
circulation in Table III.2).  10 Overnight deposits (excluding central governments'
deposits), and (for the euro area) currency in circulation, central governments'
overnight monetary liabilities, which are not included in the consolidated balance
sheet.  11 M1 plus deposits with agreed maturities of up to two years and at agreednotice of up to three months (excluding central governments' deposits) and (for the
euro area) central governments' monetary liabilities with such maturities.  12 M2 plus
repo transactions, money market fund shares, money market paper and debt securities
up to two years.  13 Deposits with agreed maturities of over two years and at agreed
notice of over three months, debt securities with maturities of over two years, capital
and reserves.  14 Non-existent in Germany.

Deutsche Bundesbank
14  Monthly Report
February 2021
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
3.  Banking system’s liquidity position  * 
   Stocks
  
€ billion; period averages of daily positions
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balances
Reserve in gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (includingmaintenance and foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Baseperiod currency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
2019         Apr. 678.6 5.7 720.3 0.1 2,635.9 619.6 0.0 1,215.8 270.5 555.6 1,379.0 3,214.4
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 689.7 5.5 718.6 0.4 2,630.6 601.9 0.0 1,228.2 248.2 561.9 1,404.6 3,234.7
         July 710.3 4.6 700.1 0.0 2,620.4 570.8 0.0 1,240.8 295.9 592.2 1,335.7 3,147.4
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 720.2 3.0 692.5 0.0 2,612.4 555.7 0.0 1,251.1 268.5 621.2 1,331.5 3,138.3
         Oct. 758.5 2.0 668.5 0.0 2,608.7 456.6 0.0 1,252.7 298.6 641.3 1,388.5 3,097.8
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 773.3 1.8 663.7 0.0 2,618.8 257.9 0.0 1,262.9 226.6 648.1 1,662.1 3,182.9
2020         Jan. 768.6 2.9 616.1 0.0 2,639.1 254.6 0.0 1,282.2 211.8 654.3 1,623.7 3,160.6
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 767.1 1.4 615.9 0.0 2,666.7 244.6 0.0 1,277.1 268.6 618.4 1,642.3 3,164.1
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 926.3 0.6 865.7 0.0 2,784.2 271.8 0.0 1,321.9 374.4 788.6 1,820.2 3,413.8         June 950.4 0.3 984.2 0.0 2,986.9 299.9 0.0 1,347.9 477.1 830.5 1,966.5 3,614.4
         July 871.3 0.8 1,401.5 0.0 3,168.2 356.0 0.0 1,365.7 671.2 703.1 2,345.9 4,067.5
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 865.9 1.3 1,593.2 0.0 3,323.6 413.2 0.0 1,381.2 712.9 651.0 2,625.7 4,420.1
         Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Nov. 864.4 1.3 1,707.8 0.0 3,475.8 460.7 0.0 1,389.1 749.0 653.5 2,797.0 4,646.8         Dec. 865.1 0.5 1,754.4 0.0 3,614.7 535.4 0.0 1,403.9 647.0 687.7 2,960.7 4,900.0
2021         Jan. 848.6 0.3 1,792.6 0.0 3,712.9 586.9 0.0 1,429.4 530.3 778.4 3,029.4 5,045.7
Deutsche Bundesbank
2019         Apr. 160.8 0.6 86.7 0.0 563.7 172.5 0.0 296.1 61.2 − 199.4 481.6 950.1
         May . . . . . . . . . . . .         June 163.6 0.6 86.1 0.0 565.2 166.3 0.0 299.6 58.0 − 213.6 505.3 971.1
         July 169.4 0.7 85.3 0.0 563.1 150.1 0.0 303.0 65.7 − 175.0 474.5 927.7
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 172.5 0.5 84.9 0.0 562.7 150.1 0.0 305.6 57.6 − 157.6 464.9 920.6
         Oct. 182.8 0.4 82.8 0.0 560.0 151.5 0.0 306.5 70.8 − 159.4 456.6 914.7
         Nov. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Dec. 186.9 0.4 82.4 0.0 566.1 82.2 0.0 307.6 55.9 − 135.3 525.4 915.3
2020         Jan. 186.0 0.9 74.0 0.0 567.9 73.6 0.0 311.7 52.7 − 95.7 486.5 871.8
         Feb. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Mar. 185.0 0.4 74.0 0.0 573.7 65.4 0.0 311.2 64.4 − 125.0 517.1 893.7
         Apr. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         May 238.0 0.2 106.8 0.0 585.3 76.3 0.0 324.1 102.0 − 174.5 602.8 1,003.2         June 248.7 0.1 122.5 0.0 623.1 85.0 0.0 326.4 137.6 − 172.6 618.1 1,029.5
         July 222.1 0.5 235.2 0.0 655.9 108.2 0.0 331.5 205.0 − 238.1 707.1 1,146.8
         Aug. . . . . . . . . . . . .         Sep. 212.1 0.8 284.0 0.0 692.0 136.0 0.0 336.4 239.6 − 298.0 774.8 1,247.3
         Oct. . . . . . . . . . . . .
         Nov. 212.1 0.7 319.5 0.0 729.0 145.5 0.0 338.1 254.7 − 302.9 826.0 1,309.6         Dec. 213.0 0.3 333.9 0.0 768.7 166.6 0.0 341.2 217.9 − 294.5 884.7 1,392.5
2021         Jan. 208.3 0.1 341.1 0.0 791.3 178.9 0.0 347.3 189.4 − 252.8 878.0 1,404.2
Discrepancies may arise from rounding. *The banking system’s liquidity position is figures are available in such cases. 2Source: ECB. 3Includes liquidity provided under
defined as the current account holdings in euro of euro area credit institutions with the Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes. 4From August 2009 includes liquidity
the Eurosystem. Amounts are derived from the consolidated financial statement of absorbed as a result of the Eurosystem’s foreign exchange swap oper ations. 5From
the Eurosystem and the financial statement of the Bundesbank. 1Figures are daily av- 2002 euro banknotes and other banknotes which have been issued by the national
erages for the reserve maintenance period ending in the month indicated. Following central banks of the Eurosystem and which are still in circulation . In accordance with
the changeover in the frequency of Governing Council monetary policy meetings to a the accounting procedure chosen by the Eurosystem for the issue of e uro banknotes,
six-week cycle, a reserve maintenance period no longer ends in every month. No a share of 8% of the total value of the euro banknotes in circulation is

Deutsche Bundesbank
15  Monthly Report
February 2021
II.  Overall monetary survey in the euro area
  
  
Flows
  
Liquidity-providing factors Liquidity-absorbing factors
Monetary policy operations of the Eurosystem
Credit
institutions‘
currentaccount
Net assets Longer- Other Other balancesin gold Main term Marginal liquidity- liquidity- Banknotes Central Other (including Reserveand foreign refinancing refinancing lending providing Deposit absorbing in government factors minimum Base maintenancecurrency operations operations facility facility deposits (net)  
6 reserves)  7 money  8 period operations  3 operations  4 circulation  5 
ending in  1 
Eurosystem  2  
  
+ 13.1 − 0.3 − 2.8 + 0.0 − 9.9 − 18.0 + 0.0 + 6.6 + 13.2 − 15.8 + 14.2 + 2.7 2019          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 11.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 5.3 − 17.7 + 0.0 + 12.4 − 22.3 + 6.3 + 25.6 + 20.3          June
+ 20.6 − 0.9 − 18.5 − 0.4 − 10.2 − 31.1 + 0.0 + 12.6 + 47.7 + 30.3 − 68.9 − 87.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 9.9 − 1.6 − 7.6 + 0.0 − 8.0 − 15.1 + 0.0 + 10.3 − 27.4 + 29.0 − 4.2 − 9.1          Sep.
+ 38.3 − 1.0 − 24.0 + 0.0 − 3.7 − 99.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 + 30.1 + 20.1 + 57.0 − 40.5          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 14.8 − 0.2 − 4.8 + 0.0 + 10.1 −198.7 + 0.0 + 10.2 − 72.0 + 6.8 + 273.6 + 85.1          Dec.
− 4.7 + 1.1 − 47.6 + 0.0 + 20.3 − 3.3 + 0.0 + 19.3 − 14.8 + 6.2 − 38.4 − 22.3 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.5 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 27.6 − 10.0 + 0.0 − 5.1 + 56.8 − 35.9 + 18.6 + 3.5          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 159.2 − 0.8 + 249.8 + 0.0 + 117.5 + 27.2 + 0.0 + 44.8 + 105.8 +170.2 + 177.9 + 249.7          May
+ 24.1 − 0.3 + 118.5 + 0.0 + 202.7 + 28.1 + 0.0 + 26.0 + 102.7 + 41.9 + 146.3 + 200.6          June
− 79.1 + 0.5 + 417.3 + 0.0 + 181.3 + 56.1 + 0.0 + 17.8 + 194.1 −127.4 + 379.4 + 453.1          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 5.4 + 0.5 + 191.7 + 0.0 + 155.4 + 57.2 + 0.0 + 15.5 + 41.7 − 52.1 + 279.8 + 352.6          Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Oct.
− 1.5 + 0.0 + 114.6 + 0.0 + 152.2 + 47.5 + 0.0 + 7.9 + 36.1 + 2.5 + 171.3 + 226.7          Nov.
+ 0.7 − 0.8 + 46.6 + 0.0 + 138.9 + 74.7 + 0.0 + 14.8 − 102.0 + 34.2 + 163.7 + 253.2          Dec.
− 16.5 − 0.2 + 38.2 + 0.0 + 98.2 + 51.5 + 0.0 + 25.5 − 116.7 + 90.7 + 68.7 + 145.7 2021          Jan.
Deutsche Bundesbank
+ 2.6 − 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 5.8 + 9.1 + 0.0 + 1.8 + 12.0 − 42.5 + 15.6 + 26.5 2019          Apr.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          May
+ 2.8 + 0.0 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 1.4 − 6.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.2 − 14.2 + 23.7 + 21.0          June
+ 5.7 + 0.0 − 0.9 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 16.2 + 0.0 + 3.5 + 7.6 + 38.6 − 30.7 − 43.5          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
+ 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 2.5 − 8.1 + 17.4 − 9.6 − 7.1          Sep.
+ 10.3 − 0.1 − 2.1 + 0.0 − 2.7 + 1.4 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 13.2 − 1.8 − 8.3 − 5.9          Oct.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Nov.
+ 4.1 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.1 − 69.3 + 0.0 + 1.1 − 14.9 + 24.1 + 68.8 + 0.6          Dec.
− 0.9 + 0.4 − 8.5 + 0.0 + 1.8 − 8.6 + 0.0 + 4.1 − 3.2 + 39.6 − 38.9 − 43.5 2020          Jan.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Feb.
− 1.0 − 0.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 5.8 − 8.2 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 11.7 − 29.3 + 30.7 + 21.9          Mar.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Apr.
+ 53.0 − 0.2 + 32.9 − 0.0 + 11.6 + 10.9 + 0.0 + 12.9 + 37.6 − 49.6 + 85.6 + 109.5          May
+ 10.7 − 0.1 + 15.7 + 0.0 + 37.8 + 8.7 + 0.0 + 2.3 + 35.6 + 2.0 + 15.3 + 26.3          June
− 26.6 + 0.4 + 112.6 − 0.0 + 32.8 + 23.2 + 0.0 + 5.1 + 67.5 − 65.5 + 89.0 + 117.3          July
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Aug.
− 10.0 + 0.3 + 48.9 + 0.0 + 36.1 + 27.9 + 0.0 + 5.0 + 34.6 − 59.9 + 67.6 + 100.5          Sep.
. . . . . . . . . . . .          Oct.
+ 0.0 − 0.1 + 35.5 − 0.0 + 37.0 + 9.5 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 15.0 − 5.0 + 51.2 + 62.3          Nov.
+ 0.9 − 0.4 + 14.4 + 0.0 + 39.8 + 21.1 + 0.0 + 3.1 − 36.8 + 8.4 + 58.7 + 82.9          Dec.
− 4.7 − 0.2 + 7.1 + 0.0 + 22.6 + 12.3 + 0.0 + 6.1 − 28.5 + 41.7 − 6.7 + 11.7 2021          Jan.
allocated to the ECB on a monthly basis. The counterpart of this adjustment is factors”. From 2003 euro banknotes only. 6Remaining items in the consolidated
shown under “Other factors”. The remaining 92% of the value of the euro financial statement of the Eurosystem and the financial statement of thebanknotes in circulation is allocated, likewise on a monthly basis, to the NCBs, with Bundesbank. 7Equal to the difference between the sum of liquidity-providing
each NCB showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued factors and the sum of liquidity-absorbing factors. 8Calculated as the sum of the
corresponding to its paid-up share in the ECB’s capital. The difference between the “Deposit facility”, “Banknotes in circulation” and “Credit inst itutions’ current account
value of the euro banknotes allocated to an NCB and the value of the euro balances”. banknotes which that NCB has put into circulation is likewise shown under “Other

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
16•
III.Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
1. Assets *
€ billion
Claims on non-euro area residents denominated
in foreign currencyClaims on non-euro area
residents denominated in euro
As at
reporting
dateTotal
assets 
Gold and gold
receivables TotalReceivables
from the IMFBalances with
banks, security
investments,
external loans
and other
external
assetsClaims on
euro area
residents
denominated
in foreign
currency TotalBalances
with banks,
security
investments
and loansClaims
arising from
the credit
facility under
ERM II
Eurosystem 1
2020 July 17 6,322.6 548.8 356.3 84.3 272.0 35.4 13.3 13.3 –
24 6,351.4 548.7 357.1 84.3 272.8 32.9 12.9 12.9 –
31 6,360.8 548.7 357.0 85.9 271.1 32.4 13.6 13.6 –
Aug. 7 6,385.3 548.7 357.1 85.8 271.3 29.9 12.7 12.7 –
14 6,404.7 548.7 357.1 85.8 271.3 29.7 12.8 12.8 –
21 6,424.0 548.7 357.9 85.8 272.0 28.5 12.7 12.7 –
28 6,440.2 548.8 358.6 85.8 272.8 27.8 11.5 11.5 –
Sep. 4 6,458.9 548.8 359.5 85.8 273.7 27.5 13.8 13.8 –
11 6,474.6 548.8 359.3 85.8 273.5 25.5 12.0 12.0 –
18 6,502.4 548.8 360.4 85.8 274.6 24.1 11.7 11.7 –
25 6,534.8 548.8 360.5 86.6 273.9 24.6 12.5 12.5 –
Oct. 2 6,705.1 559.3 351.3 84.7 266.6 22.2 12.4 12.4 –
9 6,725.7 559.3 350.8 84.7 266.0 23.0 12.6 12.6 –
16 6,743.5 559.3 351.8 84.7 267.1 21.1 13.0 13.0 –
23 6,781.8 559.3 352.6 84.8 267.8 20.9 12.1 12.1 –
30 6,775.8 559.3 353.4 84.9 268.6 20.2 11.9 11.9 –
Nov. 6 6,796.9 559.3 353.1 84.8 268.2 20.8 12.3 12.3 –
13 6,833.5 559.3 352.7 84.8 267.8 20.4 13.1 13.1 –
20 6,867.8 559.3 352.6 84.8 267.8 20.4 13.1 13.1 –
27 6,883.4 559.3 351.5 84.8 266.7 21.2 13.2 13.2 –
Dec. 4 6,923.1 559.3 353.4 86.2 267.2 22.0 12.8 12.8 –
11 6,949.6 559.3 353.3 86.2 267.1 22.3 12.8 12.8 –
18 7,008.9 559.3 354.7 86.2 268.4 25.2 12.2 12.2 –
25 7,014.7 559.3 356.7 87.1 269.7 24.5 13.0 13.0 –
2021 Jan. 1 6,979.3 536.5 347.2 85.4 261.8 23.4 14.3 14.3 –
8 6,984.7 536.5 344.3 85.1 259.2 20.1 10.8 10.8 –
15 7,015.6 536.5 343.0 85.3 257.6 21.2 10.9 10.9 –
22 7,024.2 536.5 342.9 85.3 257.6 21.8 11.1 11.1 –
29 7,033.3 536.5 342.3 85.2 257.0 22.9 10.7 10.7 –
Feb. 5 7,054.5 536.5 339.9 85.2 254.7 25.4 10.9 10.9 –
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 July 17 2,230.8 170.7 54.7 21.6 33.1 6.5 1.3 1.3 –
24 2,217.8 170.7 54.7 21.6 33.2 5.1 1.0 1.0 –
31 2,257.3 170.7 54.8 22.3 32.5 3.8 1.7 1.7 –
Aug. 7 2,271.2 170.7 54.7 22.3 32.4 1.6 1.0 1.0 –
14 2,277.4 170.7 54.3 22.3 32.1 1.2 1.2 1.2 –
21 2,274.8 170.7 54.7 22.3 32.4 1.1 1.3 1.3 –
28 2,293.3 170.7 54.5 22.3 32.3 1.0 0.4 0.4 –
Sep. 4 2,306.2 170.7 54.1 22.3 31.8 0.9 2.5 2.5 –
11 2,299.5 170.7 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.7 0.5 0.5 –
18 2,310.9 170.7 54.0 22.3 31.7 0.5 0.2 0.2 –
25 2,325.1 170.7 54.1 22.4 31.7 0.5 0.5 0.5 –
Oct. 2 2,383.8 174.0 53.2 21.9 31.2 0.1 1.2 1.2 –
9 2,379.0 174.0 53.1 21.9 31.2 0.1 1.4 1.4 –
16 2,382.2 174.0 53.3 21.9 31.4 0.1 1.7 1.7 –
23 2,401.0 174.0 53.4 21.9 31.5 0.1 0.8 0.8 –
30 2,394.5 174.0 53.3 21.9 31.4 0.1 0.8 0.8 –
Nov. 6 2,373.1 174.0 53.3 21.9 31.4 0.1 1.3 1.3 –
13 2,406.2 174.0 53.2 21.9 31.3 0.1 1.9 1.9 –
20 2,409.1 174.0 53.6 21.9 31.7 0.1 1.7 1.7 –
27 2,450.9 174.0 53.4 21.9 31.5 0.1 1.4 1.4 –
Dec. 4 2,465.1 174.0 54.2 22.6 31.6 0.1 1.7 1.7 –
11 2,451.1 174.0 54.0 22.6 31.4 0.2 1.5 1.5 –
18 2,458.9 174.0 53.9 22.6 31.3 0.5 0.8 0.8 –
25 2,485.2 174.0 54.0 22.6 31.4 0.5 0.4 0.4 –
2021 Jan. 1 2,526.9 166.9 52.2 22.2 30.1 0.5 1.5 1.5 –
8 2,474.3 166.9 52.0 22.1 30.0 0.1 – – –
15 2,481.2 166.9 52.3 22.1 30.3 0.1 – – –
22 2,460.5 166.9 52.9 22.1 30.8 0.1 0.2 0.2 –
29 2,464.6 166.9 53.0 22.0 31.0 0.2 – – –
Feb. 5 2,460.7 166.9 52.9 22.0 30.9 0.1 0.2 0.2 –
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet itemsfor foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at the end of
the quarter.  1 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
17•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Lending to euro area credit institutions related to monetary policy operations
denominated in euroSecurities of euro area residents
in euro
TotalMain re-
financing
opera-
tionsLonger-
term re-
financing
opera-
tionsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsStructural
reverse
opera-
tionsMarginal
lending
facility 
 
 
 
Credits
related
to margin
callsOther
claims on
euro area
credit
institutions
denomi-
nated in
euro TotalSecurities
held for
monetary
policy
purposesOther
securitiesGeneral
government
debt deno-
minated in
euroOther
assetsAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 1
1,590.5 1.0 1,589.4 – – 0.0 – 33.1 3,435.2 3,232.5 202.7 22.8 287.3 2020 July 17
1,590.6 1.1 1,589.4 – – 0.0 – 37.7 3,462.8 3,259.7 203.2 22.8 285.9 24
1,590.0 1.1 1,588.9 – – – – 34.0 3,477.5 3,274.7 202.8 22.8 284.7 31
1,595.5 1.0 1,594.6 – – – – 34.9 3,499.3 3,296.2 203.2 22.8 284.3 Aug. 7
1,595.6 1.0 1,594.6 – – – – 32.0 3,518.1 3,316.1 202.1 22.8 287.8 14
1,595.9 1.3 1,594.6 – – – – 33.3 3,537.7 3,335.3 202.4 22.8 286.6 21
1,595.9 1.6 1,594.3 – – 0.0 – 32.0 3,554.3 3,351.2 203.1 22.8 288.5 28
1,596.6 1.6 1,595.0 – – 0.0 – 35.2 3,567.9 3,366.2 201.8 22.8 286.7 Sep. 4
1,596.7 1.7 1,595.0 – – – – 35.7 3,589.3 3,388.2 201.1 22.8 284.4 11
1,596.7 1.7 1,595.0 – – – – 37.5 3,613.8 3,413.0 200.8 22.8 286.7 18
1,596.9 1.9 1,595.0 – – – – 36.7 3,643.3 3,442.5 200.8 22.8 288.7 25
1,753.3 1.2 1,752.1 – – – – 34.6 3,654.3 3,454.5 199.8 22.7 294.9 Oct. 2
1,754.3 1.2 1,753.1 – – – – 29.2 3,678.4 3,478.6 199.7 22.7 295.6 9
1,754.1 1.0 1,753.1 – – – – 33.2 3,693.6 3,494.9 198.7 22.7 294.7 16
1,754.1 1.0 1,753.1 – – 0.0 – 35.7 3,717.5 3,519.1 198.3 22.7 306.8 23
1,754.1 1.0 1,753.1 – – 0.0 – 26.0 3,723.9 3,529.9 194.0 22.7 304.0 30
1,754.7 0.9 1,753.8 – – 0.0 – 36.6 3,738.7 3,546.2 192.6 22.7 298.7 Nov. 6
1,754.4 0.6 1,753.8 – – – – 40.0 3,769.3 3,576.0 193.2 22.7 301.6 13
1,754.3 0.5 1,753.8 – – – – 42.1 3,801.0 3,607.8 193.2 22.7 302.2 20
1,754.5 0.6 1,753.9 – – – – 41.6 3,816.6 3,622.5 194.1 22.7 303.0 27
1,756.0 0.3 1,755.7 – – 0.0 – 41.8 3,848.8 3,654.4 194.4 22.7 306.4 Dec. 4
1,756.0 0.2 1,755.7 – – – – 38.4 3,875.5 3,681.1 194.5 22.7 309.3 11
1,792.9 0.3 1,792.6 – – 0.0 – 36.7 3,895.6 3,700.0 195.6 22.7 309.6 18
1,792.8 0.3 1,792.6 – – 0.0 – 31.9 3,900.9 3,704.9 196.0 22.7 312.8 25
1,793.2 0.5 1,792.6 – – 0.2 – 25.3 3,890.9 3,694.6 196.3 22.7 325.7 2021 Jan. 1
1,792.8 0.2 1,792.6 – – – – 38.9 3,899.8 3,703.4 196.3 22.7 318.9 8
1,793.1 0.5 1,792.6 – – – – 36.6 3,925.9 3,729.4 196.5 22.7 325.8 15
1,792.8 0.2 1,792.6 – – – – 40.6 3,942.6 3,746.1 196.4 22.7 313.2 22
1,792.7 0.2 1,792.5 – – – – 35.6 3,960.7 3,765.3 195.3 22.7 309.1 29
1,792.6 0.2 1,792.5 – – – – 37.9 3,979.5 3,784.1 195.3 22.6 309.2 Feb. 5
Deutsche Bundesbank
284.5 0.7 283.8 – – 0.0 – 5.3 669.4 669.4 – 4.4 1,034.0 2020 July 17
284.7 1.0 283.8 – – 0.0 – 5.6 676.1 676.1 – 4.4 1,015.4 24
284.7 0.9 283.8 – – 0.0 – 5.1 682.1 682.1 – 4.4 1,049.9 31
284.7 0.6 284.0 – – 0.0 – 5.6 685.6 685.6 – 4.4 1,062.9 Aug. 7
284.7 0.6 284.0 – – 0.0 – 5.7 690.3 690.3 – 4.4 1,064.9 14
284.9 0.8 284.0 – – 0.0 – 5.2 694.8 694.8 – 4.4 1,057.7 21
285.0 0.9 284.1 – – 0.0 – 5.2 699.5 699.5 – 4.4 1,072.3 28
285.1 0.8 284.3 – – 0.0 – 8.1 701.8 701.8 – 4.4 1,078.6 Sep. 4
285.1 0.8 284.3 – – 0.0 – 4.5 703.4 703.4 – 4.4 1,076.1 11
285.0 0.7 284.3 – – 0.0 – 5.6 710.4 710.4 – 4.4 1,080.0 18
285.1 0.8 284.3 – – – – 5.9 718.2 718.2 – 4.4 1,085.6 25
333.8 0.7 333.1 – – – – 6.0 723.5 723.5 – 4.4 1,087.5 Oct. 2
334.5 0.8 333.8 – – 0.0 – 4.8 730.5 730.5 – 4.4 1,076.1 9
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 5.8 732.9 732.9 – 4.4 1,075.5 16
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 9.1 740.2 740.2 – 4.4 1,084.5 23
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 5.0 745.2 745.2 – 4.4 1,077.3 30
334.5 0.7 333.8 – – 0.0 – 8.1 750.0 750.0 – 4.4 1,047.4 Nov. 6
334.2 0.4 333.8 – – 0.0 – 9.3 757.7 757.7 – 4.4 1,071.4 13
334.1 0.2 333.8 – – 0.0 – 11.3 765.4 765.4 – 4.4 1,064.6 20
334.2 0.3 333.8 – – 0.0 – 10.5 772.2 772.2 – 4.4 1,100.8 27
334.4 0.1 334.2 – – 0.0 – 10.8 781.2 781.2 – 4.4 1,104.4 Dec. 4
334.3 0.0 334.2 – – 0.0 – 10.7 785.6 785.6 – 4.4 1,086.6 11
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 9.6 790.8 790.8 – 4.4 1,083.7 18
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 7.4 791.3 791.3 – 4.4 1,112.1 25
341.4 0.2 341.1 – – 0.2 – 2.4 789.2 789.2 – 4.4 1,168.4 2021 Jan. 1
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 9.6 787.9 787.9 – 4.4 1,112.1 8
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 9.7 794.4 794.4 – 4.4 1,112.1 15
341.2 0.1 341.1 – – 0.0 – 10.5 796.1 796.1 – 4.4 1,088.2 22
341.0 0.0 341.0 – – 0.0 – 8.4 802.9 802.9 – 4.4 1,087.7 29
341.1 0.1 341.0 – – 0.0 – 9.0 806.2 806.2 – 4.4 1,079.9 Feb. 5

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
18•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
2. Liabilities *
€ billion
Liabilities to euro area credit institutions related to
monetary policy operations denominated in euroLiabilities to
other euro area residents
denominated in euro
As at
reporting
date 
Total
liabilitiesBanknotes
in circu-
lation  1 TotalCurrent
accounts
(covering
the
minimum
reserve
system)Deposit
facilityFixed-
term
depositsFine-
tuning
reverse
opera-
tionsDeposits
related to
margin
callsOther
liabilities
to euro 
area credit
institutions
deno-
minated
in euroDebt
certifi-
cates
issued TotalGeneral
govern-
mentOther
liabilities
Eurosystem 3
2020 July 17 6,322.6 1,372.7 2,916.1 2,463.7 452.4 – – – 6.9 – 792.6 724.7 67.9
24 6,351.4 1,374.6 2,928.6 2,638.8 289.8 – – 0.0 6.8 – 816.0 750.9 65.1
31 6,360.8 1,377.8 2,997.8 2,650.4 347.4 – – – 6.0 – 760.8 697.7 63.1
Aug. 7 6,385.3 1,381.6 3,051.0 2,674.8 376.2 – – – 6.3 – 728.0 665.3 62.7
14 6,404.7 1,382.9 3,035.7 2,583.9 451.7 – – – 5.6 – 772.1 712.6 59.6
21 6,424.0 1,382.3 3,045.9 2,600.4 445.4 – – – 5.9 – 781.9 725.0 57.0
28 6,440.2 1,383.1 3,025.6 2,549.4 476.2 – – – 6.1 – 822.2 763.7 58.5
Sep. 4 6,458.9 1,384.5 3,115.1 2,621.9 493.2 – – – 9.6 – 737.8 679.2 58.5
11 6,474.6 1,385.7 3,123.2 2,623.1 500.1 – – – 6.2 – 747.1 690.4 56.7
18 6,502.4 1,385.7 3,060.9 2,732.1 328.8 – – – 7.4 – 836.1 784.4 51.7
25 6,534.8 1,386.1 3,056.1 2,722.2 333.8 – – – 7.4 – 862.4 810.1 52.3
Oct. 2 6,705.1 1,387.9 3,303.1 2,807.7 495.4 – – – 7.4 – 787.8 732.8 55.1
9 6,725.7 1,390.2 3,338.2 2,787.6 550.6 – – – 7.1 – 771.4 714.8 56.6
16 6,743.5 1,390.3 3,322.9 2,788.9 534.0 – – – 7.0 – 797.6 737.6 60.0
23 6,781.8 1,391.6 3,360.6 3,242.3 118.3 – – 0.0 6.1 – 806.5 747.1 59.4
30 6,775.8 1,394.0 3,370.2 2,750.0 620.2 – – 0.0 6.3 – 787.8 721.9 65.9
Nov. 6 6,796.9 1,396.7 3,456.3 3,015.2 441.0 – – – 9.2 – 713.9 645.8 68.1
13 6,833.5 1,397.7 3,470.1 2,999.2 470.9 – – – 10.9 – 723.4 654.8 68.6
20 6,867.8 1,399.7 3,429.7 2,884.4 545.3 – – – 12.3 – 788.9 721.1 67.8
27 6,883.4 1,403.2 3,463.8 2,896.1 567.7 – – – 11.5 – 753.3 684.4 68.8
Dec. 4 6,923.1 1,410.9 3,559.1 2,962.3 596.7 – – 0.2 14.8 – 674.5 601.7 72.8
11 6,949.6 1,417.2 3,610.4 3,038.5 571.8 – – 0.1 12.7 – 627.1 557.8 69.3
18 7,008.9 1,424.7 3,600.6 3,036.8 563.7 – – – 15.6 – 643.3 560.5 82.8
25 7,014.7 1,433.6 3,570.9 2,979.4 591.4 – – – 17.8 – 621.3 540.1 81.2
2021 Jan. 1 6,979.3 1,434.5 3,489.2 2,805.3 683.9 – – – 23.6 – 611.3 516.2 95.1
8 6,984.7 1,430.1 3,637.3 3,089.9 547.3 – – 0.0 14.2 – 559.1 474.8 84.3
15 7,015.6 1,427.4 3,688.6 3,130.1 558.5 – – 0.0 13.6 – 604.8 522.2 82.6
22 7,024.2 1,426.8 3,702.7 3,082.0 620.7 – – 0.0 14.1 – 646.1 559.7 86.5
29 7,033.3 1,427.6 3,688.0 3,231.6 456.4 – – – 9.0 – 681.7 593.3 88.4
Feb. 5 7,054.5 1,429.5 3,735.4 3,209.6 525.8 – – – 11.6 – 653.9 566.6 87.3
Deutsche Bundesbank
2020 July 17 2,230.8 334.4 879.8 718.7 161.1 – – – 2.2 – 231.0 223.5 7.4
24 2,217.8 334.6 874.0 786.5 87.4 – – – 1.8 – 228.1 220.8 7.3
31 2,257.3 334.2 908.2 812.3 95.9 – – – 1.4 – 233.6 226.6 7.0
Aug. 7 2,271.2 336.5 921.4 813.2 108.2 – – – 2.0 – 231.0 223.9 7.2
14 2,277.4 337.3 904.2 749.3 155.0 – – – 1.8 – 259.0 252.0 7.1
21 2,274.8 337.6 903.3 751.9 151.4 – – – 1.4 – 258.2 251.1 7.2
28 2,293.3 339.0 904.0 748.2 155.9 – – – 2.3 – 276.9 269.3 7.6
Sep. 4 2,306.2 336.4 947.4 773.9 173.5 – – – 5.5 – 238.6 231.4 7.2
11 2,299.5 337.4 934.1 760.5 173.6 – – – 2.3 – 246.8 239.7 7.1
18 2,310.9 337.8 905.4 810.9 94.6 – – – 2.9 – 286.3 279.0 7.3
25 2,325.1 338.3 908.3 812.5 95.8 – – – 2.9 – 286.3 278.9 7.3
Oct. 2 2,383.8 337.0 1,000.3 870.0 130.3 – – – 3.0 – 252.3 245.0 7.3
9 2,379.0 338.2 996.6 812.7 183.9 – – – 2.5 – 247.4 240.2 7.2
16 2,382.2 338.7 975.6 796.8 178.7 – – – 2.8 – 264.5 257.4 7.1
23 2,401.0 339.1 1,016.1 1,010.1 6.1 – – – 2.0 – 252.8 245.5 7.3
30 2,394.5 338.1 1,030.5 812.5 218.0 – – – 1.1 – 230.2 223.1 7.1
Nov. 6 2,373.1 339.3 1,027.6 918.1 109.4 – – – 3.8 – 213.0 206.0 7.0
13 2,406.2 339.8 1,039.2 912.8 126.4 – – – 5.1 – 231.2 224.1 7.1
20 2,409.1 340.0 1,031.8 854.6 177.1 – – 0.0 6.9 – 240.3 233.0 7.3
27 2,450.9 341.4 1,051.7 866.4 185.2 – – – 5.8 – 250.9 243.1 7.8
Dec. 4 2,465.1 343.0 1,080.5 882.3 198.0 – – 0.2 7.8 – 223.0 215.3 7.7
11 2,451.1 345.2 1,075.2 883.1 192.0 – – 0.1 4.9 – 200.4 192.6 7.8
18 2,458.9 347.4 1,034.5 839.9 194.6 – – – 3.2 – 216.1 208.0 8.2
25 2,485.2 349.9 1,029.4 814.6 214.8 – – – 3.2 – 217.5 208.8 8.6
2021 Jan. 1 2,526.9 347.9 1,018.8 793.8 225.0 – – – 7.5 – 209.7 196.0 13.7
8 2,474.3 346.2 1,055.3 918.6 136.7 – – – 6.1 – 184.8 172.8 12.0
15 2,481.2 346.0 1,086.5 942.3 144.2 – – 0.0 5.8 – 207.3 193.7 13.6
22 2,460.5 346.2 1,106.8 913.9 193.0 – – 0.0 6.7 – 181.8 168.1 13.7
29 2,464.6 346.2 1,128.9 1,010.1 118.8 – – – 4.0 – 176.4 162.9 13.5
Feb. 5 2,460.7 347.0 1,140.2 1,009.0 131.1 – – – 4.8 – 163.8 151.1 12.7
* The consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem comprises the financial
statement of the European Central Bank (ECB) and the financial statements of the
national central banks of the euro area Member States (NCBs). The balance sheet items
for foreign currency, securities, gold and financial instruments are valued at marketrates at the end of the quarrter.  1 In accordance with the accounting procedure chosen
by the Eurosystem for the issue of euro banknotes, a share of 8% of the total value of
the euro banknotes in circulation is allocated to the ECB on a monthy basis. The
counterpart of this adjustment is disclosed as an "Intra-Eurosystem liability related to

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
19•
III. Consolidated financial statement of the Eurosystem
Liabilities to non-euro area
residents denominated in
foreign currency
Liabilities
to non-euro
area residents
denominated
in euroLiabilities
to euro area
residents
in foreign
currency TotalDeposits,
balances
and other
liabilitiesLiabilities
arising
from the
credit facility
under ERM IICounterpart
of special
drawing
rights allocated
by the IMFOther
liabilities  2Intra-
Eurosystem
liability
related to
euro
banknote
issue  1 
 
 
 
 
Revaluation
accountsCapital
and
reservesAs at
reporting
date
Eurosystem 3
237.0 6.0 7.5 7.5 – 57.1 274.6 – 542.9 109.0 2020 July 17
227.2 5.6 7.9 7.9 – 57.1 275.6 – 542.9 109.0 24
224.2 5.7 7.4 7.4 – 57.1 272.1 – 542.9 109.0 31
220.3 5.6 7.5 7.5 – 57.1 275.8 – 542.9 109.0 Aug. 7
210.6 5.9 7.5 7.5 – 57.1 275.3 – 542.9 109.0 14
209.6 5.6 7.7 7.7 – 57.1 276.1 – 542.9 109.0 21
204.2 5.4 7.4 7.4 – 57.1 277.2 – 542.9 109.0 28
209.9 5.7 7.2 7.2 – 57.1 280.2 – 542.9 108.9 Sep. 4
209.4 5.7 7.2 7.2 – 57.1 281.2 – 542.9 108.9 11
206.0 5.8 6.9 6.9 – 57.1 284.6 – 542.9 108.9 18
216.2 5.9 6.9 6.9 – 57.1 284.9 – 542.9 108.9 25
219.0 5.8 6.6 6.6 – 55.9 279.1 – 543.5 108.9 Oct. 2
220.6 5.8 6.4 6.4 – 55.9 277.8 – 543.5 108.9 9
224.4 5.9 6.4 6.4 – 55.9 280.7 – 543.5 108.9 16
212.5 6.1 6.3 6.3 – 55.9 284.0 – 543.5 108.9 23
212.0 6.1 6.3 6.3 – 55.9 284.8 – 543.5 108.9 30
209.7 6.3 6.1 6.1 – 55.9 290.6 – 543.5 108.8 Nov. 6
214.8 6.3 5.9 5.9 – 55.9 296.0 – 543.5 108.8 13
218.3 6.5 6.1 6.1 – 55.9 298.1 – 543.5 108.8 20
231.2 7.0 5.2 5.2 – 55.9 299.9 – 543.5 108.8 27
241.4 7.2 5.0 5.0 – 55.9 301.9 – 543.5 108.8 Dec. 4
260.5 8.0 4.2 4.2 – 55.9 301.5 – 543.5 108.8 11
300.3 8.4 3.8 3.8 – 55.9 304.2 – 543.5 108.8 18
349.2 8.0 4.1 4.1 – 55.9 301.7 – 543.5 108.8 25
431.1 7.8 3.9 3.9 – 54.8 301.4 – 512.9 108.8 2021 Jan. 1
355.5 8.0 3.9 3.9 – 54.8 300.6 – 512.5 108.6 8
285.9 7.9 3.7 3.7 – 54.8 307.8 – 512.5 108.6 15
249.6 8.3 3.8 3.8 – 54.8 297.0 – 512.5 108.6 22
241.6 8.2 4.1 4.1 – 54.8 297.2 – 512.5 108.6 29
233.8 8.3 4.0 4.0 – 54.8 302.3 – 512.5 108.3 Feb. 5
Deutsche Bundesbank
105.3 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 14.8 30.4 458.1 168.8 5.7 2020 July 17
100.7 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 14.8 30.6 458.1 168.8 5.7 24
99.3 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.8 30.6 460.5 168.8 5.7 31
99.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.8 30.6 460.5 168.8 5.7 Aug. 7
94.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.8 30.6 460.5 168.8 5.7 14
93.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 – 14.8 30.7 460.5 168.8 5.7 21
89.9 0.0 0.5 0.5 – 14.8 30.9 460.5 168.8 5.7 28
93.2 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 14.8 31.3 464.3 168.8 5.7 Sep. 4
93.8 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 14.8 31.4 464.3 168.8 5.7 11
93.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.8 31.8 464.3 168.8 5.7 18
103.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.8 31.8 464.3 168.8 5.7 25
102.9 0.0 – – – 14.5 30.6 467.0 170.4 5.7 Oct. 2
106.0 0.0 – – – 14.5 30.8 467.0 170.4 5.7 9
112.1 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 30.8 467.0 170.4 5.7 16
101.4 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 31.9 467.0 170.4 5.7 23
103.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 30.9 469.4 170.4 5.7 30
98.0 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 31.3 469.4 170.4 5.7 Nov. 6
99.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.5 31.3 469.4 170.4 5.7 13
98.4 0.0 0.4 0.4 – 14.5 31.3 469.4 170.4 5.7 20
109.6 0.0 0.2 0.2 – 14.5 31.3 469.4 170.4 5.7 27
117.9 0.0 0.3 0.3 – 14.5 31.4 470.7 170.4 5.7 Dec. 4
132.6 0.0 0.1 0.1 – 14.5 31.5 470.7 170.4 5.7 11
164.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.5 31.9 470.7 170.4 5.7 18
192.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.5 31.9 470.7 170.4 5.7 25
256.8 0.0 – – – 14.2 31.5 473.1 161.8 5.7 2021 Jan. 1
194.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 – 14.2 32.1 473.1 161.8 5.7 8
148.5 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 14.2 32.3 473.1 161.8 5.7 15
130.7 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 14.2 33.0 473.1 161.8 5.7 22
119.9 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 14.2 32.9 474.2 161.8 5.7 29
115.5 0.4 0.1 0.1 – 14.2 33.0 474.2 161.8 5.7 Feb. 5
euro banknote issue". The remaining 92% of the value of the euro banknotes in
circulation is allocated, likewise on an monthly basis, to the NCBs, with each NCB
showing in its balance sheet the share of the euro banknotes issued corresponding to
its paid-up share in the ECB's capital. The difference between the value of the eurobanknotes allocated to the NCB according to the aforementioned accounting
procedure and the value of euro banknotes put into circulation is also disclosed as an
"Intra-Eurosystem claim/liability related to banknote issue".  2 For the Deutsche Bundes-
bank: including DEM banknotes still in circulation.  3 Source: ECB.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
20•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Assets
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) in the euro area Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) in the 
to banks in the home country to banks in other Member States to non-banks in the home country 
Enterprises and house- 
holds   
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1Cash
in hand Total Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Loans 
Securities
issued
by banks Total Total Total Loans
End of year or month 
2010 8,304.8 16.5 2,361.6 1,787.8 1,276.9 510.9 573.9 372.8 201.0 3,724.5 3,303.0 2,669.2 2,354.7
2011 8,393.3 16.4 2,394.4 1,844.5 1,362.2 482.2 550.0 362.3 187.7 3,673.5 3,270.5 2,709.4 2,415.1
2012 8,226.6 19.2 2,309.0 1,813.2 1,363.8 449.4 495.9 322.2 173.7 3,688.6 3,289.4 2,695.5 2,435.7
2013 7,528.9 18.7 2,145.0 1,654.8 1,239.1 415.7 490.2 324.6 165.6 3,594.3 3,202.1 2,616.3 2,354.0
2014 7,802.3 19.2 2,022.8 1,530.5 1,147.2 383.3 492.3 333.9 158.4 3,654.5 3,239.4 2,661.2 2,384.8
2015 7,665.2 19.5 2,013.6 1,523.8 1,218.0 305.8 489.8 344.9 144.9 3,719.9 3,302.5 2,727.4 2,440.0
2016 7,792.6 26.0 2,101.4 1,670.9 1,384.2 286.7 430.5 295.0 135.5 3,762.9 3,344.5 2,805.6 2,512.0
2017 7,710.8 32.1 2,216.3 1,821.1 1,556.3 264.8 395.2 270.1 125.2 3,801.7 3,400.7 2,918.8 2,610.1
2018 7,776.0 40.6 2,188.0 1,768.3 1,500.7 267.5 419.7 284.8 134.9 3,864.0 3,458.2 3,024.3 2,727.0
2019 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2019 Mar. 8,121.3 37.0 2,343.5 1,885.9 1,614.7 271.2 457.6 319.3 138.4 3,921.0 3,488.4 3,059.8 2,765.7
Apr. 8,154.6 38.2 2,354.4 1,893.6 1,625.2 268.5 460.8 321.6 139.1 3,928.3 3,492.4 3,068.0 2,774.1
May 8,280.9 37.9 2,376.8 1,919.0 1,648.5 270.5 457.8 317.9 139.9 3,944.5 3,509.1 3,085.5 2,790.5
June 8,321.9 37.9 2,332.5 1,869.9 1,600.4 269.6 462.6 321.6 141.0 3,972.1 3,530.5 3,108.0 2,809.6
July 8,372.1 37.4 2,311.4 1,845.2 1,575.0 270.2 466.2 324.2 142.0 3,984.9 3,539.6 3,114.5 2,815.1
Aug. 8,645.5 38.3 2,327.7 1,857.2 1,589.6 267.6 470.5 327.6 142.9 4,009.7 3,554.6 3,127.0 2,827.3
Sep. 8,550.4 38.0 2,323.6 1,835.8 1,569.4 266.4 487.8 344.3 143.5 4,001.0 3,562.6 3,139.5 2,839.7
Oct. 8,445.6 39.3 2,312.0 1,810.4 1,543.9 266.5 501.6 358.5 143.1 4,008.1 3,569.7 3,149.2 2,847.6
Nov. 8,509.2 40.1 2,361.5 1,860.2 1,590.2 270.0 501.3 358.1 143.2 4,027.4 3,586.5 3,166.8 2,863.7
Dec. 8,311.0 43.4 2,230.1 1,759.8 1,493.5 266.3 470.4 327.6 142.8 4,020.1 3,584.9 3,168.7 2,864.9
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 39.4 2,293.1 1,800.7 1,531.5 269.2 492.4 348.1 144.3 4,033.9 3,591.5 3,173.1 2,867.5
Feb. 8,666.7 40.3 2,308.1 1,815.4 1,545.5 269.9 492.7 348.9 143.8 4,055.3 3,606.4 3,190.1 2,885.8
Mar. 8,912.6 48.1 2,421.0 1,920.7 1,651.9 268.8 500.4 357.5 142.8 4,096.9 3,641.9 3,215.5 2,915.9
Apr. 9,014.6 48.6 2,442.9 1,943.2 1,674.0 269.2 499.7 355.0 144.8 4,115.5 3,656.4 3,225.2 2,926.3
May 8,915.3 48.1 2,395.2 1,896.4 1,631.8 264.6 498.8 355.2 143.6 4,149.8 3,682.9 3,247.5 2,946.1
June 9,026.9 46.0 2,542.6 2,056.2 1,788.0 268.2 486.4 343.6 142.8 4,153.0 3,683.1 3,249.8 2,949.1
July 9,069.0 45.5 2,574.4 2,099.6 1,830.7 268.9 474.8 333.3 141.5 4,153.7 3,688.0 3,258.4 2,958.3
Aug. 8,985.5 46.0 2,595.4 2,127.5 1,858.5 269.0 467.9 328.0 139.9 4,148.3 3,691.9 3,266.7 2,966.1
Sep. 9,097.4 46.1 2,657.2 2,196.9 1,926.4 270.6 460.3 320.7 139.5 4,153.9 3,696.5 3,269.8 2,968.7
Oct. 9,124.3 46.3 2,686.7 2,226.8 1,957.0 269.8 459.9 320.9 139.0 4,181.8 3,713.6 3,283.1 2,980.6
Nov. 9,096.0 45.7 2,684.1 2,232.1 1,965.3 266.9 452.0 313.9 138.1 4,198.6 3,723.7 3,293.3 2,991.0
Dec. 8,943.1 47.5 2,622.7 2,178.0 1,913.6 264.4 444.7 307.0 137.7 4,179.6 3,710.0 3,297.0 2,993.1
Changes 3
2011 54.1 – 0.1 32.6 58.7 91.7 –33.0 –26.0 – 12.1 –13.9 –51.8 –35.3 38.7 56.7
2012 –129.2 2.9 –81.9 –28.4 3.0 –31.4 –53.5 – 39.7 –13.8 27.5 27.7 17.0 28.8
2013 –703.6 – 0.5 –257.1 –249.2 –216.5 –32.7 – 7.9 1.6 – 9.5 13.6 16.6 23.6 21.6
2014 206.8 0.4 –126.2 –128.6 –95.3 –33.4 2.4 7.2 – 4.8 55.1 40.0 52.3 36.8
2015 –191.4 0.3 –18.2 –12.1 66.1 –78.2 – 6.1 6.6 –12.8 64.8 64.1 68.1 56.6
2016 184.3 6.5 120.3 178.4 195.3 –16.8 –58.1 – 49.2 – 8.8 57.5 53.4 88.8 81.0
2017 8.0 6.1 135.9 165.0 182.6 –17.6 –29.1 – 19.6 – 9.5 51.3 63.5 114.8 101.1
2018 101.8 8.5 –29.2 –49.7 –53.4 3.7 20.6 13.0 7.6 78.7 71.9 118.1 127.8
2019 483.4 2.8 20.7 – 3.8 – 2.3 – 1.5 24.5 16.9 7.5 161.8 130.5 148.2 140.9
2019 Apr. 33.9 1.2 10.8 7.7 10.5 – 2.8 3.1 2.4 0.7 7.6 4.4 8.4 8.9
May 124.6 – 0.3 22.1 25.4 23.2 2.1 – 3.2 – 3.9 0.7 16.3 16.3 17.4 16.2
June 50.5 0.0 –42.3 –48.3 –47.7 – 0.6 6.0 4.8 1.2 27.8 21.7 22.9 19.4
July 49.8 – 0.5 –23.0 –25.4 –26.0 0.6 2.4 1.5 0.9 12.1 9.1 6.8 5.6
Aug. 265.9 0.8 14.8 11.4 14.2 – 2.8 3.4 2.7 0.7 23.9 14.6 12.3 11.9
Sep. –100.4 – 0.3 –19.8 –19.0 –18.0 – 1.0 – 0.7 – 1.3 0.6 7.9 8.2 12.1 12.1
Oct. –93.5 1.2 – 9.8 –24.8 –25.0 0.2 15.0 15.3 – 0.3 8.8 8.1 10.5 8.8
Nov. 55.4 0.8 48.2 49.3 45.9 3.3 – 1.1 – 1.2 0.1 18.6 16.6 17.3 15.8
Dec. –187.4 3.3 –129.3 –99.6 –96.3 – 3.3 –29.7 – 29.4 – 0.3 – 6.1 – 1.2 2.2 1.6
2020 Jan. 162.1 – 4.0 61.4 40.5 37.7 2.8 21.0 19.6 1.4 13.0 6.8 4.7 3.1
Feb. 193.8 0.8 20.5 18.6 13.8 4.8 1.9 0.5 1.3 21.8 15.0 17.2 18.3
Mar. 251.0 7.9 113.4 105.3 106.1 – 0.9 8.2 8.8 – 0.6 44.3 36.8 26.5 31.0
Apr. 96.1 0.5 20.8 21.8 21.5 0.3 – 1.1 – 3.0 1.9 18.2 14.2 9.8 10.5
May –40.6 – 0.6 22.6 22.4 19.3 3.1 0.2 1.3 – 1.1 27.3 24.9 20.5 18.0
June 118.6 – 2.1 149.4 161.5 157.8 3.7 –12.1 – 11.2 – 0.9 5.0 1.7 3.6 4.3
July 67.5 – 0.5 36.5 45.1 44.3 0.8 – 8.6 – 7.5 – 1.1 3.1 6.6 10.2 10.8
Aug. –79.5 0.5 21.7 28.2 28.0 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.9 – 1.5 – 4.9 4.3 8.7 8.1
Sep. 104.9 0.1 60.5 69.0 67.5 1.5 – 8.5 – 8.0 – 0.4 5.2 4.5 3.0 2.6
Oct. 25.2 0.2 29.1 29.7 30.5 – 0.8 – 0.6 0.1 – 0.7 27.6 17.3 12.9 11.3
Nov. 12.0 – 0.6 29.0 35.8 37.2 – 1.4 – 6.8 – 6.1 – 0.8 18.6 11.3 11.2 11.5
Dec. –151.3 1.8 –61.1 –54.1 –51.7 – 2.4 – 7.0 – 6.8 – 0.2 –19.1 –13.6 3.8 2.4
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.  1 See
footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Including debt securities arising from the exchange

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
21•
IV. Banks
euro area
to non-banks in other Member States 
Claims on non-euro area
residents
 
  
General governmentEnterprises and
households 
General government
 
Securities Total Loans 
Securities  2Total Totalof which:
Loans Total Loans 
Securities Totalof which:
LoansOther
assets  1 Period
End of year or month
314.5 633.8 418.4 215.3 421.6 289.2 164.2 132.4 24.8 107.6 1,021.0 792.7 1,181.1 2010
294.3 561.1 359.8 201.2 403.1 276.9 161.2 126.2 32.6 93.6 995.1 770.9 1,313.8 2011
259.8 594.0 350.3 243.7 399.2 275.1 158.1 124.1 30.4 93.7 970.3 745.0 1,239.4 2012
262.3 585.8 339.2 246.6 392.3 267.6 144.6 124.6 27.8 96.9 921.2 690.5 849.7 2013
276.4 578.2 327.9 250.4 415.0 270.0 142.7 145.0 31.9 113.2 1,050.1 805.0 1,055.8 2014
287.4 575.1 324.5 250.6 417.5 276.0 146.4 141.5 29.4 112.1 1,006.5 746.3 905.6 2015
293.6 538.9 312.2 226.7 418.4 281.7 159.5 136.7 28.5 108.2 1,058.2 802.3 844.1 2016
308.7 481.9 284.3 197.6 401.0 271.8 158.3 129.1 29.8 99.3 991.9 745.3 668.9 2017
297.2 433.9 263.4 170.5 405.8 286.7 176.5 119.2 28.6 90.6 1,033.2 778.5 650.2 2018
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 2019
294.1 428.5 260.6 168.0 432.6 311.4 197.8 121.2 28.9 92.4 1,084.1 826.7 735.7 2019 Mar.
293.8 424.5 260.8 163.7 435.9 315.7 202.0 120.2 29.6 90.5 1,099.5 840.3 734.2 Apr.
295.0 423.6 259.2 164.4 435.5 317.7 205.0 117.8 29.4 88.4 1,101.0 839.1 820.6 May
298.5 422.5 257.7 164.7 441.6 320.9 207.2 120.7 29.0 91.7 1,103.8 841.8 875.6 June
299.4 425.0 260.2 164.8 445.3 322.2 209.5 123.1 29.0 94.1 1,114.6 851.7 923.8 July
299.7 427.6 260.2 167.4 455.1 330.1 216.8 125.0 28.9 96.1 1,122.3 857.7 1,147.5 Aug.
299.8 423.2 255.1 168.1 438.3 313.4 200.6 124.9 28.8 96.1 1,106.8 841.9 1,081.1 Sep.
301.6 420.5 257.1 163.4 438.4 313.1 201.3 125.3 30.1 95.2 1,102.8 842.5 983.5 Oct.
303.1 419.8 257.7 162.0 440.8 315.2 201.0 125.6 30.5 95.1 1,091.3 828.7 989.0 Nov.
303.8 416.2 254.7 161.6 435.2 312.6 199.0 122.6 29.4 93.2 1,035.8 777.5 981.5 Dec.
305.6 418.3 258.6 159.8 442.4 316.4 203.8 126.0 29.8 96.2 1,078.6 819.6 1,037.1 2020 Jan.
304.3 416.3 256.5 159.8 448.9 322.8 206.6 126.2 29.9 96.3 1,088.6 829.3 1,174.5 Feb.
299.6 426.4 258.5 167.9 455.0 325.2 212.8 129.8 29.5 100.3 1,104.4 838.8 1,242.1 Mar.
298.8 431.2 259.2 172.0 459.1 329.0 217.4 130.2 31.1 99.1 1,119.2 852.3 1,288.4 Apr.
301.4 435.4 258.3 177.1 466.9 334.5 220.6 132.3 31.0 101.3 1,102.1 840.8 1,220.2 May
300.7 433.3 257.8 175.5 469.9 331.1 215.4 138.8 29.2 109.6 1,075.8 816.4 1,209.5 June
300.1 429.6 259.1 170.5 465.7 313.2 217.1 152.5 29.9 122.6 1,047.3 792.5 1,248.1 July
300.7 425.1 253.7 171.4 456.5 311.1 214.5 145.4 29.2 116.1 1,037.6 784.0 1,158.2 Aug.
301.1 426.7 256.0 170.8 457.4 311.0 215.2 146.4 29.3 117.0 1,063.9 808.9 1,176.3 Sep.
302.5 430.5 257.3 173.2 468.2 318.6 219.6 149.5 30.2 119.3 1,049.9 793.4 1,159.6 Oct.
302.2 430.5 256.7 173.8 474.8 325.6 222.5 149.2 29.1 120.1 1,048.0 792.3 1,119.7 Nov.
303.9 413.0 252.4 160.5 469.6 327.3 222.0 142.3 29.7 112.7 1,002.8 750.8 1,090.6 Dec.
Changes 3
–18.0 –74.0 –59.1 –14.9 –16.6 –13.8 – 5.5 – 2.7 8.0 –10.7 –39.5 –34.9 112.9 2011
–11.8 10.7 –10.5 21.2 – 0.2 – 0.7 – 1.5 0.5 – 2.2 2.7 –15.5 –17.7 –62.2 2012
2.0 – 7.0 –10.9 3.9 – 3.0 – 3.4 – 9.3 0.5 – 2.6 3.1 –38.8 –47.2 –420.8 2013
15.5 –12.3 –15.1 2.9 15.1 0.4 – 4.0 14.6 0.9 13.8 83.6 72.0 194.0 2014
11.5 – 3.9 – 4.2 0.3 0.7 4.4 1.8 – 3.7 – 1.0 – 2.8 –88.3 –101.0 –150.1 2015
7.8 –35.4 –12.1 –23.3 4.0 8.2 14.6 – 4.2 – 0.9 – 3.3 51.4 55.0 –51.4 2016
13.7 –51.3 –22.8 –28.5 –12.2 – 3.4 4.0 – 8.7 0.1 – 8.9 –12.3 – 6.7 –173.1 2017
– 9.8 –46.2 –19.1 –27.0 6.8 18.2 18.6 –11.4 – 1.5 – 9.9 29.0 18.9 14.8 2018
7.3 –17.7 – 8.6 – 9.1 31.3 29.5 26.9 1.7 0.0 1.7 –32.1 –33.3 330.3 2019
– 0.4 – 4.0 0.2 – 4.2 3.1 4.2 4.3 – 1.1 0.7 – 1.8 15.8 14.1 – 1.5 2019 Apr.
1.2 – 1.0 – 1.7 0.7 – 0.1 2.3 3.1 – 2.4 – 0.2 – 2.2 0.0 – 2.8 86.5 May
3.5 – 1.2 – 1.5 0.3 6.1 3.4 2.7 2.6 – 0.4 3.1 10.5 9.9 54.5 June
1.2 2.2 2.5 – 0.2 3.0 1.3 2.1 1.7 – 0.0 1.8 4.4 4.1 56.8 July
0.4 2.3 – 0.2 2.5 9.3 7.5 7.0 1.8 – 0.1 1.9 2.6 1.2 223.7 Aug.
0.0 – 4.0 – 4.7 0.8 – 0.3 – 0.1 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.1 – 0.0 –21.9 –21.7 –66.4 Sep.
1.7 – 2.4 2.1 – 4.6 0.8 0.2 1.0 0.5 1.3 – 0.8 3.9 7.7 –97.7 Oct.
1.5 – 0.8 0.6 – 1.4 2.1 1.7 – 0.7 0.4 0.4 0.0 –17.6 –19.3 5.3 Nov.
0.7 – 3.4 – 3.0 – 0.4 – 4.9 – 1.4 – 0.9 – 3.5 – 1.8 – 1.7 –47.9 –44.3 – 7.5 Dec.
1.6 2.1 3.9 – 1.8 6.2 3.2 4.5 3.0 0.4 2.6 36.0 35.9 55.6 2020 Jan.
– 1.1 – 2.2 – 2.1 – 0.1 6.8 6.7 2.8 0.1 0.1 – 0.0 13.5 12.5 137.3 Feb.
– 4.5 10.2 2.0 8.3 7.5 3.3 6.5 4.2 – 0.4 4.6 17.8 11.2 67.6 Mar.
– 0.7 4.5 0.6 3.9 4.0 3.7 4.3 0.3 1.6 – 1.3 10.4 9.3 46.3 Apr.
2.5 4.4 – 0.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 – 1.2 1.6 – 0.6 2.2 –23.0 –18.2 –67.0 May
– 0.7 – 1.9 – 0.3 – 1.6 3.3 – 3.2 – 4.9 6.4 – 1.8 8.2 –22.9 –21.2 –10.8 June
– 0.6 – 3.6 1.3 – 4.9 – 3.5 1.6 2.7 – 5.1 0.6 – 5.7 –10.3 – 7.1 38.7 July
0.6 – 4.4 – 5.4 0.9 – 9.2 – 2.3 – 2.5 – 6.9 – 0.7 – 6.2 – 7.0 – 6.0 –89.8 Aug.
0.4 1.5 2.2 – 0.7 0.7 – 0.1 0.7 0.9 0.1 0.7 21.1 20.0 18.0 Sep.
1.6 4.4 2.0 2.5 10.4 7.3 4.2 3.0 0.9 2.1 –15.3 –16.7 –16.4 Oct.
– 0.3 0.2 – 0.5 0.7 7.3 7.6 3.6 – 0.3 – 1.1 0.8 6.4 6.6 –41.4 Nov.
1.5 –17.4 – 4.2 –13.2 – 5.5 1.3 – 0.3 – 6.9 0.6 – 7.4 –43.8 –41.3 –29.0 Dec.
of equalisation claims.  3 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the flow figures
(see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
22•
IV. Banks
1. Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (excluding the Deutsche Bundesbank) in Germany *
Liabilities
€ billion
Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) in the euro area   Deposits of banks (MFIs)
in the euro area
Deposits of non-banks in the home country Deposits of non-banks 
of banks
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
PeriodBalance
sheet
total  1 Totalin the
home
countryin other
Member
States Total Total 
Overnight Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Total 
Overnight
End of year or month 
2010 8,304.8 1,495.8 1,240.1 255.7 2,925.8 2,817.6 1,089.1 1,110.3 304.6 618.2 512.5 68.4 19.3
2011 8,393.3 1,444.8 1,210.3 234.5 3,033.4 2,915.1 1,143.3 1,155.8 362.6 616.1 515.3 78.8 25.9
2012 8,226.6 1,371.0 1,135.9 235.1 3,091.4 2,985.2 1,294.9 1,072.8 320.0 617.6 528.4 77.3 31.2
2013 7,528.9 1,345.4 1,140.3 205.1 3,130.5 3,031.5 1,405.3 1,016.2 293.7 610.1 532.4 81.3 33.8
2014 7,802.3 1,324.0 1,112.3 211.7 3,197.7 3,107.4 1,514.3 985.4 298.1 607.7 531.3 79.7 34.4
2015 7,665.2 1,267.8 1,065.9 201.9 3,307.1 3,215.1 1,670.2 948.4 291.5 596.4 534.5 80.8 35.3
2016 7,792.6 1,205.2 1,033.2 172.0 3,411.3 3,318.5 1,794.8 935.3 291.2 588.5 537.0 84.2 37.2
2017 7,710.8 1,233.6 1,048.6 184.9 3,529.1 3,411.1 1,936.6 891.7 274.2 582.8 541.0 108.6 42.5
2018 7,776.0 1,213.8 1,021.8 192.0 3,642.8 3,527.0 2,075.5 872.9 267.2 578.6 541.1 104.5 45.0
2019 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2019 Mar. 8,121.3 1,281.9 1,050.1 231.8 3,676.8 3,554.7 2,095.7 877.1 280.6 582.0 544.7 109.9 51.7
Apr. 8,154.6 1,298.3 1,061.2 237.0 3,689.3 3,569.8 2,117.1 870.5 276.7 582.2 544.7 105.8 47.5
May 8,280.9 1,291.2 1,057.1 234.1 3,721.9 3,599.3 2,147.3 869.5 277.3 582.5 544.4 108.1 50.1
June 8,321.9 1,292.1 1,048.3 243.8 3,728.4 3,595.5 2,144.7 868.1 274.5 582.6 544.0 116.0 56.6
July 8,372.1 1,291.9 1,055.1 236.8 3,728.8 3,605.7 2,160.6 863.3 271.9 581.8 543.4 110.3 51.1
Aug. 8,645.5 1,306.3 1,062.2 244.1 3,754.1 3,626.8 2,182.9 863.7 276.0 580.2 542.2 114.6 54.3
Sep. 8,550.4 1,299.7 1,038.3 261.4 3,745.4 3,618.0 2,179.8 859.2 273.5 579.0 541.5 115.2 55.7
Oct. 8,445.6 1,313.5 1,050.3 263.2 3,761.4 3,633.5 2,201.7 854.6 270.4 577.2 540.6 114.1 51.4
Nov. 8,509.2 1,326.4 1,057.3 269.1 3,791.3 3,663.8 2,238.9 849.3 266.7 575.6 539.9 115.8 52.6
Dec. 8,311.0 1,242.8 1,010.4 232.4 3,778.1 3,649.8 2,230.9 843.7 261.7 575.1 540.5 116.3 54.6
2020 Jan. 8,482.2 1,293.2 1,033.0 260.2 3,775.6 3,647.0 2,229.5 846.8 267.2 570.7 537.5 116.3 54.3
Feb. 8,666.7 1,313.5 1,047.8 265.7 3,794.5 3,664.6 2,249.1 847.1 270.3 568.4 535.8 117.0 55.2
Mar. 8,912.6 1,418.4 1,135.8 282.6 3,853.2 3,705.0 2,299.1 841.5 268.6 564.4 532.5 135.5 72.3
Apr. 9,014.6 1,426.3 1,156.6 269.6 3,872.7 3,729.4 2,339.0 826.7 259.6 563.8 532.6 130.3 65.2
May 8,915.3 1,386.1 1,112.0 274.0 3,913.5 3,764.4 2,370.9 829.9 266.6 563.6 532.9 136.6 70.6
June 9,026.9 1,503.5 1,230.4 273.1 3,906.1 3,754.5 2,379.1 812.8 256.1 562.5 532.8 139.2 71.1
July 9,069.0 1,488.7 1,209.5 279.2 3,937.1 3,783.3 2,408.1 814.3 263.0 560.9 531.7 132.9 65.5
Aug. 8,985.5 1,489.8 1,213.2 276.6 3,951.0 3,790.7 2,421.8 808.3 258.8 560.6 531.8 129.7 63.6
Sep. 9,097.4 1,523.9 1,252.4 271.5 3,975.9 3,795.1 2,436.7 798.3 251.4 560.1 531.7 140.6 72.8
Oct. 9,124.3 1,536.3 1,264.9 271.4 4,015.2 3,827.0 2,473.1 794.2 249.1 559.7 531.7 140.8 69.6
Nov. 9,096.0 1,515.4 1,245.5 269.9 4,035.0 3,846.2 2,508.7 778.0 235.3 559.6 532.0 140.2 69.0
Dec. 8,943.1 1,488.8 1,238.1 250.7 4,021.8 3,836.9 2,508.5 767.8 227.1 560.5 533.2 135.1 57.0
Changes 4
2011 54.1 –48.4 –28.8 –19.6 102.1 97.4 52.4 47.6 58.8 – 2.6 1.3 4.8 6.5
2012 –129.2 –68.7 –70.0 1.3 57.8 67.1 156.1 –90.4 –50.2 1.5 14.1 – 1.4 5.4
2013 –703.6 –106.2 –73.9 –32.3 39.1 47.8 111.5 –56.3 –26.6 – 7.3 4.0 2.6 3.3
2014 206.8 –28.4 –32.2 3.9 62.7 71.6 106.0 –32.1 3.1 – 2.4 – 2.4 – 2.5 – 0.0
2015 –191.4 –62.1 –50.3 –11.9 104.1 104.8 153.2 –37.0 –10.1 –11.3 4.2 – 0.4 – 0.3
2016 184.3 –31.6 – 2.2 –29.4 105.7 105.2 124.3 –11.1 1.4 – 8.0 2.4 2.7 1.9
2017 8.0 30.6 14.8 15.8 124.2 107.7 145.8 –32.5 –15.3 – 5.6 1.5 16.4 5.8
2018 101.8 –20.1 –25.7 5.6 112.4 114.7 137.7 –18.8 – 6.5 – 4.3 1.2 – 4.3 2.3
2019 483.4 12.6 –10.0 22.6 132.1 120.0 154.1 –30.6 – 6.6 – 3.4 – 0.6 10.6 8.7
2019 Apr. 33.9 16.4 11.2 5.2 12.6 15.1 21.4 – 6.6 – 3.9 0.2 0.1 – 4.1 – 4.3
May 124.6 – 7.3 – 4.2 – 3.1 32.4 29.5 30.1 – 0.9 0.6 0.3 – 0.3 2.3 2.7
June 50.5 2.1 – 8.2 10.3 7.3 – 3.2 – 2.0 – 1.3 – 2.8 0.2 – 0.4 7.9 6.6
July 49.8 – 1.3 6.3 – 7.6 – 0.7 9.3 15.4 – 5.2 – 2.8 – 0.9 – 0.6 – 5.8 – 5.6
Aug. 265.9 13.7 6.8 6.9 24.7 20.5 21.9 0.2 4.0 – 1.5 – 1.2 4.2 3.1
Sep. –100.4 –19.2 –21.7 2.5 – 9.5 – 9.5 – 3.5 – 4.7 – 2.7 – 1.2 – 0.7 0.5 1.3
Oct. –93.5 15.0 12.5 2.5 17.1 16.2 22.5 – 4.5 – 3.1 – 1.8 – 1.0 – 0.9 – 4.2
Nov. 55.4 11.9 6.6 5.3 29.1 29.5 36.7 – 5.7 – 3.8 – 1.6 – 0.7 1.5 1.1
Dec. –187.4 –82.4 –46.4 –36.0 –12.2 –13.2 – 7.3 – 5.4 – 4.9 – 0.5 0.6 0.7 2.2
2020 Jan. 162.1 49.3 22.2 27.2 – 3.4 – 3.5 – 2.0 2.9 5.3 – 4.5 – 3.0 – 0.1 – 0.4
Feb. 193.8 20.0 14.6 5.4 18.5 17.3 19.4 0.2 3.0 – 2.2 – 1.7 0.6 0.9
Mar. 251.0 104.6 87.7 16.9 58.9 40.4 50.1 – 5.6 – 1.7 – 4.0 – 3.4 18.5 17.1
Apr. 96.1 7.0 20.3 –13.3 18.8 24.0 39.6 –15.0 – 9.2 – 0.7 0.1 – 5.3 – 7.1
May –40.6 22.0 16.8 5.2 34.0 33.3 29.9 3.6 7.3 – 0.2 0.3 1.2 0.1
June 118.6 118.2 118.9 – 0.7 – 7.0 – 9.6 8.3 –16.8 –10.5 – 1.1 – 0.1 2.6 0.6
July 67.5 –11.0 –19.0 8.1 34.1 31.5 31.0 2.1 7.4 – 1.6 – 1.1 – 5.7 – 5.4
Aug. –79.5 1.6 4.0 – 2.4 14.4 7.7 13.8 – 5.9 – 4.1 – 0.2 0.2 – 3.2 – 1.9
Sep. 104.9 33.1 38.7 – 5.7 24.1 3.7 14.4 –10.2 – 7.6 – 0.5 – 0.1 10.7 9.1
Oct. 25.2 12.3 12.4 – 0.1 39.1 32.1 36.4 – 3.9 – 3.3 – 0.4 – 0.0 0.1 – 3.3
Nov. 12.0 8.2 8.4 – 0.1 25.6 20.2 36.4 –16.0 –13.6 – 0.1 0.3 4.1 3.9
Dec. –151.3 –26.6 – 7.4 –19.1 –13.2 – 9.3 – 0.2 –10.2 – 8.2 1.0 1.3 – 5.1 –12.0
* This table serves to supplement the "Overall monetary survey" in Section II. Unlike the
other tables in Section IV, this table includes - in addition to the figures reported bybanks (including building and loan associations) - data from money market funds.
1 See footnote 1 in Table IV.2.  2 Excluding deposits of central governments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
23•
IV. Banks
  Debt securities issued  3
in other Member States  2 Deposits of
central governments
 
With agreed maturities 
At agreed notice
Totalof which:
up to
2 years Totalof which:
up to
3 months Totalof which:
domestic
central
govern-
mentsLiabilities
arising
from
repos with
non-banks
in the
euro areaMoney
market
fund
shares
issued  3 Totalof which:
with
maturities
of up to
2 years  3Liabilities
to non-
euro 
area
residentsCapital
and
reservesOther
Liabilities  1 Period
End of year or month
46.4 16.1 2.8 2.2 39.8 38.7 86.7 9.8 1,407.8 82.3 636.0 452.6 1,290.2 2010
49.6 18.4 3.3 2.5 39.5 37.9 97.1 6.2 1,345.7 75.7 561.5 468.1 1,436.6 2011
42.3 14.7 3.8 2.8 28.9 25.9 80.4 7.3 1,233.1 56.9 611.4 487.3 1,344.7 2012
44.0 16.9 3.5 2.7 17.6 16.0 6.7 4.1 1,115.2 39.0 479.5 503.0 944.5 2013
42.0 15.9 3.3 2.7 10.6 10.5 3.4 3.5 1,077.6 39.6 535.3 535.4 1,125.6 2014
42.2 16.0 3.3 2.8 11.3 9.6 2.5 3.5 1,017.7 48.3 526.2 569.3 971.1 2015
43.9 15.8 3.1 2.6 8.6 7.9 2.2 2.4 1,030.3 47.2 643.4 591.5 906.3 2016
63.2 19.7 2.9 2.6 9.4 8.7 3.3 2.1 994.5 37.8 603.4 686.0 658.8 2017
56.7 15.8 2.8 2.5 11.3 10.5 0.8 2.4 1,034.0 31.9 575.9 695.6 610.7 2018
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 2019
55.4 14.9 2.8 2.5 12.1 10.5 11.4 2.1 1,065.3 32.7 666.8 699.3 717.8 2019 Mar.
55.5 15.0 2.8 2.5 13.7 11.2 12.5 2.0 1,060.0 32.1 698.4 696.3 697.8 Apr.
55.2 14.8 2.8 2.5 14.4 12.0 11.2 2.0 1,071.8 32.4 688.6 703.5 790.6 May
56.6 16.1 2.8 2.5 17.0 14.0 12.9 2.0 1,071.1 33.1 676.3 706.6 832.5 June
56.4 15.6 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 13.9 2.1 1,075.3 33.4 667.9 709.9 882.4 July
57.5 17.4 2.8 2.5 12.8 11.2 16.9 2.2 1,072.7 33.9 676.2 713.0 1,103.9 Aug.
56.8 15.2 2.7 2.4 12.2 10.9 1.5 2.3 1,077.8 35.7 671.4 719.2 1,033.2 Sep.
60.1 17.8 2.7 2.4 13.8 10.6 1.2 2.2 1,067.5 33.4 657.4 711.0 931.3 Oct.
60.6 18.3 2.7 2.4 11.7 10.6 1.7 2.0 1,076.7 33.7 653.6 723.6 933.9 Nov.
59.0 16.5 2.7 2.4 12.0 11.2 1.5 1.9 1,063.2 32.3 559.4 728.6 935.6 Dec.
59.4 17.1 2.7 2.4 12.3 10.8 2.5 1.8 1,078.0 36.0 622.5 712.5 996.0 2020 Jan.
59.2 15.3 2.6 2.4 12.9 11.2 2.0 1.9 1,087.4 34.6 638.8 714.0 1,114.6 Feb.
60.6 16.5 2.6 2.4 12.8 11.2 1.7 2.5 1,074.1 30.8 674.1 713.4 1,175.2 Mar.
62.4 17.6 2.6 2.4 13.0 11.1 3.4 2.4 1,078.1 29.6 704.0 693.5 1,234.2 Apr.
63.4 16.4 2.6 2.4 12.5 10.8 2.2 2.2 1,076.9 28.8 693.7 686.4 1,154.4 May
65.4 19.2 2.6 2.4 12.5 11.8 0.9 2.1 1,074.0 28.6 696.8 702.1 1,141.4 June
64.8 20.2 2.6 2.3 20.8 20.1 2.1 1.9 1,067.4 25.9 698.3 694.7 1,178.9 July
63.6 19.3 2.6 2.3 30.6 29.8 1.7 1.9 1,063.9 25.5 682.1 699.9 1,095.2 Aug.
65.2 21.8 2.6 2.3 40.2 39.0 1.2 2.6 1,077.3 25.6 687.1 720.4 1,108.9 Sep.
68.6 25.0 2.6 2.3 47.3 46.6 1.4 2.7 1,075.1 24.6 687.8 712.4 1,093.3 Oct.
68.7 24.3 2.6 2.3 48.5 47.6 9.1 2.5 1,070.0 23.3 696.7 713.1 1,054.3 Nov.
75.6 30.6 2.6 2.3 49.8 48.6 9.4 2.5 1,056.9 21.2 621.9 710.9 1,030.8 Dec.
Changes 4
– 2.2 1.7 0.5 0.3 – 0.1 – 0.7 10.0 – 3.7 –76.9 – 6.6 –80.5 13.7 137.8 2011
– 7.2 – 3.6 0.5 0.3 – 7.9 – 9.2 –19.6 1.2 –107.0 –18.6 54.2 21.0 –68.5 2012
– 0.5 2.2 – 0.3 – 0.1 –11.3 –10.0 4.1 – 3.2 –104.9 –17.6 –134.1 18.9 –417.1 2013
– 2.3 – 1.2 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 6.4 – 4.8 – 3.4 – 0.6 –63.7 – 0.2 35.9 26.1 178.3 2014
– 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 – 0.4 – 1.9 – 1.0 – 0.0 –86.8 7.7 –30.3 28.0 –143.2 2015
1.1 0.0 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.2 – 1.2 – 0.3 – 1.1 8.6 – 1.3 116.1 26.4 –39.5 2016
10.8 4.2 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.1 – 0.3 – 3.3 – 8.5 –16.1 34.1 –162.3 2017
– 6.4 – 4.1 – 0.1 – 0.1 2.1 2.1 – 2.6 0.3 30.0 – 5.9 –36.0 7.4 10.3 2018
2.0 0.6 – 0.1 – 0.1 1.4 1.4 5.6 – 0.5 22.3 0.1 –47.9 30.0 329.1 2019
0.1 0.1 0.0 – 0.0 1.7 0.8 1.1 – 0.0 – 5.3 – 0.5 31.6 – 3.0 –19.4 2019 Apr.
– 0.4 – 0.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 0.6 – 1.3 0.0 11.8 0.2 –10.4 7.2 92.3 May
1.4 1.3 – 0.0 – 0.0 2.5 2.0 1.7 0.0 3.4 0.9 – 8.2 4.8 39.5 June
– 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.0 – 4.2 – 2.8 1.0 0.1 1.0 0.2 –11.7 2.2 59.2 July
1.1 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 3.1 0.1 – 5.4 0.4 5.8 2.3 221.7 Aug.
– 0.8 – 2.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.2 – 1.1 0.1 1.3 1.7 – 8.3 5.3 –69.0 Sep.
3.4 2.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.8 – 0.1 – 0.3 – 0.1 – 6.5 – 2.1 – 9.7 – 6.9 –102.1 Oct.
0.4 0.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 2.0 0.2 0.4 – 0.2 5.6 0.2 – 7.2 11.5 4.2 Nov.
– 1.5 – 1.7 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 – 9.2 – 1.3 –90.5 6.4 0.7 Dec.
0.3 0.5 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.3 – 0.5 1.1 – 0.1 11.0 3.5 59.9 –17.2 61.4 2020 Jan.
– 0.3 – 1.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.6 0.4 – 0.6 0.1 8.6 – 1.4 15.5 1.3 130.4 Feb.
1.4 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.3 0.6 –11.9 – 3.8 36.2 – 0.3 63.2 Mar.
1.8 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 0.1 – 0.1 1.7 – 0.1 1.6 – 1.3 27.6 –20.7 60.3 Apr.
1.1 – 1.1 – 0.0 – 0.0 – 0.5 – 0.3 – 1.2 – 0.1 5.1 – 0.6 –21.9 3.5 –82.0 May
2.0 2.8 – 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 – 1.3 – 0.2 – 1.3 – 0.1 4.6 16.4 –10.8 June
– 0.3 1.2 – 0.0 – 0.0 8.3 8.3 1.3 – 0.2 3.3 – 1.2 10.9 – 4.3 33.3 July
– 1.3 – 0.8 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.8 9.8 – 0.5 0.0 – 2.2 – 0.4 –14.9 5.7 –83.7 Aug.
1.6 2.4 – 0.0 – 0.0 9.6 9.2 – 0.5 0.7 10.5 0.0 2.6 19.6 14.9 Sep.
3.4 3.2 – 0.0 0.0 7.0 7.5 0.3 0.1 – 2.9 – 1.0 – 0.1 – 8.2 –15.5 Oct.
0.2 – 0.6 – 0.0 – 0.0 1.2 1.0 3.3 – 0.2 – 0.9 – 1.2 12.6 3.3 –39.9 Nov.
6.9 6.3 0.0 0.0 1.3 1.0 0.3 – 0.0 –14.6 – 3.6 –74.8 – 0.5 –21.9 Dec.
3 In Germany, debt securities with maturities of up to one year are classed as money
market paper; up to the January 2002 Monthly Report they were published togetherwith money market fund shares.  4 Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the
flow figures (see also footnote * in Table II.1).

Deutsche Bundesbank
24  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
 
2. Principal assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany, by category of banks*
  
€ billion
  Lending to banks (MFIs)  Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs)
  of which: of which: 
Loans
 Cash in hand and credit
Number of balances forreporting Balance with Balances up to and for Partici- Securities Securities
End of institu- sheet central and issued by including more than issued by pating Othermonth tions total  
1 banks Total loans banks Total 1 year 1 year Bills non-banks interests assets  1 
All categories of banks
 
2020         July 1,527 9,126.2 859.0 2,353.6 1,853.2 495.7 4,454.7 405.3 3,348.1 0.3 678.0 98.5 1,360.4
         Aug. 1,526 9,043.3 810.5 2,414.9 1,917.9 492.4 4,449.5 389.7 3,361.2 0.3 673.5 98.4 1,269.9         Sep. 1,518 9,155.2 933.3 2,378.2 1,882.3 491.2 4,456.2 383.5 3,371.2 0.3 677.6 98.5 1,289.1
         Oct. 1,511 9,183.4 859.7 2,462.0 1,968.1 489.5 4,490.9 389.4 3,387.4 0.3 688.4 98.6 1,272.1
         Nov. 1,501 9,154.5 911.6 2,407.9 1,917.0 486.5 4,506.7 390.6 3,396.3 0.3 697.9 97.3 1,231.0         Dec. 1,501 9,002.1 843.3 2,392.1 1,904.5 484.2 4,469.8 364.3 3,403.7 0.3 686.2 95.6 1,201.2
Commercial banks 6
2020         Nov. 257 3,845.0 494.5 953.9 873.6 79.7 1,417.4 245.3 937.3 0.2 220.5 35.2 944.0
         Dec. 257 3,753.3 497.1 924.3 844.1 79.7 1,381.2 227.1 936.3 0.3 208.7 33.6 917.1
   Big banks 7
2020         Nov. 3 2,244.8 160.0 521.8 488.6 33.1 673.0 125.4 424.8 0.0 112.3 29.3 860.8
         Dec. 3 2,164.7 160.7 487.3 454.7 32.6 655.4 114.3 425.5 0.1 109.5 27.7 833.6
   Regional banks and other commercial banks
2020         Nov. 144 1,155.7 204.2 240.1 194.8 45.1 631.4 84.1 442.0 0.1 102.1 5.3 74.6
         Dec. 143 1,160.7 220.2 246.1 200.2 45.7 613.6 76.5 441.7 0.1 93.2 5.2 75.6
   Branches of foreign banks
2020         Nov. 110 444.6 130.2 192.1 190.1 1.5 113.0 35.8 70.5 0.1 6.0 0.7 8.7
         Dec. 111 427.8 116.3 190.8 189.2 1.5 112.2 36.4 69.1 0.1 6.0 0.7 7.8
Landesbanken
2020         Nov. 6 856.3 96.5 238.8 181.9 56.3 399.8 41.3 311.7 0.0 43.8 8.6 112.6
         Dec. 6 807.4 47.3 249.9 194.2 55.4 393.8 37.3 311.0 0.0 42.7 8.4 108.0
Savings banks
2020         Nov. 377 1,455.8 137.0 179.4 61.3 117.9 1,102.4 46.9 883.4 0.0 171.5 14.9 22.2
         Dec. 377 1,463.7 143.6 177.9 60.7 117.1 1,105.7 45.9 887.0 0.0 172.1 14.9 21.6
 
Credit cooperatives  
 
2020         Nov. 815 1,065.8 48.6 195.5 82.5 112.8 779.9 32.9 628.1 0.0 118.8 18.2 23.6
         Dec. 815 1,072.7 52.5 195.3 82.8 112.3 782.4 32.6 630.6 0.0 119.1 18.3 24.2
Mortgage banks
2020         Nov. 10 240.3 8.4 21.7 12.0 9.6 201.5 3.3 179.3 − 18.9 0.2 8.6
         Dec. 10 241.1 7.6 21.9 12.2 9.5 202.9 3.3 180.8 − 18.8 0.2 8.5
Building and loan associations
2020         Nov. 18 243.4 1.8 45.5 29.4 16.0 192.0 1.0 165.5 . 25.5 0.3 3.9
         Dec. 18 244.9 2.5 45.6 29.5 16.1 193.1 1.0 166.6 . 25.5 0.3 3.5
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
2020         Nov. 18 1,447.8 124.8 773.1 676.3 94.2 413.7 20.0 290.9 0.0 99.0 20.0 116.2
         Dec. 18 1,419.1 92.6 777.3 681.1 94.0 410.8 17.2 291.4 0.0 99.3 20.0 118.4
Memo item: Foreign banks 8
2020         Nov. 144 1,430.2 264.6 450.7 412.6 37.5 563.9 107.6 353.5 0.2 98.9 3.7 147.3
         Dec. 144 1,411.1 283.7 437.5 398.8 38.3 543.9 98.6 352.1 0.2 90.3 3.7 142.4
  of which: Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
2020         Nov. 34 985.6 134.4 258.6 222.5 36.0 450.9 71.8 283.0 0.1 92.9 3.0 138.6
         Dec. 33 983.3 167.4 246.7 209.6 36.9 431.7 62.2 283.0 0.1 84.3 3.0 134.6
*Assets and liabilities of monetary financial institutions (MFIs) in Germany. The assets gesetzbuch) read in conjunction with Section 35(1) number 1a of the Credit
and liabilities of foreign branches, of money market funds (which are also classified Institution Accounting Regulation (Verordnung über die Rechnungslegung der Kredit-
as MFIs) and of the Bundesbank are not included. For the definitions of the respective institute) are classified under "Other assets and liabilities" as of the December 2010
items, see the footnotes to Table IV.3. 1Owing to the Act Modernising Accounting reporting date. Trading portfolio derivatives are listed separately in Statistical
Law(Gesetz zur Modernisierung des Bilanzrechts) of 25 May 2009, derivative Supplement 1 to the Monthly Report − Banking statistics, in Tables I.1 to I.3. 2For
financial instruments in the trading portfolio (trading portfolio derivatives) within the building and loan associations: including deposits und er savings and loan contracts
meaning of Section 340e(3) sentence 1 of the German Commercial Code (Handels- (see Table IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and

Deutsche Bundesbank
25  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
Deposits of banks (MFIs) Deposits of non-banks (non-MFIs) Capital
 including  
of which: of which: published
reserves,
Time deposits  2 Savings deposits  4 partici-
pation
Memo rightsitem: Bearer capital,
for for of which: debt Liabilities
funds for
up to and more arising At 3 Bank general Other securities
Sight Time Sight including than from savings out- banking liabi-   End of months’
Total deposits deposits Total deposits 1 year 1 year  2 repos  3 Total notice bonds risks lities  1   month standing  5 
All categories of banks
 
2,051.8 614.3 1,437.5 4,074.1 2,553.4 282.3 639.4 41.9 567.3 537.5 31.8 1,162.0 540.2 1,298.1 2020          July
2,040.4 601.0 1,439.3 4,084.0 2,562.5 279.1 643.9 40.8 567.0 537.6 31.5 1,162.2 540.0 1,216.6          Aug.2,084.0 610.3 1,473.7 4,103.9 2,588.3 270.4 647.6 34.1 566.5 537.4 31.1 1,188.5 544.8 1,234.1          Sep.
2,096.9 618.8 1,478.0 4,143.6 2,624.0 270.4 652.5 33.0 566.0 537.4 30.7 1,175.0 546.6 1,221.3          Oct.
2,081.7 625.9 1,455.7 4,174.3 2,669.5 256.7 651.8 40.3 565.9 537.7 30.4 1,169.2 545.9 1,183.4          Nov.1,997.8 553.6 1,444.1 4,143.7 2,646.4 248.7 651.6 32.6 566.8 539.0 30.2 1,153.8 548.4 1,158.5          Dec.
Commercial banks 6
1,010.0 452.3 557.7 1,645.1 1,138.5 159.8 236.3 37.8 98.3 93.8 12.3 167.7 181.0 841.2 2020          Nov.
961.1 402.2 558.9 1,625.3 1,121.5 158.8 234.1 30.9 98.8 94.4 12.3 163.9 182.7 820.2          Dec.
Big banks 7
443.3 172.4 270.9 824.7 571.6 83.6 84.9 33.8 83.1 79.4 1.5 125.3 80.5 771.0 2020          Nov.
408.0 151.8 256.2 806.7 556.9 81.2 83.6 26.5 83.5 80.0 1.5 122.3 80.4 747.3          Dec.
Regional banks and other commercial banks
310.0 119.3 190.7 651.6 451.3 45.5 129.3 4.1 14.8 14.0 10.7 42.0 90.7 61.4 2020          Nov.
316.1 110.0 206.0 647.8 448.9 45.3 128.0 4.4 14.9 14.0 10.7 41.2 91.9 63.8          Dec.
Branches of foreign banks
256.7 160.6 96.1 168.8 115.5 30.7 22.2 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.4 9.8 8.8 2020          Nov.
237.1 140.4 96.7 170.8 115.7 32.3 22.4 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 0.4 10.3 9.1          Dec.
Landesbanken
279.8 59.3 220.6 252.3 139.6 32.3 74.1 2.3 6.2 6.1 0.0 176.1 42.9 105.1 2020          Nov.
254.4 44.7 209.7 236.1 130.9 25.7 73.3 1.6 6.2 6.1 0.0 175.1 43.1 98.7          Dec.
Savings banks
171.5 4.4 167.1 1,092.2 776.0 12.5 13.7 − 277.6 259.5 12.4 17.0 127.8 47.3 2020          Nov.
170.0 3.0 167.0 1,101.4 787.8 10.6 13.4 − 277.3 259.2 12.2 17.0 127.9 47.4          Dec.
 
Credit cooperatives
 
147.9 1.5 146.4 784.6 555.0 29.5 12.7 − 183.3 177.9 4.0 10.4 89.1 33.8 2020          Nov.
149.0 1.1 147.9 790.8 561.0 28.8 13.0 − 184.1 178.8 4.0 10.4 89.5 33.0          Dec.
Mortgage banks
59.8 3.1 56.7 64.8 2.6 3.9 58.3 − − − . 98.2 10.7 6.8 2020          Nov.
61.0 2.9 58.2 64.4 2.1 4.5 57.8 − − − . 97.4 10.8 7.5          Dec.
Building and loan associations
28.7 2.7 26.0 188.1 3.3 1.2 183.1 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 2.8 12.3 11.6 2020          Nov.
29.6 2.5 27.1 189.8 3.3 1.2 184.8 − 0.4 0.4 0.1 2.8 12.3 10.4          Dec.
Banks with special, development and other central support tasks
383.9 102.7 281.2 147.1 54.5 17.5 73.6 0.1 − − . 697.0 82.2 137.6 2020          Nov.
372.6 97.2 275.4 135.8 39.9 19.2 75.2 0.1 − − . 687.1 82.2 141.4          Dec.
Memo item:   Foreign banks 8
556.6 293.5 263.1 629.3 467.2 63.3 76.1 9.8 19.0 18.6 3.8 35.8 69.4 139.0 2020          Nov.
540.5 262.6 277.8 626.9 460.5 67.5 76.2 10.4 19.0 18.7 3.7 35.3 69.8 138.6          Dec.
of which:   Banks majority-owned by foreign banks 9
299.9 133.0 167.0 460.6 351.7 32.7 53.9 9.8 18.6 18.3 3.7 35.4 59.6 130.2 2020          Nov.
303.4 122.2 181.1 456.1 344.8 35.2 53.8 10.4 18.7 18.3 3.6 34.9 59.5 129.5          Dec.
loan associations: Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table Vereinsbank AG), Deutsche Postbank AG (from December 2004 up to Ap ril 2018)
IV.12). 3Included in time deposits. 4Excluding deposits under savings and loan and DB Privat- und Firmenkundenbank AG (from May 2018) (see the explanatory
contracts (see also footnote 2). 5Including subordinated negotiable bearer debt notes in the Statistical Supplement to the Monthly Report 1, Banking statistics, Table
securities; excluding non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 6Commercial banks I.3, banking group ”Big banks”). 8Sum of the banks majority-owned by foreign
comprise the sub-groups ”Big banks”, ”Regional banks and other commercial banks” banks and included in other categories of banks and the category ”Br anches (with
and ”Branches of foreign banks”. 7Deutsche Bank AG, Dresdner Bank AG (up to dependent legal status) of foreign banks”. 9Separate presentation of the banks
Nov. 2009), Commerzbank AG, UniCredit Bank AG (formerly Bayerische Hypo- und majority-owned by foreign banks included in other banking cat egories. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
26  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
 
3. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic banks (MFIs) Lending to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in Negotiable bills andhand Credit money negotiable
balances market Memo money mar- (euro area Securities
banknotes with the Credit paper item: ket paper issued Securities
and Bundes- balances issued by issued by Fiduciary issued by by non-
Period coins) bank Total and loans Bills banks banks loans Total Loans Bills non-banks banks  
1 
End of year or month *
 
2011 15.8 93.8 1,725.6 1,267.9 − 7.1 450.7 2.1 3,197.8 2,774.6 0.8 6.4 415.92012 18.5 134.3 1,655.0 1,229.1 − 2.4 423.5 2.4 3,220.4 2,785.5 0.6 2.2 432.12013 18.5 85.6 1,545.6 1,153.1 0.0 1.7 390.8 2.2 3,131.6 2,692.6 0.5 1.2 437.22014 18.9 81.3 1,425.9 1,065.6 0.0 2.1 358.2 1.7 3,167.3 2,712.2 0.4 0.7 454.0
2015 19.2 155.0 1,346.6 1,062.6 0.0 1.7 282.2 1.7 3,233.9 2,764.0 0.4 0.4 469.0
2016 25.8 284.0 1,364.9 1,099.8 0.0 0.8 264.3 2.0 3,274.3 2,823.8 0.3 0.4 449.82017 31.9 392.5 1,407.5 1,163.4 0.0 0.7 243.4 1.9 3,332.6 2,894.0 0.4 0.7 437.52018 40.4 416.1 1,323.5 1,083.8 0.0 0.8 239.0 5.9 3,394.5 2,990.2 0.2 0.2 403.92019 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
2019         July 37.2 460.1 1,355.5 1,113.6 0.0 0.9 241.0 5.1 3,476.1 3,075.1 0.2 2.3 398.6
         Aug. 38.0 462.1 1,365.8 1,126.4 0.0 0.9 238.4 4.8 3,491.7 3,087.2 0.2 2.9 401.4         Sep. 37.8 452.7 1,354.1 1,115.7 0.0 0.8 237.6 4.7 3,499.8 3,094.5 0.2 3.8 401.3
         Oct. 39.0 529.1 1,252.1 1,013.6 0.0 0.9 237.6 4.6 3,506.7 3,104.5 0.2 3.4 398.6
         Nov. 39.9 529.6 1,301.7 1,059.6 0.0 1.1 241.0 4.6 3,523.5 3,121.1 0.2 3.3 398.9         Dec. 43.2 476.6 1,254.7 1,016.2 0.0 0.7 237.9 4.5 3,521.5 3,119.2 0.3 3.3 398.7
2020         Jan. 39.2 515.2 1,256.9 1,015.4 0.0 0.8 240.7 4.6 3,528.4 3,125.8 0.3 3.3 399.1
         Feb. 40.0 509.4 1,280.0 1,035.2 0.0 0.9 243.8 5.0 3,544.7 3,141.9 0.3 4.6 397.8         Mar. 47.9 621.7 1,273.0 1,029.4 0.0 1.0 242.6 5.1 3,580.0 3,174.1 0.2 5.1 400.6
         Apr. 48.4 582.3 1,334.6 1,090.6 0.0 1.2 242.8 5.0 3,594.3 3,185.3 0.2 7.2 401.6
         May 47.8 586.2 1,291.8 1,044.7 0.0 1.1 246.0 6.0 3,620.9 3,204.2 0.1 10.1 406.4         June 45.7 767.6 1,270.4 1,019.6 0.0 1.1 249.6 6.9 3,621.1 3,206.6 0.2 8.0 406.2
         July 45.2 810.5 1,270.5 1,019.2 0.0 1.2 250.0 7.5 3,625.7 3,217.2 0.2 8.0 400.3
         Aug. 45.7 760.8 1,348.1 1,096.7 0.0 1.1 250.3 7.8 3,629.7 3,219.6 0.2 9.4 400.5         Sep. 45.8 884.4 1,293.9 1,041.1 0.0 1.0 251.8 8.3 3,634.2 3,224.4 0.2 8.4 401.3
         Oct. 46.1 811.0 1,397.3 1,145.2 0.0 0.8 251.2 8.6 3,651.1 3,237.6 0.2 9.0 404.3
         Nov. 45.4 863.2 1,351.9 1,101.3 0.0 0.8 249.8 8.6 3,661.1 3,247.4 0.2 7.6 405.8         Dec. 47.2 792.9 1,367.9 1,119.7 0.0 0.7 247.5 8.8 3,647.0 3,245.1 0.2 4.0 397.7
Changes *
2012 + 2.7 + 40.5 − 68.6 − 37.5 − − 4.6 − 26.5 + 0.1 + 21.0 + 9.8 − 0.2 − 4.3 + 15.72013 + 0.0 − 48.8 − 204.1 − 170.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 32.7 − 0.2 + 4.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 4.82014 + 0.4 − 4.3 − 119.3 − 87.1 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 32.6 + 0.1 + 36.7 + 20.6 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 16.8
2015 + 0.3 + 73.7 − 80.7 − 4.3 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 75.9 − 0.1 + 68.9 + 54.1 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 15.1
2016 + 6.5 +129.1 + 48.1 + 66.9 − − 0.9 − 17.9 + 0.4 + 43.7 + 62.8 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 18.92017 + 6.1 +108.4 + 50.3 + 70.4 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 20.1 − 0.1 + 57.0 + 70.2 + 0.0 + 0.4 − 13.62018 + 8.5 + 24.0 − 81.0 − 76.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 4.4 + 3.8 + 71.5 + 105.4 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 33.22019 + 2.8 + 59.7 − 63.0 − 61.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 1.6 − 1.4 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 0.1 + 3.1 − 5.5
2020 + 4.1 +316.4 + 201.2 + 191.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 9.6 + 4.3 + 123.2 + 123.6 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 1.1
2019         July − 0.5 − 17.7 − 7.2 − 7.8 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 9.2 + 8.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.0
         Aug. + 0.8 + 1.9 + 10.3 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.6 − 0.2 + 15.6 + 12.1 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 2.8         Sep. − 0.2 − 9.4 − 9.2 − 8.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 8.1 + 7.3 − 0.1 + 0.9 − 0.1
         Oct. + 1.2 + 76.4 − 102.1 − 102.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 6.9 + 10.0 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 2.8
         Nov. + 0.9 + 0.4 + 49.6 + 46.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.4 + 0.0 + 16.8 + 16.6 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3         Dec. + 3.3 − 53.0 − 46.9 − 43.5 − 0.0 − 0.4 − 3.1 − 0.1 − 1.9 − 1.9 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1
2020         Jan. − 4.0 + 38.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 2.9 + 0.1 + 6.8 + 6.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 0.8 − 5.9 + 23.1 + 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 3.1 + 0.4 + 16.3 + 16.2 + 0.1 + 1.4 − 1.3         Mar. + 7.8 +112.4 − 7.0 − 5.9 − + 0.1 − 1.3 + 0.0 + 35.3 + 32.1 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 2.8
         Apr. + 0.5 − 39.4 + 61.6 + 61.2 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 14.4 + 11.2 − 0.1 + 2.2 + 1.0
         May − 0.6 + 3.9 + 16.9 + 13.7 − − 0.1 + 3.2 + 0.9 + 24.1 + 16.4 − 0.0 + 2.9 + 4.8         June − 2.1 +181.4 − 21.4 − 25.0 − − 0.0 + 3.6 + 0.9 + 0.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 2.1 − 0.2
         July − 0.5 + 42.9 + 0.1 − 0.4 − + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.6 + 4.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 5.9
         Aug. + 0.5 − 49.7 + 77.6 + 77.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 0.2         Sep. + 0.1 +123.6 − 54.2 − 55.6 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 1.5 + 0.5 + 4.6 + 4.8 + 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.7
         Oct. + 0.2 − 73.5 + 103.4 + 104.2 − − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.3 + 16.5 + 12.9 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 3.0
         Nov. − 0.6 + 52.3 − 17.1 − 15.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.6 + 10.5 − 0.0 − 1.4 + 1.6         Dec. + 1.8 − 70.3 + 16.0 + 18.4 − − 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 14.1 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 8.1
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exchange of equalisation claims. 3Including liabilities arising from registered debt
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not securities, registered money market paper and non-negotiable bearer de bt securities;
specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of

Deutsche Bundesbank
27  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of domestic banks (MFIs)  3 Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs)
Partici-patinginterestsin
Memo domestic Memo Memo
Equalisa- item: banks Sight Time Redis- item: Sight Time Savings Bank item:tion Fiduciary and deposits deposits counted Fiduciary de- deposits de- savings Fiduciaryclaims  
2 loans Total 4 4 bills 5 loans Total posits 6 posits  7 bonds  8 loans   Period enterprises
End of year or month *
 
− 36.3 94.6 1,210.5 114.8 1,095.3 0.0 36.1 3,045.5 1,168.3 1,156.2 616.1 104.8 36.5 2011− 34.8 90.0 1,135.5 132.9 1,002.6 0.0 36.3 3,090.2 1,306.5 1,072.5 617.6 93.6 34.9 2012− 31.6 92.3 1,140.3 125.6 1,014.7 0.0 33.2 3,048.7 1,409.9 952.0 610.1 76.6 32.9 2013− 26.5 94.3 1,111.9 127.8 984.0 0.0 11.7 3,118.2 1,517.8 926.7 607.8 66.0 30.9 2014
− 20.4 89.6 1,065.6 131.1 934.5 0.0 6.1 3,224.7 1,673.7 898.4 596.5 56.1 29.3 2015
− 19.1 91.0 1,032.9 129.5 903.3 0.1 5.6 3,326.7 1,798.2 889.6 588.5 50.4 28.8 2016− 19.1 88.1 1,048.2 110.7 937.4 0.0 5.1 3,420.9 1,941.0 853.2 582.9 43.7 30.0 2017− 18.0 90.9 1,020.9 105.5 915.4 0.0 4.7 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 578.6 37.3 33.9 2018− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5 2019
− 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4 2020
− 17.1 91.0 1,053.9 123.2 930.6 0.0 4.5 3,616.9 2,166.5 833.9 581.8 34.8 32.9 2019          July
− 17.1 90.3 1,061.4 127.7 933.7 0.0 4.5 3,638.4 2,189.1 834.4 580.3 34.7 32.7          Aug.− 17.0 90.0 1,037.5 121.4 916.1 0.0 4.5 3,629.1 2,185.4 830.3 579.0 34.4 32.6          Sep.
− 17.1 90.1 1,049.3 129.3 920.0 0.0 4.5 3,644.4 2,207.1 826.0 577.2 34.1 32.5          Oct.
− 17.1 90.2 1,055.9 126.6 929.4 0.0 4.5 3,674.8 2,244.5 820.9 575.7 33.8 32.5          Nov.− 17.3 90.4 1,010.2 107.2 902.9 0.0 4.4 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 575.2 33.2 32.5          Dec.
− 16.9 90.0 1,031.4 125.4 906.0 0.0 4.4 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 570.7 32.6 32.3 2020          Jan.
− 16.9 86.1 1,046.8 133.2 913.6 0.0 4.4 3,675.9 2,254.4 820.8 568.5 32.2 32.8          Feb.− 16.9 86.3 1,134.7 147.5 987.2 0.0 4.3 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 564.5 31.8 32.5          Mar.
− 17.1 86.4 1,154.9 141.2 1,013.6 0.0 4.3 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 563.8 31.1 32.8          Apr.
− 19.4 78.8 1,110.9 131.6 979.3 0.0 7.1 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 563.6 30.7 33.3          May− 20.8 78.8 1,229.5 131.4 1,098.1 0.0 9.4 3,766.3 2,385.3 788.2 562.6 30.3 33.4          June
− 22.2 79.3 1,207.9 125.0 1,082.8 0.0 11.1 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 560.9 29.9 33.8          July
− 22.5 79.2 1,211.5 126.2 1,085.3 0.0 11.5 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 560.6 29.6 34.0          Aug.− 22.7 79.2 1,251.5 123.8 1,127.8 0.0 12.0 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 560.1 29.3 34.3          Sep.
− 22.8 79.4 1,263.7 131.5 1,132.2 0.0 12.3 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 559.7 28.9 34.6          Oct.
− 22.9 78.1 1,244.8 134.6 1,110.2 0.0 12.5 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 559.6 28.5 34.4          Nov.− 23.5 78.3 1,236.7 125.0 1,111.6 0.0 13.1 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 560.6 28.3 34.4          Dec.
Changes *
− − 1.3 − 4.1 − 70.8 + 21.5 − 91.9 − 0.0 + 0.2 + 42.2 + 138.7 − 86.7 + 1.5 − 11.2 − 1.6 2012− − 3.3 + 2.4 − 79.4 − 24.1 − 55.3 + 0.0 − 3.4 + 40.2 + 118.4 − 53.9 − 7.4 − 17.0 − 1.7 2013− − 1.9 + 2.0 − 29.0 + 2.2 − 31.2 − 0.0 − 0.6 + 69.7 + 107.9 − 25.3 − 2.4 − 10.6 − 2.0 2014
− − 2.1 − 4.3 − 46.6 + 3.3 − 50.0 + 0.0 − 1.3 + 106.5 + 156.2 − 28.3 − 11.3 − 10.1 − 1.6 2015
− − 1.3 + 1.5 − 1.7 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.5 + 104.7 + 124.5 − 6.9 − 7.9 − 5.0 − 0.5 2016− − 0.0 − 1.6 + 11.0 − 18.4 + 29.4 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 103.1 + 142.8 − 27.5 − 5.6 − 6.7 + 0.4 2017− − 1.0 + 3.1 − 25.0 − 3.1 − 21.9 + 0.0 − 0.4 + 117.7 + 139.3 − 10.8 − 4.3 − 6.5 + 3.9 2018− − 0.7 + 0.1 − 8.6 + 1.6 − 10.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 2019
− + 5.7 − 3.3 + 313.4 + 23.2 + 290.2 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 221.6 + 273.7 − 32.7 − 14.5 − 4.9 + 1.9 2020
− − 0.4 + 0.0 + 6.8 + 0.7 + 6.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 7.2 + 15.7 − 7.6 − 0.9 − 0.1 − 0.5 2019          July
− + 0.0 − 0.6 + 7.6 + 4.5 + 3.1 + 0.0 − + 21.4 + 22.6 + 0.5 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.2          Aug.− − 0.1 + 0.1 − 21.4 − 6.3 − 15.2 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 9.3 − 3.7 − 4.1 − 1.3 − 0.3 − 0.2          Sep.
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 11.8 + 7.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 15.3 + 21.7 − 4.3 − 1.8 − 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
− − 0.0 + 0.1 + 6.7 − 2.7 + 9.4 − + 0.0 + 30.4 + 37.4 − 5.1 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 0.0          Nov.− + 0.1 + 0.2 − 45.8 − 19.3 − 26.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 13.8 − 8.2 − 4.6 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.0          Dec.
− − 0.3 − 0.4 + 21.2 + 18.2 + 3.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 2020          Jan.
− − 0.0 − 3.9 + 15.4 + 7.8 + 7.6 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 17.7 + 19.3 + 1.1 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4          Feb.− − 0.1 + 0.2 + 87.9 + 14.3 + 73.7 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2          Mar.
− + 0.3 + 0.1 + 20.2 − 6.2 + 26.4 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2          Apr.
− + 2.2 − 0.2 + 15.6 − 4.6 + 20.3 − 0.0 + 2.7 + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6          May− + 1.5 + 0.0 + 118.6 − 0.2 + 118.8 − 0.0 + 2.3 − 9.0 + 8.8 − 16.4 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1          June
− + 0.9 + 0.5 − 21.7 − 6.4 − 15.2 − 0.0 + 1.2 + 37.1 + 28.7 + 10.5 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4          July
− + 0.3 − 0.1 + 3.7 + 1.2 + 2.4 + 0.0 + 0.4 + 17.4 + 13.6 + 4.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2          Aug.− + 0.2 + 0.0 + 40.0 − 2.5 + 42.5 + 0.0 + 0.5 + 13.4 + 15.1 − 0.9 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3          Sep.
− + 0.1 + 0.2 + 12.2 + 7.7 + 4.4 − + 0.2 + 40.0 + 38.6 + 2.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3          Oct.
− + 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.3 + 3.5 + 4.8 − 0.0 + 0.3 + 20.5 + 34.1 − 13.2 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2          Nov.− + 0.6 + 0.1 − 8.1 − 9.6 + 1.5 − + 0.5 − 9.2 − 2.3 − 7.6 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0          Dec.
including subordinated liabilities. 4Including liabilities arising from monetary policy including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see Table IV.12). 7Excluding
operations with the Bundesbank. 5Own acceptances and promissory notes deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 8). 8Including liabilities
outstanding. 6Since the inclusion of building and loan associations in January 1999, arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
28  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
 
4. Assets and liabilities of banks (MFIs) in Germany vis-à-vis non-residents *
  
€ billion
Lending to foreign banks (MFIs) Lending to foreign non-banks (non-MFIs)
Treasury
Cash in bills and
hand Loans and bills negotiable Credit balances and loans, bills Negotiable
(non- money money
euro area Medium market Memo Medium marketbanknotes and paper Securities item: and paper Securitiesand Short- long- issued by issued by Fiduciary Short- long- issued by issued by
Period coins) Total Total term term banks banks loans Total Total term term non-banks non-banks
End of year or month *
 
2011 0.6 1,117.6 871.0 566.3 304.8 4.6 241.9 2.6 744.4 455.8 102.0 353.8 8.5 280.12012 0.8 1,046.0 813.5 545.5 268.1 5.4 227.0 2.6 729.0 442.2 105.1 337.1 9.0 277.82013 0.2 1,019.7 782.4 546.6 235.8 7.2 230.1 2.5 701.0 404.9 100.3 304.6 8.2 287.82014 0.2 1,125.2 884.8 618.7 266.1 7.9 232.5 1.1 735.1 415.2 94.4 320.8 6.5 313.5
2015 0.3 1,066.9 830.7 555.9 274.7 1.2 235.0 1.0 751.5 424.3 83.8 340.5 7.5 319.7
2016 0.3 1,055.9 820.6 519.8 300.7 0.5 234.9 1.0 756.2 451.6 90.1 361.4 5.0 299.62017 0.3 963.8 738.2 441.0 297.2 0.7 225.0 2.3 723.9 442.2 93.3 348.9 4.2 277.52018 0.2 1,014.1 771.9 503.8 268.1 1.0 241.3 3.0 762.0 489.6 99.9 389.7 4.3 268.12019 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.6 11.3 288.5
2019         July 0.2 1,099.0 844.6 563.6 281.0 3.3 251.1 3.8 829.3 548.2 143.9 404.3 8.6 272.5
         Aug. 0.2 1,099.5 844.9 562.8 282.1 3.4 251.1 3.9 850.7 564.8 158.0 406.8 9.4 276.4         Sep. 0.2 1,120.8 867.0 583.4 283.5 3.9 249.9 3.9 826.7 539.6 131.1 408.5 8.6 278.5
         Oct. 0.2 1,132.8 880.2 590.3 289.9 3.8 248.8 3.9 826.5 544.3 140.7 403.7 9.2 273.0
         Nov. 0.2 1,122.8 870.5 585.6 284.9 3.4 248.9 3.8 828.1 541.1 136.8 404.3 9.9 277.1         Dec. 0.2 1,064.2 814.0 532.7 281.3 1.8 248.5 3.7 795.3 513.1 111.0 402.1 7.7 274.5
2020         Jan. 0.2 1,111.1 859.7 578.2 281.5 2.7 248.7 3.8 821.5 536.9 133.0 403.8 7.7 277.0
         Feb. 0.2 1,119.0 865.9 590.7 275.2 2.9 250.2 3.8 832.3 543.7 136.8 406.9 8.6 279.9         Mar. 0.3 1,145.4 889.8 615.5 274.4 3.0 252.5 3.5 834.1 543.2 135.7 407.5 11.7 279.2
         Apr. 0.3 1,156.2 899.6 626.2 273.4 2.8 253.8 3.5 843.1 552.5 142.6 410.0 11.4 279.2
         May 0.3 1,139.4 884.7 613.2 271.5 3.3 251.4 3.7 849.7 559.2 152.6 406.5 12.1 278.4         June 0.3 1,113.8 860.8 592.4 268.5 3.7 249.3 3.8 838.4 538.2 134.7 403.5 15.8 284.5
         July 0.3 1,083.1 834.0 574.4 259.6 3.4 245.7 3.9 829.1 536.3 138.8 397.5 15.1 277.6
         Aug. 0.3 1,066.8 821.2 563.3 257.9 3.5 242.1 4.1 819.9 531.3 133.7 397.6 15.6 272.9         Sep. 0.2 1,084.3 841.3 583.4 257.9 3.6 239.4 4.1 821.9 530.4 130.3 400.2 15.2 276.3
         Oct. 0.3 1,064.7 822.9 564.5 258.5 3.5 238.3 4.1 839.8 539.3 137.7 401.6 16.5 284.1
         Nov. 0.2 1,056.0 815.8 563.4 252.4 3.5 236.7 4.0 845.6 539.5 139.8 399.7 14.0 292.1         Dec. 0.2 1,024.3 784.8 532.1 252.8 2.6 236.8 4.0 822.8 523.0 125.4 397.6 11.3 288.5
Changes *
2012 + 0.1 − 70.1 − 56.8 − 23.1 − 33.7 + 0.9 − 14.1 − 0.1 − 9.4 − 7.5 + 8.3 − 15.9 + 0.6 − 2.52013 − 0.5 − 22.7 − 26.9 − 1.3 − 25.6 + 1.8 + 2.4 − 0.0 − 21.2 − 33.1 − 5.8 − 27.2 − 0.7 + 12.62014 − 0.0 + 86.1 + 80.1 + 63.2 + 16.8 + 0.7 + 5.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 − 10.2 − 12.8 + 2.7 − 1.8 + 17.7
2015 + 0.1 − 91.8 − 86.0 − 82.2 − 3.8 − 6.7 + 0.8 − 0.1 − 6.1 − 9.2 − 6.5 − 2.7 + 1.1 + 2.0
2016 + 0.0 − 25.5 − 14.5 − 38.2 + 23.7 − 0.7 − 10.3 − 0.0 + 17.4 + 28.9 + 10.1 + 18.8 − 3.0 − 8.52017 + 0.0 − 57.2 − 48.7 − 61.5 + 12.8 + 0.0 − 8.5 + 0.6 − 4.7 + 13.0 + 8.6 + 4.4 + 0.7 − 18.42018 + 0.0 + 49.6 + 34.0 + 57.7 − 23.7 + 0.2 + 15.3 + 0.7 + 18.3 + 28.3 + 3.2 + 25.2 − 0.4 − 9.72019 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 11.3 − 21.9 + 10.7 + 0.8 + 6.3 + 0.7 + 26.8 + 19.9 + 12.7 + 7.3 + 3.0 + 3.8
2020 − 0.0 − 32.0 − 22.4 − 6.6 − 15.8 + 0.9 − 10.5 + 0.3 + 34.4 + 14.7 + 9.0 + 5.7 + 3.6 + 16.1
2019         July − 0.0 − 15.1 − 17.4 − 17.3 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.0 + 10.2 + 9.9 + 7.7 + 2.2 + 2.0 − 1.6
         Aug. + 0.0 − 3.6 − 3.5 − 3.1 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 19.0 + 14.5 + 13.9 + 0.6 + 0.8 + 3.7         Sep. − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.7 + 1.2 − 0.5 + 0.4 − 1.4 + 0.0 − 10.5 − 11.3 − 10.7 − 0.5 − 0.9 + 1.6
         Oct. + 0.0 + 18.1 + 18.9 + 9.8 + 9.1 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 + 2.9 + 7.5 + 10.1 − 2.6 + 0.7 − 5.2
         Nov. − 0.0 − 14.2 − 13.8 − 6.7 − 7.1 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 1.7 − 6.1 − 4.7 − 1.4 + 0.7 + 3.7         Dec. + 0.0 − 53.1 − 51.2 − 50.3 − 0.9 − 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 29.1 − 24.9 − 24.9 − 0.0 − 2.3 − 1.9
2020         Jan. − 0.0 + 42.2 + 41.2 + 43.2 − 1.9 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 23.1 + 21.1 + 21.4 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 1.9
         Feb. + 0.0 + 6.5 + 4.7 + 11.5 − 6.8 + 0.3 + 1.5 − 0.0 + 10.1 + 6.4 + 3.7 + 2.7 + 0.9 + 2.8         Mar. + 0.0 + 27.5 + 24.9 + 25.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 2.5 − 0.3 + 3.6 + 1.1 − 0.7 + 1.7 + 3.1 − 0.6
         Apr. + 0.0 + 7.4 + 6.5 + 5.5 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 0.0 + 6.5 + 7.2 + 6.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.4
         May − 0.0 − 22.7 − 21.4 − 22.6 + 1.2 + 0.5 − 1.8 + 0.2 + 3.2 + 2.4 + 2.5 − 0.1 + 0.7 + 0.1         June + 0.0 − 23.5 − 21.8 − 19.6 − 2.2 + 0.3 − 2.0 + 0.1 − 9.8 − 19.7 − 17.5 − 2.2 + 3.7 + 6.2
         July − 0.0 − 17.9 − 14.4 − 11.2 − 3.2 − 0.2 − 3.3 + 0.1 − 0.9 + 5.3 + 5.9 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 5.4
         Aug. − 0.0 − 14.4 − 11.1 − 10.0 − 1.1 + 0.1 − 3.4 + 0.1 − 8.4 − 4.2 − 4.8 + 0.6 + 0.5 − 4.7         Sep. − 0.0 + 13.9 + 16.6 + 18.2 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 2.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 2.5 − 3.8 + 1.3 − 0.4 + 3.0
         Oct. + 0.0 − 20.8 − 19.5 − 19.8 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 1.2 + 0.1 + 16.7 + 7.8 + 6.9 + 0.9 + 1.3 + 7.6
         Nov. − 0.0 − 3.4 − 1.9 + 1.8 − 3.7 − 0.0 − 1.5 − 0.1 + 9.7 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 0.8 − 2.5 + 8.6         Dec. − 0.0 − 26.9 − 26.3 − 28.9 + 2.6 − 0.9 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 19.3 − 13.7 − 13.6 − 0.0 − 2.7 − 3.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
29  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Deposits of foreign banks (MFIs) Deposits of foreign non-banks (non-MFIs) Partici- Time deposits (including
pating Time deposits (including bank savings deposits and bankinterests savings bonds) savings bonds)in foreign
Memo banks Medium Memo Medium Memoitem: and and item: and item:Fiduciary enter- Sight Short- long- Fiduciary Sight Short- long- Fiduciaryloans prises Total deposits Total term term loans Total deposits Total term term loans   Period
End of year or month *
 
32.9 45.0 655.7 242.6 413.1 289.4 123.7 0.1 225.9 92.3 133.6 66.9 66.6 1.3 201132.6 46.4 691.1 289.4 401.7 284.6 117.0 0.1 237.6 107.2 130.3 69.1 61.2 1.2 201230.8 39.0 515.7 222.6 293.2 196.0 97.2 0.1 257.8 118.1 139.7 76.8 62.9 1.0 201314.0 35.6 609.2 277.1 332.1 242.7 89.4 0.1 221.0 113.0 107.9 47.8 60.1 0.7 2014
13.1 30.5 611.9 323.4 288.5 203.8 84.7 0.1 201.1 102.6 98.5 49.3 49.2 0.7 2015
13.1 28.7 696.1 374.4 321.6 234.2 87.5 0.0 206.2 100.3 105.9 55.2 50.8 0.7 201612.1 24.3 659.0 389.6 269.4 182.4 87.0 0.0 241.2 109.4 131.8 68.1 63.8 0.3 201711.8 22.1 643.1 370.6 272.5 185.6 86.8 0.0 231.5 110.2 121.3 63.7 57.6 0.1 201811.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1 2019
11.3 17.2 761.1 428.6 332.5 205.1 127.3 − 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1 2020
12.8 22.0 768.5 460.7 307.8 214.3 93.5 1.3 262.9 126.2 136.7 79.5 57.2 0.1 2019          July
12.8 22.0 779.4 436.0 343.4 247.8 95.6 1.3 274.2 127.1 147.1 90.2 56.9 0.1          Aug.12.8 22.2 806.6 440.4 366.2 269.8 96.4 1.3 244.6 123.1 121.5 63.1 58.4 0.1          Sep.
12.6 21.8 787.8 430.9 356.9 259.3 97.6 1.1 251.8 119.9 131.9 73.3 58.6 0.1          Oct.
12.6 21.6 790.4 452.4 338.0 239.5 98.5 1.1 251.6 120.5 131.1 72.4 58.7 0.1          Nov.11.5 21.3 680.6 339.3 341.2 243.2 98.0 − 229.8 112.3 117.4 60.5 57.0 0.1          Dec.
11.4 21.4 756.2 433.4 322.8 223.1 99.8 − 247.8 121.8 126.0 68.1 57.8 0.1 2020          Jan.
11.4 19.0 770.5 433.8 336.7 230.1 106.6 − 255.3 129.1 126.2 66.5 59.6 0.1          Feb.11.4 19.0 826.9 463.3 363.6 250.9 112.6 − 269.0 146.3 122.7 62.8 60.0 0.1          Mar.
11.4 19.0 835.3 438.6 396.7 288.0 108.7 − 274.1 143.0 131.1 69.9 61.2 0.1          Apr.
11.4 19.0 828.1 459.2 368.9 260.8 108.0 − 280.8 150.9 129.9 67.9 62.0 0.1          May11.3 19.1 835.5 472.5 363.0 247.2 115.9 − 275.7 145.2 130.5 69.5 61.1 0.1          June
11.2 19.0 843.9 489.3 354.7 238.8 115.8 − 270.6 139.4 131.3 72.5 58.8 0.1          July
11.2 19.0 828.9 474.8 354.1 238.8 115.2 − 263.2 134.8 128.3 69.9 58.5 0.1          Aug.11.4 19.0 832.4 486.5 345.9 226.4 119.6 − 269.6 145.5 124.1 66.0 58.1 0.1          Sep.
11.5 19.0 833.2 487.3 345.9 224.6 121.3 − 269.5 142.6 127.0 68.5 58.4 0.1          Oct.
11.5 19.0 836.8 491.3 345.5 219.0 126.5 − 279.9 154.2 125.8 66.0 59.7 0.1          Nov.11.3 17.2 761.1 428.6 332.5 205.1 127.3 − 258.5 133.3 125.2 65.6 59.7 0.1          Dec.
Changes *
− 0.3 + 1.5 + 38.2 + 51.7 − 13.5 − 7.5 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 12.6 + 15.2 − 2.6 + 2.5 − 5.1 − 0.1 2012− 1.8 − 7.2 − 174.0 − 75.6 − 98.4 − 83.1 − 15.4 − 0.0 + 13.5 + 9.6 + 3.9 + 6.9 − 3.0 − 0.2 2013+ 0.1 − 3.8 + 76.3 + 47.8 + 28.5 + 39.0 − 10.5 − 0.0 − 43.6 − 8.3 − 35.3 − 30.7 − 4.6 + 0.2 2014
− 0.6 − 6.1 − 15.4 + 40.6 − 56.0 − 48.6 − 7.4 − 0.0 − 26.5 − 13.9 − 12.6 + 0.3 − 13.0 − 0.0 2015
− 0.1 − 1.5 + 82.7 + 51.0 + 31.7 + 27.0 + 4.7 − 0.0 + 3.5 − 3.1 + 6.7 + 5.9 + 0.8 − 0.0 2016− 1.0 − 4.1 − 15.5 + 25.3 − 40.8 − 43.2 + 2.4
+ 0.0 + 31.8 + 11.0 + 20.8 + 15.6 + 5.2 − 0.4 2017
− 0.2 − 2.2 − 23.9 − 23.4 − 0.4 + 2.1 − 2.6 − 0.0 − 11.9 − 0.2 − 11.8 − 5.7 − 6.0 − 0.2 2018− 0.3 − 0.9 − 9.5 − 49.4 + 39.8 + 28.0 + 11.8 − 0.0 − 0.8 + 2.1 − 2.9 − 1.8 − 1.1 − 0.0 2019
− 0.2 − 3.9 + 83.6 + 87.7 − 4.1 − 34.7 + 30.6 − + 23.6 + 13.8 + 9.8 + 7.1 + 2.8 + 0.0 2020
− 0.0 − 0.4 − 22.0 − 12.0 − 10.0 − 12.4 + 2.4 + 0.0 − 3.6 − 1.2 − 2.4 − 2.5 + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          July
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 25.9 + 34.3 + 32.8 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 10.5 + 0.6 + 10.0 + 10.3 − 0.4 −          Aug.− 0.0 + 0.1 + 9.8 − 3.1 + 12.9 + 12.5 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 16.3 + 2.3 − 18.6 − 20.0 + 1.4 + 0.0          Sep.
− 0.2 − 0.3 − 14.6 − 8.1 − 6.5 − 8.2 + 1.7 − 0.2 + 8.3 − 2.7 + 10.9 + 10.6 + 0.3 − 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 − 0.3 − 0.6 + 20.3 − 20.9 − 21.4 + 0.5 + 0.0 − 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.4 − 1.4 − 0.0 + 0.0          Nov.− 1.1 − 0.2 − 106.0 −111.5 + 5.5 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 1.1 − 20.7 − 7.7 − 12.9 − 11.4 − 1.6 − 0.0          Dec.
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 73.0 + 92.9 − 19.8 − 21.6 + 1.7 − + 16.7 + 9.2 + 7.6 + 7.4 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Jan.
− 0.0 − 2.4 + 13.3 + 5.0 + 8.4 + 5.9 + 2.5 − + 7.3 + 7.2 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 1.8 − 0.0          Feb.+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 57.2 + 29.9 + 27.3 + 21.1 + 6.2 − + 14.2 + 17.4 − 3.2 − 3.5 + 0.4 + 0.0          Mar.
− 0.0 + 0.0 + 6.0 − 25.9 + 31.9 + 33.0 − 1.1 − + 4.4 − 3.7 + 8.1 + 6.9 + 1.2 − 0.0          Apr.
− 0.0 + 0.0 − 15.3 + 9.3 − 24.6 − 24.6 + 0.0 − − 1.0 − 0.7 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 1.0 + 0.0          May− 0.2 + 0.1 + 8.8 + 13.9 − 5.1 − 13.1 + 8.0 − − 4.7 − 5.6 + 0.9 + 1.8 − 0.9 − 0.0          June
− 0.1 + 0.0 + 17.6 + 20.7 − 3.1 − 4.1 + 1.0 − − 2.7 − 4.7 + 2.0 + 4.0 − 2.0 + 0.0          July
+ 0.0 − 0.0 − 13.9 − 13.8 − 0.0 + 0.5 − 0.5 − − 7.2 − 4.4 − 2.7 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 0.0          Aug.+ 0.2 + 0.0 + 1.0 + 10.4 − 9.5 − 13.5 + 4.0 − + 5.8 + 10.4 − 4.6 − 4.1 − 0.5 + 0.0          Sep.
+ 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 2.0 + 1.6 − − 0.6 − 3.2 + 2.6 + 2.3 + 0.3 + 0.0          Oct.
+ 0.0 + 0.0 + 7.9 + 5.9 + 2.0 − 3.7 + 5.7 − + 11.6 + 12.2 − 0.6 − 2.1 + 1.5 − 0.0          Nov.− 0.2 − 1.7 − 72.3 − 61.1 − 11.2 − 12.6 + 1.3 − − 20.3 − 20.3 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0          Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
30  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
 
5. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) *
  
€ billion
Lending to domestic Short-term lending Medium and long-term
non-banks, total
      to enterprises and households to general government to enter-
 
including excluding Negoti-negotiable money ablemarket paper, Loans money
Period securities, and market Treasury
equalisation claims Total Total bills paper Total Loans bills Total Total
End of year or month *
 
2011 3,197.8 2,775.4 383.3 316.5 316.1 0.4 66.8 60.7 6.0 2,814.5 2,321.92012 3,220.4 2,786.1 376.1 316.8 316.3 0.5 59.3 57.6 1.7 2,844.3 2,310.92013 3,131.6 2,693.2 269.1 217.7 217.0 0.6 51.4 50.8 0.6 2,862.6 2,328.62014 3,167.3 2,712.6 257.5 212.7 212.1 0.6 44.8 44.7 0.1 2,909.8 2,376.8
2015 3,233.9 2,764.4 255.5 207.8 207.6 0.2 47.8 47.5 0.2 2,978.3 2,451.4
2016 3,274.3 2,824.2 248.6 205.7 205.4 0.3 42.9 42.8 0.1 3,025.8 2,530.02017 3,332.6 2,894.4 241.7 210.9 210.6 0.3 30.7 30.3 0.4 3,090.9 2,640.02018 3,394.5 2,990.4 249.5 228.0 227.6 0.4 21.5 21.7 − 0.2 3,145.0 2,732.82019 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
2019         July 3,476.1 3,075.3 270.3 243.8 243.2 0.6 26.5 24.9 1.6 3,205.9 2,807.7
         Aug. 3,491.7 3,087.4 266.2 238.8 238.3 0.5 27.4 25.0 2.4 3,225.5 2,825.7         Sep. 3,499.8 3,094.7 269.2 246.1 245.6 0.6 23.1 19.9 3.2 3,230.6 2,831.0
         Oct. 3,506.7 3,104.7 261.6 237.1 236.5 0.6 24.5 21.6 2.8 3,245.1 2,849.5
         Nov. 3,523.5 3,121.3 262.6 239.8 239.2 0.6 22.8 20.1 2.7 3,260.9 2,864.3         Dec. 3,521.5 3,119.5 260.4 238.8 238.4 0.4 21.6 18.7 2.9 3,261.1 2,866.9
2020         Jan. 3,528.4 3,126.0 261.5 236.3 235.7 0.6 25.2 22.6 2.6 3,266.9 2,874.2
         Feb. 3,544.7 3,142.3 264.8 240.0 239.3 0.7 24.8 20.8 4.0 3,279.9 2,888.9         Mar. 3,580.0 3,174.3 288.4 261.9 261.1 0.8 26.4 22.2 4.2 3,291.6 2,892.2
         Apr. 3,594.3 3,185.5 285.0 255.6 254.9 0.7 29.4 22.9 6.5 3,309.3 2,908.0
         May 3,620.9 3,204.4 285.3 254.3 253.2 1.1 31.1 22.0 9.1 3,335.6 2,931.7         June 3,621.1 3,206.8 278.9 248.5 247.6 0.8 30.4 23.3 7.2 3,342.2 2,939.8
         July 3,625.7 3,217.4 274.8 243.4 242.6 0.8 31.5 24.2 7.3 3,350.9 2,953.2
         Aug. 3,629.7 3,219.7 265.6 237.7 236.9 0.8 28.0 19.4 8.6 3,364.0 2,967.3         Sep. 3,634.2 3,224.6 261.9 232.0 231.3 0.7 29.9 22.3 7.7 3,372.3 2,976.0
         Oct. 3,651.1 3,237.8 261.0 229.5 228.7 0.7 31.6 23.3 8.2 3,390.1 2,991.5
         Nov. 3,661.1 3,247.6 258.7 229.3 228.7 0.6 29.4 22.4 7.0 3,402.4 3,001.7         Dec. 3,647.0 3,245.3 243.3 221.6 221.2 0.4 21.6 18.0 3.6 3,403.8 3,013.0
Changes *
2012 + 21.0 + 9.6 − 9.7 − 1.6 − 1.7 + 0.1 − 8.2 − 3.8 − 4.3 + 30.7 + 10.92013 + 4.4 + 0.1 − 13.8 − 5.8 − 6.3 + 0.5 − 8.0 − 7.0 − 1.1 + 18.2 + 17.62014 + 36.7 + 20.5 − 11.6 − 4.5 − 4.5 − 0.0 − 7.1 − 6.5 − 0.6 + 48.3 + 52.5
2015 + 68.9 + 54.1 + 1.6 − 1.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 2.9 + 2.8 + 0.1 + 67.2 + 73.9
2016 + 43.7 + 62.7 − 5.2 − 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 4.9 − 4.8 − 0.2 + 48.9 + 79.82017 + 57.0 + 70.2 − 6.5 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 12.1 − 12.4 + 0.3 + 63.5 + 103.42018 + 71.5 + 105.3 + 6.6 + 15.8 + 15.7 + 0.1 − 9.2 − 8.6 − 0.6 + 65.0 + 102.02019 + 126.7 + 129.1 + 11.7 + 11.6 + 11.6 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 3.0 + 3.1 + 115.0 + 132.8
2020 + 123.2 + 123.6 − 19.6 − 19.8 − 19.8 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.5 + 0.7 + 142.8 + 145.6
2019         July + 9.2 + 8.2 − 1.0 − 6.1 − 6.0 − 0.0 + 5.0 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 10.2 + 12.9
         Aug. + 15.6 + 12.1 − 4.2 − 5.1 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 0.8 + 19.8 + 18.2         Sep. + 8.1 + 7.3 + 3.1 + 7.4 + 7.3 + 0.1 − 4.3 − 5.1 + 0.8 + 5.1 + 4.8
         Oct. + 6.9 + 10.0 − 7.4 − 8.8 − 8.8 + 0.0 + 1.4 + 1.7 − 0.4 + 14.4 + 18.4
         Nov. + 16.8 + 16.7 + 0.9 + 2.6 + 2.6 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 1.5 − 0.2 + 15.9 + 14.9         Dec. − 1.9 − 1.8 − 2.0 − 0.8 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 1.2 − 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 2.5
2020         Jan. + 6.8 + 6.5 + 1.1 − 2.5 − 2.7 + 0.2 + 3.6 + 3.8 − 0.2 + 5.7 + 7.2
         Feb. + 16.3 + 16.2 + 3.3 + 3.7 + 3.6 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 1.7 + 1.3 + 13.0 + 14.7         Mar. + 35.3 + 32.1 + 23.6 + 21.9 + 21.8 + 0.2 + 1.7 + 1.4 + 0.3 + 11.7 + 3.3
         Apr. + 14.4 + 11.2 − 3.3 − 6.3 − 6.2 − 0.1 + 3.0 + 0.7 + 2.3 + 17.7 + 15.9
         May + 24.1 + 16.4 − 2.2 − 3.9 − 4.2 + 0.4 + 1.7 − 0.9 + 2.5 + 26.3 + 23.7         June + 0.2 + 2.5 − 6.4 − 5.8 − 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 1.3 − 1.9 + 6.6 + 7.9
         July + 4.6 + 10.5 − 5.9 − 6.9 − 6.8 − 0.1 + 1.0 + 0.9 + 0.1 + 10.5 + 15.2
         Aug. + 4.0 + 2.4 − 7.5 − 4.1 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 3.5 − 4.9 + 1.4 + 11.5 + 12.6         Sep. + 4.6 + 4.9 − 3.7 − 5.6 − 5.6 − 0.1 + 2.0 + 2.9 − 0.9 + 8.3 + 8.6
         Oct. + 16.5 + 12.9 − 0.9 − 2.6 − 2.6 + 0.0 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 0.6 + 17.4 + 14.6
         Nov. + 10.6 + 10.4 − 2.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 2.0 − 0.7 − 1.2 + 12.7 + 10.6         Dec. − 14.1 − 2.3 − 15.5 − 7.7 − 7.5 − 0.2 − 7.8 − 4.4 − 3.4 + 1.4 + 11.2
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Excluding debt securities arising from the exchange of
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. equalisation claims (see also footnote 2). 2Including debt securities arising from the
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not exchange of equalisation claims. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
31  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
lendingprises and households to general governmentLoans Loans
Memo Memo
item: Equal- item:
Medium- Long- Fiduciary Medium- Long- Secur- isation Fiduciary
Total term term loans Total Total term term ities  
1 claims  2 loans   Period Securities
End of year or month *
 
2,099.5 247.9 1,851.7 222.4 32.7 492.6 299.1 41.1 258.0 193.5 − 3.6 20112,119.5 249.7 1,869.8 191.4 31.4 533.4 292.7 39.4 253.3 240.7 − 3.5 20122,136.9 248.0 1,888.9 191.7 28.9 534.0 288.4 38.8 249.7 245.6 − 2.7 20132,172.7 251.7 1,921.0 204.2 24.4 532.9 283.1 33.5 249.6 249.8 − 2.1 2014
2,232.4 256.0 1,976.3 219.0 18.3 527.0 277.0 27.9 249.0 250.0 − 2.1 2015
2,306.5 264.1 2,042.4 223.4 17.3 495.8 269.4 23.9 245.5 226.4 − 1.8 20162,399.5 273.5 2,125.9 240.6 17.4 450.9 254.0 22.5 231.5 196.9 − 1.7 20172,499.4 282.6 2,216.8 233.4 16.5 412.1 241.7 19.7 222.0 170.4 − 1.4 20182,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5 2019
2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 − 1.1 2020
2,571.9 295.2 2,276.8 235.8 15.8 398.2 235.4 17.4 218.0 162.8 − 1.2 2019          July
2,588.9 298.3 2,290.5 236.8 15.9 399.7 235.2 17.4 217.8 164.5 − 1.2          Aug.2,594.1 297.2 2,296.8 236.9 15.8 399.6 235.2 17.0 218.2 164.4 − 1.2          Sep.
2,611.0 299.7 2,311.3 238.5 15.9 395.6 235.5 16.9 218.6 160.1 − 1.2          Oct.
2,624.4 301.6 2,322.8 240.0 15.9 396.5 237.6 17.6 220.0 158.9 − 1.2          Nov.2,626.4 301.3 2,325.1 240.5 15.7 394.2 235.9 17.2 218.8 158.2 − 1.5          Dec.
2,631.8 300.0 2,331.8 242.4 15.7 392.7 236.0 17.0 219.0 156.7 − 1.2 2020          Jan.
2,646.4 302.5 2,344.0 242.5 15.7 391.0 235.7 17.2 218.5 155.3 − 1.2          Feb.2,654.8 304.5 2,350.2 237.5 15.6 399.4 236.3 17.2 219.1 163.1 − 1.2          Mar.
2,671.3 307.2 2,364.1 236.7 15.9 401.3 236.4 17.3 219.1 164.9 − 1.3          Apr.
2,692.9 310.7 2,382.2 238.9 18.1 403.9 236.3 17.4 218.9 167.6 − 1.3          May2,701.4 310.8 2,390.6 238.4 19.6 402.4 234.5 17.1 217.4 167.9 − 1.2          June
2,715.7 312.5 2,403.2 237.5 21.0 397.7 234.9 16.7 218.1 162.8 − 1.2          July
2,729.1 313.1 2,416.0 238.2 21.3 396.7 234.4 16.7 217.7 162.3 − 1.2          Aug.2,737.4 313.1 2,424.2 238.6 21.5 396.3 233.7 16.2 217.5 162.6 − 1.2          Sep.
2,751.8 313.2 2,438.6 239.7 21.6 398.6 234.0 15.9 218.1 164.6 − 1.2          Oct.
2,762.3 311.5 2,450.8 239.4 21.8 400.7 234.2 15.7 218.6 166.4 − 1.2          Nov.2,771.8 310.5 2,461.4 241.1 22.4 390.8 234.3 15.7 218.6 156.6 − 1.1          Dec.
Changes *
+ 21.6 + 1.5 + 20.1 − 10.7 − 1.1 + 19.8 − 6.6 − 1.9 − 4.7 + 26.4 − − 0.2 2012+ 17.7 − 0.1 + 17.8 − 0.1 − 2.5 + 0.6 − 4.3 − 0.7 − 3.6 + 4.9 − − 0.8 2013+ 39.9 + 5.6 + 34.3 + 12.5 − 1.8 − 4.1 − 8.5 − 5.1 − 3.4 + 4.3 − − 0.2 2014
+ 59.0 + 4.5 + 54.6 + 14.8 − 2.1 − 6.6 − 6.9 − 4.8 − 2.0 + 0.2 − + 0.0 2015
+ 75.1 + 9.7 + 65.4 + 4.7 − 0.9 − 30.9 − 7.3 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 23.6 − − 0.4 2016+ 87.6 + 9.4 + 78.2 + 15.8 + 0.1 − 39.9 − 10.6 − 1.3 − 9.3 − 29.4 − − 0.1 2017+ 108.7 + 19.3 + 89.4 − 6.7 − 0.9 − 37.1 − 10.5 − 2.7 − 7.8 − 26.6 − − 0.0 2018+ 126.0 + 18.9 + 107.2 + 6.8 − 0.8 − 17.8 − 5.5 − 2.6 − 2.9 − 12.3 − + 0.1 2019
+ 145.0 + 9.4 + 135.5 + 0.6 + 6.1 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.5 + 0.4 − 1.7 − − 0.4 2020
+ 11.7 + 1.0 + 10.7 + 1.2 − 0.4 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 1.1 − − 0.0 2019          July
+ 17.1 + 3.3 + 13.8 + 1.1 + 0.0 + 1.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Aug.+ 4.7 − 0.7 + 5.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − − 0.0          Sep.
+ 16.8 + 2.4 + 14.4 + 1.6 + 0.1 − 4.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.4 − 4.3 − − 0.0          Oct.
+ 13.4 + 1.9 + 11.6 + 1.5 + 0.0 + 0.9 + 2.1 + 0.7 + 1.4 − 1.2 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 1.9 − 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 1.7 − 0.5 − 1.2 − 0.7 − + 0.3          Dec.
+ 5.3 − 1.4 + 6.7 + 1.9 − 0.0 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 − − 0.3 2020          Jan.
+ 14.6 + 2.4 + 12.2 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 1.7 − 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.5 − 1.3 − + 0.0          Feb.+ 8.3 + 2.1 + 6.3 − 5.0 − 0.1 + 8.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 7.8 − − 0.0          Mar.
+ 16.7 + 2.7 + 14.0 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 1.8 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 1.8 − + 0.0          Apr.
+ 21.5 + 3.5 + 18.0 + 2.2 + 2.2 + 2.6 − 0.0 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 2.7 − + 0.0          May+ 8.4 + 0.0 + 8.4 − 0.5 + 1.5 − 1.3 − 1.6 − 0.3 − 1.3 + 0.3 − − 0.1          June
+ 16.1 + 1.6 + 14.5 − 0.9 + 0.9 − 4.7 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 5.1 − + 0.0          July
+ 11.9 + 0.7 + 11.2 + 0.7 + 0.3 − 1.0 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.5 − 0.5 − − 0.0          Aug.+ 8.2 − 0.0 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.4 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.3 − + 0.0          Sep.
+ 13.5 + 0.1 + 13.5 + 1.1 + 0.1 + 2.8 + 0.9 − 0.4 + 1.2 + 1.9 − + 0.0          Oct.
+ 10.9 − 1.2 + 12.1 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.5 + 1.8 − − 0.0          Nov.+ 9.5 − 1.0 + 10.5 + 1.7 + 0.7 − 9.8 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 9.9 − − 0.1          Dec.

Deutsche Bundesbank
32  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
 
6. Lending by banks (MFIs) in Germany to domestic enterprises and households, housing loans,
 sectors of economic activity *
 
€ billion
Lending to domestic enterprises and households (excluding holdings of negotiable money market paper and excluding securities po rtfolios)  1 
of which:  
 
Housing loans Lending to enterprises and self-employed persons
Whole-
sale and Electricity,
gas and retail Financial
Mortgage water trade; Agri- Transport- intermedi-loans supply; repair of culture, ation and ationsecured refuse motor forestry, storage; (excludingby disposal, vehicles fishing post and MFIs) and
Mortgage residen- Other of which: mining and and telecom- insuranceloans, tial real housing Housing Manufac- and Construc- motor- aqua- munica- com-
Period Total total Total estate loans Total loans turing quarrying tion cycles culture tions panies
Lending, total End of year or quarter *
 
2018 2,727.0 1,382.2 1,391.2 1,116.4 274.8 1,483.6 392.7 139.3 116.5 71.9 138.7 53.2 50.6 157.3
2019         Dec. 2,864.8 1,512.1 1,470.4 1,213.0 257.4 1,560.5 416.1 146.6 119.0 77.1 141.6 54.2 50.3 168.2
2020         Mar. 2,915.9 1,533.2 1,488.6 1,225.8 262.8 1,598.9 421.9 155.8 120.1 79.4 143.5 54.5 52.5 176.4
         June 2,949.0 1,558.5 1,510.6 1,246.6 263.9 1,613.5 423.2 164.5 120.6 80.8 138.1 55.4 56.6 175.2         Sep. 2,968.6 1,580.1 1,537.3 1,265.4 272.0 1,616.8 434.6 157.2 121.1 82.2 135.9 55.5 57.7 173.7         Dec. 2,993.0 1,601.8 1,565.6 1,285.1 280.5 1,623.4 443.3 146.7 123.4 82.7 135.8 55.3 59.8 176.0
 Short-term lending
2018 227.6 − 7.2 − 7.2 195.9 4.1 35.5 4.9 14.7 48.3 3.7 4.9 28.02019         Dec. 238.4 − 8.1 − 8.1 206.2 4.7 35.9 5.6 15.7 48.6 3.8 4.6 27.0
2020         Mar. 261.1 − 8.3 − 8.3 230.3 4.9 43.4 6.7 17.1 49.5 4.1 6.1 34.6
         June 247.6 − 8.2 − 8.2 217.9 4.7 44.5 6.1 16.9 41.8 4.2 5.4 33.4         Sep. 231.3 − 8.5 − 8.5 201.4 5.0 36.9 6.5 16.9 38.4 4.2 5.3 30.0         Dec. 221.2 − 8.0 − 8.0 192.1 4.6 29.0 6.9 16.0 37.0 3.6 6.1 31.6
 Medium-term lending
2018 282.6 − 35.4 − 35.4 202.5 15.4 24.9 4.5 12.5 19.0 4.5 10.6 49.02019         Dec. 301.3 − 36.6 − 36.6 219.5 16.6 28.5 4.9 13.9 19.7 4.6 10.2 52.0
2020         Mar. 304.5 − 36.9 − 36.9 222.8 17.0 29.7 5.1 13.9 20.4 4.5 10.4 51.3
         June 310.8 − 37.7 − 37.7 229.8 17.6 33.6 5.2 14.2 19.6 4.5 13.4 50.2         Sep. 313.1 − 38.0 − 38.0 232.1 17.9 33.1 5.3 14.6 19.2 4.6 14.3 51.4         Dec. 310.5 − 38.5 − 38.5 230.4 18.5 30.2 5.4 14.8 19.3 4.8 15.0 51.4
 Long-term lending
2018 2,216.8 1,382.2 1,348.6 1,116.4 232.2 1,085.2 373.2 78.9 107.2 44.7 71.4 45.0 35.1 80.32019         Dec. 2,325.1 1,512.1 1,425.7 1,213.0 212.7 1,134.9 394.8 82.2 108.6 47.6 73.3 45.8 35.5 89.2
2020         Mar. 2,350.2 1,533.2 1,443.4 1,225.8 217.6 1,145.7 400.0 82.7 108.4 48.4 73.6 45.9 36.0 90.6
         June 2,390.6 1,558.5 1,464.7 1,246.6 218.1 1,165.8 400.8 86.4 109.3 49.7 76.7 46.6 37.8 91.6         Sep. 2,424.2 1,580.1 1,490.9 1,265.4 225.5 1,183.3 411.6 87.2 109.3 50.7 78.2 46.7 38.2 92.2         Dec. 2,461.4 1,601.8 1,519.1 1,285.1 234.0 1,201.0 420.2 87.5 111.2 51.8 79.4 47.0 38.7 93.0
 
Lending, total Change during quarter *
 
2019         Q4 + 25.3 + 20.1 + 20.0 + 13.9 + 6.1 + 9.2 + 4.6 − 3.5 + 0.5 − 0.3 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 0.2 + 2.0
2020         Q1 + 51.0 + 15.6 + 17.8 + 12.4 + 5.4 + 38.2 + 5.4 + 9.2 + 1.1 + 2.3 + 1.9 + 0.3 + 2.2 + 8.2
         Q2 + 30.6 + 17.8 + 21.0 + 13.7 + 7.3 + 17.1 + 5.2 + 8.8 + 0.3 + 1.4 − 4.4 + 0.9 + 4.1 − 4.0         Q3 + 19.7 + 21.7 + 26.5 + 18.8 + 7.7 − 1.9 + 6.4 − 7.4 + 0.5 + 1.4 − 2.6 + 0.1 + 1.1 − 2.1         Q4 + 23.9 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 6.1 + 8.4 − 10.3 + 2.0 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 2.2 + 2.4
 Short-term lending
2019         Q4 − 7.0 − − 0.3 − − 0.3 − 7.5 − 0.2 − 5.2 + 0.3 − 1.0 + 0.6 − 0.6 + 0.1 − 3.2
2020         Q1 + 22.7 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 + 24.2 + 0.2 + 7.5 + 1.1 + 1.4 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 1.4 + 7.6
         Q2 − 16.0 − − 0.2 − − 0.2 − 14.9 − 0.1 + 1.2 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 7.1 + 0.1 − 0.7 − 4.2         Q3 − 16.5 − + 0.3 − + 0.3 − 16.7 + 0.3 − 7.6 + 0.5 − 0.0 − 3.4 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 3.4         Q4 − 10.0 − − 0.5 − − 0.5 − 9.3 − 0.4 − 8.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 − 1.4 − 0.6 + 0.8 + 1.6
 Medium-term lending
2019         Q4 + 4.2 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 4.1 + 0.2 + 1.3 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 1.9
2020         Q1 + 3.1 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 3.3 + 0.4 + 1.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.7 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.7
         Q2 + 6.2 − + 0.7 − + 0.7 + 7.4 + 0.7 + 3.9 + 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.8 + 0.0 + 2.9 − 1.0         Q3 + 2.3 − + 0.2 − + 0.2 + 2.1 + 0.1 − 0.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 0.6         Q4 − 2.2 − + 0.6 − + 0.6 − 1.6 + 0.6 − 2.8 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.8 − 0.2
 Long-term lending
2019         Q4 + 28.1 + 20.1 + 20.1 + 13.9 + 6.2 + 12.6 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 3.3
2020         Q1 + 25.1 + 15.6 + 17.3 + 12.4 + 4.9 + 10.7 + 4.9 + 0.5 − 0.2 + 0.9 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.5 + 1.4
         Q2 + 40.4 + 17.8 + 20.4 + 13.7 + 6.8 + 24.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 0.8 + 1.3 + 3.5 + 0.7 + 1.8 + 1.2         Q3 + 33.9 + 21.7 + 26.0 + 18.8 + 7.2 + 12.7 + 6.0 + 0.7 − 0.0 + 1.0 + 1.2 + 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.7         Q4 + 36.1 + 21.3 + 27.7 + 19.3 + 8.4 + 16.9 + 8.2 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 1.1 + 1.2 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 1.0
*Excluding lending by foreign
branches. Breakdown of lending by building and loan from the changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as pro-
associations by areas and sectors estimated. Statistical breaks have been eliminated visional; subsequent alterations, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are

Deutsche Bundesbank
33  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
  
 Lending to
 Lending to employees and other individuals non-profit institutions
Memo items: Other lending Services sector (including the professions)
of which: of which:
Debit
balanceson wage,
Other Lending salaryreal to self- Lending and of which:
Housing Holding estate employed to craft Housing pension Housing Instalment
Total companies Total loans Total loans  
3 accounts Total loans   Period enterprises activities persons  2 enterprises
End of year or quarter * Lending, total 
 
756.0 237.0 47.3 196.9 432.6 48.0 1,228.4 994.8 233.7 172.9 8.3 15.0 3.7 2018
803.6 264.5 51.1 193.9 447.5 47.6 1,288.4 1,050.4 238.0 176.5 7.9 15.9 3.9 2019          Dec.
816.6 273.2 54.2 196.6 450.6 48.0 1,301.0 1,062.8 238.2 178.0 7.9 16.0 3.9 2020          Mar.
822.2 277.8 55.9 198.5 447.1 48.1 1,319.4 1,083.5 235.9 176.9 7.3 16.2 3.9          June833.5 281.7 55.1 201.9 458.9 48.1 1,335.9 1,098.8 237.0 178.3 7.5 16.0 3.9          Sep.843.7 286.6 53.8 204.1 464.0 47.9 1,353.4 1,118.3 235.2 177.4 6.7 16.2 4.0          Dec.
Short-term lending
55.9 12.0 8.1 10.4 24.0 5.2 31.2 3.1 28.2 1.5 8.3 0.5 − 201865.0 14.4 9.7 10.2 23.9 4.9 31.6 3.3 28.2 1.3 7.9 0.7 0.0 2019          Dec.
69.0 14.8 12.2 11.1 23.8 5.2 30.0 3.4 26.6 1.4 7.9 0.7 0.0 2020          Mar.
65.5 14.8 11.9 11.4 21.8 4.7 29.0 3.4 25.6 1.4 7.3 0.7 0.0          June63.1 15.6 10.7 10.9 21.7 4.3 29.3 3.5 25.8 1.3 7.5 0.6 0.0          Sep.61.9 15.7 9.6 10.5 20.9 3.7 28.6 3.4 25.2 1.3 6.7 0.6 0.0          Dec.
Medium-term lending
77.5 14.8 9.9 21.3 31.5 3.5 79.6 19.9 59.7 56.4 − 0.5 0.1 201885.7 18.1 11.0 22.9 31.9 3.5 81.4 19.9 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 2019          Dec.
87.4 19.1 11.6 23.3 31.9 3.6 81.2 19.8 61.4 58.0 − 0.5 0.0 2020          Mar.
89.0 19.7 12.6 23.5 31.6 3.5 80.4 20.0 60.4 56.9 − 0.6 0.0          June89.6 20.0 12.6 24.1 31.9 3.6 80.6 20.0 60.6 57.2 − 0.5 0.0          Sep.89.6 20.4 11.8 24.5 32.0 3.5 79.6 20.0 59.6 56.1 − 0.5 0.0          Dec.
Long-term lending
622.6 210.2 29.2 165.3 377.2 39.3 1,117.6 971.8 145.8 115.0 − 14.0 3.7 2018652.9 232.0 30.4 160.9 391.7 39.1 1,175.5 1,027.1 148.3 117.1 − 14.7 3.8 2019          Dec.
660.2 239.3 30.5 162.3 394.9 39.3 1,189.8 1,039.5 150.2 118.6 − 14.8 3.8 2020          Mar.
667.7 243.3 31.4 163.6 393.7 39.9 1,210.0 1,060.1 149.9 118.5 − 14.9 3.8          June680.8 246.1 31.8 166.9 405.3 40.1 1,226.0 1,075.4 150.7 119.8 − 15.0 3.9          Sep.692.3 250.5 32.4 169.1 411.1 40.7 1,245.3 1,094.9 150.4 120.0 − 15.1 4.0          Dec.
 
Change during quarter * Lending, total 
 
+ 9.1 + 4.2 + 0.2 + 0.8 + 2.8 − 0.6 + 15.9 + 15.5 + 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.0 2019          Q4
+ 13.0 + 4.9 + 3.1 + 1.9 + 3.0 + 0.5 + 12.6 + 12.3 + 0.2 + 1.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 10.0 + 4.6 + 1.7 + 2.1 + 3.5 + 0.1 + 13.4 + 15.8 − 2.4 − 1.0 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 7.0 + 3.9 − 0.8 + 3.2 + 5.4 + 0.0 + 21.7 + 20.0 + 1.6 + 1.7 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 9.6 + 5.2 − 1.5 + 1.8 + 4.4 − 0.2 + 17.6 + 19.3 − 1.6 − 0.7 − 0.8 + 0.2 + 0.1          Q4
Short-term lending
+ 1.7 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.5 − 0.5 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 2019          Q4
+ 4.0 + 0.3 + 2.5 + 0.9 − 0.1 + 0.2 − 1.6 + 0.1 − 1.7 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 2020          Q1
− 3.5 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 2.0 − 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.0 − 1.0 + 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 −          Q2− 2.6 + 0.8 − 1.2 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 1.2 + 0.2 − 1.1 − 0.4 − 0.8 − 0.6 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 0.0          Q4
Medium-term lending
+ 0.5 + 0.6 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − + 0.0 + 0.0 2019          Q4
+ 1.8 + 0.8 + 0.6 + 0.3 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − + 0.0 − 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 1.8 + 0.6 + 1.0 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 1.3 + 0.0 − 1.3 − 1.3 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q2+ 1.1 + 0.4 − 0.0 + 0.8 + 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.3 − − 0.1 + 0.0          Q3− 0.0 + 0.4 − 0.9 + 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.6 + 0.0 − 0.7 − 0.7 − + 0.0 − 0.0          Q4
Long-term lending
+ 7.0 + 2.7 + 0.1 + 0.9 + 3.4 − 0.0 + 15.5 + 15.4 + 0.0 + 0.2 − + 0.1 − 0.0 2019          Q4
+ 7.3 + 3.8 + 0.1 + 0.7 + 3.2 + 0.2 + 14.3 + 12.4 + 1.9 + 1.8 − + 0.1 + 0.0 2020          Q1
+ 11.6 + 4.1 + 0.9 + 1.5 + 5.7 + 0.6 + 15.7 + 15.8 − 0.2 + 0.2 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q2+ 8.6 + 2.8 + 0.4 + 3.0 + 5.4 + 0.2 + 21.1 + 20.0 + 1.1 + 1.5 − + 0.1 + 0.0          Q3+ 10.8 + 4.6 + 0.4 + 1.8 + 4.9 + 0.5 + 19.0 + 19.3 − 0.4 + 0.1 − + 0.2 + 0.1          Q4
not specially marked. 1Excluding fiduciary loans. 2Including sole proprietors.
3 Excluding mortgage loans and housing loans, even in the form of instalment credit. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
34  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic non-banks, total End of year or month*
 
2018 3,537.6 2,080.1 841.5 203.4 638.2 56.8 581.4 578.6 37.3 33.9 14.9 0.52019 3,661.0 2,236.3 816.2 202.7 613.5 52.7 560.8 575.2 33.2 32.5 14.7 0.22020 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
2020         Jan. 3,658.2 2,235.1 819.7 208.4 611.3 52.4 558.9 570.7 32.6 32.3 14.8 0.5
         Feb. 3,675.9 2,254.4 820.8 212.2 608.6 52.2 556.4 568.5 32.2 32.8 14.6 0.3         Mar. 3,716.6 2,304.9 815.5 212.7 602.8 50.1 552.7 564.5 31.8 32.5 14.6 0.6
         Apr. 3,741.9 2,345.4 801.6 206.0 595.6 48.5 547.1 563.8 31.1 32.8 14.4 1.5
         May 3,775.3 2,376.3 804.7 214.1 590.6 47.1 543.5 563.6 30.7 33.3 14.4 0.3         June 3,766.3 2,385.3 788.2 206.7 581.5 44.3 537.2 562.6 30.3 33.4 14.3 0.2
         July 3,803.4 2,414.0 798.6 215.6 583.1 46.6 536.5 560.9 29.9 33.8 14.3 0.2
         Aug. 3,820.8 2,427.7 802.9 215.0 587.9 45.8 542.0 560.6 29.6 34.0 14.4 0.5         Sep. 3,834.2 2,442.8 802.0 210.1 591.9 48.1 543.8 560.1 29.3 34.3 14.3 0.4
         Oct. 3,874.1 2,481.4 804.1 207.6 596.5 50.7 545.8 559.7 28.9 34.6 14.3 0.6
         Nov. 3,894.3 2,515.3 790.9 196.4 594.5 48.1 546.4 559.6 28.5 34.4 14.3 0.7         Dec. 3,885.2 2,513.0 783.3 188.9 594.4 47.9 546.5 560.6 28.3 34.4 14.4 0.1
Changes*
2019 + 122.5 + 155.8 − 25.7 − 0.8 − 24.9 − 4.1 − 20.7 − 3.5 − 4.1 − 1.4 + 0.9 − 0.32020 + 221.6 + 273.7 − 32.7 − 15.0 − 17.7 − 4.8 − 12.9 − 14.5 − 4.9 + 1.9 − 0.3 − 0.1
2020         Jan. − 2.8 − 1.3 + 3.5 + 5.7 − 2.2 − 0.3 − 1.9 − 4.5 − 0.6 − 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 17.7 + 19.3 + 1.1 + 3.8 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 2.5 − 2.2 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 40.7 + 50.5 − 5.3 + 0.5 − 5.9 − 2.1 − 3.7 − 4.0 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr. + 25.3 + 40.7 − 14.0 − 6.8 − 7.2 − 1.6 − 5.6 − 0.7 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.9
         May + 30.5 + 27.9 + 3.2 + 8.1 − 4.9 − 1.3 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 0.4 + 0.6 + 0.0 − 1.2         June − 9.0 + 8.8 − 16.4 − 7.4 − 9.0 − 2.8 − 6.1 − 1.1 − 0.4 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 37.1 + 28.7 + 10.5 + 8.9 + 1.6 + 2.3 − 0.7 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 17.4 + 13.6 + 4.3 − 0.6 + 4.9 − 0.7 + 5.6 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 13.4 + 15.1 − 0.9 − 4.9 + 4.0 + 2.3 + 1.7 − 0.5 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 40.0 + 38.6 + 2.2 − 3.5 + 5.7 + 2.5 + 3.2 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 20.5 + 34.1 − 13.2 − 11.2 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1         Dec. − 9.2 − 2.3 − 7.6 − 7.5 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6
Domestic government End of year or month*
2018 218.9 62.7 148.2 67.9 80.3 28.5 51.8 3.7 4.2 25.3 2.2 −
2019 237.1 74.7 154.9 76.0 78.9 26.1 52.8 3.4 4.1 24.7 2.2 0.22020 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 −
2020         Jan. 236.9 69.1 160.5 81.6 78.9 25.7 53.2 3.2 4.1 24.4 2.2 0.2
         Feb. 247.0 74.8 164.8 86.7 78.1 25.4 52.7 3.3 4.1 25.0 2.2 0.2         Mar. 238.6 72.7 158.6 83.1 75.5 23.8 51.7 3.2 4.1 25.0 2.1 0.2
         Apr. 228.7 73.9 147.8 75.1 72.7 22.8 50.0 3.1 4.0 25.3 2.1 0.2
         May 232.1 81.1 143.9 73.5 70.4 22.0 48.4 3.1 4.0 26.0 2.1 0.2         June 221.4 75.4 139.1 75.0 64.1 18.5 45.5 2.9 3.9 25.8 2.1 0.2
         July 226.5 76.7 143.0 73.4 69.6 20.3 49.3 2.8 3.9 25.9 2.1 0.2
         Aug. 237.6 79.4 151.3 76.1 75.2 19.4 55.8 2.9 3.9 26.0 2.1 0.2         Sep. 236.6 77.4 152.6 72.4 80.2 21.5 58.7 2.8 3.8 26.1 2.1 0.2
         Oct. 240.1 81.5 152.0 68.0 84.0 24.0 60.1 2.8 3.7 26.1 2.1 0.2
         Nov. 237.2 83.9 146.8 63.7 83.1 21.3 61.8 2.8 3.7 25.6 2.1 −         Dec. 229.5 80.1 143.0 59.6 83.5 20.9 62.6 2.7 3.7 25.4 2.1 −
Changes*
2019 + 17.1 + 11.8 + 5.8 + 7.8 − 2.0 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 0.4 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.0 + 0.22020 − 7.0 + 5.7 − 11.6 − 16.5 + 4.8 − 5.3 + 10.1 − 0.6 − 0.4 + 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.2
2020         Jan. − 0.2 − 5.6 + 5.6 + 5.6 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.0 −
         Feb. + 10.1 + 5.7 + 4.3 + 5.1 − 0.8 − 0.3 − 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.6 − −         Mar. − 8.4 − 2.1 − 6.3 − 3.6 − 2.7 − 1.6 − 1.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Apr. − 9.9 + 1.2 − 10.8 − 8.0 − 2.8 − 1.1 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.0 −
         May + 3.3 + 7.2 − 3.9 − 1.6 − 2.4 − 0.8 − 1.6 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.6 + 0.0 −         June − 10.7 − 5.7 − 4.8 + 1.5 − 6.3 − 3.4 − 2.9 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 −
         July + 5.1 + 1.3 + 3.9 − 1.6 + 5.5 + 1.8 + 3.7 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.0 −
         Aug. + 11.1 + 2.8 + 8.3 + 2.7 + 5.6 − 0.9 + 6.5 + 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.0 −         Sep. − 0.8 − 2.1 + 1.4 − 3.7 + 5.1 + 2.1 + 3.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.0 −
         Oct. + 3.7 + 4.2 − 0.4 − 4.5 + 4.0 + 2.4 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Nov. − 2.7 + 2.6 − 5.2 − 4.3 − 0.9 − 2.6 + 1.7 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.5 − − 0.2         Dec. − 7.7 − 3.9 − 3.8 − 4.1 + 0.4 − 0.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not

Deutsche Bundesbank
35  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
 
7. Deposits of domestic non-banks (non-MFIs) at banks (MFIs) in Germany * (cont’d)
  
€ billion
Time deposits  1,2   Memo item:
  
 for more than 1 year  2 Subordinated
 liabilities
for up for up (excludingto and to and for more Bank negotiable Liabilities
Deposits, Sight including including than Savings savings Fiduciary debt arising
Period total deposits Total 1 year Total 2 years 2 years bonds  
4 loans securities) from repos deposits  3 
Domestic enterprises and households End of year or month*
 
2018 3,318.7 2,017.4 693.3 135.4 557.9 28.3 529.6 574.9 33.1 8.6 12.7 0.52019 3,423.9 2,161.6 661.4 126.7 534.7 26.6 508.0 571.8 29.1 7.8 12.6 0.02020 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
2020         Jan. 3,421.2 2,166.0 659.2 126.8 532.4 26.7 505.7 567.5 28.5 7.9 12.6 0.4
         Feb. 3,428.9 2,179.6 656.0 125.5 530.5 26.8 503.7 565.2 28.1 7.7 12.4 0.2         Mar. 3,477.9 2,232.2 656.9 129.6 527.3 26.2 501.0 561.2 27.6 7.5 12.4 0.5
         Apr. 3,513.1 2,271.6 653.8 130.9 522.8 25.7 497.1 560.7 27.1 7.4 12.3 1.4
         May 3,543.3 2,295.2 660.9 140.6 520.2 25.2 495.1 560.5 26.7 7.4 12.3 0.2         June 3,545.0 2,309.9 649.1 131.7 517.4 25.8 491.6 559.7 26.3 7.5 12.3 0.1
         July 3,577.0 2,337.3 655.6 142.1 513.5 26.3 487.2 558.1 26.0 7.9 12.2 0.1
         Aug. 3,583.2 2,348.2 651.6 138.8 512.7 26.4 486.3 557.8 25.7 8.0 12.3 0.3         Sep. 3,597.6 2,365.4 649.4 137.7 511.7 26.6 485.1 557.3 25.5 8.2 12.2 0.2
         Oct. 3,634.0 2,399.9 652.1 139.7 512.4 26.7 485.7 556.9 25.1 8.5 12.2 0.5
         Nov. 3,657.1 2,431.4 644.1 132.7 511.4 26.7 484.7 556.8 24.8 8.8 12.2 0.7         Dec. 3,655.7 2,432.9 640.3 129.3 511.0 27.0 483.9 557.9 24.6 9.0 12.3 0.1
Changes*
2019 + 105.4 + 144.0 − 31.5 − 8.6 − 22.9 − 1.5 − 21.4 − 3.1 − 4.0 − 0.8 + 1.0 − 0.42020 + 228.5 + 268.1 − 21.1 + 1.5 − 22.6 + 0.5 − 23.0 − 13.9 − 4.6 + 1.2 − 0.2 + 0.1
2020         Jan. − 2.7 + 4.3 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 2.3 − 4.3 − 0.6 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. + 7.7 + 13.6 − 3.2 − 1.3 − 1.9 + 0.1 − 2.0 − 2.3 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 49.0 + 52.6 + 0.9 + 4.1 − 3.2 − 0.6 − 2.6 − 4.0 − 0.5 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr. + 35.2 + 39.5 − 3.2 + 1.2 − 4.4 − 0.5 − 3.9 − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.9
         May + 27.1 + 20.6 + 7.1 + 9.7 − 2.6 − 0.5 − 2.0 − 0.2 − 0.4 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 1.2         June + 1.7 + 14.5 − 11.6 − 8.9 − 2.6 + 0.6 − 3.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 32.0 + 27.4 + 6.5 + 10.4 − 3.9 + 0.5 − 4.4 − 1.6 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Aug. + 6.3 + 10.8 − 4.0 − 3.3 − 0.7 + 0.2 − 0.9 − 0.2 − 0.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 14.2 + 17.2 − 2.2 − 1.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.2 − 0.4 − 0.3 + 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 36.3 + 34.4 + 2.6 + 1.0 + 1.7 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 23.1 + 31.5 − 8.0 − 6.9 − 1.0 + 0.0 − 1.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.2         Dec. − 1.4 + 1.6 − 3.8 − 3.4 − 0.4 + 0.3 − 0.7 + 1.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.6
of which: Domestic enterprises End of year or month*
2018 1,035.4 584.0 432.9 86.0 346.9 17.2 329.7 7.0 11.4 2.8 10.3 0.52019 1,031.5 614.4 399.7 81.1 318.6 15.5 303.1 6.7 10.7 2.4 10.1 0.02020 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
2020         Jan. 1,030.8 616.3 397.5 81.7 315.8 15.4 300.3 6.6 10.5 2.4 10.2 0.4
         Feb. 1,020.4 608.8 394.7 81.2 313.5 15.6 297.9 6.5 10.4 2.4 10.0 0.2         Mar. 1,080.3 665.3 398.2 87.3 310.9 15.4 295.5 6.5 10.3 2.3 10.0 0.5
         Apr. 1,087.9 674.4 397.0 89.9 307.2 15.1 292.0 6.2 10.2 2.3 9.8 1.4
         May 1,095.7 676.0 403.5 99.2 304.2 14.5 289.7 6.2 10.1 2.4 9.9 0.2         June 1,090.9 683.7 391.2 90.0 301.2 14.5 286.6 6.2 9.9 2.4 9.8 0.1
         July 1,108.0 694.4 397.6 100.6 297.1 14.5 282.6 6.1 9.8 2.4 9.8 0.1
         Aug. 1,108.0 698.2 393.8 97.5 296.3 14.6 281.6 6.1 9.9 2.3 9.8 0.3         Sep. 1,114.5 707.3 391.4 96.5 294.9 14.7 280.2 6.0 9.8 2.3 9.7 0.2
         Oct. 1,129.9 720.0 394.2 98.6 295.6 14.7 280.9 6.0 9.6 2.3 9.7 0.5
         Nov. 1,132.1 729.2 387.4 92.7 294.8 14.8 279.9 5.9 9.5 2.3 9.6 0.7         Dec. 1,116.1 719.1 381.7 89.2 292.5 15.0 277.5 5.8 9.4 2.3 9.7 0.1
Changes*
2019 − 3.4 + 30.4 − 32.8 − 4.8 − 28.0 − 1.6 − 26.4 − 0.3 − 0.7 − 0.4 + 0.9 − 0.42020 + 81.0 + 101.2 − 18.0 + 7.0 − 25.0 − 0.4 − 24.6 − 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.0 − 0.5 + 0.1
2020         Jan. − 0.7 + 1.9 − 2.2 + 0.6 − 2.8 − 0.0 − 2.8 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.4
         Feb. − 10.5 − 7.6 − 2.8 − 0.5 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2         Mar. + 60.0 + 56.6 + 3.5 + 6.1 − 2.5 − 0.2 − 2.4 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.3
         Apr. + 7.6 + 9.2 − 1.2 + 2.5 − 3.7 − 0.3 − 3.4 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.9
         May + 4.8 − 1.4 + 6.4 + 9.4 − 2.9 − 0.6 − 2.3 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 + 0.0 − 1.2         June − 4.8 + 7.5 − 12.1 − 9.2 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 2.9 − 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         July + 17.0 + 10.7 + 6.4 + 10.5 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 4.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Aug. − 1.7 + 2.1 − 3.9 − 3.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 0.9 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.2         Sep. + 7.7 + 10.4 − 2.5 − 1.0 − 1.5 + 0.1 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Oct. + 15.2 + 12.6 + 2.8 + 1.1 + 1.7 + 0.1 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.3
         Nov. + 2.2 + 9.2 − 6.8 − 6.0 − 0.8 + 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.2         Dec. − 15.9 − 10.0 − 5.7 − 3.4 − 2.3 + 0.2 − 2.5 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.6
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also foot-   
note 2). 4 Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt securities.   
   
  

Deutsche Bundesbank
36  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
 
8. Deposits of domestic households and non-profit institutions at banks (MFIs) in Germany*
  
€ billion
Sight deposits Time deposits  1,2 
by creditor group by creditor group
Deposits of Domestic households Domestic households
domestichouseholdsand Domestic
non-profit Self- non-profit Self-
employed Other institu- employed Other institutions,
Period total Total Total persons Employees tions Total Total persons Employees individuals individuals
End of year or month*
 
2018 2,283.4 1,433.5 1,396.1 248.4 991.3 156.4 37.4 260.4 246.7 21.3 188.6 36.72019 2,392.4 1,547.2 1,507.9 266.3 1,081.6 160.1 39.3 261.7 248.3 20.8 190.2 37.32020 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
2020         July 2,469.0 1,642.9 1,602.0 282.4 1,154.4 165.2 40.9 258.0 244.5 19.9 189.2 35.4
         Aug. 2,475.2 1,650.0 1,608.8 284.2 1,160.2 164.5 41.1 257.8 244.2 19.7 190.3 34.2         Sep. 2,483.1 1,658.1 1,616.7 283.1 1,169.7 164.0 41.4 258.0 244.3 19.5 190.6 34.2
         Oct. 2,504.2 1,679.9 1,638.7 289.7 1,184.0 165.0 41.2 257.8 244.3 19.6 190.6 34.0
         Nov. 2,525.1 1,702.2 1,661.3 290.0 1,205.7 165.6 40.9 256.7 243.7 19.4 189.4 34.9         Dec. 2,539.5 1,713.8 1,672.7 291.1 1,215.4 166.2 41.1 258.6 245.1 19.3 190.5 35.2
Changes*
2019 + 108.8 + 113.6 + 111.8 + 18.5 + 88.7 + 4.6 + 1.8 + 1.2 + 1.7 − 0.6 + 1.6 + 0.72020 + 147.5 + 166.9 + 165.0 + 26.0 + 131.5 + 7.5 + 1.8 − 3.1 − 3.2 − 1.5 − 1.6 − 0.2
2020         July + 15.0 + 16.7 + 16.7 + 7.2 + 9.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 0.1
         Aug. + 8.0 + 8.7 + 8.4 + 1.7 + 6.6 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.3 − 0.2 + 0.1 − 0.2         Sep. + 6.5 + 6.8 + 6.5 − 2.2 + 9.2 − 0.5 + 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 − 0.1
         Oct. + 21.0 + 21.8 + 22.0 + 6.6 + 14.3 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.1
         Nov. + 20.9 + 22.3 + 22.6 + 0.3 + 21.4 + 0.8 − 0.3 − 1.1 − 0.6 − 0.3 − 1.2 + 0.9         Dec. + 14.5 + 11.6 + 11.4 + 1.0 + 9.7 + 0.7 + 0.3 + 1.9 + 1.4 − 0.0 + 1.1 + 0.3
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, ar e not
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. specially marked. 1Including subordinated liabilities and liabilities arising from
 
  
9. Deposits of domestic government at banks (MFIs) in Germany, by creditor group
*
 
€ billion
Deposits
   
Federal Government and its special funds  1 State governments
Time deposits Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memo
Domestic to and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:government, Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Period total Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans
End of year or month*
 
2018 218.9 10.5 4.7 1.7 4.1 0.1 12.2 39.0 13.4 11.5 13.0 1.2 13.02019 237.1 11.2 5.4 1.5 4.2 0.1 11.6 53.8 21.1 17.1 14.5 1.0 13.12020 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
2020         July 226.5 20.1 5.9 2.5 11.6 0.1 11.3 60.7 23.8 21.6 14.5 0.8 14.6
         Aug. 237.6 29.8 5.7 5.3 18.8 0.1 11.4 59.6 23.2 21.1 14.4 0.8 14.7         Sep. 236.6 39.0 6.1 6.9 25.9 0.0 11.5 60.0 24.6 20.2 14.5 0.8 14.7
         Oct. 240.1 46.6 7.9 6.8 31.8 0.0 11.5 57.6 23.1 19.5 14.3 0.7 14.7
         Nov. 237.2 47.6 6.1 6.9 34.5 0.0 11.6 52.4 24.8 13.5 13.4 0.7 14.1         Dec. 229.5 48.6 4.8 7.2 36.5 0.0 11.3 46.5 21.2 11.4 13.2 0.7 14.1
Changes*
2019 + 17.1 + 1.4 + 0.7 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.6 + 13.8 + 7.7 + 5.2 + 1.1 − 0.2 + 0.02020 − 7.0 + 37.3 − 0.6 + 5.7 + 32.2 − 0.0 − 0.3 − 7.0 + 0.2 − 5.7 − 1.3 − 0.2 + 1.0
2020         July + 5.1 + 8.3 − 0.3 + 1.1 + 7.5 − − 0.0 − 3.1 + 0.8 − 3.6 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1
         Aug. + 11.1 + 9.8 − 0.2 + 2.8 + 7.2 − + 0.0 − 1.2 − 0.6 − 0.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.1         Sep. − 0.8 + 9.2 + 0.4 + 1.6 + 7.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 + 0.6 + 1.4 − 0.9 + 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.0
         Oct. + 3.7 + 7.5 + 1.9 − 0.1 + 5.8 − 0.0 + 0.0 − 2.4 − 1.5 − 0.7 − 0.2 − 0.0 − 0.0
         Nov. − 2.7 + 1.0 − 1.8 + 0.1 + 2.7 − + 0.1 − 5.1 + 1.8 − 5.9 − 0.9 − 0.0 − 0.6         Dec. − 7.7 + 1.0 − 1.3 + 0.3 + 2.0 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 5.9 − 3.6 − 2.1 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; excluding deposits of the Treuhand agency and its Telekom AG, and of publicly owned enterprises, which are included in ”En terprises”.
successor organisations, of the Federal Railways, East German Railways and Federal Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes. The fi gures for the latest
Post Office, and, from 1995, of Deutsche Bahn AG, Deutsche Post AG and Deutsche date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, wh ich appear in

Deutsche Bundesbank
37  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
    
 
 Savings deposits  3  Memo item:
 
 by maturity
 more than 1 year  2 
Subordinated
 of which: liabilities
Domestic Domestic (excluding
up to and up to and Bank negotiable Liabilities non-profit non-profit
institu- including including more than Domestic institu- savings Fiduciary debt arisingtions 1 year Total 2 years 2 years Total tions bonds  
4 loans from repos   Period households securities)  5 
End of year or month*
 
13.7 49.4 211.0 11.1 199.9 567.9 560.6 7.2 21.7 5.8 2.4 − 201813.3 45.6 216.1 11.2 204.9 565.1 558.1 7.0 18.4 5.4 2.4 − 201913.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 − 2020
13.5 41.6 216.4 11.8 204.7 552.0 545.4 6.6 16.1 5.5 2.5 − 2020          July
13.6 41.3 216.5 11.8 204.6 551.7 545.1 6.6 15.8 5.7 2.5 −          Aug.13.7 41.2 216.8 11.9 204.9 551.3 544.7 6.6 15.7 5.8 2.5 −          Sep.
13.6 41.0 216.8 12.0 204.8 550.9 544.5 6.5 15.5 6.2 2.6 −          Oct.
13.0 40.0 216.6 11.9 204.7 550.9 544.5 6.4 15.3 6.5 2.6 −          Nov.13.5 40.1 218.5 12.0 206.5 552.0 545.7 6.3 15.1 6.7 2.7 −          Dec.
Changes*
− 0.4 − 3.8 + 5.1 + 0.1 + 5.0 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.3 − 3.3 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 2019+ 0.2 − 5.5 + 2.4 + 0.9 + 1.6 − 13.0 − 12.3 − 0.7 − 3.3 + 1.3 + 0.2 − 2020
+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.2 + 0.5 − 0.4 − 1.5 − 1.4 − 0.1 − 0.3 + 0.3 + 0.0 − 2020          July
+ 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.0 − 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Aug.+ 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.4 + 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.4 − 0.4 + 0.0 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Sep.
− 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.0 −          Oct.
− 0.5 − 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.0 + 0.1 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.1 −          Nov.+ 0.5 + 0.1 + 1.8 + 0.1 + 1.7 + 1.1 + 1.2 − 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.0 −          Dec.
registered debt securities. 2Including deposits under savings and loan contracts (see footnote 2). 4Including liabilities arising from non-negotiable bearer debt
Table IV.12). 3Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also securities. 5 Included in time deposits. 
 
     
 
Local government and local government associations
(including municipal special-purpose associations) Social security funds
Time deposits  3 Time deposits
Savings Savings
for up deposits Memo for up deposits Memoto and for more and bank item: to and for more and bank item:
Sight including than savings Fiduciary Sight including than savings Fiduciary
Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  
2,4 loans Total deposits 1 year 1 year bonds  2 loans   Period
End of year or month*
 
65.4 35.1 9.8 14.9 5.7 0.0 103.9 9.5 45.0 48.4 1.0 − 201865.3 37.4 8.6 14.0 5.4 0.0 106.8 10.8 48.8 46.2 1.1 − 201968.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.3 0.8 − 2020
59.4 32.8 8.4 13.1 5.1 0.0 86.2 14.1 40.8 30.5 0.8 − 2020          July
62.4 35.6 8.6 13.1 5.1 0.0 85.8 14.9 41.1 28.9 0.8 −          Aug.56.9 30.8 8.3 12.9 5.0 0.0 80.7 15.9 37.1 27.0 0.8 −          Sep.
59.6 34.0 8.3 12.5 4.9 0.0 76.2 16.5 33.4 25.5 0.8 −          Oct.
62.2 36.4 8.4 12.5 5.0 0.0 75.1 16.7 34.9 22.8 0.8 −          Nov.68.5 43.2 8.0 12.4 4.9 0.0 66.0 10.9 32.9 21.3 0.8 −          Dec.
Changes*
− 0.8 + 2.1 − 1.4 − 1.2 − 0.3 + 0.0 + 2.8 + 1.3 + 3.7 − 2.2 + 0.1 − 2019+ 3.5 + 5.8 − 0.6 − 1.3 − 0.5 − 0.0 − 40.8 + 0.2 − 15.9 −24.8 − 0.3 − 2020
+ 0.6 + 1.0 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0 − − 0.7 − 0.2 + 1.1 − 1.6 − 0.0 − 2020          July
+ 3.0 + 2.8 + 0.2 − 0.0 + 0.0 − − 0.5 + 0.8 + 0.3 − 1.5 − 0.0 −          Aug.− 5.5 − 4.8 − 0.3 − 0.2 − 0.1 − − 5.1 + 1.0 − 4.1 − 2.0 + 0.0 −          Sep.
+ 3.1 + 3.2 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − − 4.5 + 0.6 − 3.7 − 1.5 − 0.0 −          Oct.
+ 2.5 + 2.4 + 0.1 + 0.0 + 0.0 − − 1.1 + 0.2 + 1.5 − 2.7 − 0.0 −          Nov.+ 6.3 + 6.8 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 − − 9.1 − 5.7 − 2.0 − 1.4 + 0.0 −          Dec.
the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Federal Railways Fund, non-negotiable bearer debt securities. 3Including deposits under savings and loan
Indemnification Fund, Redemption Fund for Inherited Liabilities, ERP Special Fund, contracts. 4 Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts (see also footnote 3). 
German Unity Fund, Equalisation of Burdens Fund. 2Including liabilities arising from

Deutsche Bundesbank
38  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV. Banks
 
10. Savings deposits and bank savings bonds of banks (MFIs) in Germany sold to non-banks (non-MFIs)*
  
€ billion
Savings deposits  1 Bank savings bonds,  3  sold to
of residents of non-residents domestic non-banks
at 3 months’ at more than 3 Memo
notice months’ notice item: of which:
Interest With
of which: of which: of which: credited maturitiesSpecial Special At 3 on of moresavings savings savings non-banks, than foreign months’
Period Total Total Total Total Total notice deposits total Total 2 years facilities  
2 facilities  2 non-banks
End of year or month*
 
2018 585.6 578.6 541.1 333.4 37.5 27.2 7.0 6.2 2.3 41.2 37.3 27.9 3.92019 581.8 575.2 540.5 313.2 34.7 24.7 6.6 5.9 2.0 35.9 33.2 25.1 2.62020 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.3 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 1.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
2020         Aug. 567.0 560.6 531.8 291.2 28.8 19.4 6.3 5.8 0.1 31.5 29.6 22.9 1.9
         Sep. 566.5 560.1 531.7 290.3 28.4 19.1 6.3 5.7 0.1 31.1 29.3 22.7 1.9
         Oct. 566.0 559.7 531.7 288.3 28.0 18.7 6.3 5.7 0.1 30.7 28.9 22.5 1.9
         Nov. 565.9 559.6 532.0 287.4 27.6 18.3 6.3 5.7 0.1 30.4 28.5 22.2 1.9         Dec. 566.8 560.6 533.3 288.3 27.3 18.0 6.3 5.7 0.8 30.2 28.3 22.1 1.9
Changes*
2019 − 3.9 − 3.5 − 0.6 − 21.3 − 2.8 − 2.5 − 0.4 − 0.3 . − 5.3 − 4.1 − 2.8 − 1.22020 − 14.8 − 14.5 − 7.2 − 24.3 − 7.3 − 6.7 − 0.3 − 0.2 . − 5.7 − 4.9 − 3.0 − 0.7
2020         Aug. − 0.2 − 0.2 + 0.2 − 2.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.1 − 0.0
         Sep. − 0.5 − 0.5 − 0.1 − 1.0 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 −
         Oct. − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 1.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.2 − 0.0
         Nov. − 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.3 − 0.9 − 0.4 − 0.4 − 0.0 − 0.0 . − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.3 + 0.0         Dec. + 1.0 + 1.0 + 1.3 + 0.9 − 0.3 − 0.3 − 0.0 + 0.0 . − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.2 − 0.0
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the classified as time deposits. 2Savings deposits bearing interest at a rate which
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. exceeds the minimum or basic rate of interest. 3Including liabilities arising from
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not non-negotiable bearer debt securities. specially marked. 1Excluding deposits under savings and loan contracts, which are
 
  
11. Debt securities and money market paper outstanding of banks (MFIs) in Germany
*
 
€ billion
Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market paper Non-negotiable
bearer debt
of which: securities and
money market
with maturities of paper  6 Subordinated
up to more than 1 year up to
and including 1 year and including 2 years of which:
with
Certifi- of which: of which: non- maturities
Floating Zero Foreign cates without without more of more negotiable negotiablerate coupon currency of a nominal a nominal than than debt debt
Total bonds  
1 deposit Total Total 2 years Total 2 years securities securities bonds  1,2 bonds  3,4 guarantee  5 guarantee  5 
Period
End of year or month*
 
2018 1,099.7 139.4 27.5 355.9 88.3 106.2 3.1 22.0 6.1 971.5 0.6 0.1 30.6 0.42019 1,140.7 123.5 28.6 367.7 96.7 117.7 2.6 23.6 4.2 999.4 0.9 0.7 31.5 0.42020 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
2020         Aug. 1,127.8 118.8 12.5 328.6 93.6 98.2 1.8 25.6 3.3 1,003.9 1.0 0.8 34.5 0.4
         Sep. 1,153.2 119.6 12.4 343.7 106.9 111.0 1.8 25.7 3.3 1,016.5 1.0 0.8 35.2 0.4
         Oct. 1,139.8 117.8 12.7 327.1 93.9 98.5 1.8 26.1 3.5 1,015.3 0.9 0.7 35.2 0.4
         Nov. 1,134.2 119.3 12.7 322.1 92.3 97.0 1.7 25.5 3.2 1,011.7 1.0 0.8 35.0 0.4         Dec. 1,119.0 117.1 12.7 313.6 89.4 94.3 1.5 23.8 3.1 1,000.9 1.1 0.9 34.8 0.4
Changes*
2019 + 40.6 − 15.9 + 1.1 + 11.8 + 8.4 + 11.5 − 0.5 + 1.6 − 1.9 + 27.4 + 0.3 + 0.6 + 0.8 − 0.32020 − 20.5 − 5.2 − 0.8 − 54.1 − 22.3 − 22.2 − 1.1 + 0.2 − 1.1 + 1.5 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 2.1 − 0.0
2020         Aug. − 1.0 − 1.4 + 2.3 + 0.7 + 1.3 + 3.4 + 0.0 − 0.1 − 0.1 − 4.3 + 0.1 + 0.1 + 1.2 −
         Sep. + 25.5 + 0.8 − 0.0 + 15.1 + 13.3 + 12.8 + 0.0 + 0.2 + 0.0 + 12.6 − 0.0 − 0.0 + 0.8 −
         Oct. − 13.5 − 1.8 + 0.3 − 16.6 − 13.0 − 12.5 + 0.0 + 0.3 + 0.1 − 1.3 − 0.1 − 0.0 − 0.0 −
         Nov. − 5.6 + 1.6 − 0.0 − 5.0 − 1.6 − 1.5 − 0.1 − 0.6 − 0.2 − 3.5 + 0.1 + 0.1 − 0.2 −         Dec. − 15.2 − 2.3 + 0.0 − 8.5 − 2.9 − 2.7 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 0.1 − 10.8 + 0.1 + 0.0 − 0.2 −
*See Table IV.2, footnote *; statistical breaks have been eliminated from the coupon bonds denominated in foreign currencies. 4Bonds denominated in
changes. The figures for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. non-euro area currencies. 5Negotiable bearer debt securities and money market
Subsequent revisions, which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not paper with a nominal guarantee of less than 100%. 6Non-negotiable bearer debt
specially marked. 1Including debt securities denominated in foreign securities are classified among bank savings bonds (see also Table IV.10, footnote
currencies. 2Issue value when floated. 3Including floating rate notes and zero 2). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
39  Monthly Report
February 2021
IV.  Banks
  
12.  Building  and  loan  associations (MFIs) in Germany *)
  Interim statements
  
€ billion
Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Deposits of banks Deposits of non-
(MFIs)  5 banks (non-MFIs)
Credit Building loans Secur- Memobal- item: ities (in-
ances cluding Bearer Newand Loans Treasury Deposits Deposits debt Capital con-
Num- loans under bills under under secur- (includ- tractsber (ex- Bank savings Interim and savings savings ities ing pub- enteredof Balance cluding debt and loan and Other Treasury and loan Sight and loan Sight and out- lished into in
End of sheet building Building secur- con- bridging building discount con- and time con- time de- stand- re- year or associ-
year/month ations loans  
2 ities 3 tracts loans loans tracts deposits tracts posits  6 ing month  8 total 13 loans)  1 paper)  4 serves)  7 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2019 19 237.9 34.0 0.0 16.2 11.4 117.6 28.0 25.9 2.9 21.0 179.7 9.8 1.8 12.0 88.7
2020 18 244.9 31.9 0.0 16.1 10.8 125.1 31.7 25.5 2.9 26.7 181.4 8.4 2.8 12.3 76.5
2020         Oct. 18 242.4 31.4 0.0 16.0 10.9 123.5 31.2 25.3 2.9 24.7 179.7 8.6 2.8 12.3 6.3
         Nov. 18 243.4 31.3 0.0 16.0 10.9 124.1 31.6 25.5 2.9 25.8 179.7 8.4 2.8 12.3 6.4         Dec. 18 244.9 31.9 0.0 16.1 10.8 125.1 31.7 25.5 2.9 26.7 181.4 8.4 2.8 12.3 6.8
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Oct. 10 168.1 16.0 − 6.8 8.1 96.3 26.6 11.2 1.7 22.2 116.4 8.3 2.8 8.4 4.1
         Nov. 10 168.8 15.7 − 7.0 8.0 96.7 26.9 11.4 1.7 23.1 116.5 8.1 2.8 8.4 4.1         Dec. 10 170.0 16.2 − 7.1 8.0 97.7 27.1 11.4 1.7 24.0 117.6 8.1 2.8 8.4 4.5
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Oct. 8 74.3 15.4 0.0 9.2 2.8 27.3 4.6 14.1 1.2 2.5 63.3 0.3 − 3.8 2.2
         Nov. 8 74.6 15.6 0.0 9.1 2.8 27.4 4.7 14.1 1.2 2.7 63.2 0.3 − 3.8 2.3         Dec. 8 74.9 15.7 0.0 9.1 2.8 27.4 4.6 14.1 1.2 2.7 63.8 0.3 − 3.8 2.3
Trends in building and loan association business
  
€ billion
Changes in deposits Capital promised Capital disbursed Disbursement Interest and
under savings and commitments repayments
loan contracts Allocations outstanding at received on
end of period building loans  10 
Deposits under Loans under
Repay- savings and savings andments loan contracts loan contracts  
9 Newly
Interest of granted
credited deposits interim of which: of which:
on under Applied Applied and of
Amounts deposits bridging which: of Memo cancelled to settle- to settle-
under savings of ment of ment of loans Under which: item: paid into
savings savings and which: interim interim and alloc- Repay- Housingand and loan loan Net and and other ated ments bonusesloan ac- con- con- alloca- bridging bridging building con- during re-
Period tracts tracts Total Total Total loans Total loans loans Total tracts Total quarter counts  
9 tions 11 ceived  12 
All  building  and  loan  associations
2019 27.3 2.1 7.5 49.2 25.8 42.9 16.4 4.2 4.6 3.6 21.9 18.1 6.5 7.2 5.4 0.2
2020 26.6 2.1 8.2 53.8 29.0 48.0 18.8 4.2 4.4 3.5 24.8 18.3 6.3 6.7 ... 0.2
2020         Oct. 2.1 0.0 0.7 4.4 2.3 4.1 1.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 2.2 18.6 6.4 0.6 0.0
         Nov. 2.2 0.1 0.7 4.3 2.1 4.1 1.6 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.1 18.7 6.4 0.5 0.0         Dec. 2.3 1.6 0.6 4.2 2.2 4.1 1.5 0.3 0.3 0.3 2.2 18.3 6.3 0.7 ... 0.0
Private  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Oct. 1.3 0.0 0.4 3.3 1.6 3.2 1.1 0.3 0.3 0.2 1.8 14.0 3.5 0.4 0.0
         Nov. 1.4 0.0 0.3 3.1 1.3 3.1 1.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.8 14.0 3.4 0.4 0.0         Dec. 1.5 1.1 0.3 3.2 1.6 3.2 1.1 0.2 0.2 0.2 1.8 13.8 3.4 0.6 ... 0.0
Public  building  and  Ioan  associations
  
2020         Oct. 0.7 0.0 0.3 1.1 0.7 0.9 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.6 2.9 0.1 0.0
         Nov. 0.8 0.0 0.4 1.2 0.8 1.0 0.5 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.6 2.9 0.1 0.0         Dec. 0.8 0.6 0.3 1.0 0.7 1.0 0.4 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.4 4.5 2.9 0.1 ... 0.0
*Excluding assets and liabilities and/or transactions of foreign branches. The figures 8Total amount covered by the contracts; only contracts newly entered into, for
for the latest date are always to be regarded as provisional. Subsequent revisions, which the contract fee has been fully paid. Increases in the sum con tracted count as
which appear in the following Monthly Report, are not specially marked. 1Including new contracts. 9For disbursements of deposits under savings and loan contracts
claims on building and loan associations, claims arising from registered debt arising from the allocation of contracts see “Capital disbursed“. 10Including housing
securities and central bank credit balances. 2Loans under savings and loan contracts bonuses credited. 11Only allocations accepted by the beneficiaries; including
and interim and bridging loans. 3Including money market paper and small amounts allocations applied to settlement of interim and bridging loans. 12The amounts
of other securities issued by banks. 4Including equalisation claims. 5Including already credited to the accounts of savers or borrowers are also included in
liabilities to building and loan associations. 6Including small amounts of savings “Amounts paid into savings and loan accounts“ and “Interest and repayments
deposits. 7Including participation rights capital and fund for general banking risks. received on building loans“. 13 See Table IV.2, footnote 1. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
40•
IV. Banks
13. Assets and liabilities of the foreign branches and foreign subsidiaries of German banks (MFIs) *
€ billion
Number of Lending to banks (MFIs) Lending to non-banks (non-MFIs) Other assets  7
Credit balances and loans Loans
PeriodGerman
banks
(MFIs)
with
foreign
branches
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diaries 
 
foreign
branches  1
and/or
foreign
subsi-
diariesBalance
sheet
total  7 Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2,3 Total Totalto
German
non-
banksto
foreign
non-
banksMoney
market
paper,
secur-
ities  2 Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio
Foreign branches                                               End of year or month *
2017 52 188 1,647.8 493.9 484.1 197.1 287.0 9.8 528.8 443.2 13.1 430.1 85.6 625.1 402.9
2018 49 183 1,401.2 403.8 392.8 192.1 200.7 11.0 516.8 427.7 20.0 407.7 89.1 480.5 309.0
2019 52 198 1,453.0 407.3 389.2 216.0 173.2 18.1 534.3 436.1 19.7 416.4 98.2 511.5 361.7
2020 Feb. 52 199 1,725.2 445.3 427.1 240.5 186.6 18.2 583.5 493.8 19.5 474.3 89.7 696.4 534.6
Mar. 52 199 1,888.5 483.7 465.3 248.9 216.4 18.4 590.4 495.8 20.5 475.3 94.6 814.4 650.7
Apr. 52 199 1,875.4 473.2 455.1 261.5 193.7 18.0 584.5 492.6 20.5 472.1 91.9 817.8 646.0
May 52 198 1,823.5 442.7 425.6 248.0 177.6 17.2 571.6 475.7 19.6 456.1 95.9 809.2 632.1
June 52 198 1,780.3 440.7 426.2 250.4 175.8 14.5 559.5 463.9 19.6 444.3 95.6 780.1 608.1
July 51 206 1,774.6 438.1 424.1 264.7 159.4 14.0 546.4 452.9 19.7 433.3 93.5 790.1 625.7
Aug. 51 206 1,684.1 419.5 405.5 250.8 154.8 14.0 535.1 437.8 19.2 418.6 97.2 729.5 563.8
Sep. 51 206 1,672.4 407.7 393.3 242.2 151.1 14.4 544.2 447.5 18.9 428.7 96.7 720.5 543.7
Oct. 51 207 1,638.9 409.7 395.6 243.0 152.6 14.1 537.6 438.4 18.2 420.2 99.2 691.5 524.4
Nov. 51 208 1,622.5 411.6 398.0 236.5 161.4 13.6 523.7 427.3 14.5 412.8 96.5 687.2 519.5
Changes *
2018 –3 –5 –250.2 –101.0 –102.0 –5.0 –97.0 +1.0 –24.8 –27.1 +7.0 –34.1 +2.4 –148.2 –102.6
2019 +3 +15 +51.5 –4.7 –7.7 +23.9 –31.6 +2.9 +12.6 +0.9 –0.3 +1.2 +11.7 + 30.6 +49.6
2020 Mar. – – +163.4 +38.8 +38.6 +8.4 +30.2 +0.2 +8.6 +3.5 +1.0 +2.5 +5.1 +118.1 +116.4
Apr. – – –13.6 –12.1 –11.7 +12.6 –24.2 –0.5 –9.6 –6.3 +0.1 –6.4 –3.2 + 2.8 – 6.4
May – –1 –50.5 –27.0 –26.4 –13.5 –12.9 –0.6 –4.4 –9.4 –1.0 –8.4 +5.0 – 7.1 – 9.0
June – – –42.8 –1.2 +1.4 +2.4 –1.0 –2.7 –9.8 –9.9 +0.0 –9.9 +0.1 – 28.7 –22.8
July –1 +9 –3.1 +2.4 +2.6 +14.3 –11.7 –0.2 +0.7 +0.8 +0.1 +0.7 –0.1 + 12.6 +26.8
Aug. – – –90.2 –17.9 –17.9 –13.9 –4.0 –0.1 –9.5 –13.5 –0.4 –13.1 +4.1 – 60.2 –60.6
Sep. – – –12.5 –13.1 –13.5 –8.6 –4.9 +0.4 +5.2 +6.5 –0.4 +6.9 –1.2 – 9.8 –22.9
Oct. – +1 –33.6 +1.7 +2.0 +0.8 +1.2 –0.3 –7.6 –10.0 –0.7 –9.3 +2.4 – 29.1 –19.6
Nov. – +1 –15.3 +3.6 +4.1 –6.4 +10.5 –0.5 –8.3 –6.5 –3.7 –2.8 –1.9 – 3.3 – 1.7
Foreign subsidiaries                                           End of year or month *
2017 20 50 276.6 70.4 63.9 25.0 39.0 6.5 149.5 122.2 22.2 99.9 27.4 56.7 0.0
2018 17 43 237.2 51.2 45.4 20.1 25.3 5.8 136.4 111.7 13.8 97.8 24.7 49.6 0.0
2019 15 41 235.2 52.5 46.7 18.3 28.4 5.7 139.0 116.1 14.4 101.7 22.9 43.7 0.0
2020 Feb. 15 40 247.0 57.7 52.0 20.3 31.7 5.7 141.4 117.6 14.0 103.5 23.9 47.8 0.0
Mar. 15 40 246.2 55.7 49.3 19.5 29.9 6.4 143.9 121.7 15.1 106.7 22.1 46.7 0.0
Apr. 14 39 244.4 50.8 44.2 19.7 24.5 6.6 143.9 120.6 15.4 105.3 23.3 49.6 0.0
May 14 39 245.7 52.1 45.9 19.4 26.5 6.2 142.9 119.2 15.6 103.6 23.7 50.8 0.0
June 13 38 247.4 53.5 47.2 20.9 26.3 6.4 143.1 118.3 15.1 103.2 24.8 50.7 0.0
July 13 37 238.4 46.0 40.3 19.9 20.4 5.7 141.2 115.8 14.8 101.1 25.4 51.2 0.0
Aug. 12 36 237.6 46.8 41.2 19.6 21.6 5.6 140.9 115.9 14.6 101.3 25.0 49.8 0.0
Sep. 12 36 237.1 49.5 44.2 18.8 25.4 5.3 142.6 117.2 14.2 103.0 25.4 45.1 0.0
Oct. 12 36 235.7 44.4 39.2 18.4 20.8 5.2 142.5 116.9 14.2 102.7 25.6 48.9 0.0
Nov. 12 36 234.8 43.2 38.2 17.0 21.1 5.1 142.2 116.4 13.9 102.5 25.8 49.3 0.0
Changes *
2018 –3 –7 –42.2 –20.9 –19.9 –4.9 –15.1 –1.0 –14.2 –11.6 –8.4 –3.2 –2.6 – 7.0 ± 0.0
2019 –2 –2 –7.2 +0.4 +0.5 –1.8 +2.3 –0.2 +1.6 +3.5 +0.5 +3.0 –1.9 – 9.1 ± 0.0
2020 Mar. – – –0.6 –2.1 –2.7 –0.9 –1.8 +0.7 +2.6 +4.3 +1.1 +3.2 –1.7 – 1.1 ± 0.0
Apr. –1 –1 –2.5 –5.2 –5.3 +0.2 –5.5 +0.2 –0.3 –1.4 +0.3 –1.7 +1.1 + 3.0 ± 0.0
May – – +3.0 +2.0 +2.3 –0.3 +2.5 –0.3 –0.2 –0.6 +0.2 –0.8 +0.4 + 1.1 ± 0.0
June –1 –1 +2.0 +1.6 +1.4 +1.5 –0.1 +0.2 +0.4 –0.7 –0.5 –0.2 +1.2 – 0.1 ± 0.0
July – –1 –5.8 –5.9 –5.5 –0.9 –4.6 –0.3 –0.5 –1.0 –0.3 –0.7 +0.5 + 0.6 ± 0.0
Aug. –1 –1 –0.5 +1.0 +1.0 –0.3 +1.4 –0.0 –0.1 +0.2 –0.2 +0.4 –0.3 – 1.4 ± 0.0
Sep. – – –1.3 +2.2 +2.6 –0.9 +3.5 –0.4 +1.3 +0.9 –0.4 +1.3 +0.4 – 4.8 ± 0.0
Oct. – – –1.6 –5.2 –5.0 –0.4 –4.7 –0.1 –0.2 –0.4 +0.0 –0.4 +0.1 + 3.8 ± 0.0
Nov. – – +0.3 –0.5 –0.6 –1.4 +0.8 +0.1 +0.4 +0.2 –0.3 +0.5 +0.3 + 0.4 ± 0.0
* In this table "foreign" also includes the country of domicile of the foreign branches
and foreign subsidiaries. Statistical breaks have been eliminated from the changes.
(Breaks owing to changes in the reporting population have not been eliminated fromthe flow figures for the foreign subsidiaries.) The figures for the latest date are always
to be regarded as provisional; subsequent revisions, which appear in the following
Monthly Report, are not specially marked.  1 Several branches in a given country of

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
41•
IV. Banks
Deposits Other liabilities  6,7
of banks (MFIs) of non-banks (non-MFIs)
German non-banks  4
Total TotalGerman
banksForeign
banks Total Total 
Shortterm 
Medium
and
longtermForeign
non-banksMoney
market
paper
and debt
securities
outstand-
ing 5Working
capital
and own
funds Totalof which:
Derivative
financial
instruments
in the
trading
portfolio Period
End of year or month *                  Foreign branches
1,000.3 682.5 372.8 309.7 317.8 16.0 14.1 1.9 301.8 97.0 51.9 498.6 399.2 2017
897.1 607.2 428.8 178.4 290.0 11.4 9.7 1.8 278.5 91.2 54.0 358.9 302.6 2018
894.1 613.6 453.2 160.4 280.5 12.7 10.1 2.7 267.8 94.6 53.4 410.9 361.1 2019
975.4 660.5 471.1 189.4 314.9 13.7 10.7 3.0 301.2 110.1 54.2 585.5 533.6 2020 Feb.
1,030.8 718.6 458.6 260.0 312.3 15.1 12.0 3.1 297.2 97.2 54.7 705.7 650.4 Mar.
1,028.3 725.0 474.8 250.2 303.4 14.6 11.9 2.7 288.7 92.2 55.0 699.9 644.4 Apr.
994.0 695.4 484.1 211.3 298.7 15.3 13.1 2.2 283.3 93.5 54.7 681.2 630.2 May
979.1 680.0 484.2 195.8 299.1 14.5 12.6 1.9 284.6 85.7 54.3 661.3 607.6 June
959.1 661.2 468.6 192.6 297.9 17.3 15.6 1.8 280.6 80.2 53.5 681.8 624.2 July
943.2 655.1 460.9 194.2 288.1 14.4 12.7 1.7 273.7 74.9 52.4 613.6 563.1 Aug.
945.7 650.5 473.7 176.8 295.2 15.4 13.8 1.7 279.8 76.8 52.6 597.4 544.0 Sep.
932.4 632.6 451.1 181.5 299.9 14.0 12.3 1.7 285.9 76.7 50.9 578.9 523.9 Oct.
926.8 625.3 444.3 181.0 301.5 12.3 10.9 1.5 289.1 74.8 50.5 570.4 518.9 Nov.
Changes *
–113.1 –84.7 +56.0 –140.8 – 28.3 – 4.6 – 4.4 – 0.2 –23.8 – 9.4 + 2.0 –139.7 – 105.7 2018
– 7.2 + 2.4 +24.4 –22.0 – 9.6 + 1.3 + 0.4 + 0.9 –10.9 + 3.0 – 0.6 + 52.0 + 58.5 2019
+56.0 +58.5 –12.5 +71.0 – 2.5 + 1.4 + 1.5 – 0.1 – 3.9 –12.8 +0.5 +120.2 + 116.8 2020 Mar.
– 4.6 +4.5 +16.3 –11.8 – 9.0 – 0.4 – 0.1 – 0.4 – 8.6 – 5.6 +0.3 – 5.8 – 6.1 Apr.
–29.9 –25.4 +9.3 –34.7 – 4.5 + 0.7 + 1.2 – 0.4 – 5.2 + 2.8 –0.3 – 18.6 – 14.2 May
–14.0 –14.5 +0.1 –14.6 + 0.5 – 0.9 – 0.5 – 0.4 + 1.4 – 7.4 –0.5 – 20.0 – 22.6 June
–13.9 –13.2 –15.6 +2.4 – 0.7 + 2.9 + 3.0 – 0.1 – 3.6 – 2.8 –0.8 + 20.5 + 16.6 July
–15.0 –5.1 –7.7 +2.5 – 9.8 – 2.9 – 2.9 – 0.0 – 6.9 – 5.0 –1.1 – 68.2 – 61.1 Aug.
+ 0.4 –6.7 +12.8 –19.5 + 7.1 + 1.0 + 1.1 – 0.1 + 6.0 + 1.1 +0.1 – 16.2 – 19.1 Sep.
–13.6 –18.3 –22.6 +4.4 + 4.6 – 1.4 – 1.5 + 0.0 + 6.1 – 0.2 –1.7 – 18.5 – 20.1 Oct.
– 3.2 –4.9 –6.7 +1.8 + 1.7 – 1.7 – 1.4 – 0.2 + 3.4 – 0.9 –0.3 – 8.4 – 5.0 Nov.
End of year or month * Foreign subsidiaries
207.1 96.3 49.8 46.5 110.8 12.0 6.2 5.8 98.8 13.0 24.2 32.3 0.0 2017
171.5 71.6 36.1 35.5 100.0 9.1 6.4 2.7 90.8 14.3 22.4 29.0 0.0 2018
165.7 68.7 36.6 32.1 97.0 6.6 3.9 2.7 90.4 16.0 22.1 31.4 0.0 2019
176.3 73.5 38.6 35.0 102.7 6.8 4.1 2.7 95.9 16.4 21.7 32.7 0.0 2020 Feb.
176.1 75.1 39.8 35.3 101.0 6.7 4.1 2.6 94.3 15.6 21.3 33.3 0.0 Mar.
175.3 76.8 43.3 33.6 98.5 6.9 4.4 2.5 91.6 15.8 20.8 32.4 0.0 Apr.
177.7 76.5 42.2 34.3 101.2 7.1 4.5 2.5 94.2 15.5 20.8 31.7 0.0 May
178.8 74.8 41.0 33.7 104.1 6.8 4.3 2.5 97.3 16.4 20.8 31.4 0.0 June
171.1 67.2 38.9 28.3 103.9 7.3 4.8 2.5 96.6 16.6 20.7 30.1 0.0 July
171.1 66.1 38.1 28.0 105.0 7.1 4.6 2.5 97.9 16.5 20.6 29.4 0.0 Aug.
170.3 66.5 37.1 29.4 103.7 6.7 4.2 2.5 97.0 16.8 20.5 29.5 0.0 Sep.
167.9 63.5 35.3 28.3 104.4 7.4 4.9 2.5 96.9 17.7 20.5 29.6 0.0 Oct.
168.4 62.8 33.8 29.0 105.6 7.2 4.8 2.5 98.3 16.5 20.7 29.2 0.0 Nov.
Changes *
–37.4 –25.8 –13.7 –12.0 – 11.7 – 2.8 + 0.2 – 3.0 – 8.8 + 1.3 – 1.8 – 4.3 ± 0.0 2018
– 6.7 – 3.2 + 0.5 – 3.8 – 3.5 – 2.5 – 2.5 + 0.0 – 1.0 + 1.7 – 0.4 – 1.8 ± 0.0 2019
– 0.1 +1.6 +1.2 +0.4 – 1.7 – 0.1 – 0.0 – 0.1 – 1.6 – 0.8 –0.4 + 0.7 ± 0.0 2020 Mar.
– 1.1 +1.5 +3.5 –2.0 – 2.7 + 0.2 + 0.3 – 0.1 – 2.9 + 0.2 –0.5 – 1.0 ± 0.0 Apr.
+ 3.4 +0.2 –1.1 +1.3 + 3.2 + 0.2 + 0.2 – 0.0 + 3.0 – 0.3 –0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 May
+ 1.4 –1.6 –1.1 –0.5 + 3.0 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 3.2 + 0.9 –0.0 – 0.2 ± 0.0 June
– 5.4 –6.4 –2.1 –4.3 + 1.0 + 0.5 + 0.5 – 0.0 + 0.5 + 0.2 –0.1 – 0.5 ± 0.0 July
+ 0.2 –1.0 –0.8 –0.2 + 1.3 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.5 – 0.1 –0.1 – 0.6 ± 0.0 Aug.
– 1.5 +0.2 –1.0 +1.1 – 1.7 – 0.3 – 0.3 – 0.0 – 1.3 + 0.3 –0.1 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Sep.
– 2.5 –3.0 –1.9 –1.2 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.7 – 0.0 – 0.1 + 0.9 –0.0 – 0.1 ± 0.0 Oct.
+ 1.4 –0.4 –1.5 +1.1 + 1.7 – 0.2 – 0.2 – 0.0 + 1.9 – 1.2 +0.2 – 0.0 ± 0.0 Nov.
domicile are regarded as a single branch.  2 Treasury bills, Treasury discount paper and
other money market paper, debt securities.  3 Including own debt securities.  4 Excluding
subordinated liabilities and non-negotiable debt securities.  5 Issues of negotiable andnon-negotiable debt securities and money market paper.  6 Including subordinated
liabilities.  7 See also Table IV.2, footnote 1.

Deutsche Bundesbank
42  Monthly Report
February 2021
V. Minimum reserves
 
1. Reserve maintenance in the euro area
 
€ billion
Maintenance Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of
Reserve base  2 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 
2013 10,385.9 103.9 103.4 248.1 144.8 0.0
2014 10,677.3 106.8 106.3 236.3 130.1 0.02015 11,375.0 113.8 113.3 557.1 443.8 0.02016 11,918.5 119.2 118.8 919.0 800.3 0.02017 12,415.8 124.2 123.8 1,275.2 1,151.4 0.02018 12,775.2 127.8 127.4 1,332.1 1,204.8 0.02019 13,485.4 134.9 134.5 1,623.7 1,489.3 0.0
2020         Dec. 14,590.4 145.9 145.5 3,029.4 2,883.9 0.0
2021         Jan.  
p 14,684.0 146.8 146.5 ... ... ...
         Feb. . . . . . .
 
2. Reserve maintenance in Germany
 
€ million
Maintenance German share of Required reserves Required reserves
period before deduction of after deduction of euro area reserve base
Reserve base  2 as a percentage Current accounts  5 Excess reserves  6 Deficiencies  7 beginning in  1 lump-sum allowance  3 lump-sum allowance  4 
2013 2,743,933 26.4 27,439 27,262 75,062 47,800 2
2014 2,876,931 26.9 28,769 28,595 75,339 46,744 42015 3,137,353 27.6 31,374 31,202 174,361 143,159 02016 3,371,095 28.3 33,711 33,546 301,989 268,443 02017 3,456,192 27.8 34,562 34,404 424,547 390,143 22018 3,563,306 27.9 35,633 35,479 453,686 418,206 12019 3,728,027 27.6 37,280 37,131 486,477 449,346 0
2020         Dec. 4,020,792 27.6 40,208 40,062 878,013 837,951 1
2021         Jan.  
p 4,054,783 27.6 40,548 40,403 ... ... ...
         Feb. . . . . . . .
 
a) Required reserves of individual categories of banks
 
€ million
Banks with special,
Maintenance Regional banks development and
period and other Branches of Landesbanken and other central
Big banks commercial banks foreign banks savings banks Credit cooperatives Mortgage banks support tasks beginning in  1 
2013 5,189 4,705 1,437 9,306 5,123 239 1,263
2014 5,593 4,966 1,507 9,626 5,375 216 1,3122015 6,105 5,199 2,012 10,432 5,649 226 1,5782016 6,384 5,390 2,812 10,905 5,960 236 1,8592017 6,366 5,678 3,110 11,163 6,256 132 1,6992018 7,384 4,910 3,094 11,715 6,624 95 1,6582019 7,684 5,494 2,765 12,273 7,028 109 1,778
2020         Dec. 8,151 6,371 3,019 12,912 7,547 111 2,028
2021         Jan. 8,511 6,236 3,021 12,920 7,613 114 1,987
         Feb. . . . . . . .
 
b) Reserve base by subcategories of liabilities
 
€ million
Liabilities arising from bearer debt
Liabilities (excluding repos and securities issued with agreed matu-
deposits with building and loan Liabilities (excluding savings rities of up to 2 years and bearer
deposits, deposits with build- associations) with agreed maturities Liabilities (excluding repos and money market paper after dedu ction
ing and loan associations of up to 2 years to MFIs that are deposits with building and loan of a standard amount for bearer debt
Maintenance associations) with agreed and repos) to non-MFIs with resident in euro area countries but Savings deposits with agreed certificates or deduction of such
period not subject to minimum reserve periods of notice of up paper held by the reporting agreed maturities of up to 2 maturities of up to 2 years to
years requirements to 2 years institution beginning in  1 banks in non-euro area countries
2013 1,795,844 2,213 255,006 600,702 90,159
2014 1,904,200 1,795 282,843 601,390 86,7402015 2,063,317 1,879 375,891 592,110 104,1462016 2,203,100 1,595 447,524 585,099 133,7762017 2,338,161 628 415,084 581,416 120,8942018 2,458,423 1,162 414,463 576,627 112,6212019 2,627,478 1,272 410,338 577,760 111,183
2020         Dec. 2,923,462 1,607 436,696 560,770 105,880
2021         Jan. 2,946,060 5,935 437,895 560,686 104,201
         Feb. . . . . .
1The reserve maintenance period starts on the settlement day of the main 2% between 1 January 1999 and 17 January 2012. Since 18 January 2012, it has
refinancing operation immediately following the meeting of the Governing Council of stood at 1%. 4Article 5(2) of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the
the ECB for which the discussion on the monetary policy stance is scheduled. application of minimum reserves. 5Average credit balances of credit institutions at
2Article 3 of the Regulation of the European Central Bank on the application of national central banks. 6Average credit balances less required reserves after
minimum reserves (excluding liabilities to which a reserve ratio of 0% applies, deduction of the lump-sum allowance. 7Required reserves after deduction of the
pursuant to Article 4(1)). 3Amount after applying the reserve ratio to the reserve lump-sum allowance. 
base. The reserve ratio for liabilities with agreed maturities of up to two years was  

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
43•
VI. Interest rates
1. ECB interest rates / base rates
% per annum
ECB interest rates Base rates
Main refinancing
operationsMain refinancing
operations
Applicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromDeposit
facilityFixed
rateMinimum
bid
rateMar-
ginal
lending
facilityApplicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1Applicable
fromBase
rate
as  per
Civil
Code  1
2005 Dec. 6 1.25 – 2.25 3.25 2011 Apr. 13 0.50 1.25 – 2.00 2002 Jan. 1 2.57 2009 Jan. 1 1.62
July 13 0.75 1.50 – 2.25 July 1 2.47 July 1 0.12
2006 Mar. 8 1.50 – 2.50 3.50 Nov. 9 0.50 1.25 – 2.00
June 15 1.75 – 2.75 3.75 Dec. 14 0.25 1.00 – 1.75 2003 Jan. 1 1.97 2011 July 1 0.37
Aug. 9 2.00 – 3.00 4.00 July 1 1.22
Oct. 11 2.25 – 3.25 4.25 2012 July 11 0.00 0.75 – 1.50 2012 Jan. 1 0.12
Dec. 13 2.50 – 3.50 4.50 2004 Jan. 1 1.14
2013 May 8 0.00 0.50 – 1.00 July 1 1.13 2013 Jan. 1 – 0.13
2007 Mar. 14 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 Nov. 13 0.00 0.25 – 0.75 July 1 – 0.38
June 13 3.00 – 4.00 5.00 2005 Jan. 1 1.21
2014 June 11 -0.10 0.15 – 0.40 July 1 1.17 2014 Jan. 1 – 0.63
2008 July 9 3.25 – 4.25 5.25 Sep. 10 -0.20 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 – 0.73
Oct. 8 2.75 – 3.75 4.75 2006 Jan. 1 1.37
Oct. 9 3.25 3.75 – 4.25 2015 Dec. 9 -0.30 0.05 – 0.30 July 1 1.95 2015 Jan. 1 – 0.83
Nov. 12 2.75 3.25 – 3.75
Dec. 10 2.00 2.50 – 3.00 2016 Mar. 16 -0.40 0.00 – 0.25 2007 Jan. 1 2.70 2016 July 1 – 0.88
July 1 3.19
2009 Jan. 21 1.00 2.00 – 3.00 2019 Sep. 18 -0.50 0.00 – 0.25
Mar. 11 0.50 1.50 – 2.50 2008 Jan. 1 3.32
Apr. 8 0.25 1.25 – 2.25 July 1 3.19
May 13 0.25 1.00 – 1.75
1 Pursuant to Section 247 of the Civil Code.
2. Eurosystem monetary policy operations allotted through tenders *
Fixed rate tenders Variable rate tenders
Bid
amountAllotment
amount Fixed rateMinimum
bid rate Marginal rate  1Weighted
average rate
Date of
Settlement € million % per annumRunning for
… days
Main refinancing operations
2021 Jan. 20 234 234 0.00 - - - 7
Jan. 27 236 236 0.00 - - - 7
Feb. 3 157 157 0.00 - - - 7
Feb. 10 427 427 0.00 - - - 7
Feb. 17 459 459 0.00 - - - 7
Long-term refinancing operations
2020 Nov. 26 293 293 2      … - - - 91
Dec. 3 1,881 1,881 2      … - - - 238
Dec. 16 50,414 50,414 2      … - - - 1,099
Dec. 17 478 478 2      … - - - 105
2021 Jan. 28 6 6 2      … - - - 91
* Source: ECB.  1 Lowest or highest interest rate at which funds were allotted or
collected.  2 Interest payment on the maturity date; the rate will be fixed at: a) the
average minimum bid rate of the main refinancing operations over the life of thisoperation including a spread or b) the average deposit facility rate over the life of this
operation.
3. Money market rates, by month *
% per annum
EURIBOR  2
Monthly
average €STR  1 EONIA  1 One-week funds One-month funds Three-month funds Six-month funds Twelve-month funds
2020 July – 0.550 – 0.46 – 0.53 – 0.51 – 0.44 – 0.35 – 0.28
Aug. – 0.553 – 0.47 – 0.53 – 0.52 – 0.48 – 0.43 – 0.36
Sep. – 0.554 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.49 – 0.46 – 0.41
Oct. – 0.554 – 0.47 – 0.54 – 0.54 – 0.51 – 0.49 – 0.47
Nov. – 0.556 – 0.47 – 0.55 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.51 – 0.48
Dec. – 0.557 – 0.47 – 0.56 – 0.56 – 0.54 – 0.52 – 0.50
2021 Jan. – 0.563 – 0.48 – 0.57 – 0.56 – 0.55 – 0.53 – 0.50
* Averages are Bundesbank calculations. Neither the Deutsche Bundesbank nor anyone
else can be held liable for any irregularity or inaccuracy of the EONIA or the EURIBOR.
1 Euro overnight index average: weighted average overnight rate for interbank
operations; calculated by the European Central Bank from January 4th 1999 untilSeptember 30th 2019 based on real turnover according to the act/360 method. Since
October 1st 2019 calculated as Euro Short-Term Rate (€STR) + 8.5 basis points spread.
2 Euro interbank offered rate: unweighted average rate calculated by Reuters since 30
December 1998 according to the act/360 method.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
44•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) *
a) Outstanding amounts o
Households' deposits Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
up to 2 years over 2 years up to 2 years over 2 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Dec. 0.23 57,910 1.12 219,819 – 0.05 66,312 0.84 27,528
2020 Jan. 0.23 57,198 1.11 220,060 – 0.05 65,777 0.83 27,355
Feb. 0.23 56,142 1.10 220,286 – 0.05 65,820 0.84 26,651
Mar. 0.24 54,034 1.10 219,797 – 0.07 68,925 0.82 26,158
Apr. 0.24 52,567 1.09 219,117 – 0.07 71,964 0.82 25,694
May 0.24 53,093 1.08 219,267 – 0.08 80,523 0.83 24,937
June 0.25 53,752 1.07 218,668 – 0.05 77,282 0.85 24,172
July 0.26 53,945 1.06 218,177 – 0.08 86,703 0.90 22,652
Aug. 0.26 53,971 1.03 218,020 – 0.08 82,164 0.89 22,508
Sep. 0.26 54,068 1.02 218,212 – 0.10 82,957 0.92 23,504
Oct. 0.26 53,982 1.01 218,002 – 0.11 84,498 0.89 22,350
Nov. 0.26 52,719 1.00 217,758 – 0.11 80,549 0.85 22,254
Dec. 0.25 53,079 1.00 219,377 – 0.17 79,340 0.84 22,256
Housing loans to households  3 Loans to households for consumption and other purposes  4,5
with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years up to 1 year  6over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Dec. 2.07 4,610 1.71 26,616 2.20 1,268,612 7.12 50,916 3.44 87,320 3.65 316,610
2020 Jan. 2.05 4,755 1.69 26,351 2.18 1,271,558 7.18 49,713 3.43 87,413 3.63 317,814
Feb. 2.01 4,813 1.69 26,388 2.16 1,278,149 7.18 49,016 3.43 87,594 3.62 318,931
Mar. 2.04 4,755 1.68 26,516 2.14 1,284,212 7.33 49,209 3.42 87,284 3.61 318,802
Apr. 1.99 4,673 1.66 26,483 2.12 1,291,221 7.17 45,827 3.41 86,755 3.59 319,658
May 1.97 4,752 1.66 26,603 2.10 1,299,073 7.03 44,605 3.41 86,303 3.57 320,868
June 1.98 4,628 1.65 26,702 2.09 1,303,405 7.05 46,438 3.41 86,046 3.57 319,461
July 1.99 4,720 1.65 26,707 2.06 1,312,369 7.02 45,560 3.41 86,188 3.55 321,139
Aug. 1.98 4,727 1.64 26,690 2.05 1,315,489 6.98 45,609 3.40 86,216 3.53 321,757
Sep. 1.95 4,705 1.62 26,940 2.03 1,329,087 6.96 46,438 3.39 86,231 3.50 322,100
Oct. 1.92 4,792 1.62 26,962 2.00 1,337,259 6.86 45,325 3.38 85,849 3.48 323,886
Nov. 1.92 4,616 1.60 27,072 1.99 1,345,468 6.83 44,787 3.38 85,328 3.46 324,149
Dec. 1.92 4,557 1.60 27,024 1.97 1,353,793 6.80 45,013 3.37 85,416 3.45 323,181
Loans to non-financial corporations with a maturity of
up to 1 year  6 over 1 year and up to 5 years over 5 years
End of
monthEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Dec. 2.24 162,074 1.64 171,388 1.88 737,455
2020 Jan. 2.20 161,563 1.64 169,238 1.86 741,004
Feb. 2.21 163,078 1.62 171,571 1.86 745,054
Mar. 2.05 182,434 1.62 174,636 1.84 746,742
Apr. 1.98 185,780 1.63 177,975 1.83 752,025
May 1.95 181,594 1.62 182,819 1.82 761,686
June 2.02 172,708 1.66 184,793 1.81 766,896
July 1.96 169,944 1.66 186,433 1.80 769,953
Aug. 1.98 165,184 1.66 187,678 1.79 779,570
Sep. 2.07 160,014 1.68 186,700 1.77 774,045
Oct. 2.04 157,761 1.68 187,240 1.76 779,595
Nov. 2.06 154,555 1.69 187,341 1.75 784,308
Dec. 2.03 150,442 1.71 186,801 1.73 786,900
* The interest rate statistics gathered on a harmonised basis in the euro area from
January 2003 are collected in Germany on a sample basis. The MFI interest rate
statistics are based on the interest rates applied by MFIs and the related volumes of
euro-denominated deposits and loans to households and non-financial corporations
domiciled in the euro area. The household sector comprises individuals (including sole
proprietors) and non-profit institutions serving households. Non-financial corporations
include all enterprises other than insurance corporations, banks and other financial
institutions. The most recent figures are in all cases to be regarded as provisional.
Subsequent revisions appearing in the following Monthly Report are not specially
marked. Further information on the MFI interest rate statistics can be found on the
Bundesbank’s website (Statistics/Money and capital markets/Interest rates and
yields/Interest rates on deposits and loans).  o The statistics on outstanding amounts are
collected at the end of the month.  1 The effective interest rates are calculated either asannualised agreed interest rates or as narrowly defined effective rates. Both calculation
methods cover all interest payments on deposits and loans but not any other related
charges which may occur for enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents,
guarantees and credit insurance.  2 Data based on monthly balance sheet statistics.
3 Secured and unsecured loans for home purchase, including building and home
improvements; including loans granted by building and loan associations and interim
credits as well as transmitted loans granted by the reporting agents in their own name
and for their own account.  4 Loans for consumption are defined as loans granted for
the purpose of personal use in the consumption of goods and services.  5 For the
purpose of these statistics, other loans are loans granted for other purposes such as
business, debt consolidation, education, etc.  6 Including overdrafts (see also footnotes
12 to 14 on p. 47 ).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
45•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Households' deposits
with an agreed maturity of redeemable at notice  8 of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years up to 3 months over 3 months
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Dec. 0.01 1,548,036 0.08 3,590 0.49 729 0.60 818 0.12 539,678 0.21 34,476
2020 Jan. 0.01 1,550,487 0.14 4,181 0.44 640 0.63 939 0.11 536,842 0.19 32,999
Feb. 0.00 1,571,470 0.15 3,157 0.39 388 0.58 826 0.11 535,065 0.19 32,449
Mar. 0.00 1,567,320 0.12 2,538 0.40 286 0.60 658 0.11 531,723 0.18 31,794
Apr. 0.00 1,597,323 0.14 3,086 0.49 308 0.69 601 0.11 531,921 0.18 31,083
May 0.00 1,619,447 0.19 3,300 0.59 1,117 0.60 629 0.11 532,140 0.17 30,662
June 0.00 1,626,420 0.17 3,283 0.78 1,455 0.69 854 0.11 532,292 0.18 29,671
July 0.00 1,643,393 0.15 3,296 0.60 1,161 0.74 750 0.10 531,191 0.18 29,168
Aug. 0.00 1,650,273 0.16 2,643 0.59 563 0.64 555 0.10 531,277 0.18 28,764
Sep. 0.00 1,658,764 0.10 3,027 0.51 501 0.61 590 0.10 531,223 0.18 28,417
Oct. 0.00 1,680,565 0.10 3,014 0.44 509 0.60 805 0.10 531,245 0.18 28,001
Nov. 0.00 1,703,473 0.11 2,483 0.49 404 0.61 747 0.10 531,537 0.18 27,578
Dec. 0.00 1,715,293 – 0.01 3,214 0.40 394 0.59 794 0.10 532,793 0.18 27,312
Non-financial corporations' deposits
with an agreed maturity of
Overnight up to 1 year over 1 year and up to 2 years over 2 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2019 Dec. – 0.05 476,493 – 0.22 17,148 0.04 554 0.28 911
2020 Jan. – 0.06 468,336 – 0.11 18,221 0.12 278 0.34 158
Feb. – 0.06 462,673 – 0.25 12,289 – 0.04 158 x .x .
Mar. – 0.07 482,538 – 0.27 20,845 0.04 235 x .x .
Apr. – 0.08 495,710 – 0.17 33,483 0.48 288 0.18 78
May – 0.08 501,848 – 0.24 37,552 0.55 707 0.30 259
June – 0.08 508,658 – 0.33 31,980 0.37 633 0.38 313
July – 0.08 520,954 – 0.33 40,301 0.36 592 0.26 208
Aug. – 0.08 528,905 – 0.34 35,771 – 0.02 170 0.20 164
Sep. – 0.08 532,597 – 0.36 37,956 – 0.01 112 0.43 275
Oct. – 0.09 548,227 – 0.36 38,781 0.10 237 0.33 548
Nov. – 0.09 549,032 – 0.37 30,418 0.03 220 0.35 533
Dec. – 0.09 546,578 – 0.42 34,321 – 0.12 556 0.26 970
Loans to households
Loans for consumption  4 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
2019 Dec. 5.74 5.75 7,033 6.47 1,288 8.59 590 4.38 2,640 6.26 3,804
2020 Jan. 6.07 6.03 10,080 6.85 2,379 8.94 626 4.45 3,307 6.58 6,148
Feb. 5.81 5.81 9,284 6.65 1,995 8.58 538 4.41 3,155 6.34 5,591
Mar. 5.84 5.81 9,742 6.35 1,982 8.46 483 4.57 3,209 6.26 6,050
Apr. 6.31 6.21 7,843 6.08 1,482 8.11 361 5.06 2,291 6.59 5,190
May 5.93 5.80 7,945 6.23 1,620 7.79 494 4.49 2,843 6.39 4,608
June 5.87 5.72 8,758 6.41 1,841 8.62 401 4.39 3,258 6.34 5,099
July 5.74 5.63 9,986 6.52 2,114 8.75 439 4.26 3,744 6.29 5,804
Aug. 5.74 5.62 8,340 6.43 1,738 8.79 391 4.33 3,050 6.18 4,899
Sep. 5.56 5.52 8,638 6.42 1,726 8.53 417 4.12 3,286 6.19 4,936
Oct. 5.73 5.62 8,265 6.36 1,739 8.39 436 4.32 2,905 6.14 4,924
Nov. 5.71 5.62 7,778 6.24 1,560 8.90 566 4.26 2,797 6.06 4,416
Dec. 5.53 5.48 6,658 6.05 1,199 8.08 551 4.24 2,548 5.96 3,558
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnote x see p. 47●. + For deposits with
an agreed maturity and all loans excluding revolving loans and overdrafts, credit card
debt: new business covers all new agreements between households or non-financial
corporations and the bank. The interest rates are calculated as volume-weighted
average rates of all new agreements concluded during the reporting month. For
overnight deposits, deposits redeemable at notice, revolving loans and overdrafts,
credit card debt: new business is collected in the same way as outstanding amounts for
the sake of simplicity. This means that all outstanding deposit and lending business atthe end of the month has to be incorporated in the calculation of average rates of
interest.  7 Estimated. The volume of new business is extrapolated to form the
underlying total using a grossing-up procedure.  8 Including non-financial corporations’
deposits; including fidelity and growth premiums.  9 Excluding overdrafts.  10 Annual
percentage rate of charge, which contains other related charges which may occur for
enquiries, administration, preparation of the documents, guarantees and credit
insurance.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
46•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd)
Loans to households for other purposes  5 with an initial rate fixation of
Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Loans to households 
2019 Dec. 1.63 6,393 1.74 1,399 1.66 2,662 2.07 1,016 1.44 2,715
2020 Jan. 1.67 5,644 1.62 1,608 1.63 2,341 2.32 782 1.50 2,521
Feb. 1.77 4,739 1.57 1,108 1.79 1,860 2.52 666 1.53 2,213
Mar. 1.73 5,746 1.76 1,425 1.70 2,347 2.44 821 1.53 2,578
Apr. 1.71 6,505 1.95 2,109 1.73 2,042 2.04 944 1.60 3,519
May 1.80 6,580 1.96 2,043 1.98 2,118 2.07 833 1.63 3,629
June 1.83 6,513 1.95 2,438 1.82 2,252 2.43 1,070 1.63 3,191
July 1.78 5,293 1.61 1,536 1.84 2,241 2.32 774 1.53 2,278
Aug. 1.88 4,210 1.60 1,055 1.94 1,710 2.55 773 1.51 1,727
Sep. 1.83 4,517 1.60 1,170 1.98 1,997 2.37 612 1.51 1,908
Oct. 1.80 4,279 1.60 1,214 1.95 1,832 2.47 578 1.44 1,869
Nov. 1.84 4,026 1.61 930 1.96 1,731 2.44 585 1.51 1,710
Dec. 1.78 5,438 1.56 1,251 1.81 2,404 2.40 740 1.54 2,294
    of which: Loans to sole proprietors
2019 Dec. 1.79 4,258 . . 1.93 1,691 2.40 637 1.47 1,930
2020 Jan. 1.83 3,752 . . 1.98 1,420 2.47 559 1.51 1,773
Feb. 1.80 3,430 . . 1.82 1,301 2.57 518 1.53 1,611
Mar. 1.83 3,818 . . 1.89 1,544 2.48 636 1.52 1,638
Apr. 1.75 4,582 . . 1.88 1,402 2.02 752 1.60 2,428
May 1.81 5,056 . . 2.03 1,460 2.14 633 1.64 2,963
June 1.86 4,702 . . 1.83 1,501 2.46 806 1.68 2,395
July 1.81 3,472 . . 1.87 1,355 2.30 600 1.57 1,517
Aug. 1.76 2,755 . . 1.70 1,135 2.47 462 1.55 1,158
Sep. 1.85 3,019 . . 1.89 1,357 2.53 431 1.55 1,231
Oct. 1.78 2,888 . . 1.81 1,226 2.50 451 1.47 1,211
Nov. 1.83 2,743 . . 1.85 1,118 2.53 438 1.55 1,187
Dec. 1.85 3,793 . . 1.87 1,629 2.47 523 1.63 1,641
Loans to households (cont'd)
Housing loans  3 with an initial rate fixation of
Total
(including charges) Totalof which:
Renegotiated loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 yearsover 5 year and
up to 10 years over 10 years
Erhebungs-
zeitraumAnnual percentage
rate of charge  10
% p.a.Effective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2019 Dec. 1.34 1.29 20,048 1.48 2,938 1.81 2,396 1.37 1,553 1.14 6,622 1.27 9,477
2020 Jan. 1.39 1.34 21,927 1.47 3,871 1.83 2,545 1.32 1,797 1.16 7,106 1.35 10,479
Feb. 1.33 1.28 20,546 1.36 2,902 1.82 2,019 1.33 1,499 1.13 6,555 1.26 10,474
Mar. 1.27 1.22 25,314 1.38 3,761 1.83 2,503 1.32 1,872 1.07 8,045 1.18 12,894
Apr. 1.29 1.25 24,541 1.51 5,102 1.78 2,525 1.32 1,822 1.11 7,769 1.22 12,425
May 1.37 1.33 22,361 1.65 5,153 1.93 3,000 1.47 1,643 1.12 6,872 1.27 10,845
June 1.38 1.34 22,793 1.63 5,171 1.94 2,235 1.59 1,947 1.17 7,983 1.28 10,628
July 1.32 1.27 24,349 1.44 4,233 1.81 2,518 1.39 1,847 1.12 8,036 1.24 11,949
Aug. 1.28 1.23 21,280 1.41 3,135 1.80 2,209 1.44 1,500 1.07 7,032 1.20 10,539
Sep. 1.26 1.21 21,782 1.35 3,121 1.77 2,213 1.35 1,542 1.07 6,957 1.17 11,070
Oct. 1.24 1.19 23,217 1.24 3,834 1.75 2,362 1.32 1,554 1.03 7,579 1.17 11,722
Nov. 1.22 1.17 23,185 1.28 3,113 1.72 2,372 1.28 1,708 1.03 7,413 1.14 11,692
Dec. 1.21 1.16 22,145 1.29 3,029 1.75 2,195 1.31 1,694 1.02 7,733 1.11 10,522
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2019 Dec. . 1.20 8,740 . . 1.79 758 1.15 719 1.07 2,898 1.19 4,365
2020 Jan. . 1.26 9,963 . . 1.77 891 1.14 888 1.07 3,130 1.30 5,054
Feb. . 1.18 8,867 . . 1.73 641 1.14 702 1.04 2,785 1.19 4,739
Mar. . 1.13 11,461 . . 1.76 828 1.15 925 0.98 3,673 1.13 6,035
Apr. . 1.16 11,495 . . 1.70 951 1.21 939 1.03 3,594 1.14 6,011
May . 1.24 10,084 . . 1.86 1,046 1.31 835 1.05 3,065 1.22 5,138
June . 1.26 10,090 . . 1.84 803 1.41 935 1.10 3,656 1.25 4,696
July . 1.22 10,687 . . 1.76 951 1.23 876 1.05 3,621 1.23 5,239
Aug. . 1.16 9,074 . . 1.77 748 1.17 673 0.98 3,137 1.17 4,516
Sep. . 1.14 9,865 . . 1.75 795 1.14 753 1.00 3,201 1.14 5,116
Oct. . 1.14 10,142 . . 1.73 806 1.12 748 1.00 3,239 1.14 5,349
Nov. . 1.10 10,137 . . 1.61 819 1.10 823 0.96 3,182 1.11 5,313
Dec. . 1.08 9,588 . . 1.63 796 1.12 777 0.95 3,355 1.07 4,660
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
footnote 11, see p. 47●.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
47•
VI. Interest rates
4. Interest rates and volumes for outstanding amounts and new business of German banks (MFIs) * (cont'd)
b) New business +
Loans to households (cont'd) Loans to non-financial corporations
of which: of which:
Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13Extended
credit card debtRevolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Credit card debt  14Revolving loans  12
and overdrafts  13
Reporting
periodEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ millionEffective
interest rate  1
% p.a.Volume  2
€ million
2019 Dec. 7.62 41,902 7.69 32,556 15.11 4,576 3.05 79,862 3.07 79,476
2020 Jan. 7.72 40,805 7.65 32,270 15.13 4,497 2.99 80,217 3.00 79,819
Feb. 7.72 40,187 7.63 31,840 15.14 4,456 2.94 82,171 2.95 81,754
Mar. 7.89 40,211 7.64 32,857 15.19 4,364 2.77 88,805 2.78 88,517
Apr. 7.73 36,930 7.35 30,063 15.19 4,262 2.71 85,888 2.72 85,702
May 7.60 35,719 7.23 28,731 15.24 4,194 2.66 83,133 2.67 82,928
June 7.63 37,486 7.39 30,074 15.22 4,183 2.86 81,829 2.87 81,584
July 7.54 36,402 7.35 28,738 15.19 4,170 2.84 77,749 2.84 77,478
Aug. 7.51 36,716 7.31 29,015 15.08 4,204 2.77 76,935 2.78 76,674
Sep. 7.51 37,568 7.33 30,004 15.04 4,147 2.84 76,376 2.85 76,092
Oct. 7.42 36,256 7.19 28,750 15.03 4,144 2.75 76,056 2.76 75,773
Nov. 7.41 35,700 7.17 28,273 15.06 4,108 2.74 75,596 2.75 75,326
Dec. 7.32 36,062 7.11 28,411 15.15 4,101 2.70 73,441 2.71 73,178
Loans to non-financial corporations (cont’d)
of which: Loans up to €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of Loans over €1 million  15 with an initial rate fixation of
TotalRenegotiated
loans  9floating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 yearsfloating rate or
up to 1 year  9over 1 year and
up to 5 years over 5 years
Reporting
periodEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ millionEffective
interest
rate  1
% p.a.Volume  7
€ million
Total loans
2019 Dec. 1.29 102,587 1.40 27,151 2.10 10,584 2.40 1,608 1.45 2,396 1.15 73,303 1.36 4,483 1.18 11,129
2020 Jan. 1.24 73,322 1.34 22,883 1.98 10,775 2.45 1,509 1.53 2,545 1.03 51,717 1.39 2,121 1.26 5,911
Feb. 1.19 65,885 1.36 17,452 1.95 9,727 2.45 1,329 1.47 2,019 0.98 43,225 1.30 3,425 1.07 7,058
Mar. 1.20 96,389 1.44 24,539 1.88 10,920 2.34 1,666 1.47 2,503 1.06 69,385 1.31 3,884 1.14 9,067
Apr. 1.35 80,293 1.53 22,726 1.90 8,269 2.05 1,460 1.76 2,525 1.25 53,150 1.27 3,999 1.15 9,620
May 1.38 70,416 1.50 19,086 1.83 8,544 2.23 1,466 2.03 3,000 1.20 41,644 1.27 3,723 1.25 9,345
June 1.36 86,295 1.45 30,002 1.93 10,537 2.35 1,714 1.81 2,235 1.18 53,115 1.69 4,895 1.26 12,072
July 1.43 72,399 1.41 23,407 1.94 10,302 2.35 1,419 1.66 2,518 1.29 44,151 1.55 4,770 1.25 9,141
Aug. 1.52 55,855 1.36 16,568 1.78 8,324 2.39 1,235 1.51 2,209 1.46 35,797 1.62 3,186 1.22 5,659
Sep. 1.37 71,553 1.49 21,841 2.00 10,506 2.42 1,308 1.55 2,213 1.22 45,047 1.42 3,107 1.18 10,041
Oct. 1.37 66,721 1.36 20,690 1.99 10,358 2.38 1,354 1.49 2,362 1.17 42,053 1.73 4,238 1.18 7,163
Nov. 1.39 62,811 1.39 18,016 1.96 9,897 2.25 1,343 1.53 2,372 1.25 37,080 1.47 4,017 1.13 8,827
Dec. 1.33 87,724 1.37 26,271 2.01 9,615 2.31 1,615 1.56 2,195 1.23 56,077 1.36 4,945 1.11 13,362
    of which: Collateralised loans 11
2019 Dec. 1.38 17,816 . . 1.71 553 2.43 174 1.28 402 1.41 11,704 1.46 1,422 1.17 3,561
2020 Jan. 1.23 9,108 . . 1.71 661 2.47 147 1.43 395 1.15 6,021 1.46 316 1.14 1,568
Feb. 1.48 8,690 . . 1.66 448 2.23 96 1.25 346 1.63 5,276 1.42 822 0.98 1,702
Mar. x .x . . . 1.74 548 x .x . 1.20 411 1.29 7,469 1.88 522 1.02 2,620
Apr. 1.34 9,734 . . 1.72 492 1.56 243 1.22 556 1.39 5,375 1.44 513 1.15 2,555
May 1.48 7,873 . . 2.02 471 1.73 171 1.90 865 1.43 4,286 1.72 336 1.16 1,744
June 1.39 13,750 . . 1.81 558 2.05 224 1.71 776 1.31 8,391 1.64 1,048 1.28 2,753
July 1.37 10,021 . . 1.80 504 1.96 133 1.31 478 1.42 5,085 1.59 1,108 1.10 2,713
Aug. 1.47 7,045 . . 1.85 362 2.14 123 1.26 369 1.52 4,544 1.79 458 1.05 1,189
Sep. 1.37 11,059 . . 1.72 508 2.08 105 1.22 353 1.41 7,417 1.85 535 1.03 2,141
Oct. 1.23 8,346 . . 1.73 480 1.74 111 1.14 374 1.26 4,696 1.11 672 1.08 2,013
Nov. 1.54 9,630 . . 1.86 375 1.67 98 1.20 367 1.64 5,414 2.01 807 1.18 2,569
Dec. 1.33 15,368 . . 1.68 494 1.68 134 1.16 452 1.41 8,978 1.39 1,222 1.11 4,088
For footnotes * and 1 to 6, see p. 44●. For footnotes + and 7 to 10, see p. 45●;
11 For the purposes of the interest rate statistics, a loan is considered to be secured if
collateral (amongst others financial collateral, real estate collateral, debt securities) in at
least the same value as the loan amount has been posted, pledged or assigned.
12 Including revolving loans which have all the following features: (a) the borrower
may use or withdraw the funds to a pre-approved credit limit without giving prior
notice to the lender; (b) the amount of available credit can increase and decrease as
funds are borrowed and repaid; (c) the loan may be used repeatedly; (d) there is no
obligation of regular repayment of funds.  13 Overdrafts are defined as debit balanceson current accounts. They include all bank overdrafts regardless of whether they are
within or beyond the limits agreed between customers and the bank.  14 Including
convenience and extended credit card debt. Convenience credit is defined as the credit
granted at an interest rate of 0% in the period between payment transactions effected
with the card during one billing cycle and the date at which the debt balances from this
specific billing cycle become due.  15 The amount category refers to the single loan
transaction considered as new business.  x Dominated by the business of one or two
banks. Therefore, the value cannot be published due to confidentiality.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
48•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
1. Assets *
€ billion
End of
year/quarter TotalCurrency
and
deposits  1Debt
securities Loans  2Shares and
other equityInvestment
fund
shares/unitsFinancial
derivativesInsurance
technical
reservesNon-financial
assetsRemaining
assets
Insurance corporations
2018 Q1 2,218.0 344.1 394.6 326.9 342.8 664.0 2.3 50.7 33.9 58.6
Q2 2,226.3 346.8 400.1 319.6 346.3 669.9 2.2 53.6 34.1 53.6
Q3 2,224.8 326.3 401.1 327.9 349.4 677.8 2.0 52.9 35.7 51.6
Q4 2,213.5 318.3 400.5 330.4 349.7 665.8 2.0 55.4 36.8 54.6
2019 Q1 2,344.4 332.3 432.0 330.0 380.9 708.8 2.6 59.3 37.1 61.4
Q2 2,407.9 336.8 449.5 339.3 387.8 735.7 3.6 57.9 37.1 60.3
Q3 2,493.0 333.0 469.2 357.2 398.1 768.2 4.6 58.7 38.0 66.0
Q4 2,474.4 317.1 449.3 355.8 407.1 778.2 3.6 64.9 39.8 58.7
2020 Q1 2,431.1 316.8 453.1 365.9 384.8 739.3 4.5 68.3 39.0 59.5
Q2 2,522.1 318.3 460.9 372.0 411.7 789.1 4.3 68.4 39.0 58.6
Q3 2,553.6 311.3 474.8 374.0 414.6 809.9 4.4 67.1 39.3 58.2
    Life insurance
2018 Q1 1,187.6 212.5 198.8 206.7 43.1 481.8 1.2 8.5 19.4 15.5
Q2 1,195.2 215.3 201.6 200.5 46.3 487.9 1.1 8.8 19.5 14.2
Q3 1,194.1 199.7 201.6 209.0 47.3 493.9 1.0 8.8 19.3 13.4
Q4 1,185.3 194.5 200.1 208.4 50.4 484.7 1.0 11.6 20.3 14.3
2019 Q1 1,239.7 202.9 213.7 206.1 52.8 517.7 1.6 10.4 20.3 14.1
Q2 1,291.9 205.8 227.6 214.1 55.4 538.9 2.4 10.0 20.3 17.4
Q3 1,350.0 205.3 242.5 225.2 57.9 563.6 3.1 10.4 20.9 21.0
Q4 1,325.0 194.5 227.6 217.8 61.0 570.4 2.4 13.7 21.1 16.5
2020 Q1 1,296.5 190.6 230.6 221.4 62.0 538.8 2.2 13.7 20.7 16.4
Q2 1,348.1 193.0 234.5 223.6 64.1 577.3 2.8 13.6 20.7 18.6
Q3 1,370.6 188.6 242.3 225.9 65.7 593.0 3.0 13.6 20.9 17.7
    Non-life insurance
2018 Q1 623.2 120.2 112.7 75.1 72.1 167.0 0.3 34.6 9.8 31.5
Q2 621.6 120.1 115.7 72.9 72.9 167.4 0.3 35.6 9.8 27.0
Q3 617.9 116.3 116.1 72.8 73.7 168.9 0.2 34.9 9.8 25.1
Q4 616.2 113.8 117.4 73.7 73.8 167.4 0.2 33.5 10.8 25.6
2019 Q1 655.3 119.1 127.7 74.4 76.1 177.1 0.3 38.1 11.0 31.4
Q2 665.9 119.8 131.6 76.1 78.1 182.4 0.4 37.6 11.0 29.0
Q3 683.1 116.9 136.0 79.9 80.6 189.3 0.4 38.8 11.3 30.0
Q4 674.2 111.1 131.4 79.7 83.5 193.2 0.4 36.1 12.2 26.6
2020 Q1 673.1 110.6 132.8 80.9 81.8 187.1 0.3 38.6 11.9 29.1
Q2 689.3 112.5 134.8 82.6 83.6 197.2 0.4 39.5 12.1 26.7
Q3 698.4 109.4 139.0 83.3 86.2 203.2 0.4 38.5 12.1 26.3
    Reinsurance 3
2018 Q1 407.2 11.4 83.1 45.1 227.6 15.3 0.8 7.6 4.8 11.6
Q2 409.5 11.5 82.9 46.1 227.1 14.6 0.8 9.1 4.8 12.4
Q3 412.7 10.2 83.4 46.0 228.4 15.0 0.8 9.3 6.6 13.1
Q4 412.0 10.1 82.9 48.2 225.5 13.7 0.7 10.3 5.7 14.8
2019 Q1 449.4 10.2 90.6 49.5 252.0 14.0 0.7 10.8 5.8 15.9
Q2 450.1 11.1 90.4 49.0 254.3 14.4 0.8 10.2 5.8 13.9
Q3 459.9 10.8 90.7 52.1 259.6 15.3 1.0 9.6 5.9 15.0
Q4 475.2 11.5 90.2 58.4 262.6 14.5 0.8 15.1 6.6 15.6
2020 Q1 461.5 15.7 89.7 63.6 241.1 13.3 1.9 15.9 6.3 14.1
Q2 484.7 12.8 91.6 65.8 264.0 14.6 1.1 15.2 6.3 13.3
Q3 484.6 13.3 93.6 64.8 262.6 13.7 1.0 15.0 6.3 14.2
Pension funds 4
2018 Q1 651.2 94.5 65.3 30.0 26.2 364.6 – 7.4 41.7 21.5
Q2 658.7 94.8 65.7 30.4 28.1 368.2 – 7.6 42.2 21.7
Q3 666.0 92.1 66.3 30.5 29.6 375.1 – 7.9 42.8 21.8
Q4 672.2 91.5 67.5 30.7 30.6 378.0 – 8.1 43.8 22.1
2019 Q1 689.2 89.4 72.0 30.7 31.5 389.8 – 8.3 44.9 22.6
Q2 703.0 87.4 75.6 31.3 32.1 399.3 – 8.5 45.4 23.5
Q3 718.3 85.3 79.2 31.5 33.1 410.9 – 8.6 45.7 23.9
Q4 726.8 84.9 77.8 31.9 33.4 417.2 – 8.8 47.6 25.1
2020 Q1 709.2 81.1 75.2 31.7 33.2 405.1 – 8.9 48.4 25.5
Q2 729.3 80.0 79.5 31.9 33.4 420.4 – 9.0 48.7 26.5
Q3 732.1 80.3 81.1 31.9 33.5 420.2 – 9.0 49.2 27.0
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I super-
visory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  * Valuation of
listed securities at the corresponding consistent price from the ESCB's securities data-
base. 1 Accounts receivable to monetary financial institutions, including registered
bonds, borrowers' note loans and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Including deposits retainedon assumed reinsurance as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans and regis-
tered Pfandbriefe.  3 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insur-
ers, which is included there.  4 The term "pension funds" refers to the institutional sec-
tor "pension funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise
company pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed.
Social security funds are not included.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
49•
VII. Insurance corporations and pension funds
2. Liabilities
€ billion
Insurance technical reserves
End of
year/quarter TotalDebt
securities
issued Loans  1Shares and
other equity TotalLife/
claims on
pension fund
reserves  2 Non-lifeFinancial
derivativesRemaining
liabilities Net worth  5
Insurance corporations
2018 Q1 2,218.0 28.0 61.9 460.2 1,539.4 1,333.8 205.6 1.5 127.0 –
Q2 2,226.3 27.7 64.0 456.8 1,553.7 1,348.0 205.7 1.9 122.2 –
Q3 2,224.8 27.5 65.1 462.3 1,545.4 1,344.1 201.4 2.0 122.4 –
Q4 2,213.5 29.3 64.6 463.1 1,530.3 1,332.4 197.9 1.6 124.6 –
2019 Q1 2,344.4 31.6 68.3 488.3 1,625.8 1,403.7 222.0 1.5 128.9 –
Q2 2,407.9 31.9 69.4 489.6 1,687.3 1,465.9 221.4 1.8 128.0 –
Q3 2,493.0 31.7 69.3 488.4 1,769.2 1,542.9 226.3 2.2 132.2 –
Q4 2,474.4 31.7 75.8 515.2 1,714.7 1,499.5 215.2 1.9 135.2 –
2020 Q1 2,431.1 31.8 82.4 466.7 1,721.4 1,482.7 238.7 2.4 126.4 –
Q2 2,522.1 33.1 82.3 508.2 1,767.6 1,527.7 240.0 1.9 129.0 –
Q3 2,553.6 34.3 80.0 519.9 1,786.1 1,549.5 236.6 1.7 131.6 –
    Life insurance
2018 Q1 1,187.6 4.0 13.3 119.5 1,007.4 1,007.4 – 0.7 42.6 –
Q2 1,195.2 4.1 13.0 119.3 1,017.4 1,017.4 – 0.8 40.6 –
Q3 1,194.1 4.1 12.6 121.0 1,013.7 1,013.7 – 0.9 41.9 –
Q4 1,185.3 4.1 15.2 122.7 1,000.7 1,000.7 – 0.5 42.2 –
2019 Q1 1,239.7 4.1 14.4 120.9 1,058.9 1,058.9 – 0.4 41.1 –
Q2 1,291.9 4.1 14.5 121.8 1,108.6 1,108.6 – 0.4 42.4 –
Q3 1,350.0 3.7 15.6 116.0 1,171.8 1,171.8 – 0.6 42.4 –
Q4 1,325.0 3.6 19.1 127.6 1,129.6 1,129.6 – 0.5 44.6 –
2020 Q1 1,296.5 3.6 19.3 114.4 1,117.6 1,117.6 – 0.6 41.0 –
Q2 1,348.1 3.8 19.2 130.0 1,150.6 1,150.6 – 0.5 43.9 –
Q3 1,370.6 3.9 19.5 137.2 1,165.4 1,165.4 – 0.5 44.1 –
    Non-life insurance
2018 Q1 623.2 1.1 7.7 141.4 423.0 311.1 111.9 0.0 50.0 –
Q2 621.6 1.1 8.1 140.6 424.5 314.3 110.2 0.1 47.2 –
Q3 617.9 1.1 8.0 141.7 420.7 314.0 106.7 0.0 46.4 –
Q4 616.2 1.0 8.3 140.3 416.6 315.5 101.1 0.0 50.0 –
2019 Q1 655.3 1.1 9.3 144.1 448.4 328.9 119.6 0.0 52.4 –
Q2 665.9 1.1 8.8 146.9 459.3 341.5 117.8 0.1 49.7 –
Q3 683.1 1.2 9.1 149.5 471.8 354.8 117.0 0.1 51.4 –
Q4 674.2 1.2 9.3 153.5 457.1 349.4 107.7 0.1 53.0 –
2020 Q1 673.1 1.3 9.8 144.5 468.6 344.4 124.2 0.1 48.9 –
Q2 689.3 1.2 9.5 152.4 478.5 355.6 123.0 0.1 47.6 –
Q3 698.4 1.2 9.6 156.2 482.7 362.3 120.4 0.1 48.6 –
    Reinsurance 3
2018 Q1 407.2 22.9 40.8 199.3 109.0 15.4 93.7 0.8 34.4 –
Q2 409.5 22.5 43.0 196.9 111.7 16.2 95.5 1.1 34.3 –
Q3 412.7 22.4 44.4 199.7 111.0 16.4 94.7 1.1 34.1 –
Q4 412.0 24.1 41.2 200.1 113.0 16.2 96.8 1.1 32.5 –
2019 Q1 449.4 26.5 44.6 223.4 118.4 15.9 102.5 1.1 35.5 –
Q2 450.1 26.6 46.1 220.8 119.4 15.8 103.6 1.3 35.9 –
Q3 459.9 26.8 44.7 222.8 125.6 16.3 109.3 1.5 38.5 –
Q4 475.2 26.9 47.4 234.0 128.0 20.6 107.5 1.3 37.7 –
2020 Q1 461.5 26.9 53.3 207.8 135.3 20.8 114.5 1.7 36.5 –
Q2 484.7 28.1 53.5 225.8 138.5 21.5 117.0 1.3 37.6 –
Q3 484.6 29.2 50.9 226.6 138.0 21.8 116.2 1.0 38.9 –
Pension funds 4
2018 Q1 651.2 – 7.3 7.6 580.5 580.5 – – 2.7 53.0
Q2 658.7 – 7.5 7.7 588.1 588.1 – – 2.8 52.5
Q3 666.0 – 7.7 7.8 595.2 595.2 – – 2.9 52.4
Q4 672.2 – 7.9 8.0 605.8 605.8 – – 2.8 47.6
2019 Q1 689.2 – 8.1 8.1 613.9 613.9 – – 2.9 56.3
Q2 703.0 – 8.1 8.3 619.8 619.8 – – 2.9 64.0
Q3 718.3 – 8.2 8.4 626.8 626.8 – – 2.9 72.1
Q4 726.8 – 8.4 8.6 637.5 637.5 – – 2.9 69.4
2020 Q1 709.2 – 8.6 8.7 639.4 639.4 – – 3.0 49.6
Q2 729.3 – 8.5 8.8 645.9 645.9 – – 3.0 63.1
Q3 732.1 – 8.5 8.8 643.2 643.2 – – 3.0 68.5
Sources: The calculations for the insurance sectors are based on supervisory data
according to Solvency I and II. Pension funds data are compiled using Solvency I super-
visory data, supplemented by voluntary reports and own calculations.  1 Including de-
posits retained on ceded business as well as registered bonds, borrowers' note loans
and registered Pfandbriefe.  2 Insurance technical reserves "life" taking account of tran-
sitional measures. Health insurance is also included in the "non-life insurance" sector.3 Not including the reinsurance business conducted by primary insurers, which is in-
cluded there.  4 The term "pension funds" refers to the institutional sector "pension
funds" of the European System of Accounts. Pension funds thus comprise company
pension schemes and occupational pension schemes for the self-employed. Social secu-
rity funds are not included.  5 Own funds correspond to the sum of net worth and the
liability item "Shares and other equity".

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
50•
VIII. Capital market
1. Sales and purchases of debt securities and shares in Germany
€ million
Debt securities
Sales Purchases
Domestic debt securities  1 Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases TotalBank
debt
securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt
secur-
itiesForeign
debt
secur-
ities  3 Total  4Credit in-
stitutions
including
building
and loan
associations  5Deutsche
BundesbankOther
sectors  6Non-
residents  7
2009 70,208 – 538 –114,902 22,709 91,655 70,747 90,154 12,973 8,645 68,536 – 19,945
2010 146,620 – 1,212 – 7,621 24,044 –17,635 147,831 92,682 –103,271 22,967 172,986 53,938
2011 33,649 13,575 –46,796 850 59,521 20,075 – 23,876 – 94,793 36,805 34,112 57,525
2012 51,813 –21,419 –98,820 – 8,701 86,103 73,231 – 3,767 – 42,017 – 3,573 41,823 55,581
2013 – 15,971 –101,616 –117,187 153 15,415 85,645 16,409 – 25,778 – 12,708 54,895 – 32,379
2014 64,775 –31,962 –47,404 – 1,330 16,776 96,737 50,408 – 12,124 – 11,951 74,483 14,366
2015 33,024 –36,010 –65,778 26,762 3,006 69,034 116,493 – 66,330 121,164 61,659 – 83,471
2016 71,380 27,429 19,177 18,265 –10,012 43,951 164,148 – 58,012 187,500 34,660 – 92,768
2017 53,796 11,563 1,096 7,112 3,356 42,233 140,417 – 71,454 161,012 50,859 – 86,621
2018 61,984 16,630 33,251 12,433 –29,055 45,354 99,011 – 24,417 67,328 56,100 – 37,028
2019 125,037 68,536 29,254 32,505 6,778 56,501 85,203 8,059 2,408 74,736 39,834
2020 429,867 373,202 13,576 87,248 272,378 56,550 277,563 18,957 226,887 31,719 152,304
2020 Feb. 41,843 33,206 14,383 1,344 17,479 8,637 32,138 9,015 4,202 18,921 9,705
Mar. 3,086 4,725 – 3,853 – 5,332 13,910 – 1,638 – 10,009 17,837 4,747 – 32,593 13,095
Apr. 36,032 30,139 – 277 17,662 12,755 5,893 39,492 5,669 17,982 15,841 – 3,460
May 81,406 80,155 – 1,787 17,114 64,828 1,251 40,356 9,749 35,151 – 4,544 41,050
June 68,803 50,115 6,695 8,407 35,013 18,689 40,226 9,099 25,469 5,658 28,578
July 52,332 52,748 – 2,042 19,155 35,635 – 516 22,342 – 15,536 25,721 12,157 29,990
Aug. 66,831 71,353 1,689 19,720 49,943 – 4,532 11,303 – 7,604 18,004 903 55,527
Sep. 72,255 68,990 23,528 26,307 19,155 3,264 21,695 1,689 22,121 – 2,115 50,559
Oct. – 19,816 –38,333 –16,297 –18,383 – 3,653 18,512 28,046 9,298 24,556 – 5,808 – 47,862
Nov. 20,565 26,226 – 995 171 27,050 – 5,661 26,631 1,513 27,659 – 2,541 – 6,066
Dec. – 36,811 –38,554 –11,761 –12,069 –14,723 1,742 15,350 – 25,219 18,290 22,280 – 52,162
€ million
Shares
Sales Purchases
Residents
PeriodSales
=
total
purchasesDomestic
shares  8Foreign
shares  9 Total  10Credit insti-
tutions  5 Other sectors  11Non-
residents  12
2009 35,980 23,962 12,018 30,496 – 8,335 38,831 5,485
2010 37,767 20,049 17,718 36,406 7,340 29,066 1,360
2011 25,833 21,713 4,120 40,804 670 40,134 – 14,971
2012 15,061 5,120 9,941 14,405 10,259 4,146 656
2013 20,187 10,106 10,081 17,336 11,991 5,345 2,851
2014 43,501 18,778 24,723 43,950 17,203 26,747 – 449
2015 44,165 7,668 36,497 34,437 – 5,421 39,858 9,728
2016 30,896 4,409 26,487 31,037 – 5,143 36,180 – 141
2017 53,024 15,570 37,454 51,372 7,031 44,341 1,652
2018 58,446 16,188 42,258 84,528 – 11,184 95,712 – 26,082
2019 45,092 9,076 36,015 29,463 – 1,119 30,582 15,629
2020 100,581 33,973 66,607 131,012 26 130,986 – 30,430
2020 Feb. 2,975 416 2,559 1,000 – 947 1,947 1,975
Mar. – 2,200 566 – 2,766 5,605 – 7,442 13,047 – 7,805
Apr. 4,869 235 4,634 10,760 – 1,266 12,026 – 5,891
May 7,487 1,370 6,117 9,396 371 9,025 – 1,909
June 5,064 685 4,379 6,320 2,509 3,811 – 1,256
July 9,101 2,144 6,957 25,177 676 24,501 – 16,076
Aug. 9,459 2,900 6,559 8,808 1,020 7,788 652
Sep. 27,388 20,689 6,699 26,771 161 26,610 617
Oct. 5,083 1,057 4,027 5,316 342 4,974 – 233
Nov. 9,988 220 9,769 10,221 1,919 8,302 – 233
Dec. 14,530 2,898 11,633 14,692 2,969 11,723 – 161
1 Net sales at market values plus/minus changes in issuers' portfolios of their own debt
securities.  2 Including cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign debt securities by residents; transaction values.
4 Domestic and foreign debt securities.  5 Book values; statistically adjusted.  6 Residual;
also including purchases of domestic and foreign securities by domestic mutual funds.
Up to end-2008 including Deutsche Bundesbank.  7 Net purchases or net sales (-) of do-
mestic debt securities by non-residents; transaction values.  8 Excluding shares of publiclimited investment companies; at issue prices.  9 Net purchases or net sales (-) of foreign
shares (including direct investment) by residents; transaction values.  10 Domestic
and foreign shares.  11 Residual; also including purchases of domestic and foreign
securities by domestic mutual funds.  12 Net purchases or net sales (-) of domestic
shares (including direct investment) by non-residents; transaction values. — The figures
for the year 2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are
provisional; revisions are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
51•
VIII. Capital market
2. Sales of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities  1
Period Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by special-
purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)  2Public
debt securities
Gross sales
2009 1,533,616 1,058,815 40,421 37,615 331,566 649,215 76,379 398,421
2010 1,375,138 757,754 36,226 33,539 363,828 324,160 53,653 563,730
2011 1,337,772 658,781 31,431 24,295 376,876 226,180 86,614 592,375
2012 1,340,568 702,781 36,593 11,413 446,153 208,623 63,258 574,530
2013 1,433,628 908,107 25,775 12,963 692,611 176,758 66,630 458,892
2014 1,362,056 829,864 24,202 13,016 620,409 172,236 79,873 452,321
2015 1,359,422 852,045 35,840 13,376 581,410 221,417 106,675 400,701
3 2016 1,206,483 717,002 29,059 7,621 511,222 169,103 73,371 416,108
3 2017 1,047,822 619,199 30,339 8,933 438,463 141,466 66,290 362,332
2018 1,148,091 703,416 38,658 5,673 534,552 124,530 91,179 353,496
2019 1,285,541 783,977 38,984 9,587 607,900 127,504 94,367 407,197
6 2020 1,731,510 776,671 38,948 17,527 643,031 77,165 183,081 771,758
2020 Apr. 175,115 69,399 4,405 4,750 51,309 8,936 23,003 82,713
May 170,960 56,045 9 125 48,078 7,833 28,200 86,715
June 166,903 71,340 6,736 1,750 53,696 9,158 18,491 77,072
July 169,961 61,678 1,366 20 55,810 4,483 21,028 87,255
Aug. 144,828 56,957 16 13 53,343 3,585 8,573 79,298
Sep. 177,300 75,616 3,186 250 65,309 6,872 14,767 86,916
Oct. 127,269 61,836 2,174 265 55,991 3,406 10,079 55,354
Nov. 119,080 61,575 648 300 53,216 7,412 10,625 46,879
Dec. 82,874 49,121 389 250 46,153 2,329 8,066 25,687
of which: Debt securities with maturities of more than four years 4
2009 361,999 185,575 20,235 20,490 59,809 85,043 55,240 121,185
2010 381,687 169,174 15,469 15,139 72,796 65,769 34,649 177,863
2011 368,039 153,309 13,142 8,500 72,985 58,684 41,299 173,431
2012 421,018 177,086 23,374 6,482 74,386 72,845 44,042 199,888
2013 372,805 151,797 16,482 10,007 60,662 64,646 45,244 175,765
2014 420,006 157,720 17,678 8,904 61,674 69,462 56,249 206,037
2015 414,593 179,150 25,337 9,199 62,237 82,379 68,704 166,742
3 2016 375,859 173,900 24,741 5,841 78,859 64,460 47,818 154,144
3 2017 357,506 170,357 22,395 6,447 94,852 46,663 44,891 142,257
2018 375,906 173,995 30,934 4,460 100,539 38,061 69,150 132,760
2019 396,617 174,390 26,832 6,541 96,673 44,346 69,682 152,544
6 2020 529,395 165,031 28,500 7,427 90,769 38,335 76,855 287,509
2020 Apr. 41,373 10,274 2,165 1,300 5,943 866 8,561 22,538
May 65,827 12,372 9 125 8,134 4,104 12,431 41,024
June 60,991 17,946 5,561 1,500 5,198 5,686 9,125 33,920
July 60,090 14,074 1,366 20 11,331 1,356 13,246 32,769
Aug. 42,391 6,750 16 13 5,299 1,422 1,599 34,043
Sep. 61,762 18,442 3,036 250 9,713 5,443 7,430 35,889
Oct. 38,553 11,516 1,620 15 7,838 2,042 5,411 21,626
Nov. 34,273 10,829 548 50 4,838 5,394 5,877 17,567
Dec. 10,668 4,412 389 – 2,834 1,188 2,213 4,043
Net sales 5
2009 76,441 – 75,554 858 – 80,646 25,579 – 21,345 48,508 103,482
2010 21,566 – 87,646 – 3,754 – 63,368 28,296 – 48,822 23,748 85,464
2011 22,518 – 54,582 1,657 – 44,290 32,904 – 44,852 – 3,189 80,289
2012 – 85,298 – 100,198 – 4,177 – 41,660 – 3,259 – 51,099 – 6,401 21,298
2013 – 140,017 – 125,932 – 17,364 – 37,778 – 4,027 – 66,760 1,394 – 15,479
2014 – 34,020 – 56,899 – 6,313 – 23,856 – 862 – 25,869 10,497 12,383
2015 – 65,147 – 77,273 9,271 – 9,754 – 2,758 – 74,028 25,300 – 13,174
3 2016 21,951 10,792 2,176 – 12,979 16,266 5,327 18,177 – 7,020
3 2017 2,669 5,954 6,389 – 4,697 18,788 – 14,525 6,828 – 10,114
2018 2,758 26,648 19,814 – 6,564 18,850 – 5,453 9,738 – 33,630
2019 59,719 28,750 13,098 – 3,728 26,263 – 6,885 30,449 519
6 2020 335,066 26,204 7,861 8,016 21,718 – 11,391 48,408 260,454
2020 Apr. 34,439 3,205 1,210 4,324 – 1,002 – 1,327 11,593 19,640
May 82,863 1,000 – 1,593 – 604 4,526 – 1,330 14,387 67,476
June 47,926 10,175 3,362 1,664 5,404 – 255 2,842 34,910
July 37,500 – 4,679 – 1,443 – 714 240 – 2,762 12,126 30,054
Aug. 61,290 1,724 – 1,512 – 136 4,496 – 1,124 497 59,069
Sep. 43,923 19,271 – 1,493 – 45 20,898 – 90 3,350 21,302
Oct. – 13,531 – 14,240 – 1,656 – 608 – 10,488 – 1,488 – 741 1,450
Nov. 13,951 201 – 1,049 – 907 – 899 3,056 – 234 13,984
Dec. – 36,651 – 13,381 – 1,598 – 1,303 – 6,528 – 3,952 – 2,583 – 20,688
* For definitions, see the explanatory notes in Statistical Series - Securities Issues
Statistics on pages 43 f.  1 Excluding registered bank debt securities.  2 Including
cross-border financing within groups from January 2011.  3 Sectoral reclassification of
debt securities.  4 Maximum maturity according to the terms of issue.  5 Gross sales lessredemptions.  6 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year
2020 have been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions
are not specially marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
52•
VIII. Capital market
3. Amounts outstanding of debt securities issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Bank debt securities
End of year
or month/
Maturity
in years Total TotalMortgage
PfandbriefePublic
PfandbriefeDebt securities
issued by
special-purpose
credit institutionsOther bank
debt securitiesCorporate
bonds
(non-MFIs)Public
debt securities
2009 3,326,635 1,801,029 151,160 296,445 516,221 837,203 227,024 1,298,581
2010 3,348,201 1 1,570,490 147,529 232,954 544,517 1 645,491 250,774 1 1,526,937
2011 3,370,721 1,515,911 149,185 188,663 577,423 600,640 247,585 1,607,226
2012 3,285,422 1 1,414,349 145,007 147,070 574,163 1 548,109 1 220,456 1 1,650,617
2013 3,145,329 1,288,340 127,641 109,290 570,136 481,273 221,851 1,635,138
2014 3,111,308 1,231,445 121,328 85,434 569,409 455,274 232,342 1,647,520
2015 3,046,162 1,154,173 130,598 75,679 566,811 381,085 257,612 1,634,377
1 2016 3,068,111 1,164,965 132,775 62,701 633,578 335,910 275,789 1,627,358
1 2017 3,090,708 1,170,920 141,273 58,004 651,211 320,432 2 302,543 1,617,244
2018 3,091,303 1,194,160 161,088 51,439 670,062 1 311,572 1 2 313,527 1,583,616
2019 2 3,149,373 1,222,911 174,188 47,712 696,325 304,686 2 342,325 1,584,136
4 2020 2 3,403,783 2 1,173,009 183,261 55,192 687,338 2 247,217 2 377,095 1,853,680
2020 Apr. 3,210,996 1,206,435 190,953 58,058 696,201 261,222 352,225 1,652,335
May 3,283,745 1,199,059 189,078 57,391 693,993 258,598 366,123 1,718,562
June 2 3,329,089 2 1,205,319 192,326 59,050 697,630 2 256,313 368,928 1,754,841
July 3,344,775 1,186,901 190,615 58,228 685,892 252,167 380,465 1,777,408
Aug. 2 3,403,048 1,187,546 189,114 58,096 689,290 251,046 2 379,885 1,835,617
Sep. 3,450,911 1,209,935 187,644 58,079 713,010 251,202 383,424 1,857,552
Oct. 2 3,439,477 2 1,195,889 186,057 57,474 703,560 2 248,798 383,020 1,860,569
Nov. 3,448,759 1,191,673 184,910 56,543 698,697 251,523 382,633 1,874,452
Dec. 2 3,403,783 1,173,009 183,261 55,192 687,338 247,217 2 377,095 1,853,680
Breakdown by remaining period to maturity 3 Position at end-December 2020
bis unter 2   1 091 326   416 062   48 718   15 803   280 334   71 208   63 461   611 803 
 2 bis unter 4    660 571   281 885   48 612   14 647   164 328   54 299   65 220   313 466 
 4 bis unter 6    480 194   190 583   35 194   10 814   94 576   49 999   58 306   231 305 
6 bis unter 8    379 680   134 133   26 863   7 211   70 613   29 445   43 213   202 334 
 8 bis unter 10    261 352   69 637   13 867   3 608   36 560   15 602   24 250   167 465 
 10 bis unter 15    159 646   37 616   6 681   2 111   17 818   11 006   32 505   89 525 
 15 bis unter 20    113 754   20 483   2 259    836   15 259   2 130   10 302   82 969 
 20 und darüber    257 261   22 609   1 068    162   7 851   13 527   79 838   154 813 
* Including debt securities temporarily held in the issuers' portfolios.  1 Sectoral
reclassification of debt securities.  2 Adjustments due to the change in the country of
residence of the issuers or debt securities.  3 Calculated from month under review until
final maturity for debt securities falling due en bloc and until mean maturity of theresidual amount outstanding for debt securities not falling due en bloc.
4 Methodological changes since January 2020. — The figures for the year 2020 have
been revised. The figures for the most recent date are provisional. Revisions are not
specially marked.
4. Shares in circulation issued by residents *
€ million, nominal value
Change in domestic public limited companies' capital due to
PeriodShare capital =
circulation at
end of period
under reviewNet increase or
net decrease (-)
during period
under reviewcash payments
and ex-
change of
convertible
bonds  1issue of
bonus sharescontribution
of claims
and other
real assetsmerger
and
transfer
of assetschange of
legal formreduction
of capital 
and
liquidationMemo item:
Share circulation
at market values
(market capita-
lisation)
level at end
of period
under review  2
2009 175,691 6,989 12,476 398 97 – 3,741 – 1,269 – 974 927,256
2010 174,596 – 1,096 3,265 497 178 – 486 – 993 – 3,569 1,091,220
2011 177,167 2,570 6,390 552 462 – 552 – 762 – 3,532 924,214
2012 178,617 1,449 3,046 129 570 – 478 594 – 2,411 1,150,188
2013 171,741 – 6,879 2,971 718 476 – 1,432 – 619 – 8,992 1,432,658
2014 177,097 5,356 5,332 1,265 1,714 – 465 – 1,044 – 1,446 1,478,063
2015 177,416 319 4,634 397 599 – 1,394 – 1,385 – 2,535 1,614,442
2016 176,355 – 1,062 3,272 319 337 – 953 – 2,165 – 1,865 1,676,397
2017 178,828 2,471 3,894 776 533 – 457 – 661 – 1,615 1,933,733
2018 180,187 1,357 3,670 716 82 – 1,055 – 1,111 – 946 1,634,155
3 4 2019 183,461 1,700 2,411 2,419 542 – 858 – 65 – 2,747 1,950,224
4 2020 181,881 – 2,146 2,604 219 178 – 2,051 – 460 – 2,636 1,963,588
2020 Apr. 181,785 – 4 77 – –– 22 – 1 – 58 1,657,055
May 181,471 – 314 163 87 26 – 576 – 1 – 12 1,741,382
June 180,042 – 1,430 83 4 1 – 1,112 – 350 – 56 1,784,980
July 180,473 431 470 19 –– 3 – 6 – 48 1,799,062
Aug. 180,820 409 434 36 –– 23 22 – 61 1,887,713
Sep. 182,039 604 896 10 60 – 3 – 23 – 335 1,870,873
Oct. 182,165 36 82 18 –– 5 – 9 – 50 1,727,080
Nov. 181,879 – 340 47 – 1 – 219 – 11 – 158 1,884,308
Dec. 181,881 2 181 – 90 – 87 – 64 – 118 1,963,588
* Excluding shares of public limited investment companies.  1 Including shares issued
out of company profits.  2 All marketplaces. Source: Bundesbank calculations based on
data of the Herausgebergemeinschaft Wertpapier-Mit teilungen and Deutsche BörseAG. 3 Methodological changes since October 2019.  4 Changes due to statistical
adjustments.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
53•
VIII. Capital market
5. Yields and indices on German securities
Yields on debt securities outstanding issued by residents  1 Price indices  2,3
Public debt securities Bank debt securities Debt securities Shares
Listed
Federal securities
Total Total TotalWith a residual
maturity of
 9 to
10 years  4 TotalWith a residual
maturity of more
than 9 years and
up to 10 yearsCorporate
bonds
(non-
MFIs)German
bond
index
(REX)iBoxx
€ Germany 
price indexCDAX
share price
indexGerman
share
index
(DAX)
Period % per annumAverage
daily rateEnd-1998
= 100End-1987
= 100End-1987
= 1,000
2009 3.2 3.1 3.0 3.2 3.5 4.0 5.5 123.62 100.12 320.32 5,957.43
2010 2.5 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.7 3.3 4.0 124.96 102.95 368.72 6,914.19
2011 2.6 2.4 2.4 2.6 2.9 3.5 4.3 131.48 109.53 304.60 5,898.35
2012 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.5 1.6 2.1 3.7 135.11 111.18 380.03 7,612.39
2013 1.4 1.3 1.3 1.6 1.3 2.1 3.4 132.11 105.92 466.53 9,552.16
2014 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.2 0.9 1.7 2.9 139.68 114.37 468.39 9,805.55
2015 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.5 0.5 1.2 2.4 139.52 112.42 508.80 10,743.01
2016 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3 1.0 2.1 142.50 112.72 526.55 11,481.06
2017 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.9 1.7 140.53 109.03 595.45 12,917.64
2018 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.4 0.6 1.0 2.5 141.84 109.71 474.85 10,558.96
2019 – 0.1 – 0.2 – 0.3 – 0.3 0.1 0.3 2.5 143.72 111.32 575.80 13,249.01
2020 – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.0 0.1 1.7 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2020 Aug. – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.0 1.2 145.81 111.72 549.79 12,945.38
Sep. – 0.2 – 0.4 – 0.5 – 0.5 – 0.1 – 0.0 1.1 145.96 112.79 544.40 12,760.73
Oct. – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 1.1 146.56 113.81 492.31 11,556.48
Nov. – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.9 146.22 113.19 564.23 13,291.16
Dec. – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.8 146.15 113.14 586.72 13,718.78
2021 Jan. – 0.3 – 0.5 – 0.6 – 0.6 – 0.2 – 0.1 0.8 146.06 112.19 582.62 13,432.87
1 Bearer debt securities with maximum maturities according to the terms of issue of
over 4 years. Structured debt securities, debt securities with unscheduled redemption,
zero coupon bonds, floating rate notes and bonds not denominated in Euro are not
included. Group yields for the various categories of securities are weighted by the
amounts outstanding of the debt securities included in the calculation. Monthly figuresare calculated on the basis of the yields on all the business days in a month. The annual
figures are the unweighted means of the monthly figures. Adjustment of the scope of
securities included on 1 May 2020.  2 End of year or month.  3 Source: Deutsche Börse
AG. 4 Only debt securities eligible as underlying instruments for futures contracts;
calculated as unweighted averages.
6. Sales and purchases of mutual fund shares in Germany
€ million
Sales Purchases
Open-end domestic mutual funds  1 (sales receipts) Residents
Mutual funds open to the
general publicCredit institutions
including building
and loan associations  2 Other sectors  3
of which:
PeriodSales
=
total
pur-
chases Total TotalMoney
market
fundsSecur-
ities-
based
fundsReal
estate
fundsSpecial-
ised
fundsForeign
funds  4 Total Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
shares Totalof which:
Foreign
mutual
fund
sharesNon-resi-
dents  5
2009 49,929 43,747 10,966 –5,047 11,749 2,686 32,780 6,182 38,132 –14,995 –8,178 53,127 14,361 11,796
2010 106,190 84,906 13,381 – 148 8,683 1,897 71,345 21,284 102,591 3,873 6,290 98,718 14,994 3,598
2011 46,512 45,221 –1,340 – 379 –2,037 1,562 46,561 1,290 39,474 –7,576 – 694 47,050 1,984 7,035
2012 111,236 89,942 2,084 –1,036 97 3,450 87,859 21,293 114,676 –3,062 –1,562 117,738 22,855 –3,437
2013 123,736 91,337 9,184 – 574 5,596 3,376 82,153 32,400 117,028 771 100 116,257 32,300 6,710
2014 140,233 97,711 3,998 – 473 862 1,000 93,713 42,521 144,075 819 –1,745 143,256 44,266 –3,840
2015 181,889 146,136 30,420 318 22,345 3,636 115,716 35,753 174,018 7,362 494 166,656 35,259 7,871
2016 156,985 119,369 21,301 – 342 11,131 7,384 98,068 37,615 163,934 2,877 –3,172 161,057 40,787 –6,947
2017 153,484 94,921 29,560 – 235 21,970 4,406 65,361 58,562 156,002 4,938 1,048 151,064 57,514 –2,520
2018 131,958 103,694 15,279 377 4,166 6,168 88,415 28,263 138,254 2,979 –2,306 135,275 30,569 –6,298
2019 175,476 122,546 17,032 – 447 5,097 10,580 105,514 52,930 180,439 2,719 – 812 177,720 53,742 –4,961
2020 174,305 116,028 19,193 – 42 11,343 8,795 96,835 58,278 173,385 336 –1,656 173,049 59,934 920
2020 June 10,087 7,065 1,789 – 181 1,634 471 5,276 3,022 9,668 –2,048 15 11,716 3,007 419
July 18,259 7,417 1,671 – 195 1,460 400 5,746 10,842 17,389 – 143 – 89 17,532 10,931 870
Aug. 16,662 6,268 2,049 12 1,759 297 4,219 10,394 16,630 740 – 104 15,890 10,498 32
Sep. 16,160 10,083 1,146 112 – 18 1,052 8,937 6,077 17,415 – 705 250 18,120 5,827 –1,254
Oct. 15,409 11,677 713 33 – 99 853 10,964 3,731 15,788 939 – 90 14,849 3,821 – 380
Nov. 17,043 7,541 3,796 – 107 3,297 630 3,745 9,502 16,203 – 121 457 16,324 9,045 839
Dec. 49,591 32,118 3,506 – 122 3,094 476 28,613 17,473 48,215 1,712 125 46,503 17,348 1,376
1 Including public limited investment companies.  2 Book values.  3 Residual.  4 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of foreign fund shares by residents; transaction values.  5 Net
purchases or net sales (-) of domestic fund shares by non-residents; transaction values.— The figures for the most recent date are provisional; revisions are not specially
marked.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
54•
IX. Financial accounts
1. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2019 2020
 Item 2017 2018 2019 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 46.39 21.80 25.89 –9.14 37.45 16.34 8.56 50.08 43.44
   Debt securities –7.53 5.24 –2.23 –1.31 –0.59 –0.94 0.15 2.47 0.57
     Short-term debt securities –2.97 1.42 –1.31 –1.26 0.33 –0.31 –0.32 0.53 1.25
     Long-term debt securities –4.55 3.82 –0.91 –0.05 –0.92 –0.63 0.47 1.94 –0.68
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –3.64 0.65 –0.47 –0.24 –0.46 –0.31 –0.04 1.79 –0.48
         Non-financial corporations –0.61 0.59 0.51 –0.25 0.31 –0.25 –0.02 0.20 0.13
         Financial corporations –0.52 1.40 –0.56 0.08 –0.71 0.18 –0.16 0.59 –0.41
         General government –2.50 –1.34 –0.41 –0.07 –0.05 –0.24 0.14 1.00 –0.20
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.88 4.60 –1.76 –1.06 –0.13 –0.63 0.19 0.68 1.06
   Loans 56.22 –25.67 2.21 –6.79 –7.51 4.39 –1.00 9.56 3.45
     Short-term loans 27.83 –0.14 7.85 –7.92 –5.41 6.29 –1.34 16.87 6.87
     Long-term loans 28.39 –25.53 –5.64 1.13 –2.11 –1.90 0.34 –7.31 –3.42
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 24.05 –10.63 –9.00 –5.70 –7.02 2.86 –1.17 6.18 8.37
         Non-financial corporations 15.23 –10.03 –8.19 –6.71 –8.09 5.67 –1.29 6.25 8.95
         Financial corporations 8.42 –0.97 –1.03 0.96 1.01 –2.87 0.11 –0.07 –0.58
         General government 0.40 0.36 0.22 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00
       Loans to the rest of the world 32.17 –15.03 11.21 –1.09 –0.50 1.54 0.17 3.38 –4.92
   Equity and investment fund shares 79.82 120.60 76.61 10.76 33.88 17.68 56.68 –3.29 22.72
     Equity 71.73 118.60 67.61 9.07 30.68 16.14 55.82 –4.44 17.79
       Listed shares of domestic sectors –3.82 18.82 6.18 –3.35 15.19 –7.49 –1.51 –17.07 10.02
         Non-financial corporations –3.76 18.27 4.62 –3.32 15.24 –9.14 –1.32 –16.89 10.15
         Financial corporations –0.06 0.55 1.55 –0.03 –0.05 1.65 –0.19 –0.18 –0.14
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 6.99 –3.84 5.55 1.14 2.80 0.55 0.72 –1.45 3.44
       Other equity  1 68.56 103.62 55.88 11.28 12.68 23.08 56.61 14.08 4.34
     Investment fund shares 8.09 2.01 9.00 1.69 3.21 1.54 0.85 1.14 4.93
       Money market fund shares –0.85 –0.53 1.78 0.23 –0.03 1.61 –1.80 0.98 3.27
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 8.94 2.54 7.22 1.46 3.24 –0.08 2.65 0.17 1.66
   Insurance technical reserves 1.56 0.38 1.63 0.44 0.38 0.32 0.32 0.61 0.69
   Financial derivatives –11.32 2.15 0.52 –7.36 –3.73 10.57 –0.24 –9.63 1.08
   Other accounts receivable 155.71 11.07 –62.59 –40.07 –5.66 –41.15 0.05 –57.10 42.68
   Total 320.86 135.58 42.05 –53.47 54.23 7.21 64.51 –7.29 114.62
 External financing
   Debt securities 8.56 7.08 19.19 5.87 5.00 2.55 5.75 23.51 10.16
     Short-term securities 0.60 4.08 2.74 1.75 0.46 –0.70 1.60 2.78 –3.91
       Long-term securities 7.95 3.00 16.45 4.12 4.54 3.25 4.15 20.73 14.06
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 7.09 3.94 7.03 0.17 2.67 0.14 1.31 11.05 4.97
           Non-financial corporations –0.61 0.59 0.51 –0.25 0.31 –0.25 –0.02 0.20 0.13
           Financial corporations 9.16 3.35 5.72 0.91 2.38 –0.03 1.81 10.77 5.36
           General government 0.01 0.01 0.47 –0.61 –0.04 0.42 –0.10 –0.19 0.05
           Households –1.47 –0.01 0.34 0.12 0.03 –0.01 –0.39 0.26 –0.57
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 1.46 3.14 12.15 5.69 2.33 2.41 4.44 12.46 5.19
   Loans 99.28 126.08 76.53 38.82 10.73 4.26 29.73 20.88 6.54
     Short-term loans 23.11 60.22 19.68 17.70 –6.91 –7.39 8.31 –19.84 10.03
     Long-term loans 76.18 65.87 56.85 21.12 17.64 11.66 21.43 40.72 –3.50
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 51.38 70.84 49.76 18.18 –6.61 18.51 12.92 23.86 11.75
         Non-financial corporations 15.23 –10.03 –8.19 –6.71 –8.09 5.67 –1.29 6.25 8.95
         Financial corporations 37.30 79.39 57.25 24.25 1.80 8.76 18.35 0.98 –8.92
         General government –1.16 1.48 0.70 0.64 –0.33 4.07 –4.15 16.63 11.72
       Loans from the rest of the world 47.91 55.25 26.78 20.64 17.35 –14.24 16.81 –2.98 –5.22
   Equity 33.18 20.63 17.97 4.19 3.82 4.83 6.51 9.69 36.54
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 8.46 73.23 –24.47 –34.72 15.17 –9.39 7.19 –11.57 11.17
       Non-financial corporations –3.76 18.27 4.62 –3.32 15.24 –9.14 –1.32 –16.89 10.15
       Financial corporations 11.11 46.75 –33.11 –32.78 –0.68 0.60 1.64 1.74 –0.63
       General government 0.51 0.53 –0.01 0.04 0.04 –0.05 0.20 0.09 –0.01
       Households 0.60 7.67 4.03 1.33 0.57 –0.80 6.66 3.50 1.67
     Listed shares of the rest of the world –4.12 –31.96 –1.61 2.75 –14.41 14.28 –5.94 16.44 14.51
     Other equity  1 28.84 –20.65 44.05 36.17 3.06 –0.06 5.26 4.83 10.86
   Insurance technical reserves 6.89 6.08 2.81 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70 0.70
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 1.35 –0.49 –1.38 –2.06 2.69 –3.21 1.49 –2.26 –1.49
   Other accounts payable 58.94 22.29 7.95 –18.43 16.19 –2.20 –17.20 –48.74 42.02
   Total 208.20 181.66 123.07 29.10 39.14 6.94 26.99 3.78 94.46
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
55•
IX. Financial accounts
2. Financial assets and liabilities of non-financial corporations (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2019 2020
 Item 2017 2018 2019 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 550.8 560.2 556.8 508.7 558.4 556.8 577.2 609.6 679.6
   Debt securities 47.0 50.8 49.6 51.0 51.1 49.6 48.2 51.5 51.5
     Short-term debt securities 3.5 4.9 3.7 3.6 3.9 3.7 3.4 3.8 5.1
     Long-term debt securities 43.5 45.9 45.9 47.4 47.1 45.9 44.9 47.7 46.3
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 21.1 21.3 21.1 22.1 21.7 21.1 20.3 22.3 21.9
         Non-financial corporations 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.0 5.3 5.0 4.7 5.0 5.1
         Financial corporations 12.7 13.8 13.6 14.2 13.6 13.6 12.9 13.6 13.2
         General government 4.4 3.0 2.6 2.9 2.9 2.6 2.7 3.7 3.5
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 25.8 29.5 28.4 29.0 29.3 28.4 28.0 29.2 29.6
   Loans 620.9 591.4 595.3 597.4 591.8 595.3 593.9 602.8 604.4
     Short-term loans 495.1 491.1 499.9 498.4 494.1 499.9 498.2 514.6 520.3
     Long-term loans 125.8 100.3 95.4 99.0 97.8 95.4 95.7 88.2 84.1
     Memo item:
       Loans to domestic sectors 402.1 391.5 382.5 386.7 379.7 382.5 381.4 387.5 395.9
         Non-financial corporations 297.8 287.8 279.6 282.0 273.9 279.6 278.3 284.6 293.5
         Financial corporations 97.6 96.7 95.6 97.5 98.5 95.6 95.8 95.7 95.1
         General government 6.7 7.1 7.3 7.2 7.2 7.3 7.3 7.3 7.3
       Loans to the rest of the world 218.8 199.9 212.8 210.7 212.2 212.8 212.6 215.3 208.5
   Equity and investment fund shares 2,152.9 2,110.7 2,345.1 2,213.2 2,242.7 2,345.1 2,135.2 2,301.8 2,331.1
     Equity 1,981.3 1,944.3 2,155.1 2,032.6 2,056.1 2,155.1 1,959.3 2,115.3 2,137.6
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 332.2 302.6 342.0 319.7 328.8 342.0 288.4 337.2 352.5
         Non-financial corporations 325.3 296.0 332.9 312.1 321.4 332.9 281.4 329.6 346.0
         Financial corporations 6.8 6.6 9.0 7.7 7.3 9.0 7.0 7.6 6.5
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 48.3 40.2 50.7 45.8 47.8 50.7 45.3 47.3 55.2
       Other equity  1 1,600.8 1,601.6 1,762.4 1,667.1 1,679.5 1,762.4 1,625.7 1,730.7 1,729.9
     Investment fund shares 171.7 166.4 190.0 180.6 186.6 190.0 175.8 186.6 193.5
       Money market fund shares 1.6 1.0 3.2 1.2 1.2 3.2 1.4 2.4 5.7
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 170.1 165.4 186.8 179.3 185.4 186.8 174.4 184.2 187.9
   Insurance technical reserves 54.2 56.3 59.1 57.7 58.4 59.1 59.9 60.6 61.4
   Financial derivatives 34.1 33.4 31.5 32.6 32.1 31.5 44.9 34.7 29.7
   Other accounts receivable 1,122.7 1,154.8 1,231.4 1,181.3 1,206.3 1,231.4 1,186.3 1,094.0 1,157.5
   Total 4,582.7 4,557.6 4,868.9 4,642.0 4,740.7 4,868.9 4,645.6 4,755.1 4,915.2
 Liabilities
   Debt securities 210.6 187.8 214.0 205.6 217.0 214.0 229.3 245.8 256.7
     Short-term securities 3.4 6.1 8.8 9.1 9.5 8.8 14.0 16.8 12.6
     Long-term securities 207.2 181.6 205.2 196.5 207.4 205.2 215.2 229.0 244.1
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors 83.1 79.6 88.5 86.4 89.1 88.5 85.0 100.3 106.8
         Non-financial corporations 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.0 5.3 5.0 4.7 5.0 5.1
         Financial corporations 64.4 61.0 68.6 66.7 69.2 68.6 67.1 81.2 88.0
         General government 0.1 0.1 0.6 0.2 0.2 0.6 0.5 0.3 0.4
         Households 14.5 14.0 14.4 14.5 14.5 14.4 12.8 13.8 13.3
       Debt securities of the rest of the world 127.4 108.2 125.5 119.2 127.8 125.5 144.2 145.5 149.9
   Loans 1,629.4 1,748.0 1,826.9 1,810.0 1,824.7 1,826.9 1,856.8 1,879.0 1,889.1
     Short-term loans 650.7 710.2 732.9 745.8 740.8 732.9 741.2 719.9 728.4
     Long-term loans 978.7 1,037.8 1,094.0 1,064.2 1,083.8 1,094.0 1,115.6 1,159.1 1,160.8
     Memo item:
       Loans from domestic sectors 1,223.5 1,279.6 1,328.3 1,316.8 1,311.1 1,328.3 1,341.2 1,367.0 1,377.1
         Non-financial corporations 297.8 287.8 279.6 282.0 273.9 279.6 278.3 284.6 293.5
         Financial corporations 873.2 938.9 994.9 984.7 987.3 994.9 1,012.6 1,015.2 1,004.5
         General government 52.5 52.9 53.8 50.1 49.9 53.8 50.3 67.3 79.2
       Loans from the rest of the world 405.8 468.4 498.6 493.2 513.6 498.6 515.6 511.9 512.0
   Equity 3,078.3 2,707.0 3,108.1 2,894.0 2,900.3 3,108.1 2,579.1 2,956.5 3,097.3
     Listed shares of domestic sectors 721.3 659.3 733.5 682.4 692.4 733.5 595.2 710.9 747.3
       Non-financial corporations 325.3 296.0 332.9 312.1 321.4 332.9 281.4 329.6 346.0
       Financial corporations 149.6 161.9 157.4 145.9 145.7 157.4 126.2 150.1 156.0
       General government 46.0 41.6 51.8 45.0 47.9 51.8 41.8 50.5 53.3
       Households 200.4 159.8 191.3 179.5 177.4 191.3 145.7 180.8 192.0
     Listed shares of the rest of the world 960.5 764.8 959.2 859.9 857.6 959.2 689.3 856.3 923.6
     Other equity  1 1,396.5 1,282.9 1,415.5 1,351.6 1,350.2 1,415.5 1,294.7 1,389.2 1,426.4
   Insurance technical reserves 263.7 269.8 272.6 271.2 271.9 272.6 273.3 274.0 274.7
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 63.1 65.3 67.5 79.0 85.4 67.5 88.0 89.2 85.1
   Other accounts payable 1,124.9 1,174.3 1,305.7 1,202.4 1,262.9 1,305.7 1,254.8 1,214.9 1,264.2
   Total 6,369.9 6,152.2 6,794.8 6,462.2 6,562.1 6,794.8 6,281.2 6,659.3 6,867.0
1 Including unlisted shares.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
56•
IX. Financial accounts
3. Acquisition of financial assets and external financing of households (non-consolidated)
€ billion
2019 2020
 Item 2017 2018 2019 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Acquisition of financial assets
   Currency and deposits 107.93 138.24 139.86 42.36 23.65 49.04 24.14 72.49 41.33
     Currency 21.42 30.20 32.86 8.52 10.36 10.15 19.55 16.39 11.79
     Deposits 86.51 108.04 107.01 33.83 13.29 38.89 4.59 56.10 29.53
       Transferable deposits 99.78 109.88 111.01 34.39 17.27 42.16 18.74 58.64 31.76
       Time deposits –4.03 6.79 1.47 –0.79 –0.30 0.70 –3.11 –0.85 0.41
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) –9.24 –8.63 –5.47 0.23 –3.68 –3.97 –11.04 –1.70 –2.63
   Debt securities –8.39 1.62 –1.85 0.60 –1.35 –1.61 –1.47 0.35 –1.67
     Short-term debt securities –0.20 –0.13 –0.53 –0.13 –0.19 0.02 –0.03 0.16 0.10
     Long-term debt securities –8.19 1.74 –1.32 0.73 –1.16 –1.63 –1.44 0.19 –1.78
     Memo item:
       Debt securities of domestic sectors –5.11 2.24 –2.93 0.28 –1.52 –2.38 –0.14 0.52 –1.17
         Non-financial corporations –1.45 –0.10 0.21 0.08 –0.04 –0.04 –0.32 0.18 –0.56
         Financial corporations –2.68 2.81 –2.22 0.27 –1.31 –1.75 –0.35 0.45 –0.36
         General government –0.99 –0.46 –0.92 –0.07 –0.18 –0.58 0.53 –0.11 –0.25
       Debt securities of the rest of the world –3.27 –0.62 1.08 0.32 0.18 0.77 –1.32 –0.17 –0.50
   Equity and investment fund shares 55.17 38.44 49.78 10.90 11.96 16.20 19.39 29.00 20.30
     Equity 14.88 18.84 18.94 4.29 4.40 3.43 13.62 15.61 11.56
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 0.85 9.44 6.61 1.43 1.11 –0.24 8.07 6.35 1.97
         Non-financial corporations 0.49 6.28 3.52 1.31 0.88 –1.19 6.47 3.41 1.71
         Financial corporations 0.36 3.16 3.09 0.12 0.23 0.95 1.61 2.94 0.27
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 9.87 4.37 7.46 1.72 2.19 2.58 3.02 6.44 7.39
       Other equity  1 4.16 5.03 4.86 1.13 1.10 1.08 2.53 2.82 2.19
     Investment fund shares 40.29 19.60 30.84 6.61 7.57 12.78 5.76 13.39 8.75
       Money market fund shares –0.30 –0.22 –0.32 –0.01 0.18 –0.37 0.38 –0.10 0.10
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 40.59 19.81 31.16 6.62 7.39 13.14 5.38 13.49 8.64
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 20.23 15.80 17.93 3.45 4.46 6.57 5.29 5.62 5.56
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 37.42 28.18 38.28 9.24 8.62 9.52 10.63 6.80 6.19
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 35.52 37.28 27.51 6.59 4.98 4.75 11.53 7.55 7.04
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts receivable  2 –25.91 –9.52 –3.68 –7.80 7.23 –25.15 20.88 –11.64 8.90
   Total 221.96 250.03 267.83 65.34 59.56 59.32 90.39 110.18 87.64
 External financing
   Loans 55.38 68.41 81.16 23.84 24.85 16.59 13.13 17.63 27.53
     Short-term loans –2.19 2.44 0.92 0.87 –0.62 0.20 –1.58 –2.29 –0.52
     Long-term loans 57.57 65.97 80.23 22.97 25.47 16.39 14.71 19.91 28.05
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 47.24 57.42 67.17 16.62 21.66 19.79 15.69 18.47 25.54
       Consumer loans 11.25 11.14 14.42 6.56 3.67 –1.96 –2.67 –2.05 1.08
       Entrepreneurial loans –3.11 –0.14 –0.43 0.66 –0.49 –1.25 0.10 1.21 0.91
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 49.99 61.72 73.41 21.22 21.09 18.60 15.52 17.96 27.32
       Loans from other financial institutions 5.40 6.69 7.74 2.62 3.76 –2.01 –2.39 –0.34 0.21
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Financial derivatives 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
   Other accounts payable 0.66 0.80 0.31 0.10 0.20 –0.50 –0.17 0.25 0.31
   Total 56.04 69.21 81.46 23.94 25.04 16.09 12.96 17.88 27.84
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
57•
IX. Financial accounts
4. Financial assets and liabilities of households (non-consolidated)
End of year/quarter; € billion
2019 2020
 Item 2017 2018 2019 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
 Financial assets
   Currency and deposits 2,317.5 2,457.4 2,597.3 2,524.6 2,548.3 2,597.3 2,621.4 2,693.9 2,734.9
     Currency 197.1 227.3 260.2 239.6 250.0 260.2 279.7 296.1 307.9
     Deposits 2,120.3 2,230.1 2,337.1 2,285.0 2,298.3 2,337.1 2,341.7 2,397.8 2,427.0
       Transferable deposits 1,288.4 1,398.0 1,509.1 1,449.6 1,466.9 1,509.1 1,527.8 1,586.4 1,617.9
       Time deposits 245.4 252.4 253.9 253.5 253.2 253.9 250.8 249.9 250.3
       Savings deposits (including savings certificates) 586.5 579.7 574.2 581.9 578.2 574.2 563.2 561.5 558.8
     Debt securities 122.5 117.5 121.4 123.1 122.5 121.4 108.9 114.5 113.5
       Short-term debt securities 2.5 2.1 1.6 1.8 1.6 1.6 1.5 1.7 1.8
       Long-term debt securities 120.0 115.4 119.7 121.2 120.9 119.7 107.4 112.7 111.7
       Memo item:
         Debt securities of domestic sectors 82.9 80.2 81.4 84.5 83.4 81.4 72.3 76.7 76.1
           Non-financial corporations 12.6 12.1 12.4 12.6 12.5 12.4 11.0 11.8 11.3
           Financial corporations 66.4 64.6 66.6 68.6 67.7 66.6 58.2 62.0 62.1
           General government 3.9 3.4 2.5 3.3 3.2 2.5 3.1 3.0 2.7
         Debt securities of the rest of the world 39.6 37.4 39.9 38.6 39.2 39.9 36.6 37.8 37.4
   Equity and investment fund shares 1,242.6 1,160.4 1,382.1 1,290.3 1,320.0 1,382.1 1,216.2 1,369.8 1,418.2
     Equity 646.7 587.0 701.9 659.1 670.0 701.9 614.3 703.9 730.6
       Listed shares of domestic sectors 227.9 184.1 223.9 210.1 209.3 223.9 171.7 209.2 217.3
         Non-financial corporations 191.5 151.9 182.3 171.0 169.3 182.3 138.7 172.3 183.6
         Financial corporations 36.4 32.2 41.6 39.1 40.0 41.6 33.0 36.9 33.7
       Listed shares of the rest of the world 103.3 100.2 136.3 120.1 126.2 136.3 116.9 144.7 156.1
       Other equity  1 315.5 302.7 341.7 328.8 334.5 341.7 325.7 350.0 357.2
     Investment fund shares 595.9 573.4 680.2 631.2 650.0 680.2 601.9 665.9 687.7
       Money market fund shares 2.7 2.4 2.3 2.3 2.5 2.3 2.7 2.7 2.7
       Non-MMF investment fund shares 593.2 571.1 678.0 628.9 647.5 678.0 599.2 663.2 684.9
   Non-life insurance technical reserves and provision for calls
   under standardised guarantees 360.1 375.9 393.8 382.8 387.2 393.8 399.1 404.7 410.3
   Life insurance and annuity entitlements 991.4 1,011.1 1,069.1 1,041.6 1,054.7 1,069.1 1,080.2 1,087.4 1,093.9
   Pension entitlement, claims of pension funds on pension
   managers, entitlements to non-pension benefits 846.5 883.8 911.4 894.0 899.6 911.4 922.9 930.4 937.5
   Financial derivatives and employee stock options 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts receivable  2 31.1 29.6 29.6 31.5 32.3 29.6 29.0 29.6 30.0
   Total 5,911.7 6,035.7 6,504.8 6,287.9 6,364.6 6,504.8 6,377.7 6,630.3 6,738.3
 Liabilities
   Loans 1,711.8 1,775.6 1,857.8 1,816.3 1,841.1 1,857.8 1,871.0 1,886.6 1,915.3
     Short-term loans 54.4 58.1 58.8 59.4 58.8 58.8 57.2 54.9 54.2
     Long-term loans 1,657.3 1,717.5 1,799.0 1,756.9 1,782.4 1,799.0 1,813.8 1,831.7 1,861.1
     Memo item:
       Mortgage loans 1,247.3 1,307.9 1,378.6 1,337.4 1,359.0 1,378.6 1,394.4 1,412.5 1,438.8
       Consumer loans 211.8 218.1 231.4 229.7 233.3 231.4 228.8 226.0 227.0
       Entrepreneurial loans 252.7 249.7 247.7 249.2 248.8 247.7 247.8 248.1 249.5
     Memo item:
       Loans from monetary financial institutions 1,610.0 1,667.2 1,741.6 1,701.8 1,722.9 1,741.6 1,757.2 1,773.2 1,801.6
       Loans from other financial institutions 101.8 108.5 116.2 114.5 118.2 116.2 113.8 113.5 113.7
       Loans from general government and rest of the world 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Financial derivatives 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
   Other accounts payable 17.3 18.3 19.2 20.4 20.8 19.2 20.7 21.0 20.5
   Total 1,729.1 1,793.9 1,877.0 1,836.7 1,862.0 1,877.0 1,891.7 1,907.7 1,935.8
1 Including unlisted shares.  2 Including accumulated interest-bearing surplus shares
with insurance corporations.

Deutsche Bundesbank
58  Monthly Report
February 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
1. General government: deficit/surplus and debt level as defined in the Maastricht Treaty
  
 
Social Social
General Central State Local security General Central State Local securitygovernment government government government funds government government government government funds
Period
€ billion As a percentage of GDP
Deficit/surplus1
2014 + 17.0 + 15.5 + 2.0 − 3.9 + 3.4 + 0.6 + 0.5 + 0.1 − 0.1 + 0.1
2015 + 29.1 + 17.6 + 4.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 0.2 + 0.1 + 0.1
2016 + 36.4 + 13.7 + 7.7 + 6.3 + 8.7 + 1.2 + 0.4 + 0.2 + 0.2 + 0.32017 p + 44.4 + 7.8 + 13.9 + 11.4 + 11.2 + 1.4 + 0.2 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.3
2018 p + 61.6 + 20.8 + 12.1 + 12.8 + 16.0 + 1.8 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.4 + 0.5
2019 p + 52.5 + 22.7 + 16.0 + 5.1 + 8.7 + 1.5 + 0.7 + 0.5 + 0.1 + 0.3
2020 pe − 158.2 − 98.3 − 26.1 − 2.0 − 31.8 − 4.8 − 3.0 − 0.8 − 0.1 − 1.0
2018         H1  p + 51.3 + 18.9 + 15.5 + 7.7 + 9.3 + 3.1 + 1.1 + 0.9 + 0.5 + 0.6
         H2  p + 10.3 + 1.9 − 3.4 + 5.1 + 6.7 + 0.6 + 0.1 − 0.2 + 0.3 + 0.4
2019         H1  p + 46.5 + 19.0 + 13.0 + 6.4 + 8.1 + 2.7 + 1.1 + 0.8 + 0.4 + 0.5
         H2  p + 6.0 + 3.7 + 3.0 − 1.3 + 0.6 + 0.3 + 0.2 + 0.2 − 0.1 + 0.0
2020         H1  pe − 54.2 − 29.2 − 11.9 − 1.9 − 11.4 − 3.3 − 1.8 − 0.7 − 0.1 − 0.7
Debt level2 End of year or quarter
2014 2,213.6 1,395.8 658.2 176.1 1.4 75.6 47.7 22.5 6.0 0.0
2015 2,188.4 1,371.6 658.2 176.3 1.4 72.3 45.3 21.8 5.8 0.0
2016 2,171.6 1,365.2 640.9 178.0 1.1 69.3 43.6 20.4 5.7 0.02017 p 2,122.2 1,349.7 613.6 175.2 0.8 65.1 41.4 18.8 5.4 0.0
2018 p 2,073.6 1,322.5 599.8 167.4 0.7 61.8 39.4 17.9 5.0 0.0
2019 p 2,057.2 1,299.4 609.4 165.1 0.7 59.6 37.7 17.7 4.8 0.0
2019         Q1  p 2,083.9 1,324.0 611.7 165.7 0.7 61.6 39.2 18.1 4.9 0.0
         Q2  p 2,074.3 1,319.9 609.9 164.3 0.7 61.1 38.9 18.0 4.8 0.0
         Q3  p 2,091.2 1,327.6 619.9 163.7 0.6 61.0 38.7 18.1 4.8 0.0
         Q4  p 2,057.2 1,299.4 609.4 165.1 0.7 59.6 37.7 17.7 4.8 0.0
2020         Q1  p 2,107.0 1,327.0 628.7 165.1 0.8 61.0 38.4 18.2 4.8 0.0
         Q2  p 2,276.0 1,473.1 650.4 165.3 1.0 67.4 43.6 19.3 4.9 0.0
         Q3  p 2,345.2 1,535.9 656.9 166.6 4.6 70.0 45.9 19.6 5.0 0.1
Sources: Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculations. 1The deficit/surplus ible with the annual figures. 2Quarterly GDP ratios are based on the national output
in accordance with ESA 2010 corresponds to the Maastricht definition. In connection of the four preceding quarters. with the publication of the 2020 annual figures, no revised figures were released for   the first half of the year. Therefore, the 2020 half-year figures are not directly compat-  
 
 
2. General government: revenue, expenditure and deficit/surplus as shown in the national accounts*
  
 
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:
Compen- Inter- Gross Memo item:
Social con- Social sation of mediate capital Deficit/ Total tax
Period Total Taxes tributions Other Total benefits employees formation Interest Other surplus burden  1 consumption
€ billion
2014 1,313.9 673.0 482.3 158.5 1,296.9 691.3 227.5 147.1 60.5 47.1 123.4 + 17.0 1,160.0
2015 1,364.9 705.1 501.2 158.6 1,335.8 721.9 233.0 153.0 64.5 42.2 121.2 + 29.1 1,213.3
2016 1,426.7 739.2 524.3 163.3 1,390.4 754.5 240.7 162.5 68.1 37.3 127.2 + 36.4 1,270.42017 p 1,485.2 773.1 549.5 162.5 1,440.8 783.9 250.1 168.4 71.6 33.7 133.0 + 44.4 1,329.4
2018 p 1,553.8 808.0 572.6 173.2 1,492.2 806.0 259.6 173.4 78.7 31.1 143.5 + 61.6 1,387.6
2019 p 1,610.6 834.1 597.5 179.0 1,558.1 845.9 271.5 181.9 86.2 27.5 145.1 + 52.5 1,438.7
2020 pe 1,548.6 769.3 607.7 171.7 1,706.9 902.1 283.2 203.9 92.8 23.8 201.1 − 158.2 1,384.1
As a percentage of GDP
2014 44.9 23.0 16.5 5.4 44.3 23.6 7.8 5.0 2.1 1.6 4.2 + 0.6 39.6
2015 45.1 23.3 16.6 5.2 44.1 23.9 7.7 5.1 2.1 1.4 4.0 + 1.0 40.1
2016 45.5 23.6 16.7 5.2 44.4 24.1 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.2 4.1 + 1.2 40.52017 p 45.6 23.7 16.9 5.0 44.2 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.2 1.0 4.1 + 1.4 40.8
2018 p 46.3 24.1 17.1 5.2 44.5 24.0 7.7 5.2 2.3 0.9 4.3 + 1.8 41.3
2019 p 46.7 24.2 17.3 5.2 45.2 24.5 7.9 5.3 2.5 0.8 4.2 + 1.5 41.7
2020 pe 46.5 23.1 18.3 5.2 51.3 27.1 8.5 6.1 2.8 0.7 6.0 − 4.8 41.6
Percentage growth rates
2014 + 3.9 + 3.4 + 3.6 + 6.9 + 2.6 + 3.7 + 3.2 + 3.7 − 0.8 − 8.4 + 1.0 . + 3.5
2015 + 3.9 + 4.8 + 3.9 + 0.0 + 3.0 + 4.4 + 2.4 + 4.0 + 6.6 − 10.5 − 1.8 . + 4.6
2016 + 4.5 + 4.8 + 4.6 + 2.9 + 4.1 + 4.5 + 3.3 + 6.2 + 5.6 − 11.7 + 4.9 . + 4.72017 p + 4.1 + 4.6 + 4.8 − 0.4 + 3.6 + 3.9 + 3.9 + 3.6 + 5.1 − 9.5 + 4.6 . + 4.6
2018 p + 4.6 + 4.5 + 4.2 + 6.6 + 3.6 + 2.8 + 3.8 + 3.0 + 9.8 − 7.8 + 7.8 . + 4.4
2019 p + 3.6 + 3.2 + 4.4 + 3.3 + 4.4 + 4.9 + 4.6 + 4.9 + 9.6 − 11.6 + 1.1 . + 3.7
2020 pe − 3.8 − 7.8 + 1.7 − 4.1 + 9.5 + 6.7 + 4.3 + 12.1 + 7.7 − 13.4 + 38.6 . − 3.8
Source: Federal Statistical Office. *Figures in accordance with ESA 2010. 1Taxes and   
social contributions plus customs duties and bank levies to the Single Resolution  Fund. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
59  Monthly Report
February 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
3. General government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central, state and local government  1 Social security funds  2 General government, total
Revenue Expenditure
of which: of which:  3 
Finan- Person- Fixed Finan-
cial nel asset cialtransac- expend- Current forma- transac- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/ Rev- Expend- Deficit/
Period Total  
4 Taxes tions  5 Total 4 iture grants Interest tion tions  5 surplus enue  6 iture surplus enue iture surplus
2014 p 791.8 643.6 11.3 788.9 236.0 295.1 57.1 45.9 17.6 + 2.9 554.5 551.1 + 3.5 1,245.2 1,238.8 + 6.4
2015 p 829.8 673.3 10.4 804.3 244.1 302.7 49.8 46.4 12.5 + 25.5 575.0 573.1 + 1.9 1,301.1 1,273.6 + 27.4
2016 p 862.3 705.8 9.0 844.5 251.3 321.6 43.4 49.0 11.8 + 17.8 601.8 594.8 + 7.1 1,355.1 1,330.2 + 24.9
2017 p 900.3 734.5 7.9 869.4 261.6 327.9 42.0 52.3 13.8 + 30.8 631.5 622.0 + 9.5 1,417.5 1,377.2 + 40.3
2018 p 951.8 776.3 6.2 905.6 272.5 338.0 39.2 55.8 16.1 + 46.2 656.2 642.5 + 13.6 1,490.7 1,430.9 + 59.8
2019 p 1,010.4 799.4 11.2 975.4 285.9 349.7 33.6 62.9 16.8 + 35.0 684.7 676.6 + 8.0 1,573.7 1,530.6 + 43.1
2018         Q1  p 225.7 189.1 1.1 210.0 66.0 81.7 14.6 9.1 2.5 + 15.7 156.1 160.8 − 4.7 352.7 341.7 + 11.0
         Q2  p 239.9 194.7 1.0 206.2 65.9 80.9 5.8 11.4 2.1 + 33.7 162.4 160.1 + 2.3 373.3 337.3 + 36.1
         Q3  p 228.8 189.0 1.8 223.6 67.0 84.6 13.4 14.4 1.9 + 5.2 161.8 161.1 + 0.7 361.3 355.5 + 5.9
         Q4  p 255.2 203.9 2.2 262.1 73.1 89.7 6.2 20.3 9.6 − 6.9 174.6 163.4 + 11.2 400.7 396.4 + 4.3
2019         Q1  p 240.9 192.7 2.5 230.4 71.0 88.5 11.5 10.2 3.3 + 10.5 163.3 166.4 − 3.1 374.3 366.8 + 7.5
         Q2  p 256.3 201.7 2.0 233.4 67.5 87.0 12.2 13.0 2.6 + 22.8 169.9 168.4 + 1.5 396.1 371.9 + 24.3
         Q3  p 245.3 194.7 3.4 236.7 70.9 86.2 4.5 16.4 3.1 + 8.6 168.8 170.3 − 1.5 384.0 376.9 + 7.1
         Q4  p 269.3 210.6 3.2 272.1 76.1 87.5 5.1 22.5 7.7 − 2.8 181.9 172.6 + 9.3 420.9 414.4 + 6.5
2020         Q1  p 244.8 197.4 2.5 239.1 75.6 90.5 11.9 12.0 2.6 + 5.7 168.3 175.7 − 7.4 380.0 381.7 − 1.7
         Q2  p 212.1 158.0 2.7 269.2 69.5 119.2 8.6 15.4 3.4 − 57.1 175.9 187.0 − 11.1 354.6 422.9 − 68.2
         Q3  p 227.7 181.5 4.0 282.2 72.4 101.9 1.4 18.3 34.3 − 54.5 181.1 195.0 − 13.9 370.0 438.4 − 68.4
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Annual fig- latter are all provisional. The quarterly figures for some insurance sectors are esti-
ures based on the calculations of the Federal Statistical Office. Bundesbank supple- mated. 3The development of the types of expenditure recorded here is influenced in
mentary estimations for the reporting years after 2011 that are not yet available. The part by statistical changeovers. 4Including discrepancies in clearing transactions be-
quarterly figures contain numerous off-budget entities which are assigned to the tween central, state and local government. 5On the revenue side, this contains pro-
general government sector as defined in the national accounts but are not yet in- ceeds booked as disposals of equity interests and as loan repayments. On the expend-
cluded in the annual calculations. From 2012 also including the bad bank iture side, this contains the acquisition of equity interests and loans grant ed.6In-
FMSW. 2The annual figures do not tally with the sum of the quarterly figures, as the cluding central government liquidity assistance to the Federal E mployment Agency. 
4. Central, state and local government: budgetary development (as per the government finance statistics)
  
€ billion
Central government State government  2,3 Local government  3 
Period Revenue  1 Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus Revenue Expenditure Deficit/surplus
2014 p 322.9 323.3 − 0.3 338.3 336.1 + 2.1 218.7 218.7 − 0.1
2015 p 338.3 326.5 + 11.8 355.1 350.6 + 4.5 232.7 229.1 + 3.6
2016 p 344.7 338.4 + 6.2 381.1 372.4 + 8.8 248.9 243.1 + 5.8
2017 p 357.8 352.8 + 5.0 397.7 385.8 + 11.8 260.3 249.1 + 11.2
2018 p 374.4 363.5 + 10.9 420.5 400.1 + 20.4 271.8 261.5 + 10.2
2019 p 382.5 369.2 + 13.3 437.3 419.5 + 17.9 284.2 278.1 + 6.1
2018         Q1  p 87.9 83.9 + 4.0 100.0 92.7 + 7.3 54.9 60.3 − 5.3
         Q2  p 94.5 79.8 + 14.6 104.3 91.8 + 12.5 68.5 62.4 + 6.1
         Q3  p 91.7 95.9 − 4.2 100.7 95.4 + 5.3 66.0 64.3 + 1.7
         Q4  p 100.4 103.9 − 3.5 113.4 118.5 − 5.1 80.4 73.1 + 7.3
2019         Q1  p 84.7 86.1 − 1.4 105.7 99.4 + 6.2 58.2 63.2 − 4.9
         Q2  p 97.7 90.3 + 7.4 106.0 97.5 + 8.5 70.6 65.9 + 4.7
         Q3  p 93.2 91.3 + 1.9 107.9 102.6 + 5.2 69.1 69.2 − 0.1
         Q4  p 106.9 101.5 + 5.4 115.6 118.2 − 2.6 84.5 78.4 + 6.0
2020         Q1  p 92.3 90.4 + 1.9 105.6 102.4 + 3.2 57.9 67.7 − 9.8
         Q2  p 70.8 114.8 − 44.0 108.2 125.3 − 17.1 69.4 69.4 + 0.1
         Q3  p 83.8 105.5 − 21.7 112.9 113.7 − 0.8 67.5 72.6 − 5.1
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on Federal Statistical Office data. 1Any assigned to the general government sector. Annual figures up to and including 2011:
amounts of the Bundesbank’s profit distribution exceeding the reference value that excluding off-budget entities, but including special accounts and special-purpose
were used to repay parts of the debt of central government’s special funds are not in- associations based on the calculations of the Federal Statistica l Office. For the follow-
cluded here. 2Including the local authority level of the city states Berlin, Bremen and ing years: Bundesbank supplementary estimations. 
Hamburg. 3Quarterly data of core budgets and off-budget entities which are

Deutsche Bundesbank
60  Monthly Report
February 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
5. Central, state and local government: tax revenue
  
€ million
Central and state government and European Union
Memo item:
Balance of Amounts deducted
Central State Local untransferred in the Federal
Period Total Total government  1 government  1 European Union  2 government  3 tax shares  4 budget  5 
2014 643,624 556,008 298,518 226,504 30,986 87,418 + 198 27,772
2015 673,276 580,485 308,849 240,698 30,938 93,003 − 212 27,241
2016 705,797 606,965 316,854 260,837 29,273 98,648 + 186 27,8362017 734,540 629,458 336,730 271,046 21,682 105,158 − 76 27,3682018 776,314 665,005 349,134 287,282 28,589 111,308 + 1 26,7752019 799,416 684,491 355,050 298,519 30,921 114,902 + 23 25,998
2020 ... 632,237 313,381 286,065 32,791 ... ... 30,266
2019         Q1 193,054 162,696 79,669 71,578 11,450 19,816 + 10,541 6,270
         Q2 202,383 172,563 90,883 75,455 6,224 29,784 + 37 6,179         Q3 193,918 166,676 86,117 72,677 7,882 27,569 − 327 7,402         Q4 210,062 182,556 98,381 78,809 5,365 37,733 − 10,227 6,146
2020         Q1 198,351 168,099 83,086 75,420 9,593 18,875 + 11,377 6,855
         Q2 158,161 135,185 68,653 59,557 6,974 25,107 − 2,131 6,997         Q3 182,202 156,397 78,502 72,613 5,282 25,234 + 571 9,705         Q4 ... 172,557 83,140 78,475 10,942 ... ... 6,709
2019         Dec. . 88,149 48,411 38,226 1,512 . . 2,049
2020         Dec. . 85,916 44,302 38,133 3,480 . . 2,236
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu- government tax revenue. 3Including local government taxes in the city states Berlin,
lations. 1Before deducting or adding supplementary central government transfers, Bremen and Hamburg. Including revenue from offshore wind farms. 4Difference be-
regionalisation funds (local public transport), compensation for the transfer of motor tween local government’s share in the joint taxes received b y the state government
vehicle tax to central government and consolidation assistance, which central govern- cash offices in the period in question (see Table X. 6) and the a mounts passed on to
ment remits to state government. See the last column for the volume of these local government in the same period. 5Volume of the positions mentioned under
amounts which are deducted from tax revenue in the Federal budget. 2Customs footnote 1. 
duties and shares in VAT and gross national income accruing to the EU from central
 
 
6. Central and state government and European Union: tax revenue, by type
  
€ million
Joint taxes
Memo
Income taxes  2 Value added taxes (VAT)  5 item:
Local
Local govern-
Invest- business Central State ment
Assessed ment tax govern- govern- EU share in
Wage income Corpora- income Domestic Import trans- ment ment customs joint
Period Total  1 Total tax  3 tax tion tax tax  4 Total VAT VAT fers  6 taxes 7 taxes 7 duties taxes
2014 593,039 258,875 167,983 45,613 20,044 25,236 203,110 154,228 48,883 7,142 101,804 17,556 4,552 37,031
2015 620,287 273,258 178,891 48,580 19,583 26,204 209,921 159,015 50,905 7,407 104,204 20,339 5,159 39,802
2016 648,309 291,492 184,826 53,833 27,442 25,391 217,090 165,932 51,157 7,831 104,441 22,342 5,113 41,3452017 674,598 312,462 195,524 59,428 29,259 28,251 226,355 170,498 55,856 8,580 99,934 22,205 5,063 45,1412018 713,576 332,141 208,231 60,415 33,425 30,069 234,800 175,437 59,363 9,078 108,586 23,913 5,057 48,5712019 735,869 344,016 219,660 63,711 32,013 28,632 243,256 183,113 60,143 8,114 109,548 25,850 5,085 51,379
2020 682,345 320,798 209,286 58,982 24,268 28,261 219,484 168,700 50,784 3,954 105,632 27,775 4,703 50,107
2019         Q1 175,216 82,996 50,923 17,453 9,194 5,426 60,402 46,018 14,384 121 23,968 6,531 1,197 12,519
         Q2 185,333 90,134 54,437 16,069 8,085 11,543 59,101 43,943 15,158 2,113 26,625 6,087 1,273 12,770         Q3 179,020 81,267 53,668 13,614 7,607 6,379 61,057 45,976 15,081 2,221 26,654 6,485 1,336 12,344         Q4 196,300 89,619 60,632 16,575 7,128 5,284 62,696 47,175 15,520 3,660 32,301 6,746 1,279 13,745
2020         Q1 181,350 88,009 53,389 18,711 8,495 7,415 60,060 46,038 14,022 244 24,517 7,406 1,114 13,251
         Q2 146,360 69,928 50,760 10,633 2,348 6,187 44,262 31,625 12,638 1,170 23,525 6,326 1,149 11,175         Q3 168,308 73,766 47,470 13,492 5,411 7,392 59,819 47,933 11,886 796 25,930 6,784 1,212 11,910         Q4 186,327 89,094 57,667 16,146 8,014 7,268 55,343 43,105 12,238 1,744 31,660 7,259 1,227 13,770
2019         Dec. 95,346 54,219 26,902 16,870 7,893 2,554 21,296 16,270 5,025 1,753 15,294 2,404 382 7,197
2020         Dec. 93,329 54,842 26,655 16,508 8,077 3,602 19,227 15,006 4,221 831 15,405 2,623 400 7,413
Source: Federal Ministry of Finance and Bundesbank calculations. 1This total, unlike deducting child benefit and subsidies for supplementary private pension
that in Table X. 5, does not include the receipts from the equalisation of burdens plans. 4Final withholding tax on interest income and capital gains, non-assessed
levies, local business tax (less local business tax transfers to central and state govern- taxes on earnings. 5The allocation of revenue to central, state and local govern-
ment), real property taxes and other local government taxes, or the balance of un- ment, which is adjusted at more regular intervals, is regulated in Se ction 1 of the Rev-
transferred tax shares. 2Respective percentage share of central, state and local enue Adjustment Act. Respective percentage share of central, state and local govern-
government in revenue: wage tax and assessed income tax 42.5:42.5:15, corpor- ment in revenue for 2020: 43.0:52.9:4.1. The EU share is deducted from c entral
ation tax and non-assessed taxes on earnings 50:50:-, final withholding tax on inter- government’s share. 6Respective percentage share of central and state government
est income and capital gains, non-assessed taxes on earnings 44:44:12. 3After for 2020: 39.8:60.2. 7 For the breakdown, see Table X. 7. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
61  Monthly Report
February 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
7. Central, state and local government: individual taxes  
  
€ million
Central government taxes  1 State government taxes  1 Local government taxes
Tax on of which:
the acqui- Betting
Soli- Motor sition of Inherit- and Local Real
Energy darity Tobacco Insurance vehicle Electri- Alcohol land and ance lottery business property
Period tax surcharge tax tax tax city tax tax Other buildings tax tax Other Total tax  2 taxes
2014 39,758 15,047 14,612 12,046 8,501 6,638 2,060 3,143 9,339 5,452 1,673 1,091 57,728 43,763 12,691
2015 39,594 15,930 14,921 12,419 8,805 6,593 2,070 3,872 11,249 6,290 1,712 1,088 60,396 45,752 13,215
2016 40,091 16,855 14,186 12,763 8,952 6,569 2,070 2,955 12,408 7,006 1,809 1,119 65,319 50,103 13,6542017 41,022 17,953 14,399 13,269 8,948 6,944 2,094 − 4,695 13,139 6,114 1,837 1,115 68,522 52,899 13,9662018 40,882 18,927 14,339 13,779 9,047 6,858 2,133 2,622 14,083 6,813 1,894 1,122 71,817 55,904 14,2032019 40,683 19,646 14,257 14,136 9,372 6,689 2,118 2,648 15,789 6,987 1,975 1,099 71,661 55,527 14,439
2020 37,635 18,676 14,651 14,553 9,526 6,561 2,238 1,792 16,055 8,600 2,044 1,076 ... ... ...
2019         Q1 4,848 4,679 2,495 6,542 2,594 1,646 579 586 3,976 1,705 499 351 17,959 14,139 3,350
         Q2 9,937 5,257 3,588 2,543 2,491 1,659 485 665 3,667 1,660 513 247 19,163 14,869 3,881         Q3 10,519 4,624 3,667 2,770 2,251 1,639 515 668 3,923 1,824 474 264 17,118 12,659 4,019         Q4 15,379 5,086 4,507 2,281 2,035 1,745 538 730 4,223 1,798 488 237 17,422 13,861 3,190
2020         Q1 4,966 4,930 2,413 6,766 2,634 1,708 562 537 4,525 1,981 542 358 17,245 13,391 3,403
         Q2 8,117 4,235 3,772 2,606 2,426 1,585 455 328 3,566 2,154 425 181 12,971 8,842 3,895         Q3 9,985 4,365 3,978 2,817 2,366 1,499 506 414 3,730 2,262 509 283 14,690 10,242 4,095         Q4 14,566 5,145 4,487 2,365 2,101 1,768 715 513 4,234 2,203 567 254 ... ... ...
2019         Dec. 8,465 3,001 1,464 669 625 591 214 263 1,491 661 164 87 . . .
2020         Dec. 7,829 3,025 1,996 717 689 570 365 213 1,515 815 205 88 . . .
Sources: Federal Ministry of Finance, Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calcu-
lations. 1For the sum total, see Table X. 6. 2Including revenue from offshore wind   
farms.
 
 
8. German statutory pension insurance scheme: budgetary development and assets*
  
€ million
Revenue  1,2 Expenditure  1,2 Assets  1,4 
of which: of which:
Equity
Payments interests, Memo
from Pen- mort- item:central sioners’ gages Adminis-
Contri- govern- Pension health Deficit/ and other Real trative
Period Total butions  
3 ment Total payments insurance surplus Total Deposits  5 Securities loans  6 estate assets
2014 269,115 189,080 78,940 265,949 226,204 15,978 + 3,166 36,462 32,905 3,317 146 94 4,263
2015 276,129 194,486 80,464 277,717 236,634 16,705 − 1,588 35,556 32,795 2,506 167 88 4,228
2016 286,399 202,249 83,154 288,641 246,118 17,387 − 2,242 34,094 31,524 2,315 203 52 4,1472017 299,826 211,424 87,502 299,297 255,261 18,028 + 529 35,366 33,740 1,335 238 53 4,0322018 312,788 221,572 90,408 308,356 263,338 18,588 + 4,432 40,345 38,314 1,713 262 56 4,0082019 327,298 232,014 94,467 325,436 277,282 20,960 + 1,861 42,963 40,531 2,074 303 56 3,974
2020 
p 334,343 235,999 97,679 338,599 289,651 21,859 − 4,256 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
2018         Q1 74,368 51,726 22,489 75,482 64,885 4,569 − 1,114 34,219 32,775 1,146 240 58 4,029
         Q2 77,824 55,186 22,451 75,747 64,742 4,557 + 2,077 36,244 34,963 983 241 57 4,033         Q3 76,831 54,085 22,575 78,284 67,017 4,727 − 1,453 35,344 34,104 936 248 57 4,019         Q4 82,953 60,561 22,185 78,432 67,042 4,729 + 4,521 40,353 38,332 1,713 252 56 4,018
2019         Q1 77,984 54,393 23,426 78,630 67,328 5,087 − 646 39,432 37,637 1,474 263 57 4,001
         Q2 81,410 57,837 23,408 80,804 69,011 5,205 + 605 40,232 38,639 1,272 264 57 3,996         Q3 80,305 56,637 23,481 82,716 70,633 5,330 − 2,411 38,386 36,876 1,183 271 56 3,995         Q4 86,756 63,133 23,413 82,849 70,674 5,333 + 3,907 42,945 40,539 2,074 276 56 3,987
2020         Q1 80,578 55,999 24,436 82,622 70,829 5,346 − 2,045 40,840 38,636 1,848 300 56 3,966
         Q2 82,098 57,515 24,413 82,875 70,889 5,346 − 777 39,779 37,975 1,446 304 55 3,949         Q3 82,689 58,109 24,418 86,497 74,054 5,591 − 3,808 36,898 35,197 1,333 313 55 3,925         Q4 88,978 64,375 24,412 86,605 73,879 5,576 + 2,373 39,847 38,186 1,286 321 55 3,916
Sources: Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs and German pension insurance sequently. 2Including financial compensation payments. Excluding investment spend-
scheme. *Excluding the German pension insurance scheme for the mining, railway ing and proceeds. 3Including contributions for recipients of government cash bene-
and maritime industries. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of fits. 4Largely corresponds to the sustainability reserves. End of year or quarter. 5In-
the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- cluding cash. 6 Excluding loans to other social security funds. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
62  Monthly Report
February 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
9. Federal Employment Agency: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue Expenditure
Deficit-
of which: of which: offsetting
grant or
Adminis- loan from
Insolvency Central Unemploy- Short-time Re- Insolvency trative central
Contri- compen- government ment working Job integration benefit expend- Deficit/ govern-
Period Total  1 butions sation levy subscriptions Total benefit  2 benefits  3 promotion  4 payment  5 payment iture  6 surplus ment
2014 33,725 28,714 1,296 − 32,147 15,368 710 6,264 . 694 5,493 + 1,578 −
2015 35,159 29,941 1,333 − 31,439 14,846 771 6,295 . 654 5,597 + 3,720 −
2016 36,352 31,186 1,114 − 30,889 14,435 749 7,035 . 595 5,314 + 5,463 −2017 37,819 32,501 882 − 31,867 14,055 769 7,043 . 687 6,444 + 5,952 −2018 39,335 34,172 622 − 33,107 13,757 761 6,951 . 588 8,129 + 6,228 −2019 35,285 29,851 638 − 33,154 15,009 772 7,302 . 842 6,252 + 2,131 −
2020 33,740 28,236 630 − 61,013 20,617 22,719 7,384 . 1,214 6,076 − 27,273 −
2018         Q1 9,167 7,926 151 − 9,546 3,826 415 1,742 . 174 2,625 − 379 −
         Q2 9,713 8,523 152 − 8,471 3,431 245 1,752 . 161 2,209 + 1,243 −         Q3 9,515 8,355 152 − 7,288 3,296 50 1,623 . 114 1,514 + 2,227 −         Q4 10,940 9,367 167 − 7,802 3,204 51 1,834 . 139 1,781 + 3,138 −
2019         Q1 8,369 7,027 148 − 8,597 3,969 403 1,818 . 179 1,450 − 228 −
         Q2 8,685 7,440 156 − 8,136 3,673 204 1,832 . 243 1,475 + 549 −         Q3 8,650 7,263 162 − 7,829 3,682 68 1,711 . 190 1,510 + 821 −         Q4 9,581 8,121 172 − 8,592 3,685 98 1,941 . 230 1,816 + 989 −
2020         Q1 8,123 6,851 153 − 9,301 4,469 392 1,934 . 235 1,470 − 1,179 −
         Q2 7,906 6,691 151 − 17,005 4,869 7,977 1,793 . 254 1,407 − 9,099 −         Q3 8,350 6,934 153 − 18,619 5,737 8,637 1,701 . 472 1,414 − 10,269 −         Q4 9,361 7,760 174 − 16,088 5,543 5,712 1,957 . 251 1,785 − 6,727 −
Source: Federal Employment Agency. *Including transfers to the civil servants’ pen- encourage job take-up, rehabilitation, compensation top-up payments and promo-
sion fund. 1Excluding central government deficit-offsetting grant or loan. 2Un- tion of business start-ups. 5Until 2012. From 2005 to 2007: compensatory
employment benefit in case of unemployment. 3Including seasonal short-time amount. 6Including collection charges to other social security funds , excluding ad-
working benefits and restructuring short-time working benefits, restructuring mea- ministrative expenditure within the framework of the basic allowance for job seekers. 
sures and refunds of social security contributions. 4Vocational training, measures to
 
 
10. Statutory health insurance scheme: budgetary development
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which: of which:
Central Remedies Adminis-
govern- and trative
Contri- ment Hospital Pharma- Medical Dental therapeutic Sickness expend- Deficit/
Period Total butions  2 funds  3 Total treatment ceuticals treatment treatment  4 appliances benefits iture  5 surplus
2014 203,143 189,089 10,500 205,589 65,711 33,093 34,202 13,028 13,083 10,619 10,063 − 2,445
2015 210,147 195,774 11,500 213,727 67,979 34,576 35,712 13,488 13,674 11,227 10,482 − 3,580
2016 223,692 206,830 14,000 222,936 70,450 35,981 37,300 13,790 14,256 11,677 11,032 + 7572017 233,814 216,227 14,500 230,773 72,303 37,389 38,792 14,070 14,776 12,281 10,912 + 3,0412018 242,360 224,912 14,500 239,706 74,506 38,327 39,968 14,490 15,965 13,090 11,564 + 2,6542019 251,295 233,125 14,500 252,440 77,551 40,635 41,541 15,010 17,656 14,402 11,136 − 1,145
2018         Q1 57,788 53,670 3,625 59,854 19,028 9,569 10,045 3,656 3,763 3,370 2,614 − 2,067
         Q2 59,796 55,571 3,625 60,060 18,677 9,591 10,049 3,639 3,904 3,294 2,821 − 264         Q3 60,138 55,778 3,625 59,204 18,302 9,600 9,862 3,481 4,070 3,155 2,810 + 934         Q4 64,645 59,893 3,625 60,689 18,537 9,806 10,067 3,677 4,157 3,272 3,236 + 3,956
2019         Q1 59,809 55,622 3,625 62,485 19,586 9,947 10,386 3,738 4,106 3,649 2,707 − 2,676
         Q2 62,121 57,858 3,625 62,858 19,210 10,127 10,421 3,821 4,289 3,535 2,774 − 736         Q3 62,143 57,763 3,625 62,716 19,109 10,229 10,278 3,630 4,467 3,558 2,804 − 573         Q4 67,094 61,884 3,625 64,075 19,497 10,353 10,455 3,821 4,713 3,659 2,975 + 3,019
2020         Q1 61,949 57,419 3,625 66,438 20,049 11,086 10,806 3,804 4,470 4,061 2,816 − 4,489
         Q2 68,108 58,096 9,359 69,487 17,674 10,492 10,908 3,389 3,986 4,143 2,980 − 1,378         Q3 70,130 59,403 10,151 71,063 20,913 10,567 11,642 3,774 4,852 3,829 2,970 − 934
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. 1The final annual figures generally differ from ment. 3Federal grant and liquidity assistance. 4Including dentures. 5Net, i.e. after
the total of the reported provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised sub- deducting reimbursements for expenses for levying contrib utions incurred by other
sequently. Excluding revenue and expenditure as part of the risk structure compen- social security funds. sation scheme. 2Including contributions from subsidised low-paid part-time employ-

Deutsche Bundesbank
63  Monthly Report
February 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
11. Statutory long-term care insurance scheme: budgetary development*
  
€ million
Revenue  1 Expenditure  1 
of which:
Contributions to
of which: Non-cash Inpatient Nursing pension insur- Administrative Deficit/
Period Total Contributions  2 Total care benefits care benefit ance scheme  3 expenditure surplus
2014 25,974 25,893 25,457 3,570 10,263 5,893 946 1,216 + 517
2015 30,825 30,751 29,101 3,717 10,745 6,410 960 1,273 + 1,723
2016 32,171 32,100 30,936 3,846 10,918 6,673 983 1,422 + 1,2352017 36,305 36,248 38,862 4,609 13,014 10,010 1,611 1,606 − 2,5572018 37,949 37,886 41,265 4,778 12,957 10,809 2,093 1,586 − 3,3152019 47,228 46,508 44,008 4,990 13,043 11,689 2,392 1,781 + 3,220
2018         Q1 8,961 8,948 10,146 1,192 3,233 2,603 496 424 − 1,185
         Q2 9,338 9,322 10,118 1,160 3,217 2,658 509 389 − 780         Q3 9,349 9,334 10,428 1,202 3,251 2,781 515 397 − 1,079         Q4 10,071 10,050 10,581 1,229 3,251 2,835 561 384 − 510
2019         Q1 11,123 10,938 10,728 1,198 3,232 2,833 547 437 + 396
         Q2 11,795 11,620 10,812 1,205 3,237 2,868 588 449 + 983         Q3 11,734 11,557 11,159 1,288 3,277 2,972 598 450 + 576         Q4 12,592 12,413 11,252 1,288 3,296 3,064 626 433 + 1,339
2020         Q1 11,693 11,473 11,444 1,288 3,280 3,067 633 489 + 249
         Q2 11,921 11,732 11,816 1,266 3,281 3,173 664 468 + 105         Q3 13,924 11,938 12,890 1,382 3,285 3,249 682 500 + 1,033
Source: Federal Ministry of Health. *Including transfers to the long-term care provi- including special contributions for childless persons (0.25% of income subject to insur-
dent fund. 1The final annual figures generally differ from the total of the reported ance contributions). 3 For non-professional carers. 
provisional quarterly figures as the latter are not revised subsequently. 2Since 2005
 
 
12. Central government: borrowing in the 13. General government: debt by creditor*
 market
 
€ million € million
Banking system Domestic non-banks
Total new borrowing  1 of which:
Change Change Other do-
in money in money Period mestic fi- Othermarket market (end of year Bundes- Domestic nancial cor- domestic Foreign
Period Gross  
2 Net loans deposits  3 or quarter) Total bank MFIs  pe porations  pe creditors  1 creditors  pe 
2014 + 192,540 − 2,378 − 3,190 + 891 2014 2,213,569 12,774 632,927 190,130 44,640 1,333,098
2015 + 167,655 − 16,386 − 5,884 − 1,916 2015 2,188,404 85,952 621,415 186,661 48,583 1,245,794
2016 + 182,486 − 11,331 − 2,332 − 16,791 2016 2,171,646 205,391 598,526 179,755 45,046 1,142,9292017 + 171,906 + 4,531 + 11,823 + 2,897 2017 2,122,248 319,159 552,504 175,617 42,121 1,032,8472018 + 167,231 − 16,248 − 91 − 1,670 2018 2,073,595 364,731 508,821 181,077 42,009 976,9562019 + 185,070 + 63 − 8,044 − 914 2019  
p 2,057,166 366,562 476,020 177,601 49,707 987,276
2018         Q1 + 42,934 − 4,946 − 5,138 + 3,569 2018          Q1 2,100,279 329,387 529,897 176,495 42,221 1,022,280
         Q2 + 43,602 − 5,954 − 166 − 6,139          Q2 2,085,756 344,279 514,227 179,856 41,938 1,005,455         Q3 + 46,500 + 4,856 + 1,688 + 1,871          Q3 2,086,219 356,899 502,476 180,464 42,726 1,003,653         Q4 + 34,195 − 10,205 + 3,525 − 971          Q4 2,073,595 364,731 508,821 181,077 42,009 976,956
2019         Q1 + 56,654 + 3,281 − 2,172 − 1,199 2019          Q1  
p 2,083,861 359,884 498,724 179,512 42,186 1,003,554
         Q2 + 48,545 + 5,491 − 279 + 7,227          Q2  p 2,074,252 361,032 492,046 179,168 41,438 1,000,567
         Q3 + 48,053 + 4,030 + 176 − 5,093          Q3  p 2,091,213 358,813 489,832 179,228 47,831 1,015,509
         Q4 + 31,817 − 12,738 − 5,768 − 1,849          Q4  p 2,057,166 366,562 476,020 177,601 49,707 987,276
2020         Q1 + 65,656 + 31,296 + 9,236 + 1,698 2020          Q1  p 2,106,967 371,076 496,703 180,477 53,007 1,005,705
         Q2 + 185,560 + 126,585 + 31,212 − 7,314          Q2  p 2,275,956 424,141 561,892 181,288 52,631 1,056,004
         Q3 + 159,067 + 80,783 − 6,080 + 588          Q3  p 2,345,226 468,723 534,784 184,051 50,603 1,107,065
Source:  Federal  Republic  of  Germany − Finance Agency. Source:  Bundesbank  calculations  based  on  data   from  the  Feder al  Statistical 
1 Including  the  Financial  Market  Stabilisation Fund,  the  In- Office. * As defined in the Maastricht Treaty. 1 Calculated as a residual. 
vestment and  Repayment  Fund  and  the  Restructuring Fund for  Credit  Institutions.  2 After  deducting repurchases.  3 Ex- 
cluding the central account balance with the Deutsche Bundes- bank. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
64  Monthly Report
February 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item:  2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
General government
2014 2,213,569 12,150 72,618 1,501,494 95,896 531,412 . .
2015 2,188,404 14,303 65,676 1,499,010 89,074 520,341 . .2016 2,171,646 15,845 69,715 1,483,871 94,976 507,239 . .2017 2,122,248 14,651 48,789 1,484,462 86,513 487,832 . .
2018         Q1 2,100,279 12,472 48,431 1,479,513 76,260 483,604 . .
         Q2 2,085,756 12,636 54,933 1,465,727 73,256 479,204 . .         Q3 2,086,219 15,607 59,989 1,465,852 68,923 475,847 . .         Q4 2,073,595 14,833 52,572 1,456,543 75,999 473,648 . .
2019         Q1  
p 2,083,861 15,663 64,218 1,460,634 71,234 472,112 . .
         Q2  p 2,074,252 12,868 56,256 1,463,027 74,511 467,589 . .
         Q3  p 2,091,213 17,586 62,602 1,465,529 79,144 466,353 . .
         Q4  p 2,057,166 14,595 49,180 1,459,128 68,519 465,743 . .
2020         Q1  p 2,106,967 11,564 70,930 1,472,976 88,092 463,406 . .
         Q2  p 2,275,956 13,282 122,238 1,534,559 145,855 460,021 . .
         Q3  p 2,345,226 12,057 180,449 1,581,740 110,908 460,071 . .
Central government
2014 1,395,841 12,150 64,230 1,141,973 54,388 123,100 1,202 12,833
2015 1,371,573 14,303 49,512 1,138,951 45,256 123,550 1,062 13,5772016 1,365,248 15,845 55,208 1,123,853 50,004 120,337 556 8,4782017 1,349,683 14,651 36,297 1,131,896 47,761 119,078 1,131 10,603
2018         Q1 1,337,071 12,472 35,923 1,132,746 37,211 118,719 1,065 9,887
         Q2 1,328,657 12,636 42,888 1,119,893 35,048 118,192 1,036 10,693         Q3 1,334,898 15,607 46,614 1,118,470 36,633 117,575 817 10,260         Q4 1,322,526 14,833 42,246 1,107,140 42,057 116,250 933 9,959
2019         Q1  
p 1,323,993 15,663 50,032 1,102,604 39,185 116,508 809 11,566
         Q2  p 1,319,861 12,868 42,752 1,109,057 38,950 116,234 835 13,845
         Q3  p 1,327,584 17,586 48,934 1,105,439 39,067 116,558 704 13,833
         Q4  p 1,299,384 14,595 38,480 1,101,866 28,592 115,850 605 10,285
2020         Q1  p 1,327,045 11,564 56,680 1,103,935 38,708 116,157 546 8,229
         Q2  p 1,473,063 13,282 109,221 1,139,513 95,511 115,536 510 7,262
         Q3  p 1,535,879 12,057 166,564 1,178,717 62,993 115,548 555 12,092
State government
2014 658,164 − 8,391 361,916 19,245 268,612 14,825 2,297
2015 658,234 − 16,169 362,376 22,133 257,557 15,867 2,3482016 640,887 − 14,515 361,996 19,266 245,110 11,273 1,6942017 613,601 − 12,543 354,688 18,412 227,958 14,038 2,046
2018         Q1 604,075 − 12,548 349,682 17,372 224,473 12,997 1,882
         Q2 600,595 − 12,073 348,833 17,668 222,020 13,952 2,018         Q3 599,864 − 13,392 350,399 15,235 220,838 13,674 1,936         Q4 599,845 − 10,332 352,376 17,647 219,490 14,035 1,891
2019         Q1  
p 611,666 − 14,190 361,293 18,657 217,526 15,229 2,004
         Q2  p 609,890 − 13,508 357,571 24,068 214,743 17,631 1,887
         Q3  p 619,884 − 13,671 363,723 29,048 213,442 17,755 1,957
         Q4  p 609,431 − 10,703 361,084 25,049 212,595 14,934 1,831
2020         Q1  p 628,741 − 14,252 372,596 33,131 208,762 12,233 1,815
         Q2  p 650,402 − 13,020 398,890 32,826 205,665 11,073 2,183
         Q3  p 656,915 − 13,888 407,381 30,727 204,920 11,940 2,263
Local government
2014 176,120 − − 1,297 26,009 148,814 1,959 734
2015 176,259 − − 2,047 27,414 146,798 2,143 4632016 178,016 − − 2,404 26,941 148,671 1,819 4312017 175,220 − − 3,082 24,503 147,636 1,881 466
2018         Q1 173,997 − − 2,426 24,662 146,909 1,777 460
         Q2 172,519 − − 2,561 24,467 145,490 1,909 465         Q3 167,189 − 1 2,703 20,543 143,943 2,031 485         Q4 167,403 − 1 3,046 20,344 144,012 1,884 497
2019         Q1  
p 165,673 − 1 2,960 18,801 143,911 2,139 498
         Q2  p 164,257 − − 2,961 18,757 142,538 2,016 525
         Q3  p 163,691 − − 3,016 18,517 142,158 2,065 555
         Q4  p 165,057 − − 2,996 19,052 143,009 1,862 532
2020         Q1  p 165,094 − − 3,128 18,125 143,842 1,893 528
         Q2  p 165,331 − − 3,094 18,306 143,931 2,221 367
         Q3  p 166,593 − − 2,961 18,912 144,720 2,312 398
For footnotes see end of table. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
65  Monthly Report
February 2021
X. Public finances in Germany
 
14. Maastricht debt by instrument (cont’d)
  
€ million
Debt securities by original maturity Loans by original maturity Memo item: 2 
Period Short-term Long-term Debt vis-à-vis Claims vis-à-vis
(end of year Currency debt securities debt securities Short-term loans Long-term loans other government other governmentor quarter) Total and deposits  
1 (up to one year) (more than one year) (up to one year) (more than one year) subsectors subsectors
Social security funds
2014 1,430 − − − 387 1,043 − 2,122
2015 1,411 − − − 446 965 − 2,6852016 1,143 − − − 473 670 − 3,0442017 792 − − − 247 545 − 3,934
2018         Q1 975 − − − 424 551 − 3,610
         Q2 883 − − − 383 500 − 3,721         Q3 790 − − − 400 390 − 3,841         Q4 674 − − − 372 302 − 4,506
2019         Q1  
p 707 − − − 437 270 − 4,110
         Q2  p 726 − − − 541 185 − 4,224
         Q3  p 578 − − − 375 203 − 4,179
         Q4  p 695 − − − 359 336 − 4,753
2020         Q1  p 759 − − − 271 488 − 4,100
         Q2  p 964 − − − 565 399 − 3,993
         Q3  p 4,602 − − − 4,210 392 3,956 4,011
Source: Bundesbank calculations based on data from the Federal Statistical Office vis-à-vis other government subsectors also comprise securities holdings purchased on
and the Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency. 1Particularly liabilities result- the market. No entry for general government as debt and claims are consolidated
ing from coins in circulation. 2Besides direct loan relationships, claims and debt between different government subsectors. 
 
 
15. Maastricht debt of central government by instrument and category
  
€ million
Currency and deposits  2 Debt securities
of which:  3 of which:  3 
Inflation- Inflation- Capital
linked linked indexation Federal Treasury
Period Federal Federal Federal Federal Treasury discount Federal of inflation-
(end of year Federal bonds notes bonds notes linked notes paper savingsor quarter) Total  
1 Total 1 day bond Total  1 (Bunds) (Bobls) (Bunds)  4 (Bobls)  4 securities (Schätze)  5 (Bubills)  6 notes Loans  1 
2007 983,807 6,675 . 917,584 564,137 173,949 10,019 3,444 506 102,083 37,385 10,287 59,548
2008 1,015,846 12,466 3,174 928,754 571,913 164,514 12,017 7,522 1,336 105,684 40,795 9,649 74,6262009 1,082,101 9,981 2,495 1,013,072 577,798 166,471 16,982 7,748 1,369 113,637 104,409 9,471 59,048
2010 1,333,248 10,890 1,975 1,084,019 602,624 185,586 25,958 9,948 2,396 126,220 85,867 8,704 238,339
2011 1,343,276 10,429 2,154 1,121,331 615,200 199,284 29,313 14,927 3,961 130,648 58,297 8,208 211,5162012 1,387,104 9,742 1,725 1,177,168 631,425 217,586 35,350 16,769 5,374 117,719 56,222 6,818 200,1942013 1,389,791 10,592 1,397 1,192,025 643,200 234,759 41,105 10,613 4,730 110,029 50,004 4,488 187,1742014 1,395,841 12,150 1,187 1,206,203 653,823 244,633 48,692 14,553 5,368 103,445 27,951 2,375 177,488
2015 1,371,573 14,303 1,070 1,188,463 663,296 232,387 59,942 14,553 5,607 96,389 18,536 1,305 168,806
2016 1,365,248 15,845 1,010 1,179,062 670,245 221,551 51,879 14,585 3,602 95,727 23,609 737 170,3412017 1,349,683 14,651 966 1,168,193 693,687 203,899 58,365 14,490 4,720 91,013 10,037 289 166,8392018 1,322,526 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,3072019 
p 1,299,384 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,442
2018         Q1 1,337,071 12,472 951 1,168,669 699,638 193,811 60,778 14,455 4,421 94,282 9,031 219 155,930
         Q2 1,328,657 12,636 941 1,162,780 710,784 185,042 62,863 − 4,276 92,639 15,049 141 153,240         Q3 1,334,898 15,607 932 1,165,084 703,682 194,356 64,304 − 4,548 90,575 17,340 75 154,208         Q4 1,322,526 14,833 921 1,149,386 710,513 182,847 64,647 − 5,139 86,009 12,949 48 158,307
2019         Q1  
p 1,323,993 15,663 902 1,152,636 709,008 178,900 66,531 − 4,191 89,782 18,288 31 155,693
         Q2  p 1,319,861 12,868 852 1,151,809 720,904 173,313 68,110 − 5,691 91,024 15,042 19 155,184
         Q3  p 1,327,584 17,586 822 1,154,373 711,482 183,268 69,088 − 5,639 90,416 18,100 − 155,625
         Q4  p 1,299,384 14,595 − 1,140,346 719,747 174,719 69,805 − 6,021 89,230 13,487 . 144,442
2020         Q1  p 1,327,045 11,564 . 1,160,616 721,343 182,095 71,028 − 5,310 91,084 23,572 . 154,865
         Q2  p 1,473,063 13,282 . 1,248,734 774,587 178,329 56,061 − 3,752 95,622 79,987 . 211,047
         Q3  p 1,535,879 12,057 . 1,345,281 796,338 191,388 57,144 − 3,737 99,276 127,478 . 178,541
Sources: Federal Republic of Germany − Finance Agency, Federal Statistical Office, 2010. 2Particularly liabilities resulting from coins in circulation. 3Issuances by the
and Bundesbank calculations. 1Comprises all of central government, i.e. all Federal Republic of Germany. Excluding issuers’ holdings of own securities but in-
off-budget entities in addition to the core budget, including the government-owned cluding those held by other government entities. 4Excluding inflation-induced index-
bad bank FMS Wertmanagement and liabilities attributed to central government ation of capital. 5Including medium-term notes issued by the Treuhand agency
from an economic perspective under the European System of Accounts (ESA) (expired in 2011). 6 Including Federal Treasury financing papers (expired in 2014). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
66  Monthly Report
February 2021
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
1. Origin and use of domestic product, distribution of national income
    
  
  2019   2020
  2018   2019   2020   2018   2019   2020   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3
Item Index 2015 = 100 Annual percentage change
At constant prices, chained
  I. Origin of domestic product
Production sector(excluding construction) 109.3 105.4 95.1 0.7 − 3.6 − 9.7 − 1.9 − 5.1 − 2.9 − 4.3 − 5.9 − 21.2 − 10.3Construction 103.7 107.3 108.7 1.7 3.5 1.4 6.3 2.3 4.7 1.4 7.0 2.7 − 2.6Wholesale/retail trade, transportand storage, hotel and restaurantservices 107.5 109.7 102.8 2.3 2.1 − 6.3 2.2 1.1 3.4 1.7 − 0.2 − 14.5 − 3.4Information and communication 115.8 120.2 118.8 7.0 3.8 − 1.1 4.4 3.7 4.2 2.8 0.8 − 2.8 − 0.8Financial and insuranceactivities 97.1 99.1 98.6 − 3.6 2.0 − 0.5 0.3 2.4 3.6 1.9 0.9 − 0.5 − 1.0Real estate activities 100.8 101.8 101.2 0.3 1.0 − 0.5 0.7 0.7 1.2 1.5 0.8 − 1.3 − 0.7Business services  
1 109.8 110.8 102.0 2.4 0.9 − 7.9 1.6 0.3 1.0 0.7 − 1.7 − 13.5 − 8.4
Public services, education andhealth 105.7 107.4 105.1 1.4 1.6 − 2.2 1.8 1.3 1.9 1.5 0.0 − 8.3 − 0.1Other services 101.0 102.1 90.6 1.6 1.1 − 11.3 1.1 1.0 1.6 0.7 − 2.3 − 20.3 − 6.3
Gross value added 106.4 106.9 101.3 1.3 0.4 − 5.2 1.0 − 0.3 1.1 0.0 − 1.4 − 11.6 − 4.5Gross domestic product  
2 106.2 106.8 101.5 1.3 0.6 − 5.0 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 0.2 − 1.7 − 11.3 − 3.9
 II. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 105.6 107.2 100.8 1.5 1.6 − 6.0 1.3 1.7 2.2 1.0 − 1.4 − 13.0 − 3.7
Government consumption 107.0 109.9 113.7 1.2 2.7 3.4 2.3 1.7 3.6 3.2 2.9 4.8 4.3Machinery and equipment 112.1 112.7 98.6 4.4 0.5 − 12.5 2.8 1.1 1.7 − 2.7 − 9.2 − 23.6 − 9.8Premises 107.4 111.5 113.1 2.6 3.8 1.5 6.8 2.5 4.1 2.2 6.1 1.3 − 0.7Other investment  
4 114.2 117.3 116.0 4.5 2.7 − 1.1 2.9 2.5 2.9 2.6 − 1.1 − 1.4 − 0.7
Changes in inventories  5,6 . . . − 0.1 − 0.7 − 0.7 0.1 − 0.2 − 1.7 − 1.1 − 0.7 − 0.4 − 1.9
Domestic demand 107.7 109.0 104.5 1.8 1.2 − 4.1 2.3 1.6 0.9 0.2 − 0.9 − 8.3 − 3.9
Net exports  6 . . . − 0.4 − 0.6 − 1.1 − 1.1 − 1.7 0.4 0.0 − 0.9 − 3.5 − 0.2
Exports 109.8 110.8 99.9 2.3 1.0 − 9.9 1.7 − 1.3 2.7 0.8 − 3.2 − 22.4 − 9.1Imports 114.1 117.0 106.9 3.6 2.6 − 8.6 4.7 2.7 2.0 0.9 − 1.6 − 17.2 − 9.8
Gross domestic product  
2 106.2 106.8 101.5 1.3 0.6 − 5.0 1.0 − 0.3 1.2 0.2 − 1.7 − 11.3 − 3.9
At current prices ( € billion)
III. Use of domestic product
Private consumption  3 1,755.4 1,806.9 1,708.9 3.0 2.9 − 5.4 2.4 3.3 3.6 2.3 0.3 − 11.7 − 4.0
Government consumption 670.3 704.5 750.6 3.4 5.1 6.5 4.8 4.2 6.0 5.4 5.7 8.2 5.6Machinery and equipment 235.6 240.1 212.9 5.0 1.9 − 11.3 3.8 2.4 3.3 − 1.2 − 7.8 − 22.5 − 8.6Premises 344.9 373.7 385.7 7.4 8.4 3.2 12.3 7.4 8.3 6.0 9.6 4.1 − 0.2Other investment  
4 128.8 134.2 134.6 6.9 4.2 0.4 4.4 3.9 4.3 4.1 0.3 0.1 0.7
Changes in inventories  5 15.0 − 10.3 − 52.1 . . . . . . . . . .
Domestic use 3,150.0 3,249.1 3,140.6 3.9 3.1 − 3.3 4.2 3.8 2.7 2.0 1.1 − 7.6 − 3.8
Net exports 206.4 199.9 188.4 . . . . . . . . . .
Exports 1,590.0 1,617.4 1,451.5 3.3 1.7 − 10.3 3.1 − 0.4 3.0 1.2 − 2.9 − 22.7 − 9.9Imports 1,383.6 1,417.4 1,263.1 5.6 2.4 − 10.9 5.9 3.4 1.0 − 0.2 − 2.6 − 20.8 − 12.3
Gross domestic product  
2 3,356.4 3,449.1 3,329.0 3.0 2.8 − 3.5 3.0 1.9 3.6 2.5 0.7 − 9.2 − 3.1
IV. Prices (2015 = 100)
Private consumption 103.7 105.1 105.8 1.5 1.3 0.6 1.1 1.6 1.4 1.3 1.7 1.4 − 0.3Gross domestic product 104.4 106.7 108.4 1.7 2.2 1.6 1.9 2.2 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.3 0.8Terms of trade 100.1 100.9 103.1 − 0.8 0.9 2.1 0.3 0.2 1.4 1.5 1.4 4.2 1.9
 V. Distribution of national income
Compensation of employees 1,771.8 1,845.9 1,836.4 4.5 4.2 − 0.5 4.5 4.4 4.5 3.5 3.0 − 3.2 − 0.7Entrepreneurial and propertyincome 738.3 718.2 664.0 − 0.5 − 2.7 − 7.5 − 1.9 − 6.1 0.1 − 3.4 − 3.4 − 23.5 − 7.8
National income 2,510.1 2,564.1 2,500.4 3.0 2.2 − 2.5 2.4 1.4 3.1 1.7 1.0 − 8.6 − 2.8
Memo item: Gross national
income 3,447.4 3,542.8 3,427.2 3.3 2.8 − 3.3 3.1 2.2 3.5 2.3 0.8 − 8.8 − 3.1
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2020. Initial annual ing households. 4Intellectual property rights (inter alia, computer software and enter-
results for 2020: figures computed in January 2021. 1Professional, scientific, techni- tainment, literary or artistic originals) and cultivated assets. 5Including net increase
cal, administration and support service activities. 2Gross value added plus taxes on in valuables. 6 Contribution of growth to GDP. 
products (netted with subsidies on products). 3Including non-profit institutions serv-

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
67•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
2. Output in the production sector *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
Industry
of which: by main industrial grouping of which: by economic sector
Production
sector,
totalConstruc-
tion Energy TotalInter-
mediate
goods 
Capital
goods 
Durable
goodsNon-
durable
goodsManu-
facture of
basic metals
and
fabricated
metal
productsManu-
facture of
computers,
electronic
and optical
products
and electrical
equipmentMacinery
and
equipmentMotor
vehicels,
trailers
and semi-
trailers
2015 = 100
% of total  1   100      14,04      6,37      79,59      29,45      36,98 2.27      10,89      10,31      9,95      12,73      14,16
Period
2017 104.9 108.7 98.9 104.8 104.9 105.0 106.9 103.0 106.2 107.0 104.1 105.3
2018 2 105.8 2 108.9 97.4 105.9 105.5 106.0 106.1 106.9 107.3 109.0 106.5 103.5
2019 102.5 112.7 90.4 101.7 101.8 101.4 106.2 101.0 102.8 106.5 103.5 92.0
x,p 2020 93.8 115.6 84.0 90.7 94.8 85.3 97.8 96.4 90.4 98.5 89.2 69.0
2019 Q4 103.4 124.2 94.3 100.5 97.2 102.0 109.2 102.7 97.2 106.0 108.6 84.9
2020 Q1 96.4 100.2 94.0 95.9 101.1 90.5 101.5 99.0 98.0 103.5 91.3 79.1
Q2 84.1 115.7 72.7 79.5 85.6 70.9 84.9 91.2 78.7 89.1 81.4 44.1
r Q3 93.5 118.5 77.6 90.3 94.3 84.6 98.1 97.3 89.6 97.0 86.4 71.7
x,p Q4 101.1 128.0 91.6 97.1 98.4 95.3 106.8 97.9 95.5 104.4 97.8 81.2
2019 Dec. 96.6 124.4 95.9 91.8 83.3 97.7 97.2 93.6 82.2 98.2 116.6 66.8
2020 Jan. 92.2 86.0 99.3 92.7 98.6 86.1 98.7 97.6 95.0 99.8 83.3 79.6
Feb. 97.0 97.3 92.0 97.4 100.8 94.3 103.2 97.4 98.4 102.8 91.1 90.3
Mar. 99.9 117.3 90.6 97.6 103.9 91.0 102.7 102.1 100.5 107.9 99.5 67.4
Apr. 76.9 112.7 72.9 70.9 84.1 54.9 72.4 89.0 74.0 86.0 70.9 14.6
May 82.2 113.1 71.6 77.7 83.4 69.5 85.2 88.6 77.0 86.0 77.5 45.6
June 93.3 121.2 73.7 90.0 89.4 88.2 97.2 96.1 85.0 95.2 95.8 72.1
r July 93.1 119.4 72.2 90.1 93.0 85.7 93.2 96.6 86.2 94.4 86.2 76.0
r Aug. 88.3 114.3 80.4 84.3 91.3 75.5 91.9 93.3 86.0 94.0 78.9 57.3
r Sep. 99.0 121.9 80.1 96.5 98.5 92.6 109.1 101.9 96.7 102.6 94.1 81.8
x Oct. 101.7 125.7 92.1 98.3 103.0 92.8 108.6 101.9 99.3 103.7 90.0 85.2
x Nov. 106.0 131.2 91.6 102.7 104.5 101.2 114.7 100.6 103.1 111.1 98.7 92.2
x,p Dec. 95.6 127.1 91.0 90.4 87.6 92.0 97.0 91.3 84.1 98.4 104.6 66.1
Annual percentage change
2017 + 3.3 + 3.2 + 0.3 + 3.7 + 4.0 + 3.7 + 4.2 + 2.0 + 4.5 + 5.9 + 4.5 + 3.1
2018 2+ 0.9 2+ 0.2 – 1.5 + 1.0 + 0.6 + 1.0 – 0.7 + 3.8 + 1.0 + 1.9 + 2.3 – 1.7
2019 – 3.1 + 3.5 – 7.2 – 4.0 – 3.5 – 4.3 + 0.1 – 5.5 – 4.2 – 2.3 – 2.8 –11.1
x,p 2020 – 8.5 + 2.6 – 7.1 –10.8 – 6.9 –15.9 – 7.9 – 4.6 –12.1 – 7.5 –13.8 –25.0
2019 Q4 – 4.0 + 1.8 – 5.6 – 5.0 – 4.6 – 6.7 + 2.7 – 2.2 – 7.3 – 4.0 – 6.2 –13.0
2020 Q1 – 5.0 + 6.9 – 8.2 – 6.7 – 3.5 –10.8 – 6.2 – 1.4 – 7.9 – 3.7 – 9.2 –19.5
Q2 –18.1 + 1.7 –13.0 –22.3 –17.2 –30.6 –17.6 – 8.4 –25.0 –15.1 –20.7 –53.8
r Q3 – 8.7 – 0.4 – 4.4 –10.7 – 7.6 –15.5 – 5.9 – 3.8 –12.7 – 9.8 –15.3 –19.6
x,p Q4 – 2.3 + 3.1 – 2.9 – 3.3 + 1.2 – 6.5 – 2.2 – 4.7 – 1.8 – 1.5 –10.0 – 4.4
2019 Dec. – 5.2 + 0.5 – 7.0 – 6.2 – 6.4 – 7.7 + 2.6 – 2.2 – 9.1 – 5.5 – 6.8 –17.1
2020 Jan. – 1.3 +14.1 – 9.1 – 2.7 – 2.3 – 3.6 – 2.0 – 1.6 – 6.0 – 0.8 – 5.1 – 7.2
Feb. – 1.6 + 4.4 – 5.0 – 2.3 – 0.1 – 5.6 – 1.9 + 2.9 – 4.3 + 0.5 – 6.6 – 9.2
Mar. –11.1 + 4.1 –10.4 –13.8 – 7.6 –20.9 –13.6 – 5.0 –12.8 – 9.8 –14.4 –38.5
Apr. –24.5 ± 0.0 –17.3 –29.7 –18.9 –44.5 –28.2 –10.7 –29.5 –16.3 –28.6 –84.3
May –19.2 + 1.6 –15.1 –23.4 –19.1 –30.8 –16.1 –11.3 –25.7 –17.0 –22.0 –52.7
June –10.9 + 3.3 – 6.0 –14.0 –13.6 –17.6 – 8.9 – 3.2 –19.9 –12.1 –12.4 –25.9
r July –10.0 – 2.1 –11.3 –11.7 –10.3 –15.1 – 6.4 – 4.9 –17.4 –10.5 –16.2 –16.6
r Aug. – 8.7 + 0.4 + 0.1 –11.3 – 7.2 –17.2 – 4.1 – 5.4 –11.5 – 8.8 –16.1 –25.4
r Sep. – 7.3 + 0.4 – 2.0 – 9.1 – 5.2 –14.4 – 7.0 – 1.1 – 9.2 – 9.9 –13.7 –17.8
x Oct. – 3.1 + 3.2 + 0.3 – 4.6 – 1.8 – 6.8 – 4.7 – 4.9 – 5.0 – 4.5 –10.4 – 5.2
x Nov. – 2.5 + 3.8 – 3.8 – 3.7 + 1.2 – 6.8 – 1.4 – 6.3 – 1.8 ± 0.0 – 9.2 – 5.8
x,p Dec. – 1.0 + 2.2 – 5.1 – 1.5 + 5.2 – 5.8 – 0.2 – 2.5 + 2.3 + 0.2 –10.3 – 1.0
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * For explanatory notes, see
Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tabels III.1.a to III.1.c  o Using
JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Share of gross value added at factor cost of the production
sector in the base year 2015.  2 As of January 2018 weights in structural and civilengineering work corrected by the Federal Statistical Office.  x Provisional; estimated
and adjusted in advance by the Federal Statistical Office to the results of the Quarterly
Production Survey and the Quarterly Survey in the specialised construction industry,
respectively.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
68•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
3. Orders received by industry *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
of which:
of which:
Industry Intermediate goods Capital goods Consumer goods Durable goods Non-durable goods
Period 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change 2015 = 100Annual
percentage
change
Total
2017 108.6 + 7.8 109.4 +10.6 108.5 + 6.5 105.8 + 5.2 116.5 +10.6 102.2 + 3.2
2018 110.5 + 1.7 111.5 + 1.9 109.9 + 1.3 110.0 + 4.0 118.9 + 2.1 107.1 + 4.8
2019 104.9 – 5.1 103.5 – 7.2 105.4 – 4.1 107.0 – 2.7 123.3 + 3.7 101.7 – 5.0
p 2020 97.1 – 7.4 98.0 – 5.3 95.4 – 9.5 106.1 – 0.8 126.6 + 2.7 99.4 – 2.3
2019 Dec. 102.2 – 8.4 92.6 – 4.3 109.2 –11.1 93.7 – 2.3 120.5 +10.0 84.9 – 7.0
2020 Jan. 107.4 – 0.6 110.1 – 1.2 105.4 – 0.5 110.5 + 2.4 131.9 +11.3 103.5 – 0.9
Feb. 104.9 + 2.2 105.6 + 0.9 103.1 + 2.2 114.9 + 7.6 125.5 + 9.6 111.4 + 6.8
Mar. 98.7 –15.6 108.6 – 4.8 90.5 –23.8 114.3 – 0.8 125.5 – 2.3 110.7 – 0.2
Apr. 65.7 –37.0 77.6 –26.2 54.8 –47.1 93.0 –11.9 92.7 –19.4 93.1 – 9.2
May 71.4 –29.7 77.0 –25.2 64.8 –35.4 96.4 – 7.2 115.2 + 1.9 90.2 –10.5
June 96.8 –10.8 87.0 –17.4 102.4 – 7.7 100.5 – 4.6 120.1 – 0.8 94.1 – 6.1
July 96.0 – 7.2 94.2 – 8.4 96.0 – 6.7 104.4 – 5.6 120.5 – 1.0 99.1 – 7.3
Aug. 91.2 – 2.0 90.2 – 6.0 90.2 + 0.3 104.0 + 0.3 124.2 + 2.6 97.3 – 0.8
Sep. 103.8 – 1.5 101.3 + 1.2 104.4 – 3.7 111.1 + 2.5 146.3 + 4.6 99.5 + 1.4
Oct. 108.1 + 1.8 108.2 + 4.0 107.7 + 0.8 110.9 – 0.6 145.9 +13.8 99.4 – 6.3
Nov. 113.0 + 6.4 114.2 +10.7 112.6 + 4.9 110.6 – 0.9 139.5 + 1.0 101.1 – 1.7
p Dec. 108.2 + 5.9 101.6 + 9.7 113.0 + 3.5 103.0 + 9.9 131.6 + 9.2 93.6 +10.2
From the domestic market
2017 107.0 + 7.2 107.1 + 9.7 107.8 + 5.9 101.7 + 3.8 108.6 + 5.3 99.3 + 3.1
2018 107.1 + 0.1 108.5 + 1.3 106.6 – 1.1 102.9 + 1.2 114.7 + 5.6 98.9 – 0.4
2019 101.2 – 5.5 99.1 – 8.7 102.9 – 3.5 101.2 – 1.7 116.2 + 1.3 96.2 – 2.7
p 2020 94.9 – 6.2 94.1 – 5.0 94.9 – 7.8 98.9 – 2.3 109.5 – 5.8 95.4 – 0.8
2019 Dec. 93.6 – 7.7 84.1 – 8.1 102.3 – 8.2 89.2 – 1.9 107.3 + 8.4 83.1 – 5.7
2020 Jan. 100.6 – 6.6 104.1 – 3.4 97.4 –10.4 102.2 + 2.0 111.0 + 3.3 99.2 + 1.5
Feb. 101.9 – 2.8 99.8 – 2.8 103.0 – 3.1 105.9 – 1.0 110.5 + 0.2 104.4 – 1.4
Mar. 96.8 –13.8 102.8 – 5.9 89.7 –22.3 110.2 + 2.2 107.9 –15.2 111.0 + 9.7
Apr. 67.7 –32.4 74.6 –25.4 59.5 –40.9 83.4 –13.3 74.0 –31.9 86.6 – 5.9
May 74.9 –24.6 75.1 –24.7 72.3 –27.2 91.6 – 5.0 109.8 + 3.6 85.5 – 8.2
June 104.9 + 4.2 82.0 –17.3 126.0 +22.7 94.8 – 1.5 110.9 + 5.0 89.4 – 3.9
July 94.6 – 7.6 92.8 – 7.8 95.8 – 7.5 97.5 – 6.1 103.9 – 9.3 95.3 – 4.9
Aug. 88.1 – 3.2 88.4 – 3.0 86.1 – 4.2 99.9 + 2.4 112.0 + 3.7 95.8 + 1.8
Sep. 98.9 – 1.4 95.0 – 0.2 101.8 – 2.3 101.5 – 2.0 126.2 – 4.0 93.1 – 1.1
Oct. 103.5 + 4.4 105.8 + 7.4 101.5 + 3.0 104.3 – 2.5 120.6 – 8.6 98.8 + 0.2
Nov. 109.0 + 6.0 113.7 +12.9 105.5 + 1.9 105.0 – 4.2 124.6 – 8.2 98.4 – 2.4
p Dec. 97.3 + 4.0 94.8 +12.7 100.5 – 1.8 90.7 + 1.7 102.5 – 4.5 86.7 + 4.3
From abroad
2017 109.8 + 8.2 111.9 +11.6 108.9 + 6.9 108.9 + 6.1 122.8 +14.8 104.5 + 3.4
2018 113.0 + 2.9 114.6 + 2.4 111.9 + 2.8 115.5 + 6.1 122.2 – 0.5 113.3 + 8.4
2019 107.7 – 4.7 108.3 – 5.5 106.9 – 4.5 111.5 – 3.5 129.1 + 5.6 105.9 – 6.5
p 2020 98.8 – 8.3 102.2 – 5.6 95.7 –10.5 111.7 + 0.2 140.3 + 8.7 102.5 – 3.2
2019 Dec. 108.7 – 9.0 101.8 – 0.8 113.3 –12.6 97.1 – 2.6 131.1 +11.2 86.2 – 8.1
2020 Jan. 112.6 + 4.1 116.5 + 1.0 110.3 + 5.9 117.0 + 2.8 148.8 +16.9 106.8 – 2.5
Feb. 107.1 + 6.0 111.8 + 4.7 103.1 + 5.6 121.8 +14.3 137.6 +16.8 116.7 +13.3
Mar. 100.1 –16.9 114.9 – 3.7 91.0 –24.7 117.5 – 2.9 139.6 + 8.0 110.4 – 6.7
Apr. 64.1 –40.4 80.8 –27.0 51.9 –50.7 100.4 –11.1 107.7 –10.3 98.0 –11.4
May 68.8 –33.3 79.0 –25.6 60.3 –40.2 100.1 – 8.8 119.6 + 0.7 93.8 –12.1
June 90.6 –20.8 92.5 –17.3 88.1 –23.9 104.9 – 6.8 127.5 – 4.5 97.7 – 7.7
July 97.0 – 6.9 95.7 – 8.9 96.1 – 6.2 109.8 – 5.3 133.9 + 5.0 102.0 – 9.0
Aug. 93.6 – 1.2 92.1 – 9.1 92.7 + 3.1 107.1 – 1.3 134.1 + 1.9 98.4 – 2.7
Sep. 107.5 – 1.6 108.1 + 2.7 105.9 – 4.5 118.5 + 5.7 162.4 +10.9 104.4 + 3.3
Oct. 111.6 + 0.1 110.7 + 0.6 111.5 – 0.3 116.0 + 0.8 166.2 +32.9 99.8 –10.7
Nov. 116.1 + 6.7 114.8 + 8.3 116.8 + 6.6 115.0 + 1.7 151.5 + 8.1 103.2 – 1.2
p Dec. 116.5 + 7.2 109.0 + 7.1 120.5 + 6.4 112.6 +16.0 155.1 +18.3 98.9 +14.7
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; for ex-
planatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics, Tables
III.2.a to III.2.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
69•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
4. Orders received by construction *
Adjusted for working-day variations o
Breakdown by type of construction Breakdown by client  1
Structural engineering
Total TotalResidential
constructionIndustrial
constructionPublic sector
constructionCivil
engineering 
Industrial clientsPublic
sector  2
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2016 114.4 +14.5 115.0 +15.1 116.9 +17.0 114.9 +15.0 108.9 +9.1 113.7 +13.8 111.7 +11.8 116.0 +16.1
2017 122.4 +7.0 123.1 +7.0 123.0 +5.2 123.4 +7.4 121.8 +11.8 121.6 +6.9 119.8 +7.3 125.0 +7.8
2018 134.7 +10.0 131.2 +6.6 136.6 +11.1 127.9 +3.6 125.2 +2.8 138.8 +14.1 135.6 +13.2 132.4 +5.9
2019 146.0 +8.4 145.0 +10.5 150.1 +9.9 142.2 +11.2 138.9 +10.9 147.1 +6.0 147.9 +9.1 141.3 +6.7
2019 Nov. 145.4 +13.1 154.8 +23.2 149.7 +7.3 166.8 +42.3 127.1 +13.6 134.5 +1.9 167.9 +22.6 117.1 +4.1
Dec. 148.2 –1.3 148.9 +2.2 178.2 +7.0 131.1 –3.0 119.1 +2.4 147.3 –5.2 154.3 –5.7 122.9 –1.3
2020 Jan. 129.3 +10.2 134.0 +10.9 137.5 +11.1 134.0 +8.3 122.8 +23.0 123.9 +9.3 140.8 +11.2 111.3 +8.3
Feb. 134.5 +1.2 143.0 +10.5 148.3 +24.6 141.0 +4.9 133.1 –8.3 124.6 –9.1 139.3 +5.2 120.5 –15.1
Mar. 158.8 –7.5 154.0 –6.0 169.6 –0.4 141.1 –10.9 150.6 –7.6 164.4 –9.1 155.2 –6.6 156.4 –12.5
Apr. 149.6 –2.3 134.0 –10.1 131.6 –12.1 137.2 –9.5 130.1 –5.0 167.6 +6.1 140.3 –3.6 171.1 +4.4
May 138.9 –6.0 124.1 –14.2 146.7 –0.1 103.2 –30.7 127.9 +5.0 156.2 +3.2 121.6 –18.0 154.2 +4.3
June 167.7 +3.5 153.1 –5.3 165.0 +4.2 139.5 –14.9 164.8 +0.7 184.7 +13.5 144.4 –12.9 196.1 +22.4
July 148.9 –3.2 151.6 +2.5 157.9 +2.1 136.8 –3.6 186.0 +25.7 145.8 –9.3 136.5 –10.4 157.7 +1.7
Aug. 136.9 +1.6 135.6 ±0.0 159.6 +14.6 114.4 –12.9 135.4 –2.7 138.4 +3.6 130.4 –5.0 130.5 +1.2
Sep. 151.4 +2.4 156.8 +7.0 173.4 +10.5 140.8 +7.9 162.2 –6.2 145.2 –2.8 146.0 +1.7 144.4 –2.2
Oct. 142.3 +4.0 150.6 +9.6 181.5 +17.2 126.8 +2.1 137.9 +6.4 132.5 –2.7 141.3 +4.6 119.5 –6.6
Nov. 139.5 –4.1 146.9 –5.1 167.7 +12.0 132.1 –20.8 133.4 +5.0 131.0 –2.6 143.7 –14.4 117.6 +0.4
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * At current prices; exclu-
ding value added tax; for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series – Seasonally adjustedbusiness statistics, Table III.2.f.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Excluding residential
construction.  2 Including road construction.
5. Retail trade turnover *
Adjusted for calendar variations o
of which:
In stores by enterprises main product range
Total 
Food, beverages,
tobacco  1Textiles,
clothing,
foodwear and
leather goodsInformation
and
communications
equipmentConstruction
and flooring
materials,
household
appliances,
furnitureRetail sale of
pharmaceutical
and medical
goods, cosmetic
and toilet
articlesRetail sale via
mail order houses
or via internet
as well as
other retail sale  2
At current
prices At 2015 prices At current prices
Zeit 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change 2015 = 100Annual
percent-
age
change
2017 107.6 +5.0 105.8 +3.6 105.9 +4.1 108.1 +7.0 106.2 +6.3 103.0 +1.5 107.7 +3.7 120.5 +10.0
2018 110.7 +2.9 107.5 +1.6 109.6 +3.5 105.6 –2.3 107.1 +0.8 103.1 +0.1 112.5 +4.5 127.7 +6.0
2019 114.9 +3.8 111.0 +3.3 112.1 +2.3 106.7 +1.0 108.9 +1.7 107.1 +3.9 118.7 +5.5 138.4 +8.4
3 2020 120.8 +5.1 115.3 +3.9 121.1 +8.0 81.8 –23.3 105.5 –3.1 116.4 +8.7 122.9 +3.5 167.9 +21.3
2019 Dec. 133.2 +3.3 128.3 +2.4 128.0 +1.2 119.0 –2.8 159.1 +1.1 113.3 +3.3 133.4 +7.1 172.0 +11.7
3 2020 Jan. 108.1 +3.6 104.3 +2.5 104.0 +1.7 88.3 –2.4 114.9 +3.3 96.5 +4.9 121.3 +6.4 138.4 +5.4
Feb. 106.0 +3.9 101.6 +2.5 108.7 +7.2 80.7 –6.7 98.0 +3.9 97.1 +3.3 115.5 +4.1 126.9 +4.3
Mar. 118.3 +2.0 113.1 +0.6 130.7 +14.7 49.4 –53.9 84.9 –20.2 107.1 –6.6 136.6 +15.6 154.5 +15.5
Apr. 110.8 –4.2 105.4 –5.3 125.2 +10.4 29.0 –74.7 56.0 –39.5 100.5 –12.7 113.6 –2.8 173.9 +28.5
May 123.3 +8.7 117.4 +7.8 127.6 +14.1 78.2 –23.7 95.2 +2.4 127.1 +15.8 112.5 –3.2 169.5 +32.8
June 121.2 +5.3 115.9 +4.4 119.4 +3.3 96.3 –16.2 102.7 +4.5 121.8 +14.3 118.3 +2.6 163.2 +23.9
July 122.9 +6.4 117.5 +5.1 119.3 +4.6 98.2 –5.6 108.6 +14.3 125.1 +15.4 121.8 +0.9 156.9 +14.4
Aug. 120.3 +8.3 115.0 +6.9 121.1 +9.2 90.7 –8.1 103.2 +0.9 116.8 +15.5 117.9 +2.6 155.8 +25.3
Sep. 119.1 +6.2 113.4 +5.0 114.0 +7.0 100.5 –8.7 103.4 –6.7 117.5 +13.5 121.3 +2.8 159.0 +14.2
Oct. 128.6 +9.7 122.2 +8.5 122.4 +8.5 109.5 –6.1 119.6 +8.2 129.0 +16.2 128.0 +4.9 180.2 +27.3
Nov. 135.8 +9.9 129.5 +9.0 123.3 +7.3 91.2 –21.3 151.5 +13.8 140.5 +21.1 131.9 +6.1 223.1 +35.5
Dec. 134.9 +1.3 128.6 +0.2 136.9 +7.0 69.9 –41.3 128.4 –19.3 117.5 +3.7 135.5 +1.6 212.9 +23.8
Source of the unadjusted figures: Federal Statistical Office.  * Excluding value added tax;
for explanatory notes, see Statistical Series - Seasonally adjusted business statistics,
Table III.4.c.  o Using JDemetra+ 2.2.2 (X13).  1 Including stalls and markets.  2 Excludingstores, stalls and markets.  3 As of January 2020 figures are provisional, partially revised,
and particularly uncertain in recent months due to estimates for missing reports.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
70•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
6. Labour market *
Employment  1 Employment subject to social contributions  2 Short-time workers  3 Unemployment  4
Total of which: of which: of which:
Produc-
tion 
sectorServices 
excluding 
temporary 
employ-
mentTemporary 
employ-
mentSolely
jobs
exempt
from
social
contri-
butions  2TotalCyclically
induced TotalAssigned
to the
legal
category
of the
Third Book
of the
Social
Security
Code
(SGB III)
PeriodThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
changeThou-
sandsAnnual
percentage
change ThousandsUnem-
ploy-
ment
rate 
in %  4,5Vacan-
cies, 
thou-
sands  4,6
2016 43,661 +1.2 31,508 +2.2 9,028 21,407 834 4,804 128 42 2,691 822 6.1 655
2017 44,262 +1.4 32,234 +2.3 9,146 21,980 868 4,742 114 24 2,533 7 855 5.7 731
2018 44,868 +1.4 32,964 +2.3 9,349 22,532 840 4,671 118 25 2,340 802 5.2 796
2019 45,268 +0.9 33,518 +1.7 9,479 23,043 751 4,579 145 60 82,267 827 8 5.0 774
2020 944,782 9 –1.1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,695 1,137 5.9 613
2017 Q4 44,699 +1.4 32,759 +2.3 9,263 22,354 900 4,711 82 15 2,381 780 5.3 771
2018 Q1 44,398 +1.5 32,563 +2.4 9,214 22,279 843 4,664 325 24 2,525 909 5.7 760
Q2 44,790 +1.4 32,802 +2.3 9,296 22,414 843 4,701 23 14 2,325 760 5.1 794
Q3 45,028 +1.3 33,040 +2.2 9,387 22,546 855 4,694 35 27 2,311 784 5.1 828
Q4 45,257 +1.2 33,452 +2.1 9,498 22,890 819 4,627 88 35 2,200 755 4.9 804
2019 Q1 44,920 +1.2 33,214 +2.0 9,419 22,803 761 4,581 303 34 2,360 892 5.2 780
Q2 45,240 +1.0 33,388 +1.8 9,455 22,932 750 4,615 51 43 82,227 778 8 4.9 795
Q3 45,376 +0.8 33,548 +1.5 9,491 23,049 753 4,598 66 58 2,276 827 5.0 794
Q4 45,538 +0.6 33,924 +1.4 9,551 23,388 738 4,522 161 105 2,204 811 4.8 729
2020 Q1 r45,066 r +0.3 33,642 +1.3 9,439 23,284 686 4,458 1,219 949 2,385 960 5.2 683
Q2 r44,625 r –1.4 33,415 +0.1 9,387 23,137 640 4,235 5,399 5,388 2,770 1,154 10 6.0 593
Q3 r44,646 r –1.6 1133,420 11–0.4 119,358 1123,169 11 639 114,267 ... 11 2,689 2,904 1,266 6.3 583
Q4 944,791 9 –1.6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,722 1,167 5.9 595
2017 Sep. 44,621 +1.3 32,732 +2.3 9,272 22,304 901 4,711 28 16 2,449 800 5.5 773
Oct. 44,693 +1.3 32,778 +2.3 9,274 22,355 901 4,696 27 16 2,389 772 5.4 780
Nov. 44,763 +1.4 32,830 +2.4 9,278 22,395 916 4,720 26 16 2,368 772 5.3 772
Dec. 44,640 +1.4 32,609 +2.4 9,202 22,319 867 4,722 194 12 2,385 796 5.3 761
2018 Jan. 44,345 +1.6 32,504 +2.5 9,191 22,249 841 4,660 287 23 2,570 941 5.8 736
Feb. 44,376 +1.5 32,551 +2.4 9,223 22,262 838 4,642 359 23 2,546 927 5.7 764
Mar. 44,472 +1.4 32,660 +2.3 9,253 22,334 837 4,656 327 27 2,458 859 5.5 778
Apr. 44,646 +1.4 32,782 +2.4 9,291 22,404 840 4,686 23 13 2,384 796 5.3 784
May 44,826 +1.5 32,857 +2.3 9,310 22,450 845 4,718 21 12 2,315 751 5.1 793
June 44,898 +1.3 32,870 +2.2 9,325 22,439 853 4,742 25 16 2,276 735 5.0 805
July 44,930 +1.3 32,844 +2.2 9,339 22,396 860 4,736 22 14 2,325 788 5.1 823
Aug. 44,981 +1.3 33,131 +2.3 9,412 22,609 856 4,664 41 33 2,351 804 5.2 828
Sep. 45,173 +1.2 33,422 +2.1 9,496 22,827 842 4,619 42 34 2,256 759 5.0 834
Oct. 45,262 +1.3 33,488 +2.2 9,515 22,895 827 4,616 46 37 2,204 742 4.9 824
Nov. 45,325 +1.3 33,513 +2.1 9,513 22,934 822 4,638 51 43 2,186 745 4.8 807
Dec. 45,184 +1.2 33,286 +2.1 9,434 22,854 773 4,637 166 26 2,210 777 4.9 781
2019 Jan. 44,866 +1.2 33,156 +2.0 9,405 22,762 763 4,574 354 42 2,406 919 5.3 758
Feb. 44,908 +1.2 33,199 +2.0 9,416 22,794 758 4,564 310 29 2,373 908 5.3 784
Mar. 44,985 +1.2 33,286 +1.9 9,442 22,855 749 4,574 246 32 2,301 850 5.1 797
Apr. 45,146 +1.1 33,383 +1.8 9,457 22,925 753 4,607 49 40 2,229 795 4.9 796
May 45,269 +1.0 33,433 +1.8 9,462 22,968 749 4,627 53 45 82,236 772 8 4.9 792
June 45,304 +0.9 33,407 +1.6 9,455 22,948 750 4,646 51 43 2,216 766 4.9 798
July 45,315 +0.9 33,360 +1.6 9,450 22,901 757 4,644 55 47 2,275 825 5.0 799
Aug. 45,305 +0.7 33,610 +1.4 9,505 23,101 750 4,568 60 51 2,319 848 5.1 795
Sep. 45,509 +0.7 33,938 +1.5 9,583 23,341 754 4,517 84 75 2,234 808 4.9 787
Oct. 45,578 +0.7 33,966 +1.4 9,567 23,398 748 4,510 111 102 2,204 795 4.8 764
Nov. 45,601 +0.6 33,968 +1.4 9,559 23,423 742 4,532 124 115 2,180 800 4.8 736
Dec. 45,434 +0.6 33,740 +1.4 9,474 23,344 694 4,531 247 97 2,227 838 4.9 687
2020 Jan. r45,096 r +0.5 33,608 +1.4 9,432 23,255 689 4,471 382 133 2,426 985 5.3 668
Feb. r45,104 r +0.4 33,624 +1.3 9,427 23,278 683 4,461 439 134 2,396 971 5.3 690
Mar. r44,999 r ±0.0 33,648 +1.1 9,440 23,290 675 4,350 2,834 2,580 2,335 925 5.1 691
Apr. r44,722 r –0.9 33,430 +0.1 9,396 23,141 643 4,194 6,007 5,995 2,644 1,093 5.8 626
May r44,574 r –1.5 33,328 –0.3 9,367 23,083 624 4,206 5,726 5,715 2,813 1,172 10 6.1 584
June r44,578 r –1.6 33,323 –0.3 9,355 23,084 629 4,260 4,464 4,452 2,853 1,197 6.2 570
July r44,575 r –1.6 33,233 –0.4 9,322 23,024 635 4,302 3,319 3,306 2,910 1,258 6.3 573
Aug. r44,576 r –1.6 1133,474 11–0.4 119,365 1123,215 11 641 114,255 ... 11 2,535 2,955 1,302 6.4 584
Sep. r44,786 r –1.6 1133,784 11–0.5 119,420 1123,451 11 655 114,228 ... 11 2,227 2,847 1,238 6.2 591
Oct. r44,861 r –1.6 1133,858 11–0.3 119,409 1123,529 11 669 114,215 ... 11 2,059 2,760 1,183 6.0 602
Nov. r44,835 r –1.7 1133,893 11–0.2 119,399 1123,556 11 694 114,157 ... 11 2,259 2,699 1,152 5.9 601
Dec. 944,678 9 –1.7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,707 1,166 5.9 581
2021 Jan. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,901 1,298 6.3 566
Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Federal Employment Agency.  * Annual and quarterly
figures: averages; calculated by the Bundesbank; deviations from the official figures are
due to rounding.  1 Workplace concept; averages.  2 Monthly figures: end of month.
3 Number within a given month.  4 Mid-month level.  5 Relative to the total civilian
labour force.  6 Excluding government-assisted forms of employment and seasonal jobs,
including jobs located abroad.  7 From January 2017 persons receiving additional
income assistance (unemployment benefit and unemployment benefit II at the same
time) shall be assigned to the legal category of the Third Book of the Social SecurityCode (SGB III).  8 Statistical break due to late recording of unemployed persons in the
legal category of the Second Book of the Social Security Code (SGB II).  9 Initial pre-
liminary estimate by the Federal Statistical Office.  10 From May 2020, calculated on the
basis of new labour force figures.  11 Unadjusted figures estimated by the Federal Em-
ployment Agency. In 2018 and 2019, the estimated values for Germany deviated from
the final data by a maximum of 0.1% for employees subject to social contributions, by
a maximum of 0.7% for persons solely in jobs exempt from social contributions, and by
a maximum of 55.3% for cyclically induced short-time work.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
71•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
7. Prices
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices
of which:  1Indices of
foreign trade pricesHWWI
Index of World Market
Prices of Raw Materials  7
of which:
Total  2 Food  3Non-
energy
industrial
goods  4Energy
4,5Services
2,4Actual
rents
for
housingMemo item:
Consumer
price index
(national
concept)Con-
struction
price
indexIndex of
producer
prices of
industrial
products
sold on
the
domestic
market  6Index of
producer
prices of
agri-
cultural
products  6Exports Imports Energy  8Other raw
materials  9
Period 2015 = 100
Index level
2017 102.1 104.0 102.2 97.5 102.5 102.9 102.0 105.3 101.1 108.6 100.7 100.1 99.6 107.1
2018 104.0 106.7 103.0 102.3 104.2 104.6 103.8 110.2 103.7 109.0 101.9 102.7 124.6 106.2
2019 105.5 108.4 104.2 103.7 105.7 106.1 105.3 115.3 104.8 111.5 102.4 101.7 110.0 108.1
2020 10 105.8 10110.9 10104.1 1099.0 10106.9 10 107.6 10 105.8 10117.0 103.8 11107.8 101.7 97.3 73.4 111.6
2019 Mar. 104.4 107.7 103.9 102.4 104.1 105.7 104.2 104.9 113.0 102.4 102.5 115.2 108.3
Apr. 105.4 107.9 104.6 104.4 105.3 105.8 105.2 105.4 115.5 102.6 102.8 119.2 108.8
May 105.7 108.3 104.6 106.1 105.3 105.9 105.4 115.0 105.3 115.7 102.5 102.7 116.6 106.6
June 106.0 108.4 104.1 104.9 106.6 106.1 105.7 104.9 115.1 102.3 101.3 102.8 108.6
July 106.4 108.7 103.3 104.7 107.9 106.2 106.2 105.0 114.3 102.4 101.1 105.7 113.0
Aug. 106.3 108.8 103.4 103.8 107.8 106.3 106.0 115.8 104.5 112.5 102.3 100.5 100.2 106.0
Sep. 106.2 108.8 104.7 103.8 106.9 106.4 106.0 104.6 109.9 102.4 101.1 105.9 107.5
Oct. 106.3 108.6 105.0 103.8 106.9 106.6 106.1 104.4 110.3 102.4 101.0 105.7 107.1
Nov. 105.4 109.0 105.2 103.7 104.9 106.7 105.3 116.4 104.4 112.1 102.4 101.5 110.5 106.9
Dec. 106.0 109.2 105.1 103.6 106.1 106.8 105.8 104.5 114.5 102.5 101.7 112.5 110.4
2020 Jan. 105.1 110.1 104.0 104.9 104.3 107.0 105.2 105.3 11113.3 102.7 101.3 107.4 112.2
Feb. 105.7 111.2 104.3 103.9 105.2 107.1 105.6 117.8 104.9 114.2 102.6 100.4 94.3 108.7
Mar. 105.8 111.0 105.2 101.6 105.5 107.3 105.7 104.1 113.8 101.9 96.9 61.3 104.9
Apr. 106.2 112.2 105.4 98.6 106.7 107.4 106.1 103.4 112.5 101.5 95.2 49.7 101.0
May 106.2 112.5 105.4 97.4 106.7 107.5 106.0 118.3 103.0 109.2 101.3 95.5 55.5 102.1
June 106.9 112.7 104.8 98.7 108.1 107.6 106.6 103.0 110.0 101.3 96.1 65.2 105.1
July 10 106.4 10110.2 10102.5 1098.0 10109.4 10 107.7 10 106.1 103.2 107.5 101.3 96.4 68.3 107.5
Aug. 10 106.2 10110.1 10102.6 1097.6 10109.0 10 107.8 10 106.0 10115.7 103.2 104.8 101.2 96.5 71.2 111.7
Sep. 10 105.8 10109.9 10103.6 1096.9 10108.0 10 107.8 10 105.8 103.6 103.3 101.3 96.8 70.4 117.9
Oct. 10 105.8 10110.2 10103.9 1097.0 10107.6 10 108.0 10 105.9 103.7 103.8 101.4 97.1 73.4 118.9
Nov. 10 104.7 10110.3 10104.0 1096.0 10105.5 10 108.1 10 105.0 10116.0 103.9 103.8 101.8 97.6 77.8 120.4
Dec. 10 105.3 10109.9 10103.4 1097.4 10106.9 10 108.2 10 105.5 104.7 104.1 101.9 98.2 86.6 128.9
2021 Jan. 106.8 112.3 105.1 102.6 106.9 108.4 106.3 ... ... ... ... 99.1 140.0
Annual percentage change
2017 +1.7 +2.7 +1.2 +3.1 +1.4 +1.7 +1.5 +3.3 +2.7 +10.0 +1.7 +3.5 +19.7 +8.8
2018 +1.9 +2.6 +0.8 +4.9 +1.6 +1.6 +1.8 +4.7 +2.6 +0.4 +1.2 +2.6 +25.1 –0.8
2019 +1.4 +1.6 +1.1 +1.4 +1.5 +1.5 +1.4 +4.7 +1.1 +2.3 +0.5 –1.0 –11.7 +1.8
2020 10 +0.4 10+2.3 10–0.1 10–4.5 10+1.2 10+1.4 10 +0.5 10+1.4 –1.0 11–3.3 –0.7 –4.3 –33.3 +3.2
2019 Mar. +1.4 +1.2 +0.8 +4.6 +1.2 +1.5 +1.3 +2.4 +6.8 +1.3 +1.7 +5.2 +3.2
Apr. +2.1 +1.0 +1.3 +4.9 +2.4 +1.4 +2.0 +2.5 +9.4 +1.3 +1.4 +2.1 +2.5
May +1.3 +1.3 +1.4 +4.1 +0.7 +1.4 +1.4 +5.1 +1.9 +10.8 +0.7 –0.2 –10.2 –5.2
June +1.5 +1.4 +1.3 +2.4 +1.6 +1.5 +1.6 +1.2 +10.0 +0.2 –2.0 –21.2 –2.4
July +1.1 +2.0 +1.6 +2.3 +0.5 +1.4 +1.7 +1.1 +6.7 +0.2 –2.1 –18.6 +6.8
Aug. +1.0 +2.3 +1.1 +0.7 +0.7 +1.4 +1.4 +4.3 +0.3 +1.8 –0.1 –2.7 –23.2 +0.3
Sep. +0.9 +1.6 +0.9 –1.2 +1.2 +1.4 +1.2 –0.1 –1.5 ±0.0 –2.5 –24.8 +4.7
Oct. +0.9 +1.4 +0.9 –2.2 +1.3 +1.5 +1.1 –0.6 –1.0 –0.2 –3.5 –27.0 +1.5
Nov. +1.2 +1.9 +1.1 –4.0 +2.4 +1.5 +1.1 +3.9 –0.7 +0.4 –0.1 –2.1 –10.7 +1.6
Dec. +1.5 +2.1 +1.3 +0.1 +2.0 +1.5 +1.5 –0.2 +2.6 +0.4 –0.7 +1.0 +7.0
2020 Jan. +1.6 +2.5 +1.1 +3.3 +1.4 +1.5 +1.7 +0.2 11+1.6 +0.5 –0.9 –4.4 +7.5
Feb. +1.7 +3.1 +0.9 +2.2 +1.5 +1.4 +1.7 +3.3 –0.1 +1.9 +0.3 –2.0 –17.5 –0.6
Mar. +1.3 +3.1 +1.3 –0.8 +1.3 +1.5 +1.4 –0.8 +0.7 –0.5 –5.5 –46.8 –3.1
Apr. +0.8 +4.0 +0.8 –5.6 +1.3 +1.5 +0.9 –1.9 –2.6 –1.1 –7.4 –58.3 –7.2
May +0.5 +3.9 +0.8 –8.2 +1.3 +1.5 +0.6 +2.9 –2.2 –5.6 –1.2 –7.0 –52.4 –4.2
June +0.8 +4.0 +0.7 –5.9 +1.4 +1.4 +0.9 –1.8 –4.4 –1.0 –5.1 –36.6 –3.2
July 10 ±0.0 10+1.4 10–0.8 10–6.4 10+1.4 10+1.4 10 –0.1 –1.7 –5.9 –1.1 –4.6 –35.4 –4.9
Aug. 10 –0.1 10+1.2 10–0.8 10–6.0 10+1.1 10+1.4 10 ±0.0 10–0.1 –1.2 –6.8 –1.1 –4.0 –28.9 +5.4
Sep. 10 –0.4 10+1.0 10–1.1 10–6.6 10+1.0 10+1.3 10 –0.2 –1.0 –6.0 –1.1 –4.3 –33.5 +9.7
Oct. 10 –0.5 10+1.5 10–1.0 10–6.6 10+0.7 10+1.3 10 –0.2 –0.7 –5.9 –1.0 –3.9 –30.6 +11.0
Nov. 10 –0.7 10+1.2 10–1.1 10–7.4 10+0.6 10+1.3 10 –0.3 10–0.3 –0.5 –7.4 –0.6 –3.8 –29.6 +12.6
Dec. 10 –0.7 10+0.6 10–1.6 10–6.0 10+0.8 10+1.3 10 –0.3 +0.2 –9.1 –0.6 –3.4 –23.0 +16.8
2021 Jan. +1.6 +2.0 +1.1 –2.2 +2.5 +1.3 +1.0 ... ... ... ... –7.7 +24.8
Sources: Eurostat; Federal Statistical Office and Bundesbank calculation based on data
from the Federal Statistical Office; for the Index of World Market Prices of Raw Materi-
als: HWWI.  1 Deviations from the official figures are due to rounding.  2 With effect
from 2015, methodological changes to the collection of data on the prices of package
holidays, impacting until the beginning of the series.  3 Including alcoholic beverages
and tobacco.  4 Modified procedure as of 2017 due to calculations on the basis of thefive digit structure set out in the European Classification of Individual Consumption ac-
cording to Purpose (ECOICOP).  5 Electricity, gas and other fuels as well as transport fu-
els and lubricants, from January 2017 excluding lubricants.  6 Excluding value added tax.
7 For the euro area, in euro.  8 Coal, crude oil (Brent) and natural gas.  9 Food, bever-
ages and tobacco as well as industrial raw materials.  10 Influenced by a temporary re-
duction of value added tax.  11 From January 2020 onwards provisional figures.

Deutsche Bundesbank
72  Monthly Report
February 2021
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
  
8. Households’ income *
    
  
Gross wages and Net wages and Monetary social Saving
salaries  1 salaries  2 Mass income  4 Saving  6 ratio 7 benefits received  3 Disposable income  5 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- percent- Asage age age age age age percent-
Period change change change change change change age
€ billion € billion € billion € billion € billion € billion
2012 1,150.0 4.2 776.1 4.0 376.8 1.5 1,152.9 3.2 1,668.4 2.5 161.0 − 1.3 9.7
2013 1,186.3 3.2 799.4 3.0 383.9 1.9 1,183.2 2.6 1,690.8 1.3 157.1 − 2.5 9.32014 1,234.2 4.0 830.5 3.9 394.0 2.6 1,224.5 3.5 1,734.5 2.6 170.6 8.6 9.8
2015 1,285.5 4.2 863.3 4.0 410.5 4.2 1,273.8 4.0 1,782.3 2.8 179.4 5.1 10.1
2016 1,337.4 4.0 896.3 3.8 426.2 3.8 1,322.5 3.8 1,841.5 3.3 187.8 4.7 10.22017 1,394.1 4.2 931.6 3.9 440.9 3.4 1,372.5 3.8 1,905.9 3.5 201.9 7.5 10.62018 1,461.3 4.8 975.2 4.7 452.8 2.7 1,428.0 4.0 1,970.8 3.4 215.4 6.7 10.92019 1,521.6 4.1 1,020.3 4.6 470.8 4.0 1,491.1 4.4 2,027.1 2.9 220.3 2.2 10.9
2019         Q2 371.6 4.4 243.7 4.9 116.4 4.1 360.2 4.7 500.3 3.1 51.0 1.3 10.2
         Q3 378.1 4.5 259.1 5.1 118.9 4.4 378.0 4.9 506.1 3.5 46.6 2.1 9.2         Q4 416.6 3.3 278.4 3.6 117.8 4.3 396.2 3.8 512.5 2.4 49.7 2.6 9.7
2020         Q1 365.7 2.9 246.1 3.0 123.9 5.2 370.0 3.7 521.9 2.7 85.5 17.0 16.4
         Q2 355.4 − 4.3 234.6 − 3.8 128.0 10.0 362.6 0.7 496.1 − 0.8 99.5 95.2 20.1         Q3 372.9 − 1.4 257.9 − 0.5 131.2 10.3 389.1 2.9 509.7 0.7 68.8 47.7 13.5
Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in November 2020. *Households salaries plus monetary social benefits received. 5Mass income plus operating surplus,
including non-profit institutions serving households. 1Residence concept. 2After mixed income, property income (net), other current transfers received, income of
deducting the wage tax payable on gross wages and salaries and employees’ non-profit institutions serving households, less taxes (excluding wage ta x and
contributions to the social security funds. 3Social security benefits in cash from the consumption-related taxes) and other current transfers paid. Including the increase in
social security funds, central, state and local government and foreign countries, claims on company pension funds. 6Including the increase in claims on company pen-
pension payments (net), private funded social benefits, less social contributions on sion funds. 7 Saving as a percentage of disposable income. 
social benefits, consumption-related taxes and public charges. 4Net wages and
  
  
  
9. Negotiated pay rates (overall economy)
    
  
Index of negotiated wages  1 
On a monthly basis
Memo item:
Total excluding Wages and salaries
On an hourly basis Total one-off payments Basic pay rates  2 per employee  3 
Annual Annual Annual Annual Annual
Period percentage percentage percentage percentage percentage
2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change 2015 = 100 change
2012 92.5 2.6 92.7 2.5 92.7 2.8 92.7 2.8 92.4 2.9
2013 94.8 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 95.0 2.5 94.4 2.22014 97.7 3.1 97.8 2.9 97.7 2.8 97.7 2.8 97.2 2.9
2015 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.3 100.0 2.4 100.0 2.9
2016 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.1 2.1 102.2 2.2 102.5 2.52017 104.2 2.1 104.2 2.0 104.3 2.1 104.5 2.3 105.1 2.52018 107.1 2.8 107.1 2.8 107.0 2.7 107.3 2.7 108.4 3.22019 110.2 2.9 110.2 2.9 109.7 2.5 110.0 2.5 111.6 2.9
2020 112.6 2.2 112.5 2.1 111.9 2.0 112.2 2.0 . .
2019         Q3 114.1 4.3 114.1 4.2 112.4 2.6 110.5 2.4 110.9 3.4
         Q4 121.8 2.4 121.8 2.3 121.8 2.3 110.7 2.3 121.3 2.4
2020         Q1 104.2 2.4 104.2 2.3 104.2 2.4 111.6 2.4 107.5 2.3
         Q2 104.9 1.9 104.9 1.9 105.0 2.1 112.1 2.1 105.5 − 3.4         Q3 116.2 1.8 116.1 1.8 114.4 1.8 112.4 1.8 110.5 − 0.4         Q4 125.0 2.6 124.9 2.6 123.9 1.7 112.6 1.7 . .
2020         June 104.7 1.5 104.6 1.4 104.7 2.1 112.2 2.1 . .
         July 138.5 1.9 138.4 1.9 133.3 1.8 112.4 1.9 . .
         Aug. 105.1 1.8 105.1 1.8 105.0 1.7 112.4 1.8 . .         Sep. 104.9 1.7 104.9 1.7 105.0 1.7 112.5 1.7 . .
         Oct. 105.1 1.7 105.0 1.7 105.1 1.7 112.5 1.7 . .
         Nov. 160.4 2.1 160.4 2.1 159.7 1.8 112.6 1.7 . .         Dec. 109.4 4.1 109.4 4.1 106.9 1.7 112.6 1.7 . .
1Current data are normally revised on account of additional reports. 2Excluding and retirement provisions). 3Source: Federal Statistical Office; figures computed in
one-off payments and covenants (capital formation benefits, special payments, such November 2020. as annual bonuses, holiday pay, Christmas bonuses (13th monthly salary payment)

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
73•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
10. Assets, equity and liabilities of listed non-financial groups *
End of year/half
Assets Equity and liabilities
of which: of which: Liabilities
Long-term Short-term
of which:
PeriodTotal
assetsNon-
current
assetsIntangible
assetsTangible
assetsFinancial
assetsCurrent
assetsInven-
toriesTrade
receiv-
ables Cash  1 Equity Total Totalof which:
Financial
debt TotalFinancial
debtTrade
payables
Total (€ billion)
2016 2,364.3 1,476.7 492.3 595.8 288.9 887.5 226.8 217.4 149.0 670.7 1,693.6 888.6 482.0 805.0 249.0 192.8
2017 2,396.3 1,488.2 498.6 602.8 295.9 908.0 230.6 225.1 156.2 757.2 1,639.1 866.4 495.7 772.7 236.1 195.6
3 2018 2,589.6 1,537.1 540.8 611.1 288.5 1,052.5 249.5 234.9 172.6 790.3 1,799.3 925.8 558.7 873.5 257.5 205.1
2019 2,801.3 1,770.1 586.3 737.5 333.4 1,031.2 257.6 237.8 168.5 821.5 1,979.8 1,091.3 676.3 888.5 289.8 207.7
2018 H2 2,589.6 1,537.1 540.8 611.1 288.5 1,052.5 249.5 234.9 172.6 790.3 1,799.3 925.8 558.7 873.5 257.5 205.1
2019 H1 2,702.6 1,657.9 549.7 682.9 314.5 1,044.7 269.2 240.5 140.5 777.5 1,925.1 1,024.3 613.9 900.8 301.7 210.8
H2 2,801.3 1,770.1 586.3 737.5 333.4 1,031.2 257.6 237.8 168.5 821.5 1,979.8 1,091.3 676.3 888.5 289.8 207.7
p 2020 H1 2,892.2 1,801.3 625.0 734.3 319.7 1,090.9 257.6 216.6 220.8 794.2 2,097.9 1,183.9 754.2 914.0 335.6 179.8
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 62.5 20.8 25.2 12.2 37.5 9.6 9.2 6.3 28.4 71.6 37.6 20.4 34.1 10.5 8.2
2017 100.0 62.1 20.8 25.2 12.4 37.9 9.6 9.4 6.5 31.6 68.4 36.2 20.7 32.3 9.9 8.2
3 2018 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
2019 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
2018 H2 100.0 59.4 20.9 23.6 11.1 40.6 9.6 9.1 6.7 30.5 69.5 35.8 21.6 33.7 9.9 7.9
2019 H1 100.0 61.4 20.3 25.3 11.6 38.7 10.0 8.9 5.2 28.8 71.2 37.9 22.7 33.3 11.2 7.8
H2 100.0 63.2 20.9 26.3 11.9 36.8 9.2 8.5 6.0 29.3 70.7 39.0 24.1 31.7 10.3 7.4
p 2020 H1 100.0 62.3 21.6 25.4 11.1 37.7 8.9 7.5 7.6 27.5 72.5 40.9 26.1 31.6 11.6 6.2
Groups with a focus on the production sector (€ billion) 2
2016 1,956.8 1,182.2 347.2 482.0 271.6 774.7 212.9 175.0 117.1 535.3 1,421.5 732.7 383.2 688.8 225.1 142.2
2017 1,989.4 1,190.8 351.5 484.0 281.8 798.6 215.8 181.4 128.6 609.9 1,379.5 719.1 397.8 660.3 218.4 150.1
3 2018 2,149.9 1,215.7 388.2 473.3 277.5 934.2 234.6 188.7 139.3 637.2 1,512.7 760.3 442.4 752.4 236.2 152.6
2019 2,303.6 1,396.8 419.6 565.7 319.7 906.8 243.8 188.7 136.9 662.7 1,640.9 887.5 523.8 753.4 257.5 158.1
2018 H2 2,149.9 1,215.7 388.2 473.3 277.5 934.2 234.6 188.7 139.3 637.2 1,512.7 760.3 442.4 752.4 236.2 152.6
2019 H1 2,229.7 1,297.6 388.9 517.9 302.7 932.0 255.6 194.2 115.8 629.6 1,600.0 831.4 473.9 768.6 265.8 164.3
H2 2,303.6 1,396.8 419.6 565.7 319.7 906.8 243.8 188.7 136.9 662.7 1,640.9 887.5 523.8 753.4 257.5 158.1
p 2020 H1 2,305.5 1,352.3 406.4 547.5 303.4 953.3 244.0 171.8 171.4 615.2 1,690.4 912.2 548.5 778.2 294.6 137.1
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 60.4 17.7 24.6 13.9 39.6 10.9 8.9 6.0 27.4 72.6 37.4 19.6 35.2 11.5 7.3
2017 100.0 59.9 17.7 24.3 14.2 40.1 10.9 9.1 6.5 30.7 69.3 36.2 20.0 33.2 11.0 7.5
3 2018 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
2018 H2 100.0 56.6 18.1 22.0 12.9 43.5 10.9 8.8 6.5 29.6 70.4 35.4 20.6 35.0 11.0 7.1
2019 H1 100.0 58.2 17.4 23.2 13.6 41.8 11.5 8.7 5.2 28.2 71.8 37.3 21.3 34.5 11.9 7.4
H2 100.0 60.6 18.2 24.6 13.9 39.4 10.6 8.2 5.9 28.8 71.2 38.5 22.7 32.7 11.2 6.9
p 2020 H1 100.0 58.7 17.6 23.8 13.2 41.4 10.6 7.5 7.4 26.7 73.3 39.6 23.8 33.8 12.8 6.0
Groups with a focus on the services sector (€ billion)  
2016 407.4 294.6 145.1 113.8 17.3 112.8 13.9 42.4 31.9 135.4 272.1 155.9 98.8 116.1 24.0 50.5
2017 406.9 297.4 147.1 118.8 14.1 109.5 14.8 43.6 27.6 147.2 259.6 147.3 97.9 112.4 17.6 45.5
3 2018 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
2018 H2 439.7 321.3 152.7 137.9 11.0 118.3 14.9 46.1 33.3 153.1 286.6 165.5 116.3 121.1 21.3 52.5
2019 H1 472.9 360.3 160.8 165.1 11.8 112.6 13.7 46.3 24.7 147.9 325.0 192.8 140.0 132.2 35.9 46.5
H2 497.7 373.3 166.7 171.8 13.7 124.4 13.7 49.1 31.6 158.8 338.9 203.8 152.6 135.1 32.3 49.6
p 2020 H1 586.6 449.0 218.7 186.8 16.3 137.6 13.7 44.9 49.4 179.1 407.6 271.7 205.7 135.9 40.9 42.6
As a percentage of total assets
2016 100.0 72.3 35.6 27.9 4.3 27.7 3.4 10.4 7.8 33.2 66.8 38.3 24.3 28.5 5.9 12.4
2017 100.0 73.1 36.2 29.2 3.5 26.9 3.7 10.7 6.8 36.2 63.8 36.2 24.1 27.6 4.3 11.2
3 2018 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
2018 H2 100.0 73.1 34.7 31.4 2.5 26.9 3.4 10.5 7.6 34.8 65.2 37.6 26.5 27.6 4.8 11.9
2019 H1 100.0 76.2 34.0 34.9 2.5 23.8 2.9 9.8 5.2 31.3 68.7 40.8 29.6 28.0 7.6 9.8
H2 100.0 75.0 33.5 34.5 2.8 25.0 2.8 9.9 6.4 31.9 68.1 41.0 30.7 27.2 6.5 10.0
p 2020 H1 100.0 76.5 37.3 31.9 2.8 23.5 2.3 7.7 8.4 30.5 69.5 46.3 35.1 23.2 7.0 7.3
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Including cash equivalents.  2 Includ-
ing groups in agriculture and forestry.  3 From H1 2018 or 2018 onwards: significant
changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous periods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
74•
XI. Economic conditions in Germany
11. Revenues and operating income of listed non-financial groups *
Operating income before depreciation and amorti-
sation (EBITDA  1 ) as a percentage of revenues Operating income (EBIT) as a percentage of revenues
Distribution  2 Distribution  2
RevenuesOperating income
before depreciation
and amortisation
(EBITDA  1 )Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartileOperating
income (EBIT)Weighted
averageFirst
quartile MedianThird
quartile
Period € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4€ billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % % € billion  3Annual
per-
centage
change  4%Annual
change in
per-
centage
points  4% % %
Total
2012 1,532.5 6.6 188.7 3.2 12.3 – 0.4 5.4 10.2 17.4 95.6 – 7.7 6.2 – 0.9 2.0 6.1 10.9
2013 1,540.6 – 0.6 187.0 – 2.8 12.1 – 0.3 5.2 10.3 18.4 99.4 5.5 6.5 0.4 1.9 5.9 11.0
2014 1,565.1 1.0 198.7 4.9 12.7 0.5 5.9 10.3 17.4 109.2 8.5 7.0 0.5 1.9 6.1 11.1
2015 1,634.6 6.9 196.0 – 1.1 12.0 – 1.0 6.1 10.6 17.8 91.5 – 16.4 5.6 – 1.5 1.7 6.6 11.3
2016 1,625.0 – 0.4 214.5 7.9 13.2 1.0 6.7 11.4 17.9 111.8 9.1 6.9 0.5 2.6 6.7 12.0
2017 1,720.2 5.1 243.5 14.6 14.2 1.2 6.8 11.0 18.0 142.0 33.3 8.3 1.8 2.5 6.8 12.0
6 2018 1,707.6 0.7 232.8 – 0.9 13.6 – 0.2 6.1 10.6 17.7 129.2 – 6.3 7.6 – 0.6 2.1 6.5 11.9
2019 1,765.5 2.6 233.7 0.4 13.2 – 0.3 6.9 12.2 19.1 105.5 – 17.9 6.0 – 1.5 1.5 5.8 11.7
2015 H2 830.9 5.1 93.4 – 7.6 11.2 – 1.5 6.3 11.5 18.1 32.6 – 36.7 3.9 – 2.6 2.3 7.1 11.7
2016 H1 782.3 – 1.9 111.6 6.2 14.3 1.1 5.9 10.4 17.7 65.5 2.7 8.4 0.3 1.6 6.4 11.3
H2 842.8 1.1 102.9 9.8 12.2 1.0 6.9 11.9 19.0 46.3 20.9 5.5 0.8 3.0 7.5 12.5
2017 H1 844.4 6.8 125.7 14.6 14.9 1.0 5.7 10.1 17.2 78.5 29.6 9.3 1.6 1.8 5.8 11.6
H2 879.0 3.5 117.5 14.6 13.4 1.3 6.9 12.0 19.1 63.0 38.2 7.2 1.8 3.0 7.4 12.4
6 2018 H1 848.6 – 0.1 120.8 – 2.2 14.2 – 0.3 5.1 10.5 18.0 72.7 – 5.3 8.6 – 0.5 1.7 6.3 12.4
H2 869.8 1.4 114.5 0.5 13.2 – 0.1 6.3 11.1 17.7 58.0 – 7.7 6.7 – 0.6 2.1 6.7 12.2
2019 H1 861.7 2.7 112.4 – 4.0 13.0 – 0.9 6.5 11.6 18.5 53.4 – 23.3 6.2 – 2.1 1.5 5.7 11.7
H2 904.2 2.4 121.3 4.8 13.4 0.3 6.5 11.8 19.9 52.1 – 11.3 5.8 – 0.9 0.8 6.1 12.4
p 2020 H1 744.9 – 14.4 78.3 – 34.5 10.5 – 3.0 4.8 9.9 16.6 7.9 – 88.8 1.1 – 5.4 – 2.2 3.5 8.9
Groups with a focus on the production sector 5
2012 1,193.3 7.8 144.5 5.3 12.1 – 0.3 5.8 10.3 16.5 84.7 2.3 7.1 – 0.4 1.9 6.2 10.0
2013 1,199.6 – 0.8 142.6 – 2.6 11.9 – 0.2 5.1 10.3 16.0 77.5 – 5.8 6.5 – 0.3 1.6 5.9 10.5
2014 1,220.9 1.0 152.2 5.9 12.5 0.6 5.7 10.0 15.5 85.2 9.7 7.0 0.6 1.6 6.0 10.5
2015 1,310.5 7.0 149.1 – 2.6 11.4 – 1.1 6.3 10.5 16.3 69.1 – 19.7 5.3 – 1.7 2.1 6.6 10.4
2016 1,296.6 – 0.8 162.1 6.4 12.5 0.8 6.6 10.7 16.2 84.9 4.3 6.6 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.7
2017 1,396.8 5.5 187.6 16.6 13.4 1.3 6.8 11.0 15.8 112.6 40.5 8.1 2.0 3.2 6.7 10.5
6 2018 1,368.5 1.0 175.8 – 1.6 12.8 – 0.3 6.8 10.6 15.8 100.7 – 7.1 7.4 – 0.6 2.7 6.8 11.3
2019 1,411.8 2.0 168.2 – 4.4 11.9 – 0.8 6.6 11.3 16.6 76.3 – 23.7 5.4 – 1.8 1.2 5.7 10.1
2015 H2 661.1 5.3 66.6 – 13.1 10.1 – 2.1 5.3 11.2 15.9 18.6 – 52.4 2.8 – 3.3 1.8 7.0 10.7
2016 H1 625.5 – 2.3 86.6 1.8 13.8 0.5 6.7 10.6 15.9 52.7 – 6.4 8.4 – 0.3 2.9 6.4 10.1
H2 671.2 0.7 75.5 12.0 11.3 1.1 6.2 11.3 16.6 32.2 34.3 4.8 0.9 2.6 6.6 10.7
2017 H1 695.6 7.3 101.6 18.7 14.6 1.4 6.1 10.2 16.1 66.4 37.3 9.5 2.1 2.4 5.9 11.0
H2 701.8 3.7 86.0 14.2 12.3 1.1 6.9 11.7 16.9 46.2 45.5 6.6 1.9 3.4 7.2 10.8
6 2018 H1 682.3 – 0.1 95.0 – 3.4 13.9 – 0.5 6.5 10.8 16.7 60.0 – 6.0 8.8 – 0.6 2.9 6.6 11.5
H2 695.8 2.0 83.2 0.6 12.0 – 0.2 6.2 11.1 16.1 42.1 – 8.8 6.1 – 0.7 1.9 6.4 11.2
2019 H1 690.3 2.4 83.4 – 8.8 12.1 – 1.5 7.1 10.7 16.1 41.9 – 26.8 6.1 – 2.4 1.7 5.8 9.5
H2 721.5 1.7 84.9 0.4 11.8 – 0.2 5.9 10.8 16.9 34.4 – 19.6 4.8 – 1.3 0.6 5.2 11.2
p 2020 H1 581.0 – 16.0 49.0 – 42.9 8.4 – 3.9 4.4 8.8 15.0 0.2 – 102.6 0.0 – 6.3 – 2.2 3.1 7.9
Groups with a focus on the services sector
2012 339.2 2.8 44.1 – 3.4 13.0 – 0.8 5.1 9.7 22.7 10.9 – 46.8 3.2 – 3.0 2.1 5.7 12.3
2013 341.0 – 0.1 44.4 – 3.5 13.0 – 0.5 5.2 9.3 20.7 21.9 82.2 6.4 2.9 2.4 5.9 11.8
2014 344.2 0.8 46.5 1.8 13.5 0.1 6.0 12.3 22.6 24.1 4.3 7.0 0.2 2.6 6.3 13.7
2015 324.1 6.1 46.9 4.0 14.5 – 0.3 5.9 11.1 22.1 22.3 – 3.8 6.9 – 0.7 1.3 6.7 13.9
2016 328.4 1.3 52.5 12.8 16.0 1.6 6.8 13.4 25.1 26.9 24.4 8.2 1.5 2.3 8.2 15.3
2017 323.4 3.5 55.9 8.3 17.3 0.8 6.8 11.5 23.0 29.4 11.4 9.1 0.6 2.1 7.2 15.1
6 2018 339.2 – 0.6 57.1 1.3 16.8 0.3 5.5 10.5 24.7 28.5 – 3.5 8.4 – 0.3 1.4 5.8 16.6
2019 353.7 4.8 65.4 15.2 18.5 1.7 6.9 13.7 24.5 29.2 2.8 8.3 – 0.2 2.4 6.2 16.2
2015 H2 169.9 4.5 26.8 9.9 15.8 0.8 6.6 11.8 23.5 14.1 9.0 8.3 0.4 2.4 7.6 15.0
2016 H1 156.8 – 0.4 25.0 24.0 16.0 3.1 5.1 10.2 23.4 12.8 61.2 8.2 3.1 1.0 6.2 14.6
H2 171.6 2.9 27.4 4.2 16.0 0.2 7.4 13.3 24.3 14.1 3.0 8.2 0.0 4.0 8.9 17.1
2017 H1 148.8 4.6 24.2 0.4 16.2 – 0.6 5.2 9.8 21.0 12.1 0.3 8.2 – 0.3 1.2 5.6 14.5
H2 177.1 2.5 31.5 15.6 17.8 2.0 6.6 12.5 24.6 16.8 21.6 9.5 1.5 2.9 7.8 17.9
6 2018 H1 166.3 0.2 25.9 2.8 15.6 0.4 3.8 9.5 22.7 12.6 – 1.9 7.6 – 0.2 – 0.9 4.7 15.3
H2 174.0 – 1.3 31.3 – 0.0 18.0 0.2 6.7 11.3 25.6 15.9 – 4.6 9.1 – 0.3 2.2 7.0 17.8
2019 H1 171.4 4.0 29.0 13.1 16.9 1.4 5.7 12.3 24.4 11.6 – 7.5 6.7 – 0.9 0.0 4.9 14.5
H2 182.7 5.5 36.5 16.9 20.0 1.9 7.1 15.1 24.4 17.7 10.9 9.7 0.5 1.8 8.2 16.3
p 2020 H1 163.9 – 8.0 29.2 – 9.5 17.8 – 0.3 5.6 10.8 21.2 7.7 – 36.8 4.7 – 2.1 – 2.2 4.3 10.9
* Non-financial groups admitted to the Prime Standard segment of the Frankfurt Stock
Exchange which publish IFRS consolidated financial statements on a quarterly or
half-yearly basis and make a noteworthy contribution to value added in Germany. Ex-
cluding groups engaged in real estate activities.  1 Earnings before interest, taxes, de-
preciation and amortisation.  2 Quantile data are based on the groups' unweighted re-
turn on sales.  3 Annual figures do not always match the sum of the two half-year fig-ures. See Quality report on consolidated financial statement statistics, p. 3.  4 Adjusted
for substantial changes in the basis of consolidation of large groups and in the
reporting sample. See the explanatory notes in Statistical Series Seasonally adjusted
business statistics.  5 Including groups in agriculture and forestry.  6 From this point on-
wards: significant changes in IFRS standards, impairing comparability with previous pe-
riods.

Deutsche Bundesbank
75  Monthly Report
February 2021
XII. External sector
 
1. Major items of the balance of payments of the euro area *
  
€ million
2020
Item 2017 2018 2019 Q1 Q2 Q3 Sep. Oct. Nov.  p
Current account + 348,628 + 333,051 + 273,959 + 32,047 + 29,786 + 82,881 + 35,285 + 32,977 + 26,808A.
1. Goods
Exports 2,263,926 2,331,956 2,410,072 578,513 463,528 547,301 195,555 204,456 204,277Imports 1,919,016 2,047,078 2,083,506 501,885 407,848 451,402 160,068 165,763 168,401
Balance + 344,910 + 284,875 + 326,567 + 76,629 + 55,681 + 95,899 + 35,487 + 38,693 + 35,877
2. Services
Receipts 891,015 942,292 998,870 221,219 190,482 202,234 70,538 72,123 68,777Expenditure 803,275 829,232 941,048 236,169 179,426 184,350 61,187 65,235 63,661
Balance + 87,736 + 113,062 + 57,820 − 14,950 + 11,056 + 17,882 + 9,350 + 6,889 + 5,116
3. Primary income
Receipts 772,715 850,348 853,522 189,931 184,760 170,651 59,062 52,860 55,990Expenditure 719,016 763,367 812,233 172,201 185,302 171,407 57,862 53,682 52,146
Balance + 53,695 + 86,980 + 41,289 + 17,730 − 542 − 757 + 1,200 − 822 + 3,845
4. Secondary income
Receipts 106,517 110,225 113,362 27,802 28,494 26,552 9,163 9,171 8,702Expenditure 244,234 262,093 265,078 75,163 64,903 56,695 19,915 20,955 26,731
Balance − 137,718 − 151,867 − 151,718 − 47,362 − 36,409 − 30,144 − 10,752 − 11,783 − 18,030
Capital account − 20,154 − 37,547 − 26,247 + 55 − 4,971 + 935 − 337 + 826 + 1,256B.
Financial account (increase: +) + 350,126 + 299,842 + 213,861 + 14,108 + 41,384 + 94,502 + 43,811 + 32,453 + 36,721C.
1. Direct investment + 48,150 + 138,829 − 72,013 + 26,788 − 91,948 + 55,104 + 7,007 + 16,827 − 64,046
By resident units abroad + 373,767 − 257,732 + 24,688 − 33,012 + 81,668 + 39,295 − 41,277 + 13,453 + 36,375By non-resident units in the euro area + 325,618 − 396,561 + 96,703 − 59,800 + 173,616 − 15,809 − 48,284 − 3,375 + 100,421
2. Portfolio investment + 360,923 + 203,089 − 46,910 − 188,559 + 182,065 − 26,920 − 1,792 + 85,474 + 176,354
By resident units abroad + 651,684 + 191,892 + 436,135 − 128,963 + 383,242 + 86,759 + 19,494 + 65,822 + 84,491
Equity and
investment fund shares + 204,701 + 32,432 + 69,192 − 51,743 + 94,766 + 78,278 + 36,365 + 34,989 − 19,800
Long-term debt securities + 372,783 + 209,557 + 361,996 − 29,957 + 133,178 + 31,869 + 3,671 + 33,356 + 77,059Short-term debt securities + 74,200 − 50,092 + 4,949 − 47,264 + 155,297 − 23,388 − 20,542 − 2,523 + 27,232
By non-resident units in the euro area + 290,762 − 11,195 + 483,046 + 59,596 + 201,177 + 113,679 + 21,286 − 19,653 − 91,863
Equity and
investment fund shares + 420,681 + 111,645 + 256,050 − 71,862 + 115,756 + 53,326 − 25,202 + 26,743 − 50,364
Long-term debt securities − 137,420 − 58,191 + 220,268 + 54,137 − 13,472 + 26,735 + 32,729 − 52,037 − 22,497Short-term debt securities + 7,502 − 64,646 + 6,727 + 77,320 + 98,892 + 33,618 + 13,759 + 5,641 − 19,001
3. Financial derivatives and
 employee stock options + 22,866 + 40,232 − 2,802 + 12,283 + 38,018 − 30,954 − 21,604 − 212 + 12,646
4. Other investment − 80,533 − 107,387 + 332,354 + 160,172 − 89,964 + 93,888 + 57,564 − 72,547 − 85,637
Eurosystem − 179,203 − 134,123 + 142,555 − 58,745 + 44,069 + 7,480 − 43,268 + 30,497 − 28,321General government + 24,973 − 4,974 − 508 + 4,086 − 8,047 + 16,505 + 9,640 − 12,463 − 21,786MFIs (excluding the Eurosystem) + 144,399 + 107,972 + 182,293 + 129,941 − 135,764 + 53,719 + 114,446 − 100,172 − 42,193Enterprises and households − 70,708 − 76,261 + 8,018 + 84,889 + 9,776 + 16,185 − 23,254 + 9,591 + 6,663
5. Reserve assets − 1,277 + 25,080 + 3,231 + 3,425 + 3,212 + 3,383 + 2,637 + 2,911 − 2,596
Net errors and omissions + 21,651 + 4,337 − 33,851 − 17,993 + 16,570 + 10,686 + 8,863 − 1,350 + 8,658D.
*Source: ECB, according to the international standards of the International Monetary  
Fund’s Balance of Payments Manual (sixth edition). 

Deutsche Bundesbank
76  Monthly Report
February 2021
XII. External sector
 
2. Major items of the balance of payments of the Federal Republic of Germany
(balances)
 
€ million
Current account Financial account
 (Net lending: +/net borrowing: -)
Goods (f.o.b./f.o.b.)  1 
of which:
Supple-mentary Balance of of which: Errorstrade Secondary capital Reserve and
Period Total Total items  
2 Services  3 Primary income income account  4 Total assets omissions  5 
2006 + 137,674 + 160,965 − 4,687 − 31,777 + 40,499 − 32,014 − 1,328 + 157,142 − 2,934 + 20,796
2007 + 171,493 + 201,728 − 1,183 − 32,465 + 35,620 − 33,390 − 1,597 + 183,169 + 953 + 13,2732008 + 144,954 + 184,160 − 3,947 − 29,122 + 24,063 − 34,147 − 893 + 121,336 + 2,008 − 22,7252009 + 142,744 + 140,626 − 6,605 − 17,642 + 54,524 − 34,764 − 1,858 + 129,693 + 8,648 − 11,1942010 + 147,298 + 160,829 − 6,209 − 25,255 + 51,306 − 39,582 + 1,219 + 92,757 + 1,613 − 55,760
2011 + 167,340 + 162,970 − 9,357 − 29,930 + 69,087 − 34,787 + 419 + 120,857 + 2,836 − 46,902
2012 + 195,712 + 199,531 − 11,388 − 30,774 + 65,658 − 38,703 − 413 + 151,417 + 1,297 − 43,8822013 + 184,352 + 203,802 − 12,523 − 39,321 + 63,284 − 43,413 − 563 + 226,014 + 838 + 42,2242014 + 210,906 + 219,629 − 14,296 − 25,303 + 57,752 − 41,172 + 2,936 + 240,258 − 2,564 + 26,4162015 + 260,286 + 248,394 − 15,405 − 18,516 + 69,262 − 38,854 − 48 + 234,392 − 2,213 − 25,845
2016 + 266,689 + 252,409 − 19,921 − 20,987 + 76,199 − 40,931 + 2,142 + 261,123 + 1,686 − 7,708
2017 + 253,883 + 252,831 − 15,448 − 24,372 + 75,419 − 49,995 − 2,999 + 283,208 − 1,269 + 32,3232018 + 247,471 + 226,275 − 20,613 − 19,686 + 89,453 − 48,571 + 436 + 236,936 + 392 − 10,9712019 + 244,797 + 221,800 − 28,012 − 21,703 + 92,312 − 47,612 − 323 + 205,543 − 544 − 38,9322020 
p + 236,207 + 194,624 − 4,682 − 316 + 92,569 − 50,670 − 3,247 + 254,004 − 51 + 21,044
2018         Q1 + 72,518 + 64,662 − 1,877 − 2,379 + 24,754 − 14,520 + 3,656 + 75,991 + 699 − 183
         Q2 + 65,001 + 65,174 − 3,051 − 2,912 + 8,042 − 5,302 − 508 + 61,968 − 374 − 2,526         Q3 + 51,101 + 51,183 − 4,170 − 12,695 + 24,845 − 12,232 − 1,642 + 40,976 − 493 − 8,482         Q4 + 58,852 + 45,257 − 11,515 − 1,700 + 31,812 − 16,517 − 1,069 + 58,001 + 560 + 219
2019         Q1 + 64,465 + 56,962 − 4,195 − 1,755 + 25,936 − 16,677 + 844 + 40,491 − 63 − 24,818
         Q2 + 53,626 + 53,142 − 7,003 − 3,998 + 10,714 − 6,232 − 406 + 42,597 + 444 − 10,623         Q3 + 58,947 + 59,752 − 6,859 − 13,011 + 24,513 − 12,308 + 197 + 29,606 − 349 − 29,538         Q4 + 67,759 + 51,945 − 9,954 − 2,939 + 31,148 − 12,395 − 958 + 92,848 − 576 + 26,047
2020         Q1 + 65,441 + 53,574 − 2,210 − 1,125 + 27,016 − 14,024 − 541 + 42,281 + 133 − 22,618
         Q2 + 36,120 + 28,429 − 1,594 + 3,482 + 13,319 − 9,111 + 459 + 48,544 + 243 + 11,965         Q3 + 62,395 + 56,600 − 675 − 6,562 + 22,296 − 9,939 − 1,007 + 70,432 − 1,276 + 9,044         Q4  
p + 72,251 + 56,021 − 203 + 3,889 + 29,939 − 17,597 − 2,158 + 92,747 + 848 + 22,653
2018         July + 14,275 + 16,174 − 764 − 4,944 + 7,857 − 4,812 − 368 + 6,223 + 266 − 7,684
         Aug. + 16,805 + 17,232 − 1,536 − 5,192 + 8,462 − 3,697 − 41 + 23,333 − 640 + 6,569         Sep. + 20,020 + 17,777 − 1,870 − 2,560 + 8,526 − 3,723 − 1,234 + 11,420 − 119 − 7,366
         Oct. + 18,495 + 18,411 − 1,812 − 4,210 + 8,651 − 4,357 − 945 + 3,533 + 700 − 14,017
         Nov. + 20,435 + 16,693 − 4,707 + 510 + 8,799 − 5,566 − 586 + 25,067 − 124 + 5,218         Dec. + 19,921 + 10,153 − 4,995 + 2,000 + 14,362 − 6,595 + 462 + 29,401 − 17 + 9,018
2019         Jan. + 17,769 + 14,465 − 2,284 − 983 + 9,324 − 5,037 + 2,163 + 16,856 + 158 − 3,076
         Feb. + 15,814 + 17,758 − 1,453 − 405 + 6,479 − 8,018 + 143 + 15,799 + 112 − 158         Mar. + 30,883 + 24,739 − 459 − 368 + 10,133 − 3,622 − 1,463 + 7,836 − 333 − 21,584
         Apr. + 20,638 + 17,568 − 2,277 − 715 + 7,453 − 3,668 − 73 + 20,138 + 547 − 427
         May + 13,402 + 19,259 − 2,905 − 258 − 6,395 + 797 − 37 + 5,567 + 182 − 7,798         June + 19,586 + 16,315 − 1,821 − 3,025 + 9,656 − 3,361 − 296 + 16,892 − 285 − 2,397
         July + 19,402 + 21,458 − 2,739 − 4,723 + 7,265 − 4,599 + 201 + 8,459 + 348 − 11,144
         Aug. + 16,008 + 16,983 − 1,358 − 5,514 + 8,747 − 4,208 + 773 + 8,178 + 755 − 8,604         Sep. + 23,537 + 21,311 − 2,762 − 2,774 + 8,501 − 3,501 − 777 + 12,970 − 1,452 − 9,790
         Oct. + 18,990 + 21,317 − 2,866 − 6,137 + 8,431 − 4,621 − 893 + 32,238 − 107 + 14,141
         Nov. + 23,515 + 17,876 − 2,549 + 480 + 8,727 − 3,568 − 498 + 34,837 − 356 + 11,820         Dec. + 25,253 + 12,751 − 4,539 + 2,718 + 13,990 − 4,206 + 433 + 25,773 − 113 + 86
2020         Jan. + 16,607 + 14,306 − 744 − 740 + 10,194 − 7,153 + 301 + 3,033 + 898 − 13,875
         Feb. + 23,347 + 20,495 − 1,664 − 243 + 7,275 − 4,181 + 65 + 20,957 + 750 − 2,454         Mar. + 25,487 + 18,773 + 199 − 142 + 9,547 − 2,690 − 907 + 18,292 − 1,514 − 6,289
         Apr. + 8,896 + 3,957 − 536 + 791 + 8,471 − 4,324 + 132 + 15,176 + 950 + 6,148
         May + 6,953 + 9,331 + 870 + 1,142 − 88 − 3,432 + 65 + 3,774 + 33 − 3,244         June + 20,272 + 15,141 − 1,928 + 1,550 + 4,936 − 1,354 + 262 + 29,594 − 740 + 9,061
         July + 21,055 + 20,102 − 247 − 2,649 + 7,158 − 3,556 − 901 + 12,598 − 611 − 7,556
         Aug. + 16,566 + 14,349 − 18 − 2,966 + 8,359 − 3,176 + 614 + 38,349 − 611 + 21,168         Sep. + 24,774 + 22,148 − 410 − 947 + 6,779 − 3,207 − 720 + 19,485 − 53 − 4,568
         Oct. + 22,871 + 20,311 − 618 − 380 + 7,231 − 4,292 − 1,287 + 29,176 + 140 + 7,593
         Nov. + 21,215 + 18,447 + 212 + 1,812 + 8,486 − 7,529 − 910 + 11,845 + 89 − 8,461         Dec.  
p + 28,165 + 17,262 + 203 + 2,457 + 14,221 − 5,776 + 39 + 51,725 + 618 + 23,521
1Excluding freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2For example, warehouse acquisition/disposal of non-produced non-financial assets. 5Statistical errors and
transactions for the account of residents, deductions of goods returned and omissions resulting from the difference between the balance on the finan cial account
deductions of exports and imports in connection with goods for processing. and the balances on the current account and the capital account . 
3Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 4Including net

Deutsche Bundesbank
77  Monthly Report
February 2021
 XII. External sector
 
 3. Foreign trade (special trade) of the Federal Republic of Germany,
  by country and group of countries*
 
 € million
 2020
Group of countries/country  2017  2018  2019 Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec.  p Jan./Dec.  p 
All countries  1 Exports 1,278,958 1,317,440 1,328,152 1,204,743 91,259 109,855 112,096 111,837 100,671
Imports 1,031,013 1,088,720 1,104,141 1,025,632 79,405 89,675 92,731 95,168 85,855Balance + 247,946 + 228,720 + 224,010 + 179,111 + 11,854 + 20,180 + 19,365 + 16,669 + 14,816
I. Exports 872,427 900,141 902,831 822,981 63,166 76,563 77,558 77,059 65,627European countries
Imports 699,677 744,575 747,692 683,312 51,975 60,019 62,947 64,357 57,415Balance + 172,749 + 155,566 + 155,140 + 139,669 + 11,191 + 16,544 + 14,611 + 12,702 + 8,212
Exports 664,410 696,480 698,257 634,330 48,133 59,129 59,729 59,607 51,433 1. EU Member States (27)
Imports 549,250 586,433 593,251 547,594 42,293 48,988 50,490 51,977 46,009Balance + 115,160 + 110,047 + 105,006 + 86,736 + 5,840 + 10,140 + 9,239 + 7,630 + 5,425
Euro area (19) Exports 471,213 492,469 492,308 440,716 32,377 41,141 41,158 41,149 35,695
countries Imports 378,700 405,810 409,863 373,111 28,637 32,813 33,795 34,548 31,056
Balance + 92,513 + 86,659 + 82,445 + 67,605 + 3,739 + 8,328 + 7,363 + 6,600 + 4,639
of which:
Austria Exports 62,656 65,027 66,076 59,927 4,731 5,487 5,632 5,539 4,543
Imports 40,686 42,994 44,059 40,151 2,876 3,555 3,685 3,790 3,300Balance + 21,970 + 22,033 + 22,017 + 19,775 + 1,855 + 1,932 + 1,947 + 1,749 + 1,243
Belgium and Exports 50,071 50,389 52,006 48,567 3,621 4,546 4,655 4,473 4,047
Luxembourg Imports 43,689 49,315 46,322 39,959 3,030 3,354 3,687 3,656 3,202
Balance + 6,381 + 1,074 + 5,683 + 8,608 + 591 + 1,192 + 968 + 816 + 845
France Exports 105,687 105,359 106,564 91,009 6,444 8,429 8,508 8,462 7,278
Imports 64,329 65,024 66,199 56,686 4,153 4,807 5,163 5,712 4,691Balance + 41,359 + 40,335 + 40,364 + 34,322 + 2,291 + 3,622 + 3,346 + 2,751 + 2,587
Italy Exports 65,422 69,813 67,887 60,654 4,078 5,690 5,919 5,931 4,790
Imports 55,342 60,223 57,100 53,921 4,131 4,809 5,072 5,245 4,385Balance + 10,080 + 9,591 + 10,786 + 6,733 − 53 + 881 + 847 + 686 + 406
Netherlands Exports 84,661 91,061 91,528 84,227 6,411 7,649 7,293 7,579 7,275
Imports 90,597 97,709 97,816 88,733 6,719 7,497 7,803 7,742 7,720Balance − 5,935 − 6,649 − 6,288 − 4,505 − 307 + 152 − 511 − 163 − 445
Spain Exports 43,067 44,184 44,218 37,520 2,518 3,571 3,635 3,603 2,994
Imports 31,396 32,399 33,126 31,417 2,138 2,752 2,894 3,037 2,547Balance + 11,671 + 11,785 + 11,092 + 6,103 + 380 + 818 + 741 + 566 + 447
Other EU Member Exports 193,198 204,011 205,949 193,613 15,757 17,988 18,571 18,458 15,738
States Imports 170,551 180,623 183,387 174,482 13,656 16,176 16,695 17,429 14,953
Balance + 22,647 + 23,388 + 22,561 + 19,131 + 2,101 + 1,812 + 1,876 + 1,030 + 785
Exports 208,016 203,661 204,575 188,651 15,032 17,434 17,829 17,452 14,193 2. Other European
Imports 150,427 158,142 154,441 135,718 9,682 11,030 12,457 12,380 11,407 countries
Balance + 57,589 + 45,519 + 50,134 + 52,933 + 5,350 + 6,404 + 5,372 + 5,072 + 2,787
of which:
Switzerland Exports 53,913 54,021 56,345 56,283 4,316 4,745 4,911 5,081 4,005
Imports 45,689 45,913 45,824 45,379 3,123 3,773 4,215 4,034 3,372Balance + 8,224 + 8,108 + 10,521 + 10,904 + 1,193 + 972 + 696 + 1,048 + 633
United Exports 85,440 82,164 79,166 66,907 5,633 6,414 6,521 6,458 4,993
Kingdom Imports 36,820 37,025 38,397 34,698 2,464 2,806 2,958 3,138 2,819
Balance + 48,620 + 45,139 + 40,770 + 32,208 + 3,169 + 3,607 + 3,563 + 3,320 + 2,174
II. Exports 403,490 413,483 421,728 380,045 27,989 33,179 34,425 34,497 34,937Non-European
Imports 328,606 342,980 355,390 340,536 27,313 29,090 29,607 30,628 28,276 countries
Balance + 74,884 + 70,503 + 66,338 + 39,510 + 676 + 4,090 + 4,818 + 3,869 + 6,661
Exports 25,431 22,524 23,627 20,055 1,453 1,709 1,763 1,764 1,760 1. Africa
Imports 20,428 22,542 24,475 18,638 1,401 1,576 1,512 1,893 1,768Balance + 5,003 − 18 − 848 + 1,417 + 52 + 133 + 251 − 129 − 9
Exports 154,644 158,952 165,602 141,693 10,618 12,719 13,358 12,827 12,291 2. America
Imports 89,927 92,444 100,007 93,915 7,666 8,383 8,414 8,373 7,634Balance + 64,717 + 66,508 + 65,595 + 47,778 + 2,952 + 4,336 + 4,943 + 4,454 + 4,657
of which:
Exports 111,805 113,341 118,680 103,839 7,683 9,339 9,908 9,564 9,157 United States
Imports 61,902 64,493 71,334 67,807 5,597 6,214 5,821 5,821 5,632Balance + 49,903 + 48,847 + 47,346 + 36,032 + 2,086 + 3,125 + 4,088 + 3,743 + 3,525
Exports 212,070 219,716 221,278 207,639 15,127 17,849 18,372 19,045 19,952 3. Asia
Imports 214,393 224,355 227,036 224,087 17,974 18,793 19,427 20,023 18,561Balance − 2,323 − 4,639 − 5,759 − 16,448 − 2,847 − 944 − 1,055 − 978 + 1,391
of which:
Middle East Exports 33,104 29,144 28,663 25,419 1,874 1,964 2,116 2,077 3,333
Imports 6,963 8,156 7,460 5,906 520 529 502 407 525Balance + 26,141 + 20,989 + 21,202 + 19,513 + 1,353 + 1,435 + 1,614 + 1,670 + 2,808
Japan Exports 19,546 20,436 20,662 17,371 1,145 1,471 1,478 1,580 1,519
Imports 22,955 23,710 23,904 21,270 1,542 1,654 1,920 1,975 1,721Balance − 3,410 − 3,275 − 3,243 − 3,899 − 397 − 183 − 443 − 395 − 202
Exports 86,141 93,004 95,984 95,891 7,309 8,459 8,653 9,341 9,273 People‘s Republic
Imports 101,837 106,065 110,054 116,210 9,405 9,722 10,103 10,719 10,019 of China  
2 
Balance − 15,695 − 13,061 − 14,070 − 20,319 − 2,096 − 1,263 − 1,450 − 1,378 − 747
Exports 53,425 54,995 54,164 50,506 3,558 4,132 4,375 4,253 4,049 New industrial countries
Imports 50,873 52,945 51,748 47,972 3,566 3,794 3,987 4,120 3,917 and emerging markets
Balance + 2,552 + 2,050 + 2,416 + 2,534 − 8 + 338 + 388 + 132 + 132 of Asia  3 
Exports 11,344 12,291 11,221 10,658 791 903 933 862 934 4. Oceania and
Imports 3,857 3,639 3,872 3,895 272 338 254 339 313 polar regions
Balance + 7,487 + 8,652 + 7,349 + 6,763 + 519 + 564 + 679 + 522 + 622
 
*Source: Federal Statistical Office. Exports (f.o.b.) by country of destination, imports aircraft and other data not classifiable by region. 2Excluding Hong Kong.
(c.i.f.) by country of origin. Individual countries and groups of countries according to 3Brunei Darussalam, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of
the current position. EU excl. UK. 1Including fuel and other supplies for ships and Korea, Singapore, Taiwan and Thailand. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
78  Monthly Report
February 2021
XII. External sector
 
4. Services and primary income of the Federal Republic of Germany (balances)
  
€ million
Services  1 Primary income
of which:
Tele-
communi-
Charges for cations,the use of Other Government Other computer and
Financial information business goods and Investment primary intellectual Compensation
Period Total Transport Travel  
2 services property services services services  3 income income  4 of employees
2016 − 20,987 − 5,950 − 38,247 + 8,612 + 15,790 − 7,156 − 1,520 + 3,092 + 474 + 76,800 − 1,076
2017 − 24,372 − 3,723 − 43,558 + 9,663 + 14,759 − 8,181 − 690 + 2,177 − 521 + 77,314 − 1,3742018 − 19,686 − 1,808 − 44,543 + 9,610 + 17,240 − 7,477 − 358 + 3,324 − 1,065 + 91,442 − 9242019 − 21,703 + 536 − 46,098 + 10,302 + 17,889 − 9,330 − 2,798 + 3,568 − 1,347 + 94,453 − 7932020 
p − 316 − 4,737 − 17,020 + 9,344 + 17,653 − 6,781 − 5,257 + 2,969 − 792 + 94,615 − 1,254
2019         Q2 − 3,998 + 422 − 10,382 + 2,592 + 4,366 − 1,921 − 1,204 + 934 − 537 + 13,434 − 2,183
         Q3 − 13,011 + 344 − 18,603 + 2,811 + 3,263 − 2,267 − 386 + 936 − 1,078 + 26,837 − 1,245         Q4 − 2,939 + 208 − 10,422 + 2,841 + 5,778 − 2,584 − 635 + 777 − 93 + 27,821 + 3,420
2020         Q1 − 1,125 − 452 − 5,386 + 1,857 + 4,387 − 2,259 − 926 + 785 + 407 + 27,603 − 994
         Q2 + 3,482 − 1,288 − 1,490 + 2,433 + 4,946 − 1,491 − 1,431 + 786 − 51 + 15,753 − 2,384         Q3 − 6,562 − 1,632 − 8,360 + 2,384 + 3,523 − 1,923 − 1,830 + 798 − 1,056 + 24,474 − 1,123         Q4  
p + 3,889 − 1,366 − 1,784 + 2,670 + 4,797 − 1,108 − 1,069 + 601 − 92 + 26,784 + 3,247
2020         Feb. − 243 + 51 − 1,967 + 545 + 1,425 − 641 − 46 + 241 + 136 + 7,381 − 242
         Mar. − 142 − 546 − 1,725 + 419 + 1,818 − 808 − 77 + 254 + 159 + 9,789 − 401
         Apr. + 791 − 348 − 194 + 907 + 1,659 − 880 − 963 + 267 + 12 + 8,982 − 523
         May + 1,142 − 555 − 117 + 747 + 1,456 − 632 − 434 + 242 + 27 + 1,339 − 1,454         June + 1,550 − 385 − 1,179 + 779 + 1,832 + 21 − 33 + 277 − 90 + 5,432 − 406
         July − 2,649 − 375 − 2,320 + 1,006 + 682 − 866 − 1,009 + 273 − 373 + 7,984 − 453
         Aug. − 2,966 − 470 − 3,530 + 601 + 1,382 − 843 − 517 + 254 − 330 + 8,997 − 308         Sep. − 947 − 787 − 2,510 + 778 + 1,459 − 214 − 304 + 271 − 352 + 7,494 − 362
         Oct. − 380 − 635 − 1,673 + 1,031 + 1,236 − 702 − 121 + 259 − 50 + 7,716 − 434
         Nov. + 1,812 − 496 + 27 + 568 + 1,712 − 593 − 82 + 193 − 42 + 8,998 − 470         Dec.  
p + 2,457 − 235 − 138 + 1,072 + 1,849 + 188 − 867 + 149 + 0 + 10,070 + 4,151
1Including freight and insurance costs of foreign trade. 2Since 2001 the sample including the receipts from foreign military bases. 4Includes, inter alia, taxes on
results of a household survey have been used on the expenditure side. 3Domestic leasing, production and imports transferred to the EU as well as subsidies received
public authorities’ receipts from and expenditure on services, not included elsewhere; from the EU. 
5. Secondary income of the Federal Republic of Germany 6. Capital account of the Federal
(balances) Republic of Germany
(balances)
€ million € million
General government All sectors excluding general government  2 
of which: of which:
Personal  transfers
Current between
Current taxes on of which: resident and Non-produced
international non-resident Workers’ Capital income, wealth, non-financial
Period Total Total etc. Total remittances Total assets transfers cooperation  1 households  3 
2016 − 40,931 − 25,417 − 11,516 + 10,739 − 15,514 − 4,214 − 4,196 + 2,142 + 3,219 − 1,077
2017 − 49,995 − 22,488 − 9,852 + 10,372 − 27,506 − 4,632 − 4,613 − 2,999 + 922 − 3,9212018 − 48,571 − 28,524 − 10,098 + 10,275 − 20,047 − 5,152 − 5,142 + 436 + 3,453 − 3,0172019 − 47,612 − 28,599 − 10,428 + 11,758 − 19,013 − 5,445 − 5,431 − 323 + 2,795 − 3,1182020 
p − 50,670 − 34,315 − 12,210 + 10,366 − 16,356 − 5,925 − 5,908 − 3,247 + 331 − 3,578
2019         Q2 − 6,232 − 591 − 1,354 + 6,701 − 5,641 − 1,361 − 1,358 − 406 + 20 − 426
         Q3 − 12,308 − 7,712 − 1,890 + 1,616 − 4,595 − 1,363 − 1,358 + 197 + 1,271 − 1,073         Q4 − 12,395 − 7,933 − 4,389 + 1,348 − 4,462 − 1,363 − 1,358 − 958 + 853 − 1,811
2020         Q1 − 14,024 − 9,690 − 2,318 + 2,477 − 4,334 − 1,482 − 1,477 − 541 − 741 + 200
         Q2 − 9,111 − 5,165 − 2,262 + 4,183 − 3,946 − 1,480 − 1,477 + 459 + 665 − 206         Q3 − 9,939 − 6,231 − 3,249 + 2,004 − 3,708 − 1,481 − 1,477 − 1,007 − 60 − 947         Q4  
p − 17,597 − 13,229 − 4,381 + 1,703 − 4,368 − 1,482 − 1,477 − 2,158 + 467 − 2,625
2020         Feb. − 4,181 − 2,689 − 645 + 1,049 − 1,492 − 494 − 492 + 65 − 267 + 331
         Mar. − 2,690 − 1,296 − 614 + 1,097 − 1,394 − 494 − 492 − 907 − 507 − 400
         Apr. − 4,324 − 2,961 − 483 + 243 − 1,363 − 494 − 492 + 132 + 192 − 60
         May − 3,432 − 2,212 − 688 + 2,307 − 1,221 − 493 − 492 + 65 − 36 + 101         June − 1,354 + 8 − 1,091 + 1,632 − 1,362 − 494 − 492 + 262 + 508 − 247
         July − 3,556 − 2,129 − 1,085 + 631 − 1,427 − 493 − 492 − 901 − 459 − 442
         Aug. − 3,176 − 2,210 − 1,149 + 167 − 967 − 495 − 492 + 614 + 699 − 85         Sep. − 3,207 − 1,893 − 1,015 + 1,206 − 1,314 − 493 − 492 − 720 − 300 − 420
         Oct. − 4,292 − 2,929 − 965 + 520 − 1,363 − 494 − 492 − 1,287 − 778 − 509
         Nov. − 7,529 − 5,913 − 1,390 + 253 − 1,617 − 494 − 492 − 910 − 393 − 517         Dec.  
p − 5,776 − 4,387 − 2,026 + 930 − 1,388 − 493 − 492 + 39 + 1,639 − 1,599
1Excluding capital transfers, where identifiable. Includes current international (excluding life insurance policies). 3Transfers between resident and non-resident
cooperation and other current transfers. 2Includes insurance premiums and claims households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
79  Monthly Report
February 2021
XII. External sector
 
7. Financial account of the Federal Republic of Germany
(net)
 
€ million
2020
Item 2018 2019 2020  p Q2 Q3 Q4  p Oct. Nov. Dec.  p
I. Net domestic investment abroad
(increase: +) + 390,059 + 213,212 + 720,557 + 137,496 + 233,444 + 72,320 − 52,764 + 91,525 + 33,559
1. Direct investment + 148,042 + 119,972 + 121,057 + 5,278 + 17,899 + 46,186 + 13,140 + 34,811 − 1,765
Equity + 147,471 + 105,956 + 92,591 + 22,728 + 12,894 + 15,805 + 3,202 + 12,596 + 7
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 34,769 + 40,983 + 29,142 + 4,033 + 10,486 − 1,949 + 4,657 + 3,910 − 10,516
Debt instruments + 571 + 14,016 + 28,466 − 17,451 + 5,005 + 30,381 + 9,938 + 22,215 − 1,771
2. Portfolio investment + 83,229 + 123,681 + 180,543 + 59,227 + 44,406 + 68,181 + 26,472 + 12,566 + 29,144
Shares  2 + 9,613 + 14,248 + 65,716 + 18,970 + 18,877 + 22,881 + 4,228 + 8,725 + 9,929
Investment fund shares  3 + 28,263 + 52,930 + 58,277 + 14,425 + 27,313 + 30,706 + 3,731 + 9,502 + 17,473
Long-termdebt securities  
4 + 41,577 + 54,493 + 54,486 + 23,042 − 839 + 16,483 + 15,221 − 4,102 + 5,363
Short-termdebt securities  
5 + 3,776 + 2,009 + 2,064 + 2,790 − 944 − 1,889 + 3,291 − 1,559 − 3,621
3. Financial derivatives and
employee stock options  6 + 23,126 + 22,383 + 98,443 + 31,257 + 26,530 + 8,598 + 831 + 8,950 − 1,182
4. Other investment  7 + 135,271 − 52,280 + 320,565 + 41,492 + 145,885 − 51,493 − 93,346 + 35,109 + 6,744
Monetary financial institutions  8 + 49,862 + 9,292 − 4,588 − 47,120 − 12,604 − 49,272 − 11,898 + 1,910 − 39,283
Long-term + 4,462 + 18,194 − 8,145 − 1,101 − 4,145 + 1,363 + 1,425 − 3,033 + 2,971Short-term + 45,400 − 8,901 + 3,557 − 46,019 − 8,459 − 50,635 − 13,323 + 4,943 − 42,254
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 37,324 + 13,584 + 80,999 + 27,397 + 38,245 − 17,394 − 10,518 + 17,545 − 24,421
Long-term + 17,182 + 10,566 + 40,991 + 5,849 + 39,654 − 13,672 − 16,987 + 1,478 + 1,837Short-term + 20,143 + 3,018 + 40,008 + 21,549 − 1,409 − 3,722 + 6,469 + 16,067 − 26,258
General government − 8,710 − 4,242 + 1,042 + 1,014 + 1,540 − 5,898 − 742 − 1,117 − 4,039
Long-term − 999 − 3,103 − 1,357 − 154 − 530 − 385 − 227 − 10 − 148Short-term − 7,711 − 1,139 + 2,399 + 1,168 + 2,070 − 5,513 − 515 − 1,107 − 3,891
Bundesbank + 56,795 − 70,915 + 243,112 + 60,201 + 118,704 + 21,071 − 70,188 + 16,772 + 74,487
5. Reserve assets + 392 − 544 − 51 + 243 − 1,276 + 848 + 140 + 89 + 618
II. Net foreign investment
in the reporting country(increase: +) + 153,123 + 7,670 + 466,553 + 88,952 + 163,012 − 20,427 − 81,941 + 79,680 − 18,166
1. Direct investment + 143,602 + 64,284 + 95,404 + 1,499 + 28,503 + 35,350 + 7,839 + 30,881 − 3,371
Equity + 60,751 + 40,113 + 32,579 + 4,806 + 2,377 + 14,860 + 4,587 + 9,076 + 1,197
of which:Reinvestment of earnings  
1 + 15,743 + 17,310 + 8,235 + 1,110 + 2,273 − 1,154 + 1,124 − 626 − 1,652
Debt instruments + 82,851 + 24,172 + 62,825 − 3,307 + 26,125 + 20,490 + 3,252 + 21,806 − 4,568
2. Portfolio investment − 73,978 + 28,479 + 137,730 + 57,347 + 136,391 − 105,239 − 48,729 − 5,565 − 50,945
Shares  2 − 30,651 − 6,392 − 15,494 − 9,056 + 667 − 985 − 488 − 339 − 158
Investment fund shares  3 − 6,298 − 4,963 + 921 + 235 − 353 + 1,835 − 380 + 839 + 1,376
Long-termdebt securities  
4 − 41,376 + 32,911 + 77,297 + 34,249 + 86,634 − 72,884 − 36,311 + 516 − 37,089
Short-termdebt securities  
5 + 4,348 + 6,923 + 75,007 + 31,919 + 49,442 − 33,206 − 11,551 − 6,582 − 15,072
3. Other investment  7 + 83,499 − 85,093 + 233,419 + 30,106 − 1,881 + 49,463 − 41,051 + 54,364 + 36,150
Monetary financial institutions  8 − 35,902 − 10,010 + 108,255 − 1,879 + 1,339 − 73,198 − 859 + 19,905 − 92,245
Long-term − 8,433 + 10,968 + 33,591 + 8,172 + 1,971 + 10,539 + 1,952 + 7,199 + 1,388Short-term − 27,469 − 20,978 + 74,663 − 10,051 − 632 − 83,738 − 2,811 + 12,706 − 93,633
Enterprises and
households  
9 + 14,829 + 21,959 + 27,290 + 29,490 − 24,000 − 4,293 − 6,868 + 25,597 − 23,021
Long-term + 7,805 + 12,412 + 12,495 − 108 + 6,064 + 595 + 1,667 − 598 − 474Short-term + 7,024 + 9,547 + 14,795 + 29,598 − 30,064 − 4,888 − 8,535 + 26,195 − 22,548
General government + 2,926 + 257 − 10,576 + 1,364 − 10,520 − 4,898 − 2,933 + 2,224 − 4,189
Long-term + 697 + 133 − 268 − 104 − 193 − 535 − 90 − 125 − 321Short-term + 2,230 + 124 − 10,308 + 1,468 − 10,327 − 4,363 − 2,843 + 2,349 − 3,869
Bundesbank + 101,646 − 97,299 + 108,450 + 1,131 + 31,300 + 131,853 − 30,391 + 6,638 + 155,605
III. Net financial account
(net lending: +/net borrowing: -) + 236,936 + 205,543 + 254,004 + 48,544 + 70,432 + 92,747 + 29,176 + 11,845 + 51,725
1Estimate based on data on direct investment stocks abroad and in the Federal arising from options and financial futures contracts as well as employee s tock
Republic of Germany (see Special Statistical Publication 10). 2Including participation options. 7Includes in particular loans, trade credits as well as currency and deposits.
certificates. 3Including reinvestment of earnings. 4Up to and including 2012 8Excluding Bundesbank. 9Includes the following sectors: financial corporations
without accrued interest. Long-term: original maturity of more than one year or (excluding monetary financial institutions) as well as non-financi al corporations,
unlimited. 5Short-term: original maturity up to one year. 6Balance of transactions households and non-profit institutions serving households. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
80  Monthly Report
February 2021
XII. External sector
 
8. External position of the Bundesbank o
  
€ million
External assets
Reserve assets Other investment
of which: Net
Clearing external
Special Reserve Currency, accounts positiondrawing within the Portfolio External Gold and gold position in deposits and (col. 1 minus End of reporting
period Total Total rights the IMF securities Total ESCB  
1 col. 10) receivables investment  2 liabilities  3,4 
123456789 1 0 1 1
1999         Jan.  5 95,316 93,940 29,312 1,598 6,863 56,167 1,376 − − 9,628 85,688
1999 141,958 93,039 32,287 1,948 6,383 52,420 48,919 26,275 − 7,830 134,128
2000 100,762 93,815 32,676 1,894 5,868 53,377 6,947 − 6,851 − 8,287 92,4752001 76,147 93,215 35,005 2,032 6,689 49,489 − 17,068 − 30,857 − 10,477 65,6702002 103,948 85,002 36,208 1,888 6,384 40,522 18,780 4,995 166 66,278 37,6702003 95,394 76,680 36,533 1,540 6,069 32,538 18,259 4,474 454 83,329 12,065
2004 93,110 71,335 35,495 1,512 5,036 29,292 21,110 7,851 665 95,014 − 1,904
2005 130,268 86,181 47,924 1,601 2,948 33,708 43,184 29,886 902 115,377 14,8912006 104,389 84,765 53,114 1,525 1,486 28,640 18,696 5,399 928 134,697 − 30,3082007 179,492 92,545 62,433 1,469 949 27,694 84,420 71,046 2,527 176,569 2,9232008 230,775 99,185 68,194 1,576 1,709 27,705 129,020 115,650 2,570 237,893 − 7,118
2009 323,286 125,541 83,939 13,263 2,705 25,634 190,288 177,935 7,458 247,645 75,641
2010 524,695 162,100 115,403 14,104 4,636 27,957 337,921 325,553 24,674 273,241 251,4542011 714,662 184,603 132,874 14,118 8,178 29,433 475,994 463,311 54,065 333,730 380,9322012 921,002 188,630 137,513 13,583 8,760 28,774 668,672 655,670 63,700 424,999 496,0032013 721,741 143,753 94,876 12,837 7,961 28,080 523,153 510,201 54,834 401,524 320,217
2014 678,804 158,745 107,475 14,261 6,364 30,646 473,274 460,846 46,784 396,314 282,490
2015 800,709 159,532 105,792 15,185 5,132 33,423 596,638 584,210 44,539 481,787 318,9212016 990,450 175,765 119,253 14,938 6,581 34,993 767,128 754,263 47,557 592,723 397,7272017 1,142,845 166,842 117,347 13,987 4,294 31,215 923,765 906,941 52,238 668,673 474,1722018 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,688 439,293
2019 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 673,626 487,345
2020 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2018         June 1,213,511 167,078 116,291 14,245 4,983 31,559 991,577 976,266 54,857 701,011 512,500
         July 1,147,878 163,308 112,693 14,131 4,881 31,603 930,107 913,270 54,463 666,323 481,554
         Aug. 1,145,283 162,346 111,986 14,208 4,879 31,273 929,073 912,448 53,864 644,636 500,647         Sep. 1,189,175 161,078 110,755 14,236 4,889 31,199 973,380 956,487 54,717 686,368 502,807
         Oct. 1,167,004 168,272 116,314 14,440 5,259 32,258 943,644 927,555 55,089 664,608 502,396
         Nov. 1,184,703 168,198 116,409 14,405 5,244 32,140 960,478 941,130 56,026 674,449 510,254         Dec. 1,209,982 173,138 121,445 14,378 5,518 31,796 980,560 966,190 56,284 770,688 439,293
2019         Jan. 1,123,169 176,720 124,811 14,424 5,486 31,999 890,410 868,142 56,039 648,602 474,568
         Feb. 1,127,455 178,016 125,793 14,496 5,510 32,217 894,226 872,698 55,214 634,080 493,375         Mar. 1,190,416 178,088 125,302 14,629 5,561 32,596 958,243 941,310 54,086 655,655 534,761
         Apr. 1,167,188 177,378 124,046 14,622 6,228 32,482 935,563 919,696 54,247 627,265 539,923
         May 1,186,394 180,073 126,092 14,637 6,150 33,193 952,038 934,640 54,283 618,780 567,614         June 1,201,041 187,401 134,470 14,473 6,081 32,377 960,158 942,319 53,482 649,898 551,143
         July 1,134,349 193,244 139,163 14,613 6,391 33,077 888,584 870,903 52,521 622,006 512,343
         Aug. 1,173,640 205,331 149,696 14,703 6,379 34,553 915,546 897,901 52,763 638,696 534,944         Sep. 1,185,142 202,285 147,611 14,831 6,396 33,447 930,892 915,342 51,965 626,128 559,014
         Oct. 1,103,094 199,858 146,284 14,663 6,287 32,624 852,754 837,377 50,482 597,432 505,662
         Nov. 1,134,129 197,047 143,253 14,799 6,116 32,879 885,524 870,520 51,558 591,913 542,217         Dec. 1,160,971 199,295 146,562 14,642 6,051 32,039 909,645 895,219 52,031 673,626 487,345
2020         Jan. 1,090,725 209,432 154,867 14,785 6,110 33,671 828,120 811,435 53,173 582,526 508,198
         Feb. 1,106,033 215,748 159,889 14,857 5,989 35,014 836,782 821,562 53,503 577,841 528,192         Mar. 1,218,815 213,722 158,677 14,812 5,965 34,268 952,781 935,126 52,312 617,919 600,896
         Apr. 1,214,851 226,903 170,359 14,935 6,857 34,753 934,333 918,814 53,615 616,319 598,532
         May 1,209,328 223,125 167,780 14,650 6,787 33,908 931,521 916,145 54,682 612,403 596,925         June 1,294,167 226,135 170,728 14,603 6,955 33,849 1,012,982 995,083 55,050 618,825 675,342
         July 1,323,691 233,547 180,400 14,179 7,465 31,503 1,034,282 1,019,214 55,862 599,189 724,503
         Aug. 1,358,137 230,309 177,973 14,129 7,423 30,784 1,071,521 1,056,231 56,307 600,390 757,747         Sep. 1,414,933 227,150 173,979 14,293 7,632 31,246 1,131,686 1,115,189 56,097 649,781 765,151
         Oct. 1,346,367 227,767 174,433 14,346 7,656 31,332 1,061,498 1,047,327 57,102 619,445 726,922
         Nov. 1,347,202 212,286 159,737 14,193 7,535 30,820 1,078,270 1,060,263 56,647 625,921 721,282         Dec. 1,429,236 219,127 166,904 14,014 8,143 30,066 1,152,757 1,136,002 57,353 781,339 647,898
2021         Jan. 1,348,921 219,860 166,494 14,115 8,061 31,190 1,072,140 1,054,994 56,921 638,043 710,878
oAssets and liabilities vis-à-vis all countries within and outside the euro area. Up to respective country designation), since November 2000 also bal ances with non-euro
December 2000 the levels at the end of each quarter are shown, owing to revalua- area central banks within the ESCB. 2Mainly long-term debt securities from issuers
tions, at market prices; within each quarter, however, the levels are computed on the within the euro area. 3Including estimates of currency in circulation abroad. 4See
basis of cumulative transaction values. From January 2001 all end-of-month levels are Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, October 2014, p. 22. 5Euro opening
valued at market prices. 1Mainly net claims on TARGET2 balances (according to the balance sheet of the Bundesbank as at 1 January 1999. 

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
81•
XII. External sector
9. External positions of enterprises *
€ million
Claims on non-residents Liabilities to non-residents
Claims on foreign non-banks Liabilities to non-banks
from trade credits from trade credits
End of
reporting
period TotalBalances
with
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
grantedAdvance
payments
effected TotalLoans
from
foreign
banks Totalfrom
financial
operations TotalCredit
terms
usedAdvance
payments
received
Rest of the world
r 2017 901,267 218,110 683,156 457,369 225,788 211,769 14,018 1,115,680 143,928 971,752 770,140 201,612 131,034 70,579
r 2018 934,837 234,595 700,241 468,418 231,823 217,561 14,262 1,225,989 146,105 1,079,884 873,977 205,907 134,897 71,010
r 2019 959,708 226,949 732,759 499,322 233,437 217,768 15,669 1,281,332 165,199 1,116,133 908,374 207,759 133,704 74,055
2020 1,007,574 250,320 757,254 529,154 228,099 211,800 16,300 1,360,348 167,766 1,192,582 984,663 207,919 129,171 78,748
2020 July 975,280 254,803 720,478 507,223 213,255 197,218 16,037 1,340,169 196,590 1,143,579 949,361 194,217 116,893 77,324
Aug. 986,363 266,626 719,737 510,559 209,178 193,214 15,964 1,338,975 188,054 1,150,920 959,588 191,333 113,525 77,808
Sep. 1,010,961 287,725 723,236 503,397 219,839 203,767 16,072 1,332,854 183,201 1,149,653 946,054 203,599 126,524 77,075
Oct. 1,007,939 271,800 736,139 507,639 228,499 212,649 15,851 1,343,150 173,306 1,169,843 957,633 212,210 132,723 79,488
Nov. 1,041,274 269,412 771,862 538,966 232,896 216,316 16,580 1,389,159 176,910 1,212,249 995,840 216,409 136,587 79,822
Dec. 1,007,574 250,320 757,254 529,154 228,099 211,800 16,300 1,360,348 167,766 1,192,582 984,663 207,919 129,171 78,748
EU Member States (27 excl. GB)
r 2017 522,279 166,645 355,634 263,631 92,003 83,509 8,494 720,770 93,932 626,838 544,462 82,376 62,137 20,239
r 2018 545,146 176,529 368,617 276,091 92,525 84,214 8,312 796,793 87,930 708,863 626,713 82,150 61,561 20,589
r 2019 569,888 176,258 393,630 302,654 90,976 82,454 8,522 824,390 89,604 734,787 650,172 84,615 62,534 22,081
2020 599,741 188,300 411,440 322,386 89,054 80,200 8,854 866,365 92,592 773,773 687,613 86,160 62,357 23,803
2020 July 583,436 191,914 391,522 306,807 84,714 75,983 8,731 874,183 110,177 764,006 684,264 79,743 56,675 23,067
Aug. 591,126 203,358 387,768 305,361 82,407 73,692 8,715 874,563 109,859 764,705 687,362 77,343 54,281 23,061
Sep. 618,732 221,907 396,826 307,654 89,172 80,387 8,785 860,614 97,792 762,821 679,006 83,815 60,791 23,024
Oct. 610,828 207,421 403,407 309,901 93,506 84,649 8,856 876,598 102,236 774,362 686,246 88,116 64,119 23,997
Nov. 619,924 205,052 414,872 319,248 95,624 86,583 9,041 884,991 96,349 788,641 695,211 93,431 69,031 24,400
Dec. 599,741 188,300 411,440 322,386 89,054 80,200 8,854 866,365 92,592 773,773 687,613 86,160 62,357 23,803
Extra-EU Member States (27 incl. GB)
r 2017 378,987 51,465 327,522 193,738 133,784 128,260 5,524 394,910 49,996 344,914 225,677 119,236 68,897 50,340
r 2018 389,691 58,066 331,625 192,327 139,298 133,347 5,950 429,197 58,175 371,021 247,265 123,757 73,335 50,422
r 2019 389,820 50,692 339,129 196,668 142,461 135,314 7,146 456,942 75,595 381,347 258,203 123,144 71,171 51,974
2020 407,833 62,020 345,814 206,768 139,046 131,600 7,445 493,983 75,175 418,809 297,050 121,758 66,813 54,945
2020 July 391,844 62,888 328,956 200,415 128,541 121,235 7,305 465,986 86,413 379,573 265,098 114,475 60,218 54,257
Aug. 395,237 63,268 331,969 205,198 126,771 119,522 7,249 464,411 78,196 386,216 272,226 113,990 59,244 54,746
Sep. 392,229 65,818 326,411 195,744 130,667 123,380 7,286 472,240 85,408 386,832 267,048 119,784 65,733 54,051
Oct. 397,111 64,379 332,732 197,738 134,994 128,000 6,994 466,551 71,070 395,481 271,387 124,094 68,604 55,490
Nov. 421,350 64,359 356,991 219,718 137,273 129,733 7,539 504,169 80,561 423,608 300,630 122,978 67,556 55,422
Dec. 407,833 62,020 345,814 206,768 139,046 131,600 7,445 493,983 75,175 418,809 297,050 121,758 66,813 54,945
Euro area (19)
r 2017 454,033 149,685 304,348 232,178 72,170 64,683 7,487 654,278 75,669 578,609 512,786 65,823 50,442 15,381
r 2018 468,699 156,351 312,348 240,676 71,672 64,427 7,245 730,553 68,747 661,806 596,496 65,310 49,555 15,755
r 2019 492,090 157,829 334,261 263,830 70,431 62,939 7,492 751,076 69,464 681,612 615,369 66,243 49,609 16,634
2020 515,425 167,497 347,928 279,213 68,715 61,150 7,565 783,041 71,423 711,617 645,409 66,208 48,316 17,891
2020 July 503,799 171,546 332,253 266,887 65,366 57,739 7,627 798,703 88,669 710,033 648,187 61,846 44,029 17,817
Aug. 514,981 185,746 329,235 265,935 63,300 55,708 7,592 801,812 90,321 711,491 651,296 60,195 42,378 17,816
Sep. 539,470 203,462 336,008 268,026 67,982 60,333 7,649 786,086 78,524 707,562 643,019 64,543 47,032 17,511
Oct. 529,802 188,516 341,287 270,262 71,024 63,298 7,726 799,680 82,612 717,067 650,271 66,796 48,997 17,799
Nov. 533,187 181,425 351,763 279,009 72,754 64,973 7,780 804,820 76,828 727,992 657,289 70,703 52,565 18,138
Dec. 515,425 167,497 347,928 279,213 68,715 61,150 7,565 783,041 71,423 711,617 645,409 66,208 48,316 17,891
Extra-Euro area (19)
r 2017 447,234 68,425 378,809 225,191 153,618 147,087 6,531 461,402 68,259 393,143 257,354 135,789 80,592 55,197
r 2018 466,138 78,244 387,894 227,743 160,151 153,134 7,017 495,436 77,358 418,078 277,482 140,597 85,342 55,255
r 2019 467,618 69,120 398,498 235,492 163,006 154,829 8,176 530,256 95,735 434,521 293,005 141,516 84,095 57,421
2020 492,149 82,823 409,326 249,941 159,385 150,650 8,735 577,307 96,343 480,965 339,254 141,711 80,854 60,856
2020 July 471,482 83,257 388,225 240,336 147,889 139,480 8,409 541,466 107,921 433,545 301,174 132,371 72,864 59,507
Aug. 471,382 80,881 390,502 244,624 145,878 137,506 8,371 537,163 97,734 439,430 308,292 131,138 71,147 59,991
Sep. 471,491 84,262 387,229 235,371 151,857 143,435 8,423 546,768 104,676 442,092 303,036 139,056 79,492 59,564
Oct. 478,136 83,284 394,852 237,377 157,475 149,351 8,124 543,470 90,694 452,776 307,362 145,414 83,725 61,689
Nov. 508,087 87,987 420,100 259,957 160,143 151,343 8,800 584,339 100,082 484,257 338,551 145,706 84,021 61,684
Dec. 492,149 82,823 409,326 249,941 159,385 150,650 8,735 577,307 96,343 480,965 339,254 141,711 80,854 60,856
* The assets and liabilities vis-à-vis non-residents of banks (MFIs) in Germany are shown
in Table 4 of Section IV., “Banks”. Statistical increases and decreases have not beeneliminated; to this extent, the changes in totals are not comparable with the figures
shown in Table XII.7.

Deutsche Bundesbank
82  Monthly Report
February 2021
XII. External sector
 
10. ECB’s euro foreign exchange reference rates of selected currencies *
  
EUR 1 = currency units ...
Yearly Australia Canada China Denmark Japan Norway Sweden Switzerland United States United Kingdom
or monthly       
average AUD CAD CNY DKK JPY NOK SEK CHF GBP USD
2009 1.7727 1.5850 9.5277 7.4462 130.34 8.7278 10.6191 1.5100 0.89094 1.3948
2010 1.4423 1.3651 8.9712 7.4473 116.24 8.0043 9.5373 1.3803 0.85784 1.3257
2011 1.3484 1.3761 8.9960 7.4506 110.96 7.7934 9.0298 1.2326 0.86788 1.39202012 1.2407 1.2842 8.1052 7.4437 102.49 7.4751 8.7041 1.2053 0.81087 1.28482013 1.3777 1.3684 8.1646 7.4579 129.66 7.8067 8.6515 1.2311 0.84926 1.32812014 1.4719 1.4661 8.1857 7.4548 140.31 8.3544 9.0985 1.2146 0.80612 1.3285
2015 1.4777 1.4186 6.9733 7.4587 134.31 8.9496 9.3535 1.0679 0.72584 1.1095
2016 1.4883 1.4659 7.3522 7.4452 120.20 9.2906 9.4689 1.0902 0.81948 1.10692017 1.4732 1.4647 7.6290 7.4386 126.71 9.3270 9.6351 1.1117 0.87667 1.12972018 1.5797 1.5294 7.8081 7.4532 130.40 9.5975 10.2583 1.1550 0.88471 1.18102019 1.6109 1.4855 7.7355 7.4661 122.01 9.8511 10.5891 1.1124 0.87777 1.1195
2020 1.6549 1.5300 7.8747 7.4542 121.85 10.7228 10.4848 1.0705 0.88970 1.1422
2019         Sep. 1.6162 1.4578 7.8323 7.4634 118.24 9.9203 10.6968 1.0903 0.89092 1.1004
         Oct. 1.6271 1.4581 7.8447 7.4693 119.51 10.1165 10.8023 1.0981 0.87539 1.1053
         Nov. 1.6181 1.4630 7.7571 7.4720 120.34 10.1087 10.6497 1.0978 0.85761 1.1051         Dec. 1.6154 1.4640 7.7974 7.4720 121.24 10.0429 10.4827 1.0925 0.84731 1.1113
2020         Jan. 1.6189 1.4523 7.6832 7.4729 121.36 9.9384 10.5544 1.0765 0.84927 1.1100
         Feb. 1.6356 1.4485 7.6302 7.4713 120.03 10.1327 10.5679 1.0648 0.84095 1.0905         Mar. 1.7788 1.5417 7.7675 7.4703 118.90 11.2943 10.8751 1.0591 0.89460 1.1063
         Apr. 1.7271 1.5287 7.6858 7.4617 116.97 11.3365 10.8845 1.0545 0.87547 1.0862
         May 1.6724 1.5219 7.7482 7.4577 116.87 10.9862 10.5970 1.0574 0.88685 1.0902         June 1.6322 1.5254 7.9734 7.4548 121.12 10.7298 10.4869 1.0712 0.89878 1.1255
         July 1.6304 1.5481 8.0352 7.4467 122.38 10.6544 10.3538 1.0711 0.90467 1.1463
         Aug. 1.6433 1.5654 8.1954 7.4460 125.40 10.5797 10.3087 1.0767 0.90081 1.1828         Sep. 1.6307 1.5586 8.0333 7.4418 124.50 10.7769 10.4279 1.0786 0.90947 1.1792
         Oct. 1.6521 1.5559 7.9225 7.4424 123.89 10.9220 10.3967 1.0739 0.90741 1.1775
         Nov. 1.6266 1.5472 7.8152 7.4459 123.61 10.7453 10.2311 1.0785 0.89605 1.1838         Dec. 1.6166 1.5595 7.9602 7.4412 126.28 10.6008 10.1736 1.0814 0.90624 1.2170
2021         Jan. 1.5764 1.5494 7.8730 7.4387 126.31 10.3661 10.0952 1.0794 0.89267 1.2171
*Averages: Bundesbank calculations based on the daily euro foreign exchange    
reference rates published by the ECB; for additional euro foreign exchange reference    rates, see Statistical Series Exchange rate statistics.    
11. Euro area countries and irrevocable euro conversion rates in the third stage
of Economic and Monetary Union
From Country Currency ISO currency code EUR 1 = currency units ...
1999  January 1 Austria Austrian schilling ATS 13.7603
Belgium Belgian franc BEF 40.3399Finland Finnish markka FIM 5.94573France French franc FRF 6.55957Germany Deutsche Mark DEM 1.95583Ireland Irish pound IEP 0.787564Italy Italian lira ITL 1,936.27Luxembourg Luxembourg franc LUF 40.3399Netherlands Dutch guilder NLG 2.20371Portugal Portuguese escudo PTE 200.482Spain Spanish peseta ESP 166.386
2001  January 1 Greece Greek drachma GRD 340.7502007  January 1 Slovenia Slovenian tolar SIT 239.6402008  January 1 Cyprus Cyprus pound CYP 0.585274
Malta Maltese lira MTL 0.429300
2009  January 1 Slovakia Slovak koruna SKK 30.12602011  January 1 Estonia Estonian kroon EEK 15.64662014  January 1 Latvia Latvian lats LVL 0.7028042015  January 1 Lithuania Lithuanian litas LTL 3.45280

Deutsche Bundesbank
Monthly Report
February 2021
83•
XII. External sector
12. Effective exchange rates of the euro and indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness *
Q1 1999 = 100
Effective exchange rate of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the group Indicators of the German economy's price competitiveness
EER-19  1 EER-42  2 Based on the deflators of total sales  3 vis-à-vis Based on consumer price indices vis-à-vis 
26 selected industrial countries  4
of which:
Period NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indicesIn real terms
based on
the deflators
of gross
domestic
product  3In real terms
based on
unit labour
costs of
national
economy  3 NominalIn real terms
based on
consumer
price indices TotalEuro area
countriesNon-
euro area
countries 37 countries  526 selected
industrial
countries  437 countries  560 countries  6
1999 96.3 96.1 96.0 96.1 96.5 95.9 97.9 99.5 95.9 97.7 98.2 98.1 97.8
2000 87.2 86.8 86.1 85.7 88.1 86.1 91.9 97.4 85.5 91.1 93.0 92.2 91.2
2001 87.6 87.1 86.7 86.7 90.2 86.9 91.7 96.5 86.1 90.5 92.9 91.6 91.0
2002 89.9 90.2 89.8 90.4 94.5 90.5 92.4 95.6 88.6 91.1 93.4 92.1 91.9
2003 100.5 101.3 101.0 101.7 106.4 101.5 95.9 94.7 97.7 95.3 97.0 96.6 96.8
2004 104.3 105.2 104.0 105.0 110.8 105.3 96.2 93.5 100.2 95.6 98.4 98.1 98.4
2005 102.9 103.9 102.0 103.3 109.0 102.9 94.8 91.9 99.0 93.3 98.4 97.1 96.8
2006 102.9 103.9 101.4 102.2 109.1 102.3 93.6 90.3 98.4 91.6 98.5 96.7 96.0
2007 106.4 106.9 103.6 104.5 112.7 104.5 94.5 89.5 102.2 92.0 100.9 98.2 97.4
2008 110.2 109.8 105.9 108.9 117.4 106.9 94.9 88.3 105.3 91.3 102.3 98.4 97.6
2009 111.7 110.6 107.0 114.6 120.5 108.0 95.2 89.1 104.8 92.0 101.9 98.5 98.0
2010 104.5 102.9 98.8 106.6 111.9 99.0 92.6 88.7 98.3 88.2 98.7 94.2 92.5
2011 104.3 102.0 96.9 105.0 112.7 98.6 92.2 88.5 97.7 87.4 98.2 93.4 91.9
2012 98.6 96.8 91.4 99.0 107.5 93.8 90.1 88.3 92.6 84.7 95.9 90.5 89.0
2013 102.2 99.9 94.3 102.0 112.2 96.8 92.4 88.8 97.6 86.7 98.2 92.3 90.9
2014 102.4 99.3 94.2 102.7 114.6 97.2 93.0 89.6 97.8 87.4 98.2 92.5 91.5
2015 92.6 89.6 85.8 92.4 106.1 88.7 89.8 90.3 89.0 83.6 94.4 87.8 87.0
2016 95.3 91.6 88.0 p 93.6 110.1 90.7 90.6 90.7 90.5 84.9 95.1 88.8 88.2
2017 97.5 93.5 89.1 p 94.3 112.4 91.9 91.8 90.7 93.2 85.6 96.4 89.9 89.0
2018 100.0 95.7 90.5 p 95.8 117.3 95.1 92.8 90.7 96.0 86.4 97.7 91.1 90.9
2019 98.2 93.3 88.7 p 93.1 115.5 92.4 91.9 91.0 93.2 85.6 96.4 89.9 89.4
2020 99.7 p 93.7 ... ... 119.4 p 94.0 … … … … p96.5 p 90.1 p 90.3
2018 Aug. 99.9 95.5 90.4 p 96.1 117.8 95.4 92.7 90.6 95.6 86.4 97.3 91.0 91.0
Sep. 100.4 96.0 119.1 96.4 97.7 91.5 91.7
Oct. 99.7 95.5 117.8 95.3 97.3 91.1 91.1
Nov. 99.2 95.0 89.9 p 94.9 116.8 94.5 92.6 91.0 94.8 86.3 97.3 91.0 90.8
Dec. 99.3 94.8 117.0 94.3 97.2 90.8 90.6
2019 Jan. 98.8 94.3 116.3 93.7 96.8 90.4 90.1
Feb. 98.4 93.8 88.8 p 93.5 115.6 93.1 92.0 90.7 93.8 85.5 96.7 90.1 89.7
Mar. 97.9 93.2 115.2 92.5 96.4 89.7 89.4
Apr. 97.7 93.0 115.0 92.3 96.5 89.8 89.4
May 98.2 93.4 88.5 p 93.2 115.7 92.8 92.0 90.9 93.5 85.5 96.6 90.1 89.7
June 98.8 93.9 116.2 93.1 96.8 90.3 89.9
July 98.4 93.4 115.4 92.3 96.7 90.1 89.5
Aug. 98.9 93.9 88.9 p 93.5 116.2 93.0 92.0 91.2 93.1 85.8 96.5 90.2 89.7
Sep. 98.2 93.1 115.3 92.1 96.1 89.9 89.3
Oct. 98.1 92.9 115.3 91.9 96.2 89.7 89.2
Nov. 97.5 92.2 88.4 p 92.2 114.6 91.3 91.7 91.3 92.3 85.6 96.0 89.4 88.8
Dec. 97.4 92.1 114.7 91.2 95.9 89.4 88.8
2020 Jan. 97.0 91.4 114.2 90.5 95.9 89.0 88.4
Feb. 96.3 90.7 88.0 p 92.9 113.5 89.9 91.5 91.3 91.6 85.3 95.6 88.8 88.2
Mar. 99.0 93.1 117.8 p 93.2 96.6 90.2 p 90.2
Apr. 98.2 92.6 117.5 p 93.0 96.3 90.1 p 90.3
May 98.4 92.8 88.6 p 93.9 117.6 p 93.0 91.3 91.3 91.3 85.7 96.2 90.1 p 90.2
June 99.8 94.0 119.1 p 94.1 96.9 90.7 p 90.8
July 100.5 94.6 120.3 p 94.9 96.0 90.0 p 90.2
Aug. 101.6 95.1 90.0 p 94.0 122.4 p 96.0 p92.4 p 91.2 94.0 p 86.7 97.0 90.7 p 91.3
Sep. 101.6 95.0 122.5 p 95.8 96.8 90.6 p 91.2
Oct. 101.4 p 94.9 122.4 p 95.8 96.6 p 90.4 p 91.0
Nov. 100.7 p 94.4 ... ... 121.6 p 95.2 … … … … 96.6 p 90.1 p 90.6
Dec. 101.9 p 95.4 123.0 p 96.1 p97.1 p 90.6 p 91.1
2021 Jan. 101.4 p 94.9 122.4 p 95.5 p97.0 p 90.5 p 90.9
* The effective exchange rate corresponds to the weighted external value of the
currency concerned. The method of calculating the indicators of the German economy's
price competitiveness is consistent with the procedure used by the ECB to compute the
effective exchange rates of the euro. A decline in the figures implies an increase in
competitiveness. The weights are based on trade in manufactured goods and services.
For more detailed information on methodology and weighting scale, see the website of
the Deutsche Bundesbank (https://www.bundesbank.de/content/796162).  1 ECB
calculations are based on the weighted averages of the changes in the bilateral
exchange rates of the euro vis-à-vis the currencies of the following countries: Australia,
Bulgaria, Canada, China, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Hong Kong, Hungary, Japan,
Norway, Poland, Romania, Singapore, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the United
Kingdom and the United States. Where current price and wage indices were not avai-lable, estimates were used.  2 ECB calculations. Includes countries belonging to the
group EER-19 and additionally Algeria, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Israel, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Peru, Philippines, the
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Taiwan, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and
United Arab Emirates.  3 Annual and quarterly averages.  4 Euro area countries (from
2001 including Greece, from 2007 including Slovenia, from 2008 including Cyprus and
Malta, from 2009 including Slovakia, from 2011 including Estonia, from 2014 including
Latvia, from 2015 including Lithuania) as well as Canada, Denmark, Japan, Norway,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.  5 Euro area countries
(current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-19.  6 Euro area
countries (current composition) and countries belonging to the group EER-42.

Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
84•

Overview of publications by the  
Deutsche Bundesbank
This overview provides information about selected recent economic and statistical publica -
tions by the Deutsche Bundesbank. Unless otherwise indicated, these publications are avail -
able in both English and German, in printed form and on the Bundesbank’s website.
The printed publications are available free of charge to interested parties and may be 
obtained through the Bundesbank’s order portal. Up-to-date figures for selected statistical 
datasets are available on the Bundesbank’s website. In addition, the new Statistical Series 
provide a new basic structure and advanced options for using data and are also available 
on the Bundesbank’s website.
Annual Report
Financial Stability Review
Monthly Report
A list of the articles published in the period from 
2010 to 2020 is available on the Bundesbank’s 
website.
Monthly Report articles
March 2020
– German balance of payments in 2019
– Households’ digital purchases in the balance  
of payments
– New benchmark rates, new challenges: 
introducing the €STR in the euro area
April 2020
– Sectoral portfolio adjustments in the euro 
area during the low interest rate period
– The EU budget and its financing: looking 
back and aheadMay 2020
– The current economic situation in Germany
June 2020
– Outlook for the German economy for 2020 
to 2022
– Cash withdrawals and payments in urban 
and rural areas
July 2020
– The German current account surplus through 
the lens of macroeconomic models
– Cash hoarding by German households – how 
much cash do they store and why?
August 2020
– The current economic situation in Germany
September 2020
– The impact of monetary policy on the euro’s 
exchange rate
– Global financial interconnectedness and spill -
overs between the G20 countries
– The performance of German credit institu -
tions in 2019Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
85•

October 2020
– Developments in the German banking sys -
tem during the negative interest rate policy 
period
– Patterns of international business cycles
– The protracted rise in residential property 
prices in Germany from a macroeconomic 
perspective: transmission channels and fun -
damental determinants
– State government budgets: results for 2019
November 2020
– The current economic situation in Germany
December 2020
– Outlook for the German economy for 2021 
to 2023
– The informative value of national fiscal indi -
cators in respect of debt at the European 
level
– Risk Reduction Act – the national implemen -
tation of the European banking package
– German enterprises’ profitability and finan -
cing in 2019
January 2021
– The slowdown in euro area productivity 
growth
– Methodology and analytical options for the 
expanded statistics on banking groups’ secur -
ities holdings
– The two- tier system for reserve remuneration  
and its impact on banks and financial mar -
kets
February 2021
– The current economic situation in GermanyStatistical Series*
Banks
– Banking statistics, monthly
– Statistics on payments and securities trading, 
September
Corporate financial statements
– Consolidated financial statement statistics, 
June/ December
– Financial statement statistics (extrapolated 
results), December
– Financial statement statistics (ratios), May
– Financial statement statistics (ratios – provi -
sional data), May
Economic activity and prices
– Seasonally adjusted business statistics, 
monthly
Exchange rates
– Exchange rate statistics, monthly
External sector
– Balance of payments statistics, monthly
– Direct investment statistics, April
– International investment position and exter -
nal debt, monthly
Macroeconomic accounting systems
– Financial accounts, June
Money and capital markets
– Capital market indicators, monthly
– Investment funds statistics, monthly
– Securities issues statistics, monthly
Special Statistical Publications
1 Banking statistics guidelines, July 20202
2 Banking statistics, customer classification, 
July 20202
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
86•

3 Aufbau der bankstatistischen Tabellen , July 
20131,2
7 Notes on the coding list for the balance of 
payments statistics, September 2013
Special Publications
Makro-ökonometrisches Mehr-Länder-Modell, 
November 1996 1
Europäische Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich von Währung und Wirtschaft, May 
19971
Die Zahlungsbilanz der ehemaligen DDR 1975 
bis 1989, August 19991
The market for German Federal securities, 
May 2000
Macro-Econometric Multi-Country Model:  
MEMMOD, June 2000
Bundesbank Act, September 2002
Die Europäische Union: Grundlagen und Politik -
bereiche außerhalb der Wirtschafts- und Wäh -
rungsunion, April 20051
Die Deutsche Bundesbank – Aufgabenfelder, 
rechtlicher Rahmen, Geschichte, April 20061
European economic and monetary union, April 
2008
Weltweite Organisationen und Gremien im 
Bereich  von Währung und Wirtschaft, March 
20131
Discussion Paperso
54/2020  
Sovereign risk and bank fragility55/2020  
A random forest-based approach to identifying 
the most informative seasonality tests
56/2020  
Bank capital forbearance and serial gambling
57/2020  
Demographic change and the rate of return in 
PAYG pension systems
58/ 2020  
Performance of maturity transformation strat -
egies
59/ 2020  
Hampered interest rate pass- through – A sup -
ply side story?
60/ 2020  
Global oil prices and the macroeconomy: The 
role of tradeable manufacturing versus non-
tradeable services
61/ 2020  
Monetary policy, firm exit and productivity
62/ 2020  
GMM weighting matrices in cross- sectional 
asset pricing tests
63/2020  
Buried in the vaults of central banks – Monet -
ary gold hoarding and the slide into the Great 
Depression 
64/2020  
Demographic change and the German current 
account surplus
65/2020  
US business cycle dynamics at the zero lower 
bound
For footnotes, see p. 88•.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
87•

66/2020  
“The devil is in the details, but so is salvation” – 
Different approaches in money market meas -
urement
67/2020  
Global value chain participation and exchange 
rate pass- through
01/2021  
A structural investigation of quantitative easing
02/2021  
A note of caution on quantifying banks’ recap -
italization effects
03/2021  
Re-allocating taxing rights and minimum tax 
rates in international profit taxation
04/2021  
Real estate transaction taxes and credit supplyBanking legislation
 1 Bundesbank Act, July 2013, and Statute of 
the European System of Central Banks and 
of the European Central Bank, June 1998
 2 Gesetz über das Kreditwesen, January 
20081
 2a Solvency Regulation and Liquidity Regula -
tion, February 20082
* The Statistical Series replace the Statistical Supplements 
and, in part, the Special Statistical Publications; they will be 
provided exclusively on the Bundesbank’s website under 
Publications/ Statistics.
o Discussion papers published from 2000 are available on -
line.
1 Publication available in German only.
2 Available only as a download.Deutsche Bundesbank  
Monthly Report  
February 2021  
88•

